19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  1 
  
Official Study Title :  
Trial of Nano -hydroxyapatite -Containing Toothpastes for Relief of 
Dentin Hypersensitivity  
 
 
NCT number : NCT 04590040  
 
IRB Approval Date : 05.04.2020  
 
Unique Protocol ID : HSC2019 0535H  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  2 
 EXHIBIT A  
CLINICAL STUDY AGREEMENT BETWEEN  
The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio  
AND  
SANGI Co., Ltd, Tokyo , JAPAN 104 -8440  
 
Randomized Non-inferiority  Trial of Nano -hydroxyapatite -Containing Toothpastes for 
Relief of Dentin Hypersensitivity  
 
Principal Investigator  and Affiliations  
Bennett T. Amaechi, BDS, MS, PhD, MFDS RCPS (Glasg), FADI  
Professor and Director of Cariology  
Department of Comprehensive Dentistry  
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio  
7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, Texas 78229 -3900, USA  
Tel: +1 210 567 3185  
Fax: +1 210 567 3443  
Cellphone: +1 210 834 7675  
E-mail: amaechi@uthscsa.edu  
 
 
Sponsoring Company  Representative ('Sponsor') : 
Roslyn Hayman  
President  
SANGI Co., Ltd  
3-11-6 Tsukiji, Chuo -ku 
Tokyo  
JAPAN 104 -8440  
 
Version: 21 February 2020   
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  3 
 INDEX  
OBJECTIVE  
 
SUMMARY OF STUDY DESIGN  
 
POPULATION AND INITIAL SCREENING PROCEDURES  
Inclusion Criteria  
Exclusion Criteria  
 
RECRUITMENT SCREENING AND STUDY PROCEDURES  
(1) Pre liminary Examination for Recruitment  
(2) Washout Period  
(3) Final Selection: Baseline Sensitivity Measurement  
Test Products  
Randomization/Allotment to Test Product Groups  
Clinical Procedures  
 
EFFICACY AND SAFETY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES  
Application of the Stimulus to Trigger Sensitivity:  
Cold  Air Stimulus  
Tactile Stimulus  
Visual Analog Scale (VAS) 
Calibration of the Clinical Examiner  
Oral Soft a nd Hard Tissue Assessmen t 
Adverse Events  
 
STATISTICAL PROCEDURES  
Product Efficacy Data Analysis  
(1) Data Analysis for Efficacy of the Main Evaluation Item  
(2)Data Analysis for Efficacy of the Secondary Evaluation Item  
Sample Size Calculation  
Non-inferiority Tests for the Ratio of Two Means  
Criteria for Test Aborting and Drop -out 
Criteria for Inclusion of Subjects as Appropriate for Efficacy Analysis  
Period of Data Storage  
Schematization of Design  
 
References  
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  4 
 OBJECTIVE  
Dentinal hypersensitivity (DHS) is the incidence of short, sharp pain near the base of a 
tooth, which arises because of d entin being exposed to external stimuli by cervical 
erosion/abrasion or gingival recession, and which cannot be attributed to any other form 
of dental defect or pathology such as caries, broken or leaking restorations, or a chipped 
or cracked tooth.  The ob jective of the present study is to determine whether or not the 
regular use of  a nano -hydroxyapatite(nano -HAP) -containing toothpaste is non -inferior to 
the regular use of a potassium nitrate (KNO 3)-containing toothpaste in the relief of DHS . 
Non-inferiority  would be declared if the mean percentage reduction of sensitivity for the 
nano -HAP toothpaste was no worse than the mean percentage reduction for KNO 3-
contain ing toothpaste, within statistical variability, by a margin (Δ) of 20%(at  95% 
probability).  Our n ull hypothesis is that the nano -HAP toothpaste is not similar to the 
KNO 3 toothpaste, using anon -inferiority margin of Δ = 20% for the primary outcome 
measure. Our choice of a  non-inferiority trial design was based on the abundant and well -
established evid ence for the sensitivity relief efficacy of KNO 3 toothpaste and the 
expectation that non -inferiority of nano -HAP toothpaste to KNO 3 toothpaste would be 
sufficient to place nano -HAP toothpaste in the same class of quasi -drug as the KNO 3 
toothpaste for the r elief of DHS . A further study objective is to show whether or not, 
statistically, t he regular use of  a nano -HAP -containing toothpaste is significantly more 
effective in the relief of DHS than the regular use of a placebo toothpaste not containing 
nano -HAP.  
 
SUMMARY OF STUDY DESIGN  
This study is a double -blind, randomized, placebo -and positive -controlled, stratified 
parallel group clinical trial. A total of 192 patients diagnosed with  DHS  and meeting all 
necessary requirements for selection as subjects  will be stratified into  three  balanced 
groups ( 64 per group) according to age, gender, and  their mean sensitivity to cold air 
stimulus as scored on a Visual Analog Scale (VAS)  at the time of baseline examination for 
final selection  during the recruitment screening process.  Males  and females aged between 
20 and 80 years will be enrolled. The  three  groups will be randomly assigned to use one of  
three  test toothpastes having an identical base formulation but containing respectively 
either 0%  nano -HAP (placebo), 15% nano -HAP  or 5% KNO 3 (positive control) . Subjects will 
be instructed to use their assigned  test toothpaste as their sole oral hygiene product for 
the 8 weeks treatment duration. Subjects will be instructed to brush their teeth twice daily 
for 3 minutes, in the morning and before bed  at night , applying on each occasion a one-
inch strip of their a ssigned toothpaste on a soft -bristled toothbrush  which will be supplied . 
Examination for DHS will include response to cold air, as the primary stimulus, and to 
tactile  pressure, as a secondary stimulus, and will be conducted at the commencement of 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  5 
 recruitm ent screening (preliminary examination), then subsequently at baseline, 4 and 8 
weeks. All dental examinations for data collection in all 192 subjects will be conducted by 
the same Clinical E xaminer  throughout the study . Subjects will be examined and queri ed 
on adverse events at each study visit.  
 
POPULATION AND INITIAL  SCREENING  PROCEDURES  
This study will be conducted at the clinical research facility of the school of dentistry of 
the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio (UTHSCSA) following 
approval by the UTHSCSA Institutional Review Board  (IRB) . UTHSCSA IRB will also 
approve the Human Assurance Documents as well as perform the compliance assessment 
(study monitor). All documents for this study will be used with Japanese language 
superimposed and will be approved by the IRB.  This study will be conducted according to 
the "Recommendations for Evaluating Agents for the Reduction of Dentinal 
Hypersensitivity" as proposed by the Council on Dental Therapeutics of the American 
Dental Association, and in compliance with International Conference on Harmonization 
(ICH) Good Clinical Practice Guidelines including ICH E6, the Abbreviated Requirements 
of the Investigational Device Exemption Regulations (21CFR Part 812), and with 21 CFR 
Parts 50, 54, and 56.  
Patients presenting to any of the dental school clinics, either with a primary complaint of 
tooth hypersensitivity or whom a clinician discover s to have a hypersensitive tooth  or teeth 
during other routine dental treatment  or examinat ion will be screened to determine 
whether they meet study entry criteria.  
 
Patients can be referred to the study Investigator s by any of the dental school clinics or 
from surrounding private clinics. Initial screening of patients to confirm eligibility to 
participate in the study will be conducted by the Study Coordinator , and will include a 
medical history and information on medication use, and a review of the rest of the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  192 adult male and female patients , who are in good general 
health except for the symptoms of DHS , and who me et specific inclusion/exclusion criteria 
and the subsequent  requirements of recruitment screening will be enrolled as subjects in 
the clinical study and randomized into the  three test group s. The enrolment objective will 
be to have at least 57 subjects complete the study in each of the  three  test groups. 
Therefore to allow for about 10% dropout in each test group, 192 subjects ( 64 per group) 
will be enrolled. All relevant medical and  non-medical conditions will be taken into 
consideration when deciding whether this protocol is appropriate for a particular subject. 
The following eligibility criteria are designed to select subjects for whom protocol 
treatment is considered appropriate.  
 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  6 
 Inclusion Criteria  
・ Males or females between the age of 20 and 80 years , of any socio -economic status  
・ Diagnosed as having DHS , i.e. h aving at least one sensitive tooth with demonstrated 
cervical erosion/abrasion or gingival recessio n 
・ Showing a sensitivity response to both tactile and cold air stimulus  delivered by a  
Yeaple probe and a one-second blast of cold air respectively (see detailed description 
below)  
・ Patients must be reliable, cooperative and of adequate intelligence to read and 
understand the rating scales and other study instructions  
・ Patients must be able to read, comprehend, and  sign the informed consent form  
・ The teeth and sites to be tested should be on the buccal /labial  surfaces of incisors, 
canine s, premolars or molars where th e affected s ites are accessible  
・ Teeth selected for testing should have a p laque index of ≤ 2 
 
Exclusion Criteria  
・ The sensitive tooth is associated with concomitant oral pain due to any other 
condition such as soft -tissue lesion s, tooth -ache ascribable to dental caries, tooth 
fracture, or cracked tooth syndrome , or pain due to other surgical procedures  or 
injuries.  
・ The sensitive tooth is associated with a periodontal abscess as diagnosed from an X -
ray or clinical examination of the tooth  
・ The s ensitive tooth is associated with mobility  >1 
・ The sensitive tooth is associated with gum pain from gingivitis, occlusal trauma, 
thermal or chemical burns  
・ Patients having pain from periodontal -related causes but not DHS  
・ Previous professional desensitizing t reatment  
・ Patients using medication which could interfere with the perception of pain  
・ Medical histories marked by chronic use of anti -inflammatory  agents , daily 
analgesics,  anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antidepressants, sedatives and /or other 
psychotropi c drugs  
・ Pregnancy or breastfeeding  
・ Allergies and idiosyncratic responses to toothpaste ingredients  
・ Eating disorders or conditions associated with vomiting  
・ Systemic conditions that are etiologic or predisposing to DHS  
・ Excessive dietary or environmental expo sure to acids  
・ The sensitive tooth was restored in the preceding three months  
・ The sensitive tooth is an abutment tooth for fixed or removable prostheses  
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  7 
 ・ The sensitive tooth has extensive restoration  or restoration s extending into the test 
area 
・ Patients belo w 20 years or above 80 years of age  
・ Smok ers 
 
RECRUITMENT SCREENING AND  STUDY PROCEDURES  
Only patients who meet all initial screening  criteria and provide written informed consent  
will be invited to proceed to recruitment screening for participation  in the trial.  
Recruitment screening will consist of  three steps, as described below:  (1) a preliminary 
examination; ( 2) a 4-week washout period (for patients who meet the entry criteria during 
the preliminary examination); then  (3) at the end  of the washout period,  evaluation and 
recording of  each patient’s  baseline sensitivity level, as the basis for  final subject selection.  
 
(1) Preliminary Examination for  Recruitment  
Patients eligible for recruitment screening will report to the clinical research facility 
having refrained from 1) oral hygiene procedures or use of chewing gum for 8 hours, and 
2) eating or drinking for 4 hour s, except for drinking water, prior to the visit. Th e 
examination will include c hecking the patient’s  medical history and medication use , and 
a thorough oral examination  by the Clinical Examiner , with  evaluation of sensitive teeth.  
Tooth sensitivity will be assessed by a positive response to tactile  and cold air stimuli, and 
the entr y criteria for parameters assessed  at this preliminary examination for recruitment 
will be 1) a positive response to tactile  stimulus u sing a Yeaple probe at  30g force 
(standardized application for every subject), and 2) a VAS score  of 30mm  or more  assesse d 
using a one-second cold air  blast  from a standard dental unit a ir syringe . (The procedures 
for each of these tests are described below ). 
 
(2) Washout Period  
Only  patients who meet the entry criteria in the preliminary examination will proceed to 
the washout period. They will be assigned to use a toothpaste  not containing either 
fluoride, hydroxyapatite  or KNO 3, with an adult soft -bristled toothbrush, for a period of 
four weeks. The toothpaste and toothbrush will be used in place of the patient's norma lly 
used toothpaste and toothbrush,  and will be supplied by the Sponsor. The patient will be 
instructed, after wetting the brush, to apply one inch (2.5cm) of the supplied toothpaste 
per brushing and to brush for 3 minutes by the scrubbing method twice dai ly, in the 
morning and last thing before bed at night, rinsing out the toothpaste with 10ml of water 
for 10 seconds after brushing.  Patients will be asked to return  to the clinical research 
facility  for assessment at 4 weeks.  
 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  8 
 (3) Final Selection  : Baselin e Sensitivity Measurement  
As for the preliminary examination for recruitment, patients reporting for baseline 
examination will be required, after brushing their teeth with the supplied toothpaste and 
toothbrush on the morning of the visit, to have refrained from 1) any other oral h ygiene 
procedures or use of chewing gum, and 2) eating or drinking, except for drinking water, 
prior to the visit.  The baseline examination will assess tactile and  cold air sensitivity. (The 
procedures for each of these tests are described below ). For each  patient eligible to 
participate in the study, one or more hypersensitive teeth that satisfy the tactile and cold 
air hypersensitivity enrolment criteria will be identified for evaluation throughout the 
study.  For each  assessment visit, including the basel ine examination, sensitivity must be 
triggered by application of a tactile stimulus  and a cold air blast stimulus, and the level of 
sensitivity recorded.  
For each patient  completing the washout period, the result obtained according to the 
selection criter ia at the preliminary examination for recruitment shall be compared with 
the result obtained at  baseline examination. Only patients who 1) show a worsening of 
DHS  or 2) maintain the same level of DHS over the duration of the washout period  shall 
be selecte d and enrolled as subjects to participate in the trial,  i.e. only patients who at the 
baseline examination meet the qualifying criteria, namely a Yeaple  value of 30 g or less 
and a VAS score in response to cold air stimulus  of 30mm or more , will be accepted as 
subjects . As shown in the section explaining tactile stimulus, however, though the Yeaple 
criterion for acceptance in the study will be sensitivity at a pressure of 30g or less, in 
carrying out the baseline examination, the Clinical Examiner wi ll apply pressure starting 
from a load of 10g, and increasing by increments of 10g, up to a maximum of 80g.  
 
Test Products  
The test products shall contain respectively  0% nano -HAP (placebo ), 15% nano -HAP, and 
5% KNO 3 (positive control ). 
 
Randomization/Allotment to Test Product Groups  
A total of 192 subjects diagnosed with DHS and who have met all necessary  requirements 
for selection  as subjects in the trial  will be stratified into three  balanced groups according 
to age, gender and VAS scor e in response to cold air stimulus at the time of baseline  
examination for final selection of subjects eligible to participate in the trial (64 per group).  
One of the three  test products shall be randomly assigned to each of the  three  groups. The 
0% and 15% nano -HAP -containing toothpastes  and the 5% KNO 3 toothpaste  shall be 
randomly coded as either A, B, or C by the manufacturer or Sponsor , and the code shall 
not be disclose d until all statistical analysis is complete . 
 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  9 
 Clinical Procedures  
Immediat ely following the baseline sensitivity examination , each patient who qualifies to 
become a subject in the trial will be given and make the first use of his/her a llotted test 
toothpaste,  under the supervision of the Study Coordinator , after the latter  has confirmed 
and recorded the weight of the tube. During the next 8 weeks, subjects will be required to 
brush their teeth twice daily with their allotted test product, as instructed, and  not to take 
any food or drink for at least 30 minutes after brushin g except for drinking water . A diary 
covering the duration of the study will be provided to each subject to (1) keep a record of 
number of times of brushing each day, and (2) record the name of any medication taken 
during the study period.  All subjects wil l be asked to maintain their normal dietary habits. 
However, the use of oral hygiene products that are not related to this clinical trial, such 
as mouthwash and prescription medicine, along with dental clinic visits, dental treatment, 
professional plaque r emoval , whitening, us e of pain relie vers or commercial hypoallergenic 
products  as well as use of narcotics,  anti-inflammatory drugs, conventional analgesics, 
anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antidepressants, sedatives and other psychotropic  drugs 
shall be prohibited throughout the course of the study.  
 
Each subject will be given an a ppointment 4 weeks and 8 weeks after the baseline 
examination , for post-treatment sensitivity assessment.  On the day of each sensitivity 
assessment, subjects shall be prohibited , after morning tooth -brushing , from (1) the use of 
any other or al hygiene procedures or chewing gum and (2) from eating or drinking , except 
for drinking water , prior to the examination . The same sensitivity scoring procedures and 
restrictions used at baseline will be repeated for the examination s at 4 and 8 weeks . To 
ensure standardization , all dental examinations in all the 192 subjects will be performed 
by the same Clinical E xaminer  throughout the study. Subject s will be instructed to bring 
their allotted  test toothpaste for weighing and their diary for inspection at the time of each 
assessment visit , and at the 4 week visit each subject will be given a fresh tube of his/her 
allotted test toothpaste whose weight has also been confirmed and recorded . This 
information will be used for monitoring adherence to  the protocol. At each visit, subjects  
will also be interviewed with respect to the occurrence  of adverse events and the use  of 
concomitant medications.  
 
EFFICACY AND SAFETY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES  
 
Application of the Stimulus to Trigger Sensitivity  
Before stimulus application, all psychological and physiological factors that may alter the 
subject's degree of perception (for example —anticipation) should be controlled to the 
extent possible by standardization of procedure, training of the subject, demo nstration of 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  10 
 the stimulus , and environmental controls (for example —noise, room temperature) 
including familiarization  of the subject with the entire system.  
DHS  will be triggered by two stimuli, spaced at least 10 minutes apart to prevent the 
stimuli affec ting each other . The two stimuli will be applied in the following order : first 
tactile, then cold air blast . If considered necessary , in the Clinical E xaminer's judgement , 
each stimulus may be applied twice and /or a fake test included (in which no stimulus is 
delivered) to ensure that the subject is not responding erroneously.A1 
 
Cold Air Stimulus  
Assessment of cold air sensitivity will be conducted using air delivered from a standard 
dental unit air syringe at room temperature (~70°F±3°F)(~21°C±2°C)  and a pressure of 
60psi (± 5psi). The air will be directed perpendicular to the exposed root surface of the 
sensitive tooth for one second from a distance of approximately one centimeter, and to 
prevent false results, the sensitive t ooth to be tested will be isolated from the adjacent 
teeth (mesial and distal) using cotton rolls held in place by the examiner's gloved fingers.A2 
Assessment of sensitivity will be carried out using  VAS.A3 Within 2 minutes from 
application of the stimulus , the Clinical Examiner shall ask the subject to record the 
intensity of the sensitivity he/she experienced, using the VAS  scale. (See explanation 
below) .  
 
Tactile Stimulus  
Tactile sensitivity will be assessed using the Model 200A Yeaple Electronic Force Sensing 
Probe (Yeaple Research, Pittsford, NY). The probe will be calibrated prior to use. The 
explorer tip of the Yeaple  probe will be placed adjacent to the exposed dentin on the 
buccal/labial surface of the sensitive tooth , predominantly at the cement -enamel junction  
(CEJ).  The explorer tip will be applied perpendicular to the tooth surface, starting from a 
load of 10g, and increasing its pressure by increments of 10g, up to a maximum of 80g , for 
all sensitivity examinations except the preliminary screen ing for recruitment, which shall 
be conducted using a standard pressure of 30g for all patients.  
 
The explorer tip will be drawn slowly across the tooth surface in a distal to medial direction  
for approximately 3 -5 seconds , to ensure application of the stimulus across all exposed 
tubules. The interval between applications shall be 60 seconds. The subject will be asked 
to say "yes" at the point where he/she feels the pressure is uncomfortable, and at that time 
point the Clini cal Examiner will apply the explorer tip again at the same load for 
confirmation, and the load at which the subject again says "yes" will be recorded.A4 
 
 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  11 
 Visual Analog Scale (VAS)A3 
VAS will be used within 2 minutes of stimulus application to evaluate the  intensity of 
sensitivity on each  measurement occasion: preliminary examination for recruitment, 
baseline examination, and examination after 4 and 8 weeks.  The VAS scale, which must 
be explained to the subject, consists of an unmarked horizontal straight l ine, 100mm long, 
drawn on a sheet of paper , with the beginning and end representing no pain and maximum 
pain respectively. Following stimulus application as described above, the Clinical 
Examiner shall ask the subject to draw a vertical mark  on the line, indicating how much 
pain he/she just felt , with “no pain” being on the far left of the scale at 0mm and “pain as 
bad as it can be ,” i.e. the maximum pain the subject could experience , being on the far 
right at 100mm. The distance between 0mm and the mark mad e by the subject shall then 
be measured in mm by the Clinical Examiner and recorded as the su bject 's VAS score, i.e. 
his/her indicated level of pain.  
 
Calibration of the Clinical Examiner  
To ensure standardization and repeatability in all sensitivity assessment procedures, 
including the manufacturers’ instructions, as well as to provide accurate interpretation 
and analysis of the sensitivity response, the Clinical Examiner  will be calibrated on the  
sensitivity assessment techniques describe d above, for both the Yeaple probe and delivery 
of cold air stimulus.  The calibration will be conducted by a benchmark calibrator who is 
experienced in sensitivity assessment using cold air and the Yeaple probe. The method of 
calibration will be determined  by the benchmark calibrator. This will be done using about 
10 patients attending the clinic and diagnosed as having DHS. The sensitivity evaluation 
data collected during calibration will be recorded, and the agreement between the Clinical 
Examiner and ben chmark calibrator for objective evaluation of sensitivity (inter -
examiner) and between the Clinical Examiner’s own repeated sensitivity evaluations 
(intra -examiner) will be evaluated using Bland -Altman plots and intra -class correlation 
coefficients. Midway  during the trial, duplicate examinations will be carried out on 10% of 
the study subjects to confirm maintenance of repeatability by the Clinical Examiner. 
Calculations of agreement between the Clinical Examiner and the calibrator and between 
the Clinical  Examiner's own repeated measures will clearly educate the Clinical Examiner 
on the importance of keeping to one standard to maintain repeatability in the sensitivity 
assessment procedures.  
Oral Soft and Hard Tissue Assessment  
At the time of each sensitivi ty assessment, t he Clinical E xaminer shall  visually examine 
each subject’s oral cavity and perioral area using a  dental light and dental mirror. This 
examination will include an  evaluation of the soft and hard palate, gingival mucosa, buccal  
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  12 
 mucosa, mucogingival fold areas, tongue, sublingual and  submandibular areas, salivary 
glands, and the tonsillar and  pharyngeal areas.  
 
Adverse Events  
Information concerning any a dverse events will be obtained by the Clinical E xaminer from 
the subjects at the time of sensitivity assessment. All observed or volunt arily reported 
adverse events regardless of t est group or suspected causal relationship with  a test 
product  shall require immediate notification within 24 hours to the IRB and the Sponsor  
or its designated r epresentative , during a reporting period beginning from the time that 
the subject first provides informed consent, which is obtained prior to the start of the 
clinical study, i.e.  prior to the subject undergoing any study -related procedure and/or 
receiving  any test product, through to and including 30  calendar days after the last 
administration of the test product. Any adverse event occurring any time after the 
reporting period must be promptly reported to assess whether it meets the criteria for 
classification as a serious adverse event requiring immediate notification to the Sponsor 
or its designated representative. The Principal Investigator  is required to assess causality , 
and f or all adverse events, suf ficient information should be obtained by the Principal 
Investigator  to try to determine the causality of the adverse event. For adverse events 
with a suspected causal relationship to a test product, follow -up by the Principal 
Investigator  is required unti l the event or its sequelae are resolve d or stabilize d at a level 
acceptable to the Principal Investigator , and the Sponsor  concurs with that assessment.  
 
STATISTICAL PROCEDURES:  
Product Efficacy  Data Analysis : 
Efficacy outcomes: The primary efficacy outcome will be the decrease  in cold air stimulus 
sensitivity  (VAS score) from baseline to 8 weeks. The secondary efficacy outcome will be 
the increase  in tactile stimulus force from baseline to 8 weeks. Additional o utcomes will 
include changes in cold air stimulus sensitivity and tactile stimulus force from baseline to 
4 weeks.  
(1) Data Analysis for  Efficacy of the Primary Evaluation  Item  
Comparisons among the three groups for differences in the primary and secondary efficacy 
outcomes at each time point will be analyzed using analysis of covariance; because of the 
stratified randomization, age, gender, and baseline VAS cold air  sensitivity will be 
included as covariates. Pre -planned post -hoc comparisons inclu de: 1) pair -wise 
comparisons of the test product and the positive control against the placebo,  to 
demonstrate effectiveness and 2) 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the ratio of means for 
the nano -HAP test product to the positive control to demonstrate non -inferiority of the 
test product with the positive control. Non -inferiority will be demonstrated if the lower 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  13 
 bound of the 95% CI falls within the 20%  non-inferiority margin. If the data are log -
normally distributed, then the analyses will be done on the l og-transformed data. If the 
95% CI for the difference  between the test paste and the positive control is transformed 
back to the original scale, the back -transformed CI is a 95% CI for the ratio of means. If 
data are normally distributed, the 95% CI will b e computed using Fieller's theorem, and 
the other condition that must be met to show non -inferiority is that the reference (i.e. 
positive control) mean must be significantly different from zero using a one -sided test. A 
5% significance level will be used f or all tests.  From the results obtained for the placebo 
and positive control groups, it will be confirmed whether the non -inferiority margin used 
in the trial (20%) was appropriate or not.  
(2) Data Analysis for  the Efficacy of the Secondary  Evaluation  Item  
Repeated measures analysis of covariance will be used for comparison between the 4 -week 
and 8 -week outcomes within each group. Interactions of the treatment effect with age, 
gender, and tactile sensitivity will be examined to evaluate significance of  differential 
effects of the treatment by patient characteristics.  
Sample Size Calculation  
Based on data from prior studies, A2, A5, A6 the coefficients of variation (the ratio of the 
standard deviation to the mean  (SD/Mean) ) at 8 weeks in cold air stimulus sensitivity and 
tactile stimulus force are estimated to be 0.5 00 and 0.4 00, respectively. A7 Based on this 
COV, the power and sample size for non -inferiority t -tests from a parallel -groups design 
is calculated with the statist ical hypotheses expressed in terms of mean ratios (Treatment 
Mean / Reference Mean) instead of mean differences. Using the software PASS 2019, 
v19.0.1, the sample size  for Non -Inferiority Tests for the Ratio of Two Means  is calculated 
from R Package of Chow A8 by inputting the following information;  
Option     Value  
Design Tab  
Solve For:   Sample Size  
Higher Means Are:   Better (H1: R > 1 - NIM)  
Power:   0.80 
Alpha:   .050 
Group Allocation:   Equal (N1 = N2)  
NIM (Non -Inferiority Margin):  0.2 
R1 (Actual Ratio):   1.0 
COV (Coefficient of Variation):  0.5 0.4  
 
 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  14 
 The following results were generated by the software.  
Non-Inferiority Tests for the Ratio of Two Means  
Numeric Results for a T -Test 
R = Treatment Mean / Reference Mean  
Higher Means are Better  
Hypotheses:    H0: R ≤ 1 - NIM   vs.   H1: R > 1 - NIM  
Target 
Power  Actual 
Power  N1 N2 N -NIM  Bound 
R0 R1 COV  Alpha  
0.80 0.80419  38 38 76 -0.200  0.800  1.000  0.400  0.050  
0.80 0.80557  57 57 114 -0.200  0.800  1.000  0.500  0.050  
The highlighted numbers are the sample sizes if primary outcome measure is based on 
cold air ( green) or tactile stimuli ( yellow). The sample sizes were calculated for nano-
HAP (N1) and KNO 3 (N2) groups . (By default the placebo group will have the same 
sample size).  
Report Definitions  
Target power is the desired power value (or values) entered in the procedure. Power is 
the probability of rejecting a false null hypothesis.  
Actual power is the power obtained in this scenario. Because N1 and N2 are discrete, 
this value is often (slightly) larger than the target power.  
N1 and N2 are the number of items sampled from each population.  
N is the total sample size, N1 + N2.  
-NIM is the magnitude and direction of the margin of non -inferiority. Since high er 
means are better, this value is negative and is the distance below one that is still 
considered non -inferior.  
R0 is the corresponding bound to the non -inferiority margin and equals 1 - NIM.  
R1 is the mean ratio (treatment/reference) at which the power is computed.  
COV is the coefficient of variation on the original scale.  
Alpha is the probability of rejecting a true null hypothesis.  
 
Summary Statements  
Group sample sizes of 38 in the first group and 38 in the second group achieve 80% 
power to  detec t non -inferiority using a one -sided, two -sample t -test. The margin of non -
inferiority is  20%. The true ratio of the means at which the power is evaluated is 1.0 00. 
The significance  level (alpha) of the test is 0.050. The COV  of both groups are assumed to  
be 0.4 00. 
 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  15 
 With a sample size of  at least 57  subjects per group completing the study, a non -inferiority 
test of means using two one -sided tests achieves 80% power at a 5% significance level for 
cold air stimulus sensitivity when the true ratio of the means is 1 .000 and the non -
inferiority limit of t he mean ratio is 20%. Because the COV  for tactile stimulus force is 
smaller, the study will have higher power for that outcome. To a llow for 10% dropout, the 
study will enroll 64 subjects per group ( 192 subjects  in total ). Sample size calculations 
were per formed using PASS 2019 (Kaysville, UT).  
Dropout -Inflated Sample Size  
 
 Sample Size  Dropout -Inflated Enrollment 
sample size  Expected Number of 
Dropouts  
Dropout 
Rate  N1 N2 N N1' N2' N' D1 D2 D 
10% 38 38 76 43 43 86 5 5 10 
10% 57 57 114 64 64 128 7 7 14 
 
Definitions  
Dropout Rate (DR) is the percenta ge of subjects who are expected to be lost at random 
during the course of the study and for whom no response data will be collected (i.e. who 
will be treated as "missing").  
N1, N2, and N are the evaluable sample sizes at which power is computed. If N1 and N2 
subjects are eva luated out of the N1' and N2' subjects that are enrolled in the study, the 
design will achieve the stated power.  
N1', N2', and N' are the number of subjects that should be enrolled in the study in order 
to end up with N1, N2, and N evaluable subjects, base d on the assumed dropout rate. 
After solving for N1 and N2, N1' and N2' are calculated by inflating N1 and N2 using the 
formulas N1' = N1 / (1 - DR) and N2' = N2 / (1 - DR), with N1' and N2' always rounded 
up. (See references A7, pages 52 -53, or A8, pages 32-33.) 
D1, D2, and D are the expected number of dropouts. D1 = N1' - N1, D2 = N2' - N2, and D 
= D1 + D2.  
 
 
 
 
 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  16 
 Chart Section  
 
 
Criteria for Test Aborting and Drop-out 
Subjects may withdraw from the trial at any time at their own request, or they may be 
withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the  Principal Investigator  or Sponsor  for safety, 
behavioral, or administrative reasons. If a subject does not return for a scheduled visit, 
every effort should be made to contact the subject. In any circumstance,  every effort sh all 
be made to document subject outcome, if possible. The Principal Investigator  should 
inquire about the reason for withdrawal , and request that the subject return all unused 

19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  17 
 test product , and return for a final visit, if applicable, and should also follow -up with the 
subject regarding any unresolved adverse events.  
If a subject withdraws from the trial and also withdraws his/her consent for disclosure of 
future information, no further evaluations should be performed and no additional data 
should be collected. The Sponsor  may retain and continue to use any data collected before 
such withdrawal of consent.  
The Principal Investigator  may discontinue a subject 's participation  if, in the opinion of 
the Principal Investigator, the subject is no l onger a suitable candidate for the study. 
Possible reasons for such discontinuation include, but are not limited to:  
・ Adverse event  
・ Deviation from the p rotocol  
・ Missed appointment (s) 
・ Subject no longer meets eligibility criteria  
・ Use of a ntibiotic therapy or other prohibited medication during the study period  
 
Criteria for Inclusion of S ubject s as Appropriate for E fficacy  Analysis  
・ Usage rate of toothpaste was 80% or more  
・ No evidence of events or activity likely to impair the reliability of the examination 
results, such as loss of diary records, etc.  
・ Subject  has complied  with the required restrictions during the examination period  
 
Period of Data Storage： 
The Principal Investigator agrees that all basic documentation used in th e study (informed 
consent forms, Case Report Forms (CRFs) and all other relevant documents) shall bear 
superimposed J apanese translation, for reference purposes only, to be provided in advance 
by the Sponsor, and that the Sponsor shall have access to copie s of all such documentation, 
if it so requests, upon completion of the study. To enable evaluations and/or audits from 
regulatory authorities or the Sponsor , the Principal Investigator agrees to keep records 
including the identity of all participating subj ects (sufficient information to link records, 
e.g. CRFs and hospital records), all original signed informed consent forms, copies of all 
CRFs, serious adverse event forms, source documents, and detailed records of treatment 
abrogation . The records sh all be retained by the Principal Investigator according to ICH 
guidelines  and local regulations, or as specified in the Clinical Study Agreement, 
whichever is the longer  period . 
If the Principal Investigator relocates, retires, or for any reason withdraws from the study, 
the Sponsor  must be notified  in advance . The study records must be transferred to an 
acceptable designee, such as another investigator, another institution, or to the Sponsor . 
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  18 
 The Principal Investigator must obtain the Sponsor 's written permission before disposing 
of any records, even if retention requirements have been met.  
 
Schematization of Test Design  
 
 
 
References  
A1. Clark GE. Designing hypersensitivity clinical  studies. Dent al Clinics of North 
America, 34:531 -543, 1990  
A2. Pradeep AR, Agarwal E, Naik SB, Bajaj P, Kalra N. Comparison of efficacy of three 
commercially available toothpastes [corrected] on dentinal hypersensi tivity: A 
randomized clinical tria l. Aust ralian  Dent al Journal ,57:429 –34, 2012  
A3. Huskisson EC. Measurement of pain. Lancet 2:1127 -1131, 1974   1st 
Visit 2nd 
Visit  4 
weeks  3rd 
Visit  4  
weeks  4th 
Visit 4  
weeks  5th 
Visit  
Initial Screening:  
selection of candidates eligible for 
recruitment screening and receipt of 
candidates' informed consent  ○        
Recruitment Screening:  
①Preliminary examination:  
selection of candidates eligible to 
proceed to washout period   ◎       
②Washout period(4 weeks)     
     
③Baseline  measurement:  
final selection of subjects eligible to 
participate in the trial     ◎     
Subject enrolment     ○     
Randomization / assignment to groups     ○     
Use of test toothpaste (4 weeks)     ○  
   
Examination/measurement after 4weeks       ◎   
Use of test toothpaste (another 4 weeks)         
 
Examination/measurement after 8 weeks         ◎ 
Record -keeping in diary (8 weeks)       
   
19-535H, Amaechi, Form BB, 05 -04-20, NS.docx  19 
 A4. Mason S, Kingston R, Shneyer L, Harding M. Clinical study to monitor dentinal 
hypersensitivity with episodic use of a desensitising  toothpaste. B ritish Dental 
Journal, O pen volume 3, Article number:17011, p.3, 2017  
A5. Silverman G, Berman E, Hanna CB, Salvato A., Fratarcangelo P , Bartizek RD, 
Bollmer BW, Campbell SL, Lanzalaco AC, Mackay BJ, Mcclanahan SF, Perlich MA, 
Shaffer JB. Assessing the Efficacy of Three Dentifrices in the Treatment of Dentinal 
Hypersensitivity. J ournal of the American Dental Association,  127:191-201, 1996  
A6. West NX , Addy M, Jackson RJ, Ridge DB: Dentine hypersensitivity and the placebo 
response. A  comparison of the effect of strontium acetate, potassium nitrate and 
fluoride toothpaste s. Journal of Clinical Periodontol ogy, 24:209 -215, 1997  
A7. Julious, SA. Tutorial in Biostatistics. Sample sizes for cl inical trials with Normal 
data.  Statistics in Medici ne, 23:1921 -1986 , 2004 , partially republished as Julious, 
SA, Owen, RJ. A comparison of methods for sample size estimation for non -
inferiority studies with binary outcomes. Statistical Methods in Medical Research, 
20(6):595 -612. doi:10.1177/096228021037894 5. Epub. Oct 1. Review, 2010  
A8. Chow, SC, Shao, J, Wang, H, and Lokhnygina, Y. Sample Size Calculations in 
Clinical Research, Third Edition. Taylor & Francis/CRC. Boca Raton, Florida , 2018  