Date: Wednesday, April 21, 2021 10:51:23 AM Print Close
ID: Pro00003161 View: 0.0 Type of Submission Entry
Study Identification Information
This is the first step in your Human Research Application.  You will automatically be guided to the 
appropriate forms needed to complete your submissions.
1.0 * Study Name:
Neurophysiological and Kinematic Predictors  of Response in Chronic Stroke (SRT5)
2.0 * Brief Description (using layman 's terms) - 500 words or less:
Stroke is the leading cause of neurological disab ility in the veteran population and upper extremity 
dysfunction is a major cause of functional loss.  The costs of rehabilitation are significant and 
practically limits therapy to the first few months after stroke onset. Recent results show clearly 
that patients with chronic stroke benefit from rehabilitation and robot assisted therapy offers a 
more cost effective approach to this patient group.  In this study, we are validating a predictive 
model that uses demographics, functional status , genomics, neurophysiology, neuroanatomy, and 
other potential biomarkers to predict the likelihood of a clinically significant change in impairment 
at the end of a robot assisted therapy intervention.
3.0* Is this research study a Greater than Minimal Risk Clinical Trial? Yes No
4.0* Is this study a Greater than Minimal Ri sk Comparative Effectiveness research?
Yes No
5.0 * Principal Investigator:
George Wittenberg
  5.1 * VA hours per week the PI is devoted to project:
10
  5.2* Is the PI working with ionizing radiation? Yes No
  5.3* Is the PI working with biological hazards? Yes No
  5.4* Is the PI shipping biological hazards? Yes No
A completed and signed Research Financial Conflict of Interest Statement is required for all 
investigators (including Principal Investigat ors, Co-Principal In vestigators, and Co-
Investigators) listed on the study application. Financial Conflict of Interest Form-Nov. 
2013
5.5 Upload Financial Conflict  of Interest Statement:
GW FCOI(0.01)
6.0 Research Staff:Page 1 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Kine matic Predictors of Response in Chro n...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
Researcher Role in ProjectHours per 
Week devoted to 
projectAdminister 
Informed ConsentWorking 
with Ionizing 
RadiationWorking 
with Biologicial 
Hazards?Shipping 
biological hazards?FCOI 
Form
Kasey 
StepanskyResearch 
Staff2n o n o n o n o
Amy BoosResearch 
Staff
Coordinator30 yes no no no
Stacy 
EcksteinCoordinator1n o n o n o n o
Jennifer 
CollingerCo-Investigator1n o n o n o n o Collinger 
FCOI(0.01)
7.0 Type of Submission:
Description
This is a new study. This has not pr eviously been submitted to the IRB.
This is a new paper conversion. This study has been previously approved by the IRB.
If this is a 'New Paper Conversion' please include the MIRB Number:
Please upload a letter certifying that you ha ve made no modifications or amendments in 
converting this research study from paper to electronic:Page 2 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Kine matic Predictors of Response in Chro n...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.0 Study Identification Information
Study Identification Information (Continued)
1.0* Do you certify that all research staf f administering informed consent are 
knowledgeable about the study?yes 
2.0* To the best of your knowledge do you, or an y member of your research staff, have any 
potential, actual or perceived conflict of inte rest of a professional or personal nature 
that may affect any aspect of the research , including, but not limited to, the review 
and/or conduct of this study?
Yes No
If yes, provide a description, including na me of study team member with conflict:
3.0 * Qualifications of the Investigators:
Dr. George Wittenberg, MD, PhD, FASNR, is a clin ician-scientist at the VAPHS and University of 
Pittsburgh. He has an A.B. degree in Engineerin g and Applied Sciences from Harvard College, and 
both doctoral degrees from UCSD. He was trained in transcranial magnetic stimulation at NINDS by Leonardo Cohen. He has extensive experience since 1996 as an investigator in 
neurorehabilitation clinical trials, and has been a principal investigator on many of them. He was 
site principal investigator for VA CSP # 558, which involved robotic rehabilitation.Page 3 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Kine matic Predictors of Response in Chro n...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.2 VA Involvement
VA Involvement
1.0Does the proposed research involve any of the following?:
Name
VA Funding
VA Personnel Funded Effort
VA Patients or their Private Health Information
Other VA Resources: Central IRB
Other VA Resources: VA Equipment
Other VA Resources: VA Property (Including space leased to, or used by VA)
Other VA Resources: VA Databases
None of the Above apply to this researchPage 4 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Kine matic Predictors of Response in Chro n...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.3 Study Funding Information
Study Funding Information
1.0 * Funding Sources:
Funding Source (Other) Code
ViewMerit Review (CC 103) 9003
2.0 Upload Grant Application, if applicable (If NIH, VA, voluntary agency, must upload):
Name Modified Date
Grant Application 7/12/2019 1:45 PMPage 5 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Kine matic Predictors of Response in Chro n...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.4 Resources
1.0 * Do you currently have adequate resources (e.g., staff, physical space, information 
technology, etc.) to protect the safety of pa rticipants, staff, and the confidentiality of 
subjects’ data during th e conduct of this study?
Yes No
If yes, include a listing of the VAPHS resour ces that will be used for this study and are 
necessary to protect participants. The main laboratory area is the Laboratory for Research on Arm Function and Therapy (RAFT) which is located in the Keystone building, a co mmercial building leased by the University of 
Pittsburgh, with a pending Memorandum of Unde rstanding regarding its use as VA Research 
Space. There is an off-site waiver for the curren t study-related activities in RAFT, which is part 
of the Rehab Neural Engineering Labs (RNEL.) The laboratory contains a variety of devices 
designed around upper extremity motor function. This includes transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) equipment (a rapid stimulator capable of modulating brain activity forseveral minutes, standard TMS stimulators and Bi stim device), and Brainsight Neuronavigation 
systems. There is a unimanual exoskeleton ro bot (Armeo Power) and a bimanual KINARM 
exoskeleton robotic system (B·Kin / KINARM, Kingston, ON.)
University Drive VAPHS: All veterans will have their functional evaluations in the occupational 
therapy area at this facility.
Human Engineering Research Laboratories (HERL) are a part of the U.S. Department of 
Veterans Affairs as the Center for Wheelchairs and Associated Rehabilitation Engineering. Dr. 
Wittenberg has office space in this facility and receives administrative and scientific support from its faculty and staff. Sensitive data will be stored within its VA resources.
If no, please describe the resources that will be needed and explain how the resources will be 
obtained before the study is initiated:
2.0 * VAPHS requires that either the PI or co-PI have a physical presence  at VAPHS. 
Please describe the role the PI and/or co-P I have at VAPHS with respect to clinical 
responsibilities or in relation to other research activities.
The P.I. is a 5/8 part-time employee of VAPHS, with an appointment as Neurologist in the Medicine Service. He has 2/8 of clinical effort , which is on the Outpatient Neurology service, 
seeing consultations and follow-up patients prefer entially with stroke and movement disorders, 
as well as other general neurological disorders.  The remainder of his effort is devoted to VA 
specific research.
3.0 * Will off-site ancillary service facilities (e.g ., radiology services, central labs, non VA 
space, etc) be used for this study?
Yes No 
If yes, please provide the location and a brie f description of the project activities to be 
conducted at the off-site ancillary facilities:MRI scans will be conducted at the Magnetic Resonance Research Center, which houses and operates two 3T Siemens Prisma systems and ha s research staff and technologists to support 
our project.
The Main Laboratory Area is the Laboratory for Research on Arm Function and Therapy (RAFT) 
part of the Rehab Neural Engineering Labs (RNEL.) The laboratory is in the Keystone Building, Page 6 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Kine matic Predictors of Response in Chro n...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
second floor, in one suite that contains a vari ety of devices designed around upper extremity 
motor function. This includes transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) equipment (a rapid stimulator capable of modulating brain activity for several minutes, standard TMS stimulators and Bistim device), Brainsight Neuronavig ation systems. There is a bimanual KINARM 
exoskeleton robotic system (B·Kin, Kingston, ON.).
4.0 * Will a firm be contracted to obtain consent from subjects, collect private 
individually identifiable information from hum an subjects, or be involved in activities 
that would institutionally engage th e firm in human subjects’ research?
Yes No
If yes, please provide a description of the contracted service(s):
*Please specify the IRB that has oversight of the firm's activity(ies):
Name of Site / Institution IRB Approval Document FWA Number
There are no items to display
5.0 Collaborations
Please list any non-VAPHS institutions or indivi duals (i.e. co-authors, mentors, etc.) that you 
will collaborate with and describe their specific role in the research:Dr. Amit Sethi will supervise the clinical evaluations of upper extremity function and TMS studies. As Assistant Professor in the Department of Occupational Therapy at the University of 
Pittsburgh, he is a clinical investigator who is experienced in the assessment of upper 
extremity function and the training of stroke survivors in upper extremity functional use.
Dr. Tae Kim’s specific role is designing acquisition and analysis methods for the MRI portion of 
the proposed work. He is an Assistant Prof essor in the departments of Radiology and 
Bioengineering at the University of Pittsburg h. Research interests include brain perfusion 
modeling, cerebrovascular regulation mechanisms, and technical development and 
quantification of functional MRI, all relevant for this study.
5.1 If this is not Multi-Site Research, please up load the appropriate written agreement(s) here:
Name
There are no items to displayPage 7 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Kine matic Predictors of Response in Chro n...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.5 Project Information
1.0 Does the project involve any of the following (check all that apply):
Type
Biological Hazards (including human biological specimens)
Chemicals 
Ionizing radiation or use of radioactive materials 
Drug, Biological, or Nutritional (e .g. herbal or dietary) Supplement
2.0 Project Focus (check if applicable):
Type
Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI)
Post Traumatic/Post Deployment Stress Disorder (PTSD/PDSD)
Operation Iraqi Freedom/Operation Enduring Freedom (OIF/OEF)
3.0 KEYWORDS
Please provide a minimum of 3, maximum of 6 keywords.  Please use MeSH terms.
* stroke
* rehabilitation
* robotics
4.0 * Please describe the type of study:
one-arm, multiple baseline sequential, cohort study
5.0 * Will any of the research being conducted as a part of this study be used to fulfill 
academic requirements (e.g., master’s thesis, dissertation, or other academic 
program requirements nece ssary to obtain a degr ee/certification, etc.)? Yes 
NoPage 8 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Kine matic Predictors of Response in Chro n...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.6 (CR) Study Locations
Study Locations
1.0 * Please add the local sites wher e this study will be conducted:
Location
ViewVAPHS University Drive Division
ViewOther
If Other, Please Specify:
The Laboratory for Research on Arm Function and Therapy (RAFT).
The Human Engineering Research Laboratories (HER L), part of the U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affairs as the Center for Wheelchairs and Associated Rehabilitation Engineering.Page 9 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Kine matic Predictors of Response in Chro n...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.6.1 (CR) Multi-Site Study
1.6.1 Multi-Site Study
1.0 * Is this a multi-site study:
Yes NoPage 10 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.6.1.1 (CR) Multi-Site Study
1.6.1.1 Type of Mu lti-Site Research 
1.0 * Type of Multi-Site Research:
Research NOT Conducted Under a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) 
with a Pharmaceutical Company or other Non- Federal Entity ("Collaborative Research"). Page 11 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.6.1.1.2 (CR) Multi-Site Not Conducted Under CRADA
1.6.1.1.2 Multi-Site Not Conducted Under CRADA
1.0* Status of the PI in Proposal (check all that apply):
Coordinating Investigator in multi-site study (i ncludes studies conducted both at VAPHS and Pitt)
Provide Further Details (if needed):Page 1 2 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.6.1.1.2.1 (CR) Coordinating Investigator
1.6.1.1.2.1 Coordinating Investigator
1.0 * Number of currently participating inst itutions/sites (including VAPHS and 
international sites, if applicable):2
2.0 * Does this study involve intern ational/transnational research?
Yes No
Please answer the questions below for all research conducted within  the United States, its territories, 
or Commonwealth:
3.0 * Specify other research sites where this research will be conducted:
Name of Site / Institution IRB Approval Document
University of Pittsburgh
4.0 Provide details with regards to coordinating center responsibilities:
As both sites in the study are the RAFT Lab and th e research is being overseen by identical study 
staff, once the VA protocol is approved, the Univer sity of Pittsburgh protocol will be modified to 
reflect the coordinating site protocol. The study coordinator will ensure that all study documents and amendments are performed to reflect the coordi nating site. The PI and study coordinator will 
assure that the University of Pittsburgh will safe guard VA data as required by VA information 
security policies. The study coordinator will communi cate to engaged participating sites SAEs that 
have the potential to affect of the study and stud y events and interim results (if appropriate). The 
study coordinator and PI will report all non-compliance with the study protocol or applicable 
requirements is reported in accordance with VHA Handbook 1058.01. 
5.0 Please upload the study-wide sample info rmed consent form(s), protocol, and another 
other relevant documents, as applicable.
Name
There are no items to display
6.0 Upload applicable agreement(s) with no n-VA collaborators (e.g., Research Data Use 
Agreement) that address such issues as the responsibilities of each party, the 
ownership of the data, and th e reuse of the data for other research and any other 
relevant documents.
Name
VA MRI contract
RDUA with MRRC
Provide further deta ils (if necessary):Page 1 3 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 1.7 Section Chief and Service Line VP approvals
Please upload the approval of  the Section Chief, if applic able and the Service Line VP.
1.0 * Institutional Approval Document:
Institutional Approval Document(0.02)Page 1 4 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 2 Study Objectives & Design
Study Summary
1.0 Funding End Date:
2.0 * Abstract.  Please provide a br ief description of the study .
Stroke is the leading cause of  neurological disability in th e veteran population and problems 
with arm movement are a major cause of loss of  functional ability. The costs of rehabilitation 
are significant and effectively limit therapy to th e first few months after stroke onset. Recent 
results show clearly that patien ts with chronic stroke (> 6 m onths) benefit from intensive arm 
practice. Robot assisted thera py followed by task related training offers a cost-effective 
approach to this type of prac tice that also results in better  arm function in daily life. A 
previous study has shown that it is possible to predict who will benefi t from this kind of 
treatment, specifically what indi vidual characteristics are relate d to a clinically meaningful 
improvement in arm movement. This next phase of the study will test whether the prediction 
method is reproducible and independent of the t ype of robot being use d. It will also expand 
knowledge of how the brain area most important for movement changes its connections with 
other brain areas and the muscles in the arm.
3.0 * Describe the study objectives. Please include primary aim an d hypothesis, if applicable 
any secondary aims and hypotheses. 
Chronic upper extremity dysfun ction after stroke is a lead ing cause of disability and 
has been the target of ma ny therapeutic methods that  involve repetitive task 
practice. Clinical trials of intensive prac tice-based interventions have demonstrated 
significant changes in mean impairment in a group, but variable effects among 
individuals, with clinically significant improvements in only a fraction of the 
population. This is true of  our previous Merit Review study, which showed good 
mean gains in several areas, and about ha lf of participants having clinically 
significant changes in the primary outcome of motor impairment. The basis for these 
variable responses is not known, i.e. we do  not know the biologic al mechanisms that 
moderate response to thes e standardized intervention s. And while recovery of 
function is associated with normalization of brain network interactions and task-
related brain activation , the causal role of these chan ges is not well understood. In 
our current project period, we are conti nuing to address bo th issues with 
construction of a predictive model that  uses demographics, functional status, 
genomics, neurophysiology, neuroanatomy , and other potential biomarkers to 
predict the likelihood of a cl inically significant change in  impairment at the end of 
the intervention. 
Our long-range goal is the prescriptive application of intensive task practice to 
veterans who have suffered a stroke, maximizing the cost-b enefit ratio. We therefore 
plan to externally validate the predictive value of biomarkers as incorporated in the 
model resulting from our previous chronic st roke robotic rehabilita tion trial. We will 
not only validate the predictive model in  a new cohort, we wi ll now quantify the 
changes in functional connectivity of the affect ed hemisphere’s primary motor cortex 
with other brain areas and wi th the spinal cord, in orde r to uncover the mechanisms 
by which intensive task practi ce leads to increase d motor ability. We will continue to 
use an effective intervention  for individuals with chroni c stroke, robotic training Page 1 5 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
with  transition to task practice (Robot + TTT,) now focusin g on use of an exoskeleton 
platform, which has already been pa rt of our intervention . We propose the following 
two specific aims in the prop osed renewal of this award:
1. To validate a predicti ve model based on baseline measures  of biological and functional 
biomarkers. Working hypothesis : Baseline factors that incl ude functional and physiological 
status will predict clinically significant responses to therapy. Change from use of end-
effector and exoskeleton robots to solely e xoskeleton will not si gnificantly affect the 
prediction model. The rationale for the hypothesis is that the effects of assisted repetitive task 
practice is not dependent on a particular technology but  does depend on a biological 
substrate. Expected outcomes: The predictive model will be externally validated, a 
receiver operating curve described, and th e intervention and model validated on an 
exoskeleton platform for delivering therapy.
2. To identify the changes in th e input and output of the af fected primary motor cortex 
associated with change in motor impairment. Working hypothesis: Increased input into 
the motor cortex, increased output from the motor cortex, or both, underlies the 
treatment effect of repetitive task practice. Normalization (increase) in connectivity 
of affected primary motor cortex to other mo tor brain areas of both  sides of the brain 
will be associated with reduction of motor impairment. In a subpopulation of 
treatment responders an increased effectiv eness of the motor co rtex in directly 
activating muscles will be demonstrated. Expected outcome: The causal ro le of task 
practice in changing a brain region’s connec tivity will be known,  with potential uses 
as a surrogate measure of outcome in rehabi litation trials. Resting state BOLD MRI, 
transcranial magnetic stimulation, and cl inical electrophysiology will be used to 
provide data regarding the mechanisms of tr aining-related gains.
When we have completed the above aims, we will have a vali dated algorithm by 
which a set of baseline variables (biomark ers) can be used to inform both the 
clinician and patient regarding the likelihood  of successful training, in an appealing 
exoskeleton robotic rehabilitation platform , for upper extremity disability in the 
chronic period after stroke. This algori thm can be modified to consider those 
biomarkers that are more practical in VA  clinical settings. We will also extend 
mechanistic knowledge abou t the response to intens ive training on brain 
connectivity, which has been no ted to be altered after stro ke and which may relate to 
learned non-use of the affected limb and loss  of spinal response to descending input. 
We will have new efficacy data on the use of assisted mass practice followed by 
assisted task practice on mu ltiple dimensions of functioni ng and disability, including 
use of the arms in daily life.
4.0 * Provide a summary of the background of the study, and explain how this research will 
contribute to existing knowledge.  Describe previous studies that provides a basis to 
show that the proposed research can be carried out without undue risk to human 
subjects.  
Stroke is the leading cause of long-term disability [1] costing an estimated $38.6 
billion a year [2] and stroke-related disabi lity is becoming more prevalent [3], even 
as overall rate of stroke is in slight decline. Recent evid ence indicates that the brain 
can remodel after stroke, ev en years later, through neuroplasticity (including 
changes in excitability and synaptic streng th) and synaptogenesis  [4-6]. Behavioral 
remodeling also occurs and allows compens atory movement patte rns to accomplish Page 1 6 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
task goals [7-9]. Inte rventions incor poratin g strate gies of task s pecificit y, challen ge, 
and repetition appear to be key factors in  promoting these two types of remodeling 
and are central elements in rehabilitation of motor weakness following stroke [11]. 
Since our initial project period, the value of  robot-assisted ther apy to improve upper 
extremity function has become more establis hed but there are still questions about 
many aspects of  implementation, includin g patient selection, dose, and type of 
treatment [12]. There are two basic types of rehabilitation robots, endeffector , in 
which the patient engages with  the tip of the limb, and exoskeleton , in which a 
powered framework encloses th e limb. Both types have de monstrated efficacy [13] 
with some potential advantage in full use of exoskeleton capa bilities in training joint 
coordination [14], and we have used both ty pes in our ongoing study. Robot-assisted 
and other types of upper extremity tr eatment studies in chronic stroke 
report relatively modest average gains in motor function th at typically fail to 
translate into meaningful change in everyd ay use of the paretic arm [15]. This has 
prompted us to directly address issues  of predicting response, promoting and 
measuring translation to da ily use and determining opti mal scheduling for that 
therapy. Therefore, there is now a critical need for research that: 1. predicts response 
to hybrid robotic and functional task oriented therapies in ch ronic stroke and 2. determines 
the brain mechanisms of response to such ther apies so that we better understand why such 
therapies work for some, but not all, stroke survivors.
5.0 * Describe the overall significan ce of the research in terms of the problem to be studied 
and potential findings, as well as its relevance to the care of veterans, the VAPHS, and 
the VHA:
Importance and Impact
The primary purpose of the current proposal is to externally validate predictors of response to 
Robot + TTT (transition-to-task) ther apy in the chronic stroke population. By doing so, we 
will validate biomarkers and algorithms for a predictive model to guide matching of  
patients to a therapy base d on residual neural and motor function and other 
measurable factors. We have been contrib uting to understanding the mechanisms of 
recovery specifically by relating baseline clinical, neurophysiological and kinematic 
markers to functional outcomes . We are now proposing to go beyond this contribution by 
measuring specific changes in connectivity of the primary motor cortex, the hub of voluntary 
movement function in the human brain .
While we, and others, have as a goal  personalized treatment during the sub-acute 
period when spontaneous recovery, optimal neuroplasticity and available 
rehabilitation coincide, the field has been turning to chronic populations for a few 
reasons. First, doing so addresses the problem of an exponential growth in 
individuals aging with disabilities from stroke. Strokes are occurring earlier in the 
lifespan [16] and individuals live longer with stroke [17]  therefore causing increased 
costs to society as a public health co ncern as well as incr eased costs to the 
individuals who face more years with a lowe r quality of life. Sinc e it is known that 
neuroplasticity continues acro ss the lifespan [18] and th at rehabilitation can be 
effective years after the stroke e.g. [19], validating biomarkers and algorithms that 
best match individuals with a specific therapy wi ll maximize recovery of function and reduce 
health care resource utilization over the long term . Second, providing further evidence Page 1 7 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
for optimal use o f robotic thera py in the chronic period ma y provide an im petus for 
the installation of robots and other arm exercise programs into health clubs and veteran’s 
service organizations where rehabilitatio n and exercise can usefully combine .
Impact on Health Care Delivery for Veterans:
The long-range goal of the proposed work is to  meet the Department of Veterans Affairs 
Strategic Plan 2014-2020 listed objective 1.1 and create evidence-based rehabilitation 
methods for veterans with stroke related upper extremity hemiparesis that focus resources 
more efficiently. Prevalence of stroke-induced disability  in our veteran population 
is expected to rise since 64 % of the population is aged  55 or older [20]. Robotic 
devices provide a cost-effective method to  automate parts of therapeutic practice, 
allowing more efficient use of therapist ti me while providing high  doses of training 
[21]. We expect that the res ults from this study will validate and possibly refine our 
method for choosing  the Robot + TTT rehabilitati on technique during the long 
period following sub-acute re covery. It will also bring in sights for the science of 
predicting outcomes and opti mally matching therapeutic techniques in this period. 
While use of robotic training is a key part of the treatment in this trial, we take steps toward 
generalization with the use of an advanced r obotic rehabilitation system piloted in the 
current study. Inclusion of an exoskeleton robot is  also in line with the RR&D service’s call 
for studies of such devices.
6.0 Please upload any additional documents:
Name Version
There are no items to displayPage 18 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 2.1 Required Reviews
Required Reviews
1.0Type of Submission:
New study If this is a 'New Paper Conversion' please include the MIRB Number:
Please upload a letter certifying that you ha ve made no modifications or amendments in 
converting this research study from paper to electronic:
2.0 * Requested Review Type:
Name
Exempt
Expedited
Full IRB Review
Not Human Subject Research
3.0 
Please check which of the following Service 
Lines/Departments/Entities
will be impacted or used in the conduct of this studyUpload 
Letter 
of Support
Clinical Support
Medical Specialty
Investigational Drug Service
Imaging
Community Based Care
Patient Care Services
Behavioral Health
Primary Care
Surgical Specialty
Critical Care
Clinical Trials Center
Regulatory Coordinator Support Core
Clinical Coordinator 
Support Core
 Ancillary Support Core
 Data Support Core
Research Registry
Registry Number:
OtherPage 1 9 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
If Other, please specify:Page 20 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 3 Research Design
Methods & Procedures 
1.0 
* Does this research study involve any of the following: 
Name
Deception
Interview/Focus Groups
Use of Drug, biological, or nutriti onal (e.g., herbal or dietary) supplement (investigational or 
FDA approved)?
Use of medical devices
Prospective Analysis of Specimens
Banking of Specimens-Data
Retrospective use of specimens
Audio/Video Recordings or Photographs 
Honest Broker or other similar service
None of the AbovePage 21 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 3.4 Use of Medical Devices
Medical Devices
1.0 * Specify all devices used on this study:
Device 
NameManufacturerUse of DeviceIDE Number
(if Applicable)Device 
BrochureDescription 
of UseRisk Level 
Determined by 
Sponsor
The MagStim 
200MagStim FDA Approved but 
used in 
unapproved wayNon-Significant 
Risk
2.0 * Describe your plan for stor age and control of devices:
The device will be stored in a secure laboratory  environment only accessible by research study 
staff. Use is restricted to individual s who have been educated and trained.Page 2 2 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 4 Research study methods
Research Study Methods
Describe all study related procedures following enrollment of a subject in this study.
Please see Section 6 for where the study team defines when a subject will be considered enrolled in the 
study.
1.0 * Research Procedures/Interventions:
After obtaining informed consent and a review of medical records, participants will be seen for 
a neurological exam visit by the PI and initiation of study evaluations.
All baseline testing will occur within a 6 week time frame and will include 2 separate baseline 
functional upper extremity outcome evaluations and one baseline robot evaluation with the 
rehabilitation robots in measurement mode fo r quantitative measures of upper extremity 
kinematics and strength. If participants have di fferences in Fugl-Meyer scores greater than 2, 
one additional baseline may be administered to establish the more stable result with only two baseline datasets used for analysis. On all participants who do not have any TMS or MRI medical exclusion criteria one baseline TMS evaluation and one baseline MRI will occur.
After completion of the baseline evaluations, the intervention phase of the study will begin. 
During this time, participants will complete a total of 36 intervention sessions of Robot +TTT 
training. These will occur 3 times per week for 12  weeks. If scheduling conflicts arise, changes 
will be allowed with sessions occurring up to 4 times per week but will not exceed 18 total weeks. The intervention sessions will be one hour in duration. During each session, participants 
will complete 45 minutes of robotic intervention  followed by 15 minutes of TTT.  Participants 
will progress through 3 robot programs sequentially with 12 sessions focused on distal upper extremity function, 12 sessions focused on prox imal upper extremity function and the final 12 
sessions alternating between a distal and proximal focus. Functional outcome and robot evaluations will occur after each robot block, at final training, and at a 12 week retention follow-up. On all participants who do not have any TMS or MRI exclusion criteria one TMS evaluation and one MRI will occur after final tr aining.  Also, one TMS evaluation and one MRI 
will occur at the 12 week retention follow-up. The retention follow-up visit must occur within 4 
weeks of when it is due. All procedures are routinely done within clinical practice.
Baseline/Outcome  evaluations:
Upper extremity measures and evaluations will consist of: the Fugl-Meyer Upper Extremity 
Motor Assessment (FMA), the Wolf Motor Function Test (WMFT), Stroke Impact Scale (SIS), Action Research Arm Test, isometric strength  and range of motion evaluations of the 
shoulder, wrist, thumb, and grip. The Activity Monitor wearing schedule will occur at baseline 
(3 days), and post-training.
The Fugl-Meyer Upper Extremity Motor Performance Section Test:
Selected because it assesses impairments and has been shown to be valid and has high inter-
rater reliability and test/retest reliability [46]. In  particular, it correlates well with interjoint 
coordination measures in the UE of stroke patients [47]. The Fugl-Meyer [48] has been shown to be both internally and externally valid. Accord ing to Duncan et al., it is probably the most 
widely known scale of motor recovery after stroke and can be considered a gold standard for 
motor impairment measures [49] but its relationship to task performance is not clear. It is a primary outcome variable because it measures impairment and we can it compare to other studies.
The Wolf Motor Function Test:Page 2 3 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
Selected because it measures functional capab ility in terms of performance time, quality of 
movement, and ability to hold weight. The test appears to be more sensitive than other UE tools such as the Frenchay Arm Test and is commonly used in the CI studies of UE rehabilitation. It has high interrater reliability, high test-retest reliability and good concurrent 
validity with the Fugl-Meyer with patients who have  mild deficits [50]. It has been modified for 
use with moderate to severely impaired patients  [51] and streamlined to reduce testing time 
[52]. The time measure is the primary variable used because it continuously measures functional ability and we can compare to our previous work and other studies.
Stroke Impact Scale (disability):The short version of this test contains 50 questions and is designed to assess changes in 
impairments, disabilities and handicaps following stroke [53]. This tool assesses physical, mental, and emotional changes that occur as a re sult of stroke and that can contribute to a 
change in quality of life. The Stroke Impact Scal e has been tested for and found to be reliable, 
valid, and sensitive to change in the stroke population. The hand domain is a primary variable because it measures participation in daily life and captures the addition of TTT to robot training.
Action Research Arm Test:This has been suggested to be more responsive in chronic stroke than the Fugl Meyer and is 
also more rapid to administer [54, 55]. It is included for comparison to other studies and because we expected it to ha ve neither floor nor ceiling problems in the target study 
population. Our experience so far has confirmed this. However, it is not the primary outcome variable because it has not been as sensitive to change as the FMA.
Isometric strength and range of motion:Manual muscle testing is done for finger extensio n and shoulder abduction and grip strength is 
measured with a Dynamometer. The hand-held dynamometer has been validated for use on stroke patients. Active and passive range of mo tion is collected using standard goniometry. 
Shoulder (flexion/abduction), wrist (extension), and thumb opposition are tested. 
KINARM and finger load cell evaluations.A set of standard sensory, motor, and cognitiv e-motor evaluations will be performed. These 
tests, which have been normed, will provide mu ltiple secondary outcomes. They will relate 
connectivity measures and unimanual function to bimanual sensorimotor function. Since the KINARM only allows shoulder-elbow movement , finger movements will be evaluated using a 
custom-made load-cell array developed by Dr. Co llinger. Due to altered finger biomechanics, 
we may not be able to collect data from a subj ect's impaired hand with the custom load-cell 
device at baseline.  For these individuals, we will not collect this data at future testing time points. 
Physical Activity Monitors of arm use:To complement the self-report measures of using the paretic arm in daily life, we will continue 
to use low cost, portable 3D accelerometers (Act iGraph, Pensacola, FL) to  objectively quantify 
arm movement. Such accelerometers have good rater and test-retest reliability [56, 57] as 
well as sensitivity to change and convergent validity with standardized measures of impairment, performance and activity (see [58, 59] for recent reviews). We will coach the participant and caregiver on how to attach and detach a sensor to each arm before allowing 
them to leave our facility and return in 3 days at baseline, after training  and at retention. The 
schedule will be Monday-Thursday or Tuesday-Fr iday to avoid the weekend (potentially more 
variable within/between participants). Arm use will be collected and classified in 1-second 
epochs, summed over 24 hours and averaged over the three days using an established Page 2 4 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
software program. Reporting a ratio of paretic to  non-paretic arm use will reduce the effect of 
mobility activity such as walking that provid es common kinematic drive to both arms. The 
results of accelerometry analysis will be correlated with the measures of functional assessment using the Fugl-Meyer, WMFT and SIS-hand domain.
TMS OutcomesTranscranial magnetic stimulation of the motor cortex is performed using a MagStim 200 
Magnetic Stimulator (MagStim Ltd., Wales, UK) to assess changes in brain physiology and MEP 
in arm muscles. Surface electromyography (B&L En gineering, Santa Ana, CA) is used to record 
muscle activity from three muscles (first dorsal  interosseous [FDI], extensor carpi radialis 
[ECR], the anterior deltoid [AD]) on both th e paretic and non-paretic arms. SIGNAL (CED, 
Oxford, UK) scripts are used to drive single pulse TMS and collect simultaneous EMG data through a Power 1401 (CED) system. TMS sessions are completed at three time points: baseline, post-training, and at the 12-week follow-up visit. Soft foam earplugs are inserted into each ear canal for hearing protection. 
Prior to the initial TMS session, a skin and whole-brain reconstruction are created from the 
participant’s high resolution anatomical MRI sca n, using neuronavigation software (BrainSight, 
Rogue Research, Montréal, QC, Canada). The hand knob in each hemisphere is identified from 
the anatomical scan and used as the center point for hotspot grid (described below). The neuronavigation software records three-dimensional coordinates of each TMS stimulation site, measured using an optical digitizing device (Vic ra, Northern Digital Inc.). Thus, this technique 
ensures reproducible locations at each session.
MRI Evaluation:
Participants will lay down an d be positioned in the sc anner by MRRC staff with 
supervision from study staff. They will be given a device to  communicate any discomfort 
to staff and the procedure can be  paus ed or discontinued at  any time. The MRI 
procedure will take approximatel y 1.5 hours.  The MRI facility is located at the UPMC MR 
Research Center. It consists of two 3T Siemens Prisma scanners.  
A high resolution MPRAGE (TE 3.44 ms, TR 2250 ms, T1 900 ms, flip angle 9°, 1.5 mm 
isotropic voxels) will be obtained. Two restin g state BOLD (T2*) scans will be obtained, 
with TE=30 ms, TR = 2000 ms, FOV=220mm, resoluti on=64X64 with 36 4 mm axial slices 
over 10 min to yield 380 volumes each.  Diffu sion tensor images for fractional isotropy 
(FA) analysis will be obtained  using the most up to date Sie mens protocols to maximize 
resolution and will be optimi zed for determination of FA ra ther than  tractography. An 
ROI and seed based method will be used to determine the FA value for the posterior  
limb of the internal capsule on each side and a voxel -based correlation of a seed in the 
arm area of the primary motor cortex with th e rest of the brain. A Z transformed score 
for mean correlation of the se ed ROI with the rest of the brain will be obtained and will 
serve as a variable for the pred iction model. This will also lead to an exploration of the 
relationship of this connectivity measure with  lesion and function. Volumetric data will 
be normalized and right hemis phere strokes mirrored so that all images are in the same 
space, with the affected hemisphere on the left. But the ROI and seed-based approaches 
will be carried out in individuals to avoid most  of the blurring effects of normalization. 
The spatial normalization itself will be purely linear affine transformations, with masking 
of large lesions to reduce norma lization  error. An atlas- ba sed approach to the internal 
capsule and primary motor cort ex UE representation will be  used (e.g. WFU Pick-atlas, 
Maldjian et al., 2003, NeuroI mage 19, 1233 9.) In general we will use a combination of Page 2 5 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
public domain tools for image analysis, include AFNI, SPM, FSL, and MR Icron, all listed at 
http://www.nitrc.org .
INTERVENTION (Robot + TTT)
All participants will be enrolled in the same intervention: Robot + TTT. The intervention 
proposed will be completed 3x/week for 12 weeks. The training progression will be 
sequential with 12 sessions focused on dist al upper extremity function, 12 sessions 
focused on proximal upper extremity functi on and the final 12 sessions alternating 
between a distal and proximal focus. Particip ants will perform robot training on an FDA-
approved robot for 45 minutes fo llowed by 15 minutes of TTT practice to complete their 
60 minute intervention session.
Transition to Task Training (TTT):
Participants will receive robotic training  in the sequence de scribed above. The 
intervention session will be 60 minutes long; ho wever, 15 minutes will  focus on TTT. This 
transition to task training is functionally ba sed within four domains of real world tasks: 
homemaking, hygiene, feeding and dressing  skills. Two tasks are designed for each 
session and they are matched to the pati ent’s type of robot therapy (wrist or 
shoulder/elbow) as well as to their severity level. 
The task design is progressive in nature with difficulty adde d by changing the parameters 
and demands to promote genera lization. The tasks are performed with the participant 
sitting for tabletop activities with therap ist supervision to prevent substitution and 
promote the use of available arm motor control and motion for a more normal reaching 
pattern. The minimization of compensatory  trunk movements during reach-to-grasp 
movements has been shown to improve inter-joint coordina tion and active arm joint 
ranges in patients with hemi paresis due to chronic stroke The TTT activities proposed 
include tasks that promote both stabilizin g and active use of the hemiparetic upper 
extremity. Active arm tasks however will be emphasized more than stabilizing tasks.
Please upload a table of procedures if applicable.
The study procedures table must be completed for: 
   - All Greater than Minimal Risk (GTM) studies; and 
   - All Minimal Risk studies that use Standard of Care or Usual Care/Interventions.
Name Modified Date
Study Procedures Table 7/15/2019 1:19 PM
2.0 * Will Usual Care Procedures /Interventions be used?"
Yes No
If yes, please specify and include a description of  what the usual care or expected level of care 
is at VAPHS (e.g., medications, testing, timing , etc.) for patients, similar to those individuals 
that meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria for this research study:
2.1 If Usual Care Procedures/Interventions will be used, who is the individual or entity responsible 
for relevant aspects of the usual care (i.e., which of the above usual care activities will the 
research study team be responsible for)?:Page 2 6 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
2.2 Does the usual care at VAPHS for the condition of  interest in this research study differ from 
national guidelines/recommendations (i.e. standard of care)?
Yes No
If yes, please describe the differences:
2.3 Are any procedures that are considered standard for this patient population performed more 
frequently than usual care?
Yes No
If yes, please indicate which time points are considered usual care and which are considered 
research.
2.4 If there is more than one standard, does VAPH S limit which one is followed (e.g. warfarin use 
for atrial fibrillation vs. one of the newer anticoagulants).
Yes No
If yes, please explain:
3.0 * Does clinical expertise need to be enlisted?
Yes No
If yes, please provide the provisions for enlist ing the services of a clinician with appropriate 
expertise and privileges to perform duties, if the investigator is not a clinician [i.e. reviewing the data, adverse events, and new study findings ; also making required decisions to protect 
the health of the subject (e.g ., stopping the participant’s involvement in the study or 
determining when to notify the subject or the subj ect’s health care provider of information that 
may affect the health of the subject)]:
4.0 Please upload any surveys, questi onnaires, and data collection forms.
Document Description Version Number
ViewARAT Scoring(0.01) 0.01
ViewDemographics(0.01) 0.01
ViewDynamometry and ROM Scoring(0.01) 0.01
ViewFinger Assessment Form(0.01) 0.01
ViewFugl-Meyer Scoring(0.01) 0.01
ViewInclusion Exclusion Checklist(0.01) 0.01
ViewMedical History Form(0.01) 0.01
ViewStroke History Form(0.01) 0.01
ViewStroke Impact Scale(0.01) 0.01
ViewWolf Scoring(0.01) 0.01Page 2 7 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 4.1 Research study methods: analysis Plan 
1.0 * Please describe the analysis plan for the study (it is acceptable to refer to the 
sponsor/multi-site protocol for section if applicable):
Analysis Plan for Aim #1.
We will determine the receiver operating curve (ROC, sensitivity vs 1-specificity) of the 
predictive model for th e primary outcome, a (positive) change in FMA of greater than 
four points at 12 weeks. (A five-point chan ge in FMA is a MCSD [34].) The ROC will be 
compared to the SRT4 model [3 5]. With our proposed sample  size of 64 subjects and 
12% attrition rate, we expect to have 57 subjects completi ng the study, a validation set 
of similar size to the original se t from which the model was derived.
Further analysis, validation and refinement of  the predictive model will be performed 
using the random decision forest technique [36] . This would also result in an algorithm 
like the PREP [30] that can be used for st ep-wise decision-making about embarking on 
the 12-week program of robot+TTT.
Analysis Plan for Aim #2.
The primary analysis with be  correlation between change in physiological parameters 
(e.g. affected M1 connectivity,  recruitment curve slope) and change in FMA. Analysis of 
H-reflex changes will be comp ared to recruitment curve changes to rule out a general 
change in lower motor neuron excitability. Secondarily, there will be correlations of 
these parameters at baseline with baseline motor function measures. A more detailed 
analysis of the MRI data w ill also examine individual in terregional connections to 
determine whether any of them  are more sensitive to the intervention than others. 
There will be exploration of whether the pr edictive model also predicts changes in 
physiological measures, which could lead to  more efficient studies in the future.Page 28 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 5 Sub-Studies
1.0 * Is there a sub-study or are there su b-studies associated with this study?
There is no sub-study associated with this study. Page 2 9 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 6 Study Population Summary
Study Population Summary
1.0 * What is the maximum number of subj ects you plan to enroll at VAPHS?
80
2.0* Do you plan on enrolling patien ts into different categories:
Yes No
If yes, please explain:
3.0 If this is a multi-site study, indicate the projected total subject accrual:
70
4.0* Please provide a justification for the sample size:
Based on our record of recruitment and design feasibility, we propose to enroll 64 participants. Our current 12-week study has an attrition rate  after enrollment of 12% so we anticipate 
completing about 57. We verify that with our samp le size of 57, we will be able to estimate the 
area under the Receiver operating characteristic  (ROC) curve (AUC) with an adequate precision 
(that is, the standard error is reasonably small) . The AUC is an important measure to describe the 
performance of a predictive model for a binary outc ome such as the change in FMA of greater than 
4. The table below displays the standard error (SE) of the estimated AUC for several values of the true AUC and different prevalence of responders [10]. The SE is le ss than 0.07 in all cases except 
when AUC is 0.7 and the proportion of responders is only 33%. (This is the current situation in the preliminary analysis, providing an upper bound on our AUC measure.) 
For Aim #2, which is based on correlations, a sample size of 57 would allow detection of Pearson 
correlations r > 0.365, which is comparable to in dividual correlations found in the Robot Biology 
study, assuming alpha = 0.05, beta = 0.2 [41]. This was confirmed by the Statistics Core using that data and PASS (v14.0) software.Page 30 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 6.1 Study Population
Study Population
1.0 * Check all that apply to desc ribe your study population:
Study Population
Non-Veterans
Special Populations
Veterans
Vulnerable populations
Other
2.0 * Indicate the inclusion criteria for enrollment:
1. Clinically defined, unilateral, hemiparetic st roke with radiologic exclusion of other possible
diagnosis
2. Stroke onset at least 6 months before enrollment
3. Present with Mild/Moderate to Severe arm dysfunction (based on Fugl-Meyer scores of 10 to45)4. Be medically stable to participate in the study
5. Be English speaking
3.0 * Indicate exclusion criteria for enrollment:
1. Unable to give informed consent
2. Have a serious complicating medical illness that would preclude participation.
3. Contractures, orthopedic problems, or othe r impairments that would interfere with the
interventional training or limit the range of joint motion in the potential study arm4. Visual loss such that the subject would not be able to see the test patterns on the robot
computer monitor
5. Botulinum toxin to study arm within four months  of baseline testing or if received during the
study period
6. Unable to comply with requirements of the study
7. <21 years of age8. Enrollment in another greater-than-minimal risk study
9. Presence of medical condition or implant that prevents safe administration of TMS
(history of seizures, and/or currently taking any of the following medications: lamotrigine(Lamictal), levetiracetam (Kep pra), oscarbazepine (Trilept al), topiramate (Topamax),
phenytoin (Dilantin), arbamazepine (Tegretol) , valproic acid (Dep akote), phenobarbital
(Barbita, Luminal, Solfoton) and/or metallic implant in the head and/or neck area including
aneurysm clips or coils, stents, deep brain stimulators, electrodes, shrapnel/bullets, facialtattoos with metallic or magnetic-sensitive ink) or MRI. If participants have a medical
condition or implant mentioned above, this on ly makes them ineligible for TMS and/or MRI,
not for other parts of the study.10. Pregnancy
4.0 If there are any age, ethnic, language, or gender-based exclusion criteria, including the 
exclusion of any pregnant or  lactating women, or those of child-bearing potential, 
please provide justification:Participants must be English speaking to ensure  that all study procedures and interventions are
understood and performed safely.
5.0 Please specify why vulnerable subjects and/ or special populations will not be enrolled: 
6.0 With some exceptions as listed in VHA Han dbook 1200.05, incompetent subjects cannot 
be enrolled in VAPHS approved research. Sp ecify that you will not enroll incompetent 
subjects and the general rules to be used in making that determination:
Incompetent subjects will not be enrolled in this study because they would not meet the 
inclusion/exclusion
criteria for the study.Page 31 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
Page 3 2 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 6.1.1 Non-Veterans
Non-Veterans
1.0 * Target number of participants:
25
2.0* Describe why you cannot complete enrollment  in this study without the use of Non-
Veterans:As stated in our study objectives, our long-range goal is the prescriptive application of intensive 
task practice to individuals who have suffered a stroke, maximizing the cost-benefit ratio. Our 
predictive model must be validated with a large and heterogeneous group of subjects having varied demographics, functional status and neur ophysiology. Considering the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria, it is possible that we would not recruit a sufficient number of veteran subjects required to complete the proposed study in accordance with 38 CFR 17.45 and 38 CFR 17.92. For eligible subjects, their stroke must be their main health deficit. Participants may be excluded from the 
study if they have orthopedic and/or joint prob lems in the arm affected by their stroke. They 
cannot have any other injuries to the brain such as traumatic brain injury diagnosis. Therefore, we will recruit non-veteran subjects in order to achi eve our goal of validating our predictive model. 
Nearly 40 subjects have completed the previous  version of the study without any major study-
related adverse events, therefore we expect future participants will have a low likelihood of injury 
from the study procedures. 
According to the CDC, 795,000 Americans have a st roke every year. Only 15,000 of those are US 
Veterans. This is 1.89% of the to tal number. During recruitment for other studies in our lab, only 
one individual out of the 19 screened was a veteran.  Stroke research is, however, very relevant to 
present and former military personnel and should be pursued. By including nonveterans, this will 
allow for a larger subject pool which will increase the strength of the study statistically speaking. We will make every effort to active ly recruit veterans into this study, including posting of approved 
advertisements at VAPHS, staffing recruitment tabl es at VA Research Week events and requesting 
direct referrals from VA staff. The PI of the st udy is a practicing neurologist at VAPHS and may 
provide information about the study to patients.
The long-range goal of the proposed work is to meet the Department of Veterans Affairs Strategic 
Plan 2014-2020 listed objective 1.1 and create evidence-based rehabilitation methods for veterans with stroke related upper extremity hemiparesis that focus resources more efficiently. By increasing our sample size, the inclusion of non-ve terans will help us to validate evidence-based 
treatment methods for the veteran population. 
The goal of our study is the prescriptive applicat ion of intensive task practice to individuals who 
have suffered a stroke. Once we have validated this predictive model, it can be directly utilized in 
the rehabilitation plans for veterans who have had a stroke. By establishing a larger, more 
heterogeneous subject pool with the inclusion of no n-veterans, the statistical strength of the study 
will increase, which will improve the prediction ability of the model. 
Please upload the Inclusion of  Non-Veterans Worksheet here:
3.0 * If your study is a clinical trial, please  indicate where the VHA Notice of Privacy 
Practices (VA Form 10-0483) will be stored once signed:
This form will be stored in the secured file room in the VA Human Engineering ResearchLaboratory at Bakery Square.Page 3 3 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 7 Risk/Benefit Assessment-Risks
Risk/Benefit Assessment-Risks
1.0 * Risk classification for this study (select one).
Name
Minimal Risk
Greater than Minimal Risk
2.0 * Basis for making the above recommendation:
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation is categorized as  a greater than minimal risk procedure by the 
VAPHS.
3.0 * Describe the safety precautions that will be taken to minimize risks/harms:
There are potential risks associated with some of the procedures included in this study. However, 
the procedures have been planned by the invest igators to minimize th e danger of any major 
complications. All study procedures will be superv ised by qualified personnel who will carefully 
monitor the participants. All participants will undergo a medical and history interview with the PI at entry into the study to assure that it is safe for them to participate.
1. Risk of injury by the robot. The possible inju ries from a malfunctioning robot include bruises, 
pinching, strain, lacerations, dislocations, or bone  fractures. The robot has not caused dislocation 
or bone fracture in any of our ongoing robot studie s. The risk of injury is minimized by the design 
of the robot allowing the participant to stop it as  well as oversight by a staff member who can also 
stop the robot if there is any potential for injury.
2. Risk of injury from TTT. The is minimal risk of muscle fatigue and/or soreness, and joint pain, 
from the repetitive exercise. In order to minimi ze this risk the participant will be supervised 
throughout the activity and given rest breaks as needed. The participant will be made aware that 
they can stop the task at anytime.
3. Seizures. Transcranial magnetic stimulation at low frequency (< 1 Hz) has been used for over 
30 years in a variety of normal subjects and in  subjects with neurological conditions and has 
generally been found to be safe. In a review of 38 studies involving 850 subjects, there were no 
seizures or other major adverse events (Gilbert et al. 2004). For non-neurologically impaired subjects and for subjects with stroke, the risk is considered minimal. Although TMS is not used in 
subjects with implanted metallic devices, it is th ought to be safe in patients with hydrocephalus 
and ventricular shunts. Although high-rate, repeti tive TMS has the potential to induce seizures 
(Wassermann et al. 1996), TMS rates of 0.2 Hz or less are safe in epileptic patients and even
higher rates may have a protective effect in the case of intractable seizures (Tergau et al. 1999).
ONLY rates < 0.2 Hz will be used in this study.
4. Discomfort. 1000 TMS stimuli are an upper limit  that will not be exceeded during any session. 
Usually, it will be far fewer stimuli provided. Bu t in any case, this number (1000) of stimuli not 
likely to be stressful or uncomfo rtable, as they are spread out over time. There is no cumulative 
effect, besides potentially a slight headache. The participant may always ask for a break, and if 
this is done in between mapping different location s, causes no loss of validity of data collection. 
Since the investigator is literally inches away  from the participant, participant comfort is 
monitored closely.
5. The risk of hearing loss from the MRI scanni ng is minimized by having the subject wear 
earplugs or headphones. If a subject feels anxiety in the scanner, they will be removed from the 
scanner. For those participants who have an MRI that reveals a potential condition, previously 
unknown, having the MRI may lead to further medi cal work up. This is likely beneficial, as a 
condition may be revealed earlier in its course than it otherwise would have been, but may cause psychological distress to the participant. The MRI will be reviewed by the PI, a neurologist 
experienced in reading brain MRI, and any need for follow up will be communicated directly to the
participant.
7. Breach of confidentiality. To minimize risk all files and information is maintained in a locked file Page 3 4 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
cabinet in the study coordinator's locked offi ce or the Principle Investigator's office.
8. There are also general risks associated with us ing any piece of equipment and with any exercise 
involving moving, standing, sitting, or lying in place for prolonged periods of time. These risks 
include skin wounds like abrasions, bruises, or i rritations; body stiffness, soreness, aches, and 
trembling; and general symptoms like upse t stomach, chills, fatigue, mood changes, 
lightheadedness, and dizziness. The subject will be  monitored by a staff member while using any 
equipment and will be encouraged to voice any discomfort or fatigue to the study staff to take 
appropriate breaks and precautions as needed.
4.0* Provide details regarding the nature of ea ch risk using the area provided below:
Risk Name
ViewIntervention and Testing
ViewData Collection -Confidentiality
5.0* Do you plan on using the research answering service: Yes No
If yes, please Upload the research answering service form:
Answering Service Form(0.01)
6.0 If your study involves a tr eatment or intervention, please upload the Patient ID Card :
Subject ID Card(0.01)Page 3 5 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 7.1 Risk/Benefit Analysis-Potential Benefits and Alternatives
Risk/Benefit Analysis-Potenti al Benefits and Alternatives
Describe any potential for benefits to participants in this study:
1.0 * Direct and Indirect Be nefits to Subjects:
There may be no direct benefit from participation in this study but they will receive many sessions 
of arm rehabilitation that has previously been sh own to be effective in improving arm function. 
Subjects may receive indirect benefit given that they are contributing to medical science or helping to advance future understanding of rehabilitation after stroke.
2.0 * Describe alternatives (research or non-resear ch) that are available to subjects if they 
choose not to participate in this study:
Participation is voluntary and the alternative is not to participate.Page 3 6 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 8 Methods of Recruitment and Retention
Recruitment Methods and Materials used for Retention
1.0* Select recruitment method s used on this study:
Name
Mail Campaign
Referral by independent source
Advertising such as fliers, letter s, or ads (newspaper, TV, radio)
Web Site
Research registry
Selected from pre-existing records
Pre-existing relationship with participants
Other
If Other Methods Specify:
2.0 * Specify how subjects will be identified an d how study eligibilit y will be determined:
Recruitment will occur from within the VAPHS th rough the neurology and rehabilitation clinical 
services as well as the University of Pittsbur gh Medical Center (UPMC) . Two primary mechanisms 
will be used:
1. The Western Pennsylvania Patient Registry (Pitt IRB# PRO07080061) will be used as a 
recruitment mechanism. This registry draws from pa tients admitted to the UPMC Stroke Institute, 
and area rehabilitation hospitals plus ongoing co ntact from Stroke Survivor Support Groups. The 
purpose of the database is to provide a way to contact appropriate patients to discuss possible 
inclusion in research projects. Our investigators will inform the database coordinator of any recruitment through the database and of any reques ts to opt out. All information will be kept 
confidential. The database is maintained by the Co-Directors who are University of Pittsburgh and 
Carnegie Mellon University professors.
2. UPMC Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (Pitt IRB #12030122). All registry 
participants have provided informed consent to be  contacted for future research studies. The IRB 
approved flyer for this study will be  provided to the registry investigators to distribute to potential 
subjects according to the procedures establishe d in the registry IRB approved protocols. In 
response to the flyer, potential subjects will directly contact the research team if interested in 
participating.
Veteran participants may also be identified th rough screening medical records in CPRS and/or 
VISTA. To identify potential participants, we woul d do a search for a diagnosis of stroke over 6 
months ago and identify which VA clinics the indivi dual attends. We may then contact providers so 
that information about the study can be passed along to the potential subjects. We will also 
regularly provide study pamphlets to VAPHS rehab su pervisors for electronic distribution on their 
“Rehab Recap” email listserv. Physical and occupa tional therapists can then identify appropriate 
Veteran patients that may be candidates for th e study and provide them with information. In 
addition we may staff recruitment tables at VA PHS Research Week events, providing written and 
verbal study information directly to Veterans. VA researchers who attend Stroke Rehabilitation Research Network quarterly meet ings may also be approached directly regarding potential 
participants appropriate for this study. Study pamp hlets will also be placed at the University Drive 
campus registration desk area.
Potential participants will receive the study pamphlet where brochures are displayed at the VA 
Human Engineering Research Laboratories, and ar eas where brochures are displayed at the Rehab 
and Neural Engineering Labs on the University  of Pittsburgh campus. The study pamphlet may 
also be distributed at local stroke support groups. Page 3 7 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
A phone pre-screening will be administered to de termine potential study eligibility. After written 
consent is obtained, eligibility will be formally  determined based upon the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria. 
3.0* Provide the location (or locations) of the sites where participants will be recruited:
VPAHS, HERL- Bakery Square, UPMC, RNEL/ RAFT  Labs, University of Pittsburgh, off-site 
recruitment events (stroke support groups, public speaking events by staff, etc.)
4.0 Please include information regarding any advert isements (print, TV, radio, etc) that will 
be used to recruit subjects in cluding a general description of  where this information will 
be posted:
Our approved study pamphlet has been uploaded in  question 5.0. This w ill be posted at VPAHS, 
the VA Human Engineering Research Laboratories, and areas where brochures are displayed at the 
Rehab and Neural Engineering Labs on the Univer sity of Pittsburgh campus. The study pamphlet 
may also be distributed at local stroke support groups/events to provide information to individuals interested in research participation.
5.0Please UPLOAD the documents that will be used for recruitment and an introductory 
statement or letter to accompany consent fo r those studies obtaining written informed 
consent using methods such as fax, email or mail (if applicable). Please also upload any 
screening/recruitment question s that will be verbally as ked of potential research 
subjects.  Also, if you will be providing an y retention materials, please upload them 
here.
Name Reviewer Modified Date Version Number
Public Affairs email Boos, Amy 9/20/2019 10:09 AM 0.02
Study Pamphlet Boos, Amy 9/20/2019 10:09 AM 0.02Page 38 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 9 Informed Consent
Informed Consent
1.0
* Indicate the types of consent that will be invo lved in this study (check any or all that 
apply):
Informed Consent Category
Written/signed consent by subject
Waivers are being requested.
2.0 * Waivers: If you are applying for any waivers of consent (check any or all that apply):
Name
Waiver of Informed Consent
Waiver of HIPAA Authorization
Waiver of Documentation of Informed Cons ent ( telephone consent, verbal script)
No Waiver at all
3.0 * Will this study include non-English speaking participants?
Yes NoPage 3 9 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 9.1 Waiver of HIPAA
You have indicated you are requ esting a waiver of HIPAA. 
1.0 * Is the request only for Sc reening/Recruitment purposes?
Yes No
If yes, please describe your screening/recruitment method:
We will use a phone screening script to explain the study and ask eligibility questions over the
phone. The waiver is for the verbal screening an d review of medical records after verbal consent.
If no, the request is for the full study (e.g. retr ospective chart reviews and certain observational 
studies)
Please describe the types of records and/or databases to be accessed:
We will access the discharge summary and MRI repo rt from when an individual had their stroke 
relating to the current study. 
THE IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION BEING REQUESTED:
Note: If participants will be receiving payment and HIPAA Authorization is not being obtained, you 
must select Names, Addresses and Social Security Numbers as that information will be disclosed for 
payment purposes.
2.0* Identifiable Information per HIPAA Definition
Name
None
Account numbers
Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints
Certificate/license numbers
Device identifiers and serial numbers
Elements of dates (except year, for exam ple, date of birth, admission date, 
discharge date, date of death, date of procedures; and all ages over 89)
Email Address
Fax Numbers
Full-face photographic images or any comparable images
Geographical subdivisions smaller than a State (street address, city, county, 
precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geoc odes, except for the initial three digits 
of a zip code)
Health plan beneficiary numbers
Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers
Medical Record Numbers
Name or any derivative of  name such as initials
Social Security Numbers
Telephone Numbers
URLs (Web Universal Resource Locators) 
Vehicle identifiers and serial numbe rs, including license plate numbers
Any other unique identifying number, characteri stic, or code (Note: The study ID number, 
code or other means of record identification is not considered one of the identifiers that must 
be excluded for de-identification)
3.0* Patient Protected Health Information:Page 40 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
Name
Demographic Information (e .g., Name, Address, Phone Number, Social Security 
Number
Billing and Payment Information
Hospital or Medical Records
History and Physical Exam Notes
Mental Health Records
Data Previously Collected for Research Purposes
Progress Notes
Consultation Reports
Laboratory Test Results
Operative Reports
Other
Please indicate the 'Other' Patient Protected Health Information:
Answers to phone screen 
4.0Other Health Information:
Name
There are no items to displayPage 41 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 9.1.1 Waiver of HIPAA - More Information
Waiver of HIPAA- More Information 
1.0 * Describe how the identifiable information is  to be used and/or disclosed only by 
members of the research team and the following persons (identify with specificity and 
justify the need to disclose the info rmation to anyone outside the VHA.)  Note: If 
participants will be receiving payment and HIPAA Authorization is not being obtained, 
you must also describe this di sclosure to representatives of  the VA for administrative 
purposes here. 
Also describe how this activity meets the “minimum necessary st andard” described in 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule:All registry participants have provided informed  consent to be contacted for research studies. 
Individuals will be contacted acco rding to the procedures established in the registry IRB approved 
protocols. Research staff will be provided with co ntact information for individuals from the registry 
who may be eligible for the study. Recruitment materials will be sent to individuals from the 
registry.
Identified information will be used to screen pr ospective subjects for eligibility. Subjects can 
choose to answer the phone screening questions with a yes or no. The phone screen is performed in an effort to reduce the burden of travel on in dividuals who may not be eligible for the study. If 
an individual agrees to schedule a consent visit, then their name and contact information will be 
recorded.
The proposed study poses minimal risk to the privacy of the subjects because...
2.0 * Describe how the identifiable information will be protected from improper use or 
disclosure by (detail how this will be accomp lished including the limitations of physical 
or electronic access to the info rmation and other protections):
Registry information will not be shared with an yone not involved in the recruitment process. 
Information will be recorded on the phone screenin g paper form and stored in a locked file room 
with other identifiable data.
3.0 * Describe how the identifiers will be destroyed at the earliest opportunity consistent 
with the research (discuss the timeframe or the reasons the identifiers must be 
retained, including health or research justif ications or any legal requirement to retain 
them) (Note: At this time, identifiers used for research screening and all other screening 
records must be retained indefinitely and th is must be documented  by checking “Other” 
below):
All research records will be maintained in accord ance with the Veterans Health Administration 
(VHA) Records Control Schedule. Paper records will be disposed of using methods deemed appropriate by the VAPHS Privacy Officer, and all electronic data will be sanitized using methods 
rendered appropriate by the VAPHS ISO.
* When will screening data be  de-identified or destroyed:
Name
Other
If Other, please describe:
All research records will be maintained in accord ance with the Veterans Health Administration 
(VHA) Records Control Schedule. Paper records will be disposed of using methods deemed 
appropriate by the VAPHS Privacy Officer, and all electronic data will be sanitized using methods 
rendered appropriate by the VAPHS ISO.
4.0 * Describe how the identifiable information will  not be reused or disclosed to any other 
person or entity outside the VHA other th an the manner described in the protocol, 
except as a required by law, for authorized  oversight of this research study, or as 
specifically approved for used  in another study by an IRB:
Information (including any medical records) will rema in in locked file storage as described in our 
protocol along with other identifiable study inform ation. It will not be reused or disclosed to any 
other person or entity not directly involved in the study, except as required by law, for authorized 
oversight of this research study, or as specific ally approved for use in another study by an IRB.Page 4 2 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
5.0 * Describe why the proposed study cannot be pr acticably conducted  without a waiver of 
authorization: (discuss reasons why it woul d not be possible to obtain authorization 
from individual subjects.  Time constraint s themselves are generally not considered 
adequate for this justification:
The phone screening is conducted to minimize the burden of travel for people who may not be 
eligible for the study. Since initial screening is conducted over the phone, providing written 
authorization prior to asking the screening questions is not practical. Verbal authorization also allows medical record screening which will help iden tify participants who may not be eligible for 
the study. The anticipated discomfort in answering the screening questions is not greater than 
what is encountered in daily life. People can choose not to answer the questions in the phone 
screening. If they choose not to answer these questi ons, we will inform them that eligibility criteria 
will be verified after informed consent.
6.0 * Describe why the proposed study cannot be done without the specified identifiable 
information: Discuss reasons why it would not be possible to conduct the research 
without the identifiable information being collected.
The phone screening is conducted to minimize the burden of travel for people who may not be 
eligible for the study. Since initial screening is conducted over the phone, providing written 
authorization prior to asking the screening questions is not practical. The anticipated discomfort in 
answering the screening questions is not greater than what is encountered in daily life. People can 
choose not to answer the questions in the phone screening. If they choose not to answer these questions, we will inform them that eligibility cr iteria will be verified after informed consent.Page 4 3 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 9.3 Waiver of Documentation of Informed Consent
Waiver of Documentation of Informed Consent
You have selected a waiver of Do cumentation of Informed Consent
1.0This is a request for Waiver of Document ation of Informed Consent because this 
research study conforms to ei ther A and/or B (Check if ‘yes’ and provide the verifying 
information requested): 
* A: The only record linking the subject and the research would be the consent document and the 
principal risk would be potential harm resulting from  a breach of confidentiality.  Each subject will 
be asked whether the subject wants documentation linking the subject with the research, and the 
subject's wishes will govern.    Yes No
AND/OR
* B: The proposed study poses minimal risk to the subjects.   Yes No
If yes, please explain why the proposed study po ses minimal risks to the subjects.  (Outline the 
subject’s involvement in the project and why the study poses minimal risk) :The anticipated discomfort in answering the screening questions is not greater than what is expected to be encountered in daily life.
2.0 *  The research involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required 
outside of the research context.  Research procedures include:
Questions will be asked over the phone to dete rmine if the potential participant meets the 
eligibility criteria for this study.
3.0 * Explain how whenever appropri ate, the subjects will be provided with additional 
pertinent information (e.g . an information sheet):
If the subject is interested in participating in th e study after screening, then they will be scheduled 
for an in-person consent process.
4.0 Please upload SCRIPT here:
Document Description Version Number
ViewPhone Screening Script(0.04) 0.04Page 4 4 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 9.4 Consent Forms & Process of Consent
Consent Forms & Process of Consent
1.0 Upload the completed forms into the correct lists below.
1.1 Informed Consent Form (clean copy):
Document Modified Date Version Number
ViewConsent Form(0.09) 12/3/2019 12:00 AM 0.09
1.2 Provider Behavior Informed Consent Form (clean copy):
Document Modified Date Version Number
There are no items to display
1.3 Screening Informed Consent Form (clean copy):
Document Modified Date Version Number
There are no items to display
2.0 Consent Forms (modified copy):
Document Modified Date Version Number
ViewICF with tracked changes(0.05) 1/29/2020 10:45 AM 0.05
3.0 * Describe how, where, when, and by whom  the consent process will be initiated:
Potential subjects will be provided an explanatio n of the purpose of the research, why they are 
being asked to participate, and the duration of the study. In addition, the potential participant will 
be made aware of any foreseeable risks associ ated with the study as well as any potential 
benefits. Potential participants will be made aware of the alternative to participation in the study 
and the methods used to protect the confidentiality of the records during the study. Also, subjects 
will be told that their participation in this study is completely voluntary and that they can withdraw 
at any time. Information on who to contact if they were to have any questions, concerns, or
complaints about this research will also be provid ed. Subjects will also be asked if they understand 
the purpose, risks and benefits, procedures, and th eir rights as a research subject. Any questions 
the subjects have at any time will be answered by one of the listed study team members. The 
entire process will occur prior to obtaining written informed consent. The principal investigator or a 
team member of this study will be involved in the consent process described above. The consent 
process will take place in a private location.
4.0 * Will you be maintaining a Master List of Subjects?
Yes 
5.0 * Describe when the subject’s name will be a dded to the master list and how the list will 
be maintained in a secure fashion.  
Only once informed consent has been obtained from the subject and it has been documented using an IRB approved consent form, will the study subject’s name be added to the master list of subjects. The electronic master list will be secu red in compliance with all VA confidentiality and 
information security requirements at \\vhapt hmulherl07.v04.m ed.va.gov\herl\HERL Projects 
Wittenberg\3161.SRT5.Page 4 5 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.0.0 Data Security an d Privacy: Data Types Storing
10.0 Data Types Collecting and Storing
1.0Click the add button (below) to open an entry form to indicate the types and/or sources 
of the data that will be collected /stored as part of the project. 
Instructions:  For each type/source of data that will be collected as part of the project, 
this includes screening data, click the add bu tton to open an entry form that lists the 
types and/or sources of data. Select a source/type of the data that will be 
collected/stored. Then indicate what, if any, identifiers or sensitive information will be 
collected/stored from the source/type (None is  an option). To a dd another source/type 
click “OK Add Another” button to open up  a new entry form to repeat the process.
Example 1: You are collecting data from VA Medical records including names, last 4 of 
SSN, and addresses. Therefor e, you would select “VA medical record data” as the 
source, and then select in the identifiers: “Name or any derivative  of name, such as 
initials,” “Social Security Numbers,” and “Geographical subdivisi ons smaller than a 
State (street address, city, county, precinct , zip code, and their equivalent geocodes, 
except for the initial three digits of a zi p code)” as the identi fiers being collected.
Example 2:  You are screening VA Medical Records and recording the information you 
use to screen (i.e.: names, last 4 of SSN, and addresses, etc.)  Note: This information 
must be treated as a Source document, please  select “Screening” as the source and then 
select the identifiers “Name or any derivative of name, such as initia ls,” “Social Security 
Numbers,”, as applicable.
* 
Data Type/Source Collection Details Identifiers
ViewOther
Robotic Quantitative 
MeasuresThe Armeo Power robot has the 
ability to precisely record a 
subject's performance during 
assisted and unassisted modes. We may use this data to 
provide an objective motor 
performance measure to augment the clinical evaluations. The KINARM robot 
may also be used to perform a 
set of standard sensory, motor, and cognitive-motor 
evaluations. None
ViewQuestionnaires/Surveys, 
paperDemographic and questionnaire 
data will be recorded on the 
attached data collection sheets by approved research staff. 
Subjects will be assigned a 
subject number for labeling the data collection sheets. Prior to 
data entry, all data will be 
reviewed for inconsistencies and checked for missing values.Telephone 
Numbers
Geographical 
subdivisions 
smaller than a State (street 
address, city, 
county, precinct, zip 
code, and their 
equivalent geocodes, except for the Page 4 6 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
Data Type/Source Collection Details Identifiers
initial three 
digits of a zip code)
Name or any 
derivative of name such as 
initials
ViewOther
TMSMagnetic stimulation will be 
performed at each examination according to the following general experimental 
procedure: The target muscle 
will be at rest during the entire procedure with the participant 
resting on a pillow in the lap. 
Audio monitoring of muscle activity is performed during the 
study through the EMG 
amplifier to ensure that muscles are at rest. Soft foam earplugs are inserted into each 
ear canal for hearing 
protection. The three dimensional coordinates of 
each TMS stimulation site will 
be measured using an optical digitizing device (Vicra, 
Northern Digital Inc.) with 
localization software (BrainSight, Rogue Research, Montreal, Canada.) This 
technique ensures reproducible 
locations at each session, without having to search for 
the hotspot each time.None
ViewOther
MRI The data will be collected and 
recorded at the MRRC by research staff and study staff. Data will be transferred via a 
VA-encrypted hard drive to the 
VAPHS server.None
ViewOther
Social Security NumberSocial Security numbers will be 
collected and then destroyed after creation of the VA CPRS 
health record, which is required 
for study enrollment and progress notes for this 
intervention study. Social Security 
NumbersPage 4 7 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.0.1 Data Security and Privacy: Social Security Numbers
10.0.1 Data Security and Privacy: Social Security Numbers
1.0 You indicated that you will be using all or some part of the research subjects' SSNs as 
part of this study.  Which of the following will you be using:
Real Social Security numbers * Yes No
Scrambled Social Security numbers * Yes No
Last 4 digits of Social Security Number * Yes No
Other (some derivation of the SSN) * Yes No
If other, please explain:
2.0 * Please describe how subjects ’ Social Security numbers w ill be used in this study:
The SS number is required for CPRS documentatio n in this intervention study as well as for 
processing payment. The last 4 digits are required on the HIPAA form, which will be stored in a secure file room with other paper documents at  the Human Engineering Research Laboratories. 
HERL is located at Bakery Square, 6425 Penn Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15206. The secure file room 
is Suite 401, Room 4103. This is a locked room inside a locked office, inside a locked suite. 
Documents are transported under an approved Auth orization to Transport and Utilize VA Sensitive 
Information Outside Protected Environments form. 
3.0 * Please describe the security measures that will be taken to protect SSNs.
The SS number will be destroyed af ter the CPRS record is created. Page 48 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.1.0 Data Security and Privacy: Incoming Data
10.1.0 Incoming Data 
1.0 * Will data be transferred into VAPHS?
Yes. Data is being obtained from a non-VA  source and will be transferred to VAPHSPage 4 9 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.1.1 Data Security and Privac y: Incoming Data - Identifiable Data
10.1.1 Incoming Data - Identifiable Data
1.0* Is any of the data being transferred into VAPHS identifiable? Yes No
If yes, please describe what the identifiab le data is and where it is coming from:Page 50 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.2.0 Data Security and Privacy: Outgoing Data
10.2.0 Outgoing Data 
1.0 * Will any of the data being collected/st ored be transferred outside of VAPHS?
Yes. The data will be transferred to a non-VA entity.Page 51 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.3.0 Data Security and Privacy: Local Data Storage Types
10.3.0 Local Data Storage Types 
1.0 * How will data be stored on this project? (Select all that apply)
On Paper
ElectronicallyPage 5 2 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.3.1 Data Security and Privacy: Local Data Storage Types - Paper
10.3.1 Local Data Storage Types - Paper 
1.0* All VA research data collected in paper must  be stored in a lock ed room at VAPHS. 
List the room number(s) and th e campus(es) where data will be stored in the text box 
below.Paper documents will be stored in a secure file room at the Human Engineering Research Laboratories. HERL is located at Bakery Square, 6425 Penn Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15206. The secure file room is Suite 401, Room 4103. This is  a locked room inside a locked office, inside a 
locked suite. Page 5 3 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.3.2 Data Security and Privacy: Local Data Storage Types - Electronic
10.3.2 Local Data Storage Types - Electronic
1.0 * Where is the electronic data being stored? Select all that apply.
VAPHS Network (shared drive)
VA Encrypted VA external drive or thumb drive
Other
If "Other" please describe OR if you would like to provide additional information for 
clarification, please elaborate in the text box below.Non-identifiable data may be collected and anal yzed using a non-VA (Pitt) computer with any 
identifiable data being stored on the VAPHS shared drive. The equipment used in this study may require specific software that is available on non- VA (Pitt) computers. All data will ultimately be 
transferred and stored on the VAPHS network us ing an encrypted hard drive. All data being 
transferred will be non-identifiable . Access will be restricted to only those associated with this 
research study. Data may include kinematic, ne urophysiological and robot-generated metrics. 
If you selected VAPHS or VA  Network (Shared Drive), please provide the name of the 
drive (i.e. "MySharedDriveNa me (\\vapthshsare) (X:)"):
\\oitpthhsmsvm200.v04.med.va.gov\Research\Wittenberg_Pro3161_PSRT5Page 5 4 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.4.0 Data Security and Privacy: Reusing Data
10.4.0 Data Security and Privacy: Reusing Data
1.0
* Will the data collected in this st udy be reused in other studies? Yes No
If yes, please describe where the data to be reused will be stored and how access to 
that data will be provided and monitored:
2.0 If this research is part of a grant, pl ease upload the Data Management Access Plan 
(DMAP) or Resource Sharin g Plan for this study.
Name Modified Date
DMAP 7/15/2019 1:59 PMPage 5 5 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.5.0 Data Security and Privacy:  Off-Site Storage and Transfer of Data
10.5.0 Off-Site Storage and Transfer of Data
1.0 * You indicated that data collected as part of this study will 
be transferred outside of VA/VAPHS. Please provide a 
justification for why the data must be stored, transmitted, and/or transfe rred off-site:
Data may be transferred to the Magnetic Resonance Research 
Center, where MRI scans will be performed. Click here for Research 
Data Security and 
Privacy Frequently 
Asked Questions 
Specify in detail how data 
will be collected, entered, and analyzed. For multisite 
studies, if no data entry 
and/or analysis will occur on site, this should be specified. 
Specify how long each phase 
of the study will take to complete and provide a time line for each aspect of the 
study ending with the final 
analyses and projected publication/presentation 
timeframe. If you are 
seeking exempt status on the basis of retrospective 
medical records review, 
please include the start and end dates (dates of creation) of the medical records you 
wish to use (Note: In order 
for the study to be granted exempt status the data must 
have already been collected 
prior to the date of submission of the application 
for exempt status)   Also, 
provide all data entry forms or a complete list of the variables you will be 
collecting.
2.0 Please list all locations or individuals who will receive/be 
provided with the data, including sponsor, site monitors, 
coordinating center , University of Pi ttsburgh, non-VA 
investigators/collaborators, reading centers, core laboratories, other research laboratories, data monitoring 
committee, etc.
* Data Recipients and Identifiers:
Recipient 
and 
DescriptionIdentifier Identifier 
DescriptionTransfer 
Methods
University 
of Pittsburgh
Magnetic 
Resonance Research 
Center 
(MRRC)Elements of 
dates (except 
year, for 
example, date of birth, 
admission 
date, Date of 
BirthDirect entry into electronic 
website (Provide URL Below)
mrctr.upmc.edu/mrsched/Any identifiable information 
that is being shared with these individuals/entities 
must be described in the 
HIPAA authorization (in the disclosure section). Page 5 6 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
Recipient 
and DescriptionIdentifier Identifier 
DescriptionTransfer 
Methods
discharge 
date, date 
of death, 
date of procedures; 
and all 
ages over 89)
Telephone NumbersTelephone 
numberDirect entry into electronic 
website (Provide URL Below)
mrctr.upmc.edu/mrsched/
Name or 
any 
derivative of name such as 
initialsFirst 
name, 
Last nameDirect entry into electronic 
website (Provide URL 
Below)
mrctr.upmc.edu/mrsched/Page 5 7 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.5.1 Data Security and Privacy: Keeping a Copy of the Data
10.5.1 Data Security and Privac y: Keeping a Copy of the Data
1.0* How will the study team keep a copy of th e data at VAPHS that is being transferred?
Name
Paper (copies of CRFs, questionnaires, etc.)
Specify other method of maintaining a copy of the data being transferred:
The data will be stored on the subject demographic forms, which will be stored in a secure file 
room with other paper documents at the Human Engineering Research Laboratories. HERL is located at Bakery Square, 6425 Penn Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15206. The secure file room is Suite 401, Room 4103. This is a locked room insi de a locked office, inside a locked suite. 
2.0 * Upload the VA Data Storage and Retrieval Worksheet:Page 58 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.6.0 Data Security and Privacy: HIPAA
10.6.0 Data Security and Privacy: HIPAA
The Healthcare Insurance Portability and Accountab ility Act (HIPAA) prohibits the use of a person's 
Protected Health Information without a valid authorization.
1.0 * Select the option which fits this study:
Name
Not applicable: No PHI is being used or disclosed by VAPHS
Not applicable: Waiver has been requested
HIPAA Authorization (Combined Consent and HIPAA Authorization)
HIPAA Authorization (Standalone)
Upload HIPAA authorizat ion (Standalone) here:
Document Modified Date Version Number
ViewPlaceholder Document(0.02) 8/2/2019 3:14 PM 0.02
2.0 At screening will clinical personnel be asked to share potential participants PHI:
Yes No
 If yes, please upload the 10-5345:Page 5 9 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.7.0 Data Security and Privacy: Additional Information
10.7.0 Data Security and Privacy: Additional Information
1.0Does this research involve...
* ...specially obtained software? Yes No
If yes, please describe the softwar e and what it is being used for:
Actilife software is the proprietary software associ ated with the Actigraph activity monitors. It is 
the only software that can export the data from the monitors and convert it to a .csv or .dat file that can then be used for majority of the analysis.
SIGNAL is required to administer Transcrania l Magnetic Stimulation according to the study 
protocol. MATLAB is required for data analysis.
The Armeo Power and KINARM robots run on propriet ary software that allows safe use with human 
subjects.
The ActiLife software license was previously purchased from the company ActiGraph. A SIGNAL 
software license has also been purchased from the company A-M Systems. Only coded data will be stored in temporary files on the computer’s hard drive as data is collected. 
The Armeo Power robot runs on proprietary software that was included in the original purchase of 
the robotic system from the company Hocoma. The KINARM robot runs on proprietary software that was included in the original  purchase of the robotic system from the company BKin / KINARM. 
The robot computers will not be connected to the VA or Pitt networks. MATLAB software will only 
be used for analysis and is licensed through the RNEL.
* ...one or more Web- based applications?
Yes No
If yes, please describe the application and what it is being used for:
* ...mobile devices? Yes No
If yes, please describe:
2.0
* Will a Certificate of Confidentiality be obtained for this study? Yes No
If yes, please attach the Certificate of Confidentiality:
3.0* Will VA sensitive information be tran sported and utilized outside protected 
environments? Yes No
If you answered yes above, please upload a fu lly executed VAPHS Memo to Take VA Sensitive 
Information Outside a Protected Environment by following these instructions  .Page 60 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 10.8.0 Data Security and Privacy: Certifications
10.8.0 Certifications
1.0 * I certify that all study staff are up-to- date and will remain up-to-date with 
Information Security Awarene ss Training, Rules of Behavior, and VHA Privacy Training.
Yes No
2.0 * I also certify that when an individual is no  longer part of the study team, access will 
be removed to research study data. Yes No
3.0 * I certify that all research records will be ma intained in accordance with the Veterans 
Health Administration (VHA)Rec ords Control Schedule. Paper records will be disposed of 
using methods deemed appropriate by the VAPH S Privacy Officer, and all electronic data 
will be sanitized using methods render ed appropriate by the VAPHS ISO. Yes No
4.0 * I certify that any loss or compromise of any VA sensitive information (including 
research data), VA equipment or device, or an y non-VA equipment or device that is used 
to transport, access, or stor e VA information will be reported in accordance with the 
reporting requirements out lined in VA Handbook 6500. Yes No
5.0 * I certify that, in accordance with VA Handb ook 6500, no personal laptops will be used  
for official VA business in conjunction with this study. Yes NoPage 61 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 11 Local Data Safety Monitoring Plan
Local Data Safety Monitoring Plan
 For local studies, a data and safety monitoring plan (DSMP) must be established.
1.0 * Please describe how the study procedur es and data being collected will be 
continuously monitored so that changes in the risk/benefit ratio can be determined in a 
timely fashion during th e course of the study:
A data and safety monitoring pl an will be implemented to insure that there are no changes 
in the benefit/risk ratio during the study and that confidentiality of research data is 
maintained. These meetings are overseen by th e Directors of HERL or  their designees. Any 
instances of adverse events will be reported immediately using the standard forms and/or 
procedures set forth by the Institutional Review  Board. In addition, clinical coordinators 
from HERL may periodically review study do cumentation and/or consent forms to ensure 
that subject’s confidentiality is maintained. Reporting of adverse ev ents will be done as 
outlined by the VAPHS IRB. A data safety and monitoring report will be sent to the IRB at 
the time of renewal.
2.0 * Describe how frequently Invest igators, study personnel, an d the clinical coordinators 
involved in the study will meet and/or review study data.
Investigators, study personnel, and the clinical coordinators involved in the study will meet 
quarterly to discuss the study (e.g. study goals, progress, mo difications, documentation, 
recruitment, retention, data analysis, and confidentiality) and address any issues or 
concerns at this time.  
3.0 * Will this study use a Data Safety Monitori ng Board or Data Monitoring committee? 
Yes No
4.0 * Will this study use a Medical Monitor?  
Yes NoPage 6 2 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 12 Costs and Payments
Costs and Payments
1.0 * Does this study have a budget?:
Yes No
If yes, please upload the current budget:
Budget(0.01)
2.0* Will patients receive payments for this study?
Yes No
If yes, please upload the financial letter of su pport (either from the Business Service line or the 
Veterans Health Foundation) or documentation wa iving the requirement of a letter of support:
Financial LOS Memo 0.01
3.0 * Are you paying patients using the WePay system?
no Page 6 3 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 12.1 Costs
Costs 
1.0 * Will subjects be required to pay for any services outside of the VHA that may be 
required as part of participating in this research study?
No.Page 6 4 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 12.2 Participant Payments
Participant Payments 
1.0 * Please explain how the proposed payments are reasonable and commensurate with 
the expected contribu tions of the subject:
Participants will receive payment for time and e ffort for their study participation, commensurate 
with their expected contributions to the research study. Participants will be attending over 40 
sessions that involve attention and effort, especia lly during the exercise sessions. They will be 
contributing a significant amount of time and the information gathered from each individual 
contributes to the validation of the predictive mo del and is therefore very valuable to the study 
outcomes. 
2.0 * Please provide information on how the subject payments are fair and appropriate, and 
that they do not constitute (or appear to co nstitute) undue pressure or influence on the 
prospective research subjects to volunteer for, or to continue to participate in, the 
research study. In additional the payments do not constitute (or appear to constitute) 
coercion to participate in, or continue  to participate in, the research study:
The payment is a small amount and as such does not appear to constitute coercion to participate in the research study. Payments are approximately the same as that of other researcher studies in 
the building and area where the study is conducted. Payment is designed to approximate the cost 
of transportation plus time an d effort of the participants. 
3.0 * Specify the amount, form of payment and the specific disburse ment schedule of 
payments:
Payment of $20 per visit will be made once a month while participants are enrolled in the study. Except in limited circumstances, payments issued  through VA are generated by Electronic Funds 
Transfer (EFT). If participants are not able to  receive payment through EFT, the Direct Express 
Debit MasterCard may be issued. The Direct Expr ess Debit MasterCard is a prepaid debit card.
4.0 * Are the subjects being paid employees?
no 
If yes, please describe how it will be in accordance with the SOP:Page 6 5 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 14 References
References:
1.0* Please provide a li st of references (Multi-site protocols: You may reference the page 
numbers in the original protocol):1. Benjamin EJ, Blaha MJ, Chiuve SE, Cushman M, Das SR, Deo R, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke 
Statistics-2017 Update: A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135(10):e146-e603.2. Go A, Mozaffarian D, Roger V, Benjamin E, Be rry J, Borden W, et al. Heart disease and stroke 
statistics--2013 update: a report from the Amer ican Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;127
(1):e6-e245.3. Krishnamurthi RV, Feigin VL, Forouzanfar MH, Mensah GA, Connor M, Be nnett DA, et al. Global 
and regional burden of first-ever ischaemic and haemorrhagic stroke during 1990-2010: findings 
from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet Glob Health. 2013;1(5):e259-81.4. Gauthier L, Taub E, Perkins C, Ortmann M, Mark V, Uswatte G. Remodeling the brain: plastic 
structural brain changes produced by different motor therapies after stroke. Stroke. 2008;39(5):1520-5.5. Wittenberg GF, Chen R, Ishii K, Bushara KO, Eckloff S, Croarkin E, et al. Constraint-induced 
therapy in stroke: magnetic-stimulation motor maps and cerebral activation. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2003;17(1):48-57.6. Wittenberg G, Bastings E, Fowlkes A, Morgan T,  Good D, Pons T. Dynamic course of intracortical 
TMS pairedpulse responses during recovery of mo tor function after stroke. Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair. 2007;21(6):568-73.7. Raghavan P, Santello M, Gordon A, Krakauer  J. Compensatory motor control after stroke: an 
alternative joint strategy for object-dependent sh aping of hand posture. J Neurophysiol. 2010;103
(6):3034-43.8. Boyeson M, Jones JL, Harmon RL. Sparing of motor function after cortical injury: a new perspective on underlying mechanisms. Archives of Neurology. 1994;51:405-14.9. Kwakkel G, Meskers C, van Wege n E, Lankhorst G, Geurts A, van Kuijk A, et al. Impact of early 
applied upper limb stimulation: the EXPLICIT-s troke programme design. BMC Neurol. 2008;8:49.
10. Hanley J, McNeil B. The meaning and use of th e area under a receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) curve. Radiology. 1982;143(1):29-36.11. O'Dell M, Lin C, Harrison V. Stroke rehabilitat ion: strategies to enhance motor recovery. Annu 
Rev Med. 2009;60:55-68.12. Mehrholz J, Pohl M, Platz T, Kugler J, Elsner B. Electromechanical and robot-assisted arm 
training for improving activities of daily living, arm function, and arm muscle strength after stroke. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;9:CD006876.13. Colombo R, Pisano F, Delconte C, Mazzone A,  Grioni G, Castagna M, et al. Comparison of 
exercise training effect with different robotic de vices for upper limb rehabilitation: a retrospective 
study. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med. 2017;53(2):240-8.14. Brokaw EB, Holley RJ, Lum PS. Comparison of joint space and end point space robotic training 
modalities for rehabilitation of interjoint coordination in individuals with moderate to severe impairment from chronic stroke. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2013;21(5):787-95.15. Kwakkel G, Kollen BJ, Krebs HI. Effects of Robot-Assisted Therapy on Upper Limb Recovery 
After Stroke: A Systematic Review. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2008;22(2):111-21.16. Kissela B, Khoury J, Alwell K,  Moomaw C, Woo D, Adeoye O, et al. Age at stroke: temporal 
trends in stroke incidence in a large, biracial population. Neurology. 2012;79(17):1781-7.17. Murray CJ, Atkinson C, Bhalla K, Birbeck G, Burs tein R, Chou D, et al. The state of US health, 
1990-2010: burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors. JAMA. 2013;310(6):591-608.18. Rothman S, Mattson M. Activity-dependent, stress-responsive BDNF signaling and the quest 
for optimal brain health and resilience throughout the lifespan. Neuroscience. 2013;239:228-40.Page 6 6 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
19. van der Lee JH, Wagenaar RC, Lankhorst GJ, Vogelaar TW, Deville WL, Bouter LM. Forced use 
of the upper extremity in chronic stroke patients : results from a single-blind randomized clinical 
trial. Stroke. 1999;30(11):2369-75.20. Westat. National Survey of Veterans, Active  Duty Service Members, Demobilized National 
Guard and Reserve Members, Family Members and Surviving Spouses. 2010. p. Contract GS-23F-
8144H.21. Wagner TH, Lo AC, Peduzzi P, Bravata DM, Hu ang GD, Krebs HI, et al. An Economic Analysis 
of Robot-Assisted Therapy for Long-Term Upper- Limb Impairment After Stroke. Stroke. 2011;42
(9):2630-U422.22. Wittenberg G, Bastian A, Dromerick A, Th ach W, Powers W. Mirror movements complicate 
interpretation of cerebral activation changes during recovery from subcortical infarction. 
Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2000;14(3):213-21.23. Wolf S, Winstein C, Miller J, Taub E, Uswatte G, Morris D, et al. Effect of constraint-induced 
movement therapy on upper extremity function 3 to 9 months after stroke: the EXCITE randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2006;296(17):2095- 104.24. Lo A, Guarino P, Richards L, Haselkorn J, Wittenberg G, Federman D, et al. Robot-assisted 
therapy for long-term upper-limb impairment after stroke. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(19):1772-83.25. Kwakkel G, Winters C, van We gen EE, Nijland RH, van Kuijk AA, Visser-Meily A, et al. Effects 
of Unilateral Upper Limb Training in Two Distinct Prognostic Groups Early After Stroke: The EXPLICIT-Stroke Randomiz ed Clinical Trial. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2016;30(9):804-16.
26. Sawaki L, Butler A, Xiaoyan L, Wassenaar P, Mohammad Y, Blanton S, et al. Constraint-
induced movement therapy results in increased motor map area in subjects 3 to 9 months after stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2008;22(5):505-13.27. Sawaki L, Butler A, Leng X, Wassenaar P, Mohammad Y, Blanton S, et al. Differential patterns 
of cortical reorganization following constraint-i nduced movement therapy during early and late 
period after stroke: A preliminary study. NeuroRehabilitation. 2014.28. Wittenberg GF, Richards LG, Jones-Lush LM, Roys SR, Gullapalli RP, Yang S, et al. Predictors and brain connectivity changes associated with arm motor function improvement from intensive practice in chronic stroke. F1000Res. 2016;5:2119.29. Frohlich H, Balling R, Beerenwinkel N, Kohlbacher  O, Kumar S, Lengauer T, et al. From hype to 
reality: data science enabling personalized medicine. BMC Med. 2018;16(1):150.30. Stinear C, Barber P, Petoe M, Anwar S, Bybl ow W. The PREP algorithm predicts potential for 
upper limb recovery after stroke. Brain. 2012;135(Pt 8):2527-35.31. Stinear CM, Byblow WD, Ackerley SJ, Barber PA, Smith MC. Predicting Recovery Potential for Individual Stroke Patients Increases Rehabilitation Efficiency. Stroke. 2017;48(4):1011-9.32. Connell LA, Smith MC, Byblow WD, Stinear CM . Implementing biomarkers to predict motor 
recovery after stroke. NeuroRehabilitation. 2018;43(1):41-50.33. Gauthier L, Taub E, Mark V, Perkins C, Uswatte G. Improvement after constraint-induced 
movement therapy is independent of infarct location in chronic stroke patients. Stroke. 2009;40(7):2468-72.34. Lin K, Hsieh Y, Wu C, Chen C, Jang Y, Liu J.  Minimal detectable change and clinically important 
difference of the Wolf Motor Function Test in st roke patients. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2009;23
(5):429-34.35. DeLong ER, DeLong DM. Compar ing the areas under two or more correlated receiver operating 
characteristic curves: A non-parametric approach. Biometrics. 1988;44:837-45.36. Breiman L. Random forests. Mach Learn. 2001;45(1):5-32.37. Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Nieto-Castanon A. Conn: a functional connectivity toolbox for correlated and anticorrelated brain networks. Brain Connect. 2012;2(3):125-41.38. Busan P, Barbera C, Semenic M, Monti F, Pizzol ato G, Pelamatti G, et al. Effect of transcranial 
magnetic stimulation (TMS) on parietal and pr emotor cortex during planning of reaching Page 6 7 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
movements. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4621.
39. Procacci NM, Stanford TR, Wittenberg GF. The relationship between visual orienting and 
interlimb synchrony in a patient with a superior parietal infarction: A case study. Neurocase. 2009;15(2):73-88.40. Schieppati M, Trompetto C, Abbruzzese G. Selective facilitation of responses to cortical 
stimulation of proximal and distal arm muscles by precision tasks in man. J Physiol. 1996;491 ( Pt 2):551-62.41. Hulley SB. Designing clinical research. 4th ed . Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins; 2013. p. p.42. Roger V, Go A, Lloyd-Jones D, Benjamin E, Be rry J, Borden W, et al. Heart disease and stroke 
statistics--2012 update: a report from the Amer ican Heart Association. Circulation. 2012;125
(1):e2-e220.43. CDC. Summary Health Stat istics for U.S. Adults. 2011.
44. O'Brien S, Xue Y. Predicting goal achievement during stroke rehabilitation for Medicare beneficiaries. Disabil Rehabil. 2013.45. Levin M, Desrosiers J, Beauchemin D, Berger on N, Rochette A. Development and validation of 
a scale for rating motor compensations used for reaching in patients with hemiparesis: the reaching performance scale. Phys Ther. 2004;84(1):8-22.46. Gladstone D, Danells C, Black S. The fugl-mey er assessment of motor recovery after stroke: a 
critical review of its measurement properties. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2002;16(3):232-40.47. Levin M. Interjoint coordination during pointing movements is disrupted in spastic 
hemiparesis. Brain. 1996;119(Pt 1):281-93.48. Fugl-Meyer AR, Jaasko L, Leyman I, Olsson S, Steglind S. The post-stroke hemiplegic patient. 1. a method for evaluation of physical performance. Scand J Rehabil Med. 1975;7(1):13-31.49. Duncan P, Bode R, Min Lai S,  Perera S. Rasch analysis of a new stroke-specific outcome scale: 
the Stroke Impact Scale. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2003;84(7):950-63.50. Morris D, Uswatte G, Crago J, Cook E, Taub E.  The reliability of the Wolf motor function test 
for assessing upper extremity function following stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2001;in press.
51. Liu W, McCombe Waller S, Kepple T, Whitall J. Compensatory arm reaching strategies after 
stroke: induced position analysis. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2013;50(1):71-84.52. Bogard K, Wolf S, Zhang Q, Thompson P, Morris D, Nichols-Larsen D. Can the Wolf Motor 
Function Test be streamlined? Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2009;23(5):422-8.53. Duncan PW, Wallace D, Lai SM, Johnson D, Em bretson S, Laster LJ. The stroke impact scale 
version 2.0. Evaluation of reliability, validit y, and sensitivity to change. Stroke. 1999;30
(10):2131-40.54. van der Lee J, Beckerman H,  Lankhorst G, Bouter L. The responsiveness of the Action 
Research Arm test and the Fugl-Meyer Assessment sc ale in chronic stroke patients. J Rehabil Med. 
2001;33(3):110-3.55. Van der Lee J, De Groot V, Beckerman H, Wage naar R, Lankhorst G, Bouter L. The intra- and 
interrater reliability of the action research arm test : a practical test of upper extremity function in 
patients with stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2001;82(1):14-9.56. Uswatte G, Taub E, Morris D, Vignolo M, McCu lloch K. Reliability and validity of the upper-
extremity Motor Activity Log-14 for measuring real-world arm use. Stroke. 2005;36(11):2493-6.57. Welk G, Schaben J, Morrow JJ. Reliability of accelerometry-based activity monitors: a 
generalizability study. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2004;36(9):1637-45.58. Gebruers N, Vanroy C, Truije n S, Engelborghs S, De Deyn P. Monitoring of physical activity 
after stroke: a systematic revi ew of accelerometry-based measures. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2010;91(2):288-97.59. Lang C, Bland M, Bailey R, Schaefer S, Birkenmeier R. Assessment of upper extremity 
impairment, function, and activity after stroke: foundations for clinical decision making. J Hand Page 68 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
Ther. 2013; 26(2):104-14;quiz 15.
60. Maldjian JA, Laurienti PJ, Kraft RA, Burdette  JH. An automated method for neuroanatomic and 
cytoarchitectonicatlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets. NeuroImage. 2003;19(3):1233-9.Page 6 9 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: 15 Miscellaneous Documents
Miscellaneous Documents
If you have any documents that need to be included  in this submission, but do not fit in any of the 
previous sections please upload them here.
Document Description Version Number
There are no items to displayPage 70 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: SF - Final Page
Final Page
You have completed your application!
Please hit "Finish" to save and exit the application.  Doing so will NOT submit the application for 
review.
Please note that a submission may only be forwarded to the IRB by the Principal Investigator.  To 
do this, the Principal Investigator must press the "SUBMIT STUDY" button in My Activities for this 
Study ID:Pro00003161.
You can track the ongoing status of your submission by logging into the study workspace.Please feel free to contact the IRB with any questions or concerns.Page 71 of 7 6 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: Create/Edit
Study Funding Source
1.0 * Funding Source Name:
Merit Review (CC 103)If you can't find the Funding Source ab ove, choose "Other" and enter it here:Page 7 2 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: Print View
Name of Site / Institution:
University of Pittsburgh
Are the study-related research activities at this site defined as engagement? 
Yes
Investigator Name:
George Wittenberg
Investigator Address:
3520 Fifth Ave, Suite 201, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Investigator Email:
george.wittenberg@va.gov
Investigator Phone:
412-648-4178
IRB-of-Record Contact Name:Contact Address:Contact Email:Contact Phone:FWA:Page 7 3 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: VA Create-Edit
* Device Name: The MagStim 200
* Use of Device: FDA Approved but used in unapproved way
Manufacturer: MagStim
IDE Class:
IDE Number(if Applicable):
Risk Level Determined by Sponsor :Non-Significant Risk
Upload Device Brochure
Provide any other notes about how th is device will be used or just ification for lack of IDE number
Is the investigator hold the IDE for this device?
Yes No
If yes please provide a basis for risk level. Page 7 4 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: Risk Detail Entry
Address for each screening procedure,  research intervention/i nteratction, and follow-up /monitoring procedure: 
* Research Activity:
Intervention and Testing
Common Risks: Infrequent Risks:
Risk of injury by the robot. The possible injuries from a malfunctioning robot include bruises, pinching, 
strain, lacerations, dislocations, or bone fractures. The robot has
not caused dislocation or bone fracture in any of our ongoing robot studies. The risk of injury is minimized 
by the design of the robot allowing the participant to stop it as
well as oversight by a therapist who can also stop  the robot if there is any potential for injury.
Risk of injury from TTT. The is minimal risk of mu scle fatigue and/or soreness, and joint pain, from the 
repetitive exercise. In order to mi nimize this risk the participant
will be supervised throughout the activity and given rest breaks as needed. The participant will be made 
aware that they can stop the task at anytime.
Seizures. Transcranial magnetic stimulation at low frequency (< 1 Hz) has been used for over 20 years in a 
variety of normal subjects and in subjects with neurologicalconditions and has generally been found to be safe. In  a review of 38 studies involving 850 subjects, there 
were no seizures or other major adverse events (Gilbert et al.
2004 - attached). For non-neurologically impaired su bjects and for subjects with stroke, the risk is 
considered minimal. Although TMS is not used in subjects with
implanted metallic devices, it is thought to be safe in patients with hydrocephalus and ventricular shunts. 
Although high-rate, repetitive TMS has the potential to induceseizures (Wassermann et al. 1996),TMS rates of 0.2 Hz or less are safe in epileptic patients and even higher rates may have a protective effect in the case of intractable
seizures (Tergau et al. 1999). ONLY rate s < 0.2 Hz will be used in this study.
Some people experience anxiety (claustrophobia) when they get in the MRI. The MRI may pose a risk to 
certain metallic or implanted electronic devices (pac emaker) or identify problems that will require follow 
up. Risk of hearing loss from the scanning. For those pa rticipants who have an MRI that reveals a potential 
condition, previously unknown, having the MRI may lead to further medical work up. This is likely 
beneficial, as a condition may be revealed earlier in its course than it otherwise would have been, but may 
cause psychological distress to the participant.
Discomfort. 1000 TMS stimuli are an up per limit that will not be exceeded during any session. Usually, it 
will be far fewer stimuli provided. But in any case, this number
(1000) of stimuli not likely to be stressful or uncomfortable, as they are spread out over time. There is no cumulative effect, be sides potentially a slight headache. The
participant may always ask for a break, and if this is  done in between mapping different locations, causes 
no loss of validity of data coll ection. Since the investigator is
literally inches away from the participant, participant comfort is monitored closely.
Other TMS risks. There is no known risk to participat ing in multiple low-freque ncy TMS studies. There are 
no known adverse effects of TMS in pregnancy, but studieshave been limited to a single case report in which th ere were no adverse effects of high-rate stimulation. 
There is also the risk of skin irritation at the site of the EMG
electrodes used for TMS data collection and the chance  of electrical current (DC) less than what would be 
experience with a nine-volt battery.
Other Risks:Page 7 5 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...
ID: Pro00003161 View: Risk Detail Entry
Address for each screening procedure,  research intervention/i nteratction, and follow-up /monitoring procedure: 
* Research Activity:
Data Collection -Confidentiality
Common Risks: Infrequent Risks:
Breach of confidentiality. To minimize risk all files an d information is maintained in a locked file cabinet in 
the study coordinator's office or the Principal Investig ator's office in the Keystone Building. All sensitive 
documents are stored at HERL in a secure file room. 
Other Risks:Page 7 6 of 76 Print: Pro00003161 - Neurophysiological and Ki nematic Predictors of Response in Ch r...
4/21/2021 http://vhapthsqlirb/VAI RBProd/ResourceAdministration/Proj ect/PrintSmartForms?Project...