Page  1 of 13  Impact of Nudges on Downloads of COVID -19 Exposure Notification Smartphone Apps: A Randomized Trial  
NCT0508017 9 
Approved 11/23/2020  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page  2 of 13  Basic  Info 
 
Confirmation  Number:  dchebgci  
Protocol  Number:  844564  
Created  By: DIXON,  ERICA L 
Principal Investigator:  VOLPP,  KEVIN  G 
Protocol  Title:  Message  Testing for  COVID Alert  PA Exposure Notification  App 
Short  Title:  Message  Testing  for COVID  Alert PA  
Protocol Description:     The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Health has released an exposure notification  
app - COVID Alert PA -  statewide to aid in the COVID -19 fight. In order to increase uptake of the  
app, we will be conducting message testing in a variety of populations in order to measure what  
message has the most success in leading to uptake. Populations include patients within health 
systems, college  students, and employees across  the state.  
Submission  Type:  Social  and Biological  Sciences  
Application  Type:  EXPEDITED  Category 7 
Name:  
Dept  / School  / Div:  
Campus Address  
Mail Code  
Address:  VOLPP,  KEVIN  G 
10599 -  ME-Division  of Health  Policy  
6021  
City State Zip:  
Phone:  
Fax: 
Pager:  
Email:  
HS Training Completed:  
Training  Expiration  Date:  
Name  of course  completed  : 
GCP  Training Completed:  
Training  Expiration  Date:  
Name  of course  completed  : BLOCKLEY  HALL  
423 GUARDIAN DR 
PHILADELPHIA  PA 19104- 6021  
215-573-0270  
- 
volpp70@wharton.upenn.edu  
Yes 
 
CME  Credit  for POR  Expedited Review  - SOM  
No Protocol  Details  
 
 
Resubmission*  
No 
 
Hospital Sites  
Will any research  activities  and/or  services  be conducted  at a Penn  Medicine  affiliated  hospital  site?  
No 
 
 
 
Study  Personnel  
Principal  Investigator  
Page  3 of 13  Name:  
Dept  / School  / Div:  
Campus Address  
Mail Code  
Address:  DIXON,  ERICA  L 
10599 -  ME-Division  of Health  Policy  
6021  
City State Zip:  
Phone:  
Fax: 
Pager:  
Email:  
HS Training Completed:  
Training  Expiration  Date:  
Name  of course  completed  : 
GCP  Training Completed:  
Training  Expiration  Date:  
Name  of course  completed  : BLOCKLEY  HALL  
423 GUARDIAN DR 
PHILADELPHIA  PA 19104 -6021  
6021  
 
erica.dixon@pennmedicine.upenn.edu 
Yes 
 
CITI  Protection  of Human  Subjects  Research  Training  - ORA  
No 
Name:  
Dept  / School  / Div:  
Campus Address  
Mail Code  
Address:  
City State Zip:  
Phone:  
Fax: 
Pager:  
Email:  
HS Training Completed:  
Training  Expiration  Date:  
Name  of course  completed  : 
GCP  Training Completed:  
Training  Expiration  Date:  
Name  of course  completed  : SHARIF, MARISSA  A 
707 - Marketing  
masharif@wharton.upenn.edu  
Yes 
 
CITI  Protection  of Human  Subjects  Research  Training  - ORA  
No Study  Contacts  
 
Other  Investigator  
 
Responsible  Org (Department/School/Division):  
 
10599  - ME-Division  of Health  Policy  
 
Key Study  Personnel  
None  
 
Disclosure of Significant  Financial  Interests*  
Does  any person who is responsible  for the design, conduct, or reporting of this research  protocol  have 
a FINANCIAL INTEREST ? 
Page  4 of 13  No 
 
Penn  Intellectual  Property*  
To the best of the Principal Investigator's  knowledge, does this protocol  involve  the testing,  
development or evaluation of a drug, device, product , or other type of intellectual property (IP) that is  
owned by or assigned to the University of  Pennsylvania?  
No 
 
Certification  
I have  reviewed  the Financial  Disclosure  and Presumptively  Prohibited Conflicts  for Faculty  
Participating  in Clinical Trials  and the Financial  Disclosure  Policy  for Research  and Sponsored  
Projects  with all persons who are responsible for the design, conduct, or reporting of this research; and  
all required  Disclosures have  been attached  to this  application.  
Yes 
 
 
 
Social  and Biological  Sciences  
Study  Instruments  
Discuss the particulars of the research instruments, questionnaires and other evaluation instruments in  
detail. Provide validation documentation and or procedures to be used to validate instruments. For well  
know  and generally  accepted  test instruments  the detail  here can be brief.  More  detail  may be required  
for a novel  or new instrument.  For ethnographic  studies  identify  any study instruments  to be used (i.e. 
for deception studies) and describe in detail where, when and how the study will be conducted and who  
or what are the subjects of study. Note: For more information on how to conduct ethical and valid  
ethnographic  research,  follow  the link For oral historie s or interviews  provide  the general  framework  
for questioning and means of data collection. If interviews or groups settings are to be audio taped or  
video taped describe in detail the conditions under which it will take place. Include a copy of any novel  
or new test instruments  with the IRB  submission.  
Study instruments  will be e-mails  sent to patients,  employees,  and/or  students  through the institution  
that is contacting  individuals  about  the app. E-mails  will always  contain basic  information  about  
COVID Alert PA and a link to download -  they will also include message variations based on what the  
institution wants to test, including messages emphasizing data privacy and security, social norming,  
individual vs. community protection, and more. See atta ched file for a sample draft message and  
variation.  
 
Group Modifications  
Describe  necessary  changes  that will or have been made  to the study instruments  for different  groups. 
Groups  will all receive the  basic  e-mail with  background information  on COVID Alert  PA and a 
download link. Messages  will vary between  groups  with message  variations  including emphasizing  data 
privacy and security,  social  norming, individual  vs. community  protection,  and more.  
 
Method  for Assigning  Subjects  to Groups  
Describe  how subjects  will be randomized  to groups.  
Institutions will be responsible for selecting the group of subjects within their institution to send e -mails  
to, and will randomize  from  that group to 1 of 2 conditions.  We will assist  with randomization  
recommendations as needed.  
 
Administration  of Surve ys and/or  Process  
Describe the approximate time and frequency for administering surveys and/or evaluations. For surveys, 
questionnaires and evaluations presented to groups and in settings such as high schools, focus group  
sessions or community treatment centers explain how the process will be administered and who will  
oversee the process. For instance, discuss the potential issues of having teachers and other school  
personnel administer instruments to minors who are student s especially if the content is sensitive in  
nature. Describe the procedure for audio and videotaping individual interviews and/or focus groups and  
the storage  of the tapes.  For instance,  if audio tape recording is to be used in a classroom  setting,  
describ e how this will be managed  if individuals  in the class  are not participating  in the study. Explain 
if the research  involves  the review  of records  (including  public  databases  or registries) with identifiable  
Page  5 of 13  private information. If so, describe the type of information gathered from the records and if identifiers  
will be collected and retained with the data after it is retrieved. Describe the kinds of identifiers to be  
obtained, (i.e. names,  social  security  numbers)  and how long the identifiers  will be retained  and 
justification for use.  
E-mails  will be  sent through  the institutions  directly.  
 
Data  Management  
Describe how and who manages confidential data, including how and where it will be stored and 
analyzed. For instance, describe if paper or electronic report forms will be used, how corrections to the  
report form will be made, how data will be entered into any database, and the person(s) responsible for  
creating  and maintaining  the research  database.  Describe  the use of pseudonyms, code numbers  and 
how listing  of such  identifiers will be  kept  separate from  the research  data.  
Data reported back to the research team will include open rate of e -mails, click through rate of e -mails,  
and any deidentified demographic information associated with these rates that is available from the  
institution.  No confidential  or identifiable  information  will be shared  with our research  team.  All 
information  and data  received  back  from  institutions  will be  stored  on Penn  Box. 
 
Radiation  Exposure*  
Are research subjects receiving any radiation exposure (e.g. X -rays, CT, Fluoroscopy, DEXA, pQCT,  
FDG,  Tc-99m, etc.) that they  would not  receive if  they  were  not enrolled  in this protocol?  
No 
 
Human  Source  Material*  
Does  this research  include  collection  or use of human source  material  (i.e., human  blood, blood  
products, tissues or body fluids)?  
No 
 
CACTIS  and CT  Studies*  
Does  the research  involve  Center  for Advanced Computed  Tomography Imaging  Services  (CACTIS)  
and CT  studies  that research  subjects  would not  receive if  they  were  not part of this protocol?  
No 
 
CAMRIS  and MRI  Studies*  
Does  the research  involve  Center  for Advanced  Magnetic  Resonance  Imaging and Spectroscopy 
(CAMRIS) and MRI studies that research subjects would not rece ive if they were not part of this  
protocol?  
No 
 
Cancer  Related  research  not being  conducted by an NCI  cooperative group*  
Does  this protocol  involve  cancer -related  studies  in any of  the following  categories?  
No 
 
Medical  Information  Disclosure*  
Does the research proposal involve the use and disclosure of research subject's medical information for  
research purposes?  
No 
 
CTRC  Resources*  
Does the  research involve  CTRC  resources?  
No 
 
If the answer  is YES,  indicate  which  items  is is provided with  this submission:  
 
 
Use of UPHS  services*  
Does your study require the use of University of Pennsylvania Health System (UPHS) services, tests or  
procedures*, whether  considered routine  care or strictly  for research  purposes?  
No 
 
Primary  Focus*  
Sociobehavioral  (i.e. observational  or interventional)  
Page  6 of 13  Sociobehavioral  (i.e. cognitive  or behavioral  therapy)  
Drug  
Device - therapeutic  
Device - diagnostic  (assessing  a device for  sensitivity  or specificity  in disease  diagnosis)  
Surgical  
Diagnostic  test/procedure  (research -related  diagnostic  test or procedure)  
Obtaining  human tissue  for basic  research  or biospecimen bank  
Survey  instrument  
x None  of the above  
Name:  
Dept / School / Div:  
Phone:  
Fax: 
Pager:  
Email:  KENNEDY -SMITH,  NANCY  
10599 -  ME-Division  of Health  Policy  
215-573-2769  
215-573-8778  
KENNED YN@pennmedicine.upenn.edu  
Name:  
Type:  PENNSYLVANIA  DEPARTMENT  OF HEALTH  
UPENN  Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania  Protocol  Interventions  
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item: 
 
There are no documents  attached  for this item.  
 
 
Sponsors  
Business  Administrator  
 
Department  budget  code 
 
400 -  400 -  4 - 580184 -  5xxx -  2446 -  2398  
 
Funding  Sponsors  
 
Funding  sponsors  billing  address  
If you have  selected  a commercial  or industry sponsor, please  provide  the appropriate  address  and 
contact information for the Sponsor for the purposes of billing for IRB review fees (initial review,  
continuing review  and convened modification  fees apply here).  If the Sponsor  is not industry/  
commercial,  this information  is not necessary  to provide  with  your  application.  
 
Funding  sponsors  gift 
Is this research being funded by a philanthropic gift?  
No 
 
Regulatory  Sponsor  
IND Sponsor  
 
none  
Page  7 of 13  400 -  400 -  4 - 580184 -  5xxx -  2446 -  2398  
 
Industry  Sponsor  
 
None  
 
Project  Funding*  
Is this project  funded  by or  associated  with a grant  or contract? 
Yes 
 
Selected  Proposals  
Proposal  No Title  
10079300  Rapid Validation  and Behavioral  Economics  to Increase  Enrollment  and Engagement  with Digital Con  
 
Sponsor  Funding  
Is this study  funded by  an industry  sponsor?  
No 
 
Status  of contract  
 
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item: 
 
There are no documents  attached  for this item.  
 
 
Multi -Center  Research  
Penn  as lead  
1. Is this a multi- center  study  where  Penn  is serving  as the Lead  Site or the Penn  PI is serving  as the 
Lead Investigator?  
No 
Management  of Information  for Multi -Center  Research  
Penn irb of record  
2. Is this a multi- center  study where  the Penn  IRB will be asked  to serve  as the IRB of Record  for other  
external study sites?  
No 
 
Other  Sites  
No other  sites  
 
 
 
   
 
Protocol  
Abstract  
PA DOH rolled out a digital contact tracing/exposure notification app statewide in September called 
COVID Alert  PA. Digital contact  tracing  apps such as COVID  Alert  PA can help to quickly  notify  
people who may have been in contact with a person testing positive for COVID -19. We will deploy  
message testing  via e-mail to better  understand what  motivates  people  to download the app, at 
institutions  ranging from  health  systems,  to colleges  and universities,  to employers  in the state of PA. 
The results  of the research  will be used to aid in the uptake  of COVID Alert  PA across  the 
Page  8 of 13  Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania.  
 
Objectives  
Overall objectives  
To understand what  message  strategies  work  best to increase downloads  of COVID Alert  PA by a 
variety of  groups, including  patients,  students, and employees  of PA state  employers.  
 
Primary  outcome  variable(s)  
The primary  outcome  variable  is click  through rate to the download link embedded  in e-mails.  
 
Secondary  outcome  variable(s)  
Open  rate of e-mails.  
 
Background  
The Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania  released  a digital contact  tracing/exposure  notification  app 
(COVID  Alert  PA) statewide  in early  September  to aid in the COVID- 19 fight.  Contact  tracing  is used 
by public health authorities to contact and give guidance to anyone who has been near someone with 
COVID- 19, but is hindered both by compliance issues and situations where a person does not know the  
names of people they may have been in contact with. Digital contact tracing apps such as COVID Alert  
PA can help to quickly notify people who may have been in contact with a person testing positive for  
COVID- 19. The app uses Bluetooth to sense when phones with the app installed are  in close proximity  
with each, and exchange digital handshakes containing random IDs between the phones. The app does  
not collect name, location, or movements and the data is collected and stored only on the phone itself  
until the person choose  to release it. Through IRB#  843861 - Understanding Enrollment  and 
Engagement with a Digital Contact Tracing App in the State of Pennsylvania we have been deploying  
surveys to measure why people may or may not download the app. The results of the survey are being 
used to aid in the development of strategies to increase the uptake of the application in the state of  
Pennsylvania. In order to test which messages may increase rates of download, we will help institutions  
such as health systems, colleges and universities, and businesses and employers with message testing to  
see what strategies work  best to increase uptake.  
 
Study  Design  
Phase*  
Not applicable  
 
Design  
Participants  will be randomized  as to what  message  they receive in their e-mail; as all communication  
will be  done via  e-mail, this  is considered  internet research.  
 
Study  duration  
This study will be ongoing for the duration of the COVID Alert PA app deployment, currently estimated  
to run through 06/30/2021. A subject's participation depends on the amount of time it take for them to  
read the e- mail and click through to download, if they choose; estimated at 3- 5 minutes. We propose to  
start this on November 30th, 2020.  
 
Resources  necessary  for human  research  protection  
Describe  research  staff and justify  that the staff are adequate  in number  and qualifications  to conduct  
the research. Describe how you will ensure that all staff assisting with the research are adequately  
informed  about  the protocol  and their research  related  duties.  Please  allow  adequate  time for the 
researchers  to conduct  and complete  the research.  Please  confirm  that there  are adequate facilities  for 
the research.  
PI: Kevin Volpp Co- I's: Marissa Sharif, Laura Gibson Design Strategist: Carolina Garzon -Mrad Project  
Manager: Erica Dixon Data Analyst: Elizabeth Bair All research staff are currently working on IRB#  
843861 - Understanding Enrollment and Engagement with a Digital Contact Tracing App in the State of  
Pennsylvania, which  is an exempt  survey project  researching  motivations  for downloading, or not 
downloading, COVID Alert PA, and thus are adequately aware of the application, the protocol, and their  
research  related duties. As  this is internet based  research,  there  are no facilities  required  for this 
research beyond current work environments.  
Page  9 of 13  Children Form  
Pregnant  women  (if the study  procedures  may affect  the condition of the pregnant  woman  or 
fetus) Form 
Fetuses and/or Neonates Form  
Prisoners Form  
Other  
x None  of the above  populations  are included  in the research  study  Characteristics  of the Study  Population  
Target  population  
Adult  residents  of the Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania  
 
Subjects  enrolled  by Penn  Researchers  
10000  
 
Subjects  enrolled  by Collaborating Researchers  
50000  
 
Accrual  
Populations will be identified by institutions who are interested in message testing and outreach for  
COVID Alert PA. Based on an insti tution's predicted open rate of e -mails, we will create estimates for #  
of subjects  needed  for sample  size to make  comparisons  between  groups  (ideally  n=250  as the 
minimum per  condition, though in  a smaller  institution,  this may  not be possible).  
 
Key inclusion  criteria  
18 and  over  Resident of  PA 
 
Key exclusion  criteria  
Under age  18 Not a  resident  of PA 
 
Vulnerable  Populations  
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item: 
 
There are no documents  attached  for this item.  
 
Populations  vulnerable  to undue  influence  or coercion  
N/A 
 
Subject  recruitment  
Identification and recruitment is done by the institution interested in doing message testing -  we will 
provide the messages, and they will send out to their target audiences. W e will provide guidance as  
necessary in terms  of numbers  for testing messages.  
 
 
Will the recruitment plan propose to use any Penn media services (communications, marketing, etc.) for  
outreach via social media avenues (examples include: Facebook, Twitter, blogging, texting, etc.) or does  
the study team  plan  to directly  use social media  to recruit  for the  research?  
Yes 
 
 
Please identify which method(s) of social media you will utilize, the content of the text to be used, and 
the method(s) for posting this information (i.e., using Penn supported communication services). When  
proposing the text to utilize, please be aware of any social media limitations (i.e., number of characters  
allowed  in a tweet)  and any appropriate  confidentiality  practices  necessary  to be compliant  with posting  
Page  10 of 13  research  recruitment  text.*  
Message testing  is likely  to include  subjects  in a variety  of roles  at Penn  such as Penn  Medicine  
patients,  undergraduate  students, employees  of Penn Vet,  and any other  department  or org that is 
interested  in message testing.  Therefore,  Penn  communications  or marketing  may be involved  in 
sending the e-mails  out to subjects,  however, there  is no recruitment  to the study in a traditional sense,  
as we are simply measuring link  clicks in  e-mails.  
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item: 
 
There are no documents  attached  for this item.  
 
Subject  compensation*  
Will subjects  be financially  compensated  for their participation?  
No 
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item: 
 
There are no documents  attached  for this item.  
 
If there is subject compensation, provide the schedule for compensation per study visit or session 
and total  amount  for entire  participation,  either  as text or  separate  document  
 
 
  
Study  Procedures  
Suicidal  Ideation  and Behavior  
Does this research qualify as a clinical investigation that will utilize a test article (ie - drug or biological)  
which may  carry  a potential  for central nervous  system  (CNS) effect(s)?  
No 
 
Procedures  
1. Institution  will identify  population of interest  for receiving e-mails  about  COVID Alert  PA 2. 
Research team will provide messages to test, and recommendations for # of subjects per message 3.  
Institution  will randomize  to group and send e-mails  to population of interest,  tracking  open rate and 
click through rate 4. Institution will return data to research team regarding # of e -mails sent, open rate  
and click  through rate by message,  and any de-identified  demographic  information  of interest to 
institution  and research  team  5. The  only potential  follow -up for participants  would  be receiving  
additional e -mails from the institution  about COVID  Alert PA  
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item: 
 
There are no documents  attached  for this item.  
 
Deception  
Does  your  project  use deception?  
No 
 
International  Research  
Are you conducting  research  outside  of the United  States?  
No 
 
Analysis  Plan  
Descriptive  statistics,  two-sample  t-tests for percent  download  between  message groups  
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item: 
 
There are no documents  attached  for this item.  
Page  11 of 13  Paper -based records will be kept in a secure location and only be accessible to personnel involved  
in the study.  
x Computer -based files will only be made available to personnel involved in the study through the  
use of access privileges and  passwords.  
Prior to access to any study- related information, personnel will be required to sign statements  
agreeing to  protect  the security  and confidentiality  of identifiable  information.  
x Wherever  feasible,  identifiers  will be removed  from  study -related  information.  
A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained, because the research could place the subject at  
risk of criminal  or civil liability  or cause  damage  to the subject's  financial standing,  
employability,  or liability.  
x A waiver  of documentation  of consent  is being  requested,  because  the only link between  the 
subject  and the study  would be the consent  document  and the primary  risk is a breach  of 
confidentiality. (This is not an  option for FDA -regulated research.)  
Precautions are in place to ensure the data is secure by using passwords and encryption, because 
the research involves web -based surveys. 
Audio  and/or  video  recordings  will be transcribed  and then destroyed  to eliminate  audible  
identification of subjects.  Data confidentiality  
 
Subject  Confidentiality  
Researchers  will only receive de-identified  data from  institutions,  there  is no risk to subject  
confidentiality  
 
Sensitive  Research  Information*  
Does this research involve collection of sensitive information about the subjects that should be excluded  
from the electronic medical record?  
No 
 
Subject  Privacy  
Privacy refers to the person's desire to cont rol access of others to themselves. Privacy concerns people,  
whereas confidentiality concerns data. Describe the strategies to protect privacy giving consideration to  
the following: The degree to which privacy can be expected in the proposed research and t he safeguards  
that will be put into place  to respect  those  boundaries. The  methods  used to identify  and contact  
potential participants. The settings in which an individual will be interacting with an investigator. The  
privacy  guidelines  developed  by relevant  professions, professional  associations  and scholarly 
disciplines (e.g., psychiatry, genetic  counseling, oral history,  anthropology, psychology).  
Subjects  will not interact  with researchers,  only with their own  institutions  
 
Data  Disclosure  
Will the data be disclosed  to anyone  who is not listed  under  Personnel?  
Only  de-identified  and aggregate data will be disclosed  in reporting  to the Commonwealth  of 
Pennsylvania.  
Page  12 of 13  Name  
Street  address,  city,  county,  precinct,  zip code,  and equivalent  geocodes  
All elements  of dates  (except  year)  for dates  directly  related  to an individual  and all ages  over  89 
Telephone and fax number  
Electronic mail addresses  
Social  security  numbers  
Medical  record  numbers  
Health  plan ID  numbers  
Account numbers  
Certificate/license  numbers  
Vehicle identifiers  and serial  numbers,  including  license plate  numbers  
Device identifiers/serial numbers  
Web addresses (URLs)  
Internet  IP addresses  
Biometric  identifiers,  incl. finger  and voice  prints  
Full face photographic  images  and any comparable  images  
Any other  unique  identifying  number,  characteristic,  or code  
x None  Data  Protection*  
 
 
Does your research request both a waiver of HIPAA authorization for collection of patient information 
and involve providing Protected Health Information ("PHI") that is classified as a "limited data set"  
(city/town/state/zip code, d ates except year, ages less than 90 or aggregate report for over 90) to a  
recipient outside of  the University  of Pennsylvania  covered entity?  
No 
 
Tissue Specimens Obtained as Part of Research*  
Are Tissue Specimens being obtained for research?  
No 
 
Tissue  Specimens  - Collected  during  regular  care*  
Will tissue  specimens  be collected  during regulator  clinical  care (for treatment  or diagnosis)?  
No 
 
Tissue  Specimens  - otherwise  discarded*  
Would specimens  otherwise  be discarded?  
No 
 
Tissue  Specimens  - publicly  available* 
Will tissue specimens be  publicly available?  
No 
 
Tissue  Specimens  - Collected  as part of research  protocol*  
Will tissue  specimens  be collected  as part of the research  protocol?  
No 
 
Tissue Specimens -  Banking of blood, tissue etc. for future use*  
Does research involve banking of blood, tissue, etc. for future use?  
No 
 
Genetic  testing  
If genetic testing is involved, describe the nature of the tests, including if the testing is predicative or  
exploratory in nature.  If predictive,  please describe  plan for disclosing  results  to subjects  and provision  
Page  13 of 13  of genetic  counseling. Describe  how subject  confidentiality  will be protected  Note: If no genetic testing  
is to be obtained, write: "Not applicable."  
Not applicable.  
 
 
 
Consent  
1. Consent  Process  
Overview  
Requesting waiver  of informed  consent  
 
Children and Adolescents  
N/A 
 
Adult  Subjects  Not Competent  to Give  Consent  
N/A 
 
2. Waiver  of Consent  
Waiver  or Alteration  of Informed  Consent*  
Waiver  or alteration  of required  elements  of consent  
 
Minimal  Risk*  
The research  involves  no more  than minimal risk - participants  will be sent e-mails  from  their 
institution recommending COVID  Alert PA, including  a link to  download.  
 
Impact  on Subject  Rights  and Welfare*  
Subjects are not required to open the e -mail, read the e -mail, or click on the link in the e -mail, similar to  
any other  e-mail campaign  they may receive from  their institution.  Link clicks  are commonly tracked  
by organizations, and do not  require  written  consent  outside  of the research  context.  
 
Waiver Essential  to Research*  
In our prior study -  IRB# 843861 - Understanding Enrollment and Engagement with a Digital Contact  
Tracing  App  in the State  of Pennsylvania  - we have asked  people  what  they may do, or are likely  to do, 
if presented with the opportunity to download COVID Ale rt PA.  In this context, we want to measure  
what  people  would  actually  do when  provided  the opportunity to download as suggested  by their 
institution via e -mail. Without a waiver of consent, subjects may be influenced in their response via the  
process  of being  informed  about  the research  and going through  the consent  process. 
 
Additional  Information  to Subjects  
Institutions  may  chose  to send additional  information  about  COVID  Alert  PA to recipients  of e-mails.  
 
Written  Statement of Research*  
No 
 
If no written  statement will be provided,  please  provide  justificiation  
 
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item: 
 
There are no documents  attached  for this item.  
 
 
Risk / Benefit  
Potential  Study  Risks  
N/A - no potential risks are associated with the research, other than any that would be associated with  
typical behaviors of  opening e -mail or  clicking a  link 
Page  14 of 13  Potential  Study  Benefits  
Individuals may benefit if they chose to download the COVID Alert PA app, but other than that there is  
no direct  benefit  to subjects.  Benefits  may accrue to society  in general  if messaging strategies  to 
increase app  downloads  aid in uptake  of the app which  has benefit  in slowing  the spread  of COVID -19. 
 
Alternatives  to Participation  (optional)  
Subjects may simply not open the e -mail or not click on the link in the e -mail. Subjects may also  
download COVID  Alert PA  at any  time  - this study  does not  provide preferential  access.  
 
Data  and Safety Monitoring  
Principal Investigator (Kevin Volpp) and Pr oject Manager (Erica Dixon) will monitor data and safety,  
ensuring that no personally  identifiable  information  is sent along  with  deidentified  data.  
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item: 
 
There are no documents  attached  for this item.  
 
Risk  / Benefit  Assessment  
Minimal risk, no more  than those  ordinarily  encountered  in daily  life. Potential benefits  will be to 
society at large if the findings help frame appropriate public education efforts around COVID -19 digital  
contact tracing apps.  
 
  
General  Attachments  
The following documents are currently  attached  to this item:  
Cover  Letter  (irbcoverletterforpadohcovidalertpa11.192020.docx)  
Additional  forms  (examplee -mail- privacyvariation.docx)  