 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved                                
CLINICAL STUDY PROTO COL  
A MULTICENTER, DOUBLE- BLIND, RANDOMIZED, 
PLACEBO -CONTROLLED STUDY OF VARLITINIB PLUS CAPECITABINE 
VERSUS PLACEBO PLUS CAPECITABINE IN PATI ENTS WITH ADVANCED 
OR METASTATIC BILIARY TRACT CANCER AS SECOND- LINE  SYSTEMIC 
THERAPY  
Abbreviated Protocol Title:  
 
 Treatment Opportunity with Varlitinib in B iliary Tract 
Cancer  (TreeTopp) 
 
Protocol Number:  ASLAN001 -009 
 
EudraCT Number:  2017 -000114 -30 
Investigational Product:  Varlitinib  
Phase:  Phase 2/3  
Sponsor:  ASLAN Pharmaceuticals  Pte. Ltd.  
83 Clemenceau Avenue  
#12-03 UE Square 
Singapore 239920  
 
Protocol Date:  13 Aug 2019  
Protocol Version:  Version 6.0 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  AND PROPRIETARY  
This document contains proprietary and confidential information of ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte . Ltd. 
(ASLAN). Acceptance of this document constitutes agreement by the recipient that no previously 
unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without the prior written approval 
of ASLAN with the exception that this document m ay be disclosed to study personnel under your 
supervision who need to know the contents for conducting the study and appropriate Institutional Review 
Boards (IRBs)/Independent Ethics Committees (IECs) under the condition that the personnel have agreed 
to keep this information confidential. The foregoing shall not apply to disclosure required by governmental 
regulations or laws; however, ASLAN shall be promptly notified of any such disclosure. Nothing herein 
constitutes an invitation or offer to invest in or  deal in the securities of ASLAN. Anyone considering 
investment in ASLAN should refer to the information officially published the Taiwan Stock Exchange 
Market Observation System , and/or filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.  

 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  2 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  1 SYNOPSIS  
Protocol 
Number:  ASLAN001 -009 
Abbreviated 
Protocol Title:  Treatment Opportunity with Varlitinib in Biliary Tract Cancer  (TreeTopp)  
Protocol Title  A multicenter, double -blind, randomized, placebo -controlled study of varlitinib plus 
capecitabine versus placebo plus capecitabine in patients  with advanced or metastatic 
biliary tract cancer as second -line systemic therapy  
Investigational 
Product:  Varlitinib  
Study Centers:  Multicenter –United States , Japan, South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, China,  multiple 
countries in Europe, and the rest of world  (ROW)  
Phase:  Phase 2/3  
Objectives:  Primary objectives:  
Safety lead -in 
To assess the safety and tolerability of  varlitinib 300 mg twice daily (BID) (every 
day), in combination with capecitabine 1000 mg/m2 (BID for 14 days followed by a 
7-day rest) as measured by the incidence of adverse events (AEs), and changes from 
baseline in safety parameters.  
 
Part 1  
To assess the efficacy of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine as measured by 
co-primary endpoints of objective response rate (ORR) and progression- free survival 
(PFS), both assessed by  an Independent Central Review ( ICR). 
 
Part 2  
To assess the efficacy of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine as measured by 
overall survival (OS) . 
 
Secondary objectives : 
Safety lead -in 
1. To evaluate the pharmacokinetics (PK) of varlitinib (and any relevant circulating 
metabolites) and capecitabine (and its active  metabolite 5- FU) when given in 
combination  
2. To evaluate the effect of varlitinib on QT/QTc  
3. To evaluate the efficacy of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine as 
measured by ORR, duration of response (DoR) and disease control rate (DCR), all based on site assessment  
 
Part 1  
1. To evaluate the efficacy of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine, as 
measured by DoR , and DCR  as assessed by ICR, and OS and ORR as assessed 
by the site 
2. To assess the safety and tolerability of varlitinib when combined with 
capecitabine 
3. To explore exposure -response relationships for varlitinib (and any relevant 
circulating metabolites) for measures of efficacy, safety, and pharmacological 
responses  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  3 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  4. To examine the effects of varlitinib, when added to capecitabine on ECG 
parameters including QTcF, QTcB, HR ( heart or ventricular rate) , PR and QRS  
 
Part 2  
1. To evaluate the efficacy of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine, as 
measured by ORR, DoR, DCR and PFS, all based on site assessment  
2. To assess the safety and tolerability of varlitinib when combined with 
capecitabine 
3. To explore exposure -response relationships for varlitinib (and any relevant 
circulating metabolites) for measures of efficacy, safety, and pharmacological 
responses via sparse PK sampling and popul ation PK analyses  
 
Exploratory objectives:  
Part 1  
1. To explore the role of human epidermal growth factor family of receptors (HER)  
status as a predictor of benefit to varlitinib  
2. To explore possible relationships between HER family and downstream 
signaling protein and phospho -protein expression levels and clinical outcomes  
3. To explore possible relationships between gene mutational status and clinical 
outcomes  
 
Part 2  
If a relationship is found between biomarker(s) expression and clinical outcomes in Part 1 of t he study, the biomarker(s) could be prospectively evaluated in Part 2 of the 
study.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  4 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Study Design:   
 
This study will commence initially with a Safety lead -in group. This part of the study 
is a single arm, open label design to assess the safety of varlitinib ( 300 mg BID, every 
day) plus capecitabine ( 1000 mg/m2 administered BID every day for 14  days, 
followed by a 7 day rest period) in a small set of patients (12 to 20 patients) with 12 
patients completing the PK and ECG evaluation . Treatment will continue until disease 
progression or development of unacceptable toxicity or consent withdrawal or death.  
 
 
Part 1 of the study is designed as a double -blind, randomized, placebo controlled 
study to assess the efficacy and safety of varlitinib (300 mg BID) plus capecitabine 
(1000 mg/m2 BID for 14 days out of 21 days) in comparison with placebo plus 
capecitabine in approximately 120 patients. E ligible patient s will be randomized to 
varlitinib  or placebo  in a 1:1 ratio . Treatment will continue unt il disease progression 
or development of unacceptable toxicity or consent withdrawal or death.  

 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  5 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved   
Part 2 of the study is designed as double -blind, randomized, placebo controlled study 
to confirm the efficacy of varlitinib plus capecitabine compared to capecitabine in 
approximately 350 patients . Part 2 will follow the same design and treatment schedule 
as Part 1. This part of the study will commence following review of the Part 1 results.  
Number of 
Patients:  Safety lead -in 
A total of 12  to 20 eligible patient s will be enrolled to receive varlitinib plus 
capecitabine. 
United States:  6 to 12 eligible patients are expected to be enrolled from the United 
States.  
Rest of the World: An additional 6 to 8 eligible patients will be enrolled from  the rest 
of the world.  
Patients in this group will be replaced if varlitinib  compliance is <85% in the first 14 
days. Pharmacokinetic sampling will be performed in approximately 12 patients.  
 
Part 1  
Approximately 120 eligible patient s will be enrolled and randomized in a 1:1 ratio to 
receive varlitinib and capecitabine (n=60) or placebo and capecitabine (n=60).  
 
Part 2  
Approximately 350 eligible patient s will be enrolled and randomized in a 1:1 ratio to 
receive varlitinib and capecitabine (n=175) or placebo and capecitabine (n=175)  
 
In both Part 1 and Part 2 of the study, patients will be stratified by:  
• region - US and the ROW  and;  
• primary tumor location  - gallbladder  vs non -gallbladder  

 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  6 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Treatment:  Safety lead -in 
Per oral (PO) varlitinib 300 mg BID, every day . 
PO capecitabine 1000 mg/m2 BID from Day 1 to Day 14 followed by 7 -day of rest 
period, every 21 days . 
Treatment will continue for a minimum of 14 days, during which dose adjustment is 
not allowed. Dose adjustment and interruption is allowed from day 15 onwards. 
Treatment will contin ue in 21 -day cycles until disease progression, development of 
unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or death.  
 
Part 1 and Part 2  
PO varlitinib 300 mg (if assessed as safe in Safety lead -in) or matching placebo, both 
BID, every day  
PO capecitabine 1 000 mg/m2 BID from Day 1 to Day 14 followed by  a 7-day of rest 
period, every 21 days  
Treatment will continue until unacceptable toxicity, disease progression, withdrawal 
of consent or death.  
Dose modification will be permitted where required according to p rotocol.  
Study 
Duration:  Screening Period : 
Up to 14 days . It may be extended up to 21 days subjected to a case by case review 
and approval by the Sponsor.  
 
Treatment Period:  
Safety lead -in 
Study treatment will be given in 21 -day cycles. Patient s will receive study medication  
until disease progression, unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent or death. 
Patients will be followed for disease status every 6 weeks.  
 
Part 1 and Part 2  
Study treatment will be given in 21 -day cycles. Patient s will receive study medication  
until disease progression, development of unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of 
consent or death. Patients will be followed for disease status every 6 weeks  during 
treatment period and follow -up period until disease progressi on. Patients who 
discontinue treatment for reasons other than disease progression will be followed for 
disease status every 6 weeks until disease progression.  
 
Follow -up Period: 
Patients will complete a safety follow -up visit 28 days after the last dose of varlitinib 
therapy. All patients will be followed for survival and status of further anti -cancer 
treatment  every 12 weeks until death or until the data cut -off (DCO) for the final 
overall survival analysis.  
 
Part 1  
After the DCO for the primary analysis  of ORR and PFS , patients who are ongoing 
on the trial will continue to be followed for survival every 12 weeks . The OS follow -
up analysis is planned when approximately 95 OS events have occurred. Note, 
survival calls may be made in the week following the date of Data Cut Off (DCO) for 
the analys es, and if subjects are confirmed to be alive or if the death date is after the 
DCO , these subjects will be censored at the date of DCO.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  7 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Study 
Population:  Inclusion Criteria:  
Patients will be eligible for the study if they:  
1. Are of or older than the legal age in the respective countries at the time when 
written informed consent is obtained  
2. Have histologically or cytologically confirmed advanced (unresectable) or 
metastatic biliary tract cancer, including intrahepatic or extrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA ), gallbladder cancer and carcinoma of Ampulla 
of Vater . This includes clinical diagnosis of biliary tract cancer with histological 
confirmation of adenocarcinoma.  
3. Have received and failed one and only one prior line of systemic treatment for 
advanced or metastatic disease with radiologic evidence of disease progression. 
This prior line of systemic treatment must also contain gemcitabine  
4. Have received at least 6 doses of gemcitabine containing treatment in first line 
(Adjuvant therapy is not regarded as 1st line therapy ) 
5. Have radiographically measurable disease based on  Response Evaluation 
Criteria in Solid Tumours  (RECIST ) v1.1 as assessed by Independ ent Central 
Review (ICR) (For Part 1)  
6. Have no evidence of biliary duct obstruction, unless obstruction is controlled by local treatment or, in whom the biliary tree can be decompressed by endoscopic or percutaneous stenting with subsequent reduction in bilirubin to below or equal 
to 1.5 × uppe r level of normal (ULN)  
7. Have an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 or 1  
8. Are able to understand and willing to sign the informed consent form  
9. Have adequate organ and hematological function:  
a. Hematological function, as follows:  
• Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1.5 × 10
9/L 
• Platelet count ≥ 100 × 109/L 
b. Renal functions, as follows:  
• Estimated glomerular filtration rate or creatinine clearance 
> 50 mL/min/1.73m 2 
c. Hepatic function, as follows:  
• Albumin ≥ 3 g/dL  
• Total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 × ULN  
• Aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase ≤  5 × ULN  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Patients will be ineligible for the study if they:  
1. Are currently on or have received anti -cancer therapy within the past 3 weeks  
before receiving the first dose of study medication  
2. Are currently on or have received radiation or local treatment within the past 
3 weeks for the target lesion(s)  before receiving the first dose of study 
medication   
3. Have evidence of multiple  (≥ 2) peritoneal metastases or ascites at baseline as  
assessed by  ICR (For Part 1). ( Ascites which can be attributed by non -malignant 
causes is not excluded . Minimal ascites, which does not require paracentesis is 
permitted .) 
4. Have had major surgical procedures w ithin 14 days prior to  first dose of study 
medication  
5. Have a known metastatic brain lesion(s), including asymptomatic and well 
controlled lesion(s)  
6. Have malabsorption syndrome, diseases significantly affecting gastrointestinal 
function, resection of the stomach or small bowel, or difficulty in swallowing 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  8 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  and retaining oral medications  which in the opinion of the Investigator could 
jeopardize the valid ity of the study results  
7. Have uncontrolled intercurrent illness including, but not limited to, ongoing or 
active infection, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia, diabetes, 
hypertension, or psychiatric illness/social situations that would limit comp liance 
with study requirements  
8. Have any history of other malignancy unless in remission for more than 1 year  
(non-melanoma skin carcinoma and carcinoma- in-site of uterine cervix treated 
with curative intent is not exclusionary)  
9. Are female patient s who are pregnant or breast feeding  
10. Have been previously treated with varlitinib or have been previously treated with 
capecitabine as first line therapy for advanced or metastatic disease. For p atients 
who have previously received capecitabine as a radiosensitizer or as part of their 
adjuvant therapy and  their disease has relapsed for more than 6 month s after their 
last dose of capecitabine adjuvant therapy, their capecitabine therapy will not be 
considered as a line of systemic chemotherapy for metastatic/advanced disease, 
and thus they can participate in the study  
11. Have received any investigati onal drug (or have used an investigational device) 
within the last 14 days before receiving the first dose of study medication  
12. Have unresolved or unstable serious toxicity (≥ common terminology criteria for 
adverse events [ CTCAE ] 4.03 Grade 2) , with the exception of anemia, asthenia , 
and alopecia, from prior administration of another investigational drug and/or 
prior cancer treatment  
13. Have a known positive test for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis  C 
(treatment naïve or after treatment without sustained virologic response) , or 
hepatitis B infection with hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid exceeding 
2000 IU/mL  
14. Have a known history of drug addiction within last 1 year which,  in the opinion 
of the Investigator , could increase the risk of non- compliance to investigational 
product  
15. Need continuous treatment with proton pump inhibitors during the study period 
16. Have a history of (non -infectious) pneumonitis that required steroids or current 
pneumonitis, or have a history of interstitial lung disease or current interstitial 
lung disease  
17. Have any history or presence of clinically significant cardiovascular, respiratory, 
hepatic, renal, hematologic, gastrointestinal, endocrine, immunologic, 
dermatologic, neurologic or psychiatric disease or any other condition which in the opinion of the Investigator could jeopardize the safety of the patient or the 
validity of the s tudy results  
18. Have a baseline corrected QT interval (Fridericia’s formula)  (QTcF ) > 450  ms 
or patients with  known long QT syndrome ; torsade de pointes ; symptomatic 
ventricular tachycardia; an unstable cardiac syndrome in the past 3 months 
before screening visit ; > class 2 New York Heart Association heart failure; or 
> class 2 angina pectoris ; or receiving quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide, 
amiodarone, dronedarone, arseni c, dofetilide, sotalol, or  methadone . Please also 
see prohibited medication/therapy  (Section  5.4.10.1 ) 
 
Study Endpoints:  Primary Endpoints:   
Safety lead -in 
• Incidence of AEs, categorized in accordance to CTCAE 4.03 and changes from 
baseline in safety parameters (including vital signs, ECG parameters, clinical 
laboratory tests)  
 
Part 1  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  9 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • ORR: Defined as the proportion of patient s with a best objective response of 
complete response (CR) or partial response (PR), as assessed by ICR defined by 
the RECIST v1.1 criteria.  
• PFS: Defined as the time from randomization until the date of objective disease 
progression or death (by any cause in the absence of disease progression). 
Progression is defined in accordance with the RECIST v1.1 criteria will derived 
programmatically based on data from the ICR of r adiological data.  
  
Part 2  
• OS: Defined as the time from randomization until death by any cause. Any patient not known to have died at the time of DCO  will be censored based on 
the last recorded date on which the patient was known to be alive.  
 Secondary Endpoints:  
Safety lead -in 
• Pharmacokinetics endpoints:  The PK of varlitinib  (and any relevant circulating 
metabolites)  and capecitabine and 5 -FU (active metabolite  of capecitabine) will 
be determined at selected time points  (pre-dose, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4 , 5, 6,  8.5, 10, and 
12 hours post -dose). Other relevant circulating metabolites of capecitabine (5’ -
DFCR, 5’ -DFUR, and FBAL) will only  be determined if this is considered 
necessary based on the pharmacokinetic and safety findings) . The following PK 
parameters wi ll be evaluated where possible:  
Cycle  1 Day 1, Day 8 and Day 14:  
- maximum plasma concentration (C max) 
- time to C max(tmax) 
- plasma concentration before next dose (C trough) 
- area under the plasma concentration -time curve from 0 to 12 hours 
(AUC 0- τ) 
- half-life (t 1/2) 
- apparent clearance (Cl/F)  
- apparent volume of distribution (V z/F) 
- apparent volume of distribution at the steady state (V ss/F) 
- where τ = 12 hours (dos ing interval)  
Cycle  1 Day 8  
- accumulation ratio of AUC 0- τ (RacAUC 0- τ) (Day 8/Day 1)  
- accumulation ratio  of C max RacC max (Day 8/Day 1)  
Cycle  1 Day 14  
- accumulation ratio of AUC 0- τ (RacAUC 0- τ) (Day 14/Day 1)  
- accumulation ratio of C max RacC max (Day 14/Day 1)  
• Exploratory electrocardiogram endpoints: QTcF, QTcB, PR, QRS, HR  
• Efficacy endpoints  
- ORR: as determined  by site review of radiological data.  
- DoR: Defined as the time, in days, from the first recorded achievement of a response (PR or above) until time of objective disease progression in the subset of patient s classified as responders in the assessment of ORR  
- DCR: Defined as the proportion of patient s with a best response of stable 
disease maintained for at least 12 weeks (-5 days)  from randomization , 
PR or CR as defined by RECIST v1.1 criteria.  
 
Part 1  
• Efficacy Endpoints  
- OS 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  10 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  - DoR  
- DCR  
- ORR as based on site review of radiological data  
- Tumor size: Defined as the percentage change from baseline in the sum 
of target lesions at Week 12 ((%ΔTS Wk12) 
• Safety Endpoints  
- Incidence of AEs, categorized in accordance to CTCAE 4.03 and changes 
from baseline in safety parameters (including vital signs, ECG 
parameters, clinical laboratory tests)  
• Electrocardiogram  Endpoints  
- QTcF , QTcB, PR, QRS, HR 
• PK E ndpoints  
PK samples will be obtained for the PK evaluation of varlitinib (and any relevant 
circulating metabolites). PK samples will be collected at the following time 
points for all patients:  
- Cycle 1 Day 1: 5 minutes pre -dose, 1.5 hours, 3 hours, 5 hours, and 8 
hours post -dose 
- Cycle 1 Day 8: 20 minutes pre -dose, 1.5 hours, 3 hours, 5 hours, and 8 
hours post -dose 
- End of study after full drug washout: 28 days after last dose at the patient’s safety follow -up visit  
 
Part 2  
• Efficacy Endpoints  (all based on site review of radiological data)  
- ORR  
- DoR  
- DCR  
- PFS 
• Safety Endpoints  
- Incidence of AEs, categorized in accordance to CTCAE 4.03 and changes 
from baseline in safety parameters (including vital signs, clinical 
laboratory tests)  
• PK Endpoints  
- A population PK study with sparse sampling will be included in the Part 2 of the study to explore exposure -response relationships for varlitinib 
(and any relevant circulating metabolites)  for measures of efficacy, safety, 
and pharmacological responses via sparse PK sampling and population PK analyses.  
 Exploratory Endpoints:  
Part 1  only 
Possible relationships between protein and phospho- protein expression levels and 
clinical outcome, and gene mutational status and clinical outcome will be explored 
using proteins and genes including, but not limited to:  
• Via IHC:  
- epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), pEGFR  
- HER2, pHER2  
- HER3, pHER3  
- HER4, pHER4  
• Via PCR/Sequencing  
- Mutational status of genes, such as KRAS, NRAS, BRAF , EGFR , HER2  and 
other genetic factors that may affect response to therapy.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  11 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  The protein and gene studies will be conducted using archival material (and if not 
available, biopsy tissue samples).  
If a relationship is found between biomarker(s) expression and clinical outcomes in Part 1 of the study, the biomarker(s) could be prospectively evaluated in Part 2 of the 
study.  
Study  
Assessments:  Safety Evaluations:  
Patient safety will be evaluated based on the incidence of AEs and serious AEs 
(SAEs), physical examination, vital signs (blood pressure [systolic and diastolic], heart rate, respiratory rate, weight, and body temperature), electrocardiogram (ECG) 
parameters  (Safety lead -in and Part 1) , and clinical laboratory tests (hematology, 
clinical chemistry, coagulation and urinalysis).  
All AEs will be evaluated according to NCI -CTCAE 4.03 and will be captured from 
the time of informed consent and continue until  the safety follow -up assessment 
(28 days after last administration of study treatment). For the purpose of this study, 
fluctuations of pre -existing conditions that do not represent a clinically significa nt 
exacerbation or worsening need not be considered AEs.  In addition, p rogression of 
the cancer of target disease under study is generally not considered an AE.  
 
Safety lead -in: 
In the Safety lead -in, triplicate 12 -lead ECG will be performed on Cycle 1 Day 1 and 
Cycle 1 Day 8 at the following time points  and will be analyzed by a Core ECG 
Laboratory : 
• Cycle 1 Day 1: 45 minutes pre-dose, 5 minutes  pre-dose, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, 
and 12 hours post -dose 
• Cycle 1 Day 8 : 45 minutes  pre-dose, 5 minutes  pre-dose, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5 , 
and 12 hours post -dose 
Triplicate ECGs will also be collected 3 hours post- dose Day 22 (Cycle 2 Day 1) and 
onwards every cycle  while the subject remains in the study. The 12 -lead ECGs will 
be taken in the supine position, after the patient has been lying down for at least 10 minutes in a quiet environment. Detailed instructions will be described in the ECG manual. The ECG machines supplied by the Core ECG Laboratory will be used for all ECG collection, and the digital files of each tracing will be archived.  
 
Part 1:  
The primary electrocardiographic analysis of the protocol will be from the time -based 
ECG analysis  performed in Part  1 at baseline, Cycle 1 Day 1, Cycle 1 Day 8, and the 
safety follow -up visit . Triplicate ECGs will be collected with a PK sample collected 
immediately following ECG acquisition.  ECGs will be analyzed by a Core ECG Laboratory.  
Collection time points:  
• Cycle 1 Day 1: 45 m inutes pre-dose,  5 minutes  pre-dose, 1.5, 3, 5 and 8  
hours post -dose.  Concomitant PK samples will be collected immediately 
after the ECG collections, except for the 45 minutes pre -dose time points 
where no PK sample will be collected.  
• Cycle 1 Day 8: 45 minutes pre -dose, 5 minutes pre -dose, 1.5, 3, 5, and 8 
hours post -dose.  Concomitant PK samples will be collected immediately 
after the ECG collections, except for the 45 minutes and 5 minutes pre -dose 
time points. One pre -dose PK sample will be collected at the 20 minutes pre -
dose time point.  
• End of Study after full drug washout (28 days after the last dose) a set of 
triplicate ECGs will be collecte d 3 hours after a light snack . 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  12 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  In addition, triplicate safety ECGs will be collected 3 hour s post -dose on Day 22 
(Cycle 2 Day 1), Day 64 (Cycle 4 Day 1) and every 2 cycles  while the subject remains 
in the study. This data will not be analyzed by the Core ECG Laboratory but will be 
assessed by the investigator. The digital ECGs will be archived.  
 
Part 2:  
ECGs will be collected in Part 2 of the study as part of standard safety monitoring at screening, baseline (before a snack), and 3 hours post -dose on Day 22 (Cycle 2 Day 
1), Day 64 (Cycle 4 Day 1) and every 2 cycles  
while the subject remains in the study.  
These data will not be analyzed by the Core ECG Laboratory but assessed by 
investigators.  
 
A data safety monitoring board  (DSMB ) will meet on 2 specified occasions to review 
safety data; the first DSMB will occur after the first 12 patients in the Safety lead -in 
have completed the 21 days of follow -up and the second DSMB will be at a selected 
time point to be confirmed during Part 1 of the study. Additional DSMB meetings 
may occur if needed. Details will be specified in the DSMB  Charter.  
 
Efficacy Evaluations : 
Tumor evaluations will be performed to e valuate the efficacy of treatment according 
to RECIST v1.1. Tumor response will be assessed by means of computed tomography 
(CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at baseline and every 6 weeks until EOT 
(Safety Lead -in) or disease progression  (Part 1 and Part 2). All tumor responses 
should be assessed at every assessment time point using the same methods (contrast -
enhanced CT or MRI) used to characterize lesions identified at baseline.  
 
Safety Lead -in 
Radiological images collected in the Safety lead -in will be assessed by the site.  
 
Part 1  
Radiological images collected in the Part 1 of the study will be assessed by a n ICR. 
Patients cannot be randomized into Part 1 of the study until the ICR  has confirmed  
eligibility. Central radiological reading will not interfere with the Investigator’s 
judgment on disease progression.  
The co -primary endpoints of ORR and PFS will be programmatically derived using 
the ICR’s assessment of the radiological data in Part 1. Objective response rate as 
determined by the site review will also be reported as a secondary endpoint.  
 
Part 2  
All efficacy endpoints based on radiological data in Part 2 will be programmatically 
derived based on data provided by the site review of the Part 2 radiological data.  
 
Part 1 and 2 only  
Blood to be collected for analysis of cancer antigen 19.9 (CA19.9) and 
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) every 6 weeks starting from Week 6 .  
Archival paraffin -embedded tumor tissues will be collected during screening for 
future analysis  if the patient has provided the optional tumor tissue consent .  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  13 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Biopsies will be performed during screening for those patient s who did not have 
enough archival tumor tissue  if the patient has provided the optional tumor tissue 
consent . 
 
Pharmacokinetic Evaluations:  
Safety Lead -in 
Blood samples for PK analysis of varlitinib (and any relevant circulating metabolites) , 
capecitabine, and 5 -FU (metabolite  of capecitabine) will be collected at the following 
time points in the Safety lead -in part only:  
• Cycle 1 Day 1: 5 minutes pre-dose, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 .5, 10, and 12 hours 
post-dose 
• Cycle 1 Day 8: 20 minutes pre-dose, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, 10, and 12 hours 
post-dose 
• Cycle 1 Day 14: 5 minutes pre-dose, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, 10, and 12 hours 
post-dose 
When ECGs and PK samples are collected at the same time point, the PK samples are 
always collected after the ECGs.  
In addition, unscheduled PK samples collected 7 days following dose reductio n of 
varlitinib at any cycle of treatment  will include : up to 5 minutes  pre-dose, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5, 6, 8.5, 10, and 12 hours post -dose, if required.   
 
Part 1 and Part 2  
PK samples will be obtained for the PK evaluation of varlitinib (and any relevant 
circulating metabolites) . PK samples will be collected at the following time points:  
 
Part 1 (All patients)  
• Cycle 1 Day 1: 5 minutes  pre-dose,  1.5, 3, 5, and 8  hours post -dose 
• Cycle 1 Day 8: 20 minutes  pre-dose,  1.5, 3, 5, and 8 hours post -dose 
• End of study after full drug washout:  28 days after last dose at the patient’s 
safety follow -up visit  
When ECGs and PK samples are collected at the same time point, the PK samples are always collected after the ECGs.  
 
Part 2 (Sparse Sampling)  
• Cycle 1 Day 1: 5 minutes  pre-dose,  1-3 hours  post-dose, 3-5 hours  post-dose, 
and 5-8 hours post -dose 
• Cycle 2 Day 1: 20 minutes pre-dose,  1-3 hours  post-dose, 3-5 hours  post 
dose, and 5-8 hours post -dose 
 
In order to maintain the double -blind design of the study, blood samples will be 
collected from patients in both groups  for plasma measurements of varlitinib and its 
potential relevant  metabolites.  
In addition, unscheduled PK samples will be collected at least 7 days following dose 
reduction of varlitinib at any cycle of treatment: up to 5 minutes  pre-dose and 3-5 
hours post -dose. 
 
Biomarker Evaluations : 
Blood samples for potential retrospective analysis of potential biomarkers will be 
collected at baseline and post Week 6 treatment tumor  assessment.  
Prohibited Please see Appendix 14.3 for a complete list  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  14 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Medications  Any other antitumor treatment, proton pump inhibitors, warfarin, strong CYP3A4 
inhibitors , investigational products , and herbal preparations are prohibited throughout 
this study. H2 blocker can be given 3 hours after each dose of varlitinib.  
 
 
Safety lead-in and Part 1   (2 weeks prior to first dose  up to and including Cycle 2 Day 
1) 
Use with caution : Non-excluded drugs that are associated with  torsade de pointes and 
QTc prolongation (Appendix  14.4) or QT prolongation without torsade de pointes 
(Appendix  14.5) should be at steady -state dosing for at least 2 weeks before 
enrol lment . The dose of such drugs should not be increased , and new drugs in either 
group should not be initiated without the medical monitor’s approval. 
 
Safety lead -in and Part 1 (from Cycle 2 Day 2 onwards)  
Use with caution: Non -excluded drugs that are associated with torsade de pointes and 
QTc prolongation ( Appendix  14.4) or  QT prolongation without torsade de pointes 
(Appendix  14.5) should be at steady -state dosing for  at least 2 weeks before 
enrol lment. From  Cycle 2 Day 2  onwards , the dose of  drugs associated with torsade 
de pointes and QTc prolongation ( Appendix  14.4) or QT prolongation without torsade 
de pointes ( Appendix  14.5) ideally  should not be increased . Every attempt should be 
made to minimize the initiation of such  drugs ( Appendix  14.4 or Appendix  14.5). The 
initiation of any such drugs ( Appendix  14.4 or Appendix  14.5) requires the medical 
monitor’s approval.  
 
Varlitinib may cause a drug -drug interaction with other medications that are 
cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4, CYP2C8, or CYP2C9 inducers, inhibitors, or 
substrates. CYP3A4 is the major metabolic enzyme of varlitinib, and CYP2C8 only 
a minor enzyme. Due to the potential for drug interactions based on in vitro screens, 
concomitant use of moderate C YP3A4, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and P -gp inducers or  
inhibitors will be recorded during the entire clinical  study . 
Statistical 
Analysis:  Safety lead -in 
All safety data will be listed and summarized using appropriate descriptive statistics. Full details will be provided in the statistical analysis plan (SAP ). 
The pharmacokinetic endpoints of varlitinib, capecitabine and 5 -FU will be plotted 
and summarized using descriptive statistics.  
QTcF exposure response modeling, along with time -based central tendency effects 
and categorical QTc analyses will be evaluated.  Both the Bazett and Fridericia 
correction  (primary correction method)  formulae will be used to estimate QTc. 
 
Parts 1 and 2  
For Part 1 and 2, all primary and key secondary efficacy endpoints will be analyzed based on the Full Analysis Set (FAS) using an intention -to-treat principle. Patients 
who were randomized but did not subsequently go on to receive study treatment will be included in the FAS.  Analyses performed in the protocol -defined “ Evaluable for 
Response set (EFR)” will be supportive.
 
Objective response rate will be analyzed using a stratified exact binomial test (Mehta 
et al, Emerson) which extends Fisher’s Exact test to more than one strat um. The 
analysis will be stratified by primary tumor location (GB/non -GB).  The 2 -sided 
p-value wi ll be obtained by doubling the 1 -sided p -values.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  15 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  To test for heterogeneity across strata, the exact test of Zelen will be performed testing 
whether the treatment effect differs between the 2 strata included in the primary 
analysis.  
Progression -free surviva l will be analyzed using a stratified log -rank test using the 
Breslow method to handle ties (Breslow, 1974). The analysis will be stratified by primary tumor location (GB/Non -GB).  
Overall survival  will be analyzed using the methods outlined above for PFS.  For Part 
1, OS will be analyzed twice. A preliminary analysis of OS will be performed at the 
time of the primary analysis of ORR and PFS. It is anticipated that the OS data at this 
time will be immature, thus a second analysis of OS is planned for when 
approximately 95 patients (approx. 79%) have an OS event. The second analysis of 
OS will be considered the primary analysis of OS for Part 1 of the trial.  For Part 2, 
the primary analysis of OS will be performed when 247 patients have experienced an 
OS event . Further details will be provided in the study SAP.  
Duration of response will be listed and summarized descriptively for the duration of 
response in responding patient s, including the associated Kaplan -Meier curves.  
Disease control rate will be analyzed using the methods described above for ORR.  
Tumor size is a secondary endpoint in Part 1 and will be used to assess the exploratory 
objective of evaluating the role of HER family expression levels as predictors of benefit to varlitinib. Tumor size will be a nalyz
ed by analysis of covariance 
(ANCOVA) . 
Plasma sampling will be conducted for population PK evaluation in Parts 1 and 2 of 
the study and will use a n NLM E. PK sampling of all patients is planned for Part 1 of 
the study while sparse PK sampling is planne d for Part 2.  For the sparse PK sampling 
in Part 2, the double -blind design will be maintained and blood samples will be 
collected from a select ed number of patients without limiting the sampling to 
varlitinib patients only.  
All PK data will be analy zed according to treatment received. Deviations that have 
the potential to significantly affect the PK will be reviewed. The population, and decisions regarding which profiles are usable, will be defined by the Study Team Physician, Pharmacokineticist , and Sta tistician prior to unblinding or any analyses 
being performed.  
 
ECG/QT Analysis (Safety Lead -in and Part 1)  
General Principles  
Baseline will be defined as the mean of the triplicate ECG readings performed pre-dose on Day 1. On Day 1, pre -dose is defined as  2 sets of triplicate ECGs taken 
45 minutes and 5 minutes prior to dosing. The ECG values from these 2 sets of ECGs 
will be averaged to create the baseline value. Similarly, for all other time points, for each ECG parameter, each patient’s mean will be cal
culated from the triplicate 
readings and the mean value will be used.  
 
The final ECG assessments (including interval measurements) will be made by the 
Core ECG laboratory. The Part 1 electrocardiographic Core ECG Laboratory 
assessments constitute the study’s primary assessment of ECG/QTc. Any analysis of 
ECG data from the Safety lead -in is considered exploratory.  
 
Due to the non -randomized, open label design of the Safety lead -in, data from the 
Safety lead -in will be p resented separately from data from  Part 1 of the study. 
Furthermore, ECG/QT o utputs will be made available to the DSMB for consideration 
when determining whether the study should progress to Part 1.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  16 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved   
Methods of Analysis  
For the Safety lead -in, exploratory descriptive and categorical analyzes, including 
change from baseline will be performed to investigate the impact of varlitinib and 
capecitabine treatments on the changes from baseline in ECG parameters.  
 
The ECG parameters of interest include: QT including QTcF and QTcB, HR, PR, 
QRS intervals.  
 
For Part 1, a multi -step approach will be applied to evaluate the effect of capecitabine 
alone and varlitinib in combination with capecitabine on the ECG parameters at different time points post -dose. The comparisons will be done between ECG values 
at each time point post -dose and baseline and between treatment arms with and 
without varlitinib for each time point individually. The evaluation of the 
cardiodynamic effects of capecitabine and varlitinib may be explored using exposure-
response modeling if  there appears to be a meaningful effect of varlitinib when added 
to capecitabine  on the ECG parameters including QTcF.  This will be further 
described in the SAP. 
 
Central Tendency Analysis  
For both the Safety lead -in and Part 1, the change from baseline in QTcF, PR, QRS, 
QTcB, and heart rate, will be summarized by time point (and treatment arm for Part 
1) using descriptive statistics (n, mean, SD, min, median, max, 90% confidence 
intervals).   
 
Categorical Analyses  
For both the Safety lead -in and Part 1, the following will be summarized: 
• The proportion of patients obtaining treatment -emergent absolute QTcF values >  
450 msec and ≤ 480 msec; > 480 msec and ≤ 500 msec; and > 500 msec  
• The proporti on of patients obtaining a QTcF increase from baseline values ≥ 30 
and <60 msec and ≥ 60 msec  
• The proportion of patients obtaining a QRS change from baseline >  25% 
resulting in QRS >  120 msec  
• The proportion of patients obtaining a PR interval change from b aseline >25% 
reaching a value >220 msec  
• The proportion of patients obtaining a > 25% decrease from baseline in heart rate 
resulting in a heart rate < 50 beats per minute (bpm) or a > 25% increase from 
baseline in heart rate resulting in a heart rate > 100 bpm 
For Part 1, the above categorical data summaries will be presented by treatment arm.  
 
Morphological T -wave Analysis  
T-wave morphology will also be analyzed, focusing on change from baseline, i.e., 
treatment emergent changes.  
 
Following Part 1, a formal statistical analysis will be performed to assess the potential 
impact of varlitinib and capecitabine on changes in ECG parameters.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  17 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  The statistical stepwise approach will be used to separate the cardiodynamic effect of 
varlitinib  from normal circadian fluctuation in the ECG values and from the effect of 
capecitabine:  
1. ANOVA mixed effects comparison of the absolute values of ECG parameters at 
each time point vs baseline using treatment as a fixed effect in order to evaluate 
the contribution of circadian fluctuation and to determine how treatment 
differences contribute to the changes. The ECG parameter values will be log -
transformed and the resulting output will include the geometric mean ratio for test vs reference with the corresponding confidence interval and p -value. 
Interaction term, time point x treatment, will be also evaluated if the data allow.  
2. ANOVA comparison of the absolute values of ECG parameters as well as change from baseline (ΔECG) between treatments for each post -dose time point assessed 
separately in order to separate the varlitinib effect from that of capecitabine. The ECG parameter values will be log -transformed and the resulting output will 
include the geometric mean ratio for test vs reference with the corresp onding 
confidence interval and p -value.  ΔECG will be tested as untransformed and log-
transformed parameters to avoid bias from discarding 0 ΔECG values from the comparisons.  
3. Exposure -Response Analysis:  Linear mixed effect model between ΔQTcF and 
time mat ched concentrations of varlitinib and other potential metabolites if 
measured and as appropriate.  Other ECG variable may be similarly analyzed and 
other models used, if appropriate.  
3.1. ΔQTcF will be calculated as the difference between each time point value 
and the average baseline value for each arm with the combination 
varlitinib/capecitabine treatment.  
3.2. ΔΔQTcF will be calculated for each patient in the combination arm 
individually as the difference between the ΔQTcF value for the arm with 
combination varli tinib/capecitabine treatment and the average value of all 
patients in the capecitabine alone arm matching time point. Other ECG 
parameters may also be used in the analysis including QTcB, heart rate, etc to provide supporting information.  
3.3. Base linear mixed  effect model will include patients as a random effect.  
3.4. The total dose of capecitabine may be included as a fixed effect in the model to account for differences in total doses received by subjects with different body surface area.  
4. Linear mixed effect model  between ΔQTcF parameters and time matched 
concentrations of capecitabine and 5 -FU (metabolite of capecitabine) and other 
potential metabolites if measured and as appropriate  
4.1. ΔQTcF will be calculated for all patients in both arms as the difference between each time point value and the average baseline value.  
4.2. Base linear mixed effect model will include patients as a random effect and treatment (capecitabine alone or in combination with varlitinib) as a fixed effect; the total capecitabine dose may also be used as a fixed effect.  
5. Different covariates may be included in the complex models in addition to the 
base model as fixed effects such as time point in order to ensure the model 
feasibility and to evaluate covariates influential to ECG parameters.  
The result s of the fitted models will be presented using statistical parameters such as 
the geometric mean ratios and corresponding confidence intervals (for ANOVA) and estimates of the slope, and associated confidence interval for the linear mixed effect models.  
In addition, graphic exploration of the exposure -ECG relationship may be performed:  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  18 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Residual plots to predict results  
• Double Y plots with time on the X axis and time matched values of PK 
concentrations for varlitinib and capecitabine on the Y1 axis, ΔECG on the 
Y2 axis to determine the possibility of hysteresis between drug concentration 
and cardiodynamic effects  
• Regression/scatter plots with time matched concentrations of varlitinib and 
capecitabine on the X axis and ΔECG on the Y axis  
• Regression/scatter plots with varlitinib or capecitabine non -compartmental 
PK parameters of C max,  C trough,  AUC tau and others on the X axis and 
maximum ΔECG on the Y axis  
• Forest plots for different categories in ECG changes vs mean (SD) non -
compartmental PK parameters for varl itinib or capecitabine on the X axis  
Further details of the statistical methods will be provided in the SAP.  
Sample Size:  Part 1:  
The study is designed with co -primary endpoints, ORR , and PFS. In order to maintain 
an overall 1-sided 10% type I error rate for the study , a Hochberg procedure will be 
used, such that the trial will be deemed to have met its primary objective if either endpoint is significant at the 1-sided 5% level or if both endpoints are significant at 
the 1-sided 10% significance level.  
To ensure that adequate data are available to evaluate the effects of varlitinib on both co-primary endpoints, the DCO for the primary analysis will be the later of 3  months 
after the last patient in or when 70% of the patients (84 patients) have experienced a 
PFS event.  Based on a minimum of 84 PFS events at the time of the primary analysis, 
the study  would have a minimum of 80% power to detect a true Hazard Ratio (HR) of 
0.58 for PFS, based on a 1-sided 5% significance level.  
Furthermore,  if the primary objective of the study is met, the following approach to 
type I error control will be applied in order to support marketing approval:  
• The overall type I error rate for marketing approval will be controlled at the two-sided 5% level, using a Hochberg procedure  
• Using this approach, statistical significance may be claimed if either  ORR or 
PFS is significant at the two -sided 2.5% significance level or if both ORR 
and PFS are significant at the two -sided 5% significance level.   
One hundred and twenty patients will provide approximately 80% power to detect a 
true difference of 20% in response rate, based on a 2-sided 5% significance level and 
assuming a 10% response rate for the placebo/capecitabine group and a 30% response rate f or the varlitinib/capecitabine group.  
A total of 84 PFS events provides 80% power to detect a true HR of 0.54 , based on a 
two-sided 5% significance level. Assuming a n 8-month non- linear recruitment period, 
a 2.67- month median PFS for capecitabine alone, and a true HR of 0.54 , it is estimated 
that the DCO  for the primary analysis of Part 1 will occur approximately 12 months 
after the first patient is randomized into the study ( first patient  in). 
 
Part 2 : 
Part 2 is designed with a primary endpoint of OS. Approximately 350 patients will be 
randomized (1:1) to obtain 247 OS events. If the true OS HR for the comparison of varlitinib + capecitabine vs. placebo + capecitabine is 0.7, the study  
will have 
approximately 80% power to demonstrate a statistically significant difference for varlitinib, based on a 2-sided 5% significance level.  
Assuming a 24- month non -linear recruitment period whereby the proportion of 
patient s recruited by the end of the month i is (i/24)^2, a median OS of 6 months for 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  19 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  placebo +  capecitabine and a true HR of 0.7, it is estimated that 247 OS events will 
occur approximately 31 months after the first patient s is randomized into Part 2.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  20 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Table 1: Schedule of Assessments – Safety Lead-in 
Assessments  Screening  Study Treatment Period  EOTm Safety Follow 
upn Cycle 1  Subsequent Cycles  
Day -14 
to 0 Day 1  
(±0 day)  Day 8  
(±0 day)  Day 14  
(±0 day)  Cycle 2 Day 1, 
Cycle 3 Day 1, etc.   
(±5 days)  EOT  
(+7 days ) 28 days post 
last study 
medication 
adm inistration 
(+7 days)  
Informed Consent  X       
Demographics  X       
Medical History  X       
Physical Examination  X X X X X X X 
Body Weight  X X X X X X X 
Vital Signs a X X X X X X X 
12-Lead ECG  X X b X b  X b  X 
ECOG  X X X X X X X 
AE review c X X X X X X X 
Prior and Concomitant 
Medication and Therapy  X X X X X X X 
Varlitinib Administration d  X d X d X d X   
Capecitabine Administration e  X X  X   
Urine or Serum β -HCG f X     X  
Hematology g X X X X X X X 
Clinical Chemistry g X X X X X X X 
Urinalysis g X X X X X X  
Coagulation g,h X     X  
Serology i X       
Pharmacokinetics j  X X X    
CT/ MRI  X l    X k   
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  21 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Abbreviations: AE = adverse event, β -HCG = beta human chorionic gonadotropin , BID = twice daily,  CT = computed tomography, ECG = electrocardiogram, 
ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, EOT = End of Treatment, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PK = pharmacokinetics, SAE = serious 
adverse event . 
Footnotes:  
a. Vitals (blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, temperature) are to be collected in a standardized manner in a sitting position after the patient has 
rested comfortably for 5 minutes.  
b. For patients participating in the ECG collection, triplicate 12 -Lead ECG using the Central Laboratory -supplied ECG machines will be performed as 
close as  possible and within  25 minutes prior to PK sampling at selected time points as follows: Day  1 and Day 8: 45 minutes pre-dose, 5 minutes pre-
dose, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, and 12 hours post -dose. Select time points in this ECG assessments can be waived by the sponsor on a case by case basis. 
Patients should be rested for at least 10  minutes in a supine position and be resting quietly  before the triplicate 12 -lead ECG assessment. There should 
be no significant external stimulation (TV, radio, interaction with other subjects). On Days 1 and 8, concomitant PK samples will be collected 
immediately after ECG collection at all post- dose time  points. At pre -dose time points, PK samples will be collected at 5 minutes and 20 minutes prior 
to dosing on Cycle 1 Day 1 and Cycle 1 Day 8, respectively.   
Triplicate ECGs will be collected 3 hours post -dose on Day 22 (Cycle 2 Day 1) and onwards every cycle until disease progression. The timing of the 
ECG acquisition needs to be recorded in the CRF. Refer to the ECG Manual.  
c. Adverse event recording will commence from the time of consent and continues until the safety follow -up assessment with the patient. 
d. Varlitinib tablets 300 mg administered orally, BID, every day with food.  Patients should avoid a high -fat meal. Note: Day 1, Day 8, and Day 14 morning 
dose can only be administered under supervision of the Investigator (or designee), following collection of pre -dose PK sample and ECG.  
e. Capecitabine tablets 1000 mg/m2 administered orally, BID with food for 14 days from Day 1 to Day 14, followed by 1 week of rest.  
f. Serum pregnancy test to be performed at the screening visit for all females except those surgically sterile or 2 years postme nopausal. Serum or urine 
pregnancy tests will be performed at EOT. Unscheduled  serum or urine pregnancy tests may be performed at the Investigator’s discretion.  
g. Screening clinical laboratory tests (hematology, clinical chemistry, urinalysis and coagulation) must be completed ≤ 21 days prior to Day 1. Screening 
clinical laboratory tests may be used in lieu of pre -treatment Day  1 tests, if performed within 1 week prior to the first administration of study medications. 
The clinical laboratory tests obtained as per site standard clinical practice prior to consent is acceptable for screening laboratory tests if it meets the 
protocol required time window.  
h. Coagulation laboratory test will be performed at screening and EOT visit, however investigator may perform coagulation tests at other visits if required based on clinical judgment.  
i. Screening viral serology test  for HBV and HCV is only needed if there are no existing results within the year prior to screening. Screening viral serology 
test must be completed ≤ 21 days prior to Day 1. Serology tests include Hepatitis B surface antigen, Hepatitis C Virus antibo dy and human 
immunode ficiency virus antibody tests.  
j. For patients participating in the PK sampling, blood samples for PK analysis of varlitinib , any relevant varlitinib circulating metabolites, capecitabine 
and 5 -FU (active metabolite of capecitabine) will be collected as foll ows: Day 1, Day 8 and Day 14: post-dose: 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, 10, and 12 hours 
post-dose. Pre-dose PK samples will be collected on Day 1 at 5 minutes pre- dose, Day 8 at 20 minutes pre -dose, and Day 14 at 5 minutes pre -dose. In 
addition, unscheduled PK will be collected 7 days following dose reduction  of varlitinib at any cycle of treatment: up to 5 minutes  pre-dose, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5, 6, 8.5, 10, and 12 hours post -dose if required.  Select time points in this PK assessments can be waived by the sponsor on a case by case basis.  
k. During study treatment period, CT/MRI imaging of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis images to be performed every 6 weeks (±5 days ) from  Cycle 1 Day 
1. Brain and/or bone lesions may be scanned if applicable. Radiological assessm ents should continue until EOT visit of the patient is conducted . 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  22 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  l. Baseline CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis images must be performed within 21 days prior to Cycle 1 Day 1, brain and/or bone lesions may be 
scanned if applicable. The CT/MRI image obtained as per site standard clinical practice prior to consent is acceptable for baseline image if it meets the 
protocol required CT/MRI image acquisition guidelines and time window.  
m. EOT assessment s should be performed before the start of a new anti -tumo r treatment . 
n. If the patient  needs to start a new anti -tumo r treatment within 28 days  post last study medication administration , the safety follow -up assessments should 
be performed within 1 day be fore the start of the new anti -tumo r treatment . 
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  23 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Table 2: Schedule of Assessments – Part 1 and Part 2 
Assessments  Screening  Study Treatment Period  
EOTu Safety Follow 
up r Disease 
Status FU s Survival 
FU t Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  Subsequent 
cycles  
Day -14 
to 0 Day 1  
(±0 day)  Day 8 – 
Part 1  
(±1 day)  Day 8 – 
Part 2  
(±1 day)  Day 15 
(±1 day)  Day 1 
(± 5 days)  Day 1 
(± 5 days)  Cycle 4 Day 1, Cycle 5 Day 1, 
etc. (± 5 days)  EOT  
(+7 days)  28 days post 
last study 
medication 
administration  
(+7 days)  Every 6 
weeks (from 
Cycle 1 Day 
1) po st EOT 
until disease 
progression  
(± 5 days)  Every 12 
Weeks post 
disease 
progression  
(± 7 days)  
Informed Consent  X            
Demographics  X            
Medical History  X            
Physical 
Examination  X X X   X X X X X X  
Body Weight  X X X   X X X X X X  
Vital Signs a X X X   X X X X X X  
12-Lead ECG  X X b X b   X b  X b  Xb   
ECOG  X X X   X X X X X X  
AE review c X X X   X X X X X   
Prior and 
Concomitant 
Medication and 
Therapy  X X X   X X X X X   
Varlitinib 
Administration d  X d X d X X X d X X     
Capecitabine 
Administration e  X X X  X X X     
Urine or Serum β-
HCG f X        X    
Hematology g X X X   X X X X    
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  24 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Abbreviations: AE = adverse event, β -HCG = beta human chorionic gonadotropin, CA19.9 = cancer antigen 19.9, CEA  = carcinoembryonic antigen, 
CT = computed tomography, ECG = electrocardiogram, ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, EOT = End of Treatment, MRI = magnetic resonance 
imaging, SAE = serious adverse event . 
  Assessments  Screening  Study Treatment Period  
EOTu Safety Follow 
up r Disease 
Status FU s Survival 
FU t Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  Subsequent 
cycles  
Day -14 
to 0 Day 1  
(±0 day)  Day 8 – 
Part 1  
(±1 day)  Day 8 – 
Part 2  
(±1 day)  Day 15 
(±1 day)  Day 1 
(± 5 days)  Day 1 
(± 5 days)  Cycle 4 Day 1, Cycle 5 Day 1, 
etc. (± 5 days)  EOT  
(+7 days)  28 days post 
last study 
medication 
administration  
(+7 days)  Every 6 
weeks (from 
Cycle 1 Day 
1) post EOT 
until disease 
progression  
(± 5 days)  Every 12 
Weeks post 
disease 
progression  
(± 7 days)  
Clinical Chemistry g X X X   X X X X    
Liver Function Test 
q    X X        
Urinalysis g X X X   X X X X    
Coagulation g,h X        X    
Serology i X            
CA19.9 and CEA j X      X Xj Xj    
Collection of tumor 
tissue k X            
Biopsy l X            
Pharmacokinetics m  X X   X    X   
Biomarker 
Sampling n X      X      
CT/ MRI o X p      X Xo   X  
Survival status 
contact             X 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  25 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Footnotes:  
a. Vitals (blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, temperature) to be collected in a standardized manner in a sitting position after the patient has rested 
comfortably for 5 minutes.  
b. Part 1: Triplicate 12 -Lead ECG using the Core Laboratory -supplied ECG machines will be performed as close as  possible and within 25 minutes prior 
to PK sampling at selected time points on  
• Cycle  1 Day 1: 45 minutes  pre-dose, 5 minute pre-dose, 1.5, 3, 5 , and 8 hours post -dose. Concomitant PK samples will be collected 
immediately after the ECG collections, except for 45 minutes pre- dose time point where no PK sample will be collected.  
• Cycle 1 Day 8: 45 minutes pre -dose, 5 minutes pr e-dose, 1.5, 3, 5, and 8  hours post -dose.  Concomitant PK samples will be collected 
immediately after the ECG collections, except for the 45 minutes and 5 minutes pre- dose time points.  One pre -dose PK sample will be 
collected on Cycle 1 Day 8 at the 20 minutes p re-dose time point.  
• End of Study after full drug washout (at 28 days after the last dose) a set of triplicate ECGs will be collected 3 hours after a lig ht snack. A 
concomitant PK sample will be collected immediately after the ECG collection.  
• In addition, triplicate safety ECGs will be collected 3 hours post -dose on Day 22 (Cycle 2 Day 1), Day 64 (Cycle 4 Day 1) and every 2 cycles  
until disease progression.  These ECGs will not be analyzed by the Core ECG Laboratory.  
Patients should be rested for at least 10 minutes in a supine position and be resting quietly before the triplicate 12 -Lead ECG assessment. There should 
be no significant external stimulation (TV, radio, interaction with other subjects).  
 
Part 2: Triplicate safety ECGs will be collected at screening, baseline (before a snack), and 3 hours post -dose on Day 22 (Cycle 2 Day 1) and Day 64 
(Cycle 4 Day 1) and every 2 cycles  while the subject remains in the study.  These ECGs will not be analyzed by the Core ECG Laboratory but assessed 
by the investigators.  
c. Adverse event recording will commence from the time of consent and continues until the safety follow -up assessment with the patient. 
d. Varlitin ib tablets 300 mg administered orally, BID, every da y with food.  Patients should avoid a high -fat meal. Note: Cycle 1 Day 1 , Cycle 1 Day 8  
(Part 1 only),  and Cycle 2 Day 1 morning dose can only be administered under supervision of the Investigator (or designee), following collection of 
pre-dose PK sample and ECG.  
e. Capecitabine tablets 1000 mg/m2 administered orally, BID with food for 14 days from Day 1 to Day 14, followed by 1 week of rest.  
f. Serum pregnancy test to be performed at the screening visit for all females except those surgically sterile or 2 years  postmenopausal. Serum or urine 
pregnancy tests will be performed at EOT. Unscheduled  serum or urine pregnancy tests will be performed at the Investigator’s discretion.  
g. Screening clinical laboratory tests (hematology, clinical chemistry, urinalysis and coa gulation) must be completed ≤ 21 days prior to Day 1. Screening 
clinical laboratory tests may be used in lieu of pre -treatment Day 1 tests, if performed within 1 week prior to the first administration of study medications.  
The clinical laboratory tests obtained as per site standard clinical practice prior to consent is acceptable for screening laboratory tests if it meets the 
protocol required time window.  Liver function testing is included in the Clinical Chemistry testing.  
h. Coagulatio n laboratory test will be performed at screening and EOT visit, however investigator may perform coagulation tests at other visits if required 
based on clinical judgment.  
i. Screening viral serology test for HBV and HCV is only needed if there are no existing results within the year prior to screening. Screening viral serology 
test must be completed ≤ 21 days prior to Day 1. Serology tests include Hepatitis B surface antigen, Hepatitis C Virus antibo dy and human 
immunodeficiency virus antibody tests.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  26 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  j. During the study treatment period, blood is to be collected for the analysis of CA19.9 and CEA at every 6 weeks (±5 days) from Cycle 1 Day 1 together 
with CT/MRI . The final collection of blood for these analyses should occur at EOT.  If the reason for EOT is due to radiological disease progressions 
and CA19.9/CEA ha ve already  been assessed  with the most recent scans, then CA19.9/CEA at EOT can be omitted.  
k. Archival paraffin -embe dded tumor tissues will be collected during screening for future analysis (the minimum archival tumor tissue to be collected is 
19 unstained slides of 5 microns ). 
l. Biopsy will be performed dur ing screening for those patients who did not have enough archival tumo r tissue if the patient has provided the optional 
tumor tissue consent.  
m. Blood samples for PK analysis of varlitinib and any relevant circulating metabolites will be collected as follows:  
Part 1 (All Patients):   
• Cycle 1 Day 1: 5 minutes pre -dose, 1.5, 3, 5,  and 8 hours post -dose. PK samples will be collected immediately after the ECG collections.  
• Cycle 1 Day 8: 20 minutes pre -dose, 1.5, 3, 5, and 8 hours post -dose.  PK samples will be collected immediately after the ECG collections.  
• End of study after full drug washout:  28 days after last dose at the patient’s safety follow -up visit . PK samples will be collected within 25 
minutes after ECG evaluation . 
Part 2:  
Sparse plasma sampling will be conducted for the population PK evaluation by using nonlinear mixed  effects models on : 
• Cycle 1 Day 1: 5 minutes pre-dose, 1- 3 hours post -dose, 3- 5 hours post -dose, and 5- 8 hours post -dose 
• Cycle 2 Day 1: 20 minutes  pre-dose, 1- 3 hours post -dose, 3- 5 hours post -dose, and 5- 8 hours post -dose.  
Part 1 & Part 2: In addition, u nscheduled PK samples will be collected at least 7 days following dose reduction  of varlitinib at any cycle of treatment: 
up to 5 minutes  pre-dose and 3- 5 hours post -dose.  
n. Blood samples for potential retrospective analysis of potential biomarkers will be collected at baseline and Cycle 3 Day  1 
o. CT/MRI imaging of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis images to be performed every 6 weeks (±5 days)  from Cycle 1 Day 1 . Brain and/or bone lesions 
may be scanned if applicable. Radiological assessments should continue unt il the patient experiences disease progression, regardless of whether the 
patient discontinues randomized therapy or starts a subsequent anti -cancer therapy.  
p. Baseline CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis images must be performed within 21 days prior to Cycle 1 Day 1, brain and/o r bone lesions may 
be scanned if applicable.  The CT/MRI image obtained as per site standard clinical p ractice prior to consent is a cceptable for baseline image if it meets 
the protocol required CT/MRI image acquisition guidelines and time window.  
q. Additional weekly liver function test  (AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, gamma glutamyl transferase, total bilirubin, direct bilirubin)  will also be 
performed for all patients on Cycle 1 Day 8 and Cycle 1 Day 15.  
r. No other additional study -related activities or assessments are mandated during follow -up visit; however, patient data available from the assessments 
done as part of their routin e follow -up visits will be collected by the sponsor.  If the patient needs to start a new anti -tumo r treatment within 28 days  
post last study medication administration , the safety follow -up assessments should be performed within 1 day before the start of a new anti -tumo r 
treatment . 
s. Disease status follow -up will be performed post EOT every 6 weeks from Cycle 1 Day 1, regardless of timing of EOT.  
t. Survival follow -up by either telephone or clinic visit will be performed every 12 weeks post EOT and PD until death to find out the survival status, 
new chemotherapy or biological treatments and the outcome of any ongoing adverse events.  
u. EOT assessment s should be performed be fore the start of new anti -tumo r treatment . 
 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  27 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  2 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1 Synopsis  ............................................................................................................. 2  
2 Table of Contents ............................................................................................ 27  
2.1 List of In-text Tables  ...................................................................................... 32  
2.2 List of In -text Figures  ..................................................................................... 32  
List of Abbreviations and Definition of Terms .......................................................... 33  
3 Introduction .................................................................................................... 36  
3.1 Background ..................................................................................................... 36  
3.2 Varlitinib  ......................................................................................................... 37  
3.2.1  Nonclinical Studies.......................................................................... 37  
3.2.2  Clinical Studies ................................................................................ 38  
3.2.3  Known or Potential Risks of Varlitinib  ........................................... 39  
3.2.4  Known or Potential Risks of Capecitabine...................................... 40  
3.3 Rationale for the Study  .................................................................................. 40  
4 Study Objectives  ............................................................................................. 42  
4.1 Primary Objective  .......................................................................................... 42  
4.2 Secondary Objective(s)  .................................................................................. 42  
4.3 Exploratory Objectives .................................................................................. 43  
5 Investigational Plan ........................................................................................ 44  
5.1 Overall Study Design and Plan: Description ............................................... 44  
5.1.1  Study Design  ................................................................................... 44  
5.2 Discussion of Study Design  ............................................................................ 46  
5.3 Selection of Study Population ........................................................................ 48  
5.3.1  Number of Planned Patients ............................................................ 48  
5.3.2  Inclusion Criteria  ............................................................................. 48  
5.3.3  Exclusion Criteria  ............................................................................ 49  
5.3.4  Removal of Patients from Therapy or Assessments  ........................ 50  
5.3.5  Pregnancy  ........................................................................................ 52  
5.3.5.1  Acceptable Forms of Contraception  ................................................ 53  
5.3.5.2  Time Period for the Collection of Pregnancy Information .............. 53  
5.3.5.3  Follow-up in the Event of a Pregnancy ........................................... 53  
5.4 Investigational Products ................................................................................ 54  
5.4.1  Study Medication Administered  ...................................................... 54  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  28 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  5.4.2  Identity of Investigational Products and Background 
Therapy  ............................................................................................ 55  
5.4.3  Storage Condition of Study Medications ........................................ 55  
5.4.4  Packaging and Labeling  .................................................................. 56  
5.4.5  Method of Assigning Patients to Treatment Groups ....................... 56  
5.4.6  Procedures for Randomization ........................................................ 57  
5.4.7  Selection of Doses in the Study ....................................................... 58  
5.4.8  Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Patient .............................. 60  
5.4.8.1  Dose Modification ........................................................................... 62  
5.4.8.2  Management of Toxicities  ............................................................... 64  
5.4.9  Blinding ........................................................................................... 68  
5.4.10  Prior and Concomitant Therapy ...................................................... 69  
5.4.10.1  Prohibited Medication/Therapy ....................................................... 70  
5.4.11  Treatment Compliance  .................................................................... 71  
6 Timing of Study Procedures  .......................................................................... 71  
6.1 Study Visits – Safety Lead -in ........................................................................ 71  
6.1.1  Screening Visit – Safety Lead -in..................................................... 71  
6.1.2  Treatment Visits – Safety Lead -in................................................... 72  
6.1.3  End of Treatment Visit (+ 7 Days) – Safety Lead -in ...................... 73  
6.1.4  Safety Follow up Visit 28 Days Post Last Study Medication Administration (+ 7 Days) – Safety Lead -in ................................... 73
 
6.2 Study Visits – Part 1  ....................................................................................... 74  
6.2.1  Screening Visit – Part 1  ................................................................... 74  
6.2.2  Treatment Visits – Part 1  ................................................................. 74  
6.2.3  Safety Follow- up Visit 28 Days Post Last Study Medication 
Administration (+ 7 Days) – Part 1  ................................................. 77  
6.2.4  Disease Status Follow -up Visit Every 6  Weeks (±  5 Days) 
Post End of Treatment until Disease Progression – Part 1  .............. 77  
6.2.5  Survival Follow-up Visit, Every 12 Weeks (± 7 Da ys) Post 
Disease Progression  – Part 1  ........................................................... 78  
6.3 Study Visits – Part 2  ....................................................................................... 78  
6.3.1  Screening Visit – Part 2  ................................................................... 78  
6.3.2  Treatment Visits – Part 2  ................................................................. 79  
6.3.3  Safety Follow -up Visit 28 Days Post Last Study Medication 
Administration (+ 7 Days) – Part 2  ................................................. 81  
6.3.4  Disease Status Follow -up Visit Every 6 Weeks (± 5 Days) 
Post End of Treatment until Disease Progression – Part 2  .............. 81  
6.3.5  Survival Follow-up Visit, Every 12 Weeks (±  7 Days) Post 
Disease Progression  – Part 2  ........................................................... 81  
6.4 Duration of Treatment  ................................................................................... 82  
7 SAFETY, EFFICACY, PHARMACOKINETIC AND BIOMARKER VARIABLES  ................................................................................................... 82
 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  29 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  7.1 Safety, Efficacy Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic 
Measurements Assessed  ................................................................................. 83  
7.1.1  Safety Assessm ents ......................................................................... 83  
7.1.1.1  Adverse Events  ................................................................................ 83  
7.1.1.2  Reporting of Serious Adverse Events ............................................. 87  
7.1.1.3  Unexpected Adverse Reactions  ....................................................... 88  
7.1.1.4  Clinical Laboratory Evaluation ....................................................... 89  
7.1.1.5  Vital Signs  ....................................................................................... 90  
7.1.1.6  Physical Examination  ...................................................................... 90  
7.1.1.7  12-lead ECG  .................................................................................... 90  
7.1.1.8  ECOG P erformance Status  .............................................................. 92  
7.1.2  Efficacy Variables  ........................................................................... 92  
7.1.2.1  Tumor Evaluation ............................................................................ 92  
7.1.2.2  Cancer Antigen Evaluation  ............................................................. 93  
7.1.3  Pharmacokinetic Variables  .............................................................. 93  
7.1.3.1  Determination of Drug Concentrations in Biological 
Samples  ........................................................................................... 93  
7.1.3.2  Pharmacokinetic Sampling  .............................................................. 93  
7.1.3.3  Pharmacokinetic Analysis  ............................................................... 95  
7.1.4  Biomarker Variables ........................................................................ 96  
7.2 Data Safety Monitoring Board and Independent Central Review ............ 97  
8 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  .......................................................................... 98  
8.1 General Statistical Considerations ................................................................ 98  
8.2 Sample Size Derivation  .................................................................................. 99  
8.2.1  Safety Lead -in Sample Size  ............................................................ 99  
8.2.2  Part 1 Sample Size  ........................................................................... 99  
8.2.3  Part 2 Sample Size  ......................................................................... 100  
8.3 Analysis Populations .................................................................................... 100  
8.3.1  Safety Population .......................................................................... 100  
8.3.2  Full Analysis Set ........................................................................... 101  
8.3.3  Evaluable for Response Set (Part 1 only) ...................................... 101  
8.3.4  Per Protocol Analysis Population .................................................. 101  
8.3.5  PK Analysis Set  ............................................................................. 102  
8.4 Study Endpoints  ........................................................................................... 103  
8.4.1  Objective Response Rate  ............................................................... 103  
8.4.2  Progression-Free Survival ............................................................. 104  
8.4.3  Overall Survival ............................................................................ 104  
8.4.4  Duration of Response .................................................................... 105  
8.4.5  Disease Control Rate  ..................................................................... 105  
8.4.6  Tumor Size .................................................................................... 106  
8.4.7  Safety End points............................................................................ 106  
8.4.8  ECG Parameters  ............................................................................ 106  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  30 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  8.5 Methods of Statistical Analysis ................................................................... 106  
8.5.1  Primary Endpoints ......................................................................... 106  
8.5.1.1  Part 1 - Objective Response Rate  .................................................. 106  
8.5.1.2  Part 1 – Progression-Free Survival ................................................ 107  
8.5.1.3  Part 2 – Overall Survival ............................................................... 110  
8.5.2  Secondary Endpoints ..................................................................... 110  
8.5.2.1  Efficacy Endpoints ........................................................................ 110  
8.5.2.2  Safety Data Analysis  ..................................................................... 113  
8.5.2.3  ECG/QT Analysis .......................................................................... 115  
9 Quality Assurance and Quality Control ..................................................... 118  
9.1 Audit and Inspection  .................................................................................... 118  
9.2 Monitoring  .................................................................................................... 118  
9.3 Data Management and Coding ................................................................... 119  
10 Records and Supplies  ................................................................................... 120  
10.1  Drug Accountability  ..................................................................................... 120  
10.2  Financing and Insurance  ............................................................................. 120  
11 Ethics  ............................................................................................................. 120  
11.1  Independent Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board ............... 120  
11.2  Regulatory Authorities................................................................................. 120  
11.3  Ethical Conduct of the Study  ...................................................................... 121  
11.4  Informed Consent  ......................................................................................... 121  
11.5  Patient Confidentiality  ................................................................................. 122  
12 Reporting and Publication, Including Archiving  ...................................... 123  
13 References  ..................................................................................................... 124  
14 Appendices  .................................................................................................... 126  
14.1  RECIST Criteria  .......................................................................................... 126  
14.2  ECOG Performance Scale ........................................................................... 127  
14.3  Prohibited Concomitant Medication/Therapy  .......................................... 128  
14.4  Use with Caution: Drugs Associated with Torsade de Pointes and 
QT Prolongation ........................................................................................... 129  
14.5  Drugs that Prolong the QTc and are Not Clearly Associated with Torsade de Pointes ........................................................................................ 134
 
14.6  Protocol Approval Signatures ..................................................................... 137  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  31 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  14.7  Investigator Signature Page ........................................................................ 138  
14.8  Study Personnel  ............................................................................................ 139  
14.8.1  Sponsor Personnel ......................................................................... 139  
14.8.2  Clinical Research Organization Personnel  .................................... 140  
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  32 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  2.1 List of In -text Tables  
Table 1:  Schedule of Assessments – Safety Lead -in .................................................. 20 
Table 2:  Schedule of Assessments – Part 1 and Part 2  ............................................... 23 
Table 3:  Investigational Product ................................................................................. 54 
Table 4:  Background Therapy .................................................................................... 54 
Table 5:  Dose Calculations for Starting Dose of Capecitabine of 1000 mg/m2 ......... 60 
Table 6:  Recommended Dose Adjustments for Varlitinib/Placebo  ............................ 63 
Table 7:  Recommended Dose Adjustment for Capecitabine ...................................... 63 
Table 8:  Recommended Management of Diarrhea Attributable to Varlitinib  ............ 65 
Table 9:  Recommended Management of Nausea/Vomiting attributable to Varlitinib  66 
Table 10:  Recommended Dose Adjustment for Management of Hyperbilirubinemia 
with Increased Transaminases  ...................................................................... 67 
Table 11:  Recommended Dose Adjustment for Management of Hyperbilirubinemia 
due to Indirect Bilirubin  ............................................................................... 67 
Table 12:  Recommended Dose Adjustment for Management of Increase Serum 
Creatinine  ..................................................................................................... 68 
Table 13:  Clinical Laboratory Parameters  .................................................................... 89 
Table 14:  Summary of Outcome Variables and Analysis Populations ....................... 103 
 
2.2  List of In -text Figures  
Figure 1:  Safety Lead -in Study Design  ........................................................................ 44 
Figure 2:  Part 1 Study Design  ...................................................................................... 45 
Figure 3:  Part 2 Study Design  ...................................................................................... 46 
 
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  33 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  LIST OF ABBREVIATION S AND DEFINITION OF TERMS  
AE adverse event  
AKT  protein kinase B 
ALT  alanine aminotransferase  
ANC  absolute neutrophil count  
AST  aspartate aminotransferase  
AUC  area under the plasma concentration -time curve  
AUC τ area under the plasma concentration -time curve during a dosage 
interval (τ) 
BID twice daily  
BMI  body mass index  
BP blood pressure  
BTC  biliary tract cancer  
CCA  cholangiocarcinoma  
CI confidence interval  
CL observed systemic plasma clearance  
Cmax maximum concentration  
CTCAE  common terminology criteria for adverse events  
Ctrough Trough plasma concentration  
CRF  case report form  
CRO  contract research organization  
DCO  data cut -off 
DCR  disease control rate  
DoR  duration of response  
DSMB  data safety monitoring board  
ECG  electrocardiogram  
ECOG  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group  
EDC  electronic data capture  
EFR evaluable for response  
EGFR  epidermal growth factor receptor  
5’-DFCR  5’-deoxy -5-fluorocytidine  
5’-DFUR  5’-deoxy -5-fluorouridine  
EOT  end of treatment  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  34 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  5-FU 5-fluorouracil  
FAS full analysis set  
FBAL  α-fluoro -β-alanine  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
HER  human epidermal growth factor receptor  
IB Investigator’s Brochure  
ICF informed consent form  
ICH International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements 
for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use  
ICR independent central review  
IEC independent ethics committ ee 
IRB institutional review board  
KM 
LLN  Kaplan Meier  
Lower Limit of Normal  
MAD  multiple ascending dose  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MTD  maximum tolerated dose  
NCCN  National Comprehensive Cancer Network  
NLME  nonlinear mixed effects model  
ORR  objective response rate  
OS overall survival  
PFS Progression -free survival  
PK pharmacokinetic  
PP Per protocol  
PR partial response  
QTc corrected QT interval  
QTcF  corrected QT interval  (Fridericia’s formula)  
Rac AUC  Accumulation ratio calculated from AUC τ,ss and AUC τ after single 
dosing 
Rac C max Accumulation ratio calculated from C max,ss and C max after single dosing  
RECIST  Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours  
ROW  rest of world  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  35 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  RTSM  Randomizati on and Trial Supply Management  
SAE  serious adverse event  
SAP statistical analysis plan  
SD stable disease  
SLI Safety lead -in 
SOP standard operating procedure  
SUSAR  suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction  
t1/2 terminal elimination half -life 
TID three times a day  
Tmax time of maximum concentration  
ULN  upper limit of normal  
US United States  
Vz apparent volume of distribution during terminal phase  
Vss steady -state volume of distribution  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  36 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  3 INTRODUCTION 
Varlitinib (also known as ASLAN001) is a small -molecule, adenosine triphosphate 
competitive inhibitor of the tyrosine kinases -epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), 
human epidermal growth factor receptor  (HER)2 , and HER 4, developed by Array 
BioPharma.   
ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd. (ASLAN) has in -licensed va rlitinib  (ASLAN001) as 
of July 2011, and is responsible for future clinical development of the molecule. In August 
2015, varlitinib  was granted orphan- drug designation status for the treatment of 
cholangiocarcinoma by the United S tates (US) Food and Drug Administration (FDA) , 
Office of Orphan Products Development. 
3.1 Background 
Biliary tract cancers  (BTCs)  are heterogeneous and highly lethal malignancies including 
a spectrum of invasive carcinomas arising in the gallbladder and bile ducts (intrahepatic 
and extrahepatic), and variably, ampullary carcinoma. These tumo rs are very uncommon, 
representing less th an 1% of all cancers in the developed countries. Approximately 1200 
new cases in the United Kingdom and 9000 new cases in the US are diagnosed per year, 
although the incidence is increasing, perhaps related to gallstone disease. Despite this 
relative rarity, these tumo rs present a significant therapeutic challenge as most patients 
are often diagnosed at an advanced stage when surgical resection is not feasible and treatment options are limited. The 5 -year overall survival  rates are 5 % to 10% for 
gallbladder  cancers and 10 % to 40% for cholangiocarcinomas.
1,2,3 
Surgical resection with negative margins or liver transplantation remains the potential therapy for cure, but only for the minority of patients whose tumor s appear resectable on 
staging assessments. However, recurrence occurs f requently for this resectable subset, 
with more local than distant relapse. Orthotopic liver transplantation is also a potential avenue for cure in patients with unresectable perihilar or intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. The benefit of neoadjuvant chemoradiation in quality of resection as well as survival is limited. Thus, systemic therapy, largely relied on cytotoxic chemotherapy, remains a necessary component of treatment both for recurrent disease or for tumor s advanced at 
diagnosis.
2 Currently, the FDA  approved agents that are used to treat  cholangiocarcinoma 
include gemcitabine , capecitabine, cisplatin , oxaliplatin , fluoropyrimidines (including 5-
Fluorouracil [5- FU]), or a combination of these. However, it is important to note that none 
of these agents is FDA approved primarily  for use  in biliary tract cancers.4 
Historically, there has been no standard treatment for advanced or metastatic BTC. A randomized Phase 2 study was conducted in 410 patient s with locally advanced or 
metastatic cholangiocarcinoma, gallbladder cancer and ampullary cancer to receive cisplatin (25 mg/m
2) followed by gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) on Days 1 and 8 every 
21 days or gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) on Days 1, 8, and 15 every 28 days. A significant 
benefit in both response rate and progression free survival (PFS) was seen favoring the gemcitabine/ cisplatin arm. Furthermore, median overall survival (OS) was 11.7 months 
in the gemcitabine /cisplatin group compared with 8.1 months in the gemcitabine -only 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  37 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  group (hazard ratio 0.64; 95% CI, 0.52–0.80, p < 0.001), with no increase in adverse 
events (AE s) for the combination arm when compared with the single -agent.  
While cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents are useful in the treatment of biliary tract 
cancers, the magnitude of their beneficial effects is less than desired. Targeted therapies based on the understanding of the molecular basis of tumors are being investigated in biliary tract cancers with some promi sing results. Targeted therapies, perhaps in 
combination with cytotoxic agents , may be the most promising advancement in this tumor 
type.
2 
The human EGFR family consists of four members: HER1 (EGFR), HER2 (c -erbB -2), 
HER3 (c -erbB -3) and HER4 (c -erbB -4). Epidermal growth factor receptor , HER2, and 
HER4 are single -pass transmembrane glycoprotein receptors, members of the type I 
receptor tyrosine kinase family. Upon ligand binding, their activation induces the homo- 
or hetero -dimerization  and subsequent phosphorylation of intracellular tyrosines, which 
lead to both cell proliferation and survival and therefore cancer development and progression. Aberrations in EGFR family members play a role in the development and progression of many human cancers.
5,6,7,8 
Epidermal growth factor receptor  is variably expressed in the majority of biliary tract 
cancers, with expression occurring nearly ubiquitously in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas, and to a slightly lesser extent in the other tumor types. Human 
epidermal growth factor 2 is overexpressed in only a minority of biliary tract cancers, but 
preclinical experiments have shown that simultaneous blockade of EGFR and HER2 by lapatinib leads to growth inhibition of an orthotopic rat model of i ntrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma if administered early .
2,9 Both EGFR and HER2 inhibitors have 
demonstrated clinical efficacy in cancer treatment. Thus, a simultaneous inhibition of EGFR, HER2 , and HER4 represents a new therapeutic approach for broadly targeting 
different tumor types that may be mo re effective than selective inhibition of each receptor.  
3.2 Varlitinib  
Varlitinib is a potent, small-m olecule, adenosine triphosphate -competitive inhibitor of the 
receptor tyrosine kinases EGFR, HER2, and HER4. ASLAN believes that varlitinib  is a 
compound that may be beneficial to patient s with cancer by simultaneous inhibition of 
these receptors.   
Full details of nonclinical and clinical studies conducted to date are provided in the Investigator ’s Brochure ( IB).
10 The following sections provide a summary of varlitinib 
studies conducted. 
3.2.1 Nonc linical Studies  
Nonclinical studies includ ing in vivo  pharmacology studies, pharmacokinetic studies, 
toxicokinetic studies, absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion studies , and 
toxicology studies have been conducted with varlitinib. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  38 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Numerous pharmacology studies have demonstrated the activity of varlitinib  in tumor-
bearing animal models of breast cancer, non -small cell lung cancer, gastric cancer, 
ovarian cancer, and epidermoid cancer. Significant inhibition of tumor growth (> 70%) 
was seen with twice daily (BID) doses of 100 mg/kg and once daily doses of 200 mg/kg 
in the EGFR- driven A431 tumor xenograft model of epidermoid carcinoma.  
Toxicity studies have been conducted in Sprague -Dawley rats (acute and repeat dose) and 
cynomolgus monkeys (repeat dose). The main observed adverse effects in both species were gas trointestinal disturbances, soft stools, weight loss, mild clinical chemistry, and 
hematology changes and partially reversible histopathological alterations.  
The administration of varlitinib  at doses up to 60 mg/kg was tolerated in most animals in 
an extensive panel of safety studies. The overall conclusion from safety studies is that varlitinib  has an acceptable safety profile for administration in human cancer patients at 
the proposed doses. 
Details of the full varlitinib nonclinical program are presented in the IB.
10 
3.2.2 Clinical Studies  
Varlitinib has been administered as a single agent a nd in combination with other agents 
in 5 completed Phase 1 studies and 1 completed Phase 2A study and is currently being 
administered in 7 on- going studies. Patients with metastatic gastric cancer, gastro -
esophageal tumors, breast cancer, and biliary tract  cancer have been being evaluated. As 
of 31 December 2016, a total of 345 patients with solid tumors had been administered 
varlitinib  at total daily doses ranging from 50  mg to 1200 mg.  
Completed single -agent studies of varlitinib include a Phase 1 dose -escalation and 
expansion study of the ditosylate salt capsule (Clinical Study ARRY -0501), a Phase 1 
dose- escalation study of the free base tablet (Clinical Study ARRAY -543- 103), and a 
Phase 2a study of the tolerability and biological activity of the free ba se tablet (Clinical 
Study ASLAN001 -001). Completed combination studies of varlitinib as a free base tablet 
include a Phase 1 dose -escalation combination study with docetaxel (Clinical Study 
ARRAY-543- 104), a Phase 1 dose -escalation combination study with c apecitabine 
(Clinical Study ARRAY -543- 204), and a Phase 1 dose -escalation combination study with 
gemcitabine (Clinical Study ARRAY -543- 206). The maximum tolerated dose ( MTD ) has 
been determined for varlitinib as a single agent and in combination with 3 separate standard chemotherapies (docetaxel, capecitabine, and gemcitabine) in patients with advanced solid tumors. Ongoing Phase 2 studies are being conducted in patients with 
BTC, metastatic breast cancer, and gastric cancer.  
Evaluation of the efficacy of varlitinib in the clinical studies conducted to date has demonstrated that partial response (PR) or stable disease (SD), as defined by the Response 
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours (RECIST ) has been observed with varlitinib in each 
clinical study to date. In one study (ARRAY -543- 103), the incidence of stable disease 
was higher in the varlitinib 500 mg BID cohort than the varlitinib 300 mg or 400 mg BID 
cohorts. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  39 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  There was a trend for patients with HER2- positive tumors to have an increased rate of 
stabl e disease compared to patients with HER2 -negative tumors. Conversely, there was a 
trend for patients with EGFR -positive tumors to have a decreased rate of stable disease 
compared with to patients with EGFR- negative tumors (ARRAY -543-0501). 
Adverse events of diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting have been reported frequently across 
all studies conducted with varlitinib. The time of onset of these AEs has been variable with the majority of episodes being managed with standard anti -emetic and anti -diarrheal 
medicatio ns. Dermatological AEs have been reported during varlitinib therapy including 
rash, erythematous rash, papular rash, macular rash, maculopapular rash, exfoliative rash, skin exfoliation, dermatitis acneiform, and acne. If symptoms are not adequately controlled with symptomatic treatment, a dose holiday (either with or without subsequent dose reduction) may be required.  
Elevation in serum liver transaminases ( alanine aminotransferase [ ALT ] and/or aspartate 
aminotransferase [ AST ]) and cases of hyperbilirubin emia have been observed in some 
patients receiving varlitinib. Levels of ALT, AST, conjugated and total blood bilirubin as 
well as signs and symptoms of liver toxicity should be monitored during varlitinib treatment.  Cases of increased serum creatinine hav e been observed particularly when 
varlitinib is administered with platinum- based chemotherapies. Appropriate monitoring 
of renal function is recommended. 
Prolongation of the corrected QT interval (QTc) by >  60 milliseconds (msec) from 
baseline has been observed in 2 patients. Two patients in Study ARRAY -543-204 
experienced clinically significant QT prolongations with one of the patients having 
multiple cardiopulmonary complications at baseline and remaining on treatment with verapamil and dig oxin, both of which could have interfered with QTc measurements 
during the study. The QTc prolongation in the second patient was assessed as not related to study treatment and the patient was withdrawn from the study due to a major protocol violation. In vitro  studies have shown that therapeutically active concentrations of 
varlitinib are 1200- to 1625- fold lower than those likely to produce any change in cardiac 
conduction. Therefore, it is unclear if the existing data implicate varlitinib in any way in the observed QTc prolongation events. 
Details of the full varlitinib clinical program are presented in the IB.
10  
3.2.3 Known or Potential Risks of Varlitinib 
Varlitinib has demonstrated an acceptable safety profile in nonclinical toxicology studies 
and in the completed Phase  1 and Phase 2A studies in humans. However, as with any new 
investigational drug, unexpected AEs may occur with the use of varlitinib. The following is a summary of potential risks ; additional details are presented  in the IB
10: 
• Varlitinib must not be admin istered to pregnant or nursing women 
• Varlitinib exposure is negatively influenced by co -administration of  proton pump 
inhibitors, H2 antagonists, and co- medications that increase gastric pH  
• Varlitinib may cause a drug -drug interaction with other medication s that are 
CYP3A4, CYP2C8, or CYP2C9 inducers, inhibitors, or substrates. Due to the potential for drug interactions based on in vitro screens, concomitant use of 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  40 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  moderate C YP3A4, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and P -gp inducers or inhibitors will be 
recorded during the entire clinical study 
• Signs of gastrointestinal side effects (diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting) should be 
monitored in patient s receiving varlitinib. However, prophylactic anti -emetics are 
usually not required with varlitinib administration  
• ALT, AST, and bilirubin along with signs or symptoms of liver toxicity should be monitored during varlitinib treatment 
3.2.4 Known or Potential Risks of Capecitabine 
In this study, varlitinib will be co -administered with capecitabine. Refer to the XELODA
® 
(capecitabine) prescribing information leaflet12 for known and potential risks following 
administration of capecitabine.  
3.3 Rationale for the Study  
Biliary tract cancer  (BTC) is a therapy -refractory cancer with very limited treatment 
alternatives. First- line therapy is often a combination of gemcitabine and cisplatin, as 
recommended in the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN ) guidelines. A 
standard second- line therapy for BTC has not been established and no drug is currently 
approved in the US for this indication. In the ABC -02 study, approximately 15% of the 
patients were treated with 5 -FU-based chemo¬therapy as second -line treatment after 
progression from the gemcitabine/cisplatin (GC) regimen, with a median OS of 
11.2 months (Valle et al. 2010). There is data suggesting that the 5- FU principle may be 
useful in BTC, such as the S -1 data from Japan and small studies with capecitabine in 
BTC.  
However, although the efficacy was demonstrated in phase II studies in a small number of patient s and the second- line chemotherapies are considered for patients who can 
receive chemotherapies, sufficient evidence has not been established. In addition, no clinical studies have been conducted to directly compare the second -line chemotherapies 
with no treatment (supportive therapy) and it is necessary to investigate whether the second -line chemotherapies contribute to the extension of survival. The NCCN  
recommend s monotherapy or combination of the following agents indicated for 
unresectable biliary cancer: gemcitabine, capecitabine, cisplatin, oxaliplatin , and 
fluoropyrimidine (including 5-FU). These agents, however, are not prioritized agents for biliary cancer approved by the FDA.  
The second- line a gents for biliary cancer differ  in each country, but capecitabine is one 
of the common options at the present. Capecitabine is an oral fluorouracil prodrug that undergoes enzyme conversion to 5-FU in the body and is use d for advanced biliary cancer 
off-label in accordance with the NCCN guideline, because of the limited therapies for 
advanced biliary cancer. From the above, ASLAN consi ders that v arlitinib in combination 
with capecitabine can provide even more benefits to patients with biliary tract cancer . 
Varlitinib has demonstrated tumor shrinkage responses and durable disease stabilization in BTC in ongoing Phase IB safety and tolerability studies in Singapore (ASLAN001 -
002SG) and Taiwan (ASLAN001-002). 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  41 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  The potential efficacy of varlitinib in BTC is also supported by nonclinical studies which 
have demonstrated dysregulated HER1 and HER2 activity in this tumor type and support the hypothesis that HER receptors are driving BTC tumor proliferation and survival. In 
terms of drug metabolism, varlitinib is cleared via the biliary tract and therefore drug concentrations should be high at the primary tumor site.  
Furthermore, results from an ongoing study in trastuzumab- failed metastatic breast cancer 
(ASLAN001 -003) where 400 mg  BID varlitinib in combination with capecitabine 
demonstrate that the combination of varlitinib and capecitabine has anti -tumor activity, 
is well- tolerated and would be a rational combination in multiple malignancies, including 
BTC.  
Second -line BTC remains  an area of high unmet medical need. To date, no randomized 
clinical studie s have demonstrated statistically significant improvements in any efficacy 
parameters . Most of the studies us ed small, single arm designs. Thus a  study with a 
double- blind, placebo -controlled, randomized design has the potential to provide robust, 
evidence of efficacy in second -line BTC.  Primary e fficacy endpoints that will be used to 
evaluate efficacy  in the study include Objective Response Rate ( ORR ) and PFS for Part 
1 of the study  and OS for Part 2 of the study . These are well known endpoints for oncology 
studies and have been used to support health authority decisions on drug approvability.  
See Section  5.2 for a further discussion of the study design. 
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  42 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  4 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
4.1 Primary Objective  
The primary  objectives of the study are:  
Safety lead- in: 
• To assess the safety and tolerability of varlitinib 300 mg BID (every day), in 
combination with capecitabine 1000 mg/m2 (BID for 14 days followed by a 7- day 
rest) as measured by incidence of AEs, and changes from baseline in safety 
parameters.  
Part 1: 
• To assess the efficacy of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine as measured 
by co -primary endpoints of ORR and PFS, both assessed by an Independent 
Central Review (ICR) . 
Part 2: 
• To assess the efficacy of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine as  measured 
by OS. 
4.2 Secondary Objective(s)  
The secondary objectives of the study are:  
Safety lead- in: 
1. To evaluate the pharmacokinetics (PK) of varlitinib (and any relevant circulating 
metabolites)  and capecitabine (and its active metabolite  5-FU) when given in 
combination 
2. To evaluate the effect of varlitinib on QT/QTc 
3. To evaluate the efficacy of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine, as 
measured by ORR, duration of response ( DoR ), and disease control rate ( DCR ), 
all based on site assessment  
Part 1: 
1. To evaluate the efficacy of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine, as 
measured b y DoR , and DCR as assessed by ICR , and OS and ORR as assessed by 
the site 
2. To assess the safety and tolerability of varlitinib when combined with capecitabine  
3. To explore exposure -response relationships for varlitinib (and any relevant 
circulating metabolites) for measures of efficacy, safety, and pharmacological 
responses 
4. To examine the effects of varlitinib, when added to capecitabine on electrocardiogram (ECG) parameters including QTcF, QTcB, HR, PR and QRS 
 
 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  43 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Part 2 : 
1. To evaluate the efficacy of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine, as 
measured by ORR, DoR, DCR and PFS , all based on site assessment  
2. To assess the safety and tolerability of varlitinib when combined with capecitabine  
3. To explore exposure -response relationships for varlitinib (and any relevant 
circulating metabolites) for measures of efficacy, safety, and pharmacological 
responses via sparse PK sampling and population PK analyses 
4.3 Expl oratory Objectives  
The exploratory objectives of the study are: 
Part 1: 
1. To explore the role of HER family of receptor  status as a predictor of benefit to 
varlitinib  
2. To explore possible relationships between HER family and downstream signaling protein and phospho-protein express ion levels and clinical outcomes  
3. To explore possible relationships between gene mutational status and clinical outcomes 
Part 2: 
If a relationship is found between biomarker(s) expression and clinical outcomes in Part  1 
of the study, the biomarker(s) could be prospectively evaluated in Part 2 of the study. 
 
 
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  44 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  5 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
5.1 Overall Study Design and Plan: Description  
5.1.1 Study Design  
This study is designed as a multicenter, double -blind, randomized, placebo-controlled 
study of varlitinib plus capecitabine versus placebo plus capecitabine in patient s with 
advanced or metastatic BTC as second -line systemic therapy.  
Safety Lead- in: 
This study will commence initially with a Safety lead -in group ( Figure 1 ). This part of 
the study is a single arm, open -label design to assess the safety of varlitinib ( 300 mg 
administered BID every day) plus capecitabine ( 1000 mg/m2 administered BID every day 
for 14 days, followed by a 7- day rest period) in a small set of patient s (12 to 20 patients) 
with 12 patients completing the  PK and ECG evaluations . Treatment will continue until 
disease progression , deve lopment of unacceptable toxicity , withdrawal of consent, or 
death.  
A data safety monitoring board ( DSMB) meeting will occur after the first 12 patients in 
the Safety lead -in who have completed 21 days of follow-up in order to review the safety 
and tolerability data prior to commencement of Part 1 of the study.  
Figure 1: Safety Lead -in Study Design 
 
Abbreviations:  AE = adverse event, DCR  = disease control rate, DoR  = duration of response , DSMB  = data safety 
monitoring board, ECG = electrocardiogram, N  = number of patients, ORR  = objective response rate, 
PK = pharmacokinetics, QT/QTc  = QT interval  / corrected QT interval, USA  = United States of America.  
  

 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  45 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Part 1: 
Part 1 of the study is designed as  a double- blind, randomized, placebo- controlled study 
to assess the efficacy and safety of varlitinib plus capecitabine in comparison with placebo 
plus capecitabine in approximately 120 patient s (Figure 2 ). Eligible patient s will be 
randomized to varlitinib  or placebo (300 mg administered BID every day) plus 
capecitabine ( 1000 mg/m2 administered BID every day for 14 days, followed by a 7- day 
rest period). Treatment will continue until disease progression , development of 
unacceptable toxicity , withdrawal of consent, or death. A DSMB will meet at a selected 
time point (to be confirmed) during Part 1 for review of safety data. 
Figure 2: Part 1 Study Design 
 
 
Abbreviations: N  = number of patients, DCR  = disease control rate, DoR  = duration of response, DSMB  = data safety 
monitoring board, ECG = Electrocardiogram , OS = overall survival, PD  = progressive disease, PFS  = progression -free 
survival , PK = pharmacokinetics.  
  

 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  46 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Part 2: 
Part 2 of the study is designed as double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study to 
confirm the efficacy of varlitinib (300 mg administered BID) plus capecitabine 
(1000 mg/m2 administered BID for 14 days out of 21 days) compared to capecitabine in 
approximately 350 patient s (Figure 3 ). Part 2 will follow the same design and treatment 
schedule as Part 1. This part of the study will commence following review of Part 1 results.  
Figure 3: Part 2 Study Design 
 
Abbreviations: N  = number of patients, DCR  = disease control rate, Do R = duration of response, OS  = overall survival, 
PD = progressive disease, PFS  = progression -free survival , PK = pharmacokinetics.  
 
5.2 Discussion of Study Design  
To date , no randomized clinical studie s in second -line BTC  have demonstrated 
statistically significant improvements in any efficacy parameters. Historically, clinical studie s in second- line BTC have been conducted using small, single arm designs. 
Consequently, the results of these studie s can be difficult to inte rpret and compare, due 
to the intrinsic bias known to afflict single arm designs. 
The proposed study has been designed to provide robust, unequivocal evidence of 
efficacy in second -line BTC. For that reason, a randomized, double-blind, placebo -
controlled design has been selected to definitively quantify the contribution of varlitinib, 
above and beyond the background chemotherapy agent, capecitabine. 
ASLAN001 -009 is designed to provide sufficient data on the efficacy and safety of 
varlitinib in combination  with capecitabine in patients with advanced or metastatic BTC 

 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  47 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  who have progressed after one line of systemic therapy in order to support a decision on 
its approvability for marketing. The control will be capecitabine plus placebo. 
The proposed dose of var litinib is 300  mg BID.  The MTD of varlitinib in combination 
with capecitabine 1000 mg/m2 BID was determined to be 400 mg BID based on previous 
studies of the combination therapy ( ARRAY-543-204). Considering that patients with 
BTC who have failed one line of systemic therapy are usually frail with multiple co -
morbidities, the dose of varlitinib selected for this study is 300 mg BID in combination 
with capecitabine.  
The dosing schedule of capecitabine selected for this study will be capecitabine at 
1000 mg/m2 BID for 2 weeks followed by a 1 -week rest period in 3 -week cycles. The 
dosage, PK, and safety of capecitabine (1000 mg/m2 BID, Day 1 to Day 14, followed by 
a 7-day rest period) ha ve been established in the ARRAY -543- 204 study. This dose of 
capecitabine has been successfully used with varlitinib in patient s with advanced 
metastatic breast cancer (ASLAN001 -003) and in a study ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) where 
capecitabine was used in combination with lapatinib in metastatic breast cancer .11,13 
Study ASLAN001-009 is anticipated to be conducted worldwide with approximately 20% 
of the patients from US sites.  
This study will commence initially with a Safety lead -in group designed as a single arm, 
open label study to assess the safety of varlitinib plus capecitabine i n a small set of 
patient s (12 to 20) prior to commencing Part 1 in a larger study population  (n=120) . A 
DSMB will review safety data on 2 occasions (refer to Section  7.2) to monitor the safety 
of patient s. Part 2 (n=350) of the study will not commence until the results of Part 1 have 
been evalu ated. 
Part 1 of the study include s co-primary endpoints of ORR and PFS determined via central 
review . Overall survival  is the primary endpoint in Part 2 of the study. These are well 
known endpoints for oncology studies and have been used to support health authority decisions on drug approvability. 
In Part 1 of the study, for the purpose of marketing approval, a Hochberg proc edure will 
be used to control the overall type I error rate associated with the co -primary endpoints, 
ORR and PFS, at the two- sided 5% level. Using this approach, statistical significance can 
be declared if either  ORR or PFS is significant at the two -sided  2.5% level, or if both 
endpoints are significant at the two- sided 5% significance level.  For significance at the 
2-sided 5% level, the study  has approximately 80% power to detect a 20% difference in 
ORR, assuming a 10% response rate for the control arm. S imilarly, for significance at the 
two-sided 5% level, 84 PFS events would provide approximately 80% power to detect a 
true HR of 0.54 (approximately an 84% prolongation in PFS). If statistical significance is 
demonstrated, ASLAN believe s that th ese effect sizes  represent a clinically meaningful 
improvement in efficacy relative to the current care options. This improvement would 
represent a step -change in the treatment options for patients with second line BTC. To 
enable a further illustration of the clinica l benefit realized through the improvement in 
ORR, DoR will be included as a secondary endpoint in the study and will help 
characterize the durability of the observed responses. All radiological data collected in 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  48 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  the Part 1 of the study will be assessed via an IC R of the imaging data thus eliminating 
the potential bias that can arise from site evaluations.  
Data from the Safety lead -in, Part 1 and Part 2 will be evaluated  separately for safety and 
efficacy. Patient s whose data contributed to the Part 1 analysis will not be included in the 
Part 2 analysis.  
5.3 Selection of Study Population 
5.3.1 Number of Planned Patient s 
Safety lead- in: 
A total of 12 to 20 eligible patient s will be enrolled to receive varlitinib plus capecitabine.   
United States:  6 to 12 eligible patients are expected to be enrolled from  the United States.  
Rest of the World: An additional 6 to 8 eligible patients will be enrolled from  the rest of 
the world. 
Patient s in this group will be replaced if investigational product compliance is <  85% in 
the first 14 days. Pharmacokinetic sampling will be performed in approximately 12 
patients.  
Part 1 : 
Approximately 120 eligible patient s will be enrolled and randomized in a 1:1 ratio to 
receive varlitinib and capecitabine (n=60) or placebo and capecitabine (n=60). 
Part 2 : 
Approximately 350 eligible patient s will be enrolled and randomized in a 1:1 ratio to 
receive varlitinib and capecitabine (n=175) or placebo and capecitabine (n=175). In both P art 1 and Part 2 of the study, patient s will be will be stratified by:  
• region - US  and the rest of world (ROW) and;  
• primary tumor location  - gallbladder  vs non- gallbladder . 
5.3.2 Inclusion Criteria  
To be eligible for study entry patient s must satisfy  all of the following criteria: 
1. Are of or older than the legal age in the respective countries at the time when 
written informed consent is obtained 
2. Have histologically or cytologically confirmed advanced (unresectable) or 
metastatic biliary tract cancer, including intrahepatic or extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma ( CCA ), gallbladder cancer , and carcinoma of Ampulla 
of Vater . This includes clinical diagnosis of biliary tract cancer with histological 
confirmation of adenocarcinoma.  
3. Have received and failed one and only one prior line of systemic treatment for advanced or metastatic disease with radiologic  evidence of disease progression. 
This prior line of systemic treatment must also contain gemcitabine.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  49 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  4. Have received at least 6 doses of gemcitabine containing treatment in first line 
(Adjuvant therapy is not regarded as 1st line therapy) 
5. Have radiographically measurable disease based on RECIST v1.1 as assessed by 
Independent Central Review (ICR) (For Part 1).  
6. Have no evidence of biliary duct obstruction, unless obstruction is controlled by local treatment or, in whom the biliary tree can be decompressed by endoscopic or percutaneous stenting with subsequent reduction in bilirubin to below or equal to 1.5 × upper level of normal (ULN) 
7. Have an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 or 1 
8. Are able to understand and willing to sign the informed consent form (ICF)  
9. Have adequate organ  and hematological function: 
a. Hematological function, as follows: 
• Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1.5 × 10
9/L 
• Platelet count ≥ 100 × 109/L 
b. Renal functions, as follows: • Estimated glomerular filtration rate or creatinine  cl earance  
> 50 mL/min/1.73m
2 
c. Hepatic function, as follows: • Albumin ≥ 3g/dL  
• Total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 × ULN  
• ALT  and AST  ≤ 5 × ULN  
5.3.3 Exclusion C riteria  
Patient s will be excluded from the study if one or more of the following criterion is  
applicable:  
1. Are currently on or have received anti -cancer therapy within the past 3 weeks  
before receiving the first dose of study medication  
2. Are currently on or have received radiation or local treatment within the past 
3 weeks for the target lesion(s) before receiving the first dose of study medication  
3. Have evidence of multiple  (≥ 2) peritoneal metastases  or ascites at baseline as 
assessed by ICR (For Part 1).  (Ascites which can be attributed by non-m alignant 
causes is not excluded . Minimal ascites, which does  not require paracentesis is 
permitted .) 
4. Have had major surgical procedures within 14 days prior to first dose of study medication  
5. Have a known metastatic brain lesion(s), including asymptomatic and well 
controlled lesion(s) 
6. Have malabsorption syndrome, diseases significantly affecting gastrointestinal 
function, resection of the stomach or small bowel, or difficulty in swallowing and retaining oral medications  which in the opinion of the Investigator could 
jeopardize the validity of the study results 
7. Have uncontrolled intercurrent illness including, but not limited to, ongoing or 
active infection, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia, diabetes, hypertension, or psychiatric illness/social situations that would limit compliance with study requirements 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  50 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  8. Have any history of other malignancy unless in remission for more than 1 year  
(non- melanoma skin carcinoma and carcinoma- in-site of uterine cervix treated 
with curative intent is not exclusionary)  
9. Are female patient s who are pregnant or breast feeding 
10. Have been previously treated with varlitinib or have been previously treated with  
capecitabine as first line therapy for advanced or metastatic disease. For patients 
who have previously received capecitabine as a radiosensitizer or as part of their 
adjuvant therapy and their disease has relapsed for more than 6 months after their 
last dose of capecitabine adjuvant therapy, their capecitabine therapy will not be considered as a line of systemic chemotherapy for metastatic/advanced disease and thus the y can participate in the study  
11. Have received any investigational drug (or have used an investigational device) within the last 14 days before receiving the first dose of study medication 
12. Have unresolved or unstable serious toxicity (≥ common terminology cr iteria for 
adverse events [ CTCAE ] 4.03 Grade 2), with the exception of anemia, asthenia , 
and alopecia, from prior administration of another investigational drug and/or 
prior cancer treatment  
13. Have a known positive test for human immunodeficiency virus, hepa titis C 
(treatment naïve or after treatment without sustained virologic response) , or 
hepatitis B infection with hepatitis B virus  deoxyribonucleic acid  exceeding 
2000 IU/mL  
14. Have a known history of drug addiction within last 1 year  which , in the opinion 
of the Investigator , could increase the risk of non -compliance to investigational 
product 
15. Need continuous treatment with proton pump inhibitors during the study period 
16. Have a history of (non- infectious) pneumonitis that required steroids or current 
pneumonit is, or have a history of interstitial lung disease or current interstitial lung 
disease  
17. Have any history or presence of clinically significant cardiovascular, respiratory, hepatic, renal, hematologic, gastrointestinal, endocrine, immunologic, dermatologic,  neurologic or psychiatric disease or any other condition which in 
the opinion of the Investigator could jeopardize the safety of the patient  or the 
validity of the study results 
18. Have a baseline corrected QT interval  (Fridericia’s formula) ( QTcF ) > 450 ms or 
patient s with known long QT syndrome ; torsade de pointes ; symptomatic 
ventricular tachycardia; an unstable cardiac syndrome in the past 3 months before 
screening visit ; > class 2 New York Hear t Association heart failure; or > class 2 
angina pectoris ; or receiving quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide, amiodarone, 
dronedarone, arsenic, dofetilide, sotalol, or  methadone. Please also see prohibited 
medication/therapy ( Section  5.4.10.1_Prohibited_Medication/Therapy
) 
5.3.4 Removal of Patient s from Therapy or Assessments  
A patient  may withdraw from the study for any reason without prejudice to further 
treatment. A patient  can be withdrawn from the study for any of the following reasons: 
• Patient voluntarily withdraws from participation*  
• Radiographic disease progression * 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  51 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Clinical dis ease progression  
• Unacceptable toxicity * 
• Patient ’s withdrawal of consent* 
• Death  
• Pregnancy  
• Significant  protocol deviation 
• Lost to follow-up* 
• If deemed  by the Investigator that it is not in patient ’s interest  to continue in the 
study  
* Further details provided below . 
Patient s who do not comply with the protocol or who withdraw consent will be replaced 
in the Safety lead -in part only. Patient s who stop study drug for any other reasons will not 
be replaced. Withdrawn patient s will not be replaced in Part 1 and Part 2. The reason(s) 
for withdrawal will be documented in the case report form (CRF). 
The sponsor also has the right to terminate the study at any time in case of serious adverse 
events (SAEs) or if special circumstances concerning the study medicat ion or the 
company itself occur, making further treatment of patient s impossible. In this event, the 
Investigators will be informed of the reason for study termination. All patient s receiving 
active treatment and who, in the opinion of the investigator, may benefit from continued 
varlitinib treatment, will be offered participation in an open- label extension s tudy where 
only varlitinib will be provided by the sponsor or be managed under a compassionate use 
program governed by the regulatory authoriti es in th e respective countries.  
Withdraws from participation (follow- up permitted): Patient s withdrawing from the 
study treatment will be encouraged where possible to return to the site for a study follow -
up visit , particularly  for safety evaluations , tumor assessments, and survival follow -up. 
In Part 1 and Part 2 of the study, patient s will be followed up for survival when they 
withdraw from the study treatment every 12 weeks after the end of treatment (EOT) visit until death or up to data cut- off (DCO) of t he study, whichever occurs first.  
In this instance, it is important to note that the patient is ceasing participation, NOT withdrawing consent. 
Radiographic disease progression : Sites should continue to perform radiological 
assessments until disease progression (or death in the absence of progression) in 
accordance with RECIST v1.1. Patient s will be withdrawn from the treatment if there is 
radiological evidence of disease progression as defined by RECIST v1.1. Additional 
radiological assessments of disease will not be undertaken unless there is a clinical 
indication (such as additional symptoms or signs). If radiological  progression is equivocal, 
for example within the bounds of measurement error, it is recommended to continue 
randomized study treatment until the next scheduled assessment and reassess. Once permanently discontinued, randomized study medication  cannot be re- started.  
Unacceptable toxicity : If th e symptoms are not controlled with standard treatments and 
are considered to be clinically significant, study therapy will be stopped and the patient  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  52 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  will be withdrawn from the study  treatment . Refer to Section  5.4.8.1 for more details of 
dose interruption/resumption/modification. Patient s removed from study treatment for 
unacceptable toxicity will be followed until resolution or stabilization of the AE.  
Patient s who  are withdrawn from treatment prior to radiographic disease progression 
should continue to be followed until progression in accordance with the study plan. 
Consent Withdrawal : Patient s may withdraw from the study at any time at their own 
request. The withdrawal of consent should be explained in detail in the medical records 
by the Investigator and entered on the appropriate CRF page. Details of withdrawal 
should indicate whether the withdrawal is from further treatment with study medication  
only or also from study procedures and/or post treatment study follow -up. Patient s who 
request to withdraw from further treatment and study procedures may be followed up for OS (if consented by patient s). 
The Investigator should inquire about the reason for withdrawal  and request that the 
patient  return all unused study medication . The Investigator should also ask the patient  to 
return for a final visit, if applicable, and follow -up with the patient  regarding any 
unresolved AEs. 
Lost to follow -up: If a patient  does not  return for a scheduled visit, every effort should 
be made at least once every month to contact the patient  to reschedule the visit, including 
mandatory telephone contact and written letter; as well as on a case- by-case basis patient  
visit.  All efforts sho uld be documented in the patient ’s medical source record. Patient  is 
considered lost to follow -up if patient  cannot be reached after 3  months from the 
scheduled visit or before date of DCO, whichever is earlier.  
All patient s who are withdrawn or discontinued from the study are required to complete 
a safety follow -up visit within 28 days after the last administration of study medication , 
where possible. If the Investigator is unable to complete the safety follow -up visit 
assessments, the reason(s) must be recorded in the eCRF. All AEs/SAEs will be collected 
until 28 days after the last administration of study medication.  
If a patient discontinues  study  treatment and is withdrawn  from  the study for any reason,  
the study center  must immediately  notify the medical  monitor. The Investigator should 
also ensure the return  of unused study medication.  
5.3.5 Pregnancy  
There is no information regarding the effects varlitinib cou ld have on the development of  
a human f etus. Capecitabine may cause fetal harm if given to a pregnant woman. 
Capecitabine causes  embryolethality and teratogenicity in mice and embryolethality in 
monkeys when administered during organogenesis
12. Therefore, it is important that 
females and the partners of male patient s do not become pregnant during the study and 
for at least 3 months after the patient  has taken their  last dose of varlitinib . 
Female patient s of child bearing potential and men enrolled in this study, in addition to 
partners of male patient s must agree to use adequate contraception (as listed in 
Section  5.3.5.1) prior to study entry, for the duration of study participation, and for 3 
months following completion of varlitinib /placebo or capecitabine therapy.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  53 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  A female of child -bearing potential is any woman (regardless of sexual orientation, 
having undergone a tubal ligation, or remaining celibate by choice) who meets the 
following criteria:  
• Has not undergone a hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy; or  
• Has not been naturally postmenopausal for at  least 12 consecutive months (i .e., 
has had menses at any time in the preceding 12 consecutive months). 
5.3.5.1 Acceptable Forms of Contraception  
A highly effective method of birth control is defined as those which result in a low failure rate (i .e., less than 1% per year) when used consistently and correctly.  
Individually horm onal, barrier or intrauterine device methods alone are not acceptable.  
Examples of acceptable forms of highly effective contraception for women include:  
• Established use of oral, injected or implanted hormonal methods of contraception 
in combination with a barrier method* 
• Placement of an intrauterine device or intrauterine system in combination with a 
barrier method  
• Sterilized male partner (with the appropriate post -vasectomy documentation of 
the absence of sperm in the ejaculate) in combination with a barrier method  
• True abstinence: When this is in line with your preferred and usual lifestyle 
Examples of non-acceptable methods of contraception include:  
• Barrier method alone 
• Periodic abstinence (e.g., calendar, ovulation, sympthothermal, post ovulation)  
• Withdrawal  
• Spermicide  
*Barrier methods include: diaphragm, cervical cap, and condom.  
For men , it is recommended that a condom be worn for all sexual intercourse (in addition 
to another effective means of contraception) as it is not known if study drug may affect 
sperm risking the potential for congenital abnormalities. 
5.3.5.2 Time Period for the Collecti on of Pregnancy Information 
All pregnancies in female patient s and in female partners of male patient s receiving study 
drug will be recorded from enrolment until 3 months  after last dose of varlitinib /placebo 
or capecitabine. 5.3.5.3 Follow- up in the Event of a Pregnancy  
Should a woman become pregnant or suspect she is pregnant while participating in this 
study, or should a male patient ’s partner become pregnant or suspect she is pregnant while 
the male is participating in this study, the treating Investigator should be informed 
immediately. Female patient s will be withdrawn from study  treatment, and all 
pregnancies will be reported along the same timelines as a SAE.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  54 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  If a female patient  or the female partner of a male patient  who has received study drug  
becomes pr egnant the pregnancy will be recorded. The independent ethics committee 
(IEC) and the Sponsor will be informed. In all cases of pregnancy, the patient  will be 
asked to provide information on the outcome of the pregnancy, including premature 
termination sho uld the case arise.  
Spontaneous miscarriage and congenital abnormalities will be reported as a SAE. 
The follow -up period will be deemed to have ended when the health status of the child 
has been determined on its birth and followed up for eight weeks following the birth for 
any potential abnormalities.  
5.4 Investigational Products 
5.4.1 Study Medication Administered  
In the Safety lead -in, eligible patient s will receive varlitinib plus capecitabine (n=12  to 
20). 
In Part 1 and Part 2 of the study, eligible patient s will be randomized into 2 arms; 
experimental arm will receive varlitinib plus capecitabine (part 1: n=60; part 2: n=175) or control arm will receive placebo plus capecitabine (part 1: n=60; part 2: n=175). 
Study medications are presented in Table 3  and Table 4 . 
Table 3: Investigational Product 
Investigational  
Products  Dose form  Route  Dose (mg)  Dose 
frequency  Duration * 
Varlitinib  Tablet  Oral 300 mg BID Every day in a 21 -day cycle 
Placebo  Tablet  Oral Not Applicable  BID Every day in a 21 -day cycle 
Abbreviation: BID  = twice daily.  
*Treatment will continue until disease progression assessed by the Investigator as per RECIST version  1.1, 
unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or death.  
Table 4: Background Therapy  
Background  
Therapy  Dose form  Route  Dose (mg)  Dose frequency  Duration*  
Capecitabine  Tablet  Oral 1000 mg/m2 BID 14 days (Day 1 -14) 
followed  by 7 days rest in a 
21-day cycle  
Abbreviation: BID  = twice daily.  
*Treatment will continue until disease progression assessed by the Investigator as per RECIST version  1.1, 
unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or death.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  55 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  5.4.2 Identity of Investigational Products and Background Therapy  
Varlitinib  
ASLAN will supply the varlitinib tablets.  
Varlitinib tablets consist of varlitinib (ASLAN001) (as free base), lactose monohydrate, 
hydroxypropyl cellulose, croscarmellose sodium, magnesium stearate, and Opadry II 
yellow film- coat. The tablets are yellow, round, standard convex, film -coated tablets, 5/16 
inch in diameter.  
Place bo 
ASLAN will supply the matching placebo  tablets.   
Placebo tablets  will be identical  in appearance to varlitinib tablets; yellow, round, standard 
convex, film-coated tablets, 5/16 inch in diameter.  
Capecitabine  
Capecitabine  (XELODA®) will be sourced centrally and be supplied to the study  by 
ASLAN for Safety lead -in Part 1 and Part 2. For the study lead- in and after the Part 1 
DCO, capecitabine (does not have to be XELODA® if other commercial brands are more 
readily available at the site) can also be supplied by the study site , if needed . 
Capecitabine is a fluoropyrimidine carbamate with antineoplastic activity. It is an orally administered systemic prodrug of 5’ -deoxy-5- fluorouridine , which is converted to 5 -
fluorouracil.  
Capecitabine is a white to off -white crystalline powder with an aqueous solubility of 26 
mg/mL at 20ºC. Capecitabine is supplied as biconvex, oblong film -coated tablets for 
oral administration. Tablet s are supplied as either 150 mg or 500 mg strength 
capecitabine.  
The inactive ingredients in capecitabine include: anhydrous lactose, croscarmellose 
sodium, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, microcrystalline cellulose, magnesium stearate and purified water. The peach or light peach film coating contains hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, talc, titanium dioxide, and synthetic yellow and red 
iron oxides.  
Refer to the XELODA
® (capecitabine) prescribing information leaflet for additional 
details12. 
5.4.3 Storage Condition of Study Medications  
Varlitinib/Placebo  
It is recommended that varlitinib/placebo is stored up to 25ºC (77 ºF) protected from light.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  56 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  No special procedures for the safe hand ling of varlitinib are required.  
Capecitabine  
It is recommended that capecitabine is stored , as per the instruction on the package 
insert, at 25 °C (77 °F); excursions permitted to 15 to 30°C (59  to 86°F) . 
The storage area of the study center  has to be a secure, temperature controlled, locked 
room with restricted access.  Study centers will be required to keep a temperature log 
to establish a record of compliance with these storage conditions.  
Accurate records must be kept regarding dispensing  and return of study medication for 
each individual patient  in the study. Reasons for inconsistency from the expected 
dispensing or return of study medication must be recorded. The Sponsor will be 
permitted upon request to audit the supplies, storage, dispensing procedures and records.  
5.4.4 Packaging and Labeling 
All packaging and labeling operations will be performed according to Good 
Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products and the relevant regulatory requirem ents. 
Varlitinib , matching placebo and capecit abine tablets  (Part 1 and 2 only*)  are packaged 
in 
DosePak wallet with Child-Resistant ATSM Index class XIIIA re -closable semi rigid 
blister packaging . 
*Since  each site’s pharmacy will be suppl ying their own capecitabine  in the Safety lead -in 
part of the study and after the Part 1 DCO, the packaging and labeling will be dependent on 
their selected brand.  
5.4.5 Method of Assigning Patient s to Treatment Groups  
Safety Lead- in: 
The Safety Lead -in part of the study has a non-randomized single arm design. All eligible 
patient s will receive varlitinib 300 mg BID, every day plus capecitabine 1000  mg/m2 BID, 
Day 1 to 14, followed by a 7-day rest period (21- day cycle).  
Each patient ’s eligibility will be reviewed by the medical monitor during the screening 
period. Patient s will be sequentially enrolled after being screened for eligibility and 
providing consent. 
At screening, potential patient s will be assigned a unique screening number that starts 
with “S” and 4 digits (i.e., S1001) manually or by electronic data capture system.  
In the case of discontinuation of chemotherapy due to toxic effects, varlitinib or placebo 
therapy will be continued until disease progression, the development of unacceptable 
toxicities , or withdrawal of consent or death . 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  57 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  After the DCO in Part 1 , all patients receiving treatment including those from the Safety 
Lead -in and who, in the opinion of the investigator, may benefit from continued varlitinib 
treatment, will be offered participation in an open- label extension study where only 
varlitinib will be provided by the sponsor; or be managed under a compassionate use 
program governed by the regulatory authorities in the respective countries. 
Parts 1 and 2: 
At the initial screening visit, the Investigator or suitably trained delegate will: 
1. Obtain signed ICF (main study) from the potential patient  before any study 
specific procedures are performed.  
2. Potential patient s will be assigned a unique screening number that starts with “S” 
and 4 digits (i .e., S1001) by electronic data capture system. This screening number 
will be sequential from S afety lead -in, and will not be repeated. 
3. Determine patient  eligibility. See Section  5.3.2 and Section  5.3.3.  
4. Once the patient  is confirmed to be eligible, the Investigator or suitably trained 
delegate will a ssign eligible patient  a unique randomization number via 
Randomization and Trial Supply Management (RTSM) system. Randomization 
numbers will start with “R” followed by 4 digits (i .e., R1001 for part 1, R2001 for 
part 2 ) and will be assigned strictly sequentially by RTMS (starting at R1001, 
R2001 in part 1 and 2, respectively ), as patient s are eligible for randomization. 
This number is the patient ’s unique identifier and is used to identify the patient  
with the assigned treatment. This randomization number will be available to th e 
Investigator in the electronic data capture system.  
5.4.6 Procedures for Randomization  
Patient s must not be randomized unless all eligibility criteria have been met.  For Part 1 
only, this includes receiving eligibility confirmation from the ICR.  
Patient s who satisfy all the entry criteria will be centrally assigned to study treatment by 
the RTSM, according to the randomization scheme generated by the designated CRO.  
Patient s will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to either varlitinib or placebo, both on a 
background of capecitabine (n=120 for Part 1 and n=350 for Part 2). The randomization scheme will be stratified by the following 2 covariates:  
• Geographical region - US or ROW  
• Primary tumor location – gallbladder (GB) or non -GB 
The actual treatment given to patients will be determined by the randomization scheme 
in RTSM. The randomization scheme will be produced using SAS® version 9.4, which  
incorporates a standard procedure for generating randomization numbers. One randomization list will be produced containing sufficient random numbers for each of the 4 randomization strata. A blocked randomization will be generated and all centers will 
use the same list in order to minimize any imbalance in the number of patient s assigned 
to each treatment group. 
The dose and regimen of randomized therapy to be administered is as follows: 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  58 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Varlitinib 300 mg BID, every day 
• Placebo BID, every day  
Patient s in both arms will receive background chemotherapy with capecitabine 
1000 mg/m2 BID , Day 1 to 14, followed by a 7- day rest peri od (21- day cycle).  
Patient s will be identified to the Centralized Randomization Center  using site number, 
screening number, randomization number, gender, and date of birth. Patient s will be 
randomized strictly sequentially within each stratum, as patient s are eligible for 
randomization. The RTSM will inform the Investigator of the Kit ID number to be 
allocated to the patient  at each dispensing visit via electronic data capture (EDC).  
Study medication should only be dispensed to each  randomized patient  at the Cycle 1 
Day 1 visit. It is allowed to randomize patient up to 24 hours prior to first dose. The first 
dose of study medication must only be administered in the morning of Cycle 1 Day 1 after 
pre-dose assessment (e .g., safety laboratory sampling, electr ocardiogram [ECG], PK 
sampling) are completed . The day on which a patient takes the first dose of study 
medication  will be considered Cycle 1 Day 1 .  
The Kit ID number dispensed at each visit will correspond to the treatment to which the 
patient  was origin ally randomized.  
If a patient discontinues participation in the study, then their screening/randomization number cannot be reused.  
5.4.7 Selection of Doses in the Study  
Varlitinib  
The MTD of varlitinib in combination with capecitabine 1000 mg/m2 BID was 
determined to be 400 mg BID  in a previous stud y of the varlitinib/capecitabine 
combination therapy ( Study ARRAY -543-204). Considering that patients with BTC who 
have failed one line of systemic therapy are usually frail with multiple co -morbiditie s, the 
dose of varlitinib selected for this study is 300 mg BID in combination with capecitabine. 
This dose combination of varlitinib and capecitabine will be assessed for safety and 
tolerability in the first  12 patient s in the S afety lead -in, prior to randomization of patient s 
in Parts 1 and 2 of the study.  
Capecitabine  
In this study capecitabine will be administered as 1000 mg/m2 BID for 14 days followed 
by 1 -week rest.  Refer to Table 5  for the dose calculation.  Capecitabine tablets are 
available in 2 dosage strengths, 500mg and 150mg. In order to allow improved patient compliance and to be in line with routine clinical prac tice, it is allowed for patient to be 
dosed with ± 5% deviation from the Dose per administration (mg) listed in  Table 5 to 
reduce number of c apecitabine tablets used.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  59 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  The dosage, PK, and safety of capecitabine (1000 mg/m2 BID, Day 1 to Day 14, followed 
by a 7 -day rest period) ha ve been established in the ARRAY -543- 204 Phase I study. This 
dose of capecitabine has been successfully used with varlitinib in patient s with advanced 
metastatic breast cancer (ASLAN001 -003) and in a study ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) conducted by 
Geyer , et al. where capecitabine was used in combination with lapatinib in metastatic 
breast cancer.11 This dose of capecitabine is also supported b y an article by Patt et al. 
2004.13  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  60 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Table 5: D ose Calculations f or Starting Dose of Capecitabine of 1000 mg/m2 
Full dose  
1000 mg/m2 Number of 150 mg tablets and/or 500 mg 
tablets per administration  
(each administration to be given morning 
and evening)  Reduced dose 
(75%)  
750 mg/m2 Reduced dose 
(50%)  
500 mg/m2 
Body Surface 
Area (m2) Dose per 
administration 
(mg)  150 mg  500 mg  Dose per 
administration 
(mg)  Dose per 
administration 
(mg)  
≤1.26  1150  1  2  800  600  
1.27 - 1.38 1300  2  2  1000  600  
1.39 - 1.52 1450  3  2  1100  750  
1.53 - 1.66 1600  4  2  1200  800  
1.67 - 1.78 1750  5  2  1300  800  
1.79 - 1.92 1800  2  3  1400  900  
1.93 - 2.06 2000  -  4  1500  1000  
2.07 - 2.18 2150  1  4  1600  1050  
≥ 2.19 2300  2  4  1750  1100  
 
5.4.8 Selection and Timing of D ose for Each Patient  
Safety Lead -in 
Varlitinib will be administered BID with a meal or within 30  minutes after food intake, 
approximately at the same time (±2 hours), in the morning and evening each day, using 
the appropriate number of 100 mg tablets. High fat meal should be avoided and varlitinib tablets should not be chewed, crushed, or broken. 
On Cycle 1 Day 1, Cycle 1 Day 8, and Cycle 1 Day 14, varlitinib tablets (morning dose) 
can only be administered under the supervision of the Investigator (or designee).  Capecitabine will be administered with food at the same time as varlitinib  BID for 14  
days with 7  days rest in a 21- day cycle.  
A sample low fat meal is : 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  61 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved   
*Type of low fat meal to be given with varlitinib should be  based on the investigator’s 
judgement  
During the Cycle 1  Day 1 and Day 8 visits, the morning  meal will be a small snack  to 
be taken approximately 30 minutes prior to morning dosing of varlitinib . Patient s will 
remain fasted  until after the 6-hour ECG/PK assessment  when  they will receive a 
snack/small meal.  The next meal can be taken after the 8.5-hour ECG/PK assessment.  
Timing and type of meal will be recorded  on the CRF . 
Part 1 and 2 
Varlitinib or placebo will be administered BID with a meal  or within 30 minutes after 
food intake, approximately at the same time (±2 hours), in the morning and evening each 
day, using the appropriate number of 100 mg tablets. High fat meal should be avoided 
and varlitinib tablets should not be chewed, crushed or broken. 
Retake of one dose of varlitinib or placebo is allowed if patient  vomits within 30 minutes 
after administration of varlitinib or placebo. Retaking of varlitinib is not allowed if patient  
vomits again upon first retake. On Cycle 1 Day 1 and Cycle 1 Day 8 (Part 1 only) , Cycle 2 Day 1,  varlitinib tablets 
(morning dose) can only be administered under the supervision of the Investigator (or 
designe e).  
Capecitabine will be administered with food at the same time as varlitinib or placebo 
BID for 14 days with 7 days rest in a 21- day cycle.  Dose  modifi cation details are 
provided in Section  5.4.8.1.  
Study medication  will be dispensed to each patient  to take at home after leaving the study 
center until the next scheduled visit. The study medication  is to be taken until the patient  

 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  62 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  experiences an unacceptable toxicity, withdraws consent, disease progression (as 
assessed by the Investigator based on REC IST version 1.1 [ Appendix 14.1]), or death. 
5.4.8.1 Dose Modification 
If a patient  experiences a clinically significant adverse event of CTCAE 4.03 Grade 3 and 
above, not attributable  to the disease or disease -related processes under investigation, 
dosing of investigational product  and/or background therapy will be interrupted or the 
dose reduced and supportive therapy administered as required*. Any c hange in study 
medication needs to be recorded in the CRFs along with the reason for the change. 
*Note: In the Safety l ead-in, treatment will continue for a minimum of 14 days, during 
which time dose adjustment is not allowed. Dose adjustment and interrupt ion is allowed 
from Day 15 onwards. 
The recommended d ose adjustment schedule for the investigational product  
(varlitinib/placebo) and capecitabine are described in Table 6  and Table 7  below, 
respectively, with the exception of hyperbilirubinemia, as well as  serum creatinine 
increase, which are described separately in Section  5.4.8.2. Clinical judgment of the 
treating investigator sho uld guide the management plan for  each patient based on 
individual benefit/risk assessments.  
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  63 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Table 6: Recommended Dose Adjustments for Varlitinib/Placebo  
Toxicity  
(NCI CTCAE  4.03 Grades)  During a Course of Therapy  Dose Adjustment for 
Next Treatment  
Grade 1  and 2  Maintain dose level  Maintain dose level  
Grade 3  and above  
1st appearance  
Inter rupt until resolved to grade 0-2 300 mg BID  
2nd appearance  200 mg BID  
3rd appearance  100 mg BID  
4th appearance  Discontinue treatment permanently  - 
Abbreviations: BID  = twice daily, NCI CTCAE  = The National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events.  
Table 7: Recommen ded Dose Adjustment for Capecitabine  
Toxicity  
(NCI CTCAE 4.03 Grades)  During a Course of Therapy  Dose Adjustment for Next 
Treatment  
Grade 1  Maintain dose level  Maintain dose level  
Grade 2  
1st appearance  
Interrupt until resolved to grade 0 -1 1000 mg/m2 
2nd appearance  750 mg/m2 
3rd appearance  500 mg/m2 
4th appearance  Discontinue treatment permanently  - 
Grade 3  
1st appearance  
Interrupt until resolved to grade 0 -1 750 mg/m2 
2nd appearance  500 mg/m2 
3rd appearance  Discontinue treatment permanently  - 
Grade 4  
1st appearance  Discontinue permanently  
OR 
If physician deems it to be in the 
patient ’s best interest to continue, 
interrupt until resolved to Grade 0 -1 500 mg/m2 
Abbreviation: NCI CTCAE  = The National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events . 
Any interruption in dose or reduct ion in dose of study medication  and background therapy  
needs to be captured in the CRF. In the event that the administration of varlitinib/placebo 
or capecitabine is interrupted  for longer than 6 consecutive weeks , varlitinib/placebo or 
capecitabine must be permanently withdrawn. If  capecitabine is permanently withdrawn, 
patient s are allowed to continue in the study on varlitinib/placebo  until disease 
progression, unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent , or death.  Similarly, in the 
event that varlitinib /placebo  is permanently withdrawn, patients are allowed to continue 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  64 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  in the study on capecitabine until disease progression, unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal 
of consent, or death.  
5.4.8.2 Management of Toxicities 
Management of Gastrointestinal Toxicities attributable to Varlitinib  
Diarrhea:  
For the management of diarrhea  for patient s in this study, routine loperamide prophylaxis 
as a standby  is recommended. The recommend dose of loperamide is 2 mg three times a 
day (TID). Buscopan or a similar antispasmodic agent is recommended for management 
of acute symptoms. The recommended initial dose of Buscopan is 20 mg T ID and can be 
escalated to 20  mg QID . 
The pharmacologic interventions for treatment emergent diarrhea should include: 
First line therapy – loperamide 
• If receiving routine loperamide prophylaxis, increase dose to a maximum of 
16 mg/day . 
• If new -onset diarrhea, take loperamide 4 mg with first bout of diarrhea followed 
by 2 mg every 4 hours or after every unformed stool (maximum 16 mg/day). 
Continue until diarrhea-free for 12 hours. 
• With recovery to < Grade 1, take loperamide 2 mg TID.  
As a second line therapy for the treatment of diarrhea refer to Table 8 . 
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  65 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Table 8: Recommended Management of Diarrhea A ttributable to Varlitinib  
Toxicity  
(NCI CTCAE 4.03 
Grades)  Treatment  Dose Adjustment  
Grade 1  If persistent diarrhea on loperamide, add 
diphenoxylate hydrochloride plus atropine 
sulfate (Lomotil®) 2.5 mg every 6 to 8 hours  Maintain dose level  
Grade 2  If persistent diarrhea on loperamide, add 
octreotide (short acting) 150  µg SC TID, or 
after the initial dose of short acting 
octreotide, if well tolerated, a single dose of 
octreotide LAR 20 mg intramuscularly  Maintain dose level  
Grade 3 or Grade 4  after intensive loperamide therapy, titrate 
loperamide to keep diarrhea controlled 
(< 4 stools/day)  1st occurrence  
Maintain dose level  
Octreotide (100 to 150 µg SC BID or 25 to 
50 µg/hour IV if dehydration is severe, with 
dose escalation up to 500 µg SC TID  2nd occurrence 
Reduce Varlitinib/placebo 
dose to 200 mg BID  
IV fluids as appropriate  3rd or more occurrence  
Reduce Varlitinib/placebo 
dose to 100 mg BID  consider prophylactic antibiotics, especially 
if diarrhea is persistent beyond 24 hours or if 
there is a fever or Grade 3 /4 neutropenia  
Abbreviations: BID  = twice daily, IV = intravenous, NCI CTCAE  = The National Cancer Institute Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events , SC = subcutaneous, TID  = 3 times a day . 
Nausea/Vomiting: 
Both varlitinib and capecitabine are considered to have low to minimal emetic risk. 
Routine prophylaxis for nausea/vomiting is not recommended . Anti -emetic medications 
can be used on an as -needed basis (PRN). If nausea/vomiting recur in later cycles of 
treatment, prophylactic medications can be used on the discretion of Investigator. Several 
anti-emetic drugs have QT prolongation effe cts and therefore are not allowed in the Safety 
lead-in part of this study , which will assess the QTc prolongation effect of study 
medications.  The recommended management of nausea/vomiting is listed in Table 9 .  
*Metoclopramide, dolasetron, g ranisetron , and ondansetron are prohibited in the Safety 
lead-in (Cycle 1 Day 1 to Cycle 2 Day 1 ) and Part 1 (C ycle 1 Day 1 to C ycle 2 Day 1) of 
this study due to their QT prolonging effect. These medications can be used with caution 
in Part 2 of this study  (Section  5.4.10). From  Cycle  2 Day 2 in the Safety lead -in and P art 
1 of this study  and in the event that symptoms cannot be controlled by panolosetron or 
patients are intolerant to panolosetron, then investigators are allowed to prescribe 
metoclopramide, dolasetron, granisetron, and ondansetron without prior approval. 
However  for tracking p urpose, Sponsor must be informed if the above medications have 
been used. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  66 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Table 9: Recommended Management of Nausea/Vomiting attributable to 
Varlitinib  
Study part  Breakthrough treatment for 
acute symptom control  Prophylaxis for recurrent 
nausea/vomiting (s tart 30 mins 
before study treatment)  
Safety lead -in 
Part1 (Cycle 1 Day 1 
to Cycle 2 Day 1) Olanzapine 5 -10 mg PO QD 
PRN or 
Prochlorperazine: 5 -10 mg every 
6 hours PRN (maximum 
40 mg/day)   
 Prochlorperazine: 10 mg PO and 
then every 6  hours PRN 
(maximum 40 mg/day)  
or 
Palonsetron: 0.25 mg IV every 
5 days  
Part 1 (Cycle 2 
Day 2 and afterward)  
and 
Part 2  Olanzapine 5 -10 mg PO QD 
PRN 
or Prochlorperazine: 5 -10 mg every 
6 hours PRN (maximum 
40mg/day)  
or 
Metoclopramide: 10 -20 mg 
PO/IV every 4 -6 hours PRN 
or Dexamethasone 12 mg PO/IV 
and QD PRN
* 
or Haloperidol 0.5- 2 mg PO/IV 
every 4 -6 hours 
Or one of the following:  Dolasetron: 100 mg PO QD PRN 
Granisetron: 1 -2 mg (total dose) 
PO QD PRN or 1 mg  PO BID 
PRN or 1  mg IV QD PRN or 3.1 
mg/24  hours transdermal patch 
every 7  days  
Ondansetron: 16- 24 mg PO QD 
PRN or 8 -16 mg IV QD PRN Metoclopramide: 10 -20 mg PO 
and then every 6 h PRN 
or 
Prochlorperazine: 10 mg PO and then every 6  hours PRN 
(maximum 40 mg/day) or one of the following:  
Dolasetron: 100 mg PO QD PRN Granisetron: 1 -2 mg PO QD 
PRN or 3.1 mg/24 hours transdermal patch every 7  days  
Ondansetron: 8- 16 mg PO QD 
PRN 
Palonsetron: 0.25 mg IV every 
5 days  
Abbreviations: BID  = twice daily , IV = intravenous, PO = per oral , PRN  = as needed , QD = once daily . 
Taken from NCCN Guidelines version 1.2017: Antiemesis . 
*: moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor, use with caution. 
 
Management of hyperbilirubinemia and serum creatinine attributable to 
Varlitinib  
Hyperbilirubinemia  
The dose adjustment schedule for investigational product  (varlitinib/placebo) when  
hyperbilirubinemia occurs in combination with an increase in transaminases (ALT, AST) 
of CTCAE 4.03 Grade 2 and above is  described in Table 10. 
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  67 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Table 10: Recommended Dose Adjustment for Management of 
Hyperbilirubinemia with Increased Transaminases  
Toxicity   
(NCI CTCAE 4.03 
Grades)  During a Course of Therapy  Dose Adjustment for 
Next Treatment  
Grade 1  Maintain dose level  Maintain dose level  
Grade 2 and 3  
1st appearance 
Interrupt until resolved to grade 0 -1 300 mg BID 
2nd appearance 200 mg BID  
3rd appearance 100 mg BID  
4th appearance Discontinue treatment permanently  - 
Grade 4  
1st appearance Interrupt until resolved to grade 0 -1 200 mg BID  
2nd appearance Interrupt until resolved to grade 0 -1 100 mg BID  
3rd appearance Discontinue treatment permanently  - 
Abbreviations: BID  = twice daily, NCI CTCAE  = The National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events.  
If hyperbilirubinemia is primarily due to an increase in indirect bilirubin (with indirect 
bilirubin > direct bilirubin and direct bilirubin ≤ 1.5 × ULN ) with no increase in 
transaminases levels (ALT, AST) or an in crease in transaminases of ≤ Grade 1, follow 
the dose adjustment schedule in  Table 11 . 
Table 11: Recommended Dose Adjustment for Management of 
Hyperbilirubinemia due to Indirect Bilirubin  
Toxicity  (NCI 
CTCAE 4.03 Grades)  During a Course of Therapy  Dose Adjustment for 
Next Treatment  
Grade 1 and 2  Maintain dose level  Maintain dose level  
Grade 3 and above  
1st appearance 
Interrupt until resolved to grade 0 -2 300 mg BID 
2nd appearance 200 mg BID  
3rd appearance 100 mg BID  
4th appearance Discontinue treatment permanently  - 
Abbreviations: BID  = twice daily, NCI CTCAE  = The National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events.  
Increased Serum creatinine  
Dose adjustment schedule for investigational product (varlitinib/placebo) as a result of 
increased serum creatinine levels is described in the  Table 12 . 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  68 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Table 12: Recommended Dose Adjustment for Management of Increase Serum 
Creatinine  
Toxicity  (NCI 
CTCAE 4.03 Grades)  During a Course of Therapy  Dose Adjustment for 
Next Treatment  
Grade 1  Maintain dose level  Maintain dose level  
Grade 2 and 3  
1st appearance 
Interrupt until resolved to grade 0 -1 300 mg BID 
2nd appearance 200 mg BID  
3rd appearance 100 mg BID  
4th appearance Discontinue treatment permanently  - 
Grade 4  
1st appearance Interrupt until resolved to grade 0 -1 200 mg BID  
2nd appearance Interrupt until resolved to grade 0 -1 100 mg BID  
3rd appearance Discontinue treatment permanently  - 
Abbreviations: BID  = twice daily, NCI CTCAE  = The National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events.  
5.4.9 Blinding  
Part 1 and Part 2 of the study is a double -blind study and thus the Investigator, site staff 
and patient s are all blinded to treatment. No individual -patient  information that can 
potentially un-blind the Investigator or patient  will be reported until the end of the study. 
The presentation of the placebo will be identical in appearance to the study drug. 
A communication plan will describe the procedure for un- blinding the study. The 
Investigator at the  site will have access to the details of the double -blind treatment for 
each patient . Access to these details will be via RTSM.  
Note!: The Investigator may only break the code if knowledge of the study medication  
is necessary to provide optimal treatment to the patient  in an emergency situation . 
Whenever  possible, the Investigator must consult with the sponsor before breaking the 
code. The unblinding procedure is described in RTSM User Guide. 
Emergency unblinding will not preclude patient ’s data being included in the study 
analyses. The primary efficacy analyses are performed on an intention -to-treat basis 
(Section  8.3.2, Section  8.3.3), and unblinding will not result in a patient  being excluded 
from a ny analysis sets. Similarly, safety will be assessed using the safety population 
(Section  8.3.1), which includes all patient s who received at least  one dose of study drug , 
regardless of any subsequent unblinding. However, a listing of all cases requiring 
unblinding will be provided, including details of the reason for unblinding. 
Unblinding of all study treatment assignment will be performed at the time of data cut -off 
(DCO) of Part 1 and Part 2 of the study respectively before primary analysis. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  69 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  The data cut -off for the  primary analysis of Part 1 will be the later of 3 months after Last 
Patient  In (LPI) or when 70% of the patient s (84 patient s) have experienced PFS events, 
while the data cut -off for Part 2 will be when 247 OS events have occurred.  
After the treatment allocation is un blinded post DCO, all patient s receiving active 
treatment and who, in the opinion of the investigator, may benefit from  continued 
varlitinib treatment, will be offered participation in an open- label extension s tudy where 
only varlitinib will be provided by the sponsor; or be managed under a compassionate use 
program governed by the regulatory authoriti es in the respective countries. 
5.4.10 Prior and Concomitant Therapy  
Concomitant medication may be given as medically indicated. All patient s will be asked 
to provide a complete list of concomitant medication including prescription, over -the-
counter, complementary, and alternative medications that have been taken within 4 weeks before the first treatment visit. They must also inform the Investigator about any new medication started while on the study. 
Details (including indication, doses, frequency, and start/stop dates) of concomitant medication  taken, as well as concomitant therapy (including indication, start and stop 
dates) administered within 4 weeks before the first treatment visit, during the study , until 
the completion of the safety follow -up visit, must be documented in the medical record 
and the appropriate CRF. 
Varlitinib  
Varlitinib may cause a drug -drug interaction with other medications that are cytochrome 
P450 (CYP) 3A4, CYP2C8, CYP2C9 or CYP2C19 inducers, inhibitors, or substrates. 
Human CYP3A4 is the major route of metabolism of varlitinib, whereas CYP2C8 and CYP2C19 are minor routes. Due to the potential for drug interactions based on in vitro screens, concomitant use of moderate CYP3A4, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and P -gp inducers 
or inhibitors will be recorded during the entire clinical study. Refer to the FDA ’s Drug 
Developmen t and Drug Interactions: Table of Substrates, Inhibitors and Inducers.
14 
Examples of CYP2C8 substrates are:  
• amodiaquine (antimalarial, anti- inflammatory)  
• serivastatin (statin)  
• paclitaxel (chemotherapeutic)  
• repaglinide (antidiabetic)  
• torasemide (loop diuretic) 
• sorafenib (tyrosine kinase inhibitor) 
• rosiglitazone (antidiabetic) - converted to active metabolites  
Examples of strong CYP2C8 inhibitors (one that causes a > 5 -fold increase in the plasma 
area under the plasma concentration -time curve  (AUC ) values or more tha n 80% decrease 
in clearance ) are:  
• gemfibrozil (hypolipidemic)  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  70 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Examples of moderate CYP2C8 inhibitors (one that causes a > 2- fold increase in the 
plasma AUC values or 50 % to 80% decrease in clearance):  
• trimethoprim (antibiotic)  
Examples of CYP2C8 inhibitors with unspecified potency: 
• thiazolidinediones (antidiabetic) 
• montelukast (leukotriene receptor antagonist) 
• quercetin (anti -inflammatory) Examples of CYP2C8 inducer: 
• rifampicin (antibiotic)  
Varlitinib is a weak inhibitor of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 with an IC50 of  3.2 µM and 10.6  
µM, respectively. Its plasma protein binding is higher than 99% so the free fraction of 
varlitinib in the blood is not likely to reach that concentration. 
In the Safety Lead -in and Part 1 of the study, non- excluded drugs that are associated with 
torsade de pointes and QTc prolongation ( Appendix 14.4) or QT Prolongation without 
torsade de pointes ( _Drugs_that_Prolong Appendix 14.5 ) should be at steady -state dosing 
for at least 2 weeks before enroll ment. During the study, from 2 weeks before  the first 
dose to up to and including Cycle 2 Day 1, the dose of such drugs should not be increased , 
and new drugs in either group should not be initiated without approval from medical 
monitor. 
In addition to the above, in the Safety lead -in and Part 1 of the study, from  Cycle 2 Day 
2 onwards, the dose of drugs associated with torsade de pointes and QTc prolongation 
(Appendix 14.4) or QT prolongation without torsade de pointes ( Appendix 14.5) ideally 
should not be increased. E very attempt should be made to minimize the initiation  of such 
drugs ( Appendix 14.4 or Appendix 14.5). The initiation of any such drugs 
(Appendix 14.4 or Appendix 14.5) requires the medical monitor’s approval. 
Capecitabine  
Refer also  to the XELODA® (capecitabine) prescribing information leaflet12 for details 
of drug interactions with capecitabine . 
5.4.10.1 Prohibited Medication/Therapy  
Prohibited medications during this study will include  
• any other antitumor treatment 
• proton pump inhibitors 
• warfarin  
• strong CYP3A4 inhibitors 
• any other investigational product  
• herbal preparations 
• H2 blocker can be given 3 hours after each dose of varlitinib. 
Please see Appendix 14.3 _Prohibited_Concomitant_Medication/T for the list of 
prohibited medication/therapy. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  71 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  5.4.11 Treatment C ompliance  
The administration of all study medication s should be recorded in the appropriate sections 
of the CRF. Patient s shall report any self -administered medication.  
Patient s will be issued with a diary card, which is to be returned to the study center at the 
next visit. Treatment compliance of self -administered study medication  will be assessed 
by regular tablet counts on the patient  diary card and the information will be re corded in 
the appropriate section of the CRF. 
In the event of a study  related procedure or an intolerable AE or AE ≥ CTCAE 4.03 Grade 
3 (Section  5.4.8.1),  patient s may be counseled  to interrupt dosing permanently or 
temporarily. Doses not taken in such instances do not count as planned dose 
administrations and do not constitute lack of compli ance.  
Patient s must bring all containers of study medication  and any remaining tablets as well 
as the patient  diary card with them at each scheduled visit. Patient s will be instructed to 
notify the study center personnel of missed doses. Dates of missed or  held doses will be 
recorded on the CRF. 
At each visit, patient s will be issued a patient  diary card, which contains clear instructions 
on how and when to take the study medication  and to record the time and date of each 
dose. Each patient  will record on t he patient  diary card the number of tablets of study 
medication  taken and the time of taking them daily. This diary card will be returned to 
the study center  at each scheduled visit.  
The recorded information is required to be entered into the eCRF by study  center  
personnel. 
6 TIMING OF STUDY PROCEDURES  
Patient s will provide written informed consent before any study -related procedures are 
performed.  The timing and details of study assessments for the Safety lead -in are provided in Table 
1 and for Part 1 and Part 2 in Table 2 .
6.1 Study Visits  – Safety Lead -in 
6.1.1 Screening Visit – Safety Lead- in 
Screening  will be performed  up to 14 days prior  to the first administration  of the 
study medication  and background medication (Cycle  1 Day 1). Prior  to any 
evaluations being performed,  written  informed consent  must be  obtained  and a 
screening  number assigned. Patient s will then be assessed  for compliance with  the 
inclusion and  exclusion criteria.  The following assessments  will be performed:  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  72 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Demographic information 
• Medical history, concomitant medication(s) and prior treatment(s)  
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• Triplicate central  12-lead ECG  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Blood collected for hematology, clinical chemistry, coagulation, and serology  
• Urine collected for urinalysis  
• Blood collected for pregnancy test for female patients of childbearing potential 
• CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Brain and/or bone lesions may be 
scanned, if applicable.  
Any of these investigations may be repeated to allow pati ents to qualify for the study. 
If appropriate, and with prior approval from the sponsor or their designee, patients who 
fail screening or who pass screening but have not been treated may be re -screened. 
Where investigations are repeated, the most recent investigations should meet all 
inclusion and exclusion criteria .  
6.1.2 Treatment Visits  – Safety Lead- in 
Cycle 1 Day 1, Day 8 and Day 14 
Refer to Table 1 for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry    
• Urine collected for urinalysis  
• Pre-dose triplicate  central 12-lead ECG at 45 minutes pre-dose and 5 minutes 
pre-dose on Cycle 1 Day 1 and Cycle 1 Day 8 only  (NOTE: not required on Day 
14) 
• Pre-dose blood collected for PK analysis  at 5 minutes pre -dose on Cycle 1 Day 
1, 20  minutes pre -dose on Cycle 1 Day 8 and 5 minutes pre -dose on Cycle 1 Day  
14 
• Varlitinib administration  
• Capecitabine administration   
• Post-dose triplicate central 12-lead ECG  at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, and 12 hours post -
dose (NOTE: not required on Day 14) 
• Post-dose b lood collected for PK analysis  at 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, 10 , and 
12 hours post- dose 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  73 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  When ECGs and PK samples are collected at the same time point, the PK samples 
are always collected after the ECGs . 
Subsequent Cycles – Cycle 2  Day 1, Cycle 3  Day 1 , etc. (±5 days) 
Refer to Table 1  for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood colle cted for hematology and clinical chemistry  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Varlitinib administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
• Triplicate  central 12-lead ECG  (3 hours post-dose)  
• CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Brain and/or bone lesions may be  
scanned, if applicable every 6 weeks from Cycle 1 Day 1.  
6.1.3 End of Treatment Visit  (+ 7 Days) – Safety Lead- in 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Urine or blood collected for pregnancy test for female patients of childbearing 
potential  
• Blood collected for hematology, clinical chemistry , and coagulation 
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
EOT assessment s should be performed be fore the start of new anti -tumo r treatment . 
6.1.4 Safety Follow up Visit  28 Days Post Last Study Medication Administration 
(+ 7 Days) – Safety Lead- in 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• Triplicate central 12-lead ECG  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  74 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  If the patient  needs to start a new anti -tumo r treatment within 28 days post last study 
medication administration, the safety follow -up assessments should be performed 
within 1 day before the start of the new anti -tumo r treatment.  
 
6.2 Study Visits – Part 1  
6.2.1 Screening Visit – Part 1  
Screening  will be performed  up to 14 days prior  to randomization (Cycle  1 Day 1). 
It may be extended up to 21 days subjected to a case by case review and approval by 
the Sponsor. Prior  to any evaluations being performed,  written  informed consent must 
be obtained and screening  number assigned. 
Patient s will then be assessed  for compliance with  the inclusion and exclusion criteria.   
The following assessments will  be performed: 
• Demographic information  
• Medical history, concomitant medication(s) , and prior treatment(s)  
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• Triplicate central 12-lead ECG  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Blood collected for hematology, clinical chemistry, coagulation, serology, cancer 
antigen 19.9 ( CA19.9 ), and CEA  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Blood collected for pregnancy test for female patients of childbearing potential 
• Blood collected for retrospective analysis of biomarkers  
• Information on acquired tu mor mutations if available as part of medical history 
or during study participation 
• Archival paraffin -embedded tumor tissues collected for future analysis  (the 
minimum archival tumor tissue to be collected is 19 unstained slides of 5 microns)  
• Biopsy for those patient s who do not have enough archival tumor tissue 
(additional consent to be provided) 
• CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis images must be performed within 21 
days prior to Cycle 1 Day 1, brain and/or bone lesions may be scanned, if 
applicable. 
 
6.2.2 Treatment Visits – Part 1  
Cycle 1  Day 1 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  75 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Pre-dose triplicate central 12-lead ECG  at 45 minutes pre-dose and 5 minutes 
pre-dose 
• Pre-dose b lood collected for PK analysis  at 5 minutes pre -dose  
• Varlitinib or placeb o administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
• Post-dose triplicate central 12-lead ECG  at 1.5, 3, 5, and 8 hours post -dose  
• Post-dose b lood collected for PK analysis  at 1.5, 3, 5, and 8 hours post -dose  
When ECGs and PK samples are collected at the same time point, the PK samples 
are always collected after the ECGs . 
 
Cycle 1  Day 8 (± 1 day) 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry  including weekly liver 
funct ion test s 
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Pre-dose triplicate central 12-lead ECG  at 45  minutes pre -dose and 5 minutes 
pre-dose 
• Pre-dose b lood collected for PK analysis at 20 minutes pre -dose  
• Varlitinib or placebo administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
• Post-dose triplicate central 12-lead ECG  at 1.5, 3, 5, and 8 hours post -dose  
• Post-dose blood collected for PK analysis at 1.5, 3, 5, and 8 hours post -dose 
When ECGs and PK samples are collected at the same time point, the PK samples are 
always collected after the ECGs.  
Cycle 1  Day 15 (± 1 day) 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timin g of the following assessment: 
• Blood collected for weekly liver function tests  
• Varlitinib or placebo administration  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  76 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved   
Cycle 2  Day 1 (±5 days) 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Varlitinib or placebo administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
• Post-dose triplicate  central 12 -lead ECG  at 3 hours post -dose 
Cycle 3  Day 1 (±5 days) 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Varlitinib or placebo administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
• Blood collected for retrospective anal ysis of biomarkers  
• Blood collected for CA19.9 and CEA 
• CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Brain and/or bone lesions as 
applicable 
Subsequent Cycles  from Cycle 4  Day 1, Cycle 5  Day 1, etc. (±5 days) 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  77 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Varlitinib or placebo  administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
• Blood collected for CA19.9 and CEA every 6 weeks from Cycle 1 Day 1  
• CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Brain and/or bone lesions as 
applicable every 6 weeks from Cycle 1 Day 1  
• Post-dose triplicate cent ral 12 -lead ECG at 3 hours post -dose every 2 cycles  from 
Cycle 4 Day 1  
 
End of Treatment Visit  (+ 7 days) – Part 1  
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Urine or blood collected for pregnancy test for female patients of childbearing  
potential  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Blood collected for hematolog y, clinical chemistry and coagulation 
• Blood collected for CA19.9 and CEA . If the reason for EOT is due to 
radiological disease progressions and CA19.9/CEA have already been assessed 
with the most recent scans, then CA19.9/CEA at EOT can be omitted.  
EOT assessment s should be performed be fore the start of new anti -tumo r treatment . 
6.2.3 Safety Follow -up Visit  28 Days P ost Last Study Medication Administration  
(+ 7 Days) – Part 1  
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• Triplicate central 12 -lead ECG  3 hours after light snack  
• Blood collected for PK analysis within 25 minutes after  ECG evaluation  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
If the patient  needs to start a new anti -tumo r treatment within 28 days post last study 
medication administration, the safety follow -up assessments should be performed 
within 1 day before the start of the new anti -tumo r treatment.  
6.2.4 Disease Status  Follow- up Visit Every 6 Weeks (± 5 Days) Post E nd of 
Treatment until Disease Progression – Part 1  
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  78 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Brain and/or bone lesions as 
applicable 
6.2.5 Survival Follow -up Visit , Every 12 Weeks (± 7 Days) P ost Disease 
Progression  – Part 1  
• Survival status contact 
• Details of a nti-cancer treatment  
Note: Survival calls may be made in the week following the date of DCOs for the 
analyses, and if subjects are confirmed to be alive or if the death date is after the 
DCOs, these subjects will be censored at the date of the DCOs.  
6.3 Study Visits – Part 2  
6.3.1 Screening Visit – Part 2  
Screening  will be performed  up to 14 days prior  to randomization (Cycle  1 Day 1). 
It may be extended up to 21 days subjected to a case by case review and approval by 
the Sponsor. Prior  to any evaluations being performed,  written  informed consent must 
be obtained and screening  number assigned. 
Patient s will then be assessed  for compliance with the inclusion and exclusion criteria.   
The following assessments will  be performed: 
• Demographic information 
• Medical history, concomitant medication(s) , and prior treatment(s)  
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• Triplicate central 12-lead ECG  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Blood collected for hematology, clinical chemistry, coagulation,  serology, cancer 
antigen 19.9 ( CA19.9 ), and CEA  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Blood collected for pregnancy test for female patients of childbearing potential  
• Blood collected for retrospective analysis of biomarkers 
• Information on acquired tumor  mutations if available as part of medical history 
or during study participation 
• Archival paraffin -embedded tumor t issues collected for future analysis  (the 
minimum archival tumor tissue to be collected is 19 unstained slides of 5 microns)  
• Biopsy for those patient s who do not have enough archival tumor tissue 
(additional consent to be provided) 
• CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis images must be performed wit hin 21 
days prior to Cycle 1 Day 1, brain and/or bone lesions may be scanned, if applicable. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  79 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved   
6.3.2 Treatment Visits – Part 2  
Cycle 1  Day 1 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Pre-dose triplicate central 12 -lead ECG (before a snack)  
• Pre-dose blood collected for PK analysis at 5 minutes pre -dose 
• Varlitinib or placebo administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
• Post-dose blood collected for PK analysis at 1-3 hours post dose, 3- 5 hours post 
dose, and 5- 8 hours post dose (Sparse PK sampling)  
Cycle 1  Day 8 (± 1 day) 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessment: 
• Blood collected for weekly liver function tests  
• Varlitinib or placebo administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
 
Cycle 1  Day 15 (± 1 day) 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessment: 
• Blood collected for weekly liver function tests  
• Varlitinib or placebo administration  
 
Cycle 2 Day 1 (±5 days) 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  80 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Pre-dose blood collected for PK analysis at 20 minutes pre -dose 
• Varlitinib or placebo administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
• Post-dose triplicate central 12 -lead ECG at 3 hours post- dose 
• Post-dose blood collected for PK analysis at 1-3 hours post dose, 3- 5 hours post 
dose, and 5-8 hours post dose (Sparse PK sampli ng) 
Cycle 3  Day 1 (±5 days) 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Varlitinib or placebo administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
• Blood collected for retrospective anal ysis of biomarkers  
• Blood collected for CA19.9 and CEA 
• CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Brain and/or bone lesions as 
applicable 
Subsequent Cycles  from Cycle 4 Day 1, Cycle 5  Day 1, etc. (±5 days) 
Refer to Table 2  for assessment details and timing of the following assessments: 
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Blood collected for hematology and clinical chemistry  
• Urine collected for urinalysis 
• Varlitinib  or placebo  administration  
• Capecitabine administration  
• Blood collected for CA19.9 and CEA  every 6 weeks  from Cycle 1 Day 1  
• CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Brain and/or bone lesions as 
applicable every 6 weeks  from Cycle 1 Day 1  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  81 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Post-dose triplicate central 12-lead ECG  at 3 hours post dose every 2 cycles from 
Cycle 4 Da y 1 
 
End of Treatment Visit (+ 7 days) – Part 2  
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
• Urine or blood collected for pregnancy test for female patients of childbearing 
potential  
• Urine collected for urinalysis  
• Blood collected for hematolog y, clinical chemistry and coagulation 
• Blood collected for CA19.9 and CEA . If the reason for EOT is due to radiological 
disease progressions and CA19.9/CEA have already been assessed with the most  
recent scans, then CA19.9/CEA at EOT can be omitted.  
EOT assessment s should be performed be fore the start of new anti -tumo r treatment . 
6.3.3 Safety Follow-up Visit 28 Days Post Last Study Medication Administration 
(+ 7 Days) – Part 2  
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• Collection of AEs  
• Concomitant medication review  
If the patient needs to start a new anti -tumor treatment within 28 days post last study 
medication administration, the safety follow -up assessments should be performed 
within 1 day before the start of the new anti -tumo r treatment.  
6.3.4 Disease Status Follow- up Visit Every 6 Weeks (± 5 Days) Post End of 
Treatment until Disease Progression – Part 2  
• Physical examination and weight  
• Vital signs  
• ECOG performance status  
• CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Brain and/or bone lesions as 
applicable 
6.3.5 Survival Follow- up Visit, Every 12 Weeks ( ± 7 Days) P ost Disease 
Progression  – Part 2  
• Survival status contact 
• Details of anti -cancer treatment  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  82 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  6.4 Duration of T reatment  
The duration of each patient ’s study involvement will be as follows: 
Screening Period: Up to 14 days . It may be extended up to 21 days subjected to a case by 
case review and approval by the Sponsor.  
Treatment Period:  
• Safety lead -in: Study treatment will be given in 21 -day cycles. Patient s will 
receive investigational product  and background medication until d isease 
progression, development of unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent or 
death. Patient s will be followed for disease status every 6 weeks.  
• Part 1 and Part 2: Study treatment will be given in 21 -day cycles. Patient s will 
receive investigational product and background medication until disease 
progression, development of unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent or 
death. Patient s will be followed for disease status every 6 weeks. After disease 
progression, all patient s will be followed for survival every 12 weeks until death 
or until the DCO for Part 2 OS analysis.  
Safety Follow-U p Period: Patient s will complete a safety follow -up visit 28 days after the 
last dose of investigational product . If the patient needs to start a new anti -tumo r treatment 
within 28 days post last study medication administration, the safety follow -up assessments 
should be performed within 1 day before the start of the new anti -tumo r treatment . 
Only in Part 1 and 2: 
Follow- up Period: If patient s have not experienc ed radiological progression at the time 
of treatment discontinuation, radiological assessments should continue every 6 weeks 
(± 5 days) until disease progression (Disease Status Follow -Up). After disease 
progression, all patient s will be followed for survival every 12 weeks until death or until 
the DCO for the final OS analysis  (Survival Follow-Up) 
7 SAFETY, EFFICACY, PHARMACOKINETIC AND BIOMARKER 
VARIABLES  
The planned schedule of assessments is presented in  Section  6, Table 1  (Safety  lead-in) 
and Table 2  (Part 1 and Part 2). 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  83 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  7.1 Safety, Efficacy Pharmacoki netic and Pharmacodynamic Measurements 
Assessed  
7.1.1 Safety Assessments 
7.1.1.1 Adverse Events  
Adverse Event D efinition  
An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical study patient  
administered a medicinal product which does not necessarily have a causal relationship 
with this treatment. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign 
(including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not it is related to the 
medicinal (investigational) product. This includes an exacerbation of pre- existing 
conditions or events, intercurrent illnesses, drug interaction or the significant worsening of the indication under investigation that is not recorded elsewhere in the CRF under specific efficacy assessments . Fluctuations of pre -existing conditions that do not 
represent a clinically significant exacerbation or worsen ing need not be considered  AEs.  
Surgical procedures planned before enrol lment of the patient  in the study are not 
considered AEs if the condition(s) was known before study inclusion. In the latter case, the medical condition should be reported in the patient ’s medical history.  
Progression of the cancer of target disease under study is generally not considered an AE. 
It is the responsibility of the Investigator to document all AEs that occur during the study . 
AEs will be elicited by asking the patient  a non- leading question; for example, “Have you 
experienced any new or changed symptoms since we last asked/since your last visit?” Adverse event s should be reported on t he appropriate page of the CRF.  
Serious Adverse Event Definition  
An SAE is any untoward medical occurrence or effect that, at any dose,  
• Results in death. 
• Is life -threatening (an AE is life -threatening if the patient  was at immediate risk 
of death from the event as it occurred, i .e., it does not include a reaction that might 
have caused death if it had occurred in a more serious form).  
• Requires or prolongs inpatient hospitalization. (Complications occurring during 
hospitalization are AEs and are SAEs if they cause prolongation of the current hospitalization .) 
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacit y. (An AE is incapacitating 
or disabling if it results in a substantial and/or permanent disruption of the patient ’s ability to carry out normal life functions).  
• Results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  84 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  In addition, medical and scientific judgement is  required to decide if prompt notification 
is required in situations other than those defined for SAEs above. This may include any 
event that the Investigator regards as serious that did not strictly meet the criteria above 
but may have jeopardized the patient  or required intervention to prevent one of the 
outcomes listed above, or that would suggest any significant hazard, contraindication, side effect, or precaution that may be associated with the use of the study medication . 
Events related to disease progression will not be reported as SAEs unless the events lead 
to death , and the death will be reported as an SAE. 
Hospitalization due to the following reasons does not need to be reported as an SAE: 
• Reasons described in the protocol (i.e., drug administration, protocol required 
procedures); 
• Surgery or procedure planned prior to entry into the study; 
• Surgery or procedure planned for pre-existing conditions that do not worsen after 
entry into the study; 
• Social/administrative reasons (i.e., due to distance between home and hospital, 
hospice placement for terminal care due to progressive disease, etc.). 
Assessment of Severity  
The Investigator will make an assessment of intensity for each AE and SAE reported 
during the study using the CTCAE 4.03 criteria. The a ssessments will be based on the 
Investigator’s clinical judgment. The severity of each AE and SAE recorded in the CRF 
should be assigned to one of the categories: 
Grade 1:  Mild; asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or diagnostic 
observations only; intervention not indicated 
Grade 2:  Moderate; minimal, local or non -invasive intervention indicated; 
limiting age -appropriate instrumental activities of daily living  
Grade 3:  Severe or medically significant but not immediately life threatening; 
hospitalization  or prolongation of hospitalization  indicated; disabling; 
limiting self -care activities of daily living  
Grade 4:  Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated 
Grade 5:  Death related to AE  
All changes in severity must be recorded in the eCRF. 
Assessment of C ausality 
Every effort will be made by the Investigator to assess the relationship of the AE, if any, 
to the  investigational product  (varlitinib/placebo) and the background therapy 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  85 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  (capecitabine) . For both investigational product and background therapy , causality should 
be assessed using the categories presented as follows : 
Definitely  Related:  A clinical  event,  including clinical  laboratory test abnormality,  
occurring in a plausible time relationship  to the medication  
administration,  and which  cannot  be explained by concurrent disease  
or other drugs or chemicals.  The response to withdrawal  of the drug  
should be clinically  plausible.  
Probably  Related:  A clinical  event, including clinical laboratory test abnormality, with 
a reasonable time sequence to the medication  administration,  
unlikely to be attributes  to concurrent disease  or other drugs or  
chemicals,  and which  follows a clinically  reasonable response on  
withdrawal.  
Possibly  Related:  A clinical  event, including clinical laboratory test abnormality, with 
a reasonable time sequence to the medication  administration,  but 
which  could  also be explained by concurrent  disease  or other drugs  
or chemicals.  Information  on the drug withdrawal  may be lacking  
or unclear.  
Unlikely  Related:  A clinical  event, including clinical  laboratory test abnormality, with 
little or no temporal relationship  to medication  administration,  and 
which  other  drugs, chemicals  or underlying disease  provide  
plausible explanations.  
Not Related:  A clinical  event,  including clinical laboratory test abnormality  that 
has no temporal  relationship  to the medication  or has more  likely  
alternative etiology. 
NOTE: AEs listed as ‘possibly , probably or definitely’ related to the investigational 
product are considered to have a suspected ‘reasonable causal relationship’ to the 
investigational product. A dverse event s listed as ‘unlikely  or unrelated ” are considered 
have a suspected “un related” causal relationship to the investigational agent/intervention.  
Action Taken  
The Investigator will describe the action taken in the appropriate section of the CRF, as 
follows: 
• None 
• Varlitinib/placebo permanently withdrawn  
• Capecitabine permanently withdrawn 
• Varlitinib/placebo  temporarily interrupted  
• Capecitabine tempor arily interrupted  
• Varlitinib/placebo dose modified  
• Capecitabine dose modified  
• Concomitant medication /therapy  
• Other, specify.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  86 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Follow- up of Adverse Events  
All Investigators should follow up patient s with AEs until the event is resolved, the patient  
is lost to follow -up or until, in the opinion of the Investigator, the event is stabil ized or 
determined to be chronic . Details of AE resolution  must be documented in the CRF. 
Documentation and Reporting of A dverse Events  
Adverse events will be recorded and reported from the patient’s signing of the informed 
consent to the safety follow -up assessment . Prior to receiving study medication , only 
AEs that were assessed as related to study procedures will be recorded and reported.   
If a patient begins a new anti -tumor therapy within 28 days after the last administration 
of study medication, the AE reporting period for non- serious AEs ends at the time the 
new therapy is started.  
All AEs per the definition stated in the protocol  that are observed, elicited by the 
Investigator or reported by the patient , regardless of their causal relation to study 
medication will be documented in source documents, captured in CRF and will be 
evaluated by the Investigator. All new AEs, as well as those that worsen in intensity or 
frequency relative to baseline, which occur during the defined AE collection period must be recorded.  
Each AE should be described in detail: A medical diagnosis of the event (if a medical diagnosis cannot be determined, a description of each sign or symptom characteriz ing the 
event should be recorded), onset date, resolution date, a determination of whether the event is serious or not, severity, relationship to the study medication, action taken and outcome. 
The minimum information required for each AE includes the following: 
• Type of event  
• Duration (start and end dates) 
• Severity  
• Changes in severity  
• Seriousness 
• Causality in relation to varlitinib/placebo  
• Causality in relation to capecitabine  
• Action taken in relation to varlitinib/placebo  
• Action taken in relation to capecitabine 
• Treatments in relation to event  
• Outcome 
Outcome  
The Investigators  are to record  the ‘Outcome to Date’ using the following categories:  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  87 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Fatal  The termination  of life as  a result  of an AE 
Not Resolved  One of the possible results  of an AE outcome  that indicates  that the event  
has not improved or the patient  has not recuperated  
Resolved  One of the possible results  of an AE outcome  that indicates  that the event  
has improved or the patient has recuperated  
Resolved  with 
Sequelae  One of the possible  results  of an AE outcome  where  the patient  
recuperated  but retained  pathological/clinical conditions resulting  from  
the prior disease or injury (AE) 
Unknown  Not known,  not observed,  not recorded,  or refused  
7.1.1.2  Reporting of Serious Adverse Events  
Collection of SAEs starts from signing of  ICF until 28 days after the last administration 
of study medication . Prior  to receiving investigational product, only SAEs that were 
assessed as related  to study procedures will be reported.  
If a patient begins a new anti -tumor therapy within 28 days after the last administration 
of study medication, the SAE reporting period for SA Es ends at the time the new therapy 
is started.  
The following information regarding SAEs should be captured by the site where possible : 
• Date AE met criteria for SAE  
• Date Investigator became aware of SAE  
• Reason AE considered serious 
• Date of hospitalization  
• Date of hospital discharge 
• Probable cause of death (if applicable)  
• Date of death (if applicable)  
• Autopsy performed (if applicable) 
• Causality assessment in relation to study procedure(s) 
• Causality assessment in relation to other medication  
• Causality assessment in relation to varlitinib/placebo  
• Causality assessment in relation to capecitabine  
The sponsor has a legal responsibility to notify the appropriate regulatory authorities 
about the safety of the study medication . Accordingly, the Investigator must report all 
SAEs  per the definition stated in the protocol, regardless of presumed causal relationship, 
on the SAE page of the eCRF within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event. During eCRF 
downtime, the paper SAE form should be sent to the sponsor’s assigned safety 
representative by email within 24 hours of becoming aware  of the event . 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  88 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Email: ASLANSafety@parexel.com  
For medical emergencies contact:  
Name : Mei Ling Long  
Mobile : +65 9888 9987 
Name:  Chih Yi Hsieh  
Mobile:  +886 975 865 105 
The Investigator should not wait to receive additional information to document fully the 
event before notification of a SAE, though additional information may be requested. 
Where applicable, information from relevant laboratory results, hospital case records, and autopsy reports should be obtained. 
The sponsor and/or 
the sponsor’s assigned safety representative will promptly notify all 
relevant Investigators and the regulatory authorities of findings that could adverse ly affect 
the safety of patient s, impact on the conduct of the study or alter the IEC/institutional 
review board ( IRB) approval/favor able opinion of the study . In addition, the sponsor’s 
assigned safety representative, on behalf of the sponsor , will expedite the reporting to all 
concerned Investigators, to the IECs/IRBs, where required, and to the regulatory 
authorities of all adverse reactions that are serious , unexpected , and considered related to 
the study medication (See Section  7.1.1.1). 
Details of the procedures to be followed if a pregnancy occurs are provided in 
Section  5.3.5. 
7.1.1.3 Unexpected Adverse Reactions  
Unexpected Adverse Reaction D efinition  
An unexpected adverse reaction is any untoward and unintended response that is related to the administration of the study drug  at any dose that is not consistent with the applicable 
product information (e .g., Investigator’ s Brochure for an unauthor ized investigational 
medicinal product or summary of product characteristics for an author ized product). 
All suspected (i.e., related to the medication), unexpected serious adverse reactions 
(SUSARs) will be the subject  of expedited reporting . The sponsor and/or 
the sponsor’s 
assigned safety representative shall ensure that all relevant information about a SUSAR 
that is fatal or  life-threatening is reported to the relevant competent authorities and 
IEC/IRB within 7 days after knowledge by the sponsor of such a case and that relevant follow- up information is communicated within an additional 8 days . All other SUSARs 
will be reported to the relevant competent authorities and IEC/IRB within 15 days after knowledge by the sponsor of such a case . All Investigators should follow up SUSARs 
until the event is resolved or until, in the opinion of the Investigator, the event is stabil ized 
or determined to be chronic . Post study SUSARs that occur after the patient  has completed 
the clinical study must be reported by the Investigator to the sponsor. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  89 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  7.1.1.4 Clinical Laboratory Evaluation 
The clinical laboratory tests specified below will be performed with the timing detailed 
in Table 1  (Safety lead -in) and Table 2  (Part 1 and Part 2) . All clinical laboratory samples 
will be processed and evaluated by the site ’s local  laboratory. Analysis of biomarkers will 
be performed by a central laboratory.  
During the study, all out of range (abnormal) laboratory values must be evaluated and commented on by the Investiga tor for clinical significance. The clinical laboratory 
samples to be evaluated  are presented in  Table 13 . 
Table 13: Clinical Laboratory Parameters  
Safety Clinical Laboratory Parameters (Using Local Laboratory) 
Hematology 
 Hemoglobin, hematocrit, red blood cell count, white blood cell, 
platelet count, white blood cell subset count (neutrophils, 
eosinophils, basophils, l ymphocytes, and monocytes), mean 
corpuscular volume, mean corpuscular hemoglobin, mean cell 
hemoglobin concentration 
Clinical Chemistry [fasted]  
 Albumin, total protein, blood glucose, sodium, potassium, blood 
urea nitrogen, creatinine, AST , ALT , alkaline phosphatase, gamma 
glutamyl transferase, total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, triglyceride, 
total cholesterol, lactate dehydrogenase, calcium, and uric acid 
Liver Function Test  AST, ALT,  alkaline phosphatase, gamma glutamyl transferase, total 
bilirubin, direct bilirubin  
Coagulation  Prothrombin time/ International Normalized Ratio, activated partial 
thromboplastin time  
Urinalysis  
 Specific gravity, pH, protein, leucocytes,  red blood cells,  Nitrite , 
ketones, urobilinogen and bilirubin. Microscopy  will be performed 
when necessary.  
Pregnancy Screen  
 Females of childbearing potential will be screened for pregnancy. 
The screening pregnancy test will be by blood sample to detect the 
presence of β- HCG (collected as part of biochemistry sample).  
Serum  or urine  pregnancy tests are acceptable at  subsequent visits 
at the Investigator’s  discretion . 
Viral Serology  
 Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis B deoxyribonucleic acid  
viral load if Hepatitis B surface antigen returns positive, Hepatitis C 
virus antibody and human immunodeficiency virus antibody.  
Tumor Markers – For Part 1 and Part  2 of the study only  (Using Local Laboratory)  
Tumor Markers  
 CEA, CA19.9 
Abbreviations:  ALT  = alanine aminotransferase, AST  = aspartate aminotransferase, β -HCG  = beta human chorionic 
gonadotropin CA19.9 = cancer antigen  19.9, CEA  = carcinoembryonic antigen . 
Additional and repeat testing may be performed at the discretion of the I nvestigator.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  90 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  All laboratory reports must be reviewed, signed, and dated by the Investigator.  
Any clinical laboratory test result considered by the Investigator to be clinically 
significant should be considered an AE. Significant abnormal values that are drug- related 
occurring during the study will be followed until repeat test re sults return to normal, 
stabiliz e, or are no longer clinically significant. 
7.1.1.5 Vital Signs  
Blood pressure (systolic and diastolic), heart rate, respiratory rate, and temperature will 
be measured manually or automatically in a standardized manner in a sitting position after 
the patient  has rested comfortably for 5 minutes.  
7.1.1.6 Physical Examination 
Physical examinations will be performed by a physician and/or delegated qualified 
personnel according to local legislation if applicable  and will include the examination of 
the following: general appearance, eyes, ears, nose, throat, chest/respiratory, heart/cardiovascular, gastrointestinal/liver, musculoskeletal/extremities, 
dermatological/skin, thyroid/neck, lymph nodes, and neurological/psychiatric systems. 
The patient s’ height will be checked at screening visit, and body weight will be checked 
at the sta rt of each cycle during the study.  
All clinically significant treatment- emergent findings that were not present at baseline or 
described in the medical history will be recorded as AEs. 
7.1.1.7 12-lead ECG  
A 12 -lead ECG will be taken in the supine position, after the patient  has been lying down 
for at least 10 minutes  in a quiet environment . There should be no significant external 
stimulation (TV, radio, interaction with other subjects).  Detailed instructions , including 
the allowable window of time to complete the ECGs , will be described in the ECG manual.  
The ECG machines supplied by the Core ECG Laboratory will be used for all ECG 
collection , and  the digital files of each tracing will be archived . 
General Principles ( Safety Lead -in and Part 1) 
The following parame ters will be assessed: heart rate, PR, QRS, QT, QT cF (Fridericia’s 
formula), and QTcB (Bazzett’s formula) . While the Investigator (or a qualified observer 
at the investigational site) will interpret the ECG using one of the following categories: within nor mal limits, abnormal but not clinically significant, or abnormal and clinically 
significant, the final ECG assessments (including interval measurements) will be made 
by the Core ECG laboratory.  
Baseline will be defined as the mean of the triplicate QT/QTc readings performed pre-
dose on Day 1. On Day 1 , pre-dose is defined as 2 sets of triplicate ECGs taken 45 minutes 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  91 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  and 5 minutes prior to dosing. The ECG values from these 2 sets of  ECGs will be averaged 
to create the baseline values.  Similarly, for all other time  points, for each ECG parameter,  
each patient ’s mean will be calculated from the triplicate readings and the mean value 
will be used . 
 
Safety Lead -In 
Any analysis of ECG data from the Safety lead -in is considered exploratory.  
On Cycle 1  Day 1 and Day 8, the following parameter will be determined at the following 
time points:  
- Absolute heart rate, pulse rate, QRS, QT/QTc values at 45 minutes pre -dose, 
5 minutes pre-dose, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 8.5, and 12 hours post dose  
- Heart rate, pulse rate, QRS, QT/QTc change from baseline at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 
8.5, and 12 hours post-dose 
 
QTc will be reported for both Fridericia and Bazett’s corrections . 
Triplicate ECGs will also be collected 3 hours post- dose Day 22 (Cycle 2 Day 1)  and 
onwards every cycle  while the subject remains in the study. 
Due to the non-randomized, open label design of the Safety lead- in, data from the Safety 
lead-in will be presented separately from data from Part 1 of the study. Furthermore, 
ECG/QT out puts will be made available to the DSMB for consideration when 
determining whether the study should progress to Part 1. 
Part 1  
The Part 1 electrocardiographic Core ECG Laboratory assessments constitute the study’s primary assessment of ECG/QTc.  The time -based electrocardiographic analysis  will be 
performed in Part 1  at baseline, Cycle 1 Day 1, Cycle 1 Day 8, and safety follow -up visit.  
On Cycle 1 Day 1 and Day 8, the following parameters will be determined at the following time points:  
- Absolute heart rate, pulse rate, QRS, and QT/QTc values  at 45 minutes pre -
dose, 5 minutes pre-dose, 1.5, 3, 5, 8 hours post-dose. 
- Heart rate, pulse rate, QRS, and QT/QTc change from baseline at 1.5, 3, 5, 
and 8 hours post-dose. 
Twenty -eight days after the last dose of study drug (after full drug washout), a set of 
triplicate ECGs will be collected 3 hours after a light snack.  
In addition, triplicate safety ECGs will be collected 3 hours post -dose on Day 22 (Cycle 
2 Day 1), Day 64 (Cycle 4 Day 1) and every 2 cycles  while the subject remains in the 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  92 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  study. This data will not be analyzed by the Core ECG Laboratory but will be assessed 
by the investigator. 
 
Part 2  
ECGs will be collected in Part 2 of the study as part of standard safety monitoring at 
screening, baseline (before a snack), and 3 hours post -dose on Day 22 (Cycle 2 Day 1), 
Day 64 (Cycle 4 Day 1) and every 2 cycles  while the subject remains in the study.  These 
data will not be analyzed by the Core ECG Laboratory but assessed by investigators.  
7.1.1.8 ECOG Performance Status  
The ECOG performance status will be recorded using the scale provided in Appendix 14.2. 
7.1.2 Efficacy Variables  
7.1.2.1 Tumor Evaluation 
Tumor evaluations will be performed to evaluate the efficacy of treatment according to 
RECIST version  1.1 ( Appendix 14.1) . Tumor response will be assessed by means of 
computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at baseline  and every 
6 weeks 
 from Cycle 1 D ay 1 during the treatment period until EOT  (Safety Lead -in) or 
disease progression (Part 1 and Part 2).  
Baseline CT/MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis images must be performed within 21 
days prior to Cycle 1 Day 1, brain and/or bone lesions may be scanned if applicable. 
For Part 1 and 2 of the study, radiological assessments should continue until the patient  
experiences disease progression, regardless of whether the patient  discontinues 
randomized therapy or starts a subsequent anti- cancer therapy.  
All tumor responses should be assessed at every assessment time point using the same 
methods (contrast -enhanced CT or MRI) used to characterize the lesions identified at 
baseline. Apart from  the radiological reading at the site to determine disease progres sion, 
for Part 1 of the study all images will be assessed by a blinded ICR, and the ICR must 
confirm the presence of measurable disease in order to confirm a patient’s eligibility at 
baseline screening prior to a patient being randomized into the study. Central radiological 
reading will not interfere with Investigator’s judgment on disease progression.  
For Part 1 only, t he co -primary endpoints of ORR and PFS and other secondary endpoints 
(except OS) will be based on the blinded ICR of all radiological data. Objective response 
rate as determined by the site review will also be reported as a secondary endpoint.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  93 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  7.1.2.2 Cancer Antig en Evaluation 
For Part 1 and 2 of the study, blood will be collected for analysis of CA19.9 and 
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) at screening and every 6 weeks  (±5 days) from Cycle 
1 Day 1. Collection of blood for these analysis stops at EOT.  
Archival paraffin -embedded tumor tissues will be collected during screening for future 
analysis  if the patient has provided the optional tumor tissue consent.  
Biopsies will be performed during screening for those patient s who did not have enough 
archival tumor tissue  if the patient has provided the optional tumor tissue consent. 
7.1.3 Pharmacokinetic Variables  
7.1.3.1 Determination of Drug Concentrations in Biological S amples  
Safety Lead- in Part  
Analysis of plasma sa mples for the determination of varlitinib  (and any relevant 
circulating metabolites) , capecitabine and 5 -FU will be performed in Safety Lead -in Part . 
Other relevant  circulating metabolites of capecitabine (5’ -DFCR, 5’ -DFUR and FBAL) 
will only be determined if this is considered necessary based on the pharmacokineti c and 
safety findings  of the study . Relevant circulating metabolites of varlitinib will not be 
determined at this Safety Lead -in because they remain unknown. 
Part 1 and 2 
Analysis of plasma sa mples for the determination of varlitinib  and its relevant circu lating 
metabolites  will be performed in Part 1 and Part 2. C apecitabine and 5-FU will not be 
determined in Parts 1 and Part 2 of the study if no relevant pharmacokinetic interactions 
between varlitinib and capecitabine/5 -FU are observed in the Sa fety Lead -in part of the 
study.  
7.1.3.2 Pharmacokinetic Sampling  
Safety Lead- in 
Blood samples for PK analysis of varlitinib (and any relevant circulating metabolites) ,  
capecitabine, and 5- FU (active capecitabine metabolite) will be collected at the following 
time points in  the Safety lead-in part only: 
• Cycle 1 Day 1: 5 minutes pre -dose, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, 10, and  12 hours post-
dose  
• Cycle 1 Day 8: 20 minutes pre -dose, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, 10, and  12 hours post-
dose 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  94 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Cycle 1 Day 14: 5 minutes pre -dose, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, 10, and  12 hours post-
dose 
Patient s must withhold taking the morning dose of varlitinib and capecitabine until 
pre-dose PK sample is collected. The actual sample date and time of all PK samples must 
be recorded in the CRF . 
In addition, unscheduled PK collected 7 days following dose reduction of varlitinib at any 
cycle of treatment : up to 5 minutes pre-dose, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.5, 10, and 12 hours 
post-dose if required.  
 
Part 1 and Part 2 
In Part 1 and Part 2, PK samples will be obtained for the PK evaluation of varlitinib (and 
any relevant circulating metabolites) . PK samples will be collected at the following time 
points:  Part 1 (All patients)  
• Cycle 1 Day 1: 5 minutes pre-dose, 1.5, 3, 5, and 8 hours post-dose 
• Cycle 1 Day 8: 20 minutes pre-dose, 1.5, 3, 5, and 8 hours post-dose 
• End of study after full drug washout:  28 days after last dose at the patient’s safety 
follow-up visit 
 
Part 2 (Sparse Sampling) 
• Cycle 1 Day 1: 5 minutes pre-dose, 1- 3 hours  post-dose , 3-5 hours  post-dose, and 
5-8 hours post-dose 
• Cycle 2 Day 1: 20 minutes pre-dose, 1- 3 hours  post-dose , 3-5 hours  post-dose, 
and 5-8 hours post-dose 
 In order to maintain the double -blind design of the study, blood samples will be collected 
from all subjects in Part 1 for plasma measurements of varlitinib and its potential relevant circulating metabolites. For the sparse PK sampling in Part 2, the double -blind design 
will also be maintained and blood samples will be collected for a selected number of 
subjects, without limiting the sampling to the varlitinib subjects only.  
All PK data will be analy zed according to treatment received. Deviations that have the 
potential to significantly affect the PK will be reviewed. The population, and decisions regarding which profiles are usable, will be defined by the Study Team Physician, Pharmacokineticist , and Statistician prior to any analyses being performed.  
In add ition, unscheduled PK samples will be collected at least 7 days following dose 
reduction of varlitinib at any cycle of treatment : up to 5 minutes pre-dose and 3- 5 hours 
post-dose. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  95 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Handling and processing details , including the allowable window of time to complete the 
PK blood draws, will be outlined in the Laboratory Manual. 
 
7.1.3.3 Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
Safety Lead- in 
The PK of varlitinib (and any relevant circulating metabolites) , capecitabine and 5 -FU 
(active metabolite) will be determined at selected time points. The following PK parameters will be evaluated where possible:  
Cycle 1 Day 1, Day 8 , and Day 14: 
• maximum plasma concentration (C
max) 
• time to C max(tmax) 
• plasma concentration before next dose (C trough) 
• area under the plasma concentration -time curve from 0 to 12 hours (AUC 0-τ) 
• half-life (t 1/2) 
• apparent clearance (Cl/F)  
• apparent volume of distribution (V z/F) 
• apparent volume of distribution at the steady state (V ss/F) 
where τ = 12 hours (dosing interval)  
 Cycle 1 Day 8  
• accumulation ratio of AUC
0- τ (RacAUC 0- τ) (Day 8/Day 1)  
• accumulation ratio of C max RacC max (Day 8/Day 1)  
Cycle 1 Day 14  
• accumulation ratio of AUC 0- τ (RacAUC 0- τ) (Da y 14/Day 1) 
• accumulation ratio of Cmax RacC max (Day 14/Day 1) 
Summary statistics for varlitinib (and any relevant circulating metabolites)  will be 
tabulated for the PK parameters by study day. The mean, standard deviation (SD), coefficient of variation (%CV), geometric mean, %CV geometric mean, median, minimum, and maximum will be presented for relevant PK parameters indicated above. Median, minimum, and maximum will be presented for T
max. Profi le plots of patient  data 
will be presented on both linear and log scale. Pharmacokinetic parameters in plasma will be derived using standard non- compartmental 
methods with WinNonlin
® Professional Version 5.2 or higher (Pharsight Corp., Mountain 
View, Calif ornia, US) or SAS® Version 9.2 or higher (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North 
Carolina, US). Actual elapsed time from dosing will be used for final plasma PK 
parameter calculations.  
 
 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  96 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Part 1 and Part 2 
Using appropriate PK software depending on whether comprehensive PK sampling or 
sparse PK sampling is obtained in practice, the PK data will be used to derive PK parameters such as, but not restricted to, C
max, AUC , and t 1/2 for varlitinib.  
Population PK evaluation in Part 1 and Part 2 of the study will be performed by nonlinear 
mixed effects model (NLME) using NONMEM program version VII (Globomax LLC, Ellicott City, MD, US ) and SAS
® Version  9.2 or higher (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North 
Carolina, US). Actual elapsed time from dosing  will be used for final plasma PK 
parameter calculations.  
The final PK analyses will be the responsibility of the CRO. Pharmacokinetic analyses 
will be conducted according to CRO Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for PK analyses unless otherwise specifi ed. The actual PK sampling times will be used in the PK 
calculations.  
The varlitinib concentration- time profiles, along with the derived PK variables, will be 
listed for each patient  per dose and dosing day and summarized appropriately. Population 
PK mode ls may be used to derive the PK parameters and will aim to characterize 
variability in the population by investigating the influence of covariates such as weight, age, smoking status and/or concomitant medications. In addition, if the data are suitable, potential relationships between plasma varlitinib and efficacy or safety endpoints will be investigated using a graphical approach and/or appropriate PK/PD modeling techniques. 
7.1.4 Biomarker Variables  
Blood samples for retrospective analysis of potential biomarkers will be collected at 
baseline and post week 6 treatment tumo r assessment.  
For Part 1 and 2 of the study, optional donation of archival/fresh tumor biopsy samples can be provided (a separate consent to be signed). The minimum archival tumor tissue to 
be collected is  19 unstained slides of 5 microns . The collected tumo r tissue and blood 
samples, as well as, m atched normal tissue will be stored for further analyses for mRNA, 
proteins and genes.  
Refer to the Bioanalytical Laboratory Manual for detailed sample collection, labeling, 
storage, and shipment instructions for further analysis of tumo r tissues.  
Exploratory variables will be evaluated in Part 1 only. 
Possible relationships between protein and phospho- protein expression levels and clinical 
outcome, and gene mutational status and clinical outcome will be explored using proteins 
and genes including, but not limited to:  
• Via IHC:  
- epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), pEGFR  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  97 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  - HER2, pHER2  
- HER3, pHER3 
- HER4, pHER4 
• Via PCR/Sequencing  
- Mutational status of genes, such as KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, EGFR, HER2  and other 
genetic factors that may affect response to therapy.  
The protein and gene studies will be conducted using archival material (and if not 
available, biopsy tissue samples). 
If a relationship is found between biomarker(s) expression and clinical outcomes in Part  1 
of the study, the biomarker(s) could be prospectively evaluated in Part 2 of the study.  
7.2 Data Safety Monitoring Board and Independent Central Review  
A DSMB  consisting of independent experts will be convened on 2 specified occasions to 
review the accumulating safety date for the study.  
The first DSMB meeting will occur  after the first 12 patients in the  Safety lead -in have 
completed the 21 days of follow-up, and  before initiating Part 1 of the study.   
The second DSMB meeting will occur at a selected time point during Part 1 of the study  
according to DSMB Charter.  
The composition, specific responsibilities , scope and plan of the DSMB will be defined 
in the DSMB Charter.  Radiologic al images collected in the Part  1 of the study will be assessed by ICR . Details 
of the ICR will be defined in  the ICR Charter.  
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  98 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  8 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
8.1 General Statistical Considerations 
All statistical analyses will be performed by the designated CRO , using SAS®, version 
9.3 or higher.  
Unless specified otherwise, data from the Safety lead -in, Part 1, and Part 2 of the study 
will be presented separately in the tables , figures , and l istings . Patient s whose data 
contributed to the Part 1 analysis will not be included in the Part 2 analysis. For Parts 1 and 2, for the purpose reporting all FAS and EFR --based endpoint s (efficacy 
data and demography), Study Day  1 is defined as the date of randomization to study 
treatment. For visits (or events) that occur on or after randomization, study day is 
defined as (date of visit [event] -date of randomization + 1). For visits (or events) that 
occur prior to randomization, study day is defined as (date of visit [event] - date of 
randomization). There is no Study Day 0.  For Parts 1 and 2, for the purpose of reporting all safety set based endpoints (e.g. AEs, laboratory findings, vital signs, ECG, exposure and dose intensity) and PK set- based 
endpoints, Dose Day  1 is defined as the date of first dose of study treatment (referred to 
in the protocol as Cycle 1 Day 1). For visits (or events) that occur on or after first dose, dose day is defined as (date of visit [event] -date of first dose of study treatment + 1). For visits (or events) that occur prior to first dose, dose day is defined as (date of visit [event] -date of first dose of study treatment). There is no Dose Day 0. For listings (such 
as for AEs) that include the derivation of “days since last dose,” this is defined as (event date -date of last dose). Events that occur on the same day as the last dose of study drug 
will therefore be described as occurring zero days from the last dose of study drug.  The database for the Safety  lead-in will be locked at the  time of the Part 1 analyses. 
However, interim data f rom the Safety lead -in will be made available to the DSMB prior 
to the final DCO to enable the DSMB to review the emerging safety and tolerability data and to advise whether the study can proceed to Part  1. Details of the data to be provided 
to the DSMB will be provided in the DSMB charter. 
The primary analysis of Part 1 will be the later of 3 months after last Patient i n or when 
70% of the patient s (84 patient s) have experienced a PFS event. The primary analysis of 
all primary and secondary endpoints, with the exception of OS, will be performed at this 
time.  
For Part 1, a  preliminary analysis of OS will be performed at the time of the primary 
analysis of ORR and PFS. It is anticipated that the OS data at this time will be immature, 
thus a second analysis of OS is planned for when approximately 95 patients (approx. 79%) have an OS event. The second analysis of OS will be considered the primary analysis of 
OS for the trial.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  99 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  The DCO for Part 2 will be when 247 OS events have occurred. All secondary endpoints, 
including ORR, PFS and DoR, will be reported at the time of the prim ary analysis of OS.  
8.2 Sample Size Derivation  
8.2.1 Safety Lead- in Sample Size  
The Safety lead -in is not formally powered to assess any statistical hypotheses. In this 
part, 12 to 20 eligible patient s (6-12 from US, 6-8 from ROW) will be enrolled to receive 
varlitinib plus capecitabine. 
Patient s in this group will be replaced if study medication  compliance is < 85% in the 
first 14 days. 
8.2.2 Part 1  Sample Size  
Part 1 is designed with co- primary endpoints ORR and PFS. In order to maintain an 
overall, 1- sided 10% type I error rate for Part 1, a Hochberg procedure15 will be used, 
such that the study will be deemed to have met its primary objective if either endpoint is 
significant at the 1-sided 5% level or if both endpoints are significant at the 1-sided 
10% significance level.  
One hundred and twenty patient s provide approximately 80% power to detect a true 
difference of 17% in response rate, based  on a 1-sided 5% significance level and assuming 
10% response rate for the placebo group and a 27% response rate for varlitinib. To ensure 
the adequate data are available to evaluate the effects of varlitinib on both co -primary 
endpoints, the DCO  for the primary analysis will be the later of 3  months after last patient  
in and when 70% of patient s (84 patient s) have experienced a PFS event.  Based on a 
minimum of 84 PFS events at the time of the primary analysis, the study would have a 
minimum of 80% power to detect a true HR of 0.58 for PFS based on a 1-sided 5% 
significance level.  
Furthermore,  if the primary objective of the study is met, the following approach to type 
I error control will be applied in order to support marketing approval: 
• The overall type I  error rate for marketing approval will be controlled at the two -
sided 5% level, using a Hochberg procedure  
• Using this approach, statistical significance may be claimed if either  ORR or PFS 
is significant at the two -sided 2.5% significance level or if both ORR and PFS are 
significant at the two -sided 5% significance level.   
One hundred and twenty patient s provide approximately 80% power to detect a true 
difference of 20% in response rate, based on a 2-sided 5% significance level and assuming 
10% response rate for the placebo group and a 30% response rate for varlitinib. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  100 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  A total of 84 PFS events provides 80% power to detect a true HR of 0.54, based on a two-
sided 5% significance level. Assuming a 8-month non- linear recruitment period, a 2.67 
month median PFS for capecitabine alone, and a true HR of 0.54, it is estimated that the DCO for the primary analysis of Part 1 will occur approximately 12 months after the first 
patient  is randomized into the study ( first patient  in). 
Overall Survival is a secondary endpoint in Part 1. A preliminary analysis of OS will be 
performed at the time of the primary analysis of ORR and PFS. It is anticipated that the OS data at this time will be immature, thus a second analysis of OS is planned  for when 
approximately 95 patients (approx. 79%) have an OS event. Due to the number of OS events expected at the time of the first analysis, this initial analysis of OS will be considered exploratory only. Although a p- value may be presented, for the purpose of 
marketing authorization, no claims of statistical significance will be based on the initial analysis. For the purpose of type I error control across the two analyses of OS in support 
of marketing authorization, the OS update analysis will be considered the primary analysis of OS for Part 1 of the study, and statistical significance will be assessed at the 
two-sided 5% significance level.  
8.2.3 Part 2  Sample Size  
Part 2 is designed with a primary endpoint of OS. Approximately 350 patient s will be 
randomize d into Part 2 to obtain 247 death events (70% maturity). If the true OS HR for 
the comparison of varlitinib+capecitabine versus placebo+capecitabine is 0.7 (likely to correspond to a 43% prolongation of OS), the study has 80% power to demonstrate a statistically significant difference for OS, assuming a 2-sided 5% significance level.  
Assuming non- linear recruitment of 350 patient s over a twenty -four month period, and 
median OS times of 8.6 months and 6 months for the varlitinib and placebo arms respectively , it is estimated that 247 OS events will occur approximately 31 months after 
the first patient  in for Part 2.  
All secondary endpoints will be analyzed at the time of the primary analysis of OS. 
8.3 Analysis Populations 
8.3.1 Safety Population 
For each part of the study, the  safety population includes all patient s in that part of the 
study who received at least 1 dose of randomized therapy (or study medication in the Safety lead -in) and will be the primary analysis set for the assessment of safety and 
tolerability in the study.  
For the purpose of data summaries, patient s will be included in the safety population 
according to the treatment arm and dose level initially received, regardless of any 
subsequent dose adjustments. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  101 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  8.3.2 Full Analysis Set  
For each part of the stud y, the  full analysis set is based on the intention- to-treat principle 
and includes all randomized patient s (or treated patient s for the Safety  lead-in) analyzed 
in accordance with the intended treatment arm, regardless of the treatment actually 
received.   
With the exception of Part 1, Tumor Size which is not considered a key secondary 
endpoint (See Section 8.4.6 and 8.5.2.1), for all study parts, the primary analysis of all 
primary and key secondary efficacy endpoints, will be based on the full analysis set  (FAS).  
8.3.3 Evaluable for Response Set  (Part 1 only) 
The EFR set is defined as a subset of the FAS and includes patients with measurable disease at baseline, as determined by ICR assessments of radiological data based on the RECIST criteria, version 1.1. For Part 1 only, a sensitivity analysis of ORR and DCR will be performed in the evaluable for response (EFR) set to investigate the impact of patients without measurable disease on the primary endpoint. Since measurability is an inclusion criteria, all patients  in Parts 1 should have measurable disease at baseline. Thus, if no 
patients were randomised in error, results in the EFR set will not be presented.  
Since tumor size is an endpoint based on patients’ tumor measurements, it can only be 
defined for the subs et of the FAS with measurable disease at baseline. Thus the EFR set 
will be the primary analysis set used for the assessment of tumor size for Part 1 (See Section 8.4.6). 
8.3.4 Per Protocol Analysis Population 
The per protocol (PP)  analysis population is defined for Part 1. Efficacy is not the focus 
of the S afety lead -in and Part 2 will be assessed on an intention- to-treat basis only . Thus 
PP analyses are not required for the S afety lead -in and Part 2 of the study. 
The PP analysis p opulation will include all randomized patient s according to the 
treatment actually received, and excluding any patient s with major deviations.  Major 
deviations that would lead to exclusion from the PP  analysis population include:  
• Patient s who did not have the intended disease (failure of inclusion criteria 2)  
• Subjects who did not have the intended indication, i.e. were not second line 
patients (failure of inclusion criteria 3)  
• Patient s who did not received any randomized therapy  
• Patient s with baseline radiological scan performed before the start of 
protocol- specified in terval prior to randomization  
• Patients who did not have measurable disease at baseline as determined by ICR  
• Subjects who have not received at least six doses of gemcitabine in a first line 
setting (i.e. failure of inclusion criteria 4, protocol version 4.0 onwards) 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  102 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Subjects with multiple ( ≥2) peritoneal metastases at baseline or ascites at baseline 
which cannot be attributed to a non- malignant cause (i.e. failure of exclusio n 
criteria 3, protocol version 4.0 onwards), based on ICR review 
• Subjects with baseline albumin <3 g/dL (failure of the albumin component of 
inclusion criteria 9c)      
In addition to the programmatic determination of the major deviations, monitoring notes or summaries will be reviewed to determine any important post entry deviations that are not identifiable via programming, and to check that those identified via programming are correctly classified.  The final classification will be made blinded, prior to d atabase lock.  
Patient s who received the incorrect randomized therapy should be included in the PP 
analysis set according to the therapy actually received.  Similarly, subjects who were mis -
stratified at randomization will be included in the PP analyses acc ording to the correct 
stratification levels, regardless of the levels declared at randomization.  
Failure of an inclusion/exclusion criterion will not automatically be classified as a major 
deviation. 
The PP analysis population will be the used to assess the sensitivity of the Part 1 ORR, 
DoR, DCR, PFS and OS an alyses to major deviations. 
8.3.5 PK Analysis Set 
The PK population contains all patient s who have been dosed with varlitinib and provided 
at least one usable PK profile. All PK data will be analy zed according to treatment 
received.  
For the Safety lead -in, this population will comprise all data patient s who receive study 
treatment as per protocol (300 mg BID) and did not violate or deviate from the protocol 
and planned dosing regimen (300 mg) in ways that would significantly affect the PK 
analyses (for example skipping doses, or taking reduced doses or taking concomitant medications with the potential to cause a drug -drug interaction) during the PK sampling 
period. Patient s who did deviate from the planned dosing regimen may still provide some 
data for inclusion in the PK set if they have at least one usable PK profile. The population, and decisions regarding which profiles are usable, will be defined by the St udy Team 
Physician, Pharmacokineticist, and Statistician prior to any analyses being performed.  
PK sampling of all patients is planned for Part  1 the study, while sparse PK sampling is 
planned for Part 2 . The number of patients who will provide samples in Part 2 for the PK 
analysis  will be defined based on the results of Part 1 of the study . All PK data will be 
analy zed according to the treatment received. Deviations that have the potential to 
significantly affect the PK will be reviewed, and patient s, or specific PK profiles for a 
patient , may be excluded from the PK set if appropriate. The population, and decisions 
regarding which profi les are usable, will be defined by the Study Team Physician, 
Pharmacokineticist , and Statistician. Since the PK sample analysis may be performed 
following the primary analyses of efficacy, the CRO responsible for the analysis of the 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  103 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  PK samples will mask th e subject ID prior to any discussion regarding deviations, in order 
to ensure that decisions regarding which samples to include/exclude from the PK set are 
made blinded to clinical outcomes. 
Population PK models may be used to derive the PK parameters. 
Table 14: Summary of Outcome Variables and Analysis Populations 
Outcome Variable Analysis Population  
(Sensitivity Analysis Population)  
Efficacy Data  (Primary and key secondary 
endpoints)   
ORR, DCR  FAS (EFR  and PP Part 1 only)  
 
PFS, OS , DoR   
FAS (PP Part 1 only)  
Part 1 ORR based on site data  FAS  
Part 1 Tumor size1 EFR 
Demography  FAS 
  
Pharmacokinetics   
PK PK 
  
Safety   
Exposure  Safety  
Adverse Events  Safety  
Laboratory measurements  Safety  
Vital Signs  Safety  
ECG  Safety  
Physical Examination  Safety  
1 Tumor size, by definition, is only defined in patients with measurable disease.  For marketing authorization, no 
statistical claims will be based on tumor size (See Section 8.5.2.1 ). 
 
Abbreviations: DCR  = disease control rate, DoR  = duration of response,  ECG  = electrocardiogram, 
EFR = evaluable for r esponse , FAS = full analysis set, ORR  = objective response rate, OS = overall 
survival. PFS = p rogression - free survival , PK = pharmacokinetics, PP = per protocol  
8.4 Study Endpoints  
8.4.1 Objective Response Rate 
Objective response r ate is a co -primary endpoint in Part 1 and a secondary endpoint in 
Part 2, and the S afety lead -in cohort. 
Objective response rate is defined as the number (%) of patient s with at least o ne visit 
response of CR or PR. Data obtained up until progression, or last evaluable assessment 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  104 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  in the absence of progression, will be included in the assessment of ORR. This will be 
irrespective of whether or not patient s discontinued treatment or received a subsequent 
therapy prior to progression. For a ll study parts, ORR will be evaluated based on the FAS 
set (Section  8.3.2).  
8.4.2 Progression -Free Survival  
Progression- free survival  is a co -primary endpoint in Part 1, and is a secondary endpoint 
in Part 2. 
Progression- free survival  is defined as the time from randomization (or start of treatment 
in the Safety lead -in) until the date of objective disease progression or death (by any c ause 
in the absence of disease progression) regardless of whether the patient  withdraws from 
randomized therapy (study treatment in the Safety lead -in) or receives another antitumor 
therapy  prior to disease progression. Patient s who have not experienced di sease 
progression or died at the time of analysis will be censored at the time of the latest date 
of assessment from their last evaluable RECIST assessment. However, if the patient  
progresses or dies after 2 or more missed visits, the patient  will be censored at the time 
of the latest evaluable RECIST version  1.1 assessment. 
The PFS time will always be derived based on the scan/assessment dates rather than visit dates and the following rules will be applied: 
• Date of disease progression will be determined based on the earliest  of the dates of 
the component that triggered the disease progression, i .e., if both the target lesions 
and the non-target lesions indicate disease progression but were scanned on different 
days, the earlier of the 2 dates would be applied. 
• When censoring a patient  for PFS , the patient  will be censored at the latest  of the dates 
contributing to a partic ular overall visit assessment.  
For Part 1, the co- primary endpoint, PFS, will be derived programmatically using  data 
from the ICR. To support sensitivity analyses, PFS will also be derived programmatically using the site assessments of the Part 1 radiological data.  
For Part 2 and the Safety lead -in, PFS will be derived programmatically using the site 
radiological d ata.  
Further detail s will be provided in the SAP. 
8.4.3 Overall Survival 
Overall survival is a secondary endpoint in Part 1, and the primary endpoint in Part 2 of 
the study. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  105 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Overall survival  is defined as the time from the date of randomization until death due to 
any cause.  Any patient  not known to have died at the time of DCO will be censored based 
on the last recorded date on which the patient  was known to be alive.  
Note, survival calls may be made in the week following the date of DCO for the analysis, 
and i f patient s are confirmed to be alive or if the death date is after the DCO these patient s 
will be censored at the date of DCO.  
8.4.4 Duration of Response 
Duration of response is secondary endpoint in all study parts. 
The DoR is defined as the time from the date  of first documented response until the date 
of documented disease progression or death in the absence of disease progression. The 
end of response should coincide with the date of disease progression or death from any cause used for the PFS endpoint. For P art 1, DoR will be calculated using the ICR data, 
and for Part 2 and the Safety lead -in, DoR will be calculated from the site radiological 
data.  
The time of the initial response will be defined as the latest of the dates contributing towards the first visit response of PR or CR. For example, if the patient  was first noted to 
have a PR at week 6, and the target and non -target lesions were assessed on different dates 
at this visit, then the later of the 2 assessment dates would be used as the start date of the 
response. 
If a patient  does not progress following a response, then their DoR will use the PFS 
censoring time.  
Duration of response will not be  defined for those patient s who do not have documented 
response. 
8.4.5 Disease Control Rate 
Disease control r ate is a secondary endpoint in all study parts. 
Disease control rate is defined as the number (%) of patient s with at least one visit 
response of CR or P R, or with stable disease for a minimum o f twelve weeks (±  5 days) 
from randomiz ation (Parts 1 and 2) or starting treatment (Safety lead- in only). Data 
obtained up until progression, or last evaluable assessment in the absence of progression, 
will be inclu ded in the assessment of DCR. This will be irrespective of whether or not 
patient s discontinued treatment or received a subsequent therapy prior to progression. For 
all study parts, DCR will be evaluated based on the FAS set ( Section  8.3.2) . For Part 1, 
DCR will be calculated based on the ICR data. For Part 2 and the Safety lead -in, DCR 
will be calculated from the site radiological data.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  106 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  8.4.6 Tumor Size  
The percentage change from baseline in tumor size at Week 12 (%ΔTS Wk12) is a 
secondary endpoint for Part 1, and will be used to help evaluate the exploratory objectives 
of investigating the possible role of baseline biomarker levels a s predictors of clinical 
benefit. It will be evaluated using the Evaluable for Response set (EFR) ( Section  8.3.3). 
Tumor size is not considered to be a key secondary endpoint; for the purpose of marketing authorization, no statistical claims will be made based on tumor size.   
The %ΔTS
Wk12 will be defined as follows: 
• Baseline tumor size: defined as the sum of longest diameters of target lesions at 
baseline  
• Week 12 TS: defined as the sum of longest diameters of target lesions at week 12 
 
%∆𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊12=100  ×𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊  12 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇−𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑊𝑊𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑊𝑊 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑊𝑊𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑊𝑊 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 
An increase from baseline of 20% will be imputed for any patient s who die by any cause, 
or withdraw from the study due to symptomatic disease  progression prior to Week 12. 
Any patient s who withdraw from the study due to radiological disease progression prior 
to Week 12 will be included in the analysis, and will be assigned a percentage change 
from baseline of 20%, or the value that was observed at the time of disease progression 
(whichever is larger). Full details of data imputation rules will be provided in the SAP. 
8.4.7 Safety Endpoints  
Patient  safety will be evaluated based on physical examination, vital signs (blood pressure 
[systolic and diastolic], heart rate, respiratory rate, and body temperature), ECG 
parameters, clinical laboratory tests (hematology, clinical chemistry, coagulation, and urinalysis), and AEs. 
8.4.8 ECG Parameters  
The ECG parameters of interest  are QT including QTcF and QTcB, HR (heart or 
ventricular rate), PR, and QRS intervals.  
8.5 Methods of Statistical Analysis 
8.5.1 Primary Endpoints  
8.5.1.1 Part 1 - Objective Response Rate  
The primary analys is will test for the superiority of varlitinib -containing treatment arm 
relative to the placebo -containing arm.  
Objective response r ate will be analy zed using a stratified exact binomial test 
16,17 that 
extends Fisher’s Exact test to more than one strat um. The analysis will be  stratified by 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  107 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  primary tumor location ( gallbladder/NonGB). The 2- sided p- value will be obtained by 
doubling the 1-sided p- value.  
The conditional maximum likelihood estimate of the odds ratio will be presented together 
with its exact 2 -sided 95% confidence  limit, which excludes one if and only if the 
stratified exact binomial test is significant at a  2-sided 5% level. Corresponding 
significance levels and confidence intervals (CIs) will be calculated using tests performed 
at a 1 -sided 10% level. The 1- sided  p-value will also be presented.  
To test for heterogeneity across strata, the exact test of Zelen18 will be  performed testing 
whether the treatment effect differs between the 2 strata included in the primary analysis.  
For Part 1 only, subgroup analyses will be conducted comparing ORR between treatments in the subgroups of the FAS set defined by the stratification factors declared at 
randomization, Region (US/Non- US) and primary tumor location (GB/Non -GB), plus the 
following factors: 
• Gender ( male v s female)  
• Race (Asian/Caucasian/Other)  
• Baseline ECOG status  (0/1) 
• Extent of disease ( locally advanced/m etastatic)  
• Age (<60/>=60) 
• Baseline HER2 expression (positive defined as +++ or above by IHC, otherwise 
negative)  
• Any HER positivity ( positive defined as + or higher by IHC for HER1, HER2,  
HER3, HER4 , or otherwise negative) 
Note: The sub-group analyses based on IHC biomarker data will be reported outside of 
the main CSR.  
 Other baseline variables may also be included if there is clinical justification or an imbalance is observed across the treatment arms. For each sub -group, the odds ratio and 
corresponding 80% CI will be presented on a forest plot including the odds ratio and 80% 
CI from the overall population. Additionally, if the primary analysis of ORR is significant at the 2-sided 5% level in the overall population, the forest plot will be replicated using 
95% CI . 
No adjustment to the significance level for testing will be made since all these analyses will be considered supportive of the primary analysis of ORR. 
8.5.1.2 Part 1 – Progression -Free Survival  
In Part 1, the primary analysis will test for the superiority of  varlitinib -containing 
treatment arm relative to the placebo -containing arm, as assessed by PFS.  The DCO for 
the primary analysis of PFS will be the later of 12 weeks after last patient in and 84th 
documented PFS event. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  108 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Progression- free survival will be an alyzed using a stratified log -rank test using the 
Breslow method to handle ties .19 The stratification factor  is primary tumor location 
(GB/Non -GB). The results will be presented in terms of the HR (with a HR <1 favoring 
the varlitinib -containing arm) and associated 2-sided 95 CI and 2-sided p- value. For Part 
1 only, the 80% CI and 1- sided p- value will also be presented. The HR and its CI can be 
estimated from the log -rank as follows20,21,22: 
 
Kaplan -Meier (KM) plots of PFS , with tick marks to identify censored observa tions, will 
be presented by treatment group. Summaries of the number and percentage of patient s 
experiencing a PFS event, and the type of event (RECIST 1.1 or death) will be provided 
along with median PFS for each treatment.  
The assumption of proportionali ty will be assessed.  
For Part 1 only, subgroup analyses will be conducted comparing PFS between treatments in the subgroups of the full analysis set defined by the  stratification factors declared at 
randomization, Region (US/Non- US) and primary tumor locat ion (GB/Non -GB), plus the 
following factors: 
• Gender ( male vs female)  
• Race (Asian/Caucasian/Other)  
• Baseline ECOG status  (0/1) 
• Extent of disease ( locally advanced/m etastatic)  
• Age (<60/>=60) 
• Baseline HER2 expression (positive defined as +++ or above by IHC, otherwise 
negative)  
• Any HER positivity (positive defined as + or higher by IHC for HER1, HER2, 
HER3 , HER4, or otherwise negative)  
Note: The sub-group analyses based on IHC biomarker data will be reported outside of 
the main CSR.  
 Other baseline variables may also be assessed if there is clinical justification. For each 
subgroup, the HRs (varlitinib: placebo) and associated CIs will be calculated from a log rank test within each individual subgroup. These will be presented on a forest plo t 
including the HR and 80% CI from the overall population. The purpose of the subgroup 

 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  109 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  analyses is to assess the consistency of treatment effect across expected and possible 
prognostic factors.  
No adjustment to the significance level for testing will be ma de since all these analyses 
will be considered supportive of the primary analysis of PFS. 
For both Part 1 and Part 2, Cox proportional hazards modeling will be employed to assess 
the effect of covariates on the HR estimate. Before embarking on more detailed modeling, 
an initial model will be constructed, containing treatment and the stratification factor  
primary tumor location  alone, to ensure any output from the Cox modeling is likely to be 
consistent with the results of the stratified log -rank test.  
The presence of quantitative interactions will be assessed formally by means of an overall global interaction test. This will be performed in the full analysis set by comparing the fit of a Cox proportional hazards model including treatment, all covariates, and all covariate-
by treatment interaction terms, with one that excludes the interaction terms and will be assessed at the 2 -sided 10% significance level. If the fit of the model is not significantly 
improved then it will be concluded that overall the treatme nt effect is consistent across 
the subgroups. 
If the global interaction test is found to be statistically significant, an attempt to determine 
the cause and type of interaction will be made. Stepwise backwards selection will be performed on the saturated model, whereby (using a 10% 2- sided level throughout) the 
least significant interaction terms are removed one -by-one and any newly significant 
interactions re -included until a final model is reached where all included interactions are 
significant and all ex cluded interactions are non -significant. Throughout this process all 
main effects will be included in the model regardless of whether the corresponding interaction term is still present. This approach will identify the factors that independently alter the treatment effect and prevent identification of multiple correlated interactions.  
Any quantitative interactions identified using this procedure will then be tested to rule out any qualitative interaction using the approach of Gail and Simon .
23 
The primary analysis of PFS will be based on the programmatically derived PFS based on an ICR of radiological data and using all scans regardless  of whether they were 
scheduled or not. To assess the potential impact of informative censoring on the primary analysis of PFS, a sensitivity analysis using PFS derived from site assessments will be performed. Full details of the planned sensitivity analyses will be provided in the SAP. 
The primary analysis will be performed on the FAS.  Patient s whose data contributed to the Part 1 analysis will not contribute to the Part 2 
analysis.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  110 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  8.5.1.3 Part 2 – Overall Survival 
In Part 2, the primary analysis will test for the superiority of varlitinib -containing 
treatment arm relative to the placebo -containing arm, as assessed by OS.  
The primary analysis of OS will be performed after the 247th documented OS event. OS 
will be analy zed using the methods described in Section  8.5.1.2 for PFS.  
Patient s whose data contributed to the Part 1 analysis will not contribute to the Part  2 
analysis.  
8.5.2 Secondary Endpoints  
8.5.2.1 Efficacy Endpoints 
Progression -free survival based on site assessments  
In all study parts, PFS based on the site review of radiological data is a secondary endpoint. 
PFS based on site data will be analy zed using the same model and methodology as 
described in Section  8.5.1.2 for PFS based on ICR. 
Further details will be provided in the SAP. 
Duration of Response 
The DoR will not be formally analyzed. Duration of response  will be listed and presented 
using KM curves. Descriptive statistics, based on the KM estimates, will be presented by 
treatment group.  
Overall Survival (Part 1) In Part 1, OS will be analy zed using the methods described in Section  8.5.1.2 for PFS. 
OS will be analyzed twice. The initial analysis of OS will be performed at the time of the 
primary analysis of ORR and PFS. Due to the number of OS events expected at the time of the first analysis, this initial analysis of OS will be considered exploratory only. 
Although a p- value may be presented, for the purpose of marketing authorization, no 
claims of statistical significance will be based on the initial analysis. A further OS upda te 
analysis is performed when approximately 95 OS events have occurred.   To support 
marketing authorization, for the purpose of type I error control across the two analyses of OS, the OS update analysis will be considered the primary analysis of OS in the study. 
Disease Control Rate 
Disease control r ate will be analyz ed using a stratified exact binomial test
16 that extends 
Fisher’s Exact test to more than 1 stratum. The analysis will be stratified by primary tumor 
location ( GB/Non -GB). The 2 -sided p- value will be obtained by doubling the 1- sided p-
value.  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  111 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  The conditional maximum likelihood estimate of the odds ratio will be presented together 
with its exact 2 -sided 95% confidence limit, which excludes one if and only if the 
stratified exact binomial test is significant a 2 -sided 5% level. Corresponding significance 
levels and CIs will be calculated using tests performed at a 1 -sided 10% level. The 1-
sided p-value will also be presented. 
To test for heterogeneity across strata, the exact test of Zelen will be performed testing 
whether the treatment effect differs between the 2 strata included in the primary analysis.  
Tumor Size  
The percentage change from baseline in tumor size at Week 12 ( %ΔTS Wk12) is a 
secondary endpoint for Part 1. Tumor size is not considered to be a key secondary 
endpoint; for the purpose of marketing authorization no statistical claims will be based on tumor size. 
Tumor size will be presented graphically using waterfal l plots for each treatment arm, 
presenting each patient ’s Week 12 percentage change in tumor size as a separate bar with 
the bars ordered from the largest increase to the largest decrease.  Reference lines at the 
+20% and –30% change in tumor size levels will be added to the plots, which correspond 
with the definitions of disease progression and PR, respectively. In these waterfall plots, 
the patient s whose Week 12 percentage change in tumor size is based on an imputation 
will be clearly  shown. The 2 treatme nt arms will be plotted separately, but presented side -
by-side on a single page.  
Waterfall plots of the best percentage change from baseline will also be presented, as 
described above for the Week 12 percentage change from baseline.  
Tumor size will also b e used to help evaluate the exploratory objectives of exploring 
relationships between baseline biomarker levels and clinical outcomes (e .g., baseline 
HER2 status and clinical outcome, and other HER family statuses and clinical outcomes).  
In line with the exploratory objectives of the study , the statistical analysis of tumor size 
in Part 1 will be also be used to help evaluate the role of HER family expression levels 
status as a predictor of benefit to varlitinib.  If a relationship is found between biomarker(s) 
expression and clinical outcomes in Part 1 of the study, the biomarker(s) could be prospectively evaluated in Part 2 of the study.  
These analyses will be exploratory, and may be driven by the data observed, and specifically the prevalence of the HER family sub -groups of interest. However, the 
analysis principles to be followed are outlined below. 
1. ASLAN will create and document a list of the key biomarkers of interest, based upon the biological plausibility of predictivity for clinical outcomes. The list will be limited to those biomarkers, or combinations of biomarkers for which a scientific hypothesis exists. These will represent the biomarkers that will be used 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  112 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  to assess the listed exploratory objectives, providing that there is suffi cient 
prevalence of that biomarker in the study population. 
2. For each biomarker of interest, each patient ’s baseline biomarker status will be 
independently evaluated blinded to study treatment and clinical outcome 
3. For each biomarker sub- group, or combination of biomarkers identified on the 
prospectively defined list (step 1), if at least  15 patients  in the EFR population are 
determined to be expressors, then the role of that biomarker as a predictor of 
clinical outcome (tumor size) will be evaluated as descr ibed below. 
For each biomarker of interest (or combination of biomarkers), the absolute values at baseline and Week 12, along with the percentage change from baseline target lesion size at Week 12 will be summarized using descriptive statistics and presented by treatment arm and baseline biomarker status.  
The number and percentage of patient s in each treatment arm whose Week 12 data is 
imputed will also be presented ( split by biomarker sub -group). 
The effect of varlitinib on percentage change in tumor size  will be estimated from an 
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) model fitting the Week 12 percentage change from 
baseline as the response variable, and treatment, primary tumor location (GB/Non -GB),  
baseline biomarker status (positive or negative), the interaction treatment x baseline biomarker status, baseline tumor size, and the time from the baseline scan t o 
randomization as covariates. 
The significance of the interaction term will be evaluated at the 1-sided 10% level to 
determine whether there is evidence of a treatment by biomarker interaction. Regardless 
of the significance of the interaction term, the number of patient s, unadjusted mean and 
adjusted least squares (LS) means for each treatment arm will be presented for each level 
of biomarker status factor  (positive or negative), together with the difference in adjusted 
LS means between treatment arms for each level of the biomarker status factor and 
corresponding p-value and 80% and 95% CI s for the difference.  
If the interaction term is not significant at the 1-sided 10% level, the number of patient s, 
unadjusted mean and adjusted least squares (LS) means for each treatment arm will also be presented together with the difference in adjusted LS  means between treatment arms 
and corresponding p-value and 80% and 95% CI s for the difference.  
If, at blind review, it is judged that the data do not adequately follow a normal distribution 
assumption, then a log- transformation may be used. Specifically in place of percent 
change in Week 12 value the AN COVA model will use loge (Week 12/baseline). In this 
situation , the ratio of the geometric LS  means corresponding CI and p -value will be 
presented.  
As a sensitivity analysis , a nonparametric analysis will be performed . The Hodges 
Lehmann estimate of the median difference and corresponding 80% CI will be derived  
and presented . The median percentage change and range will be presented for each 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  113 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  treatment arm, together with the number of patient s and percentage of patient s in each 
treatment arm whose Week  12 data is imputed in the nonparametric analysis.  
For all biomarkers of interest (step 1), waterfall plots color -coded by baseline biomarker 
status will be produced. 
Note, due to the differing timeframes of the endpoints being available for analysis, the 
above statistical analyses of the biomarker data will be reported outside of the study CSR.  
 
8.5.2.2 Safety Data Analysis 
For each study part, safety data will be assessed for the safety population.  
All AE data will be listed along with information regarding initial study dose, dose at 
onset, onset time (study day) , duration, severity, and relationship to study treatment.  
Treatment emergent AEs (TEAEs) are defined as AEs with an onset date on or after the 
start of treatment. The following summaries will be produced, by treatment group and overall for all TEAEs:  
• An overview table of the incidence of TEAEs, grade 3+ TEAEs, SAEs, TEAEs 
leading to treatment discontinuation and TEAEs leading to death, by treatment arm 
and overall. For each summary category, the results will be shown overall (regardless of causality), and for the incidence of causally -related TEAEs. For example, the 
overall incidence of TEAEs will be presented, as well as the incidence of TEAEs related to randomized therapy, the incidence of TEAEs related t o capecitabine and the 
incidence TEAEs related to both randomized therapy and capecitabine.  
• Summary of TEAEs by system organ class and preferred term: Both the number and 
percentage of patient s in each category ( patient -level summary) and the number of 
episodes (episode -level summary). This summary table will be repeated for TEAEs 
attributed as causally related to randomized therapy  (varlitinib or placebo)  
• Summary of TEAEs occurring in at least 10% of patient s, sorted in descending order 
of frequency (i .e., most frequent event shown first). The order of frequency will be 
determined by the most frequent preferred term across both arms, regardless of CTC 
grade. For each event, the results will be presented for all CTC grad es, and also split 
by grade 1 -2, and grade 3+. 
• Summary of TEAEs attributed as causally related to randomized therapy  occurring 
in at least 10% of patient s, sorted in descending order of frequency (i .e., most frequent 
event shown first). The order of frequency will be determined by the most frequent preferred term across both arms. For each event, the results will be presented for all CTC grades, and also split by grade 1 -2, and grade 3+. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  114 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Summary of CTC grade 3 and above TEAEs sorted in descending order of f requency 
(i.e., most frequent event shown first). The order of frequency will be determined by 
the most frequent preferred term across both arms. 
• A summary or CTC grade 3 and above TEAEs attributed as causally related to 
randomized therapy sorted in descen ding order of frequency (i .e., most frequent event 
shown first). The order of frequency will be determined by the most frequent preferred 
term across both arms. 
• Summary of SAEs by preferred term  
• Summary of SAEs attributed as causally related to randomized therapy, sorted by 
preferred term  
• Categorical Analysis  of ECG  findings (See Section 8.5.2.3 )  
 
Additionally, the following will be listed:  
• AEs with outcome of death along with the date of onset, dosing day, dose at onset, 
treatment status at onset (pre -treatment, ongoing or post -treatment) and Investigator’s 
assessment of severity and relationship to study drug  
• All SAEs along with the date of onset, dosing day, dose at onset, treatment status at 
onset ( pre-treatment, ongoing or post -treatment), date of resolution (if AE is resolved), 
Investigator’s assessment of severity and relationship to study drug 
• AEs leading to discontinuation of study medication, listed along with the date of onset, 
dosing day, dos e at onset, treatment status at onset (pre -treatment, ongoing or post -
treatment) and Investigator’s assessment of severity and relationship to study drug  
If an AE is reported more than once during the study period, the greatest severity and the 
worst -case attribution will be presented in summary tables. Any AEs commencing 
> 28 days after discontinuation of study treatment will not be included in the tabulations 
of AE data.  
All clinical laboratory data (clinical chemistry, hematology and urinalysis data), vital 
signs and ECG data will be listed. Data tabulations and graphical displays of clinical 
laboratory data (clinical chemistry, hematology , and urinalysis data), vital signs and ECG 
data, will include all assessments from screening up to (and including) 28 days  after 
discontinuation of study treatment .  In addition, all data measured on a continuous scale 
(except respiration rate and pulse) will be displayed graphically as described below:  
Safety lead- in:  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  115 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  • Patient  profile plots of laboratory data over time, including reference lines at the LLN 
and ULN. Any dose reductions will be indicated on the plots using a change in line -
type.  
• Patient  profile plots of the change from baseline over time, including a horizontal 
reference line at zero. Any dose reductions will be indicated on the plots using a 
change in line- type.  
Parts 1 and 2:  
• Box plots of laboratory data over time, by treatment, including reference lines at the 
LLN and ULN  
• Box plots of the change from baseline over time, by treatment, including a horizontal 
reference line at zero  
To enable assessment of the potential for drug -induced liver injury, for all study parts the 
following outputs will be produced: 
• A scatter plot of maximum on -treatment ALT versus maximum on -treatment total 
bilirubin (x -axis), both expressed as multiples of the upper limit of normal (ULN), 
including reference lines at 3×ULN for ALT, and 2×ULN for total bilirubin. For each 
patient , the maximum ALT and maximum total bilirubin may occur at different visits  
• A scatter plot of maximum on -treatment AST versus maximum on -treatment total 
bilirubin (x -axis), both expressed as multiples of the upper limit of normal (ULN), 
including reference lines at 3  × ULN for AST, and 2 × ULN for total bilirubin.  For 
each patient , the maximum AST and maximum total bilirubin may occur at different 
visits.  
In the event that the s catter plots of ALT or AST against bilirubin identify any potential 
Hy’s law cases (patient s with either both ALT > 3 × ULN and total bilirubin > 2 × ULN, 
or both AST > 3 × ULN and total bilirubin > 2 × ULN), profile plots over time will be produced for these patient ’s liver function tests (ALT, AST, ALP , and total bilirubin), 
expressed in multiples of the ULN, showing all 4 LFT parameters on the same plot.  
Physical examination data will be listed.  
To further assess the tolerability of varlitinib, exposure  and dose intensity will be listed 
and summarized by treatment arm. Further details will be provided in the study SAP.  
8.5.2.3 ECG/QT Analysis 
For the Safety lead -in, exploratory descriptive and categorical analy ses, including change 
from baseline will be perform ed to investigate the impact of varlitinib and capecitabine 
treatments on the changes from baseline in ECG parameters.  
 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  116 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  For Part 1  of the study , a multi- step approach will be applied to evaluate the effect of 
capecitabine alone and varlitinib in combination with capecitabine on the ECG 
parameters at different time points post- dose. The comparisons will be done between 
ECG values at each time point post -dose and baseline and between treatment arms with 
and without varlitinib for each time point individually. The evaluation of the 
cardiodynamic effects of capecitabine and varlitinib may be explored using exposure -
response modeling if there appears to be a meaningful effect of varlitinib when added to 
capecitabine on the ECG parameters including QTcF.  This will be further described in 
the SAP.  
 Central Tendency Analysis will be performed for both the Safety lead -in and Part 1  of the 
study , the change from baseline in QTcF, PR, QRS, QTcB, and heart rate, will be 
summarized by time point (and treatment arm for Part 1) using descriptive statistics (n, mean, SD, min, median, max, 90% confidence intervals).   For both the Safety lead- in and Part 1, the following categorical data will be summarised : 
- The proportion of patients obtaining treatment -emergent absolute QTcF values > 450 
msec and ≤ 480 msec; > 480 msec and ≤ 500 msec; and > 500 msec 
- The proportion of patients obtaining a QTcF increase from baseline values ≥ 30 and <60 msec and ≥ 60 msec 
- The proportion of patients obtaining a QRS change from baseline > 25% resulting in 
QRS >  120 msec 
- The proportion of patients obtaining a PR interval change from baseline >25% reaching a value >220 msec  
- The proportion of patients obtaining a >  25% decrease from  baseline in heart rate 
resulting in a heart rate < 50 beats per minute (bpm) or a > 25% increase from baseline 
in heart rate resulting in a heart rate > 100 bpm 
For Part 1  of the study, the above categorical data summaries will be presented by 
treatment a rm. 
Following this, categorical analyses will be applied to the categorical data summaries above.  
Additionally, T-wave morphology will be analyzed. The morphological T- wave analysis  
will be focusing on the change from baseline, i.e., treatment emergent changes.  
Following Part 1  of the study , a formal statistical analysis will be performed to assess the 
potential impact of varlitinib and capecitabine on changes in the ECG parameters.  
The statistical stepwise approach will be used to separate the cardiodynamic effect of 
varlitinib from normal circadian fluctuation in the ECG values and from the effect of capecitabine:  
 
1. ANOVA mixed effects comparison of the absolute values of ECG parameters at each time point vs baseline using treatment as a fixed effect in  order to evaluate the contribution of circadian fluctuation and 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  117 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  to determine how treatment differences contribute to the changes. The 
ECG parameter values will be log -transformed and the resulting output 
will include the geometric mean ratio for test vs r eference with the 
corresponding confidence interval and p- value. Interaction term, time 
point x treatment, will be also evaluated if the data allow.  
 
2. ANOVA comparison of the absolute values of ECG parameters as well as change from baseline (ΔECG) between t reatments for each post -
dose time point assessed separately in order to separate the varlitinib effect from that of capecitabine. The ECG parameter values will be log-transformed and the resulting output will include the geometric 
mean ratio for test vs re ference with the corresponding confidence 
interval and p -value.  ΔECG will be tested as untransformed and log-
transformed parameters to avoid bias from discarding 0 ΔECG values from the comparisons. 
 
3. Exposure- Response Analysis:  Linear mixed effect model b etween 
ΔQTcF and time matched concentrations of varlitinib and other potential metabolites if measured and as appropriate.  Other ECG variable may be similarly analyzed and other models used, if appropriate. 
3.1 ΔQTcF will be calculated as the difference between each time point value and the average baseline value for each arm with the combination varlitinib/capecitabine treatment.  
 
3.2 ΔΔQTcF will be calculated for each patient in the combination arm individually as  the difference between the ΔQTcF value for 
the arm with combination varlitinib/capecitabine treatment and the average value of all patients in the capecitabine alone arm matching time point. Other ECG parameters may also be used in the analysis including QTcB, heart rate, etc to provide supporting information. 
 
3.3 Base linear mixed effect model will include patients as a random effect.  
 
3.4 The total dose of capecitabine may be included as a fixed effect in the model to account for differences in total doses received by subjects with different body surface area.  
 
4. Linear mixed effect model between ΔQTcF parameters and time matched concentrations of capecitabine and 5 -FU (metabolite of capecitabine) and 
other potential metabolites if measured and as appropriate 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  118 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  4.1. ΔQTcF will be calculated for all patients in both arms as the 
difference between each time point value and the average baseline value.  
4.2. Base linear mixed effect model will include patients as a random effect and treatment (capecitabine alone or in combinati on with 
varlitinib) as a fixed effect; the total capecitabine dose may also be used as a fixed effect.  
5. Different covariates may be included in the complex models in addition to the base model as fixed effects such as time point in order to ensure the model  feasibility and to evaluate covariates influential to ECG 
parameters.  
The results of the fitted models will be presented using statistical parameters such as the geometric mean ratios and corresponding confidence intervals (for ANOVA) and estimates of the  slope, and associated confidence interval for the linear mixed effect 
models.  In addition, the following graphic exploration of the exposure -ECG relationship may be 
performed:  
• Residual plots to predict results  
• Double Y plots with time on the X axis and time matched values of PK 
concentrations for varlitinib and capecitabine on the Y1 axis, ΔECG on the Y2 axis to determine the possibility of hysteresis between drug concentration and cardiodynamic effects  
• Regression/scatter plots with time matched co ncentrations of varlitinib and 
capecitabine on the X axis and ΔECG on the Y axis • Regression/scatter plots with varlitinib or capecitabine non -compartmental PK 
parameters of C
max, Ctrough,  AUC tau and others on the X axis and maximum ΔECG on the 
Y axis  
• Forest plots for different categories in ECG changes vs mean (SD) non-
compartmental PK parameters for varlitinib or capecitabine on the X axis  
 
9  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  
9.1 Audit and Inspection  
Study cen ters and study documentation may be patient  to Quality Assurance audit during 
the cou rse of the study by the sponsor  or its nominated representative . In addition, 
inspections may be conducted by regulatory authorities at their discretion.  
9.2 Monitoring  
Data for each patient  will be recorded on a CRF . Data collection must be completed for 
each patient  who signs an ICF and is administered study drug. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  119 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  In accordance with GCP and ICH guidelines, the study monitor will carry out source 
document verification at regular intervals to ensure that the data collec ted in the CRF are 
accurate and reliable.  
The Investigator must permit the monitor, the IEC /IRB , the sponsor’s internal auditors , 
and representatives from regulatory authorities direct access to all study -related 
documents and pertinent hospital or medical records for confirmation of data contained 
within the CRFs .  
9.3 Data Management and Coding 
The designated CRO will be responsible for activities associated with the data 
management of this study . This will include setting up a relevant database and data 
transfer mechanisms, along with appropriate validation of data and resolution of queries . 
Data generated within this clinical study will be handled according to the relevant standard operating procedures (SOPs) of the data management and biostatistics depa rtments of sponsor or the designated CRO . 
Study centers will enter data directly into an EDC system by completing the CRF via a 
secure internet connection . Data entered into the eCRF must be verifiable against source 
documents at the study center . Data to be recorded directly on the eCRF will be identified 
and the eCRF will be considered the source document . Any changes to the data entered 
into the EDC system will be recorded in the audit trail and will be FDA CFR  21 Part  11 
comp liant.  
Medical coding will u se Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) for 
concomitant diseases and A Es and WHO Drug for medications.  
Missing or inconsistent data will be queried in writing to the Investigator for clarification . 
Subsequent modifications to t he database will be documented. 
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  120 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  10 RECORDS AND SUPPLIES  
10.1 Drug Accountability  
On receipt of the study medication  (varlitinib, placebo, and capecitabine ), the Investigator 
(or deputy) will conduct an inventory check of the supplies and verify that study drug  
supplies are received intact and in the correct amounts as in the patient  dosing diary, 
before  completing  a supplies receipt . The Investigator will retain a copy of this receipt at 
the study center  and return the original receipt to the study monitor . The monitor may 
check the study supplies at each study center  at any time during the study. 
It is the responsibility of the study monitor to ensure that the I nvestigator (or deputy) has 
correctly documented the amount of the study drug  received, dispensed,  and returned on 
the dispensing log that will be provided. A full drug accountability log will be maintained 
at the  study center  at all times . The study monitor will arrange collection of unused study 
drug returned by the patient . The study monitor will also perform an inventory of study 
drug at the close -out visit to the study cen ter. All discrepancies must b e accounted for and 
documented. 
10.2 Financing and Insurance  
Financing and insurance of this study will be outlined in a se parate agreement between 
the designated CRO  and the sponsor. 
11 ETHICS  
11.1 Independent Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board 
Before initiation of the study at each study cen ter, the protocol, the  ICF, other written 
material given to the patient s, and any other relevant study doc umentation will be 
submitted to the appropriate IEC/ IRB. Written approval of the study and all relevant study 
information must be obtained before the study cen ter can be initiated or the study drug is 
released to the Investigator. Any necessary extensions or renewals of IEC/IRB approval 
must be obtained for changes to the study such as amendments to  the protocol, the ICF or 
other study documentation. The written approval of the IEC/IRB together with the 
approved ICF must be filed in the study files. 
The Investigator will report promptly to the IEC/IRB any new information that may 
adversely affect the safety of the patient s or the conduct of the study . The Investigator 
will submit written summaries of the study status to the IEC/IRB as required . On 
completion of the study, the IEC/IRB will be notified that the study has ended. 
11.2 Regulatory Authorities 
Relevant study documentation will be submitted to the regulatory a uthorities of the 
participating countries, according to local/national requirements, for review  and approval 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  121 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  before the beginning of the study . On completion of the study, the regulatory authorities 
will be notified that the study has ended. 
11.3 Ethical Conduct of the Study  
The Investigators and all parties involved in this study should conduct the stud y in 
adherence to the ethical principles based on the Declaration of Helsinki, GCP, ICH 
guidelines, and the applicable national and local laws and regulatory requirements. 
Study ASLAN001 -009 will be performed in compliance with the protocol, International 
Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human 
Use Good Clinical Practice (ICH GCP)  and local regulatory requirements. Aspects of the 
study concerned with the study medication  will meet the requirements of Good 
Manufacturing Practice. 
11.4 Informed  Consent  
The process of obtaining informed consent must be in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements and must adhere to GCP.  
The Investigator is responsible for ensuring that no patient  undergoes any study related 
examination or activity before that patient  has given written informed consent to 
participate in the study . 
The Investigator or designated personnel will inform the patient  of the objectives, 
methods, anticipated benefits and potential risks and inconveniences of the study . The 
patient  should be given every opportunity to ask for clarification of any points s/he does 
not understand and, if necessary, ask for more information. At the end of the interview, 
the patient  will be given ample time to consider the study . Patient s will be required to 
sign and date the ICF . After signatures are obtained, the ICF will be kept and archived by 
the Investigator in the Investigator’s study file . A signed and dated copy of the patie nt 
ICF will be provided to the patient  or their authorized representative. 
Patient s who agree to provide an optional tumor tissue sample  (Section  7.1.4) will need 
to give written informed consent, in addition to consenting in the main part of the study. It should be emphas ized that the patient  may refuse to enter the study or to withdraw from 
the study at any time, without consequences for their further care or penalty or loss of 
benefits to which the patient is otherwise entitled . Patient s who refuse to give or who 
withdraw written informed consent should not be included or continue in the study. 
If new information becomes available that may be relevant to the patient ’s willingness to 
continue participation in the study, a new ICF will be approved by the IECs/IRBs  (and 
regulatory a uthorities , if required) . The study patient s will be informed about this new 
information and re-consent will be obtained. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  122 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  11.5 Patient  Confidentiality  
Monitors, auditors, and other authorized agents of the sponsor and/or its designee, the 
IECs/IRBs  approving this research, and the US FDA , as well as that  of any other 
applicable agencies, will be granted direct access to the study patient s’ original medical 
records for verification of clinical study procedures and/or data, without violating the 
confidentiality of the patient s to the extent permitted by the law and regulations . In any 
presentations of the results of this study or in publications, the patient s’ identity will 
remain confidential.  
All personal data collected and processed for the purposes of this study should be 
manag ed by the Investigator and his/her staff with adequate precautions to ensure 
confidentiality of those data, and in accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act), applicable to national and/or local laws and regulations on persona l 
data protection. 
 
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  123 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  12 REPORTING AND PUBLICATION, INCLUDING ARCHIVING  
Essential documents are those documents that individually and collectively permit 
evaluation of the study and quality of the data produced. After completion of the study  
(end of study def ined as the date of the last visit of the last patient ), all documents and 
data relating to the study , including digital ECGs, will be kept in an orderly manner by 
the Investigator in a secure study file . This file will be available for inspection by the 
sponsor or its representatives . Essential documents should be retained for 2 years after 
the final marketing approval in an ICH region or for at least 2 years since the 
discontinuation of clinical development of the study medication . It is the responsibility of 
the sponsor to inform the study center  when these documents no longer need to be retained. 
The Investigator must contact the sponsor before destroying any study related 
documentation. In addition, all patient  medical records and other source document ation 
will be kept for the maximum time permitted by the hospital, institution , or medical 
practice.  
The sponsor must review and approve any results of the study or abstracts for professional meetings prepared by the Investigator(s). Published data must not compromise  the 
objectives of the study . Data from individua l study cen ters in multicen ter studies mu st 
not be published separately. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  124 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  13 REFERENCES  
1. Valle J, Wasan H, Palmer DH, et al; ABC -02 Trial Investigators. Cisplatin plus 
Gemcitabine versus Gemcitabine for biliary tract cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010 Apr 
8;362(14):1273-81. 
2. Ciombor KK, Goff LW. Advances in the management of biliary tract cancers. Clin 
Adv Hematol Oncol. 2013 Jan;11(1):28-34. 
3. Ghosn M, Kourie HR, El Rassy E, eEt al. Optimum chemotherapy for the  
management of advanced biliary tract cancer. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Apr 14;21(14):4121-5. 
4. Subbiah IM, Subbiah V, Tsimberidou AM, et al. Targeted therapy of advanced gallbladder cancer and cholangiocarcinoma with aggressive biology: eliciting early response signals from phase 1 trials. Oncotarget. 2013 Jan 27;4(1):153-62. 
5. Yang X, Wang W, Wang C, et al. Characterization of EGFR family gene aberrations in cholangiocarcinoma. Oncol Rep. 2014 Aug;32(2):700-8. 
6. Hynes NE, Stern DF. The biology of erbB -2/neu/H ER-2 and its role in cancer. 
Biochimicaetbiophysicaacta.1994;1198(2-3):165-184. 
7. Klapper LN, Kirschbaum MH, Sela M, Yarden Y. Biochemical and clinical implications of the ErbB/HER signaling network of growth factor receptors. Adv ances in Ccancer Rresearch.  2000;77:25-79. 
8. Salomon DS, Brandt R, Ciardiello F, Normanno N. Epidermal growth factor -related 
peptides and their receptors in human malignancies. Critical Rreviews in Ooncol ogy/Hhematology. 1995;19(3):183-232. 
9. Geynisman DM, Catenacci DV. Toward personal ized treatment of advanced biliary 
tract cancers. Discov Med. 2012 Jul;14(74):41-57. 
10. Investigator’s Brochure Varlitinib (ASLAN001). Version 11, dated 11 Feb 2017. 
11. Geyer CE, Forster J, Lindquist D, et al. Lapatinib plus capecitabine for HER2-positive advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(26):2733-2743. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa064320. 
12. XELODA
® (capecitabine) prescribing information leaflet. 
13. Patt YZ, Hassan MM, Aguayo A, et al. Oral capecitabine for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma, cholangiocarcinoma, and gallbladder carcinoma. Cancer. 2004;101(3):578-586. doi:10.1002/cncr.20368. 
14. FDA Drug Development and Drug Interactions: Table of Substrates, Inhibitors and Inducers (accessed 8 th March 2017): https://www.fda.gov/drugs/developmentapprovalprocess/developmentresources/druginteractionslabeling/ucm093664.htm. 
15. Hochberg, Y. A Sharper Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of significance. Biometrika. 1988;75: 800-802. 
16. Mehta CR, Patel NR, Gray R. Computing an exact confidence interval for the common odds ratio in several contingency tables. Journal of the American Statistical Assoc.iation 1985;80:969 -973. 
17. Emerson JD. Combining estimates of the odds ratio: the state of the art. Statistical Methods in Medicadl Res.earch 1994;3:157-178. 
18. Zelen M. The analysis  of several 2x2 contingency tables. Biometrika. 1971;58:129-
137. 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  125 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  19. Breslow, NE. Covariance aAnalysis of cCensored sSurvival dData. Biometrics. 
1974; 30:89-–99. 
20. Berry G, Kitchin RM, Mock PA. A comparison of two simple hazard ratio estimators based on the logrank test. Statistics in Med.icine 1921091; 10:749-755. 
21. Collett D. Modelling Survival Data in Medical Research. 2nd ed. Boca Raton (FL): Chapman & Hall/CRC; 2003. 
22. Sellke, T,. and Siegmund, D. Sequential analysis of the proportional hazards model. Biometrika  1983;70: 315-26.326, 1983 
23. Gail M, Simon R. Testing for qualitative interactions between treatment effects and patient subsets. Biometrics 1985;41:361-72. 
24. Lee SY, Kim HS, Choi YJ, et al. A prognostic index to identify patients with intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma who could benefit from gemcitabine plus cisplatin. Am J Ther. 2016;23(6):e1449-e1455. 
25. Waghray A, Sobotka A, Marrero CR et al. Serum albumin predicts survival in patients with hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf). 2017;5(1):62-66. 
26. Garrison RN, Kaelin LD, Galloway RH, and Heuser LS. Malignant ascites. Clinical and experimental observations. Ann Surg. 1986;203(6):644-51. 
27. Saif MW, Siddiqui IA, and Sohail MA. Management of ascites due to gastrointestinal malignancy. Ann Saudi Med. 2009; 29(5): 369–377. 
28. Ayantunde AA and Parsons SL. Pattern and prognostic factors in patients with malignant ascites: a retrospective study. Ann Oncol. 2007;18(5):945-9.  
29. Weber SM, DeMatteo RP, Fong Y, et al. Staging laparoscopy in patients with extrahepatic bi liary carcinoma. Analysis of 100 patients. Ann Surg. 
2002;235(3):392-9  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  126 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  14 APPENDICES  
14.1 RECIST Criteria  
Response and progression will be evaluated in this study using the new international 
criteria proposed by the revised Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) guideline (version 1.1) [Eur J Ca 45:228- 247, 2009]. Changes in the largest diameter  
(unidimensional measurement) of the tumor lesions and the shortest diameter in the case of malignant lymph nodes are used in the RECIST criteria.   A sum of the diameters (longest for non- nodal lesions, short axis for nodal lesions) for all 
target lesions  will be calculated and reported as the baseline sum diameters. If lymph 
nodes are to be included in the sum, then as noted above, only the short axis is added into the sum. The baseline sum diameters will be used as reference to further characterize any 
objective tumor regression in the measurable dimension of the disease. 
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  127 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  14.2 ECOG Performance Scale 
Grade  Descriptions  
0 Normal activity. Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease 
performance without restriction.  
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory. Restricted  in physically strenuous 
activity, but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or 
sedentary nature ( e.g., light housework, office work).  
2 In bed < 50% of the time. Ambulatory and capable of all self- care, 
but unable to carry out any work activities. Up and about more than 
50% of waking hours.  
3 In bed > 50% of the time. Capable of only limited self- care, 
confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking hours.  
4 100% bedridden. Completely disabled. Cannot carry on any self-
care. Totally confined to bed or chair.  
5 Dead.  
  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  128 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  14.3 Prohibited Concomitant Medication/Therapy  
Category  Wash -out Period  Examples of prohibited 
concomitant medication  
*included but not 
limited to:  
Strong CYP3A4 
Inhibitors 21 days before first dose of  
study medication  Clarithromycin,  
Darunavir,  
Indinavir,  Itraconazole,  
Ketoconazole,  Lopinavir,  Nefazodone,  Nelfinavir,  Ritonavir,  Saquinavir,  Telithromycin,  
Tipranavir,  
Grapefruit juice  
Proton Pump Inhibitors  Not Applicable  Esomeprazole, 
Lansoprazole,  
Omeprazole, Pantoprazole, 
Rabeprazole  
H2 antagonist  Can only be taken 3 hours 
after investigational product Cimetidine,  
Famotidine,  
Nizatidine,  
Ranitidine  
Any other investigational 
Product/Device 14 days before first dose of 
study medication   
Anti-emetic drugs  with 
QT prolongation effects Safety Lead -In (Cycle 1 Day 
1 to Cycle 2 Day 1) 
Part 1 (Cycle 1 Day 1 to 
Cycle 2 Day 1)  Metoclopramide,  
Dolasetron, Granisetron, 
Ondansetron  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  129 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  14.4 Use with Caution: Drugs Associated with Torsa de de Pointes and QT 
Prolongation 
 
Generic Name  Brand Names 
(Partial List)  Drug Class  Therapeutic Use  
Amiodarone  Cordarone, 
Pacerone, 
Nexterone Antiarrhythmic  Abnormal heart rhythm  
Anagrelide  Agrylin, Xagrid  Phosphodiester
ase 3 inhibitor  Thrombocythemia  
Arsenic 
trioxide  Trisenox  Anticancer  Cancer (leukemia)  
Astemizole 
(Removed from 
Market)  Hismanal  Antihistamine  Allergic rhinitis  
Azithromycin  Zithromax, Zmax  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Bepridil 
(Removed from 
Market)  Vascor  Antianginal  Angina Pectoris (heart pain)  
Chloroquine  Aralen  Antimalarial  Malaria  
Chlorpromazin
e Thorazine, 
Largactil, 
Megaphen  Antipsychotic / 
Antiemetic  Schizophrenia, nausea, many 
others 
Cilostazol  Pletal  Phosphodiester
ase 3 inhibitor  Intermittent claudication  
Ciprofloxacin  Cipro, Cipro -XR, 
Neofloxin  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Cisapride 
(Removed from 
Market)  Propulsid  GI stimulant  Increase GI motility  
Citalopram  Celexa, Cipramil  Antidepressant, 
SSRI  Depression  
Clarithromycin  Biaxin, Prevpac  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Cocaine  Cocaine  Local 
anesthetic  Anesthesia (topical)  
Disopyramide  Norpace  Antiarrhythmic  Abnormal heart rhythm  
Dofetilide  Tikosyn  Antiarrhythmic  Abnormal heart rhythm  
Domperidone  Motilium, 
Motillium, Motinorm Costi, 
Nomit  Antinausea  Nausea, vomiting  
Donepezil  Aricept  Cholinesterase 
inhibitor  Dementia (Alzheimer's 
Disease)  
Dronedarone  Multaq  Antiarrhythmic  Abnormal heart rhythm  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  130 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Generic Name  Brand Names 
(Partial List)  Drug Class  Therapeutic Use  
Droperidol  Inapsine, 
Droleptan, 
Dridol, Xomolix  Antipsychotic / 
Antiemetic  Anesthesia (adjunct), nausea  
Erythromycin  E.E.S., 
Robimycin, 
EMycin, Erymax, Ery-Tab, Eryc 
Ranbaxy, Erypar, Eryped, Erythrocin Stearate Filmtab, Erythrocot, E-Base, Erythroped, Ilosone, MY -E, 
Pediamycin, Zineryt, Abboticin, Abboticin- ES, 
Erycin, PCE Dispertab, Stiemycine, 
Acnasol, Tiloryth  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection, increase 
GI motility  
Escitalopram  Cipralex, 
Lexapro, Nexito, Anxiset -E 
(India), Exodus (Brazil), Esto (Israel), Seroplex, Elicea, Lexamil, Lexam, Entact (Greece), Losita (Bangladesh), Reposil (Chile), Animaxen (Colombia), Esitalo (Australia), Lexamil (South Africa)  
  
 Antidepressant, 
SSRI  Depression (major), anxiety 
disorders 
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  131 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Generic Name  Brand Names 
(Partial List)  Drug Class  Therapeutic Use  
Flecainide  Tambocor, 
Almarytm, 
Apocard, Ecrinal, 
Flécaine  Antiarrhythmic  Abnormal heart rhythm  
Fluconazole  Diflucan, Trican  Antifungal  Fungal infection  
Gatifloxacin 
(Removed from 
Market)  Tequin  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Grepafloxacin 
(Removed from 
Market)  Raxar  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Halofantrine  Halfan  Antimalarial  Malaria  
Haloperidol  Haldol (US & 
UK), Aloperidin, Bioperidolo, Brotopon, Dozic, Duraperidol (Germany), Einalon S, Eukystol, Halosten, Keselan, Linton, Peluces, Serenace, Serenase, 
Sigaperidol  Antipsychotic  Schizophrenia, agitation  
Ibogaine (Only 
on Non US 
Market)  None  Psychedelic  Narcotic addiction, unproven  
Ibutilide  Corvert  Antiarrhythmic  Abnormal heart rhythm  
Levofloxacin  Levaquin, 
Tavanic  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Levomepromaz
ine (Only on Non US 
Market)  Nosinan, 
Nozinan, Levoprome Antipsychotic  Schizophrenia  
Levomethadyl 
acetate (Removed from Market)  
  
 Orlaam  Opioid agonist  Narcotic dependence  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  132 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Generic Name  Brand Names 
(Partial List)  Drug Class  Therapeutic Use  
Levosulpiride 
(Only on Non 
US Market)  Lesuride,  
Levazeo,  Enliva 
(with 
rabeprazole)  Antipsychotic  Schizophrenia  
Mesoridazine 
(Removed from 
Market)  Serentil  Antipsychotic  Schizophrenia  
Methadone  Dolophine, 
Symoron, Amidone, Methadose, Physeptone, 
Heptadon  Opioid agonist  Narcotic dependence, pain  
Moxifloxacin  Avelox, Avalox, 
Avelon  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Ondansetron  Zofran, Anset, 
Ondemet, Zuplenz, Emetron, Ondavell, Emeset, Ondisolv, 
Setronax  Antiemetic  Nausea, vomiting  
Oxaliplatin  Eloxatin  Antineoplastic 
Agent  Cancer  
Papaverine HCl 
(Intra -
coronary)  none  Vasodilator, 
Coronary Diagnostic adjunct  
Pentamidine  Pentam  Antifungal  Fungal infection 
(Pneumocystis pneumonia)  
Pimozide  Orap  Antipsychotic  Tourette's Disorder  
Probucol 
(Removed from 
Market)  Lorelco  Antilipemic  Hypercholesterolemia  
Procainamide  Pronestyl, Procan  Antiarrhythmic  Abnormal heart rhythm  
Propofol  Diprivan,  
Propoven  Anesthetic, 
general  Anesthesia  
Quinidine  Quinaglute, 
Duraquin, Quinact, Quinidex, Cin-Quin, Quinora 
 Antiarrhythmic  Abnormal heart rhythm  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  133 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved   
  
  Generic Name  Brand Names 
(Partial List)  Drug Class  Therapeutic Use  
Roxithromycin 
(Only on Non 
US Market)  Rulide, Xthrocin, 
Roxl-150, Roxo, Surlid, Biaxsig, Roxar, Roximycinv, Roxomycin, Rulid, Tirabicin, 
Coroxin  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Sevoflurane  Ulane, Sojourn  Anesthetic, 
general  Anesthesia  
Sotalol  Betapace, 
Sotalex, Sotacor  Antiarrhythmic  Abnormal heart rhythm  
Sparfloxacin 
(Removed from 
Market)  Zagam  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Sulpiride (Only 
on Non US Market)  Dogmatil, 
Dolmatil, Eglonyl, Espiride, Modal, 
Sulpor  Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia  
Sultopride 
(Only on Non 
US Market)  Barnetil,  
Barnotil,  Topral Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia  
Terfenadine 
(Removed from 
Market)  Seldane  Antihi stamine  Allergic rhinitis  
Terlipressin 
(Only on Non US Market)  Teripress,  
Glypressin, Terlipin,  
Remestyp,  Tresil,  
Teriss and others  Vasoconstricto
r Septic shock  
Terodiline 
(Only on Non 
US Market)  Micturin,  Mictrol 
(not bethanechol) Muscle 
relaxant  Bladder spasm  
Thioridazine  Mellaril, 
Novoridazine, 
Thioril  Antipsychotic  Schizophrenia  
Vandetanib  Caprelsa  Anticancer  Cancer (thyroid)  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  134 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  14.5 Drugs that Prolong the QTc and are Not Clearly Associated with Torsade de 
Pointes  
Generic Name  Brand Names 
(Partial List)  Drug Class  Therapeutic Use  
Alfuzosin  Uroxatral  Alpha1 -blocker  Benign prostatic hyperplasia  
Apomorphine  Apokyn, Ixense, 
Spontane, Uprima  Dopamine agonist  Parkinson's disease  
Aripiprazole  Abilify, Aripiprex  Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia, depression 
(adjunct)  
Artenimol+piperaq
uine Eurartesim  Antimalarial  Malaria  
Asenapine  Saphris, Sycrest  Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia  
Atomoxetine  Strattera  Norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitor  ADHD  
Bedaquiline  Sirturo  Antibiotic  Tuberculosis, Multi -drug 
resistant  
Buprenorphine  Butrans,  Belbuca,   
Bunavail,  Buprenex,  
Suboxone,  Zubsolv  Opioid receptor 
modulator Narcotic addiction and pain  
Clomipramine  Anafranil  Antidepressant, 
Tricyclic  Depression  
Clozapine  Clozaril, Fazaclo,  
Versacloz  Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia  
Cyamemazine 
(cyamepromazine) 
(Only on Non US 
Market)  Tercian  Antipsychotic  Schizophrenia, sedation  
Delamanid (Only 
on Non US 
Market)  Deltyba  Antibiotic  Tuberculosis, drug resistant  
Desipramine  Pertofrane,  
Norpramine  Antidepressant, 
Tricyclic  Depression  
Dexmedetomidine  Precedex,  Dexdor,  
Dexdomitor  Sedative  Sedation  
Dolasetron  Anzemet  Antiemetic  Nausea, vomiting  
Efavirenz  Sustiva and others  Antiretroviral  HIV 
Ezogabine 
(Retigabine)  Potiga,  Trobalt  Anticonvulsant  Seizures, Partial  
Famotidine  Pepcid, Fluxid, 
Quamatel  H2-receptor 
antagonist  Gastric hyperacidity, GERD  
Felbamate  Felbatol  Anticonvulsant  Epilepsy  
Fingolimod  Gilenya  Sphingosine 
phospate receptor 
modulator 
 Multiple Sclerosis  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  135 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  Generic Name  Brand Names 
(Partial List)  Drug Class  Therapeutic Use  
Flupentixol (Only 
on Non US 
Market)  Depixol, Fluanxol  Dopamine 2 and 
5HT2a antagonist Schizophrenia  
Foscarnet  Foscavir  Antiviral  Viral infection (HIV/AIDS)  
Gemifloxacin  Factive  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Granisetron  Kytril,  Sancuso, 
Granisol  Antiemetic  Nausea, vomiting  
Hydrocodone - ER Hysingla™ ER,  
Zohydro ER  Analgesic  Pain, severe  
Iloperidone  Fanapt, Fanapta, 
Zomaril  Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia  
Imipramine 
(melipramine)  Tofranil  Antidepressant, 
Tricyclic  Depression  
Isradipine  Dynacirc  Antihypertensive  Hypertension  
Lithium  Eskalith, Lithobid  Antimania  Bipolar disorder  
Melperone (Only 
on Non US 
Market)  Bunil, Buronil, 
Eunerpan Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia  
Mifepristone  Korlym, Mifeprex  Progesterone 
antagonist  Pregnancy termination  
Mirabegron  Myrbetriq  Beta3 adrenergic 
antagonist  Bladder spasm  
Mirtazapine  Remeron  Antidepressant, 
Tetracyclic  Depression  
Moexipril/HCTZ  Uniretic, Univasc  Antihypertensive  Hypertension  
Nicardipine  Cardene  Antihypertensive  Hypertension  
Norfloxacin  Noroxin, Ambigram  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Nortriptyline  Pamelor, Sensoval, 
Aventyl, Norpress, 
Allegron, Noritren, 
Nortrilen  Antidepressant, 
Tricyclic  Depression  
Ofloxacin  Floxin  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Paliperidone  Invega, Xepilon  Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia  
Pasireotide  Signifor  Somatostatin 
analog  Cushings Disease  
Perphenazine  Trilafon,   
Etrafon/Triavil,  
Decentan  Antipsychotic  Schizophrenia  
Pilsicainide (Only 
on Non US 
Market)  
 
 Sunrythm  Anti-arrhythmic  Arrhythmia  
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  136 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved   
 Generic Name  Brand Names 
(Partial List)  Drug Class  Therapeutic Use  
Pipamperone (Only 
on Non US 
Market)  Dipiperon (E.U),  
Propitan (Japan),  Dipiperal,  Piperonil,  
Piperonyl  Antipsychotic  Schizophrenia  
Promethazine  Phenergan  Antipsychotic / 
Antiemetic  Nausea, vomiting  
Prothipendyl (Only 
on Non US Market)  Dominal,  
Largophren,  Timoval,  Timovan,  
Tumovan  Antipsychotic  Schizophrenia  
Rilpivirine  Edurant, Complera, 
Eviplera  Antiviral  Viral infection (HIV/AIDS)  
Risperidone  Risperdal  Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia  
Saquinavir  Invirase(combo)  Antiviral  Viral infection (HIV/AIDS)  
Sertindole (Only 
on Non US 
Market)  Serdolect, Serlect  Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia,  anxiety  
Solifenacin  VESIcare  Muscle relaxant  Bladder spasm  
Tacrolimus  Prograf, Prograf, 
Advagraf, Protopic  Immunosuppressa
nt Immune suppression  
Telavancin  Vibativ  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Telithromycin  Ketek  Antibiotic  Bacterial infection  
Tetrabenazine  Nitoman, Xenazine  Monoamine 
Transporter 
Inhibitor  Chorea (Huntington's disease)  
Tiapride (Only on 
Non US Market)  Tiapridal,  Italprid,  
Sereprile,  Tialaread,  Tiaryl,  Tiaprim,  
Tiaprizal,  Sereprid,  
Tiapridex  Selective D2, D3 
dopamine 
antagonist Alcoholism, withdrawal  
Tizanidine  Zanaflex, Sirdalud  Muscle relaxant  Muscle spasticity  
Tolterodine  Detrol, Detrusitol  Muscle relaxant  Bladder spasm  
Trimipramine  Surmontil, 
Rhotrimine, Stangyl  Antidepressant, 
Tricyclic  Depression  
Tropisetron (Only 
on Non US 
Market)  Navoban,  Setrovel  Antiemetic  Nausea, vomiting  
Venlafaxine  Effexor, Efexor  Antidepressant, 
SNRI  Depression  
Zotepine (Only on 
Non US Market)  Losizopilon,  
Lodopin,  Setous and 
Zoleptil  Antipsychotic, 
atypical  Schizophrenia  
AS LAN Pham1aceuticals Pte. Ltd. 
ASLANOOl-009 Version 6.0 
14.6 Protocol Approval Signatures 13Aug2019 
Page 137 of 140 
Abbreviated Protocol Treatment Oppo1iunity with Varlitinib in Biliary Tract Cancer 
Title: (TreeTopp) 
Protocol Title: 
Protocol Number: 
Protocol Version 
Number and Date: A multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of 
varlitinib plus capecitabine versus placebo plus capecitabine in patients 
with advanced or metastatic biliary tract cancer as second-line systemic 
therapy 
ASLANOOJ-009 
Version 6.0, 13 Aug 2019 
This study will be conducted in compliance with the clinical study protocol (and 
amendments), the International Council on Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines for current 
Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable regulatory requirements. 
Sponsor Signatory 
 
Head ofR&D 
ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd. 
 
Acting CMO 
ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd. Signature 
Date 
Signature 
Date 
Confidential © 20 I 8 AS LAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., al I rights reserved 

 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  138 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  14.7 Investigator Signature Page 
Abbreviated Protocol 
Title:  Treatment Opportunity with Varlitinib in Biliary Tract Cancer 
(TreeTopp)  
Protocol Title:  A multicenter, double -blind, randomized, placebo -controlled study of 
varlitinib plus capecitabine versus placebo plus capecitabine in patients  
with advanced or metastatic biliary tract cancer as  second -line systemic 
therapy  
Protocol Number:  ASLAN001 -009 
Protocol Version 
Number and Date:  Version  6.0, 13 Aug 2019  
Confidentiality and GCP Compliance Statement  
I, the undersigned, have reviewed this protocol  (and amendments) , including appendices , 
and I will conduct the study as described in compliance with this protocol  (and 
amendments) , GCP, and relevant ICH g uidelines. 
Once the protocol has been approved by the IEC/IRB, I will not modify this protocol 
without obtaining prior approval of ASLAN  and of the IEC/IRB. I will submit the 
protocol amendments and/or any ICF modifications to ASLAN  and IEC/IRB, and 
approval will be obtained before any amendments are implemented.  
I understand that all information obtained during the conduct of the study with regard to 
the patient s’ state of health will be regarded as confidential . No patient s’ names will be 
disclosed . All patient s will be identified by assigned numbers on all CRF s, laboratory 
samples , or source documents forwarded to the sponsor . Clinical information may be 
reviewed by the sponsor or its agents or regulatory agencies . Agreement must be obtained 
from the patient  before disclosure of patient  information to a third party. 
Information developed in this clinical study may be disclosed by  ASLAN 
Pharmaceuticals  Pte. Ltd. , to other clinical Investigators,  regulatory agencies, or other 
health authority or g overnment agencies as required.  
   
Investigator Signature   Date  
   
Printed Name    
   
Institution    
 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  139 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  14.8 Study Personnel  
14.8.1 Sponsor Personnel  
ASLAN Medical Vice President  
Name:   
Title:  VP Medical  
Address:  ASLAN Pharmaceuticals  Pte. Ltd.  
Room 3202, 32F, 333 Keelung Road 
Section 1 Taipei  110 
Taiwan  
Telephone No.:   
 
ASLAN C
linical Operations Vice President  
Name:   
Title:  VP Clinical Operations  
Address:  ASLAN Pharmaceuticals  Pte. Ltd.  
83 Clemenceau Avenue  
#12-03 UE Square 
Singapore 239920  
Telephone No.:   
 
  

 
ASLAN  Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd.   13 Aug 2019  
ASLAN001 -009 Version  6.0 Page  140 of 140  
 
Confidential © 2018 ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Pte. Ltd., all rights reserved  14.8.2 Clinical Research Organization Personnel  
Asia and Europe  
Name:   
Title:  
 
Company:  Project Manager  
 
Syneos Health (Formerly known as INC Research ) 
 
Address:  21 Biopolis Road  
#03-03 North Tower 
Nucleos  
Singapore 138567  
Telephone No.:   
 
United States  
Name:   
Title:  
 
Company:  Project Manager  
 
BIORASI, LLC  
 
Address:  One Turnberry Place  
19495 Biscayne Blvd.  
Suite #900,  Aventura 
Florida 33180  
USA  
Telephone No.:   
 Japan 
Name:   
Title:  
 
Company:  Project Manager  
 
CMIC Co.,Ltd.   
 
Address:  Hamamatsucho Building  
1-1-1 Shibaura, Minato-ku 
Tokyo 105 -0023 
Japan  
Telephone No.:   
 
