 
 
 
 
 
 
March 22, 2022  
 
Clinicaltrials.gov  
 
To Whom  it May Concern:  
 
Following please find the final protocol  for the study titled “Randomized, Double -Blind, Sham -
Controlled, Prospective, Multi -Center Pilot Study to Evaluate the Safety and Effectiveness of 
Duodenal Mucosal Resurfacing Using the Revita™ System in the Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes”, 
version date 9Ju l2020, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED].  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Sarah Hackett  
Sr. Director of Clinical Operations  
Fractyl Health  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fractyl Health  Inc. I 17 Hartwell Street  I Lexington, MA  02421
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 819B4C9E-9E17-4D80-A94F-9C59AD7DA034

 
 Randomized, Double-Blind, Sham-Controlled, 
Prospective, Multi-Center Pilot Study to Evaluate 
the Safety and Effectiveness of Duodenal Mucosal 
Resurfacing Using the Revita™ System in the 
Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes 
 
The Revita™ US Pilot Study 
 
Protocol Number: C-40000  
   
Sponsor:  
Fractyl Laboratories 
17 Hartwell Avenue 
Lexington MA 02421 
 
 
 
  
Version 3.0   
Date 9 July,2020 
 
 
C o n f i d e n t i a l          D o  N o t  C o p y  
 
This investigational protocol contains confidential information for use by the principal investigators and their designated 
representatives, including IRBs and/or Ethics Committees, participating in this clinical investigation. It should be held 
confidential and maintained in a secure location. It should not be copied or made available for review by any unauthorized person or firm. 
  

 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 2 of 96 Sponsor Protocol Approval Page 
  
STUDY TITLE:  Randomized, Double-Blind, Sham-Controlled, 
Prospective, Multi-Center P ilot Study to Evaluate the 
Safety and Effectiveness of Duodenal Mucosal 
Resurfacing Using the Revita™ System in the 
Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes  
 
The Revita™ US Pilot Stud y  
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  C-40000   
VERSION NUMBER:  3.0  
 
 
  
We, the undersigned, have read and approve the protocol spec ified above and agree on 
its content. 
 Sarah Hackett, BS 
Director of Clinica l Operations  
Fractyl Laboratories 
USA 
    
Date: 
Sanobar Parkar, MD, MPH 
Medical Director, Clinical Development 
Fractyl Laboratories 
USA 
  
Date: 
Kelly White, PharmD 
Executive Director, Clinical 
Development 
Fractyl Laboratories 
USA 
  
Date: 
Juan Carlos Lopez-Talavera, MD, PhD 
Chief Medical Officer 
Fractyl Laboratories 
USA 
 
   
Date: 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 3 of 96 Investigator Protocol Approval Page 
 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Sham-Controlled,  Prospective, Multi-Center Pilot 
Study to Evaluate the Safety and Eff ectiveness of Duodenal Mucosal Resurfacing 
Using the Revita™ System in th e Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes 
 
The Revita™ US Pilot Study 
 
C-40000 
 
Protocol Version 3.0 
 
I hereby agree to participate in this evaluat ion of the Fractyl Re vita™ System Sponsored 
by Fractyl Laboratories, Inc. (here in after “Study Sponso r”).  I agree to conduct this 
investigation according to the requirements of  the protocol provided by the Study Sponsor 
in accordance with applicable local regulat ions, and in accordance with the conditions 
imposed by the reviewing Institutional Review Board (IRB).  I agree to supervise all use 
of the investigational devic es and to ensure appropriate informed consent is obtained 
from all subjects prior to inclusion in this study.  I understand that this invest igation will be monitored by the Study Sponsor and/or a 
designee employed by the Study Sponsor. This  monitoring will involve periodic inspection 
of my investigational site and ongoing review of  the data that are subm itted by me to the 
Study Sponsor.    I am aware that the Study Sponsor reserves t he right to discontinue this investigation at 
any time.  I understand this study protocol and trial re sults are confidential, and I agree not to 
disclose any such information to any person other than a represent ative of the Study 
Sponsor, the IRB/EC, or regul atory authorities withou t the prior writt en consent of the 
Study Sponsor.  Accepted by:    ________________________ _________       _________________________ 
Principal Investigator      Date   __________________ __________________ __________________ ________ 
Printed Name  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 4 of 96 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
1 INTRODUCT ION ........................................................................................ 22  
1.1 Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) 22  
1.2 Existing Treatment Options 22  
1.3 Summary of Limitations of Current Therapies 24  
1.4 Emerging Metabolic Role in the Gut 25  
1.5 Fractyl RevitaTM System 26  
1.6 DMR Procedure 27  
1.7 Clinical Experience 28  
1.8 Risk Analysis 29  
2 STUDY DES IGN ......................................................................................... 33  
2.1 Overview 33  
2.2 Number of Study Sites and Subjects 34  
2.3 Intended Use 34  
2.4 Study Objectives 34  
2.5 Study Workflow 35  
2.6 Study Duration 36  
2.7 Study Endpoints 36  
2.8 Blinding 37  
2.9 Control of Bias and Validity 37  
3 STUDY POPULATION ................................................................................ 38  
3.1 Subject Selection 38  
3.2 Duration of Subject Participation 38  
4 SCREENING PERIOD AND EL IGIBILITY CR ITERIA................................. 39  
4.1 Selection Criteria 39  
5 STUDY VISI TS ........................................................................................... 43  
5.1 Visit 1: Screening (Pre-Medication Run-In) 43  
5.2 Visit 2: Baseline (Pos t Medication Run-In) 44  
5.3 Visit 3: Procedure (within 21 days from Visit 2) 46  
5.4 Visit 4: Day 7 Telephone Call (+/-2 days) 50  
5.5 Visit 5: Day 14 Telephone Call (+/-2 days) 50  
5.6 Visit 6: Week 4 (Day 28) Clinic Visit (+/- 7 days) 51  
5.7 Visit 7: Week 8 (Day 56) Telephone Call (+/- 2 days) 52  
5.8 Visit 8: Week 12 (Day 84) Clinic Visit (+/- 7 days) 53  
5.9 Visit 9: Week 15 (Day 105) Telephone Call (+/- 2 days) 54  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 5 of 96 5.10 Visit 10: Week 18 (Day 126) Clinic Visit (+/- 7 days) 54  
5.11 Visit 11: Week 21 (Day 147) Telephone Call (+/- 2 days) 55  
5.12 Visit 12: Week 24 (Day 168) Clinic Visit (+/- 7days) 56  
5.13 Visit 3C: Crossover to DMR Vi sit (+21 days from Visit 12) 59  
5.14 COVID-19 Exceptions 59  
5.15 Unscheduled Visits 59  
5.16 Subject Withdrawal & Early Termination 59  
6 STUDY PROCEDURES & ASSESSMEN TS .............................................. 60  
6.1 Demographics/Medical History/Physical Exam 60  
6.2 Body Weight, Blood Pressure & Targeted Physical Exam 61  
6.3 Blood Analysis 61  
6.4 Electrocardiogram 62  
6.5 Renal Function 62  
6.6 MRE 62  
6.7 Lifestyle Counseling 63  
6.8 SF-36 Quality of Li fe Questionnaire 63  
6.9 PROMIS® (Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System) 63  
6.10 Subject Self-Monitoring of Blood Gl ucose (SMBG) and Glycemia Diary 63  
6.11 Management of Glycemia and Antidiabetic Medication 64  
6.12 Concomitant Medications 69  
7 STUDY MANAGE MENT ............................................................................. 69  
7.1 Regulatory Compliance 69  
7.2 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review 69  
7.3 Study Records 70  
7.4 Study Reports 71  
7.5 Device Accountability 73  
7.6 Protocol Deviations 73  
7.7 Investigational Site Termination 73  
7.8 Adverse Event Reporting 73  
7.9 Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) 80  
7.10 Clinical Events Committee (A djudication Committee) 81  
8 DATA MANAGEMENT AND STAT ISTICAL CONSID ERATIONS .................. 82  
8.1 82 
7.11 Data Collection and Quality Control 82  
8.1.1  82 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 6 of 96 8.2 Statistical Considerations 84  
9       REFERENC ES ......................................................................................... 89  
APPENDIX 1: SCHEDULE OF ASSESSMENTS – DM R CASES ..................... 92  
APPENDIX 2: SCHEDULE OF ASSE SSMENTS – SHAM  CASES................... 94  
APPENDIX 3: MAXIMUM APPROVED DAILY DOSE OF NON-INSULIN 
GLUCOSE LOWERING  AGENTS  .............................................................. 96  
 
     
  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 7 of 96 Protocol Version 3.0 Rationale for Changes 
Section Chan ge Rationale for Chan ge 
2.1  Subject enrollement # of changes from 
18 to 9  Amended to reflect actual number of 
subjects enrolled. 
2.1 Both treatment arms will be followed up 
for a total of 48 weeks to 24 weeks  Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
2.1 Telephone visits 30 and 42 removed  
and in-clinic visits 36 and 48 post 
procedure visits removed.  Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
2.2 Enrollement # changed from 18 to 9  Amended to reflect actual number of 
subjects enrolled. 
2.4  Removed study objective to assess the 
effect of DMR on glycemic endpoint 48 weeks after the randomized procedure 
for durabilit
y of effect determination  Amended study objective to eliminate 48 
week glycemic endpoint in DMR arm. 
2.7.1 Removed secondary endpoint proportion 
of DMR-treated subjects with an A1c improvement from baseline at 24 weeks 
that maintain an A1c improvement at 48 
weeks   Eliminated 48 week secondary 
endpoints in DMR arm. 
2.7.1 Removed additional endpoint interest 
A1c change from baseline to Week 48 
by visit over time, DMR only 
 Eliminated 48 week additional endpoints 
of interest in DMR arm. 
2.7.1 Removed additional endpoint interest 
FPG change from baseline to Week 48 
by visit over time, DMR only 
 Eliminated 48 week additional endpoints 
of interest in DMR arm. 
2.7.1 Removed additional endpoint interest 
UACR change from baseline to Week 48  
by visit over time, DMR only  
 Eliminated 48 week additional endpoints 
of interest in DMR arm. 
2.7.1 Removed additional endpoint interest 
ALT and AST change from baseline to 
Week 48 b y visit over time, DMR onl y Eliminated 48 week additional endpoints 
of interest in DMR arm. 
3.1 Subject enrollement # of changes from 
18 to 9 Amended to reflect actual number of 
subjects enrolled. 
3.2  Updated the total anticipated duration of 
subject participation in the clinical study 
for a subject randomized to DMR will be up to a maximum of 33 weeks from 57 
weeks (maximum of 6 weeks between 
Screening and Baseline, maximum of 3 weeks between Baseline and 
Procedure, and 24 weeks from 48 
weeks of follow up post procedure
). Revised total study duration to reflect 
the elimination of follow ups out to Week 
48 for DMR arm. 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 8 of 96 Section Chan ge Rationale for Chan ge 
5.12.11 Added following language under AE for 
Week 24 visit “Subjects with an ongoing 
possibly and probably device and 
procedure related AEs reported at week 24 follow up visit will be followed until 
resolution. This will also also include 
AEs (signs and symptoms) reported during 24 week follow up period but 
without a definitive diagnosis and/or 
attribution of the cause at this visit” This language is added to ensure all 
ongoing AEs or those without diagnosis 
or causality will be followed until 
resolution for subject safety reason. 
5.14  Added COVID-19 Expectations for the 
study  Added language around COVID-19 
exceptions to endpoint assessments and 
crossover procedures.   
5.14 Removed Visit 13 Week 30 telelphone 
call  Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
5.15 Removed Visit 14 Week 36 In Clinic Visit  Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
5.16 Removed Visit 15 Week 42 telelphone 
call Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
5.17 Removed Visit 16 Week 48 In Clinic Visit Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
6.7  Subjects will be provided lifestyle 
counselin g to Week 24 (visit 12 )  Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
6.8  SF-36 Quality of Life Questionnaire 
assessment removed at Week 48 visit  Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
6.9 PROMIS questionnaire removed at 
Week 48 visit  Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
6.11 Anti Diabetic Regimen will be followed 
through 24 week Visit 12 instead of 
Week 48 Visit 16  Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
6.11.1 Hyperglycemia Management from week 
24 to week 48 will not be followed  Amended for elimination of follow ups 
out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
7.9 Added “All possibly and probably device 
and procedure related AEs reported during 24 weeks follow up will be 
followed until resolution. This will also 
also include resolution of all AEs (signs and symptoms) reported upto 24 weeks 
for which there is not yet a definitive 
diagnosis and/or attribution of cause by the 24 weeks follow up visit”. This is added to ensure safety of all 
subjects with ongoing AE(signs and symptoms) during 24 week followup or 
without diagnosis or causality at their 
last or week 24 follow up visit. 
7.12.2  Sample size decreased from 18 to 9 
subjects  Amended to reflect actual number of 
subjects enrolled. 
7.12.5 Removed safety population analysis 
through 48 weeks po st-DMR; this will 
include the 48 weeks of the study for 
patients receiving DMR from the start of 
the study. Result s will be presented 
separately for the first 24 weeks and the 
24-48 weeks.   Revised analysis of safety population 
due to elimination of follow ups out to Week 48. 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 9 of 96 Section Chan ge Rationale for Chan ge 
7.12.6 Secondary efficacy endpoint proportion 
of DMR-treated subjects with an A1c 
improvement from baseline at 24 weeks 
that maintain an A1c improvement at 48 weeks    Eliminated 48 week secondary endpoint 
in DMR arm. 
7.12.6 Additional Endpoint of Interest removed 
(i) A1c change from baseline to 
Week 48 by visit over time, DMR only (ii) FPG change from baseline to 
Week 48 by visit over time, DMR only 
(iii) UACR change from baseline to 
Week 48  by visit over time, DMR only  
(iv) ALT and AST change from baseline to Week 48 by visit over time, 
DMR onl
y Eliminated 48 week additional endpoints 
of interest in DMR arm. 
Apprendix 
1  Schedule of Assessments for visit #13 to 
16 removed  Updated scheduled of assessments to 
reflect elimination of follow ups out to Week 48 in DMR arm. 
  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 10 of 96 Protocol Summary 
 
Title: Randomized, Double- Blind, Sham-Controlled, 
Prospective, Multi-Center P ilot Study to Evaluate the 
Safety and Effectiveness of Duodenal Mucosal Resurfacing (DMR) Using the Revita™ System in the Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) 
 
Short Title: The Revita™ US Pilot Study 
 
Protocol ID#: C-40000  
 
Device: The Fractyl Revita™ System is an endoscopic treatment 
consisting of a single catheter and console designed to lift the 
duodenal mucosa with saline followed by controlled circumferential hydrothermal ablation of the mucosa.   
 
Study Objectives: The study objectives are: 
 to assess the safety of the Fractyl Revita™ System for the 
treatment of subjects with  type 2 diabetes (T2D) 
suboptimally controlled on 2 to 3 oral antidiabetic medications (OADs) 
 to assess the effect of Duodenal Mucosal Resurfacing 
(DMR) versus Sham procedu res on glycemic endpoints 
24 weeks after the procedure  
Study Design: Randomized, double-blind sham-controlled prospective 
multicenter clinical investi gation of subjects with T2D 
suboptimally controlled on 2 to 3 OADs, one of which must be metformin. Total post-randomizat ion study duration will be up 
to 48 weeks. 
 
 Up to 6 Study Sites in the US 
 Maximum of 9 enrolled subj ects, with 2:1 randomization 
scheme  
 4 week OAD Run-In Period to assess stability of blood 
glucose control in conjunction with medication compliance and lifestyle (diet, exercise) counseling 
 OADs will be held constant fr om start of Run-In Period 
through Week 24, with protocol  pre-specified treatment 
algorithms for hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia. Note: Subjects on SU medications wi ll be provided with specific 
instructions regarding their medication usage pre- and 
post-DMR/Sham proc edure (See 5.3.1). 
 Following OAD Run-In Period,  subjects will be scheduled 
for an endoscopic evaluation consistin
g of an assessment 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 11 of 96 of the esophagus, stomach,  duodenum and associated 
structures to ensure there are no conditions that would 
exclude the subject from having the index procedure (DMR or Sham).   
 Following confirmation of elig ibility during the endoscopic 
evaluation, subjects will be randomized to receive either the DMR or Sham procedur e, and post-procedure, will 
return for follow-up visits  as per visit schedule. 
 Unblinding will occur at Week 24: 
o Sham treatment arm subjec ts who accept the offer 
of crossover will receive DMR treatment at Week 24 with a 24-week follow-up post-procedure  
o Their antidiabetic m edications will be held 
constant from Week 24 through Week 48 with protocol pre-s pecified treatment 
algorithms for hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia 
o Subjects will continue to receive lifestyle 
(diet, exercise) counseling 
o DMR treatment arm will continue to receive lifestyle 
(diet, exercise) counseling through Week 24.   
o Their antidiabetic medications will be 
managed with a protocol  pre-specified 
rescue treatment algorithm consistent with 
current diabetes standard of care 
 In subjects randomized to the DMR treatment arm, an 
ablation site biopsy will be performed at Week 24  
 A Data Monitoring Commi ttee (DMC) with pertinent 
expertise will monitor the safety of study subjects on an ongoing basis    
 A Clinical Events Committee (CEC) will adjudicate safety 
endpoints, and provide an unbiased assessment of 
adverse event (AE) relatedness and severity  
 
Indication for Use: The Revita™ System is intended to improve glycemic control 
in conjunction with diet and exercise in patients with T2D who  are inadequately controlled with oral antidiabetic medications. 
 
Inclusion Criteria Screening Visit (Pre-Medi cation Run-In, Visit 1) 
1. Men and non-pregnant wom en 28-65 years of age 
2. Diagnosed with T2D fo r at least 3 years  
3. Hemoglobin A1C (A1C) of 7.5 - 9.5% (59 - 80 
mmol/mol) 
 
4. On two to three OADs (metformin plus one or two 
additional OADs
) with two (see note below ) at least at 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 12 of 96 half maximum labeled dose (or highest tolerated) with 
no changes in medication in the 12 weeks prior to the Screening Visit (Visit 1) (Refer to Table 8.3 of the 
American Diabetes Association [ADA] Standard of Medical Care in Diabetes 2018 for the maximum approved daily dose of non-insulin glucose lowering agents.) Note: For subjects on sulfonylurea (SU) 
glucose-lowering drugs for diabetes, the only SUs permitted in the study will be glipizide or glimepiride, and their doses below half maximum labeled dosing will not be an exclusion fo r study entry. Patients 
unwilling to reduce the dose of  SU at the time of the 
DMR procedure as descri bed by protocol will be 
excluded. 
5. Agree to use an additional glucose-lowering treatment 
(eg, liraglutide, other OA D with the exception of 
glyburide) if recommended by the study investigator in 
case of persistent hyperglycemia.   
6. Agree not to donate blood dur ing their participation in 
the study 
7. Able to comply with study requirements and 
understand and sign the Informed Consent Form 
8. Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) must be 
using two acceptable methods of contraception 
throughout the study 
9. Women must not be breastfeeding 
 
Baseline Visit (Post Medi cation Run-In, Visit 2) 
1. WOCBP must have a negativ e urine pregnancy test at 
Baseline Visit 
 
Exclusion Criteria Screening Visit (Pre-Medi cation Run-In, Visit 1) 
1. Diagnosed with Type 1 Diabetes (T1D)  2. Probable insulin production failure, defined as fasting 
C Peptide serum <1 ng/mL (333pmol/l) 
3. History of diabetic keto acidosis or hyperosmolar 
nonketotic coma 
4. Previous use of any types of insulin for >1 month (at 
any time, except for treatm ent of gestational diabetes) 
5. Current use of injectable medications for diabetes 
(insulin, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist [GLP-1RA]) 
6. Current use of glyburide,  a sulfonylurea (SU) glucose-
lowering drug for diabetes.  
7. Hypoglycemia unawareness or  a history of severe 
h
ypoglycemia (more than 1 severe h ypoglycemic 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 13 of 96 event, as defined by need for third-party-assistance, in 
the last year) 
8. Known autoimmune disease, including but not limited 
to celiac disease, or pre- existing symptoms of systemic 
lupus erythematosus, scleroderma or other autoimmune connective tissue disorders 
9. Previous GI surgery that could limit treatment of the 
duodenum such as Bilroth 2, Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass, or other similar procedures or conditions  
10. History of chronic or acute pancreatitis 11. History of diabetic gastroparesis 12. Known active hepatitis or active liver disease  13. Acute gastrointestinal ill ness in the previous 7 days 
14. Known history of irritabl e bowel syndrome, radiation 
enteritis or other inflammato ry bowel disease, such as 
Crohn’s disease 
15. Known history of a structur al or functional disorder of 
the esophagus that may impede passage of the device through the gastrointestinal tr act or increase risk of 
esophageal damage during an endoscopic procedure, 
including Barrett’s esophagus, esophagitis, dysphagia, 
achalasia, stricture/stenos is, esophageal varices, 
esophageal diverticula, esophage al perforation, or any 
other disorder of the esophagus 
16. Known history of a structur al or functional disorder of 
the esophagus, including an y swallowing disorder, 
esophageal chest pain disorder s, or drug refractory 
esophageal reflux symptoms 
17. Known history of a structur al or functional disorder of 
the stomach, including gastric  ulcer, chronic gastritis, 
gastric varices, hiatal hernia (> 2 cm), cancer or any other disorder of the stomach 
18. Known history of chronic symptoms suggestive of a 
structural or functional di sorder of the stomach, 
including any symptoms of chronic upper abdominal pain, chronic nausea, chronic vomiting, chronic dyspepsia or symptoms suggestive of gastroparesis, including post-prandial full ness or pain, post-prandial 
nausea or vomiting or early satiety 
19. Known history of duodenal ulce r, intestinal diverticula 
(diverticulitis), intesti nal varices, intestinal 
stricture/stenosis, small bowel obstruction, or any other 
obstructive disorder of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract 
20. Currently have ongoing symptoms suggestive of 
intermittent small bowel obstr uction, such as recurrent 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 14 of 96 bouts of post-prandial abdominal pain, nausea or 
vomiting 
21. Active H. pylori infection (subjects with active H. pylori 
may continue with the screeni ng process if they are 
treated with an appropriate antibiotic regimen)  
22. History of coagulopathy, upper gastrointestinal 
bleeding conditions such as ulcers, gastric varices, strictures, congenital or  acquired intestinal 
telangiectasia  
23. Current use of anticoagul ation therapy (such as 
warfarin) which cannot be discontinued for 7 days before and 14 days after the procedure  
24. Current use of P2Y12 inhibitors (clopidogrel, pasugrel, 
ticagrelor) which cannot be discontinued for 14 days before and 14 days after the procedure.  
25. Unable to discontinue non- steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) during treatment through 4 weeks following the procedure. Use of low dose aspirin is allowed. 
26. Current use of serotonergic medications (SSRI) 27. Use of systemic glucocorti coids (excluding topical or 
ophthalmic application or inhal ed forms) for more than 
10 consecutive days within 90 days prior to the Screening Visit. 
28. Use of drugs known to affect GI motility (e.g. 
Metoclopramide) 
29. Receiving weight loss medi cations such as Meridia, 
Xenical, or over the count er weight loss medications 
30. Untreated/inadequately treated hypothyroidism, 
defined as an elevated Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) level at Screening; if on thyroid hormone replacement therapy, must be on a stable dose for at 
least 6 weeks prior to Screening 
31. Persistent anemia, defined as Hemoglobin <10 g/dL 
32. Subjects who have do nated blood or received a 
transfusion in the prior 3 months 
33. Subjects with condition s that alter red blood cell 
turnover 
34. Subjects with prosthetic joints   35. Significant cardiovascul ar disease including known 
history of valvular disease,  or myocardial infarction, 
heart failure, transient ischemic attack or stroke within the last 6 months  
36. Moderate or severe chr onic kidney disease (CKD), 
with estimated 
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR ) <45 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 15 of 96 ml/min/1.73m2 (estimated by Modification of Diet in 
Renal Disease [MDRD]) 
37. Known immunocompromised status, including but not 
limited to individual s who have undergone organ 
transplantation, chemothera py or radiotherapy within 
the past 12 months, who have clinically-significant leukopenia, who are positive for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or whose immune status 
makes the subject a poor candidate for clinical trial participation in the opini on of the Investigator 
38. Active systemic infection 39. Active malignancy within the last 5 years (with the 
exception of treated basal cell or treated squamous 
cell carcinoma) 
40. Subjects with a personal or family history of medullary 
thyroid carcinoma 
41. Subjects with Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia syndrome 
type 2 
42. Not a candidate for sur gery or general anesthesia 
43. Active illicit substance abuse or alcoholism 44. Current smoker  45. Participating in another ongoing clinical trial of an 
investigational drug or device 
46. Any other mental or physi cal condition which, in the 
opinion of the Investigator, makes the subject a poor 
candidate for clinical trial participation 
47. Unwilling or unable to perform self-monitoring of blood 
glucose (SMBG), complete the patient diary, or comply 
with study visits and other  study procedures as 
required per protocol  
Baseline Visit (Post Medi cation Run-In, Visit 2) 
1. A1c post run-in phase < 7.5%  (59 mmol/mol) or > 9.5% 
(86 mmol/mol)2. Any seve re hypoglycemic event, 
defined as hypoglycemia requiring third-party assistance; or any clinically significant hypoglycemic event, defined as self-monito red or laboratory plasma 
glucose level < 54 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L); or ≥ 2 glucose 
alert values ≤70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L), unless a clear 
correctable precipitating fact or can be identified, since 
the Screening Visit (Visit 1) 
2. Uncontrolled hyperglycemia  with a glucose level >270 
mg/dl (>15 mmol/L) after an overnight fast or >360 
mg/dl (>20 mmol/l) in  a randomly performed 
measurement durin
g Medication Run-In Period and 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 16 of 96 confirmed by a second meas urement (not on the same 
day) 
3. Mean of 3 separate blood pressure measurements 
>180 mmHg (systolic) or >100 mmHg (diastolic) 
4. WOCBP with a positiv e urine pregnancy test at 
Baseline Visit  
Procedure (Visit 3)   
1. Active and uncontrolled GERD defined as grade III 
esophagitis or greater 
2. Abnormalities of the GI tract preventing endoscopic 
access to the duodenum 
3. Anatomic abnormalities in the duodenum that would 
preclude the completion of the DMR procedure, including tortuous anatomy 
4. Malignancy newly diagnosed by endoscopy 5. Upper gastrointestinal c onditions such as ulcers, 
polyps, varices, strictures, congenital or acquired intestinal telangiectasia  
Study Endpoints: Effectiveness Endpoints: 
 Primary Endpoint:   
A1c change from baseline to Week 24, DMR vs Sham   
Secondary Endpoints:  
(i) A1c change from baseline to Week 24 by visit over 
time, DMR vs. Sham  
(ii) Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) change from baseline 
to Week 24, DMR vs. Sham  
(iii) FPG change from baseline to Week 24 by visit over 
time, DMR vs. Sham   
(iv) Urine Albumin-to-Creat inine Ratio (UACR) change 
from baseline to Week 24, DMR vs. Sham  
(v) Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) and Aspartate 
Aminotransferase (AST) change from baseline to 
Week 24, DMR vs. Sham  
 
Additional Endpoints of Interest: 
(i) A1c change from Week  24 (pre-DMR) in Sham 
cross-over group to Week 48   
(ii) FPG change from Week 24 (pre-DMR) in Sham 
cross-over group to Week 48   
(iii) RAND Short Form (36) Health Survey (SF-36) 
change from baseline at Week 24 (prior to  assessments or endoscop
y) vs Sham 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 17 of 96 (iv) PROMIS® (Patient-Reported Outcomes 
Measurement Informati on System) change from 
baseline at Week 24 (prior to  assessments or endoscopy) vs Sham 
 
Safety Endpoints: 
 Event number and incidence of reported adverse 
events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs), as 
well as device- and procedure-relatedness of AEs and 
SAEs, unanticipated adverse device effects (UADEs), 
and withdrawals due to AEs  
 Other safety  
o assessments including vital signs and weight, 
physical exam, laboratory values (FPG, HbA1c, 
ALT, AST and UACR), elec trocardiogram [ECG]  
o Duodenal biopsy samples for histological 
evidence of mucosal regrowth, inflammation 
and fibrosis 
o Magnetic Resonance Imaging Enterography 
(MRE) to assess thermal injury in the duodenum 
 
Note: As a pilot evaluation, th is study is not statistically 
powered and only descriptive statistics will be used to assess 
both primary and secondary endpoints. 
 
Study Assessments:        A1c 
FPG ALT, AST UACR Duodenal mucosal biopsy MRE SF-36  PROMIS®   
Study Sponsor: Fractyl Laboratories Inc. 
17 Hartwell Ave 
Lexington, MA 02421 USA  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 18 of 96 List of Abbreviations  
ACRONYM DESCRIPTION 
A1c Gl ycated Hemo globin (HbA1c ) 
ADA American Diabetes Association 
AE Adverse Event 
ALT Alanine Aminotransferase 
AST Aspartate Aminotransferase   
BMI Bod y Mass Index 
BP Blood Pressure CBC Complete Blood Count CEC Clinical Events Committee CFR Code of Federal Re
gulations 
DMC Data Monitorin g Committee 
DMR Duodenal Mucosal Resurfacin g 
DPP Diabetes Prevention Pro gram 
DPP4 Dipeptid yl peptidase-4 inhibito r 
EC Ethics Committee ECG Electrocardio
gram 
eCRF Electronic Case Report Form EDC Electronic Data Capture eGFR Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate FPG Fastin
g Plasma Glucose 
GI Gastrointestinal GIP Gastric Inhibitor
y Peptide 
GLP-1 Gluca gon-like peptide 1 
GLP1-RA Gluca gon-like peptide 1 receptor a gonist 
HCP Health Care Provide r 
HDL Hi gh Densit y Lipoprotein 
HIV Human Immunodeficienc y Virus 
HOM A-IR Homeostatic Model Assessment of Insulin Resistance 
ICH International Conference on Harmonization ICF Informed Consent Form IEC Independent Ethics Committee IFU Instructions for Use IRB Institutional Review Board ITT Intent-to-Treat IV Intravenous LDL Low Densit
y Lipoprotein 
mg/dL Milli grams per Decilite r 
Mmol Millimoles mmol/L Millimoles per lite
r 
MRE MRI n
g/mL MRI Enterography 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Nano
grams per millilite r 
NSAIDs Non-steroidal anti-inflammator y drugs 
OAD Oral antidiabetic medications 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 19 of 96 OD Outer diamete r 
PROMIS ® Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information S ystem 
pmol/l Picomole/lite r 
PP Per Protocol PT Preferred term Q
A Qualit y Assurance 
QOL Qualit y of Life 
SAE Serious Adverse Event SAP Statistical Anal
ysis Plan 
Sc subcutaneous SF-36 Short Form 
(36) Health Surve y by RAND 
SGLT2i Sodium- glucose cotransporte r-2 inhibito r 
SMBG Self-Monito ring of Blood Glucose 
SOC S ystem or gan class 
SSRI Serotoner gic medications 
SU Sulfon ylurea 
TEAE Treatment Emer gent Adverse Event 
TZD Thiazolidinedione T1D T
ype 1 Diabetes 
T2D  T ype 2 Diabetes  
TSH Th yroid Stimulatin g Hormone 
UACR Urine Albumin-to-Creatinine Ratio  UADE Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect WOCBP Women of Childbearin
g Potential 
 
  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 20 of 96 List of Definitions 
Term Definition 
As-Treated (AT) 
Population The subset of ITT subjects w ho received at least one ablation 
or undergo the sham procedure.   This is the primary 
population for efficacy.  Subjec ts are analyzed according to 
the treatment received.  
End-of-study The end-of-study date is when all subjects have completed all 
study visits or have otherwise discontinued from the study. 
 
Enrolled Subject Study enrollment is def ined as successful completion of the 
endoscopic evaluation, randomization, and initiation of the index procedure, DMR or sham.  
Fasting blood glucose level  Blood sample obtained after an overnight fast of at least 8 
hours 
Hypoglycemic events A glucose alert value is defined as ≤ 70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L). 
Serious, clinically important hypoglycemia is defined as a plasma glucose of < 54 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L ).  Severe hypoglycemia is defined as denoting severe cognitive impairment requiring external  assistance for recovery. 
 
Intent-to-Treat (ITT) Population The ITT population includes all subjects who were 
randomized after the Medication Run-In phase.  This is the 
secondary analysis population for efficacy (no imputation will be made for missing data, given t he nature of the study; i.e., 
analysis on this population will be performed using only 
available data).  Subjects are analyzed according to the 
treatment to which they were randomized.  
Medication Run-In Time period when su bjects who have met the Screening 
criteria undergo the 4 week Medication Run-In period. 
 
On-Study Period Subject participation in  the study will begin from the time of 
signing the informed consent and  concludes after the last 
study visit is completed.  
Safety Population This population includ es all subjects in whom randomized 
treatment was attempted. Subj ects are analyzed according to 
the treatment received.  
Screening Period From the time the subject signs informed consent until the 
time of randomization will be considered a screening period. 
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 21 of 96 Screen Failure Patient who signs the informed consent form and fails to 
meet all eligibility criteria.  
Subject Patient who participates in th is study in any capacity will be 
referred to as the “sub ject”.        
                                                                     
Study Participation 
Duration From the time the first subj ect signs informed consent until 
their completion of the last study visit.  
Study Population The study population in cludes all subjects consented at the 
site. Within this population there are Screened, Medication Run In, and Safety populations.  
Study Reference Manual A general term for any informati on or guideline provided to 
the study sites on technical aspects or procedural details of the clinical study.  
 
  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 22 of 96 1 Introduction 
  
1.1 Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) 
T2D is an endocrine disorder that is characterized by chronically elevated blood 
glucose (hyperglycemia) and subsequent va scular complications.  It is a global 
disease of pandemic proportions and, in t he United States alone, there are over 
25 million patients with T2D and nearly 2 million newly diagnosed patients every 
year (1). T2D is the leading cause of  blindness (due to diabetic retinopathy, 
20,000 cases/year), end -stage renal disease (due to diabetic nephropathy, 
50,000 cases/year), and amputation (due to diabetic neuropathy, 70,000 
cases/year) (2).   
 T2D is a complicated condition and its c haracteristic feature, hyperglycemia, 
manifests through diminished insulin action in the body. This occurs through two main pathogenic drivers: (i) a failure of the pancreat ic beta cells to secrete 
adequate insulin; and (ii) systemic resistanc e to insulin action (termed “insulin 
resistance”). In principle, some pat ients who are genetically predisposed to 
disease worsen their degree of insulin resistance through westernized lifestyle 
behaviors (i.e., excessive caloric consumpt ion of a diet rich in fat and simple 
sugars, and insufficient physical activity).  This insulin resistant state thus 
imposes a persistent and excessive insu lin secretory demand on the pancreatic 
beta cells
 (3,4). Over time, the pancreatic beta cell is unable to sustain its 
capacity to maintain such a high level of insulin secretion, and overt insulin 
secretory failure ensues. The mismatch  between the degree of insulin resistance 
and the insufficient pancreatic insulin pr oduction leads to the onset of frank 
hyperglycemia and clinical diabetes (5).  Unfortunately, once established, the 
disease continues to run a progressive course as pancreatic beta cell reserve 
further and inexorably declines over time. This explains why treatment 
approaches to lower blood glucose early in t he disease invariably fail in the face 
of progressive beta cell failure. This i nevitably results in the typical patient 
requiring more treatment assistance over time, culminating in the advanced state 
of negligible beta cell secretory reserv e and the need for insulin treatment by 
injection (6,7). Therefore, an ideal  new treatment approach for T2D would 
intervene before pancreatic beta cell func tion has completely failed with the aim 
of improving insulin sensitivity, and del aying or reducing the progressive decline 
in insulin secretory capacity.  
1.2 Existing Treatment Options 
Existing treatment options for T2D include lifestyle modification, pharmacological 
therapy and bariatric surgery.  
 Lifestyle Modification 
Lifestyle modification (i.e. diet, exercise) is a well-est ablished intervention that is 
a critical first treatment step in T2 D clinical management. Under carefully 
controlled clinical trial conditions, intens ive lifestyle modification exerts metabolic 
benefit in subjects with pre-T2D, as  demonstrated in the Diabetes Prevention 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 23 of 96 Program (DPP)  (8,9) and in patients with T2D (10,11). However, lifestyle 
modification alone is a largely ineffect ive treatment approach in a real world 
setting in large part due to patient non- compliance over the long term (12).  
 
 Pharmacological Intervention  
Pharmacological intervention is the ma instay of diabetes management, with 
approximately 45 anti-diabetes  therapeutics currently available in the US. 
Unfortunately, like lifestyle modifica tion, patient non-compliance renders this 
extensive treatment resource only partial ly effective. As illustration, a large 
segment of the US T2D population rema ins in sub-optimal glycemic control 
despite access to a wide array of  pharmacological opt ions (13,14).  
Pharmacological treatment of T2D is predominantly founded on increasing insulin 
action to limit hyperglycemia.  This is  accomplished by either (1) increasing 
insulin availability through stimulating endogenous secretion from the pancreatic 
beta cells or, in advanced disease, by ex ogenously administering insulin, or (2) 
increasing the body’s sensitivity to insu lin action, in other words, insulin 
sensitization. Pharmacological intervent ion is also founded on pragmatic ease of 
implementation and patient acceptance, w here orally administered therapies tend 
to be used earlier in the disease before graduating to the need for injectable therapies (i.e., Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist [GLP-1RA], insulins). 
 
Increasing insulin availability  is realized through well-established 
pharmacological therapy classes, the sulphonylureas (SUs), GLP-1RAs, and 
insulin, but two of the three classes (S Us and insulin) do so with potential for 
causing abnormally excessive circulating insulin levels that can expose patients 
to the harmful effects of hypoglycemia.  It is well-established that iatrogenic 
hypoglycemia in T2D, through use of eit her SU or insulin, is associated with 
detrimental consequences, namely cardiovascular complications and death (15-18). It is also speculated that the exce ssive hyperinsulinemia observed with both 
treatment classes, in particular with exogenous insulin use, stimulates abnormal 
lipogenesis, and this results in weight gain through increased adiposity and increased abnormal fat deposition in crit ical end organs, such as the liver, 
thereby worsening co-existent fatty liver disease (19-21).  Insulin sensitization  can be elicited by well-establis hed interventions (lifestyle 
[diet and exercise], metformin , thiazolidinediones [TZD s]) that result in an 
improvement in overall glycemia. This improvement in glycemia can be observed 
at all stages of T2D: in conjunction with insulin secretagogues or exogenous insulin later in the disease, or to prev ent the progression of  beta cell failure when 
used earlier in the disease (22). It is also  recognized that insulin sensitization is 
often accompanied by metabolic benef its beyond glycemic control through 
positive effects observed in other insulin sensitive end organs (e.g., cardiovascular system, liver, and ovar y) (23-25). With the TZD class as 
illustration, positive effects have been reported on blood pre ssure, improvements 
in fatty liver disease manifestations, and a return to ovulation in anovulatory 
females (26). 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 24 of 96  
 Bariatric Surgery  
Bariatric surgery has emerged as an intervention that exerts striking 
improvements in glycemic control in subjec ts with T2D, seemingly in a weight-
independent manner, and hi ghlights the important role of the gastrointestinal tract 
in regulating metabolic homeostasis (27, 28).  It has been shown to exert durable 
improvements in glycemic control that are superior to that achieved with 
optimized pharmacological ther apy (29,30). However, the notion of surgery itself 
and its attendant risks, as well as limited surgical capacity, limits the role of 
bariatric surgery to impac t population-level disease. 
 
1.3 Summary of Limitations of Current Therapies 
A number of barriers are acknowledged as impediment s to achieving optimal 
glycemic control in T2D with currently available treatment options at both the 
patient and population level.  
 
 By Patient Adherence/Compliance 
The treatment of T2D is notabl e in that the majority, if not all, of the available 
interventions require some level of co mpliance on the part of the individual 
patient on a daily basis (e.g., administ ering oral medications or injections, 
sometimes multiple times per day, exer cising, eating healthy meals and snacks, 
blood glucose monitoring). Non-compliance therefore limits great ly the impact of 
lifestyle modification and most of the pharmacological therapies; and the more 
complex and labor intensive a given treat ment (e.g., exogenous insulin) the more 
it diminishes real world impact (31). Bariatric surgery has emerged as a very 
different treatment approach involving a si ngle point in time intervention that 
exerts a powerful impact on metabolism.  It is of course counterbalanced by the 
short-term effects of an actual surgic al procedure and the significant risk of post-
surgical complications, but it neverthel ess offers a transformative treatment 
approach that circumvents many  of the issues of patient  compliance (32,33).    
 
 By Specific Treatment Approach 
Each pharmacological modality also comes wi th specific tolerability or adverse 
event considerations that become a particular impediment to their use and 
contribute to real world non-compliance.  
Treatment Impediment 
Metformin GI intolerability, certai n exclusion criteria, rare lactic 
acidosis 
SUs Wei ght gain, h ypoglycemia 
Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors 
(DPP4s ) Pancreatitis risk, rare  angioedema and arthralgia 
TZDs Wei ght gain, edema, heart fail ure, bladder cance r 
Acarbose GI intolerabilit y 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 25 of 96 SGLT2i GU infection, rare ketoacidosis, amputations 
GLP-1RA GI intolerabilit y, injections, risk of pancreatitis 
Insulin Weight gain, hypoglyc emia, edema, injections, blood 
glucose monitoring 
 
 By Disease Progression a nd Treatment Continuum 
T2D is a progressive disease and currently  available pharmaco logical therapies 
are not designed to address its core pathophysiological abnormalities, and this 
results in an inability to alter the inexorabl e course of the disease. In other words, 
pharmacological treatment has been lar gely designed to limit the metabolic 
manifestation of clinical diabetes (hyper glycemia) but without treating the actual 
underlying disease. The average pat ient therefore requires more 
pharmacological treatment over  time to control hyperglyce mia, culminating in the 
eventual transition to insulin treatment (34, 35). The final step to insulin treatment 
is especially problematic in that subjects  resist this final therapeutic step as the 
treatment itself carries gr eat negative stigma; it is har d to implement in a real 
world setting especially among patients wi th multiple chronic diseases and 
multiple concomitant chronic medica tions (see above), and there are inherent 
harmful side effects of insulin therapy t hat are often experienced by the patient 
(e.g., hypoglycemia, fluid retent ion, weight gain) (36-38).  
 In summary, the management of T2D, des pite an extensive list of treatment 
modalities, is impeded, given that (i) patient non-comp liance limits treatment 
success at all parts of the disease cont inuum, (ii) the ava ilable treatments only 
treat the metabolic cons equence of the disease (hy perglycemia) and not the 
underlying disease itself, (iii) the availabl e treatments are unable to safely correct 
hyperglycemia in a large segment of the population, and (iv) aversion to insulin 
use means patients suffer needlessly with  prolonged hyperglycemia pre-insulin 
use.      
1.4 Emerging Metabolic Role in the Gut  
Recent bariatric surgery experience has provided an increasing body of evidence that the gut plays a critical metabolic role  in T2D.  More specifically, the bypass 
of the duodenum or prevention of nutrient  contact with the duodenal mucosal 
surface results in a prompt and sustained in sulin sensitizing effect. This effect 
appears to be independent of the short-term calorie restriction and the later 
reduction in adipose fat mass that is observed in patients who have undergone 
bariatric surgery.  DMR, using the Revita™ System, is desi gned to mimic the metabolic benefit of 
the duodenal exclusion compone nt of bariatric surger y, thereby eliciting an 
insulin sensitizing effect.  The clinical data gathered thus far indicate that DMR 
exerts a likely insulin sensitizing effe ct as evidenced by a lowering of 
Homeostatic Model Assessment of Insuli n Resistance (HOMA-IR), an insulin 
sensitizing metabolic signature by met abolomics testing (e.g., lowering of α-
hydroxybutyrate, diacylglycerol, and peroxid ase activity), and other related insulin 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 26 of 96 sensitizing biomarker effects (incl uding lowered hepatic transaminases and 
urinary albumin).  Unlike bariatric surgery, which involv es an anatomical bypass of the duodenum 
and therefore no exposure of i ngested nutrients to the surf ace of that portion of 
the GI tract, DMR is designed to ablate and resurface the duodenal mucosal 
surface, thus allowing nutrients to be exposed to a resurfaced local mucosa. This infers that the duodenal mucosa surfac e is in some way abnormal in insulin 
resistant T2D subjects and is therefore em anating a potential ‘insulin resisting’ 
effect.  This notion is supported by  multiple lines of evidence:  
 (i) the duodenum undergoes a maladaptiv e hypertrophic response when 
exposed to unhealthy nutrients (i.e ., fat, simple sugars);  
(ii) this change appears to be associat ed with an augmented insulin resistant 
signal emanating from this portion of the bowel;  
(iii) this signal appears to be persistent and reversible in T2D, as revealed in 
patients after bariatric sur gery:  in patients in w hom metabolic improvement 
has been established after surgery, t he acute re-exposure of the bypassed 
duodenum to nutrients quickly restores t he insulin resistant, hyperglycemic,  
dysmetabolic condition that had existed pre-surgery; and 
(iv) ablation technology ap plied to other tissue surf aces has shown that the 
natural tissue response to ablation is  re-growth with subsequent healthy 
tissue surface formation (39-41) 
 
Taken together, there is  a strong rationale that the duodenal mucosa of T2D 
subjects is in some way abnormal and that subjects would likely reap metabolic benefit if the local duodenal mucosa is re surfaced through an ablation technique.  
Preliminary clinical data gathered in ~100 patients treated with the Revita™ 
System (discussed in Section 1.7) suggest that DMR does indeed exert a glycemic improvement in T2D subjects, which appears to be mediated through an insulin sensitizing mechanism. The goal of the proposed pilot study is to further advance the DMR clinical evidence in  T2D subjects in a controlled clinical 
setting to better characterize its safety and effectiveness profile.  The Fractyl Revita™ System has achiev ed CE-marking and allows physicians to 
safely and effectively ablate the duodenal mucosa in patients with T2D. This 
procedure decreases hyperglycemia in t hese patients, thereby positively 
impacting their abnormal metabolic state. Further study of the Fractyl Revita™ 
System in patients with T2D will add impor tant new data regarding tolerability, 
efficacy and safety of the DMR procedur e compared to a s ham-treated control 
group, provide both a short- and longer-t erm metabolic and safety perspective, 
and better characterize the intended user population.  
 
1.5 Fractyl Revita
TM System 
The Fractyl Revita™ System consists of two main components:  the Revita™ 
Catheter and a Console.  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 27 of 96  
Revita™ Catheter: 
The Revita™ Catheter is a sterile, single use device that is de livered transorally 
over a guidewire into the duodenum usi ng standard techniques, by a therapeutic 
endoscopist, and performs two fu nctions: 1) injects saline into the submucosa of 
the duodenum to create a thermal barrier wh ile also lifting the mucosa with saline 
to create a more uniform surface for ablat ion; and 2) ablates the mucosal surface 
using heated water recirculating inside a balloon.   To achieve its function, the Revita™ Cat heter is construct ed of a multi-lumen 
shaft with a balloon affixed to its distal end. Affixed to the outside of the balloon 
are three narrow shafts, each with a port, that are used to draw a vacuum when 
placing the saline durin g the mucosal lifting portion of  the procedure. Within each 
shaft is a fluid lumen with a miniaturized needle affixed to the distal end. Each 
needle is wholly contained wit hin the port ensuring its safe use. During the 
mucosal lift, the tissue is drawn into t he needle port, and saline is injected into 
the submucosal space through the needles.  The proximal end of the shaft is 
fitted with a handle and saline and vacuum lines  that are affixed to a console unit 
to control its function.  The catheter is available with a 24 mm outer diameter 
(OD) balloon.   Console: 
The console is a reusable electro-mec hanical piece of equipment and provides 
precisely controlled functionality to the catheter to perform the submucosal lift 
and hot fluid ablation steps of  the procedure.  The consol e continuously monitors 
its performance to detect fault conditions  and mitigate risks to the patient. The 
console is controlled by the user thr ough the use of a software user interface 
monitor. Prior to use, the console is fi tted with a sterile singl e use line set that 
serves as the pathway for the saline to be placed into the duodenal submucosa 
during the procedure.   
1.6 DMR Procedure 
The DMR procedure using the Revita™ S ystem is completed in the endoscopy 
suite or in an operating room using eit her general anesthesia by a physician who 
is trained in therapeutic endoscopic procedur es involving the use of a guidewire. 
The patient is positioned in the left la teral decubitus position used for endoscopic 
procedures or preferred position as di ctated by the site’s requirements for 
endoscopic procedures. A standard endoscope is used to complete an initial endoscopic evaluation and a guidewire is deliv ered past the ligament of Treitz to 
assist in delivering the catheter. Anti -peristaltic agents may be used during the 
procedure. Catheter deliver y and device location for treatment is verified using 
fluoroscopic guidance. The use of fluorosc opy is limited to use during catheter 
placement and verification of location duri ng treatment.  Based on data collected 
during earlier clinical investigations, the duration of radiation exposure is 
approximately equivalent to  that delivered during an endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography pr ocedure, which is a common endoscopic procedure 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 28 of 96 with an acceptable safety profile. The to tal procedure time is approximately 30 
minutes.     Mucosal Lift and Ablation Procedure The Revita™ catheter is placed in the proximal duodenum distal to the papilla. 
Both mucosal lift and mucosal ablation of the duodenum are commonly performed in the endoscopy suite, and the Revita™ System is designed to enable a highly controlled lift and ablation of the post-papillary duodenum.  Using 
the console interface, the balloon is in flated and vacuum delivered to draw  the 
intestinal mucosal tissue into the ports located on the balloon. The actuator on 
the handle is moved to advance the needle into the submucosal space within 
each of the ports. The console delivers  saline colored with methylene blue or 
similar dye into the submucosa through the needles within the lumens of the 
catheter resulting in complete circumfer ential lift of the mucosa. Once complete, 
the ablation cycle is start ed and hot water is circulated into the balloon to 
complete an ablation of the previously expanded tissue. The balloon is deflated 
and the catheter repositioned distally to  the next segment to be treated. The 
process of expansion, abl ation and reposit ioning is repeated until the needed 
length is treated. A full DMR procedure is defined as 5 complete ablations 
representing 10 axial centim eters of circumferentially  ablated tissue in the 
duodenum. The Revita™ catheter and endoscope are then removed.  
 
1.7 Clinical Experience 
A first in human clinical investigati on (C-10000) began in August 2013 at a single 
site in Santiago, Chile and enrolled 57 subjects. The objective of this 
investigation was to evaluat e initial feasibilit y and the safety profile of the DMR 
procedure using the Revita™ System, and its effect on subjects with T2D. 
Efficacy was evaluated with FPG and A1c levels. Safety data included 
volunteered/elicited AEs and their relatedness to  the study device or  procedure.     
Early in the course of the study, thr ee SAEs of duodenal stenosis were reported. 
All resolved without sequelae. As correct ive action, procedural and catheter 
modifications were implemented with no fu rther reports of stenosis across the 
entire Revita™ clinical progr am to date. An additional SA E of jejunal perforation 
during catheter placement and prior to abl ation, was noted. The most frequent 
AEs were GI-related (abdominal distenti on, abdominal pain, change of bowel 
habit and diarrhea). They occurred early  following the procedure, were 
predominately mild in severity, and re solved early during the post-operative 
period, all without sequel ae. Although the study was conducted primarily to 
demonstrate safety, A1c and FPG lo wering and HOMA-IR improvement 
suggested significant improvement in t he metabolic derangements of diabetes 
(42).   A second single arm, open label evaluation has enrolled 46 subjects in Europe 
and South America (C-20000). The objective of  this multi-center trial  was to 
verify that the results seen in C-10000 at a single center  were generalizable to a 
broader population across Europe, in addition  to South America . There were no 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 29 of 96 device-related SAEs. One procedure-related SAE, a transient low grade fever 
(38°) with C-reactive protein (CRP) elev ation, occurred the day after DMR and 
required one extra day of hospitalization.   Consistent with the C-10000 study, the 
most frequent AEs were GI-related, occu rring early post procedure; they were 
transient and generally mild. Effectivene ss was demonstrated by a robust mean 
improvement in A1c of 1.0% at 24 weeks,  with 71.1% of subjects achieving an 
improvement of at least 0.5%; mean FPG lowering of 35.7 mg/dL; a durable 
glycemic response over 52 weeks of obs ervation; and a clinically-relevant 
decrease in HOMA-IR.    C-30000, a randomized double-blind sham-c ontrolled prospective multicenter 
clinical investigation in up to 120 T2D s ubjects was initiated in Europe and Brazil 
in Q2 2017, and includes mechanistic studi es as well as safety and effectiveness 
assessments.  
1.8 Risk Analysis 
There are certain residual risks associated with the use of the Fractyl Revita™ 
System and the DMR procedur e. AEs that may result from the DMR System 
include those commonly associated with gastrointestinal endoscopy procedures, 
as well as device-related AEs: potential acute and chronic adverse 
consequences of the device-induced duodenal ablation treat ment, or those 
resulting from device malfunction, device user error, selected materials, device 
design or device construction.  Some AEs may be associated with both the procedure and the device. In addition, device malfunctions may occur which may or may not result in a device-related AE. The Instructions for Use (IFU) provide a 
listing of these device-related residual risks.  Below is a listing of these risks, the 
means by which they may be minimized, as well as a justification for conducting the study. 
 
 Procedure Risks 
Potential AEs associated with the endoscopic procedure and sedation include 
the following (in al phabetical order):  
• Abdominal cramps, discomfort, or pain 
• Allergic or adverse reacti on to sedation or anesthesia 
• Abdominal bloating • Cardiac or respiratory arrest • Death  • Delayed gastric emptying  • Dental injury • Difficulty swallowing • Digestive tract injury or perforation • Fever • Gastrointestinal bleeding • Headache • Hyperglycemia • Hypoglycemia 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 30 of 96 • Hypotension 
• Hypoxia • Impaired judgment or reactions • Indigestion • Infection • Injury to esophagus • Laryngospasm • Mucosal injury to GI tract  • Nausea  • Pancreatitis • Perforation • Pneumoperitoneum • Pulmonary aspiration • Sore or irritated throat  • Vomiting 
 
Many of these risks and complications a ssociated with the procedure are similar 
to those associated with other commonl y performed endoscopic procedures with 
sedation, such as duodenal biopsies and endoscopic mucosal resection.   
 
 Device Risks 
 Potential AEs associated with the device include the following:   
 Abdominal cramps, discomfort, or pain 
 Abscess formation 
 Allergic reaction to the device materials or methylene blue  
 Death  
 Delayed gastric emptying  
 Diarrhea 
 Digestive tract injury 
 Duodenal stenosis 
 Fever 
 Gastric dumping syndrome 
 Gastritis 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Hyperglycemia 
 Hypoglycemia 
 Infection 
 Mucosal injury to GI tract  
 Nausea  
 Nutritional malabsorption 
 Pancreatitis 
 Perforation 
 Stomach or duodenal obstruction  
 Stricture  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 31 of 96  Structural damage to the GI tract 
 Thermal damage to the duodenum wa ll or surrounding structures 
 Ulcer 
 Vomiting 
 
Device malfunctions that lead to device-related AEs include:  
 Console delivers incorrect ablation ti me and temperature profile resulting 
in GI tract injury or perforation 
 Hole in hot fluid catheter balloon re sulting in leakage of hot fluid that 
results in GI tract injury or perforation  
 Lost catheter component in t he GI tract or wall that re sults in GI tract injury 
or perforation 
 Device malfunctions that may or may not result in device-related AEs include: 
 Component degradation  
 Device breakage  
 Device disarticulation  
 
 Minimizing Study Risks 
The following steps have been taken to minimize risks associated with the procedure and the use of the Fractyl Revita™ System: 
 
 The tissue or fluid contacting materi als used in the construction of the 
Revita™ Catheter are known medica l-grade materials that are well-
characterized and have a long history of  use. In addition, biocompatibility 
testing has proven that the materials are safe. 
 The device design uses known technologies including sub-mucosal 
injection and hot fluid balloon to complete the procedure. Similar 
technologies are currently in use for such accepted procedures as endoscopic mucosal resection and treatment of menorrhagia.  
 The device design has been rigorously tested in the laboratory, animal 
models and clinical trials to charac terize its performance and confirm the 
safety and performance of the procedure. 
 All endoscopists receive detailed traini ng in the use of the Fractyl Revita™ 
System and the DMR procedure. The tr aining includes hands-on use of 
the system in a lab setting. 
 
 Justification for Investigation 
As with any medical device developed for use in a procedure, there are risks 
associated with the Fractyl Revita™ S ystem and the DMR pr ocedure. Many of 
these risks are similar to those seen wi th other endoscopic devices that are 
passed either over the wire or th rough an endoscope for treatment in the 
esophagus, stomach or duodenum. The risk profile of such devices in the hands 
of experienced therapeutic endoscopists has  improved dramatically over time 
with dedicated training, implementation of  best practices in therapeutic technique 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 32 of 96 (e.g. use of endoscopic guidewires), im proved endoscopic visualization, and 
improved fluoroscopic capabilities in endoscopic suites. From a procedural 
standpoint, devices such as achalasia- pneumodilatation balloons, injection 
needles, RF ablation devices and endosco pic mucosal resection systems have 
shown a satisfactory history of safe and effective clinical use. Attempts have 
been made to limit procedural risks by limit ing study participation to subjects in 
general good health as per the stringent in clusion/exclusion criteria, having the 
DMR procedure conducted only by physici ans and procedural teams trained in 
advanced therapeutic endoscopic procedur es, and by conducting didactic and 
hands-on animal labs. In addition, appropriate steps have been taken to minimize the risks associated with the device desi gn and materials, as listed above.   
 The medical consequences and morbidity associated with T2D have been well studied and documented, and include mi crovascular and macrovascular 
complications such as renal failure, blindness, peripheral neuropathy, amputation, increased risk of  myocardial infarctions, stroke, and peripheral 
vascular disease. A successful DMR proc edure is expected to lower A1c in T2D 
patients with inadequate glycemic contro l despite the use of oral glucose-
lowering medications, given its potentia l for increasing insulin sensitivity and 
action, thereby decreasing glucose toxi city and enabling more effective glycemic 
control. In addition to its beneficial e ffect on the pathophysiological drivers of 
metabolic dysfunction, the DMR procedur e has a key therapeutic advantage in 
that its effectiveness is not complianc e-dependent, in contrast to all other 
currently available T2D therapies. Bec ause poor adherence to medications is a 
significant barrier to glycemic control in  the general population, a DMR procedure 
which does not require daily complianc e with additional medi cations may prove 
to be particularly helpful in achieving superior real world results, as has been 
observed with bariatric surgery. In conj unction with an appropriate lifestyle  (eg, 
healthy diet, exercise), a DMR procedur e performed in patients who have not 
achieved target glycemic goals with thei r current regimen of OADs should help 
optimize glycemic control and support endogenous  beta cell function. Removing 
compliance as an impediment to glycemi c control, and given its mechanistic 
plausibility, the DMR pr ocedure and device offer an im portant new therapy to 
patients with T2D to help reduce the morbidity and end-organ damage from this 
debilitating chronic illness.    
 As noted above, there are potential benefits associated with the DMR procedure, 
and the risks associated with the devic e and procedure have been identified and 
minimized where possible. Thus, the benefit/risk profile associated with the 
Revita™ System warrants further clinical re search and justifies this investigation. 
 
 
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 33 of 96 2 Study Design 
 
2.1 Overview 
In two clinical trials conducted to date, the Fractyl Revita™ System has been studied as an open-label device intervention without a pre-specif ied control arm. 
Additionally, the first randomized, double-blind, s ham controlled study was 
initiated in Q2, 2017 in Europe and South Am erica and is in the process of being 
closed out.  The US Pilot study is a prospective, randomized, double-blind (subject and 
endocrinologist), 24-week, sham-controlled, mu lti-center, pilot trial  in a maximum 
of 9 enrolled subjects with T2D suboptim ally controlled on 2 to 3 OADs, one of 
which must be metformin. The ra ndomization scheme will be 2:1 DMR 
treatment:Sham procedure. To tal post-randomization study duration will be 24 
weeks for DMR subjects and 48 weeks fo r Sham subjects who undergo the 
crossover procedure within 21 days of Week 24 visit.  All eligible subjects will participate in  a 4-week antidiabetic medication Run-In 
Period before randomization to the index procedure to assess stability of blood 
glucose control in conjunction with medication compliance and lifestyle (diet, exercise) counseling. OADs will be held co nstant from start of Run-In Period 
through Week 24, with protocol pre- specified treatment algorithms for 
hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia.   Following the medication run-in peri od, subjects will be scheduled for an 
endoscopic evaluation consisting of an asse ssment of the esophagus, stomach, 
duodenum and associated structures to ens ure there are no conditions that 
would exclude the subject from having t he index procedure (DMR or Sham).  
   Following confirmation of s ubject eligibility during the endoscopic evaluation, 
subjects will be randomized to receiv e the DMR or Sham procedure. Post 
procedure the subjects will be required to re turn for follow-up visits as per visit 
schedule.  Both treatment arms will be followed up fo r a total of 24 weeks from the index 
procedure and will continue to receive lifes tyle counseling through the end of the 
study. At the Week 24 Visit, subjects randomized to the DMR treatment arm will 
have an ablation site biopsy and will be follo wed for an additional 24 weeks. At 
the Week 24 Visit, the Sham treatment arm will be provided t he opportunity to 
cross-over to receive the DMR treatm ent. Sham subjects will then repeat all 
study visits from the DMR procedure through 24 weeks post crossover. Sham 
subjects that choose not to crossove r and have the DMR study  will be withdrawn 
from the study.  
  On an ongoing basis, study subjects will be provided with healthy lifestyle counseling to educate them on the importance of exercise and diet in relation to 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 34 of 96 blood glucose control.  They will receive blood glucose meters at the Screening 
Visit and will be instructed how to perfo rm  self-monitoring of blood glucose 
(SMBG) at a schedule as outlined in Se ction 6.10. Subjects will be provided 
diaries in which they will record any changes in medication use, SMBG results, and any symptoms of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia.  Study assessments include: A1c, FPG, ALT, AST, UACR, Duodenal mucosal 
biopsy, MRE, SF-36 Ques tionnaire, PROMIS®.  
 Subject follow up visits conducted by telephone will occur at 7 and 14 days and at Weeks 8,15 and 21   post procedure. Subject follow up visits conducted in 
clinic will occur at Week  4, 12, 18 and 24 post procedure. A summary of the 
assessments and data collection requirement s is presented in Appendix 1 (DMR) 
and Appendix 2 (Sham).      
2.2 Number of Study Sites and Subjects 
Up to 6 sites in the US will participate in the study. The total st udy enrollment is a 
maximum of 9 enrolled subjects in a randomized scheme of 2:1 (DMR:Sham)  
 
2.3 Intended Use 
The Fractyl Revita™ System is intended to improve glycemic control in conjunction with diet and exercise in patients with T2D w ho are inadequately 
controlled with oral anti diabetic medications.  
 
2.4 Study Objectives 
The study objectives are: 
 to assess the safety of the Fractyl Revita™ System for the treatment of 
subjects with T2D suboptimally cont rolled on 2 to 3 oral antidiabetic 
medications  
 to assess the effect of DMR ve rsus Sham procedures on glycemic 
endpoints 24 weeks after the procedure   
  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 35 of 96 2.5 Study Workflow 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
     
    
 
*Subjects randomized to DMR who do not receiv e any ablations during the DMR procedure will 
have all clinical findings docu mented, and will be followed for safety through the Week 4 
visit and then discontinued from the study. 
 
**Subjects randomized to Sham who crossover to  DMR but do not receive any ablations during 
the DMR procedure will have all clinical findings documented, and will be followed through the Week 4 post crossover vi sit and then discontinued from the study. 
 
+Subjects that choose not to crossover from sham to DMR will be discontinued from the study 
and the End of Study Electronic Case R eport Forms (eCRFs) will be completed. 
  Screened 
Protocol-specified Inclus ion/Exclusion criteria  Did not meet Study Eligibility 
Criteria – Screen Failure  
Medication Run In 
(4 weeks) Did not meet post Run-In Study Eligibility Criteria – Screen Failure 
Endoscopic Evaluation  
(Per Protocol) Failed Endoscopic Evaluation – Screen Failure
  
Randomized (ITT) 
2:1 (DMR to Sham) 
Crossover to DMR 
(Within 21 Days after Week 24)  Did not undergo  
DMR** + DMR Arm  Sham Arm Did not undergo  
DMR* Did not undergo 
sham procedure 
End of Study  
(Week 24 follow-up post randomized DMR treatment / Week 24 follow-up Post Crossover) Follow up visits  
(Day 7 - Week 24 Post Crossover) Follow up visits  
(Day 7 – Week 24) 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 36 of 96 2.6 Study Duration 
It is anticipated that the overall duration of  this investigation will be approximately 
23 months including subject enrollment, collection of follow-up assessments, and 
data analysis. The study will be initiated at each institution following approval of 
the respective independent Institutional Review Board (IRB) and after a Site 
Initiation Visit has been performed. Enrollment  of subjects will take approximately 
four (4) months based on six (6) site s accruing a maximum of 9 enrolled 
subjects. Subjects will be follow for 24 weeks after initial randomization to 
DMR/Sham procedure or following Sham  crossover to DMR procedure. Final 
data collection, analysis and final study r eport will take an additional 4 months.   
 
2.7 Study Endpoints 
This study is designed as a multi-c enter pilot evaluation of safety and 
effectiveness of the DMR procedure. It is not powered to demonstrate a 
statistically significant difference in effectiveness parameters between the 
treatment groups, and these endpoints will not formally define subject and study 
success. Instead, the results of this evaluation will be used to better understand 
the safety profile of the DMR procedure and to examine the reduction in A1c to 
aid in powering the future pivotal study which will serve as the basis for marketing authorization in the US.   
 Effectiveness Endpoints 
 
Primary Endpoint  
A1c change from baseline to Week 24, DMR vs Sham  
 
Secondary Endpoints  
(i) A1c change from baseline to Week 24 by visit over time, DMR vs. Sham 
(ii) FPG change from baseline to Week 24, DMR vs. Sham (iii) FPG change from baseline to Week 24 by visit over time, DMR vs. Sham 
(iv) UACR change from baseli ne to Week 24, DMR vs. Sham 
(v) ALT and AST change from baseli ne to Week 24, DMR vs. Sham 
 
Additional Endpoints of Interest 
(i) A1c change from Week 24 (pre-DMR) in Sham cross-over group to Week 
48   
(ii) FPG change from Week 24 (pre-DMR ) in Sham cross-over group to Week 
48   
(iii) Short Form (36) Health Survey Ve rsion 2 (SF-36) change from baseline at 
Week 24 (pre- assessments and endoscopy) vs Sham 
(iv) Promis® (Patient-Reported Outcom es Measurement In formation System) 
change from baseline at Week 24 (pre- assessments and endoscopy) vs 
Sham 
 
 Safety Endpoints 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 37 of 96  Event number and incidence of report ed AEs and SAEs, as well as device- 
and procedure-relatedness of AEs and SAEs, UADEs, and withdrawals due 
to AEs  
 Other safety  
 assessments including vital signs and weight, physical exam, 
laboratory values (FPG, HbA1c, ALT, AST and UACR), ECG 
 Duodenal biopsy samples for hist ological evidence of mucosal 
regrowth, inflammation and fibrosis 
 MRE to assess thermal injury to the duodenum. 
 
2.8 Blinding 
In this study, the endocrinologist and the associated site personnel and the 
subjects will be blinded to the treatment  through the Week 24 follow-up visit, as 
will the Sponsor study team  (except the proctors and technichians who will be 
present at the procedure).  While the endoscopist will not be blinded to individual 
treatments, he or she will be blin ded to cohort level data and will not be 
responsible for the diabetes  management of the subjects . At the Week 24 Visit, 
the subjects, the endocrinologist and the bli nded study site staff, as well as the 
blinded Sponsor study team will be unblinded.  Subjects who received the Sham treatment  will be offered the option to crossover 
and undergo the DMR procedure at the Week 24 Visit post randomization.   
 Sham-treated subjects who do not choos e to crossover and receive DMR will be 
discontinued (withdrawn) from the study and the E nd of Study eCRFs will be 
completed.  No study staff, associated hospital pers onnel, or study subjects will be informed 
of the randomization assi gnments until the scheduled time of unblinding at Week 
24, and care will be taken to minimize the risk of inadv ertent premature 
unblinding.  The unblinding occurs afte r all assessments have been conducted at 
the Week 24 Visit.  
2.9 Control of Bias and Validity 
The following measures have been included  in the study to control bias and 
increase study validity: 
 The study design utilizes multiple in vestigators and multiple study sites. 
 The study design utilizes objective endpoints that are meas ured in a central 
laboratory using validated methodology, these include A1c and  FPG. 
Standardized methods and protocols fo r performing and evaluating tests and 
examinations have been incorporated into the study protocol.   
 The use of a randomized controlled study  design minimizes the bias in the 
findings and is considered the gol d standard to demonstrate the true 
treatment effect. 
 The study monitor will review data colle ction forms as they are received from 
the study sites to assure there are no missing or incorrect data.  Missing or 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 38 of 96 incorrect data are queried and corrected in the database.  Site re-training will 
take place as required to ensure compliance with the protocol.   
 The DMC will evaluate SAEs and other  pertinent safety parameters to ensure 
unbiased ongoing safety surveillance.  
 The CEC will adjudicate SAEs, and provide an unbiased assessment of AE 
relatedness and severity. Employing an independent body to oversee AE 
causality provides added validity to t he assessment of study safety endpoints, 
reduces potential Sponsor or Investigat or bias, and increases the consistency 
of all safety determinations.  
 
3 Study Population 
 
3.1 Subject Selection 
A maximum of 9 subjects at up to six (6) st udy sites in the US will be enrolled into 
this clinical study. The clinical stud y population will be comprised of males and 
females, 28 - 65 years of age who satisf y all of the inclusion and exclusion 
criteria, as defined in Secti on 4.1. All subjects taking part in this clinical study 
must undergo the informed consent process.  Subjects must be allowed adequate 
time to review the consent, have any questions answered, and make a voluntary 
decision to participate in the clinical study. Each subject must sign and date the 
IRB-approved Informed Consent Form (I CF) before any clinical study-related 
procedures are performed. A copy of the signed ICF will be provided to the 
subject for his/her records. A subject’s participation in the clinical study begins 
with the signing and dating of the ICF.   Study sites may utilize a number of methods to recruit potential subjects into the 
study including evaluation of existing subjects  from their clinical practice, referrals 
from other physicians and re cruitment via external advertising. Advertising 
materials need to be reviewed and approv ed by the IRB before use.   
 
 Initial Subject Identification 
Potential subjects are identified by the Investigator or thei r designee(s) through 
medical record review, referring physi cians, and inquiries from interested 
subjects. Subjects may be pre-screened using a telephone screening script to 
evaluate potential eligibility for the study . If the subject meets the study’s basic 
entry criteria as verified over the te lephone using the screening script or through 
medical record review, the subject is invi ted to attend an office visit for potential 
inclusion in the study and consent to parti cipate in the study by signing the ICF. 
    
 
3.2 Duration of Subject Participation 
The total anticipated duration of subject par ticipation in the clinical study for a 
subject randomized to DMR will be up to a maximum of 33 weeks (maximum of 6 
weeks between Screening and Baseline, maximum of 3 weeks between Baseline 
and Procedure, and 24 weeks of follow up post procedure). 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 39 of 96  
The total anticipated duration of subject par ticipation in the clinical study for a 
subject randomized to Sham will be up to a maximum of 60 week s (maximum of 6 
weeks between Screening and Baseline, maximum of 3 weeks between Baseline 
and Procedure, 24 weeks (to max of 27 weeks) to Crossover and 24 weeks of follow up post crossover procedure).     
4 Screening Period and Eligibility Criteria 
The screening period will be completed in 3 phases and the elig ibility confirmed 
at each of these visits: Screening (Visit 1,  Pre-Medication Run-In), Baseline (Visit 
2, Post-Medication Run-In) and Procedure (Visit 3). The inclusion criteria and 
additional exclusion criteria fo r each visit are listed by vi sit in the following section 
below.  
4.1 Selection Criteria 
Selection criteria will be assessed and elig ibility confirmed over the first 3 study 
visits: at the initial Screeni ng Visit (Visit 1), at Baseline (Visit 2), and during the 
endoscopic evaluation at the Procedure Visit (Visit 3). Details of any subject who 
is screened for the study but is found to be ineligible at any of these 3 visits, 
based on medical history, medication us e, physical exam, laboratory or ECG 
findings, will be considered a screen fa ilure and the data collected must be 
entered in the Screening/Enrollment Log and documented in the eCRF. Screen 
Failure subjects will be informed by a te lephone call from the site  staff that they 
are ineligible for cont inued study participation. 
 
 Inclusion Criteria   
 
Screening Visit (Pre-Med ication Run-In, Visit 1)  
1. Men and non-pregnant wo men 28-65 years of age 
2. Diagnosed with T2D for at least 3 years  3. A1C of 7.5 - 9. 5% (59-80 mmol/mol) 
4. BMI ≥ 28 and ≤ 40 kg/m
2 
5. On two to three oral OADs (metformin  plus one to two addi tional OADs) with 
two (see note below) at least at hal f maximum labeled dose (or highest 
tolerated) with no changes in medi cation in the 12 weeks prior to the 
Screening Visit (Visit 1) (Refer to ADA Standard of Medical Care in Diabetes 
2018, Table 8.3 for the maximum approved daily dose of non-insulin glucose lowering agents)  (43). Note: For subjects on sulfonylurea (SU) glucose-
lowering drugs for diabetes, the only SU s permitted in the study will be 
glipizide or glimep iride, and their doses below half maximum labeled dosing 
will not be an exclusion for study entry . Patients unwilling to reduce the dose 
of SU at the time of the DMR proc edure as described by protocol will be 
excluded. 
6. Agree to use an additional glucose-loweri ng treatment (eg, liraglutide, other 
OAD with the exception of glybur ide) if recommended by the study 
investigator in case of persistent hyperglycemia.   
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 40 of 96 7. Agree not to donate blood during their participation in the study 
8. Able to comply with study requirements and understand and sign the 
Informed Consent Form 
9. Women of childbearin g potential (WOCBP) must be using two acceptable 
methods of contraception throughout the study 
10. Women must not be breastfeeding 
 
Baseline Visit (Post Medi cation Run-In, Visit 2)  
1. WOCBP must have a negative urine pregnancy test at Baseline Visit 
 
 Exclusion Criteria 
 Screening Visit (Pre-Med ication Run-In, Visit 1)  
1. Diagnosed with Type 1 Diabetes (T1D)  2. History of diabetic ketoacidosis  or hyperosmolar nonketotic coma 
3. Probable insulin producti on failure, defined as fasting C Peptide serum <1 
ng/mL (333pmol/l) 
4. Previous use of any types of insuli n for >1 month (at an y time, except for 
treatment of gestational diabetes) 
5. Current use of injectable medicati ons for diabetes (insulin, GLP-1RA) 
6. Current use of glyburide, a sulf onylurea (SU) glucose-lowering drug for 
diabetes  
7. Hypoglycemia unawareness or a history of severe hypoglycemia (more than 1 
severe hypoglycemic event, as defined by  need for third-party-assistance, in 
the last year) 
8. Known autoimmune disease, including but  not limited to celiac disease, or 
pre-existing symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma or 
other autoimmune connective tissue disorder 
9. Previous GI surgery that could limit treatment of the duodenum such as 
Bilroth 2, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, or other similar procedures or conditions  
10. History of chronic or acute pancreatitis 
11. History of diabetic gastroparesis 12. Known active hepatitis or active liver disease  13. Acute gastrointestinal illness in the previous 7 days 14. Known history irritable bowel syndr ome, radiation enteritis or other 
inflammatory bowel disease, such as Crohn’s disease 
15. Known history of a structural or func tional disorder of t he esophagus that may 
impede passage of the device through the gastrointestinal tract or increase 
risk of esophageal damage during an endoscopic procedure, including 
Barrett’s esophagus, esophagitis, dysphagia, achalasia, stricture/stenosis, esophageal varices, esophageal  diverticula, esophagea l perforation, or any 
other disorder of the esophagus 
16. Known history of a structural or  functional disorder  of the esophagus, 
including any swallowing disorder, es ophageal chest pain disorders, or drug 
refractory esophageal  reflux symptoms 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 41 of 96 17. Known history of a structural or func tional disorder of t he stomach including 
gastroparesis, gastric ulcer, chronic gastrit is, gastric varices, hiatal hernia (> 2 
cm), cancer or any other disorder of the stomach 
18. Known history of chronic symptoms s uggestive of a structural or functional 
disorder of the stomach,  including any symptoms of  chronic upper abdominal 
pain, chronic nausea, chronic vomiti ng, chronic dyspepsia or symptoms 
suggestive of gastroparesis, including post-prandial fullness or pain, post-
prandial nausea or vomiting or early satiety 
19. Known history of duodenal ulcer, intestinal  diverticula (diverticulitis), intestinal 
varices, intestinal stricture/stenosis, small bowel obstruction, or any other 
obstructive disorder of the GI tract 
20. Currently have ongoing symptoms sugges tive of intermittent small bowel 
obstruction, such as recurrent bouts of  post-prandial abdominal pain, nausea 
or vomiting 
21. Active H. pylori infection (Subjects with active H. pylori may continue with the 
screening process if they ar e treated with an appropriate  antibiotic regimen)  
22. History of coagulopathy, upper gastroint estinal bleeding conditions such as 
ulcers, gastric varices, strictures , congenital or acquired intestinal 
telangiectasia  
23. Current use of anticoagul ation therapy (such as warfarin) which cannot be 
discontinued for 7 days before and 14 days after the procedure  
24. Current use of P2Y12 inhibitors (clopidogrel, pasugrel, ticagrelor) which 
cannot be discontinued for 14 days before and 14 days after the procedure.  
25. Unable to discontinue non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) during 
treatment through 4 weeks following the pr ocedure. Use of low dose aspirin is 
allowed.  
26. Current use of serotonergic medications (SSRI) 27. Use of systemic glucocorticoids (exclud ing topical or ophthal mic application or 
inhaled forms) for more than 10 consec utive days within 90 days prior to the 
Screening Visit 
28. Use of drugs known to affect GI motility (e.g. Metoclopramide) 
29. Receiving weight loss m edications such as Meridia,  Xenical, or over the 
counter weight loss medications 
30. Untreated/inadequately treated hypothyroidism, defined as an elevated 
Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone (TSH) level at Screening; if on  thyroid hormone 
replacement therapy, must be on stable dose for at least 6 weeks prior to 
Screening 
31. Persistent Anemia, de fined as Hemoglobin <10 g/dL 
32. Subjects who have donated blood or received a transfusion in the prior 3 
months 
33. Subjects with conditions that  alter red blood cell turnover 
34. Subjects with prosthetic joints   35. Significant cardiovascular disease including known history of valvular 
disease, or myocardial infarction, hear t failure, transient ischemic attack or 
stroke within the last 6 months 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 42 of 96 36. Moderate or severe chronic kidney di sease (CKD), with estimated glomerular 
filtration rate (eGFR) <45 ml/min/1.73m2 (estimated by MDRD) 
37. Known immunocompromised status, incl uding but not limited to individuals 
who have undergone organ transplantation, chemotherapy or radiotherapy 
within the past 12 months, who have clinic ally-significant leukopenia, who are 
positive for the human immunodeficiency vi rus (HIV) or whose immune status 
makes the subject a poor candidate for clin ical trial participation in the opinion 
of the Investigator 
38. Active systemic infection 39. Active malignancy within the last 5 year s (with the exception of treated basal 
cell or treated squamous cell carcinoma) 
40. Subjects with a personal or family history of medullary  thyroid carcinoma 
41. Subjects with Multiple Endoc rine Neoplasia syndrome type 2 
42. Not a candidate for sur gery or general anesthesia 
43. Active illicit substance abuse or alcoholism 44. Current smoker  45. Participating in another ongoing clinical trial of an investigational drug or 
device 
46. Any other mental or physical cond ition which, in the opinion of the 
Investigator, makes the subject a poor c andidate for clinical trial participation 
47. Unwilling or unable to perform SMBG, co mplete the patient diary, or comply 
with study visits and other study pr ocedures as required per protocol 
 Baseline Visit (Post Medi cation Run-In, Visit 2) 
1. A1c post Run-In Phase < 7.5% (59 mmol/mol) or > 9.5% (86 mmol/mol) 
2. Any severe hypoglycemic event, def ined as hypoglycemia requiring third-
party assistance; or any clinically si gnificant hypoglycemic event, defined as 
self-monitored or laboratory plasma gluc ose level < 54 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L); or 
≥ 2 glucose alert values ≤70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L), unless a clear correctable 
precipitating factor can be identified, since the screening visit (Visit 1) 
3. Uncontrolled hyperglycemia with a glucose level >270 mg/dl (>15 mmol/L) 
after an overnight fast or >360 mg/dl (>20 mmol/l) in a randomly performed 
measurement during Medication Run-In  Period and confirmed by a second 
measurement (not on the same day)  
4. Mean of 3 separate bl ood pressure measurements >180 mmHg (systolic) or 
>100 mmHg (diastolic) 
5. WOCBP with a positive urine pregnancy test at Baseline Visit 
 
Procedure (Visit 3)   1. Active and uncontrolled GERD defined as grade III esophagitis or greater 
2. Abnormalities of the GI tract prev enting endoscopic access to the duodenum 
3. Anatomic abnormalities in the duodenum that would preclude the completion 
of the DMR procedure, in cluding tortuous anatomy 
4. Malignancy newly diagnosed by endoscopy 5. Upper gastrointestinal conditions such as ulcers, polyps, varices, strictures, 
congenital or acquired inte stinal telangiectasia 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 43 of 96  
5 Study Visits 
 
5.1 Visit 1: Screening (Pre-Medication Run-In) 
When the subject comes into clinic for the Screening Visit, the Informed Consent 
procedure is completed.   
 Informed Consent 
The informed consent shall inform the subj ect as to the objec tive and procedures 
of the study and possible risks involved.  The subject will be informed about 
his/her right to withdraw from the study at any time  and for any reason without 
sanction, penalty, or loss of benefits to wh ich the subject is otherwise entitled, 
and that withdrawal from the study will not  jeopardize their futu re medical care.  
The contents of the Informed Consent Form (ICF) will be discussed with the 
subject allowing adequate time for questions . If a subject is willing to participate 
in the study, they will indicate their wi llingness by signing the form. A signed copy 
of the ICF will be given to each subject in  the study. The site must make a note in 
the subject’s medical record that cons ent was given, and the date and time at 
which the form was signed. 
 
 Demographics, Medical History and Full Physical Exam 
As outlined in Section 6.1, subject demographics, medical history and a full 
physical exam will be completed by the Investigator or des ignated study site 
personnel.  
 
 Blood Analysis 
As outlined in Section 6.3, subjects will  have sufficient blood drawn to complete 
the required tests.   Subjects with test results outside acc eptable ranges that are indicative of an 
underlying condition that would compromise  their participation in the study based 
on the protocol-specified Exclusion Criter ia or Investigator expertise will be 
excluded from the study and cons idered to be Screen Failures.  
 
 H. pylori Test 
As outlined in Section 6.3, a blood sample  will be drawn to complete testing of 
H.pylori on all potential subjects.  Participants with active H. pylori may continue with the screening process if they 
are treated with an appropriate  antibiotic regimen (A positive result will not be 
considered and Adverse Event). 
 
 ECG 
As outlined in Section 6.4, a 12-lead ECG will be performed  on all potential 
subjects. 
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 44 of 96 
 Lifestyle Counseling 
As outlined in Section 6.7, the subject wi ll be provided with diabetic nutrition, 
healthy lifestyle and exercise guidance during th is visit that is consistent with the 
standards of the American Diabetes Associ ation (ADA) in order to educate them 
on the importance of a healthy lifest yle to blood glucose control.   
 
 Medication Run-In Period 
Individuals who meet all the Inclusion Cr iteria and none of the Exclusion Criteria 
at the Screening Visit (Visit 1) will be el igible to start the 4 week Medication Run-
In. Subjects will be instructed to conti nue their OAD regimen without change. The 
intent of the Medication Run-In Period is  to verify a subject’s medication regimen 
and associated compliance, and to assess stability of glycemic control to ensure a stable baseline for subsequent comparisons. 
 
 SMBG / Glycemia Diary 
As outlined in Section 6.10, subjects wi ll be provided with a home blood glucose 
meter, taught to perform SMBG (per the schedule outlined in Section 6.10) and 
asked to record the glucose values in the Glycemia Diary provided by the site. 
Subjects will be instructed to record the occurrence and blood glucose values (if 
possible) of all hypoglycemic episodes. T hey will also record their daily OAD 
intake. 
 
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, a complete list of all medications a subject is 
currently taking will be recorded by the Investigator or designated study site 
personnel.  
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any reported/el icited adverse events or as dictated by 
blood tests and office evaluation will be re corded in the eCRF.  AEs are collected 
from the time the ICF is signed.    
5.2 Visit 2: Baseline (Post Medication Run-In) 
Subjects will come into the clinic for the Baseline Visit after completing a 
minimum of a 4 week (28 day ) Medication Run-In.  Th is visit must occur 4-6 
weeks (28 – 42 days) after the Screening Visit (Visit 1).  
 At this visit, subjects will be assess ed for the following a dditional Inclusion 
Criteria: 
1. WOCBP must have a negative urine pregnancy test at Baseline Visit 
 At this visit, subjects will be assess ed for the following a dditional Exclusion 
Criteria: 1. A1c post Run-In Phase < 7.5% (59 mmol/mol) or > 9.5% (86 mmol/mol) 
2. Any severe hypoglycemic event, def ined as hypoglycemia requiring third-
party assistance; or any clinically si gnificant hypoglycemic event, defined as 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 45 of 96 self-monitored or laboratory plasma gluc ose level < 54 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L); or 
≥ 2 glucose alert values ≤70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L), unless a clear correctable 
precipitating factor can be identified, since the Screening Visit (Visit 1) 
3. Uncontrolled hyperglycemia with a glucose level >270 mg/dl (>15 mmol/L) 
after an overnight fast or >360 mg/dl (>20 mmol/l) in a randomly performed 
measurement during Medication Run-In  Period and confirmed by a second 
measurement (not on the same day)  
4. Mean of 3 separate bl ood pressure measurements >180 mmHg (systolic) or 
>100 mmHg (diastolic). 
5. WOCBP with a positive urine pregnancy test 
 
At the end of the Baseline Visit, the endoscopic procedure will be scheduled for 
subjects who are still eligible for study  participation. The maximum time allowed 
between the Baseline Visit (Visit 2) and t he Endoscopic Procedure Visit (Visit 3) 
is 21 days. Provide subjects on SU medi cations with specific instructions 
regarding their medication usage pre-  and post-DMR/Sham  procedure (See 
5.3.1).  The study procedures outlined below will be performed at this Baseline (Post 
Medication Run-In) Visi t in all subjects.  
 
 Body Weight, Blood Pressure & Targeted Physical Exam  
As outlined in Section 6.2, weight and bl ood pressure will be measured in all 
subjects.  A symptom-directed physica l examination will be performed if new 
signs or symptoms are reported by a s ubject.  Abnormal findings noted at the 
previous physical exam will be reeval uated and any abnormal findings recorded. 
 
 Pregnancy Test  
A urine pregnancy test for WOCBP will be performed by a loca l laboratory.   
 
 Blood Analysis 
As outlined in Section 6.3, subjects c ontinuing to be screened for study inclusion  
will have sufficient blood drawn to complete the standard blood analysis and 
forwarded to a central laboratory for analysis.   A subject with test results outside acc eptable ranges that are indicative of an 
underlying condition that would compromise  their participation in the study based 
on the protocol-specified Exclusion Criter ia or Investigator expertise will be 
excluded from the study and consi dered to be a Screen Failure.  
 
 Renal Function 
As outlined in Section 6.5, urinary albumin  and creatinine levels will be analyzed 
to determine the UACR for evaluation of  kidney function.  A urine sample will be 
collected (at the same time as the fa sting blood sample) from the subject and 
forwarded to a central labor atory for analysis.    
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 46 of 96 
 MRE 
As outlined in Section 6.7, subjects will undergo a MRE.  
 Lifestyle Counseling 
As outlined in Section 6.7, a member of the nutrition staff will query the subject 
regarding his/her adherence to a healthy lifestyle regimen, and provide the 
subject with advice regarding improvement in his/her diet and exercise regimen, 
if needed.  Subjects will be reminded of the importance of a healthy lifestyle to 
blood glucose control.    
 SF-36 Quality of Life Questionnaire 
As outlined in Section 6.8, subjects will complete the SF-36 for a health status 
and QOL assessment.      
 PROMIS® Patient Reported Outcomes 
As outlined in Section 6.9, subjects complete PROMIS® questionnaires to evaluate physical health.    
 OAD Use, SMBG / Gl ycemia Diary Review 
The subject’s Glycemia Diary will be  revi ewed by the study site personnel for the 
occurrence of any exclusionary glycemic events, and OAD adherence. Subjects who meet the hypoglycemia or hyperglyce mia exclusion criteria as outlined in 
Section 5.2 be excluded from the study.  Subjects still eligible fo r the study will continue to perform SMBG, record 
occurrence of hypoglycemia, and continue their OADs without any changes 
through Visit 3 (Procedure).   
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent  medication use reported by the subject 
will be recorded. Any changes in medica tion will be recorded on the medication 
log.  
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any reported adv erse events by the subject or dictated 
by blood tests or office eval uation will be recorded.   
 
5.3 Visit 3: Procedure (wit hin 21 days from Visit 2) 
The procedure visit will consist of endosc opy, randomization of eligible subjects, 
and the completion of the index procedure (DMR or Sham).  All assessments are 
to be completed during a single clinic visi t.  This visit may not occur more than 21 
days after the Baseline Visit (Visit 2).   
 
 Endoscopic Evaluation 
Prior to the procedure, subjects who ar e on SU medication will be instructed by 
the site regarding specific pre- and post-procedure (DMR or Sham) SU 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 47 of 96 management.  They will be asked to take half their regular dose of SUs the day 
before the procedure, and omit taking any SU the day of the procedure.  On the 
day of the procedure,the subject will undergo endoscopy with an assessment of 
the esophagus, stomach, duodenum  and associated structures in order to ensure 
there are no conditions that would excl ude the subject from receiving the index 
procedure (DMR or Sham).    The following additional exclusion crit eria should be assessed via endoscopy 
prior to subject study enrollment:  
1. Active and uncontrolled GERD defined as grade III esophagitis or 
greater 
2. Abnormalities of the GI tract preventing endoscopic access to the 
duodenum 
3. Anatomic abnormalities in t he duodenum that would preclude the 
completion of the DMR procedur e, including tortuous anatomy 
4. Malignancy newly diagnosed by endoscopy 5. Upper gastrointestinal conditions such as ulcers, polyps, varices, 
strictures, congenital or acqui red intestinal telangiectasia 
 Any subject found to have the conditions listed in the Exclusion Criteria above 
will be considered a Screen Failure and will be excluded from further study 
participation.  
 Randomization 
Following confirmation of s ubject eligibility during t he endoscopic evaluation, the 
subject will be randomized using electroni c assignment via a web-based system  
at a 2:1 ratio to: 
 DMR Procedure  
 Sham Procedure  
 
The endocrinologist and the associated site  personnel and the subjects will be 
blinded to the treatment through the Week 24 follow-up visit, as will the Sponsor 
study team (except the proctors and tec hnichians who will be present at the 
procedure).  While the endoscopist will not  be blinded to indi vidual treatments, he 
or she will be blinded to cohort level dat a and will not be responsible for the 
diabetes management of t he study subjects.  
 Immediately following randomization, par acetamol, acetaminophen or equivalent 
will be administered to prevent pain afte r the procedure and to minimize the risk 
of premature unblinding.   
 Subject Enrollment 
Study enrollment is defined as succ essful completion of the endoscopic 
evaluation, randomization, and initiation of the index procedure, DMR or Sham. 
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 48 of 96 All subjects who are enrolled in the study  will be required to adhere to the follow-
up schedule outlined in this protocol.   
 Duodenal Mucosal Resurfacing Procedure 
The DMR procedure using the Revita™ S ystem utilizes an over the wire 
endoscopic approach to ablate the duodenum as detailed in the Instructions for Use (IFU) and Operators Manual  supplied with the study materials. Training will 
also be provided by Fractyl in advance of initiating the study.   The procedure may be completed in an endoscopic suite or in an Operating 
Room depending on the facilities and suppo rt at each investigative site. All 
subjects will be monitored before and during anesthetization by general 
anesthesia or conscious sedation per each facility’s standard protocol. A 
complete DMR procedure is defined as 5 complete ablations representing 10 
axial centimeters of circumferentia lly ablated tissue in the duodenum.   
 During the DMR procedure, a measurem ent is made by the endoscopist to 
approximate the distance in centimeters from the papill a to the proximal edge of 
the first completed ablation. This data wi ll be used to assist the endoscopist in 
the location for the biops ies at the Week 24 Visit. 
 For subjects randomized to DMR who do not receive any ablations during the 
DMR procedure, due to items such as tortuous anatomy precluding distal 
catheter delivery or erosive duodentitis, all clinical findings noted during the 
procedure will be documented in the medi cal record and in the CRFs. If the 
diameter of the subject’s duodenum prohi bits the use of the single Revita 
catheter it will be noted in the medical record and in the CRFs. The subjects will 
be followed for safety through the Week 4 visit and then disc ontinued from the 
study.  
 Sham Procedure  
The Sham procedure will consist of plac ing the Revita™ Catheter as described 
above into the duodenum for a minimum of 30 minutes and then removing it from 
the patient.   
 Post-Procedure Care & Discharge  
Unforeseen events (findings or procedures ) may occur during either the DMR or 
Sham procedures. These unforeseen event s are those that are not planned as 
part of this procedure (e.g., a drop in oxy gen saturation or evidence of intestinal 
bleeding, etc.). Unforeseen events t hat are emergent in  nature should be 
recorded as adverse events and the invest igator should reassess the subject’s 
suitability for continued participation in this study.   Immediately following the procedure, t he subject will be transported to the 
Recovery Area and monitored according to  the hospital/physician protocol for 
endoscopic procedures. The subject may be  released from the Recovery Room 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 49 of 96 to the nursing unit when they have met t he hospital’s criteria for discharge from 
the Recovery Area. Immediat e postoperative care will be dictated by the hospital 
or physician’s standard care protocol regarding post-anesthesia recovery.  
 Prior to discharge, all subjects will be examined and evaluated for the presence of any AEs that may have occurred between the time of the procedure and 
discharge. A subject’s hospital st ay can be extended based on need as 
determined by the Investigator. Subjec ts may be discharged when they meet the 
discharge criteria following the lo cal sedation protocol and discharge 
requirements.  
 Post-Procedure Glucose and Diet Management  
For people with diabetes, any procedure t hat causes them to miss a meal or 
change their usual meal plan will require  special planning to safely manage blood 
glucose. Subjects will be specifical ly instructed on appropriate post-procedure 
diet and glycemic management prior to disc harge.  Intensified glucose monitoring 
will be implemented during this period, as  discussed in Section 6.10. Subjects 
will be instructed to maintain adequate caloric intake and hydration during the 
entire post-procedure period. Guidelines fo r post-procedure, 2-week diet are as 
follows. The day of the procedure, absti nence of food is maintained (water is 
allowed but must be sipped). On Days 1–3 after the procedure, the subject may 
drink clear liquids such as tea, chick en broth and skimmed (fat -free) milk. Day 4-
6 post-procedure, the subject should begin to  eat a soft diet such as chicken or 
beef soup (broth with herbs and semoli na), nonfat yogurt, and tea and sugar-free 
gelato. Day 7-14 of the diet, the subjec t may expand their diet to include foods 
such as stew, fruit puree, yogurt and soda crackers. Training of the site 
personnel regarding the principles of nut ritional management during this peri- 
and post-procedure period will be performed at every site prior to subject study 
entry. Site personnel training will in clude the composit ion and adequacy of 
dietary intake, attention to appropriate hydration, and relevance of intake to 
glycemic control.  Following the DMR/Sham pr ocedure, subjects on SU medications will be 
instructed to restart their medicines in an incremental fashion (step-wise increase 
to pre-procedure dose) guided by how well t heir dietary intake is progressing (eg, 
tolerability of full soft diet, calorie intake) and by their blood glucose levels as 
noted during their intense glucose monitori ng efforts (refer to section 6.10 for 
additional instructions on SMBG and sect ion 6.11 for additional instructions on 
Management of Glycemia and Anti diabetic Medication).  
 After finishing the 14 day diet, a standard diabetic diet, outlined by the registered 
dietitian, will be resumed as tolerated.  
 OAD Use, SMBG and Gl ycemia Diary Review 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 50 of 96 As outlined in Sections 6.10 and 6.11, subjects will continue on their standard 
OAD regimen post-procedure, and record OAD use, blood glucose levels, and 
any hypoglycemia in the Glycemia Diary.  
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent medication reported by the subject will 
be recorded. Any changes in medication wi ll be recorded on the medication log. 
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any AEs report ed by or elicited from the subject, or 
dictated by blood tests or office evaluat ion will be recorded in the eCRF. Those 
that occur after the DMR or Sham procedure will be considered to be Treatment-
Emergent Adverse Events (TEAEs).     
5.4 Visit 4: Day 7 Telephone Call (+/-2 days) 
At Day 7 post-procedure, the subject will be contacted via telephone; no 
office/clinic visit is required. The follow ing reminders will be given and information 
collected during the call:  
 Post-Procedure Diet Reminder 
The subjects will be reminded about the s pecific 14 day post-procedure diet.   
     
 OAD and Rescue Medication Use,  SMBG, and Glycemia Diary 
Review 
The subject’s Glycemia Diary will be revi ewed by the study site personnel for 
OAD adherence, the addition of rescue medication for hyperglycemia, the 
occurrence of any hypoglycemia event, and SMBG levels (as outlined in Section 
6.10 and section 6.11). For subjects w ho had been on SU medications prior to 
the DMR/Sham procedure, a review of  dietary as well as glycemic and 
medication history will be performed to assess adequacy of their current SU dose 
and to provide further dosing recommendations, as needed.   
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent medication reported by the subject will 
be recorded. Any changes in medication wi ll be recorded on the medication log. 
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any AEs report ed by or elicited from the subject, or 
dictated by blood tests or office evaluat ion, will be recorded in the eCRF.  
 
5.5 Visit 5: Day 14 Telephone Call (+/-2 days) 
At Day 14 post-procedure, the subject will be contacted via telephone; no 
office/clinic visit will be required.  The following reminders will be given and 
information collected during the call:  
 Post-Procedure Diet Reminder 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 51 of 96 The subjects will be reminded to discont inue the specific 14-day post-procedure 
diet. As outlined in Section 6.7, subjects  will return to a standard diabetic diet as 
tolerated, as outlined by the study nutritionist.     
 OAD and Rescue Medication Use,  SMBG, and Glycemia Diary 
Review 
The subject’s Glycemia Diary will be revi ewed by the study site personnel for 
OAD adherence, the addition of rescue medication for hyperglycemia, the 
occurrence of any hypoglycemia event, and SMBG levels (as outlined in Section 
6.10 and section 6.11). For subjects w ho had been on SU medications prior to 
the DMR/Sham procedure, a review of dietary as well as glycemic and 
medication history will be performed to assess adequacy of their current SU dose 
and to provide further dosing recomm endations, as needed until patient resumes 
to the pre-procedue SU dose based on investigator clinical judgment.  
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent  medication reported by the subject is 
recorded. Any changes in medication are recorded on the medication log. 
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any AEs report ed by or elicited from the subject, or 
dictated by blood tests or office eval uation, will be recorded in the eCRF. 
 
5.6 Visit 6: Week 4 (Day 28) Clinic Visit (+/- 7 days) 
The following evaluations will be completed at the Week 4 Visit: 
 
 Body Weight, Blood Pressure & Targeted Physical Exam  
As outlined in Section 6.2, weight and bl ood pressure will be measured in all 
subjects. A symptom-directed physical examination will be conducted if new 
signs or symptoms are reported by a s ubject. Abnormal findings noted at the 
previous physical exam will be reeval uated and any abnormal findings recorded. 
 
 Blood Analysis  
As outlined in Section 6.3, subjects will  have sufficient blood drawn to complete 
the standard blood analysis and forwarded to a central laboratory for analysis.  
 
 Lifestyle Counseling 
As outlined in Section 6.5, a member of t he nutrition staff will query the subjects 
regarding their adherence to a healthy life style regimen, and provide them with 
advice about improving their diet and exercise regimen, if needed.  Subjects will 
be reminded of the importance of a healthy lifestyle to blood glucose control.   
    
 OAD and Rescue Medication Use,  SMBG, and Glycemia Diary 
Review 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 52 of 96 The subject’s Glycemia Diary will be revi ewed by the study site personnel for 
OAD adherence, the addition of rescue medication for hyperglycemia, the 
occurrence of any hypoglycemia event, and SMBG levels.  
 Management of Glycemia and Antidiabetic Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.11, subjects will  continue to take antidiabetic medication 
without any changes to the regimen unless rescue criteria are met.  
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent medication reported by the subject will 
be recorded. Any changes in medication wi ll be recorded on the medication log. 
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any AEs report ed by or elicited from the subject, or 
dictated by blood tests or office eval uation, will be recorded in the eCRF. 
 
 Blinding Assessment  
The subject will be asked about treatm ent assignment and the response will be 
recorded in the eCRF.  
5.7 Visit 7: Week 8 (Day 56) Telephone Call (+/- 2 days) 
At Week 8 post-procedure, the subjec t will be contacted via telephone; no 
office/clinic visit will be required.  The following reminders will be given and 
information collected during the call:  
 OAD and Rescue Medication Use,  SMBG, and Glycemia Diary 
Review 
The subject’s Glycemia Diary will be revi ewed by the study site personnel for 
OAD adherence, the addition of rescue medication for hyperglycemia, the 
occurrence of any hypoglycemia event, and SMBG levels.  
 Management of Glycemia and Antidiabetic Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.11, subjects will continue to take  antidiabetic medication 
without any changes to the regimen unless rescue criteria are met.  
 Lifestyle Counseling 
As outlined in Section 6.7, a member of t he nutrition staff will query the subjects 
regarding their adherence to a healthy life style regimen, and provide them with 
advice about improving their diet and exercise regimen, if needed.  Subjects will 
be reminded of the importance of a health y lifestyle to blood glucose control. 
 
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent medication reported by the subject will 
be recorded. Any changes in medication wi ll be recorded on the medication log. 
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 53 of 96 As outlined in Section 7.8 any AEs report ed by or elicited from the subject, or 
dictated by blood tests or office eval uation, will be recorded in the eCRF. 
 
5.8 Visit 8: Week 12 (Day 84) Clinic Visit (+/- 7 days) 
The following evaluations will be completed at the Week 12 Visit:   
 Body Weight, Blood Pressure & Targeted Physical Exam  
As outlined in Section 6.2, weight and bl ood pressure will be measured in all 
subjects.  A symptom-directed physical examination will be conducted if new 
signs or symptoms are reported by a s ubject. Abnormal findings noted at the 
previous physical exam will be reev aluated and any abnormal findings recorded 
 
 Blood Analysis  
As outlined in Section 6.3, subjects wi ll have sufficient blood drawn to complete 
the standard blood analysis and forwarded to a central laboratory for analysis.  
 
 Renal Function 
As outlined in Section 6.5, urinary albumin  and creatinine levels will be analyzed 
to determine the UACR for evaluation of kidney function.  A urine sample will be 
collected (at the same time as the fa sting blood sample) from the subject and 
forwarded to a central labor atory for analysis.    
 
 MRE 
As outlined in Section 6.7, subjects will undergo a MRE.  
 Lifestyle Counseling 
As outlined in Section 6.7, a member of t he nutrition staff will query the subjects 
regarding their adherence to a healthy life style regimen, and provide them with 
advice about improving their diet and exercise regimen, if needed.  Subjects will 
be reminded of the importance of a healthy lifestyle to blood glucose control.   
  
 SF-36 Quality of Life Questionnaire 
As outlined in Section 6.8, subjects will complete the SF-36 for a health status 
and QOL assessment.      
 PROMIS® Patient Reported Outcomes 
As outlined in Section 6.9, subjects complete PROMIS® questionnaires to evaluate physical health.    
 OAD and Rescue Medication Use,  SMBG, and Glycemia Diary 
Review 
The subject’s Glycemia Diary will be revi ewed by the study site personnel for 
OAD adherence, the addition of rescue medication for hyperglycemia, the 
occurrence of any hypoglycemia event, and SMBG levels.  
 Management of Glycemia and Antidiabetic Medication 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 54 of 96 As outlined in Section 6.11, subjects will  continue to take antidiabetic medication 
without any changes to the regimen unless rescue criteria are met.  
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent medication reported by the subject will 
be recorded. Any changes in medication wi ll be recorded on the medication log. 
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any AEs report ed by or elicited from the subject, or 
dictated by blood tests or office eval uation, will be recorded in the eCRF. 
 
 Blinding Assessment  
The subject will be asked about treatm ent assignment and the response will be 
recorded in the eCRF.  
5.9 Visit 9: Week 15 (Day 105) Telephone Call (+/- 2 days) 
At Week 15 post-procedure, the subjec t will be contacted via telephone; no 
office/clinic visit will be required.  The following reminders will be given and 
information collected during the call:  
 OAD and Rescue Medication Use,  SMBG, and Glycemia Diary 
Review 
The subject’s Glycemia Diary will be revi ewed by the study site personnel for 
OAD adherence, the addition of rescue medication for hyperglycemia, the 
occurrence of any hypoglycemia event, and SMBG levels. 
 
 Management of Glycemia and Antidiabetic Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.11, subjects wi ll continue to take oral antidiabetic 
medication without any changes to the r egimen unless rescue criteria are met. 
 
 Lifestyle Counseling 
As outlined in Section 6.7, a member of t he nutrition staff will query the subjects 
regarding their adherence to a healthy life style regimen, and provide them with 
advice about improving their diet and exercise regimen, if needed.  Subjects will 
be reminded of the importance of a health y lifestyle to blood glucose control. 
 
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent medication reported by the subject will 
be recorded. Any changes in medication wi ll be recorded on the medication log. 
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any AEs report ed by or elicited from the subject, or 
dictated by blood tests or office eval uation, will be recorded in the eCRF. 
 
5.10 Visit 10: Week 18 (Day 126) Clinic Visit (+/- 7 days) 
The following evaluations will be completed at the Week 18 Visit:  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 55 of 96  
 Body Weight, Blood Pressure & Targeted Physical Exam  
As outlined in Section 6.2, weight and bl ood pressure will be measured in all 
subjects. A symptom-directed physical examination will be conducted if new 
signs or symptoms are reported by a s ubject. Abnormal findings noted at the 
previous physical exam will be reeval uated and any abnormal findings recorded. 
 
 Blood Analysis  
As outlined in Section 6.3, subjects will  have sufficient blood drawn to complete 
the standard blood analysis and forwarded to a central laboratory for analysis.  
 
 Lifestyle Counseling 
As outlined in Section 6.7 a member of t he nutrition staff will query the subjects 
regarding their adherence to a healthy life style regimen, and provide them with 
advice about improving their diet and exercise regimen,  if needed. Subjects will 
be reminded of the importance of a healthy lifestyle to blood glucose control.   
  
 OAD and Rescue Medication Use,  SMBG, and Glycemia Diary 
Review 
The subject’s Glycemia Diary will be revi ewed by the study site personnel for 
OAD adherence, the addition of rescue medication for hyperglycemia, the 
occurrence of any hypoglycemia event, and SMBG levels.  
 Management of Glycemia and Antidiabetic Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.11, subjects wi ll continue to take oral antidiabetic 
medication without any changes to the r egimen unless rescue criteria are met. 
 
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent medication reported by the subject will 
be recorded. Any changes in medication wi ll be recorded on the medication log. 
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any AEs report ed by or elicited from the subject, or 
dictated by blood tests or office eval uation, will be recorded in the eCRF. 
 
5.11 Visit 11: Week 21 (Day 147) Telephone Call (+/- 2 days) 
At Week 21 post-procedure, the subjec t will be contacted via telephone; no 
office/clinic visit will be required.  The following reminders will be given and 
information collected during the call:  
 OAD and Rescue Medication Use,  SMBG, and Glycemia Diary 
Review 
The subject’s Glycemia Diary will be revi ewed by the study site personnel for 
OAD adherence, the addition of rescue medication for hyperglycemia, the 
occurrence of any hypoglycemia event, and SMBG levels.  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 56 of 96 
 Management of Glycemia and Antidiabetic Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.11, subjects wi ll continue to take oral antidiabetic 
medication without any changes to the r egimen unless rescue criteria are met. 
 
 Lifestyle Counseling 
As outlined in Section 6.7, a member of t he nutrition staff will query the subjects 
regarding their adherence to a healthy life style regimen, and provide them with 
advice about improving their diet and exercise regimen,  if needed. Subjects will 
be reminded of the importance of a health y lifestyle to blood glucose control. 
 
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent medication reported by the subject will 
be recorded. Any changes in medication wi ll be recorded on the medication log. 
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any AEs report ed by or elicited from the subject, or 
dictated by blood tests or office eval uation, will be recorded in the eCRF. 
 
5.12 Visit 12: Week 24 (Day 168)  Clinic Visit (+/- 7days) 
All subjects and the site endocrinologist and staff will be unblinded at this visit.  
 The following evaluations will be completed at the Week 24 Visit (with the exception of Endoscopic Assessment which can be completed within 7 days of the Week 24 Visit):   
 Body Weight, Blood Pressure & Targeted Physical Exam  
As outlined in Section 6.2, weight and blood pressure will be measured in all 
subjects. A symptom-directed physical examination will be conducted if new 
signs or symptoms are reported by a s ubject. Abnormal findings noted at the 
previous physical exam will be reeval uated and any abnormal findings recorded 
 
 Blood Analysis  
As outlined in Section 6.3, subjects will  have sufficient blood drawn to complete 
the standard blood analysis and forwarded to a central laboratory for analysis.  
 
 ECG 
As outlined in Section 6.4, a 12-lead ECG will be performed.  
 Renal Function 
As outlined in Section 6.5, urinary albumin  and creatinine levels will be analyzed 
to determine the UACR for evaluation of kidney function. A urine sample will be 
collected (at the same time as the fa sting blood sample) from the subject and 
forwarded to a central labor atory for analysis.    
   
 Lifestyle Counseling  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 57 of 96 As outlined in Section 6.7 a member of t he nutrition staff will query the subjects 
regarding their adherence to a healthy life style regimen, and provide them with 
advice about improving their diet and exercise regimen,  if needed. Subjects will 
be reminded of the importance of a health y lifestyle to blood glucose control. 
 
 SF-36 Quality of Life Questionnaire 
As outlined in Section 6.8, subjects will complete the SF-36 for a health status 
and QOL assessment.       
 PROMIS® Patient Reported Outcomes 
As outlined in Section 6.9, subjects complete PROMIS® questionnaires to evaluate physical health.    
 OAD and Rescue Medication Use,  SMBG, and Glycemia Diary 
Review 
The subject’s Glycemia Diary will be revi ewed by the study site personnel for 
OAD adherence, the addition of rescue medication for hyperglycemia, the 
occurrence of any hypoglycemia event, and SMBG levels.  
 Management of Glycemia and Antidiabetic Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.11, subjects cont inue to take all antidiabetic medication 
without any changes to the regimen unless rescue criteria are met. Subjects in the Sham treatment arm on SUs who are unblinded, and are offered and accept 
to undergo the DMR procedure, will be pr ovided with specific peri-procedural 
instructions regarding their SU  dosing (see Section 5.12.13). 
 
 Concomitant Medication 
As outlined in Section 6.12, all concurrent  medication reported by the subject will 
be recorded. Any changes in medication wi ll be recorded on the medication log. 
 
 Adverse Events (AEs)  
As outlined in Section 7.8, any AEs report ed by or elicited from the subject, or 
dictated by blood tests or office eval uation, will be recorded in the eCRF. 
Subjects with an ongoing possibly and probably device and procedure related 
AEs reported at week 24 follow up visit will  be followed until resolution. This will 
also also include AEs (signs and sympto ms) reported during 24 week follow up 
period but without a definitiv e diagnosis and/or attributi on of the cause at this 
visit.  
 
 For Subjects Treated with the DMR Procedure Only 
Endoscopy and Endoscopic Evaluation  
A follow up endoscopic evaluation to vis ually examine the treatment site and 
adjacent tissues will be conducted a fter all Week 24 Visit assessments are 
complete and within 7 days of visit 12 / w eek 24. A video of the procedure will be 
obtained, as well as any Investigat or notes detailing their observations. 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 58 of 96  
Biopsy  During the 24 week follow-up endoscopy, abl ation site biopsies will be taken to 
evaluate the mucosal tissue that has regrown post DMR procedure.     
 During the index DMR procedure, the endo scopist approximated the distance in 
centimeters from the papilla to the proximal edge of the first completed ablation. 
This distance was documented at the ti me of the procedure and will be available 
to the endoscopist during the follow-up endoscopy. Biopsies will be taken from 
within the first ablation zone whose lengt h is defined as the proximal edge, as 
determined above, to a distanc e of 2.0 cm distal whic h corresponds to the length 
of the Revita™ Catheter abl ation balloon. This techniqu e will ensure biopsies are 
taken from a location that wa s previously ablated.   
 A total of 4 biopsies will be taken from  the ablation zone, with one biopsy taken 
from each circumferential quadrant on the lumen. A single biopsy from the un-
ablated tissue proximal to the papilla will serve as a control. In addition, the Investigator will take  biopsies in any ablated area where the 
tissue appears abnormal under en doscopic visualization. 
 Biopsies will be taken using large capacity, radial jaw forceps and placed in 10% formalin containers labeled with s ubject ID and sample location.  
 Samples will be embedded in paraffin, and thin samples of each biopsy will be stained (hematoxylin and eosin; trichr ome) to assess mucosal regrowth, 
inflammation and fibrosis using a 0- 4 ordinal scoring system. The following 
assessments will be made comparing t he ablated biopsies to the control: 
 Villous Formation 
 Acute Inflammation 
 Chronic Inflammation 
 Fibrosis 
The biopsy specimen will be analyzed at  a central pathology laboratory in 
accordance with Good Laboratory Practice Regulations under the direction of a 
Board Certified Pathologist.  
 
 For Subjects Treated with the Sham Procedure 
At the Week 24 Visit, all subjects initia lly treated with the Sham Procedure will 
have the same evaluations as the subj ects in the DMR tr eatment group listed 
above, except  for the 24 Week Follow-up en doscopy, endoscopic evaluation and 
biopsy. For subjects who accept the o ffer to crossover, the Endoscopy / DMR 
procedure will be scheduled within 21 days of this Week 24 Visit.   During the time 
between the Week 24 Visit and the crossove r to DMR (Visit 3C), medications 
should be held stable. Prior to the procedur e, subjects who are on SU medication 
will be instructed by the site regardi ng specific pre- and post-procedure SU 
management.  They will be asked to take half their regular dose of SUs the day 
before the procedure, and omit  taking any SU the day of the procedure.   
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 59 of 96  
Note: Subjects that choose not to crossover from sham to DMR will be 
discontinued (withdrawn) from the study and the E nd of Study eCRFs will be 
completed. 
 
5.13 Visit 3C: Crossover to DMR Visit (+21 days from Visit 12) 
This visit is for Sham subjects onl y. The endoscopy and the DMR procedure will 
be completed at this visit. A video of t he procedure will be obtained, as well as 
any Investigator notes detailing their observations.  
 
Once a Sham subject is treated with the DMR procedure, these subjects 
complete follow-up study Visits 4 (Day 7) through 12 (Week 24) as described in 
the protocol in Sections 5.4 through 5.12 (which are referred to as Visits 4C – 
12C for the Sham crossover group). Thes e visits after the crossover to DMR 
include the exact same assessments as the initial visits and these crossover 
subjects will now be following the same  visit schedule as a subject that was 
initially randomized to DMR.   
 Note: Subjects randomized to Sham who crossover to DMR but do not receive 
any ablations during the DMR procedure will have all clinical findings 
documented, and will be followed through the 4 week post crossover visit and 
then discontinued from the study.  
5.14 COVID-19 Exceptions 
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, in-clinic  assessments, follow up endoscopic 
evaluations, biopsies and crossover proc edures may not be offered to subjects 
unless the following cr iteria are met: 
 It is safe for subj ects, site staff, and Sponsor Proctor (for crossover visits 
only) to travel to the study site during the given window  
 The study site allows on-site clinic al research activities and elective 
procedures 
 If both of these criteria are not met and subjects are unable to be seen on site, 
the study team will contact subjects via telephone to collect adverse events and concomitant medication changes  through Week 24.     
 
 
5.15 Unscheduled Visits 
An unscheduled visit can occur at any time during the study. All unscheduled 
visits will be documented in the s ource documentation and in the eCRF. 
 
5.16 Subject Withdrawal  & Early Termination 
All subjects initially randomized to the DMR procedure will be followed for 24 
weeks post-procedure.  All subjects init ially randomized to the Sham procedure 
will be followed for 24 weeks, crossove r to DMR and be followed for 24 weeks 
post crossover.  While study withdrawal is discouraged, subjects may withdraw 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 60 of 96 from the study at any ti me, with or without reason, and without prejudice to 
further treatment.  Reasonable  efforts will be made by the investigational site to 
obtain a final data set from  the subject, corresponding to  data captured at Visit 
12.  Reasons for withdrawal include physi cian discretion, subject choice to 
withdraw consent, loss to follow-up and death, as described below.   
 
 Physician Discretion: the investig ator determines that, for medical 
reasons, it is in the best interest of the subject to discontinue 
participation in the study.  If an AE or SAE occurs that could affect the 
subject’s safety or well-being, this should be documented in the eCRF as a reason for a subject’s study  participation di scontinuation. 
 Lost to Follow-Up:  Unable to locate the subject despite documented 
attempts to notify via tel ephone, email or mail.    
 Subject Withdrawal:  The subjec t requests to terminate his/her 
involvement in the study, therefor e withdrawing his/her consent to 
participate in the study (the invest igator must thoroughly document the 
reasons for termination, making all e ffort to obtain information about 
possible underlying AEs leading to t he decision to withdraw from study 
participation).  
 Death:  If possible, an autopsy and/or death certif icate should be 
obtained in order to document  the cause of death. 
 
All subjects enrolled in the clinical st udy (including those withdrawn from the 
clinical study or lost to follow-up) shall be accounted for and documented. If a 
subject withdraws from the clinical in vestigation, the reason(s) shall be 
documented in the eCRF. All AEs ongoing at time of study end will be followed 
up until resolution or deemed to be chronic or stable. Withdrawn subjects will not 
be replaced.  
 
6 Study Procedures & Assessments 
 
6.1 Demographics/Medical History/Physical Exam 
Subject demographics, medical history and a full physical exam are completed 
by the physician or assigned medical perso nnel. If necessary, the subject’s HCP 
may be asked to provide medical record s about the subject’s medical history. 
Specific parameters to  be captured include: 
 Demographic information, including date of birth, sex, race, and ethnicity 
 Diabetes history, including durati on, prior therapy, current therapy 
 History of macrovascular compli cations: coronary heart disease, 
cerebrovascular disease, and peripheral arterial disease 
 Microvascular complications: retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy 
 Concurrent health conditions 
 Previous surgeries/treatments 
 Physical exam findings with a focus specifically for T2D, including: 
- Vital signs:  pulse, blood pressure 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 61 of 96 - Height, weight 
- Fundoscopic exam - Thyroid palpation - Abdominal exam - Heart and lung auscultation - Deep tendon reflex and sensation (v ibration, pinprick) assessment in 
distal lower extremities 
- Skin examination 
 
6.2 Body Weight, Blood Pressure & Targeted Physical Exam  
Weight and blood pressure will be  obtained in all subjects.   
 Body weight will be measured to t he nearest 0.1 kg on a calibrated 
scale in the morning before breakfast after a visit to the lavatory with 
the subject in light clothing with shoes removed. 
 
 Blood pressure will be measured in a sitting position in duplicate (in 
same arm) after 15 min of rest. Note: For Eligibility assessment, use 
the mean of 3 separate blood pr essure measurements >180 mmHg 
(systolic) or >100 mmHg (diastolic). 
 A symptom-directed physical examinati on will be conducted if new signs or 
symptoms are reported by t he subject.  Abnormal findings noted at the previous 
physical exam will be reevaluated and any abnormal findings recorded.  
 
6.3 Blood Analysis 
Subjects will have sufficient fasting blood drawn to complete the following tests in a schedule as outlined in Appendi x 1 & 2. As indicated in the table below, the test 
name will have the associated spec ific evaluations included.  
 All blood drawn for analysis should be performed after at least an 8-hour 
overnight fast.  
Test Name Evaluation to be Included 
Complete Blood Count White Blood Cell Count  
White Blood Cell Differential Total Hemoglobin Hematocrit Platelet Count 
Blood Chemistry  Blood Urea Nitrogen 
Calcium Chloride Creatinine & calculated eGFR Potassium Sodium Albumin 
Liver Panel ALT 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 62 of 96 AST 
Total Bilirubin Alkaline Phosphatase Ferritin 
Pancreatic Enzymes Amylase 
Lipase 
Thyroid Stimulating Hormone 
(TSH) Same 
Fasting Lipid Panel Total Cholesterol 
High Density Lipoprotein (HDL) Low Density Lipoprotein (LDL) Tri
glycerides 
Fastin g Plasma Glucose Same 
Glycosylated hemoglobin 
(A1c) Same 
Fasting C-Peptide  Same 
Fastin g Insulin Same 
H.pylori 
(Screening Visit Onl y) Same 
 
At the Screening visit, subjects with test  results outside acceptable ranges that 
are indicative of an underlying condi tion that would compromise their 
participation in the study, based on protocol-specified E xclusion Criteria or the 
Investigator’s expertise, will be excluded from the study and considered to be 
Screen Failures. All out-of-range laborator y values obtained duri ng the course of 
the study will be deemed as clinically signific ant or not clinically significant by the 
investigator. Clinically significant val ues will be considered AEs and recorded as 
such on the eCRFs, as described in Section 7.8.  Blood samples will be analyzed at a central laboratory. 
 
6.4 Electrocardiogram 
A 12-lead ECG will be performed in a schedule as outlined in Appendix 1 & 2.  Clinically relevant abnormal findings wi ll be reported as AEs, if they are newly 
discovered after inclusion in the study.  
6.5 Renal Function 
Urinary albumin and creatinine levels will be obtained to evaluate renal function.  
A urine sample will be collected (at the same time as the fasting blood sample) 
from the subject and forwarded to a cent ral laboratory for analysis. Analyses will 
include albumin, creatinine and albumin/creatinine ratio.  
 
6.6 MRE 
Subjects will undergo MRE as outlined in Appendi x 1 & 2 at the Baseline (Visit 2) 
to evaluate the duodenum and at Week 12 (V isit 8) to assess the entire 10 cm 
length of treated duodenum for thermal injury. Clinically-relevant abnormal 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 63 of 96 findings will be reported as AEs, if they are newly discovered after inclusion in 
the study.  
6.7 Lifestyle Counseling 
Subjects will be provided with standard diab etic nutrition, healthy lifestyle and 
exercise guidance that is consistent with ADA standards at Screening, and from 
Baseline (Visit 2) up to Week 24 (Visit 12) to educate them on the importance of 
diet in relation to blood glucose contro l.  Compliance with diet and lifestyle 
recommendations will be discussed with the subject throughout the study and 
specifically in the case of insufficient gl ycemic control. The details are provided in 
the Study Reference Manual.  
6.8 SF-36 Quality of Life Questionnaire 
Subjects will complete an assessment of he alth status and qualit y of life, the SF-
36 Questionnaire, at Baseline, and Weeks 12 and 24. These measures rely upon 
patient self-reporting. The SF-36 asks 36 questions to measure functional health 
and well-being from the patient's point of vi ew. It is a practical, reliable and valid 
measure of physical and mental health t hat can be completed in five to ten 
minutes.  
6.9 PROMIS® (Patient-Reported Outcom es Measurement Information System) 
Subjects will complete the PROMIS® at Baseline, 12 and 24 Week Visits. PROMIS® is a set of person-centered measures that will be used to evaluate 
and monitor physical health in subjects. For the purposes of this study, the 
gastrointestinal symptom domains were  chosen including nausea/vomiting, 
gas/bloating, diarrhea and belly pain. 
 
6.10 Subject Self-Monito ring of Blood Glucose (SMBG) and Glycemia Diary 
Subjects will be provided with a Glycemi a Diary, a home blood glucose meter 
and supplies for use at home during the study, and will be instructed in correct 
SMBG technique. Subjects will measure blood glucoses according to a pre-specified schedule, presented below, and record them in their Glycemia Diary. 
 
 Except as indicated for the Post -Procedure Intensive Monitoring Phase 
(Days 0-14), all subjects will be required to test a fasting (pre-breakfast) 
and a pre-dinner blood glucose level us ing SMBG daily.  In addition, they 
will perform more intensive monitoring of blood glucose, 4 times per day (once pre-breakfast [fasting] AND onc e before lunch, once before dinner, 
and once before bed), on at least 3 days on the week before each clinic 
visit and each telephone visit.   
 
 On Days 0-14 following the DMR pr ocedure (the Post-Procedure Intensive 
Monitoring Phase), subjects will be required to perform more intensive 
monitoring of blood glucose, 4 times per  day (once pre-breakfast [fasting] 
AND once before lunch, once before dinner, and once before bed), every 
single day during this period. 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 64 of 96  
 Subjects will be requested to monitor blood glucose levels with increased 
frequency whenever they experience any i llnesses (eg, cold, flu), or have 
symptoms of hyper- or hypoglycemia. 
 Subjects will be instructed to bring their Glycemia Diary to the clinic at every 
study visit, and to scan/fax 7- day records to the site pr ior to each telephone visit. 
 While symptoms of hyper- or hypoglycemi a can be variable across patients with 
diabetes, the symptoms outline below may ty pically be associated with abnormal 
blood glucose levels, and should prompt  subjects to perform SMBG more 
frequently:   
Low Blood Glucose Symptoms 
 Sweating  
 Shaking  
 Sudden mood changes (irritated)  
 Hunger pangs  
 Difficulty speaking  
 Rapid heartbeat  
 Epileptic seizure  
 Loss of consciousness  
 High Blood Glucose Symptoms 
 Frequent urination  
 Increased thirst  
 Dry mouth 
 
 
Below are some symptoms that can apply to both high and low blood glucose: 
 Fatigue  
 Dizziness  
 Headache  
 Distorted vision  
 Nausea  
 Concentration problems  
 Confusion  
 Difficulty standing and walking  
 Muscle spasms  
 Tired and/or weak feeling  
 
6.11 Management of Glycemia a nd Antidiabetic Medication 
While the subjects are in the study, they  will continue seeing their HCPs per their 
customary schedule, or as needed, for all non-glucose related medical issues.  
The management of the s ubjects’ glycemic control will be carried out by the 
investigator at the study site, w ho will be guided by the hyperglycemia and 
hypoglycemia management guidelines as outlined in the protocol (Section 
6.11.2).  The investigator  will keep the subjects’ HCPs apprised of any diabetes 
medication changes, and may seek their input if needed. At the completion of the 
study, the subjects’ HCPs will resume  full management of their diabetes. 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 65 of 96  
Over the course of the study, subject’ s glycemia will be managed by assessing 
the following parameters: 
 Antidiabetic medication use 
 SMBG values as recorded in the Glycemia Diary  
 A1c levels 
 Occurrence of hypoglycemia 
 Symptomatic severe hyperglycemia 
 All study Investigators and study site personnel will be instructed in the 
importance of SMBG, Glycemia Diary review, and meticulous diabetes 
management with lifestyle counseling at t he study visits, especially for subjects 
whose glucose values exceed accepted thresholds (i.e., >180 mg/dL [10.0 mmol/L]). The Investigator will be in structed to probe for factors that may 
contribute to inadequate glycemic control, such as:  
 Compliance with concurrent diabetes therapies 
 Compliance with diet and exercise guidelines 
 Intercurrent disease 
 Subjects will fax/scan their Glycemi a Diary results prior to the telephone 
contacts, and bring their Glycemia Diar ies to every study visit. During these 
telephone and on-site visits, t he SMBG levels recorded in the Glycemia Diary will 
be reviewed, and compliance with concu rrent diabetes therapies and diet and 
exercise guidelines will be assessed.  Additional lifestyle and nutritional 
counseling will be provided to educate subjects on the importance of diet and 
exercise in relation to blood glucose control.  Antidiabetic medication regime establ ished during the Run-In Period will be 
continued through the index procedure with out change, except for SU use, until 
the Week 24 visit (Visit 12), unless subjects  meet the Study Exclusion criteria as 
outlined in Section 4.1.2, at the Baseline Visit (Post Medication Run-In, Visit 2) or 
unless they meet the on-tr eatment rescue therapy criteria as outlined below. 
Subjects on SU medications at study entry who qualify for the DMR/Sham 
procedure will be instructed to take half their usual dose of SUs the day before 
the DMR/Sham procedure, and no SU inta ke the day of the procedure.  
Following the procedure, subjects on SU medications will be instructed to restart their medicines in an incremental fashi on (step-wise increase to pre-procedure 
dose) guided by how well their dietary inta ke is progressing (eg, tolerability of full 
soft diet, calorie intake), by their bl ood glucose levels as noted during their 
intense glucose monitoring efforts and investigator clinical judgment. 
 
 Hyperglycemia Management 
If any 2 consecutive FPG values as determined by SMBG exceed the threshold 
limits outlined below, the subject will be called for an unscheduled visit as soon 
as possible.  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 66 of 96  
The threshold values for rescue treatment will be defined as follows: 
 Baseline up to Week 12: FPG > 220 mg/dL (12.2 mmol/L) 
 Week 12 up to Week 24: FPG >200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) or no 
improvement in A1c from Baseline  
• A confirmatory FPG is to be obtained by the local or central laboratory. 
If the confirmatory FPG exceeds the threshold value, the investigator 
will perform an assessment for rescue using the factor s listed below: 
• Blood glucose absolute value compared to rescue threshold 
• Overall trajectory of  FPG re lative to run-in and baseline 
• Isolated incident vs a persistent  elevation in blood sugar  
• Presence or absence of hyperglycemic symptoms  
• Presence or absence of an assignable cause of high blood sugar (e.g. 
intercurrent infection) 
 
At Week 24, subjects who were in the sham-treated group and who accept the 
offer to crossover to the DMR procedure w ill be assessed by the investigator for 
rescue therapy based on the criteria above if  they meet the threshold value.   
 The DMR-treated subjects will be offered re scue therapy at Week 24 if they have 
an HbA1c >8% or no improvement in A1 c from baseline, and subsequently will 
be offered treatment escalation at 12-week intervals if their HbA1c levels exceed 
8%.  At the beginning of their study participati on, randomized subjects will be on 2 or 3 
oral antidiabetic medications (OADs), one of which must be metformin. Protocol-
specified guidance on escalation of  treatment based on the above glycemic 
criteria, occurring at 12-week interval s, is outlined in following Table: 
  
Hyperglycemia Rescue Therapy Guidelines: 
On-Stud y Regimen  Dose Adequac y1 Rescue Re gimen 
Metformin + other 
OAD(s) Submaximal metformin 
only ↑ metformin dose if 
tolerated 
Submaximal other OAD onl
y2 ↑ other OAD dose if 
tolerated 
Submaximal both ↑ metformin dose if 
tolerated; if not, ↑ other 
OAD dose if tolerated2 
Metformin + other OAD
(s) Maximally tolerated Add Liraglutide 1.23 mg 
subcutaneous (sc) daily4 
Metformin, other OAD(s), Liraglutide 1.2 m
g Maximally tolerated 
OADs ↑Liraglutide to 1.8 mg sc 
daily 
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 67 of 96  Refer to Appendix 3 Table 8.3 of the American Diabetes Association (ADA) Standard of 
Medical Care in Diabetes 2018 for the maximum approved daily dose of non-insulin 
glucose lowering agents.  
 
2 If a subject is on submaximal SU dose, that dose can be maintained.  
 
3 The choice of Liraglutide as a rescue agent was made to ensure homogeneity for the 
treatment population and ensure maximum efficacy for patients failing two to three 
OADs.    
 
4 Investigators are advised to follow the package insert for Liraglutide, namely to start at 
0.6mg sc daily for two weeks and then escalate to 1.2mg sc daily thereafter, if 
tolerated, to reduce the risk of GI side effects.  
 
Prior to starting Liraglutide rescue t herapy, a careful GI history should be 
obtained and the presence of nausea, vomi ting or diarrhea be recorded prior to 
the initiation of liraglutide treatment. S ubjects who are not felt to be candidates 
for Liraglutide therapy based on the Inve stigator’s judgement, or who do not 
tolerate the drug, may have an   OAD that  the subject is not taking (TZD or DPP-
4 inhibitor or SGLT2 inhi bitor or SU) added to their regimen, and prescribed as 
per labeled instructions.  For rescue t herapy with SUs, only glipizide or 
glimepiride use is allowed.  
 For subjects who may require more intensive diabetes management, investigators will be counseled to cons ider initiating insulin therapy if blood 
glucose is ≥300 mg/dL (16.7 mmol/L) or HbA1C is ≥10% or if the patient has 
persistent symptoms of hyperglycemia (i .e., polyuria or polydipsia). As the 
patient’s glucose toxicity resolves, the r egimen may, potentially, be simplified. If 
subjects remain poorly controlled despite in tensification therapy with insulin, they 
will be discontinued from the study.  
 Hypoglycemia Management 
Hypoglycemia is the major limiting factor in the gl ycemic management of both 
T1D and T2D. Subjects entering the Sc reening Phase of the study will be 
identified as having T2D without hypogl ycemia unawareness or a history of 
severe hypoglycemia (more than 1 seve re hypoglycemic event, as defined by 
need for third-party-assistance, in the la st year). During study conduct, however, 
subjects may be at risk of experienci ng hypoglycemia due to the combination of 
background antidiabetic medicati on use and procedure effects.  
 The International Hypoglycaemia St udy Group (2017) has classified  
hypoglycemia as outlined in following Table:  Hypoglycemia Definition and Treatment Guidelines: 
 Hypoglycemia Criteria Description 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 68 of 96 Glucose alert value ≤70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L) Suffici ently low for treatment with 
fast-acting carbohydrate 
Clinically significant hypoglycemia <54 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L) Sufficient ly low to indicate serious, 
clinically important hypoglycemia 
Severe hypoglycemia No specific glucose 
threshold Hypoglycemia associated with 
severe cognitive impairment, requiring external assistance for recover
y 
 During the Run-in Phase (Screening th rough Procedure), hypoglycemia meeting 
the criteria outlined bel ow will be exclusionary. 
 
H
ypoglycemia  Criteria Outcome 
 Any severe hypoglycemic event, defined as 
hypoglycemia requiring third-party 
assistance; or  
 Any clinically significant hypoglycemic 
event, defined as self-monitored or laboratory plasma glucose level < 54 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L); or  
 ≥ 2 glucose alert values ≤70 mg/dL (3.9 
mmol/L) unless a clear correctable precipitatin
g factor can be identified  Immediate treatment of 
hypoglycemia 
 Subject exclusion from study  
 
Hypoglycemia that occurs following random ization, whether not ed with SMBG or 
due to symptoms, must be recorded in the Glycemia Diary and treated. Glucose 
(15–20 g) is the preferred treatment for the conscious individual with 
hypoglycemia at the glucose alert value of ≤70 mg/dL [3.9 mmol/L]), although 
any form of carbohydrate that contains  glucose may be used. Fifteen minutes 
after treatment, if SMBG shows continued hypoglycemia, the treatment should be 
repeated. Once SMBG-obtained value retu rns to normal, the individual should 
consume a meal or snack to pr event recurrence of hypoglycemia. 
 The use of glucagon is indicated for the treatment of hypoglycemia in people 
unable or unwilling to consume carbohydrat es by mouth. Glucagon should be 
prescribed for all individuals at incr eased risk of clinically significant 
hypoglycemia, defined as blood glucose <54 mg /dL (3.0 mmol/L), su ch that it is 
available should it be needed.  Patients are instructed to contact the Inve stigative site as soon as possible for 
review of Glycemia Diary data and to assess if a change in glycemic therapy is required in case one of the following occurs: 
1. any severe hypoglycemic episode 2. 2 or more previously unreported episodes of blood glucose ≤70 mg/dl  
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 69 of 96 If a subject has symptoms suggestive of hypoglycemia, the subject should 
perform SMBG, and treat if indicated,  as discussed regarding hypoglycemia 
management above (6.11.2).  However, if  it is not possible to obtain a 
confirmatory SMBG value in the setting of symptoms suggestive of 
hypoglycemia, the subject should a ssume the symptoms were due to 
hypoglycemia and should be treat ed. All glucose values ≤70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L), 
and all symptomatic treated episodes of hypoglycemia, with or without a SMBG 
value, should be recorded in the subj ect’s Glycemia Diary. Information on 
hypoglycemia will be transcribed from t he diary onto the hypoglycemia eCRF 
page by the site. Because the analysis for hypoglycemia will be based on data recorded on the Hypoglycemia Reporti ng eCRF page and not the AE eCRF 
page, it is requested that t he Investigator not report the hypoglycemic events on 
the AE eCRF page unless the hypoglycemia epi sode meets the cr iteria of an 
SAE. However, the Investigator is not prohibited from characterizing 
hypoglycemia as an AE. Any event of hypoglycemia reported as an AE will be 
cross-checked to ensure that the event  is also reported on the Hypoglycemia 
Reporting eCRF page.   In the case of symptomatic hypoglycemi a or severe hypoglycemia appropriate 
adjustment of antidiabetic therapy, such as a dose reduction / discontinuation of 
ongoing rescue medication or existing ba ckground therapy can be initiated. 
Reduction or discontinuation of ongoing rescue medication should be considered 
before a reduction in the dose of existing background therapy. 
 
6.12 Concomitant Medications 
All concomitant medications will be recor ded at the Screening Visit. The use of 
ongoing and any new medications will then be noted at each following study visit.  
All medication use will be captured in the source documents and on the 
appropriate eCRF page. The following information will be recorded for each 
medication: name, indication, dos e, frequency, start date, end date. 
  
7 Study Management 
 
7.1 Regulatory Compliance  
This clinical trial will be conducted acco rding to 21 CFR Part 812, 21 CFR Part 
50, 21 CFR Part 56; EN ISO 14155:2011; GC P principles and the principles of 
the World Medical Association Declar ation of Helsinki 1964 (including all 
amendments and Notes of Clarification, up to and including the Scotland 2000 
amendment and Tokyo 2004 Note of Clarification). The Investigator will conduct all aspects of this trial in accordance wit h all national, state,  and local laws or 
regulations. 
 
7.2 Institutional Review  Board (IRB) Review 
IRB approval is required for each instit ution participating in this clinical 
investigation. Investi gators are responsible fo r obtaining and maintaining 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 70 of 96 approval of the study, including the subject consent forms and recruitment 
materials, by their institution’s IR B. The IRB approved Informed Consent Form 
must be retained at the investigational site and made available for inspection.  
 The clinical site’s IRB must meet all re levant regulatory requi rements. The study 
protocol and ICFs will be reviewed by the IRB, and written approval from the 
committee must be received by Fractyl prio r to enrolling subjects into the study. 
The protocol must be re-approved by the IRB upon receipt of amendments and 
annually, as local regulatory requirements require.  The Investigator is responsible for s ubmitting all protocol changes and SAE 
reports to the IRB according to local procedures. At a mi nimum, all SAEs 
requiring an investigational device exempt ion safety report must be immediately 
reported.  In accordance with applicable local regulat ory requirements, the Investigator may 
be obligated to provide periodic safety updates on the conduct of the study at his 
or her site and notification of study closure to the IRB. Such periodic safety 
updates and notifications are the responsibility of the In vestigator and not of the 
Sponsor.  All relevant correspondence from the IRB will be forwarded by the respective study site to the Sponsor in a timely fashion. 
 
7.3 Study Records 
All information and data sent to Fracty l or their authorized representatives 
concerning subjects or their participation in  this study are considered confidential. 
All data used in the analysis and reporting of this evaluation will be used in a 
manner without identifiable re ference to the subject. 
 The following records must be maintained in designated Fractyl Clinical Study 
administrative files: 
 Clinical protocol  and all amendments 
 Investigator’s Brochure 
 IRB Roster 
 IRB approval letter(s) and approved informed consent(s) (including any 
revisions) 
 Approved advertisements for subject recruitment (if applicable) 
 Correspondence with the IRB  
 Signed Clinical Study Agreement 
 Site authorized personnel signatur e list/Delegation of Authority Log 
 Signed Non-Disclos ure Agreement  
 Curriculum vitae for all investigators  
 Financial Disclosure Forms 
 Correspondence relating to this study  (with Sponsor, clinical monitors, 
other Investigators, etc.) 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 71 of 96  IFU 
 Device Accountability Log and device related paperwork (including 
shipping documents, invoices, device return log, etc.) 
 Normal value(s)/Range(s) for all laboratories used 
 Laboratory certification(s) for all laboratories used  
 Monitoring Letters/Report(s) and S ponsor Representative Signature Log 
 eCRF Completion Guidelines 
 Reports (including Adverse Event repor ts, annual reports and final reports 
from Investigator and Sponsor) 
 The following records must be maintained for each subject enrolled in the study: 
 Signed subject consent form 
 All completed eCRFs 
 Record of any side effects, device malfunction, and treatment failures 
(with supporting documentation) 
 Procedure reports, nursing notes, and subject office files 
 Patient diaries 
 Copies of all laboratory records 
 Records of any interventions (procedure reports, nursing notes, etc.) 
 Reports of all imaging, in cluding representative images 
 Records related to subject deaths duri ng the investigation (including death 
records, death certificate and autopsy report, if performed). 
 
The Investigator or Investigational site will maintain in original format all essential 
study documents and source documentation that support the data collected on 
the subjects in compliance with GCP st andards and all applicable federal, state, 
and local laws, rules and regulations relate d to the conduct of a clinical study.  
Investigator files containing all record s and reports of the in vestigation should be 
retained for a minimum of two years or  longer after approval of a marketing 
application, two years after records are no longer required to support marketing 
application, or at least 2 years have el apsed since the formal discontinuation of 
clinical development of the DMR procedure. It is Fractyl’s responsibility to inform 
the Investigator when these documents no longer need to be maintained. To 
avoid any error, the investigator shoul d contact Fractyl before destroying any 
records and reports pertaining to the study  to ensure they no longer need to be 
retained. The Investigator will take meas ures to ensure that  these essential 
documents are not accidentally damaged or destroyed. If for any reason the 
Investigator withdraws responsibility for maintaining these essential documents, 
custody must be transferred to an indivi dual who will assume responsibility, and 
Fractyl must receive writt en notification of this custodial change. Notice of 
transfer should be submitted to the FDA not later than 10 working days after the 
Sponsor has been notif ied of the change. 
 
7.4 Study Reports 
Investigators are requir ed to prepare and submit the following complete, 
accurate, and timely reports as outlined in the following table. 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 72 of 96  
    Responsibilities for Prepar ing & Submitting Reports 
 
Type of Report Prepared by 
Investi gator for Time of Notification 
(From Documented Event ) 
Case Report Forms 
(workin g copy) Fractyl Ready for monitoring within 10 
workin g days 
Serious Adverse Event 
(device related or not ) Fractyl, IRB 
(as required ) Within 24 hours of knowledge 
Device Malfunction Fract yl Within 24 hours of knowled ge 
Subject death during the 
investi gation Fractyl and IRB Within 24 hours of knowledge 
Unanticipated Adverse 
Device Effect Fractyl, IRB  
(as required ) Within 24 hours of knowledge 
Subject withdrawal Fract yl Within 7 da ys of knowled ge 
Withdrawal of IRB/EC 
approval Fractyl  Within 24 hours of knowledge 
Deviation from 
investi gational protocol Fractyl, IRB  
(as required ) Within 7 days of knowledge 
Informed consent not 
obtained from sub ject Fractyl and IRB Within 24 hours of knowledge 
Annual Progress report Fractyl and IRB Within 1 month of annual 
IRB/Approval date 
Final summary report Fractyl, IRB  
(as required ) Within 3 months of study 
completion 
Other information as requested b
y Fract yl, IRBAs appropriate As requested 
 Reports generated for this clinical investi gation should be stored in accordance 
with section 7.3.    Investigator’s Annual and Final Reports Each year a summary report is prepared by  the Study Principal Investigator and 
Sponsor providing a synopsis of the subjec ts treated to date, safety profile, as 
well as other pertinent clinical information associated with the device usage. The report is provided to each study site Invest igator to file reports as required by 
IRB, local guidelines and government regulations.   
  Upon completion or termination of the study  a final report is prepared.  This 
report contains a critical evaluation of all data collected during the course of the 
investigation at each instit ution.  The report must be signed by the Principal 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 73 of 96 Investigator at the site and is provided to the IRB and a copy to Fractyl.  Any 
modifications to this final  report must be reviewed and  approved by Fractyl.   
 
7.5 Device Accountability 
All devices received for this trial are inventoried and accounted for throughout the 
study. The devices must be stored in  a secure, limited-access area. Upon 
request by the Sponsor or study comple tion, all unused consumable devices and 
all pieces of capital equipment are retu rned to Fractyl. No devices may be used 
outside this trial except by authorized investigators in accordance with the 
protocol.  Devices that do not function properly  during use or others that may be 
determined by the Sponsor to be needed fo r post use evaluation are retained by 
the site until the evaluation is complete at  which time they are returned to the 
Sponsor.   
7.6 Protocol Deviations  
The investigator must not make changes or  deviate from the protocol, except to 
protect the life and physica l well-being of a subject in an emergency. The 
investigator shall notify the Sponsor and t he reviewing IRB (as applicable) of any 
deviation from the investigational plan to protect the life or ph ysical well-being of 
a subject in an emergency, and those devia tions which affect the scientific 
integrity of the clinical investigations. Such notice shall be given as soon as 
possible, but no later than 24 hours a fter the emergency o ccurred, or per 
prevailing local requirements,  if sooner than 24 hours.  
 
All deviations from the investigational  plan must be documented and reported to 
the Sponsor using entry onto the eCRF. Sites may also be required to report 
deviations to the IRB, per local guid elines and government regulations.  
 Deviations are reviewed and evaluated on an ongoing basis and, as necessary, 
appropriate corrective and preven tive actions (including notification, center re-
training, or discontin uation) are put into place by the Sponsor. 
 
7.7 Investigational Site Termination 
Fractyl reserves the right to terminate an investigational site for any of the 
following reasons: 
 Repeated failure to complete eCRFs 
 Failure to obtain Informed Consent 
 Failure to report SAEs within 24 hours of knowledge 
 Loss of or unaccounted for device inventory 
 Repeated protocol deviations 
 Failure to enroll an adequat e number of subjects 
 
7.8 Adverse Event Reporting 
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 74 of 96 
 Adverse Events (AEs) 
An AE is any untoward medical occurrence,  unintended disease or injury, or any 
untoward clinical sign (including an abnor mal laboratory finding) in subjects, 
users, or other persons, regardless of whether or not it is related to the 
investigational medical device. 
 This definition includes adverse ev ents related to the medical device of 
this investigation. 
 This definition includes adverse ev ents related to the procedures involved 
(any procedures in the clin ical investigational plan) 
 For adverse events involving “users or  other persons”, this definition is 
restricted to adverse events related to the medical device of this 
investigation. 
. Adverse events are classified and tabulat ed by relationship to procedure or 
device, severity, and body system. Serious Adverse Events (SAEs), deaths and Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (U ADEs) will be listed separately.   
 The following should not be recorded as AEs: 
 Pre-planned procedure unless the c ondition for which the procedure was 
planned has worsened from t he first study-related activity after the subject 
has signed the informed consent form. 
 Pre-existing conditions found as a result of screening procedures. These 
should be recorded as medical hi story/concomitant illness. 
 Out-of-range laboratory values that are deemed clinically significant by the 
Investigator will be considered AEs and recorded as such on the eCRFs,  Adverse Event information will be reco rded in the eCRF Adverse Event Form. 
AEs, SAEs and UADEs will be coded using MedDRA.   Adverse events are graded on a 3-point sca le and reported as indicated on the 
eCRF. The intensity of an adverse ex perience is defined as follows:  
 
 Mild: Discomfort noticed, but no disr uption to daily activity 
 Moderate: Discomfort sufficient to reduce or affect normal daily activity  
 Severe: Inability to work or perform normal daily activity 
 Study Procedure and Device Relationship: the relationship of an adverse event 
to the device and to the procedure will be assessed by the investigator as 
follows: 
Definitely Related: Clear-cut temporal association and no other possible cause. 
Probably Related: Clear-cut temporal associati on and a potential alternative 
etiolo gy is not apparent. 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 75 of 96 Possibly Related: Temporal association is less clear and other etiologies are 
also possible. 
Not Related: There is no temporal associati on and/or evidence exists that 
the event is definitel y related to another etiolo gy 
All adverse event reports are filed as required by IRB and FDA regulations. For 
all adverse events (whether device-related or  not), all sections of the appropriate 
Adverse Event Form(s) must be completed. In this study, all adverse events are collected starting after info rmed consent has been signed. 
 
AEs that may result from the DMR S ystem include those commonly associated 
with gastrointestinal endoscopy procedur es, as well as device-related AEs: 
potential acute and chronic adverse c onsequences of the device-induced 
duodenal ablation treatment, or  those resulting from dev ice malfunction, device 
user error, selected materials, device des ign or device construction.  Some AEs 
may be associated with both the procedure and the device. In addition, device 
malfunctions may occur which may or ma y not result in a device-related AE. 
  Potential AEs associated with the endo scopic procedure and sedation include 
the following:  
 Abdominal cramps, di scomfort, or pain  
 Allergic or adverse reacti on to sedation or anesthesia 
 Abdominal bloating 
 Cardiac or respiratory arrest 
 Death 
 Delayed gastric emptying  
 Dental injury 
 Difficulty swallowing 
 Digestive tract injury or perforation 
 Fever 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Headache 
 Hyperglycemia 
 Hypoglycemia 
 Hypotension 
 Hypoxia 
 Impaired judgment or reactions 
 Indigestion 
 Infection 
 Injury to esophagus 
 Laryngospasm 
 Mucosal injury to GI tract  
 Nausea  
 Pancreatitis 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 76 of 96  Perforation 
 Pneumoperitoneum 
 Pulmonary aspiration 
 Sore or irritated throat  
 Vomiting 
 
Potential AEs associated with t he device include the following: 
 Abcess formation  
 Abdominal cramps, discomfort, or pain 
 Allergic reaction to the device materials or methylene blue  
 Death 
 Delayed gastric emptying  
 Diarrhea 
 Digestive tract injury 
 Duodenal stenosis 
 Fever 
 Gastric dumping syndrome 
 Gastritis 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Hyperglycemia 
 Hypoglycemia 
 Infection 
 Mucosal injury to GI tract  
 Nausea  
 Nutritional malabsorption 
 Pancreatitis 
 Perforation 
 Stomach or duodenal obstruction  
 Stricture  
 Structural damage to the GI tract 
 Thermal damage to the duodenum wa ll or surrounding structures 
 Ulcer 
 Vomiting 
 Device malfunctions that lead to device-related AEs include:  
 Console delivers incorrect ablation ti me and temperature profile resulting 
in GI tract injury or perforation 
 Hole in hot fluid catheter balloon re sulting in leakage of hot fluid that 
results in GI tract injury or perforation  
 Lost catheter component in the GI tract or wall that results in GI tract injury 
or perforation 
 Device malfunctions that may or may not result in device-related AEs include: 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 77 of 96  Component degradation  
 Device breakage  
 Device disarticulation  
 Any procedural or device-related adverse events are to be follow ed until there is 
evidence of resolution or permanent change.  The determination of whether an adverse event is classified as a SAE or UADE 
is based on the definitions contained in  sections 7.8.2 and 7.8.3, taking into 
account the clinical judgm ent of the investigator. 
 
 Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) 
A SAE is any untoward medical occurrence that:  
 Results in death,  
 Is immediately life-threatening,  
 Results in disability or permanent damage, 
 Requires intervention to prev ent permanent impai rment or damage, 
 Requires participant hospitaliza tion or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization,  
 Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or 
 Is any other serious or  important medical event 
 Important medical events t hat may not result in deat h, be life-threatening, or 
require hospitalization may be consi dered serious when, based upon appropriate 
medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prev ent one of the outcomes listed in this 
definition.  This definition includes device deficiencie s that might have led to a SAE if a) 
suitable action had not been taken or b) in tervention had not been made or c) if 
circumstances had been less fortunate. These are handled under the SAE reporting system.  Planned hospitalization for a pre-existing condition, or  a procedure required by 
the protocol, without serious deterioration in health, is not considered a SAE.   A SAE may or may not be considered related to the device. 
 
 Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE) 
An UADE is defined as any serious adverse effect on health or safety or any life 
threatening problem or death caused by, or  associated with, the device if that 
effect, problem or death was not previous ly identified in nature, severity or 
degree of incidence in the in vestigational plan; or any other unanticipated serious 
problem associated with the device that rela tes to the rights, sa fety or welfare of 
subjects.   
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 78 of 96 
  Adverse Events of Special Interest 
Adverse Events of Special Interest are characterized as: 
 Specific events that may be related to the mechanism of action of the 
DMR procedure (eg,  hypoglycemia)  
 Potential adverse consequences of the procedure (eg, GI adverse events)  
 Rare events that may or may not be related to the DM R procedure/device, 
but are of interest to the S ponsor (eg, unexplained fever) 
 Irrespective of whether an AE is serious or non-serious, the following events are 
defined as ‘protocol-specified adverse events of special interest’ and have additional reporting requirements.  Events of Special Interest are: 
 Hypoglycemia 
 Diarrhea 
 Abdominal pain 
 Nausea 
 Vomiting 
 Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Unexplained fever 
 As stated in Section 6.11.2, hypogl ycemia, unless the hypoglycemia episode 
meets the criteria of an SAE, will not be recorded as an adverse event, but will be 
captured on the Hypoglycemia Reporting eCRF  page. However, the Investigator 
is not prohibited from characterizing hypoglycemia as an AE. Any event of 
hypoglycemia reported as an AE will be cr oss-checked to ensure that the event 
is also reported on the Hypogl ycemia Reporting eCRF page.   
 Prior to starting Liraglutide rescue t herapy, a careful GI history should be 
obtained and the presence of nausea, vomi ting or diarrhea be recorded prior to 
the initiation of liraglutide treatment. Fo r episodes of diarrhea,  time from the DMR 
(or Sham) procedure, as well as dur ation of episode, will be recorded. 
Characteristics of diarrhea (bloody, steatorrhea), and other clinical symptoms 
associated with diarrhea (eg, fever, abdominal pain) will also be recorded.  
 All episodes of abdominal pain, or naus ea, or vomiting will be reported as 
separate AEs.  If a subject experienc es combined symptoms of pain, nausea and 
vomiting, each will be reported as a separate AE unless a clear medical 
diagnosis is determined, eg, viral gastr oenteritis, and time from the DMR (or 
Sham) procedure, as well as durati on of episode, will be recorded. The 
Investigator needs to assess the clinical  state of the subject to ensure that 
potential obstruction or stenosis/stricture of the GI tract is not present. Three 
SAEs of duodenal stricture were reported ear ly in the DMR clinical program, but 
there have been no occurrences after proce dural and device  modifications were 
implemented. Nevertheless, if symptom s persist (e.g. two weeks for mild 
symptoms, three days for moderat e symptoms and 48 hours for severe 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 79 of 96 symptoms) or progress, an endoscopic ev aluation is recommended but left to the 
discretion of the investigator.  For any episodes of gastrointestinal bl eeding, time from the DMR (or Sham) 
procedure, as well as duration of episode , will be recorded. All episodes will be 
followed carefully to resolu tion. Additional laborator y tests or diagnostic tests 
should be done according to medical judgm ent depending on the clinical course. 
 If a subject experiences a fever (> 38 ° C) that occurs within 2 weeks of the 
DMR/Sham procedure, and persists for several days, efforts should be made to 
identify a cause for the fever, if possible.  All additional symptoms associated with 
the fever (eg, rigors, abdominal pai n, diarrhea) should be recorded.  
 
 SAE & UADE Reporting 
AEs observed during the course of this tria l, regardless of severity or relationship 
to the trial procedure or investigational  medical device will be recorded on the 
appropriate Adverse Event Form  and reported to the Sponsor. 
 For US sites and reporting to FDA, the procedures for handling and 
reporting/notification of SAEs shall be carried out in accordance with the 
applicable sections of 21 CFR Part  812 and local IRB requirements. 
 Investigator Safety Reporting Requirements  SAEs will be recorded in the Adverse Event Form and the event is to be reported to the Sponsor within 24 hours of k nowledge of the event. Information not 
available at the time of the initial report must be documented in the Adverse 
Event Form within 24 hours of receipt of the new information. Substantiating data 
such as relevant hospital or medical records and diagnostic test reports should 
also be submitted by scan/fax to the Sponsor.    An Investigator shall submit to the S ponsor and to the reviewing IRB a report of 
any UADE occurring during an investigation as soon as possible, but in no event 
later than 10 working days after the investi gator first learns of the effect.    
 The Investigator must adhere to all repor ting requirement for his IRB and national 
authorities. 
 
Sponsor Safety Reporting Requirements  
SAEs and UADEs will be reported to the FD A, in accordance with 21 CFR Part 
812.  In the event of a UADE, Sponsor will immediately conduct an evaluation of a 
UADE, and report the results of such ev aluation to FDA and to all reviewing 
IRB’s and participating investigators with in 10 working days after the Sponsor 
first receives notice of the effect. T hereafter the Sponsor shall submit such 
additional reports concerning the effect as FDA requests. 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 80 of 96  
All possibly and probably device and pr ocedure related AEs (including 
SAEs/UADEs/AESIs) reported during 24 weeks follow up will be followed until 
resolution. This will also also include resolution of all AEs (signs and symptoms) 
reported upto 24 weeks for which there is  not yet a definitive diagnosis and/or 
attribution of cause by the 24 weeks follow up visit.   
7.9 Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) 
A DMC will be convened for the study and assembled prior to subject enrollment. The group will be multidisciplinary and me mbership will include individuals not 
participating in the clinical study. The DMC members will ac t independently from 
both the Sponsor and the study investi gators. The group will consist of an 
endoscopist, endocrinologist and a biostatist ician. Full DMC details including 
structure, roles and responsibilities are included in the DMC Charter. 
 General responsibilitie s of the DMC include: 
 Review and finalization of the DMC Charter 
 Review of data during the trial r egarding safety and regarding quality of 
trial conduct, including participant ri sk versus benefit, and other factors 
potentially affecting patient safety 
 Monitoring of the quality of the treatm ent provided at individual sites by 
reviewing the occurrence of peri- procedural complications and major 
protocol violations 
 Providing recommendations to the Sponsor about modifications in the 
protocol and/or continuati on of the trial necessary to maintain the safety of 
the subjects 
 To maintain continuous blinding and study integrity, the safety analysis will be 
conducted by an independent statistician, and measures will be taken to ensure 
the validity of the data and integrity of the study’s c onduct. As part of the DMC 
Charter, the DMC will agree upon a set of stopping rules for the study, consistent 
with principles outlined in Section 7.9.1.  A fundamental responsib ility of a DMC is 
to make recommendations to the Sponsor concerning the continuation of the study: whether to continue the study as  designed; other recommendations that 
might be made include study termination, study continuation with major or minor 
modifications, or tempor ary suspension of enrollment  and/or study intervention 
until some uncertainty is resolved. T he DMC will document its recommendations, 
and the rationale for such recommendations, in a form that can be reviewed by 
the Sponsor and then circulated, if and as appropriate, to IRBs, FDA, and/or 
other interested parties. In almost all ca ses, a DMC is advisory to the Sponsor; 
the Sponsor decides whether to accept recommendations to discontinue a trial.  
 
 Stopping Rules 
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 81 of 96 The DMC may recommend termination or sus pension of the study if any of the 
following predefined conditions are met: 
 The DMC may terminate or suspend the study if an SAE resulting in death is 
possibly, probably, or definitely relat ed to the investigational device and/or 
procedure 
 The DMC may recommend termination of the study if an SAE that is probably 
or definitely related to the investig ational device or the investigational 
procedure occurs at a true rate as determined by the lower 95% confidence 
bound of SAEs resulting in serious in jury, permanent impairment of a body 
function or permanent damage to a body st ructure that is greater than 1% 
 In addition, termination or suspens ion may be recommended for any other 
perceived safety concern based on clinic al judgment, including but not limited 
to a higher than anticipated rate for device failures resulting in adverse events, or unexpected SAEs 
 Treatment of the subjec ts will be paused if 6 subjects require escalation of 
their baseline antidiabetic medications  or addition of another antidiabetic 
medication at any time following DMR tr eatment or sham procedure, while the 
DMC evaluates the data to consider w hether treatments s hould continue   
 
7.10 Clinical Events Commi ttee (Adjudication Committee) 
A clinical events committee (CEC) will be es tablished to review important safety 
adverse events reported by trial inve stigators to determine whether the 
adjudication of severity and relatedness meets protocol-spec ified criteria.  
 The CEC will be composed of members co vering necessary medical specialties 
(eg, gastroenterology, endocrinology) and dev ice clinical trial experts. CEC 
members must disclose any potential conflicts of interest and must be 
independent of the Sponsor. 
 Information reviewed on each death, SAE, UA DE, or AE of Special Interest may 
include laboratory, pathology and/or imaging data, autopsy reports, physical 
descriptions, and any other  data deemed relevant. The CEC will be masked to 
the assigned study arm when performing th eir assessments. The importance of 
the CEC is in assessing Investigator at tribution of causality to the randomized 
treatment (DMR or Sham) in instances when severity or causality assessments 
may be deemed subjective and/or require the application of a comp lex definition.  
 In their assessments, the CEC will be gui ded by the adverse events depicted in 
Section 7.8.1 as potential adverse ev ents associated with sedation, endoscopy 
or the DMR  procedure, or device-rela ted adverse events associated with the 
DMR catheter and console, including devic e-related adverse events from the 
materials selected, device design or cons truction.  While the CEC will use their 
judgment in adjudicating causality,  general guidelines can be stated: 
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 82 of 96  If the adverse event is associated with sedation, it should be ascribed to 
the procedure 
 If the adverse event is one t hat has been described with endoscopic 
procedures, it should be ascribed to  both the device and the procedure  
 If the adverse event is one that is rarely, if at all, associated with non-
invasive endoscopic procedures, it should be ascribed to the device 
 If the adverse event is one that has been identified in the protocol as a 
potential device-related adverse event, it should be ascribed to the device 
 The relationship of an adverse event to the device and to the procedure is to be  
assessed by the Investigator utilizing the cr iteria outlined in Se ction 7.8.1, Study 
Procedure and Device Relationship. The CEC will review each causality assessment to ensure that the causality meets these protocol-specified criteria. 
 Only events that have been adjudicated will be used in the DMC safety 
assessments to guide the DMC decision r egarding study cont inuation. The CEC 
will work in accordance with written gui delines included in the CEC Charter 
describing in details the composition, ta sks, responsibilities and work processes 
of the Committee.  
The CEC will not share responsibility  with DMC for evaluating interim 
comparisons; however, their assessment s (performed at frequent intervals 
throughout the trial with results incor porated into the database in a timely 
manner) will help to ensure that  the data reviewed by DMC are as accurate and 
free of bias as possible.   
8 Data Management and St atistical Considerations 
 
8.1     Data Collection and Quality Control 
          8.1.1 Site Training 
The training of investigational si te personnel on proper data collection, 
documentation practices, and eCRF completion is the responsibility of Fractyl. To 
ensure uniform data collecti on and protocol compliance, Fractyl-appointed 
clinical monitors will review the clinical protocol, techniques for the identification 
of eligible subjects, and instructions on in -hospital/office visit data collection with 
the study site research coordinators.  This will be completed before or in 
conjunction with site initiation. 
 
           8.1.2 Elect ronic Case Report Forms (eCRFs) 
Subject data are recorded in a limited access secure electronic data capture 
(EDC) system. All changes made to the clinical data will be captured in an 
electronic audit trail and available for review  by Fractyl or its representative. The 
associated software and database are desig ned to meet regulatory compliance 
for deployment as part of a validated syst em compliant with laws and regulations 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 83 of 96 applicable to the conduct of clinical studi es pertaining to the use of electronic 
records and signatures.  
 
The Investigator will provide his/her electronic signature on the appropriate 
eCRFs in compliance with local regulat ions. A written signature on printed 
eCRFs will also be provided if requir ed by local regulation. Changes to data 
previously submitted to the Sponsor r equire a new electronic signature by the 
Investigator acknowledging and approving the changes. 
 
eCRFs must be completed fully for each subject by the site staff, e-signed by the Investigator, and available for review by regulatory authorities,  Fractyl and/or its 
designees.  
           8.1.3 Data Reporting 
The investigator, or an individual desig nated by him/her, is responsible for 
recording all study data on the eCRFs s upplied by Fractyl. The required study 
data will also be documented in t he subject’s medical record.  
 All patient related medical data in the study will be handled confidentially and as 
per applicable data protection laws and lo cal regulations and will not be released 
without the written consent of the subject (or the s ubject’s guardian). The data 
will be handled and stored in an anonymous format.  
 
          8. 1.4 Data Monitoring  
Completed eCRFs will be verified by a Fr actyl appointed monitor at the site at 
regular intervals throughout the study. To th is end, the investigator must permit 
inspection of the study files, subject eCRFs, and subject medical records by Fractyl-appointed monitors and authorized gove rnment agencies, as indicated.    
 The study will be monitored according to applicable provisions of Fractyl or 
designee’s Monitoring Procedures, and in conformance with Good Clinical 
Practices. Study monitors must be  qualified by training and experience. 
 Monitoring will include pr e-study site qualification, site initiation visit, on-going site 
study monitoring and study closure monitoring as described in the study monitoring plan. The major function of t he clinical monitor is to observe and 
assess the quality of the clinical study. In  addition, the study will be monitored to 
ensure that potential adverse trends ar e quickly identified allowing immediate 
corrective action. The monito r’s duties will include: on-site  visits, observation of 
treatment with the study dev ices and review of study documents and results.   
 The study monitor will review/verify IRB approvals, Informed Consent documents, source documents and eCRFs. Visual and/or electronic data review 
will be performed by the study monitor to  identify possible data discrepancies.  
The study monitor(s) will verify the data entered into the eCRFs against hospital 
records, medical history, or other source documents to ensure accuracy and 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 84 of 96 completeness of the data. Manually gener ated and/or automatic queries will be 
created in the EDC system and issued to t he site for appropriate response. Site 
staff will be responsible for reso lving all queries in the database. 
 
8.2 Statistical Considerations 
Prior to locking the database, all data edi ting will be completed and decisions 
regarding the evaluability of a ll subject data for inclusion in the statistical analysis 
will be made. The rationale for excluding any  data from the statistical analyses will 
be prospectively defined, and classification of all or part of a subjects’ data as 
non-evaluable will be completed and doc umented before the entire database is 
locked.    Additional details on the analysis as well as any changes from the analysis plans 
presented in the protocol are provided in the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).   
            8.2. 1 General Considerations 
While this protocol does specify prim ary and safety endpoints, these are not 
meant to define subject and study success. In stead, the results of this evaluation 
will be used to establish the safety and efficacy profile of the DMR procedure and 
to evaluate the effect size for poweri ng future clinical investigations.  
 Nominal and ordinal variables for eac h time period will be presented using 
frequencies and percent of patients in each category. Interval and ratio 
continuous variables for each time period will be presented using means and 
standard deviations, median, quartile s, and minimum and maximum. For 
variables collected at multiple follow- up time periods, tables which include 
change from baseline (where baseline is def ined as last measurement prior to 
attempted treatment with DMR) will be presented at each follow-up visit. 
 Distributions of each continuous variable will be assessed prio r to analysis and 
examined for normality. Data with interval or ratio scales to be analyzed that are not normally distributed will be analyz ed using non-parametric statistics. 
Statistical tests will be performed using two-sided significance levels of 5% 
unless otherwise specified.  The primary analysis phase is the first 24 weeks of the randomized treatment 
phase. Descriptive statistics on variables collected during the Medication Run-In 
phase will also be presented for completeness. 
 
           8.2.2 De termination of Sample Size 
Up to 6 study sites will randomize a maximum of 9 subjects in a 2:1 randomization scheme (DMR:Sham). Sample  size determination is based on the 
nature of this pilot study and not statis tical considerations. The study is not 
powered to show statisticial significance. 
 
           8.2. 3 Analysis Populations  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 85 of 96 Study Population:  The study population includes al l subjects consented at the 
site. Within this population there are Screened, Medication Run In, Intent-to-
Treat, As-Treated and Safety populations.  Intent-to-Treat (ITT):  The ITT population includes all subjects who were 
randomized after the Medication Run-In phase. This is the secondary analysis 
population for efficacy (no imputation wi ll be made for missing data, given the 
nature of the study; i.e., analysis on this  population will be performed using only 
available data). Subjects will be analyzed under  the treatment to which they were 
randomized. 
 
As-Treated (AT):  The subset of ITT subjects who received at least one ablation 
or undergo the randomized sham  procedure. This is t he primary population for 
efficacy.  No imputation will be made for missing data. Subjects will be analyzed 
under the treatment received.  
 
Week 24 Per Protocol Population: The PP population includes all subjects in 
the AT population who did not have any ma jor protocol deviations that could 
affect the assessment of efficacy and had their Week 24 study visit within the 
protocol-specified window. Subjec ts will be analyzed under the treatment 
received.    Safety:  This population includes all subjects in whom sham or DMR was 
attempted. Subjects will be analyzed a ccording to the treatment received. 
 
           8.2.4Demogra phic and Baseline Characteristics  
Demographic and baseline data will be summa rized using summary statistics of 
sample size, mean, standard deviation,  median, quartiles,  min and max for 
continuous variables and proportions and frequency of patients for categorical 
values. Demographics will be presented for the following analysis populations: 
3. The Medication Run-In 4. ITT overall and by-r andomized treatment group 
5. AT overall and by-a ctual treatment group  
 
           8.2.5 Safety Analysis 
All safety data will be displayed and analysed using descriptive statistical methods. No formal inferential analysis is planned for safety comparisons. The 
primary safety endpoint is proportion of  subjects experiencing device or 
procedure related SAEs or UADEs thr ough 24 Weeks following start of DMR or 
sham treatment. These will be presented overall and by system organ class and 
preferred term (PT). This will be conducted on the Safety analysis set overall and 
by actual treatment group. Subjects who experience more than one event in a 
given System Organ Class (SOC) and PT will be counted once within that SOC 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 86 of 96 and PT. The total number of events and t he number and percentage of subjects 
with each event will be reported.  
 The remaining safety analyses discussed below will be carried out for the following sets within the Safety analysis population:  
1. Safety population through 24 weeks post-randomization, by treatment 
group received at start of study  (DMR or sham, depending on the 
treatment the patient actua lly received) and overall. 
2. Safety population through 24 we eks post-DMR combined populations; 
this will include the first 24 weeks of  the study for patients receiving 
DMR from the start of the study, and weeks 24 -48 post crossover for 
patients switching from sham-t o-DMR. Results will be presented 
separately for patients originally rece iving DMR, for patients originally 
receiving Sham and receiving DMR at  week 24, and for all patients 
combined receiving DMR at start of the study or at Week 24. 
 
Clinical Laboratory Te sts and Vital Signs: Descriptive statistics (sample size, 
mean, standard deviation, median, quartiles, minimum and maximum) of 
observed measurement at each visit and of  the change from baseline (baseline is 
defined as the last measur ement prior to DMR procedu re) to each visit will be 
presented for each vital sign and laboratory variable. Listings of abnormal and/or 
clinically significant findings/values will be presented for each laboratory and vital 
sign variable.  
Duodenal biopsy sample assessment of  histological evidence of mucosal 
regrowth, inflammation and fibrosis will be summarized descriptively. Occurrence 
of  severe fibrosis or inflamma tion from ablated area duodenal biopsy will be 
compared to non-ablated control sample. 
 Adverse Events: AEs, SAEs and UADEs will be coded using MedDRA.  Treatment Emergent AEs, SAEs  and UADEs are defined as events starting or 
worsening after start of DMR (or sham, if  applicable). The number and percent of 
patients with Treatment Emergent AEs, SAEs and UADEs will be summarized 
overall and by primary SO C and preferred term (PT). Subjects who experience 
more than one event in a given SOC and PT will be counted once within that 
SOC and PT. Detailed listings of subjects  that experience AEs and SAEs will be 
provided.   The number and percent of subjects wit h treatment emergent AEs, UADEs and 
SAEs will be further presented by severity and by relationship to the device or procedure. In tabulating the severity of AEs on a per subject basis, the greatest 
severity will be assigned to a subject should there be more than one occurrence of the same AE with different reported se verities. Relationship will be categorized 
as unrelated, possibly, probably and defin itely related. The highest level of 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 87 of 96 association will be  reported for subjects wit h different relationships for the same 
AE.  The Hypoglycemia Reporting eCRF page will collect time of event, blood glucose 
value, symptoms if present, treatment, and duration. The incidence and event 
rates of hypoglycemia will be assessed based on the severity of the 
hypoglycemia: severe hypoglycemic event, defined as hypoglycemia requiring third-party assistance; or any clinically  significant hypoglycemic event, defined as 
self-monitored or laboratory plasma gluc ose level < 54 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L); or  
glucose alert values ≤70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L). 
 Episodes of diarrhea will be recorded both as events, and as incidence.   
 
           8. 2.6 Effectiveness Analysis 
 
Primary Efficacy Endpoint:   
The primary efficacy endpoint is change in A1c at 24 Weeks. The analyses will 
be carried out on the AT analysis popul ation (primary) ,the ITT analysis 
population, and the Week 24 PP (per-protoco l) population. Descriptive statistics 
(mean, standard deviation, median, quart iles, minimum and maximum, and two-
sided 95% confidence interval of the m ean) of change in A1c will be presented 
by randomized treatment group (DMR vs. sham) for the ITT population and by 
actual treatment group for the AT and PP populations. 
Significance testing and 
statistical modeling will be omitted due to the small sample size.   
 
Secondary Efficacy Endpoints:  
(i) A1c change from baseline to Week 24 by visit over time, DMR vs. Sham 
(ii) Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) ch ange from baseline to Week 24, DMR vs. 
Sham 
(iii) FPG change from baseline to Week 24 by visit over time, DMR vs. Sham 
(iv) Urine Albumin Creatin ine Ratio (UACR) change from baseline to Week 24, 
DMR vs. Sham 
(v) Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) and Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST) 
change from baseline to Week 24, DMR vs. Sham  
 
The above secondary endpoints will be analyzed on the same analysis 
populations and the same manner as  the primary efficacy endpoint.  
 
 Additional Endpoints of Interest: 
The following are the additio nal endpoints of interest. They will be analyzed for 
(a) the ITT, AT, and PP subjects randomized  to receiving DMR;  (b) for the ITT, 
AT, and PP subjects switching from Sham  to DMR at Week 24; and for (c) ITT, 
AT, amd PP subjects in (a) and (b) combined. Baseline is defined as the last 
measurement taken prior to the DMR procedure. 
 
(i) A1c change from Week 24 (pre-DMR) in S ham cross-over group to Week 48   
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 88 of 96 (ii) FPG change from Week 24 (pre-DMR ) in Sham cross-over group to Week 
48   
(iii) Short Form (36) Health Survey Version 2 (SF-36) change from baseline at 
Week 24 (pre- assessments and endoscopy) vs Sham 
(iv) Patient-Reported Outcomes Meas urement Information System ( PROMIS®) 
change from baseline at Week 24 (pre- assessments and endoscopy) vs 
Sham 
 
For each endpoint, descriptive statisti cs (mean, standard deviation, median, 
quartiles, minimum and maximum, and two-si ded 95% confidence interval of the 
mean) will be presented.  
 
         8.2.7 Handling of Missing Data 
Missing data within this subject cohort is expected to occur at a low rate. All 
efforts will be made to prevent the occurrenc e of missing data. Site training and 
regular monitoring will help to minimize missing data. Due to the sample size and 
nature of this pilot study, there will be no imputation of missing data. In other 
words, analyses will be bas ed only on available data. 
 In the clinical study report, the number and proportion of ITT subjects who were 
in compliance through Week 24 at each follow-up visit will be presented. The 
number and percent of ITT subjects who prematurely withdraw from the study will 
be tabulated overall and by reason fo r withdrawal. This will be performed by 
randomized treatment group and overall. 
   
           8.2.8 An alyses on Medication Run In Phase 
The number and percent of patients wit h adverse events occurring during the 
Run-In phase will be presented overall and by SOC and PT. Descriptive statistics 
of end-of-run-in-phase A1c for all Medicati on Run-In subjects will be presented.
 
  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 89 of 96 9       References 
 
1. International Diabetes Federation (2014). The Global Burden. In IDF, 
International Diabetes Atlas (6th ed., pp30) 
2. CDC diabetes fact sheet 
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes /data/statistics/2014statist icsreport.html, Fractyl 
internal market analysis 
3. Fonseca V. Defining and characteri zing the progression of Type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care 2009; 32(S2):151-6. 
4. Kashyap SR, Defronzo R. The insulin  resistance syndrome: physiological 
considerations. Diabetes and Vascular  Disease Research 2007;4(2):13-19. 
5. Kasuga M. Insulin resistance and pancr eatic beta cell failure. J Clin Invest 
2006;116(7):1756-6 
6. Meier JJ, Nauck MA. Is the diminished in cretin effect in type 2 diabetes just 
an epi-phenomenon of impaired β-cell function? Diabetes 2010;59(5):1117-
25. 
7. Jacobs PG, Konrad-Martin D, Mc millan GP, McDermott D, Fausti SA. 
Influence of acute hyperglycemia on ot oacoustic emissions and the medial 
olivocochlear reflex. J Ac oust Soc Am 2012;131(2):1296-306. 
8. Diabetes Prevention Program Research  Group. Reduction in the incidence of 
type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervent ion or metformin. N Engl J Med. 
2002;346(6):393-403. 
9. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. 10-year follow-up of diabetes 
incidence and weight loss in the Dia betes Prevention Program Outcomes 
Study. Lancet 2009 Nov;374:1677-86. 
10. Look AHEAD Research Group. Reducti on in weight and cardiovascular 
disease risk factors in individuals with type 2 diabetes: one-year results of the 
Look AHEAD trial. Diab Care 2007;30(6):1374-83. 
11. Look AHEAD Research Group, Wing RR. Long-Term Effects of a lifestyle 
intervention on weight and cardiovascular risk factors in individuals with type 
2 diabetes mellitus: four year results of  the Look AHEAD Trial. Arch Intern 
Med 2010;170(17):1566-1575. 
12. American Diabetes Association.  Standar ds of medical care in diabetes – 
2015: 4. Foundations of care: education,  nutrition, physical activity, smoking 
cessation, psychosocial care, and immunization. Diabetes Care 2015;38(Suppl. 1):S20–S30. 
13. Bae JP, Lage MJ, Mo D, Nelson DR, Hoogwerf BJ.  Obesity and glycemic 
control in patients with diabetes mellit us: Analysis of physician electronic 
health records in the US from 2009- 2011.  J Diabetes Complications 2016 
Mar;30(2):212-20. 
14. Ali MK, Bullard KM, Saaddine JB , Cowie CC, Imperatore G, Gregg EW. 
Achievement of goals in U.S. diabetes care, 1999–2010. N Engl J 
Med. 2013;368(17):1613-24. 
15. Heller SR, Choudhary P, Davies C, et al.; UK Hypoglycaemia Study Group. 
Risk of hypoglycaemia in types 1 and 2 diabetes: effects of treatment 
modalities and their duration. Diabetologia 2 007;50:1140–1147 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 90 of 96 16. Donnelly LA, Morris AD, FrierBM, et al.; DARTS/MEMOCollaboration. 
Frequency and predictors of hypoglycaem ia in Type 1 and insulin-treated 
Type 2 diabetes: a population-bas ed study. Diabet Med 2005;22:749–755. 
17. Cryer PE. The barrier of hypoglyce mia in diabetes. Diabetes 2008;57:3169–
3176. 
18. Cryer PE. Death during intensive glyce- mic therapy of diabetes: mechanisms 
and implications. Am  J Med 2011;124:993–996. 
19. Schwartz SS, Jellinger PS, Herman ME . Obviating Much of the Need for 
Insulin Therapy in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Re-Assessment of Insulin Therapy’s Safety Profile , Postgraduate Medicine 2016. 
20. Tang et al. Effects of Insulin Glargi ne and Liraglutide Therapy on Liver Fat as 
Measured by Magnetic Resonance in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes: A Randomized Trial. Diabetes Care 2015 Jul; 38(7):1339-46. 
21. Juurinen L et al. Effects of insulin therapy on liver fat content and hepatic 
insulin sensitivity in patients with ty pe 2 diabetes. Am J Physiol Endocrinol 
Metab 2007;292:E829 –35. 
22. Kawamori R, Kadowaki T, Onji M, Sei no Y, Akanuma Y. Hepatic safety profile 
and glycemic control of pioglitazone in  more than 20,000 patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus: Postmarketing surv eillance study in Japan. Diabetes Res 
Clin Pract 2007;76(2):229–35. 
23. Liao et al. Pioglitazone and cardiovascu lar outcomes in patients with insulin 
resistance, pre-diabetes and type 2 diabet es: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. BMJ Open 2017;7(1):e013927. 
24. Kernan et al. Pioglitazone after Ischemic  Stroke or Transient Ischemic Attack, 
N Engl J Med 2016 Apr 7. 
25. Cusi et al. Long-Term Pioglitazone Tr eatment for Patients With Nonalcoholic 
Steatohepatitis and Prediabetes or Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Ann Intern Med. 
2016 Sep 6;165(5):305-15. 
26. Aroda et al. Metabolic and hormonal changes induced by pioglitazone in 
polycystic ovary syndrome: a randomized, placebo-contro lled clinical trial. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009;94:469–76. 
27. Cummings DE. Metabolic sur gery for type 2 diabetes. Nat Med 
2012;18(5):656-8. 
28. Cummings DE, Bloom SR, Rubino F. At the heart of the benef its of bariatric 
surgery. Nat Med 2012;18(3):358-9. 
29. Kashyap SR, Bhatt DL, Wolski K et al. Metabolic effects of bariatric surgery in 
patients with moderate obesity and type 2 diabetes: analysis of a randomized 
control trial comparing surgery with intensive medical treatment. Diabetes 
Care 2013;36(8):2175-82. 
30. Mingrone G et al.  Bariatric–metabolic  surgery versus conventional medical 
treatment in obese patients with type 2 di abetes: 5 year follow-up of an open-
label, single-centre, r andomised controlled trial.  The Lancet;386(9997):964-
973.  
31. O’Connor PJ. Improving medication adherence: Challenges for physicians, 
payers, and policy makers. Arch Intern Med 2006;166(17):1802-4. 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 91 of 96 32. Nathan DM. Clinical practice: initia l management of glycemia in type 2 
diabetes mellitus. N E ngl J Med 2002;347:1342-9. 
33. Schauer, P. R. et al. Bariatric surger y versus intensive medical therapy for 
diabetes — 5-year outcomes. N. Engl. J. Med. 376, 641–651 (2017). 
34. Rubino and Panagiotopoulos  “Metabolic surgery: the cutting edge of diabetes 
care” Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Apr 21. 
35. Cook MN, Girman CJ, Stein PP, Alexander CM, Holman RR. Glycemic 
control continues to deteriorate after sulfonylureas are added to metformin among patients with type 2 diabetes.  Diabetes Care 2005;28(5):995-1000. 
36. O’Connor PJ. Improving medication adherence: Challenges for physicians, 
payers, and policy makers. Arch Intern Med 2006;166(17):1802-4. 
37. Phillips LS, Branch WT, Cook CB et  al. Clinical inertia. Ann Intern Med 
2001;135(9):825-34. 
38. Nicolucci A, Kovacs Burns K, Holt RI  et al. Diabetes Attitudes, Wishes and 
Needs second study (DAWN2™): Cross- national benchmarking of diabetes-
related psychosocial outcomes for people with diabetes. Diabetic Medicine 
2013;30(7):767-77. 
39. Dunkin BJ, Martinez J, Bejaro PA,  et al. Thin-layer ablation of human 
esophageal epithelium using a bipolar radiofrequency balloon device. Surg 
Endosc 2006;20:125-30. 
40. Odze RD, Lauwers GY. Histopathology of Barrett's esophagus after ablation 
and endoscopic mucosal resection therapy. Endoscopy 2008 Dec;40(12):1008-15.  
41. Alster et. al. “Comparison of four car bon dioxide resurfacing lasers. A clinical 
and histopathologic eval uation” Dermatol Surg. 1999 Mar;25(3):153-8. 
42. Rajagopalan H, Cherrington AD, T hompson CC et al. Endoscopic Duodenal 
Mucosal Resurfacing for the Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes: 6-Month Interim 
Analysis From the First-in-Human Pr oof-of-Concept Study. Diabetes Care 
2016;39(12):2254-2261. 
43. American Diabetes Association Standar ds of Medical Care in Diabetes – 
2018. Diabetes Care 2018; 41 Supplement 1: S1-S172. 
44. Management of Hyperglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes, 2018. A Consensus 
Report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European 
Association for the Study of Di abetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 2018 
Dec; 41(12): 2669-2701   
 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 92 of 96 Appendix 1: Schedule of Assessments – DMR Cases 
 
Visit 
#  Visit 
Visit Window / 
Intervention  
Informed  
Consent 
History & 
Full PE 
Body Weight & 
Targeted PE 
Pregnancy  Test 
(if applicable)  
Blood Analysis 
H.pylori Test 
ECG 
Renal Function 
MRE 
Endoscopic  
Evaluation  
Subject  
Randomization  & 
Enrollment  
DMR Procedure  
Biopsy 
Blinding 
Assessment  
Lifestyle 
Counselin g 
SF‐36 
Questionnaire  
PROMIS®  Patient 
Reported Outcome  
Self‐Monitoring  
Blood Glucose/ 
Glycemia  Diary 
Adverse Events 
Medication  Use@ 
1 Screening  
(Pre Run‐In)    X  X&   X X X        X     *  X X 
2 Baseline 
(Post Run‐In) Visit to 
occur 4‐6 
weeks after 
Screening    X&  X X   
X X      
X  X  X  X  X X@ 
3 Procedure   
(DMR) Max is 21 
days from 
Baseline 
Visit         
  
X  X  X   
¥     X X@ 
4  Day 7 Call  +/‐ 2 days                 **     X  X X@ 
5  Day 14 Call  +/‐ 2 days                 **     X  X X@ 
6 Week 4 
(28 Day) +/‐ 7 days   X  X           X  X     X  X X 
7 Week 8 Call 
(56 Day) +/‐ 2 days                   X     X  X X 
8 Week 12 
(84 Day) +/‐ 7 days   X  X   X X      X  X  X  X  X  X X 
9 Week 15 Call 
(105 Day) +/‐ 2 days                 X     X  X X 
10 Week 18 
(126 Day) +/‐ 7 days   X  X           X     X  X X 
11 Week 21 Call 
(147 Day) +/‐ 2 days                 X     X  X X 
12 Week 24 
(168 Day) +/‐ 7 days    X   X  X X  X#    X  X  X  X  X  X X 
 
& for the purpose of eligibility, Mean of 3 separate blood pressu re measurements >180 mmHg (systolic) or >100 mmHg (diastolic), for other Blood Pressure 
assessments it will be measured in a sitting position in  duplicate (in same arm) after 15 min of rest  
*Provide diary & glucose meter to the subject 
 
@Patients using SU will be asked to adjust t heir SU intake based on section 5.3.1 
 
#A follow up endoscopic evaluation to visually examine the treat ment site and adjacent tissues will be conducted after unblindin g and within 7 days of visit 12 / week 
24  
¥The 14-day post procedure diet reviewed with the subject  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 93 of 96  
**Lifestyle Counseling discussions during phone calls at Day 7 & 1 4are conducted by the study coor dinator in the form of remind ers for the subjects and do not need 
to be conducted by a member of the nutrition staff  
 
Note: Subjects randomized to DMR who do not  receive any ablations during the DMR proc edure will be followed for safety through the Week 4 visit and then 
discontinued from the study. 
  
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 94 of 96 Appendix 2: Schedule of Assessments – Sham Cases 
Visit 
#  Visit 
Visit Window / 
Intervention  
Informed  
Consent 
History & 
Full PE 
Body Weight & 
Targeted PE 
Pregnancy  Test 
(if applicable ) 
Blood Analysis 
H.pylori Test 
ECG 
Renal Function 
MRE 
Endoscopic  
Evaluation  
Subject  
Randomization  & 
Enrollment  
Sham / Crossover  
DMR Procedure  
Biopsy 
Blinding 
Assessment  
Lifestyle 
Counselin g 
SF‐36 Quality of 
Life Questionnaire  
PROMIS®  Patient 
Reported Outcome  
Self‐Monitoring  
Blood Glucose/ 
Glycemia  Diary 
Adverse Events 
Medication  Use@ 
1 Screening  
(Pre Run‐In)    X  X&   X X X        X     *  X X 
2 Baseline 
(Post Run‐In) Visit to 
occur 4‐6 
weeks after 
Screening    X&  X X   
X X      
X  X  X  X  X X@ 
3 Procedure   
(DMR) Max is 21 
days from 
Baseline 
Visit         
  
X  X  X   
¥     X X@ 
4  Day 7 Call  +/‐ 2 days                 **     X  X X@ 
5  14 Day Call  +/‐ 2 days                 **     X  X X@ 
6 Week 4 
(28 Day) +/‐ 7 days   X  X           X  X     X  X X 
7  Week 8 Call 
(56 Day) +/‐ 2 days                   X     X  X X 
8 Week 12 
(84 Day) +/‐ 7 days   X  X   X X      X  X  X  X  X  X X 
9 Week 15 Call 
(105 Day) +/‐ 2 days                 X     X  X X 
10 Week 18 
(126 Day) +/‐ 7 days    X   X           X     X  X X 
11 Week 21 Call 
(147 Day) +/‐ 2 days                  X     X  X X 
12 Week 24 
(168 Day) +/‐ 7 days    X   X  X X        X  X  X  X  X X 
3C Crossover  to 
DMR Within 21 
days from 
Week 24         
  
X   X   
¥       X X 
4C Crossover  
Day 7 Call +/‐ 2 days                 **     X  X X 
5C Crossover  
Day 14 Call +/‐ 2 days                 **     X  X X 
6C Crossover  
Week 4 
(28 Day) +/‐ 7 days    X   X   
  
      
X     X  X X 
7C Crossover  
Week 8 Call +/‐ 2 days                 X     X  X X 
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 95 of 96 Visit 
#  Visit 
Visit Window / 
Intervention  
Informed  
Consent 
History & 
Full PE 
Body Weight & 
Targeted PE 
Pregnancy  Test 
(if applicable ) 
Blood Analysis 
H.pylori Test 
ECG 
Renal Function 
MRE 
Endoscopic  
Evaluation  
Subject  
Randomization  & 
Enrollment  
Sham / Crossover  
DMR Procedure  
Biopsy 
Blinding 
Assessment  
Lifestyle 
Counselin g 
SF‐36 Quality of 
Life Questionnaire  
PROMIS®  Patient 
Reported Outcome  
Self‐Monitoring  
Blood Glucose/ 
Glycemia  Diary 
Adverse Events 
Medication  Use@ 
(56 Day) 
8C Crossover  
Week 12 
(84 Day) +/‐ 7 days    X   X   
X X         
X  X  X  X  X X 
9C Crossover  
Week 15 Call 
(105 Day) +/‐ 2 days          
  
      
X     X  X X 
10C Crossover  
Week 18 
(126 Day) +/‐ 7 days   X  X   
  
     
X     X  X X 
11C Crossover   
Week 21 Call 
(147 Day) +/‐ 2 days         
  
      
X     X  X X 
12C Crossover  
Week 24 
(168 Day) +/‐ 7 days    X   X  
X X  
      
  X  X  X  X X 
 
& for the purpose of eligibility, Mean of 3 separate blood pressu re measurements >180 mmHg (systolic) or >100 mmHg (diastolic), for other Blood Pressure 
assessments it will be measured in a sitting position in  duplicate (in same arm) after 15 min of rest  
*Provide diary & glucose meter to the subject  
@Patients using SU will be asked to adjust t heir SU intake based on section 5.3.1 
 ¥The 14-day post procedure diet reviewed with the subject  
 
**Lifestyle Intervention discussionsduring phone calls at Day 7 & 14  are conducted by the study c oordinator in the form of remi nders for the subjects and do not need 
to be conducted by a member of the nutrition staff 
 
 
Note: Subjects randomized to Sham who cr ossover to DMR but do not receive any ablat ions during the DMR pr ocedure will be follow ed through the 4 week post 
crossover visit and then discontinued from the study. 
 
Note: Subjects that choose not to crossover from sham to DM R will be discontinued from the study and the End of Study CRFs will  be completed.   
 
Protocol # C-40000 Version 3.0 
Revision Date: 9 July, 2020  Page 96 of 96 Appendix 3: Maximum Approved Daily  Dose of Non-Insulin Glucose 
Lowering Agents 
ADA Standards of Medica l Care in Diabetes 201843 
 
 
 
 
 
 
