 
 
 
STUDY TITLE: OPEN LABEL 
POSTMARKET  
EVALUATION OF ORALLY  
DOSED ALMEGA PL® ON CHOLESTEROL  
AND CARDIO -METABOLIC 
PARAMETERS.  
 
 
NCT NUMBER: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
DATE OF DOCUMENT: 4TH MARCH 2022  
                                                                                                                           
 
 
 
Open -label post -market evaluation of AlmegaPL/Cholesterol. , Master Version PICF, V1, October 25th 2020.  Page 1 of 6  
 
 
Clinical Trial Protocol  
1. Study Title: Open label post -market evaluation of orally dosed  Almega PL on cholesterol and cardio -
metabolic parameters.   
2. Short title:  Almega PL CV Health Open Label Study  
3. Protocol ID #:  ALM-CVH -22 
4. Version #: V1 March 4th 2022  
5. Investigators: Dr Eneko Ganuza1 (Principal Investigator ), Eghogho H. Etomi1 (Study Director) . 
6. Sponsors: 1Qualitas Health (Texas, USA)  
7. Study site:  2800 Post Oak Blvd, Suite 5858 Houston, TX 77056.  
8. Introduction  
8.1 Study Rational  
Cardiovascular disease is  one of  the leading causes  of mortality in the United States hence, there is an 
increasing demand for supplements to lower atherogenic lipid  levels.  
8.2 Investigational Product  
The investigational product iwi/Cholesterol is a commercially available capsule -form herbal (algae) supplement 
containing Almega®PL, a Nannochloropsis  algae -derived extract rich in eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA). EPA is 
a type of omega -3 essential fatty acid known to play a beneficial role in protection against cardiovascular 
disease. Iwi/Cholesterol is the only source of long chain omega -3 that does not c ontain the DHA that is 
present in other omega -3 sources (fish oil, krill oil, other algal oils). Almega®PL was registered at the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) as a New Dietary Ingredient (NDIN) in 2014.  
8.3 Background  
AlmegaPl was previously studies i n a double -blind, placebo -controlled, randomized three -month clinical trial 
(Rao  et al., 2020  Nutrients , 12, 1869)  that showed  that this product decreases total cholesterol and VLDL -
cholesterol.  
8.3 Risk Benefit Assessment  
8.3.1 Known Potential Risks  
The safety of Almega®PL has already been reviewed by the FDA as part of the New Dietary Ingredient  
notified in 2014. AlmegaPl is a commercial rather than an investigational product with more than 5 years of 
history of use , where  no ma jor adverse events have been reported . In the above -mentioned clinical trial 
(Rao  et al., 2020  Nutrients , 12, 1869)  three participants  in each group (placebo and Almega®PL ) reported 
adverse effects (nausea , abdominal cramping  and diarr hea) which was likely associated to the nocebo effect . 
 
  
Page 2 of 6 
 
 
Open -label post -market evaluation of AlmegaPL/Cholesterol. , Master Version PICF, V 1, March 4th 2022.  Page 2 of 6    
8.3.2 Known Potential Benefits  
• Almega®PL decreases total and VLDL -cholesterol  (Rao eta al. , 2020)  
• AlmegaPL  increases your omega -3 index (Rao et al., 2020).  
• Higher bioavailability than other omega -3 forms (Kagan et al., 2013 Lipids Health Dis , 12, 1)  
• No fishy aftertaste.  
• More sustainable than fish oil.  
• Provides each participant with their lipid panel information they could monitor during the study.  
• Increase consumer awareness and engagement towards Almega ®PL and their health benefits.  
 
8.3.3 Assessment of potential risk and benefits Potential Risks  
As a final remark we would like to add that the current study will be targeting new customers that will  be taking 
the Almega®PL  regardless of their participation of this study. Therefore, the study is not exposing the 
participants to the risks (and benefits) of taking the supplement but  rather monitoring the population that is 
already taking the supplements. From that point of view, this is not strictly an interventional study, but a cohort 
study in which a population is being monitored.  
 
8.3 Objectives and Endpoints  
The aim of this study is  to assess the effectiveness of Almega ®PL on improving blood markers associated with 
heart health of iwi customers.  Specifically, we would like to confirm the decrease in cholesterol observed in our 
previous trial (Rao et al., 2020) while assessing the capacity to decrease also triglycerides (primary outcome).As 
a secondary objective we would like to understand if EPA,  precursor of signalling molecules involved in the 
inflamatiory response, could help decrease the inflammatory marker hs -CRP.  
 
 
OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  JUSTIFICATION FOR 
ENDPOINTS  
Primary    
Can Almega ®PL  supplement 
decrease triacylglycerides in a 
generally healthy population?  
 
 Triglyceride change from baseline 
over 6-month  period .   Triglyceride levels is 
an atherogenic lipid 
and an important risk 
factor in 
Cardiovascular 
Disease  
Secondary    
Can Almega ®PL  supplement 
replicate the decrease in VLDL and 
total cholesterol we observed in 
our previous clinical trial (Rao et 
al., 2020)?  
Will the results from a controlled 
population translate to the iwi 
costumers?  
Can Almega ®PL  supplement 
decrease the ag e-related 
inflammatory marker hs -CRP in a 
generally healthy population?  
 
 Total Cholesterol  change from 
baseline over 6 -month period.   
VLDL -Cholesterol  change from 
baseline over 6 -month period . 
LDL -Cholesterol  change from 
baseline over 6 -month period . 
HDL -Cholesterol  change from 
baseline over 6 -month period . 
hs-CRP  change from baseline over 
6-month period . 
Fasting glucose  change from 
baseline over 6 -month period . 
HbA1c  change from baseline over 
6-month period . Cholesterol in plasma 
levels is atherogenic 
and a risk factor in 
Cardiovascular 
Disease.  
Hs-CRP is an age 
related inflammatory 
market. Omega -3 help 
regulate the 
inflammatory 
response.  
 
  
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
Open -label post -market evaluation of AlmegaPL/Cholesterol. , Master Version PICF, V 1, March 4th 2022.  Page 3 of 6 OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  JUSTIFICATION FOR 
ENDPOINTS  
 
 
 
9. Study Design:  
EPA is a type of omega -3 essential fatty acid known to play a beneficial role in protection against 
cardiovascular disease. Almega®PL  is the only natural source containing EPA as sole n -3 HUFA that is 
available over the counter for human consumption. We hypothesized  that AlmegaPL  supplementation 
improves blood markers associated with heart health and inflammation. This post-market open label single 
armed trial involving 200 -300 male and female participants, that will be monitored during the first 6 months 
following their subscription to Almega®PL .  
As part of the screening procedure , participants will complete a short questionnaire to make sure they are 
new iwi users. Any participant who is already using iwi will not be considered in the study. Any participant that 
has a serious condition (including but not limited to kidney, neurological, immunological, liver,  and 
gastrointestinal disease, any heart condition,  or diabe tes) will also be disqualified for the program and directed 
to their doctor. Any participant attempting conception, pregnant or breastfeeding will also be disqualified. All 
other participants will be accepted into the limited study based on their time of a pplication until the quota is 
completed.  Participation in this study is purely voluntary and participants can withdraw at any point without 
prejudice .  
 
Participants will be asked to take the allocated product according to the dose  prescribed ( 2 capsules p er day 
containing 1000 -1100 mg  Almega®PL ) and adherence to the protocol will be evaluated with a follow up email. 
Participants will be asked to maintain their usual level of physical activity and diet for the duration of the study. 
The dose used in this trial is in agreement with the commercial dose communicated to the FDA and 
comparable to doses previously used in our clinical trials.  
 
Along with the fist supplement order shipped to the new subscriptions, participants will receive the baseline 
hearth health test kit from ImawareTM. Participants will be contacted 3 and 6 months after and they will be sent 
subsequent kits once the confirmed adherence to the supplement. The test kits  will monitor blood lipid le vels 
across a supplementation period (baseline, month 3 and month 6)  thanks to a finger prick blood drawing 
system . The age, height, weight, gender, fasting total cholesterol, LDL -cholesterol, HDL -cholesterol, 
calculated VLDL -cholesterol, triglycerides, as well as hs -CRP inflammatory marker, and  glucose and HbA1c 
as diabetes indicator of each participant will be recorded over the study period.  Qualitas Health  will receive 
the aggregated  data of the participants only for statistical analyses  at their headquarter in Houston  and store it 
in the company share drive with access restricted to those involved in the study . There will be no cost incurred 
for this analytical assessment to the participant.   
 
Results for the per protocol (PP) population will be  first tested for normality before any other test will be  
conducted and baseline data was compared again  month 3 and month 6 data . Based on the distribution of 
data, Welch two -sample unequal variance t -tests and Wilcoxon Ranks sum tests were used to compare two -
tailed differences between groups. Differences will be  considered statistically significant at a p value < 0.05. 
Interventi on effect will also test using an analysis of covariance model (ANCOVA) adjusting for baseline 
parameters.  
 
10. Study Procedures:  
10.1 Treatment Schedule  
Study Stage  Specific Timing  Activity  
Planning  
2 Months  N/A ● Approval of protocol  
● Independent peer -review  
 
  
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
Open -label post -market evaluation of AlmegaPL/Cholesterol. , Master Version PICF, V 1, March 4th 2022.  Page 4 of 6 ● Logistical arrangements  
● Recruitment  
Pre-Study  
1 Month  Upon approval and  
completion  
of recruitment  ● Preliminary screening against inclusion and exclusion criteria  
● Pre-study interview:  
o Information email and gain informed consent from the 
participant  
o Enrolled participants purchase the product and receive the 
testing ki ts along with instruction regarding the study 
requirements.  
Study  
Week 0 -24 
 
 
 
Trial  
Months 0 -6 
(Period  begins at  
trial week 2)  
 
 
 
 
 
End-Study  
Month 3  Baseline data collection  First test kit will be shipped to imaware  
Trial Period  ● Participant takes product as instructed  
● Participant will receive and send the test kits on month 3 and 6  
 
 
 
 
Trial end interview  ● Participant completes end -trial blood test.  
● Participant s exit email  or phone  interview to address adherence.  
 
Post-Study  N/A ● Data verification and statistical analysis  
● Report drafting and approval  
● Study debrief and review  
* Please note that enrolment  in the trial to receive product will only occur after all inclusion criteria have 
been met.   
 
10.2 Length of Treatment Time  
In total, participants will be required to send the test kits 3 times throughout the total trial time of 6 months.  
At the completion of month 6, participants will repeat the baseline measures including a final blood test and a 
required exit interview.  
Clinical interviews will be undertaken by email  or phone . The trial will be completed once the last participants  
complete  the exit interview .  
 
  
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
Open -label post -market evaluation of AlmegaPL/Cholesterol. , Master Version PICF, V 1, March 4th 2022.  Page 5 of 6  
10.3. Risks and Discomforts   
As in the case of taking any treatment, we cannot guarantee that participants will not experience any 
uncomfortable effects during this study. The treatment includes the following ingredients: Almega PL.  
 
There are 4 reported causes of adverse effects of orally dosed supplements containing EPA reported on the 
TGA database. Specifically, diarrhoea, dry skin, enteritis infection (inflammation of the small intestine) and 
nephrolithiasis (kidney stones). These events are 4 out of several thousands of participa nts. A 2011 study using 
a similar EPA based product and involving 229 participants found the product to be well tolerated.  
 
There is also a risk of discomfort that may be experienced because of  the blood draws  with finger  prick . 
Blood sampling  can cause p ain, bleeding, bruising, and/or swelling at the site of needle penetration (risk less 
than 1 in 50). Fainting  may occur  (risk less than 1 in 100 ), and infection rarely occurs (risk less than 1 in 1000).  
 
Should participants experience any of these or other  mild adverse effects or have other concerns about the 
treatment, blood collection, or data collection please contact the investigators (24 hours a day). Our contact 
details are found in the Contacts section of this document and the 24-hour contact mobile number is also on 
the product label.   
 
  
10.4. Voluntary Participation/Right to Refuse or Withdraw   
There is no obligation for participants to be involved in this study. If participants decide to participate in the 
study and later  feel they no longer wish to be part of it, participants may withdraw from the study at any 
time without prejudice to any curr ent or future involvement in clinical studies held by the study investigators or 
sponsor. If participants withdraw their consent, all data collected up until that time will be used in the analysis 
of the data.   
 
All communications will be performed by a tr ained iwi Qualitas employee  (Study Director)  or the Principal 
Investigator Dr. Ganuza. In the event that Dr. Ganuza does not screen the participant, Dr Ganuza will review 
case files before participants are enrolled. Any participant that presents a response  or result (e.g. blood test) 
that is outside of normal range will be directed by ImawareTM to medically trained professionals with their 
results.  
 
 10.5. Confidentiality   
The study investigator will gather certain personal information about participants. This information will be held 
by Qualitas/iwi as aggregated data. Data will be identifiable via study number allocated at enrolment  but not by 
participant name.  All public ly shared data or data used in publications will be in a non -identifiable form.   
Consent is sought for extended use of the data, which means it may be used in future research —for example, 
an extension of the current study and/or related studies conducted b y Qualitas/iwi. Furthermore, data may be 
used for subsequent statistical analysis , which  may be published in peer -reviewed journals ; however , no 
identifiable personal details will be published or used.  
Participant data will be stored in the company share drive with access restricted to the researchers involved in 
the study  at the head office of Qualitas Health for a period of 15 years and will be accessed by Trial Co -
Investigator and trial contact. At the end of this storage period participant data will be  disposed of in a 
confidential manner .  
Unless required by law, only the participants and their authorised representatives, will have access to data 
which identifies participants by name or from which participant identity is otherwise apparent or can be 
reasonably ascertained.  
 
  
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
Open -label post -market evaluation of AlmegaPL/Cholesterol. , Master Version PICF, V 1, March 4th 2022.  Page 6 of 6 All personal information will be used only for the purpose of administering participation in this study and in 
accordance with the laws governing the protection and privacy of personal information under USA privacy 
legislation.  
By si gning the attached consent form, participants authorize the release of/or access to this confidential 
information in an aggregated non -identifiable form to the relevant study personnel and regulatory authorities 
as noted above.  
Participants have the right to access personal information collected from them in connection with the study 
and request corrections of any such personal information that is incorrect.  
10.6. Termination of the Study   
This research project may be stopped for a variety of reasons.   
 
During the trial, any participant that records out -of-range analytical levels will be referred to their GP for 
assessment of suitability/safety for continuation in the trial.  
 
At the discretion of the GP the participant will either be placed on standar d care of cholesterol -lowering 
medication (and removed from the trial) or continue in the trial on the supplementation.  
 
The participant also has the option to stop supplementation at any point.  
 
11. Investigator Benefits   
The investigators are being remu nerated to conduct this study. They  will not allow a  conflict of interest to 
compromise their position or this research study.   
   
12. Consent   
The Principal Investigator, Dr Eneko Ganuza, is required to provide participants with all information regarding 
the nature and  purpose of the research study, risks/ benefits,  and the possibility of alternative 
treatment ; participants should be given the opportunity to discuss these. It must be stated that participants 
are free to withdraw anytime and that i f participants do not participate , they will not suffer any  prejudice.  
 
13. Advice and Information  – Contact Details    
If participants have any further questions regarding this study, please do not hesitate to contact:  
Eneko Ganuza  –Trial Contact  
Ph: + 1 832 850 2022  
24hr mobile: +1 480 519 5342  
 
If unwarranted side effects occur,  please don’t hesitate to contact a doctor and the study representative.    
In the case of an emergency please dial 911.    