STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1SYNOPSIS 5
2INTRODUCTION 9
2.1 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 9
2.2 BENEFITS AND RISKS TO PATIENTS 11
3STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 12
3.1 OBJECTIVES 12
3.2 PRIMARY ENDPOINT 13
3.3 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS 14
3.4 SAFETY ENDPOINTS 16
3.5 PHARMACOKINETIC ENDPOINTS 16
3.6 PATIENT EXPERIENCE ENDPOINTS 17
3.7 BIOMARKER EXPLORATORY RESEARCH 17
4INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 17
4.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 17
4.2 DISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN 20
5STUDY ACTIVITIES 22
5.1 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 22
5.2 CONTRACEPTION RECOMMENDATIONS 26
5.3 PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND THERAPY 28
5.4 PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT THERAPY 31
5.5 DISCONTINUATION FROM STUDY DRUG OR SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL FROM STUDY 32
5.6 FOLLOW-U P FOR STUDY DRUG DISCONTINUATION OR SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL FROM STUDY 33
5.7 ASSESSMENT OF DISEASE ACTIVITY 35
5.8 STUDY DRUG 35
5.9 RANDOMIZATION /DRUG ASSIGNMENT AND BLINDING 39
5.10 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 40
6SAFETY CONSIDERATION S 41
6.1 COMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 41
Page 2 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.2 TOXICITY MANAGEMENT 45
6.3 DATA MONITORING COMMITTEE 49
6.4 CARDIOVASCULAR ADJUDICATION COMMITTEE 50
7STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF S AMPLE SIZE 50
7.1 STATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 50
7.2 DEFINITION FOR ANALYS IS POPULATIONS 50
7.3 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 51
7.4 STATIST ICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 52
7.5 INTERIM ANALYSIS 53
8ETHICS 53
8.1 INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE /INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (IEC/IRB) 53
8.2 ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE STUDY 53
8.3 SUBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 53
9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM CO MPLETION 54
10DATA QUALITY ASSURAN CE 54
11COMPLETION OF THE ST UDY 54
12REFERENCES 55
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. EXAMPLES OF COMMONLY USED STRONG CYP3A I NHIBITORS AND INDUCE RS 30
TABLE 2. IDENTITY OF STUDY DR UG 37
TABLE 3. SPECIFIC TOXICITY MA NAGEMENT GUIDELINES FOR ABNORMAL LABORAT ORY VALUES 47
LIST OF FIGU RES
FIGURE 1. STUDY SCHEMATIC 20
Page 3 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS 57
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 61
APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES 62
APPENDIX D. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE 63
APPENDIX E. CORTICOSTEROID TAPER ING SCHEDULE 69
APPENDIX F. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES 70
APPENDIX G. OPERATIONS MANUAL 75
Page 4 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Why Is This Study Being Conducted
Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA)
Giant cell arteritis (GCA), also known as temporal arteritis, is a systemic vasculitis of the large vessels 
with a predilection for the cranial branches of the aorta.  GCA affects women to men in a 3:1 ratio and 
almost exclusively those over age 50.  The c ourse of GCA is characterized by a relatively abrupt onset 
followed by chronic vascular and systemic inflammation.  Left untreated, patients with GCA tend to 
manifest persistent systemic and vascular inflammation with resultant pathology related to progres sive 
vascular occlusion.
The characteristic symptoms of GCA include those related to vascular occlusion such as headache, jaw 
pain related to use (jaw claudication), as well as ocular symptoms.  Visual symptoms occur in up to 30% 
of GCA patients and can in clude diplopia or vision loss with 15% of patients manifesting permanent 
unilateral or bilateral loss of vision.  Patients with GCA experience systemic symptoms such as fever, 
fatigue, and weight loss.  There is a significant overlap between GCA and polymy algia rheumatica (PMR) 
with up to 30% of those with GCA manifesting PMR.
Corticosteroid (CS) therapy is the current mainstay of treatment for GCA.  High doses of CS therapy are 
initially required and most often quickly control inflammation and prevent visi on loss and/or other 
irreversible symptoms.  Initial high dose CS therapy is followed by a prolonged period of dose tapering.  
During this tapering phase, between 50% and 80% of GCA patients experience a disease flare.1  In 
addition to symptomatic pathology, prolonged exposure to CS therapy results in approximately 80% of 
GCA patients manifesting steroid -associated pathology within 10 years following diagnosis.2
Though many symptoms such as headache and PMR symptoms resolve rapidly with initiation of high 
dose CS therapy, ischemic complications such as jaw claudication may take considerably longer.  
Additionally, GCA is associated with chronic vascular damage including aortic inflammation with 
subsequent aortic aneurysm formation which may result in spontaneous rupture and/or the need for 
surgica l repair.  Notably, there are cases reported of chronic underlying vascular inflammation and 
progression of vascular pathology despite control of clinically apparent disease activity, even while still 
on chronic CS therapy.3  Thus, there remains the potential for improved treatment options which can 
mitigate this subclinical vascular inflammation.
The prevalence of GCA varies by region with reported r ates of temporal arteritis/GCA varying widely 
between 1 and 30 per 100,000 individuals and with further enrichment in individuals ≥ 50 years of age.  
The highest rates are observed in populations from Scandinavian countries and of Northern European 
descent .1
The current treatment regimen for GCA consists almost exclusively of CS therapy.  Numerous trials of 
biologic and non -biologic immunosuppressants have attempted to identify steroid -sparing therapies, 
but until recently none have been definitively successful.  Recently, Phase 2 and Phase 3 studies of 
tocilizumab have demonstrated superiority in the achievement of GCA disease remission compared to 
Page 9 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.standard -of-care CS therapy.4,5  In addit ion to increased rates of remission, these studies demonstrated 
the ability to reduce exposure to CS therapy by nearly half with concomitant tocilizumab treatment. ]
Upadacitinib as Potential Treatment for GCA
Targeting the Janus kinase (JAK) signaling pathway for autoimmune diseases such as GCA, rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA), Crohn's disease (CD), psoriatic arthritis (PsA), ulcerative colitis (UC), atopic dermatitis (AD), 
and axial spondyloarthritis (AxSpA), is supported by the involvement of various pro- inflammatory 
cytokines that signal via JAK pathways in the pathogenesis of these immune -related disorders.  The 
activation of JAK signaling initiates expression of survival factors, cytokines, chemokines, and other 
molecules that facilitate leukocyte cellula r trafficking and cell proliferation which contribute to multiple 
inflammatory and autoimmune disorders, including the key cytokines driving GCA pathogenesis.6-8
The JAK family is composed of 4 members:  JAK1, 2, 3, and tyrosine kinase 2 (Tyk2).  These cytoplasmic 
tyrosine kinases act in tandem to activate the Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) 
that transduce cytokine -mediated signals, and are associated with multiple membrane cytokine 
receptors such as common gamma chain (CGC) receptors and the glycoprotein 130 transmembrane 
proteins.9  JAK3 and JAK1 are components of the CGC cytokine receptor complexes that are responsible 
for the signaling of the inflammatory cytokin es interleukin (IL) -2, -4, -7, -9, -15 and -21; whereas IL -12 
and IL -23 signal through JAK2 and Tyk2.10  Propagation of these signals is important in the amplification 
of inflammatory responses.
Upadacitinib is a novel JAK1 inhibitor currently being developed for the treatment of adult patients with 
inflammatory diseases such as RA, CD, PsA, UC, AD, AxSpA, and Takayasu arteritis .  In an in -vitro sett ing, 
upadacitinib potently inhibits JAK1 activity, but to a lesser degree, inhibits the other isoforms, JAK2 and 
JAK3.  The enhanced selectivity of upadacitinib against JAK1 may offer an improved benefit/risk profile 
in patients with GCA.  Upadacitinib has reduced activity against JAK2 and JAK3 which may mitigate JAK2 
inhibitory effects on erythropoiesis and myelopoiesis as well as immunosuppressive effect mediated by 
JAK3 inhibition.
By preferentially targeting JAK1, it is anticipated that upadacitinib wil l demonstrate the ability to 
abrogate signaling of key cytokines involved in the pathogenesis of GCA.  Extensive preclinical, ex vivo, 
and in vivo studies have demonstrated robust inhibition of the JAK1- dependent cytokines IL -6 and 
Interferon gamma (IFN -γ).  These two cytokines have been strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of 
GCA.  IL -6 receptor blockade with tocilizumab has demonstrated efficacy in GCA in Phase 2 and Phase 3 
studies.4,5  However, preclinical and translational human studies have suggested that even in the setting 
of high dos e CS with resultant reduction of IL -6 pathway, there persists a level of subclinical 
inflammation driven largely by IFN -γ.11,12  Serial biopsies of patients with GCA treated with high dose 
CShave demonstrated that the IL -6 cytokine pathway is highly responsive to standard CS therapy, 
whereas the IFN -γ pathway is resistant to steroid -mediated immunosuppression.13  Moreover, direct 
IFN-γ blockade abrogates STAT1 activa tion, reduced expression of ICAM -1, CXCL9, 10, 11 and prevents 
macrophage adhesion/infiltration.
Similarly, treatment with the relatively non -selective JAK inhibitor tofacitinib in a translational model of 
human GCA14demonstrated abrogation of STAT -1 signaling, reduced blood levels of IFN -γ, and 
prevention of T cell and macrophage accumulation in the vessel wall.
Page 10 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Clinically, the persistence of smold ering inflammation is supported by studies in which patients with 
GCA, or the closely related large vessel vasculitis Takayasu's arteritis, who were treated with the IL -6 
pathway blocker tocilizumab, demonstrated persistent vasculitis of medium -sized and l arge vessels on 
autopsy despite apparent clinical response to therapy.15,16  These data suggest that although IL -6 
receptor blockade can provide reduction in flares when used continuously on the background of a 
forced CS taper, ultimately targeting the CS/IL -6 resistant Th1 responses will be ne cessary to resolve 
chronic smoldering vasculitis.  Among those with a good response to tocilizumab in a 1- year study, over 
half of subjects relapsed (as early as 3 months) after discontinuation of IL -6R blockade.17
Using RA as a model, exposures achieved with upadacitinib 15 mg daily are anticipated to provide a level 
of IL -6 inhibition in range of that achieved with tocilizumab 162 mg weekly (the app roved GCA dose).  In 
addition to IL -6 blockade, there is anticipated to be robust inhibition of the IFN -γ signaling with 
upadacitinib.  Thus, upadacitinib treatment has the potential to provide additive efficacy above and 
beyond that observed with IL -6R bl ockade alone.
Clinical Hypothesis
It is hypothesized that inhibition of cytokine signaling through the IL -6, IFN -γ, and IL -12 signaling 
pathways by upadacitinib, a selective JAK1 inhibitor, will result in improved ability to maintain remission 
with absence of GCA signs and symptoms compared to placebo (PBO), even in the setting of a more 
rapid reduction of CS treatment.
2.2 Benefits and Risks to Patients
Despite the observed benefit of tocilizumab over standard -of-care CS therapy (56% versus 18% rates of 
sustai ned remission from Week 12 through Week 52 defined as the absence GCA signs and symptoms, 
normalization of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C -reactive protein (CRP), and adherence to 
the CS taper regimen),5there is still significant room for improvement.  In addition, it is not yet clear if 
the observed benefit translates into a potential for drug -free remission.  Thus, there remains a medical 
need for additional therapeutic options in GCA to further increa se rates of sustained remission and 
minimize steroid exposure.
The doses to be evaluated in Study M16 -852 (upadacitinib 7.5 and 15 mg once daily [QD]) are expected 
to provide an optimal benefit/risk profile to support chronic administration in this study p opulation; 
refer to the Selection of Doses in the Study section for additional details.
Adverse events (AEs) such as infections includin g herpes zoster reactivation, major adverse 
cardiovascular events (MACE defined as cardiovascular death, non -fatal myocardial infarctions and non -
fatal strokes), thrombosis, malignancies, and hematologic AEs have been observed with JAK inhibition.  
Upadacitinib is a novel selective JAK1 inhibitor with the ability to decrease inflammation mediated by 
JAK1 signaling while hav ing less inhibitory effect on JAK2 and JAK3.  This could potentially minimize 
some of the reported safety concerns with less selective JAK inhibition which are thought to be 
mediated by inhibition of JAK2 and JAK3 signaling pathways .
An increased risk of infections including opportunistic infections (e.g. ,mucosal candida infections) and 
herpes zoster, non -melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), and abnormal laboratory changes (e.g., elevations of 
Page 11 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.serum transaminases, lipids, and creatine phosphokinase; and reductions in hemoglobin and white 
blood cells) have been observed with upadacitinib therapy. 
In ORAL Surveillance, a study of a different JAK inhibitor, tofacitinib, in RA patients 50 years of age and 
older with at least one cardiovascular risk factor, higher rate s of all -cause mortality, malignancies, MACE 
and thrombosis (overall thrombosis, deep vein thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism) were seen in 
patients treated with tofacitinib versus TNF blockers .7These higher rates were primarily observed in 
patients 65 years of age and older, patients with a history of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, and 
patients with other cardiovascular risk factors (such as current or past long -time smokers). Although 
upadacitinib clinical trial data to date have not indicated a higher risk for MACE, venous 
thromboembolism, malignancies excluding NMSC, or deaths in RA pat ients treated with upadacitinib 
versus adalimumab, the findings of the ORAL Surveillance study may potentially also apply to other JAK 
inhibitors and an increased risk for these events compared to TNF blockers cannot be completely 
excluded. Therefore, the investigator should consider the benefits and risks of upadacitinib treatment 
and suitable treatment alternatives in determining study participation and the continued use of 
upadacitinib in patients 65 years of age and older, patients with a history of ath erosclerotic 
cardiovascular disease or other cardiovascular risk factors, patients who are current or past long -time 
smokers, and/or patients with other malignancy risk factors (e.g., current malignancy or history of 
malignancy).
The results of genetic tox icology testing indicate that upadacitinib is not genotoxic; however, 
upadacitinib is teratogenic based on animal studies, which necessitates avoidance of pregnancy in 
females of childbearing potential.  Based on the calculated safety margins for human fet al exposure with 
seminal fluid transfer, there is judged to be no risk to the pregnancy of female partners of male subjects 
who are treated with upadacitinib.
A detailed discussion of the pre -clinical and clinical toxicology, metabolism, pharmacology, and safety 
experience with upadacitinib can be found in the current Investigator's Brochure.18
Taken together, the safety and efficacy data from upadacitinib studies to date show a favorable 
benefit:risk profile for upadacitinib and support the continued investigation of upadacitinib in patients 
with various autoimmune/inflammatory conditions.
In vi ew of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19 [coronavirus SARS- CoV-2]) pandemic, the benefit -risk 
profile of various immunomodulatory therapies on COVID -19 is being evaluated.  At this time, the 
effects of upadacitinib on the course of COVID -19 are not wel l defined.
3STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
3.1 Objectives
Period 1
To evaluate the efficacy of upadacitinib 7.5 mg once daily (QD) and 15 mg QD in combination with a 
26-week CS taper regimen compared to PBO in combination with a 52 -week CS taper regimen, as 
mea sured by the proportion of subjects in sustained remission at Week 52, and to assess the safety and 
tolerability of upadacitinib in subjects with GCA.
Page 12 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Period 2
To evaluate the safety and efficacy of continuing versus withdrawing upadacitinib in maintaining
remission in subjects who achieved remission in Period 1.
3.2 Primary Endpoint
The primary endpoint is the proportion of subjects achieving sustained remission at Week 52.  Sustained 
remission is defined as having achieved both of the following:
Absence of GC A signs and symptoms from Week 12 through Week 52
Adherence to the protocol -defined CS taper regimen.
Page 13 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.volume of distribution (V/F).  Additional parameters may be estimated if useful in the interpretation of 
the data.  Data from this study may be combined with data from other studies for the populati on 
pharmacokinetic analyses.
3.6 Patient Experience Endpoints
Data on patient experience will be collected by questionnaire at the Baseline visit and answers will be 
recorded in the electronic case report form (eCRF).  The objective of the research is to obtai n relevant 
information about patient experiences regarding the burden of GCA disease and treatment.
3.7 Biomarker Exploratory Research
Optional blood samples for exploratory research will be collected as described in the Activity Schedule 
(Appendix D).  Prognostic and predictive biomarker signatures may be evaluated.  Biomarker 
assessments may include nucleic acids, proteins, metabolites, or lipids.  Expl oratory research will focus 
on GCA and upadacitinib.  The objective of research is to analyze samples for biomarkers that will help 
to understand the subject's disease and response to upadacitinib.  Genes of interest may include (but 
not limited to) those associated pharmacokinetics (drug metabolizing enzymes, drug transport proteins), 
genes within the target pathway (JAK, Tyk2, tumor necrosis factor [TNF]), or other genes believed to be 
related GCA and other inflammatory diseases (human leukocyte antigens [HLA], IL).  Research may also 
include epigenetic changes in DNA that may associate with the subject's response to treatment or 
disease.  Samples for ribonucleic acid (RNA) and proteomics will be used to research if any genetic 
variants result in changes t o gene expression or protein concentrations.
These assessments may be explored in the context of GCA or related conditions and/or upadacitinib or 
drugs of similar classes.  Research on samples collected in Germany will be restricted to GCA and 
upadacitinib.  The results from these analyses are exploratory in nature and may not be included with 
the clinical study report.
The samples may be retained for no longer than 20 years after study completion or per local 
requirements.
4INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Stud y Design and Plan
Study M16 -852 is a Phase 3, global, multicenter, randomized, double -blind, PBO -controlled study.  
Approximately 420 subjects will be enrolled into this study.
The study population will consist of adult subjects who are at least 50 years o f age with a diagnosis of 
active GCA, either new onset or relapsing disease, within 8 weeks of Baseline.  Active GCA is defined by 
the presence of at least one of the following:  unequivocal cranial symptoms of GCA, unequivocal 
symptoms of PMR, or other fe atures judged by the investigator to be consistent with GCA or PMR flares, 
AND an ESR ≥ 30 mm/hr or CRP ≥ 1 mg/dL.
Page 17 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.New onset disease is defined as diagnosis of GCA within 8 weeks of Baseline.  Relapsing disease is 
defined as active GCA in a subject who has failed at least one attempted CS taper.
The study will allow enrollment of a minimum of 30% of subjects with new onset disease and up to 70% 
of subjects with relapsing disease.  The study will also allow enrollment of up to 20% of subjects with 
previous u se of an IL -6 inhibitor with discontinuation based on reasons other than disease flare.
The study duration will include a 35 -day maximum Screening Period:  a 52 -week randomized, 
double -blind, parallel -group treatment period (Period 1); a 52 -week blinded ex tension period in which 
subjects may either be re -randomized or continue their original treatment assignment (Period 2); and a 
30-day follow -up period.
In Period 1, subjects who meet eligibility criteria will be randomized in a 2:1:1 ratio to 1 of 3 treatm ent 
groups:
Upadacitinib 15 mg administered daily + 26 -week CS taper regimen (n = 210)
Upadacitinib 7.5 mg administered daily + 26 -week CS taper regimen (n = 105)
PBO administered daily + 52 -week CS taper regimen (n = 105)
Subjects must have received treatment for active GCA at a dose of ≥ 40 mg prednisone (or equivalent) at 
any time prior to Baseline and must be receiving prednisone (or prednisolone) ≥ 20 mg QD at Baseline.  
Subjects must have GCA that, in the opinion of the investigator, is clinically st able to allow the subject to 
safely initiate the protocol -defined CS taper regimen.
Starting at Baseline, all subjects will switch from CS obtained outside of the study to CS provided by the 
sponsor with the oral prednisone or prednisolone dose at 20, 30, 40, 50, or 60 mg QD.  The initial dose 
of prednisone or prednisolone will be at the discretion of the investigator, based on disease severity and 
comorbid medical conditions, but should be at a minimum of 20 mg QD at Baseline.  At Baseline, if a 
subject is on a dose other than 20, 30, 40, 50, or 60 mg QD, the dose should be rounded up or down, as 
clinically indicated per investigator discretion, to the nearest of these doses.   If a subject has already 
taken the CS dose at home on the day of the Baseline vis it, dosing should not be repeated with 
sponsor -provided CS.  Prednisone or prednisolone will be tapered according to a predefined schedule 
over a 26 - or 52- week period.  Open -label prednisone or prednisolone will be provided until the dose is 
tapered to 2 0 mg/day.  Subsequently, blinded prednisone or prednisolone will be provided for the 
remaining blinded taper regimen through Week 52.  See Section 5.8for additional details regarding CS 
therapy during the study.
Subjects assigned to either dose of upadacitinib who achieve sustained remission for at least 
24consecutive weeks prior to the Week 52 Visit (at the end of Period 1) will be re -randomized in a 
2:1ratio to either continue on upadacitinib or switch to PBO in Period 2.  Subjects who achieved 
sustained remission for at least 24 weeks prior to the Week 52 visit (at the end of Period 1) who were 
assigned to PBO in Period 1 will continue to receive PBO in Period 2.  Remission is defined as absence of 
GCA signs and symptoms AND adherence to the protocol -defined CS taper regimen or CS -free.
At Week 52, subjects who have absence of GCA signs and symptoms AND are CS -free at the Week 52 
visit, but do not achieve sustained remission for at least 24 consecutive weeks prior to the Week 52 
Page 18 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Visit, will continue in Period 2 on their originally randomized treatment assignment.  All other subjects 
will be discontinued from study drug and the study at the end of P eriod 1.
Subjects who discontinue study drug during Period 1 should receive treatment at the investigator's 
judgment, in accordance with local standard -of-care (which could include tocilizumab), and continue to 
follow the regular visit schedule for the remainder of Period 1 and adhere to the Period 1 study 
procedures as noted in Appendix D.
In Period 2, subjects who experience a flare (defined as an event deter mined by the investigator to 
represent recurrence of GCA signs or symptoms or an ESR measurement > 30 mm/hr attributable to 
GCA, AND requiring initiation of CS) will start open- label escape therapy with prednisone or 
prednisolone at investigator's discreti on.  A flare may be documented at either a scheduled or 
unscheduled visit.  Subjects meeting flare criteria will return within approximately 4 weeks after the visit 
in which flare was determined for reassessment.  The reassessment can occur at either a reg ularly 
scheduled or unscheduled visit.  If the subject does not have absence of GCA signs and symptoms within 
approximately 4 weeks after the visit in which flare was determined, they will be discontinued from 
study drug.  Subjects who discontinue study dr ug should receive treatment at the investigator's 
judgment, in accordance with local standard -of-care (which could include tocilizumab), and continue to 
follow the regular visit schedule for Period 2 and adhere to the study procedures as noted in 
Appendix D.
An independent, external data monitoring committee (DMC) will be established for periodic review of 
unblinded safety data and to ensure subject s afety.  In addition, a futility analysis will be conducted by 
the DMC to assess lack of efficacy once the first 140 enrolled subjects complete 24 weeks of treatment.  
Study sites and subjects will remain blinded for the duration of the study.  After the la st subject 
completes the Week 52 visit the Sponsor will be unblinded to Period 1 study drug assignment to 
facilitate regulatory filings.  See Section 6.3and Section 7.5for additional details regarding the DMC and 
the planned futility analysis.
The schematic of the study is shown in Figure 1.  Further details regarding study procedures are located 
in the Operations Manual.
See Section 5for information regarding eligibility criteria.
Page 19 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476 -29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Figure 1. Study Schematic
R1 = sustained remission for 24 consecutive weeks prior to Week 52; R2 = remission at Week 52 only
4.2 Discussion of Study Design
Choice of Control Group
Placebo control will be used in this study to address potential confounding factors, such as placebo 
effect, potential investigator bias in safety and efficacy assessment or regression to the mea n in 
endpoint evaluation.
The control group in this study will be placebo plus a 52 -week CS taper regimen and represent a CS 
monotherapy taper regimen.  A 52 -week duration for CS taper was chosen for the control group 
because it is consistent with clinical practice standard of care.
Appropriateness of Measurements
Standard statistical, clinical, and laboratory procedures will be utilized in this study.  All efficacy 
measurements in this study are standard for assessing disease activity in subjects with GCA.   All clinical 
and laboratory procedures in this study are standard and generally accepted.
Page 20 of 155 
  
    
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
   
   
 
      
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
  
                  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Suitability of Subject Population
This study will enroll adult female and male subjects who are at least of 50 years of age at the time of 
the Screening visit who have been diagnosed with GCA and who have active disease within 8 weeks of 
Baseline.  The study population selected in this study reflects the standard population for GCA trials with 
new interventions.
Selection of Doses in the Study
This Phase 3 study will evaluate 2 doses of upadacitinib (7.5 or 15 mg QD) using the once -daily tablet 
formulation.  The selection of doses was informed by results from the exposure -response relationships 
characterized in Phase 2 studies in RA (Studies M13 -537 and M13 -550), the Phase 3 clinical trials in RA 
(Studies M13 -549 [SELECT -NEXT] and M13 -542 [SELECT -BEYOND]), and the published results for Phase 2 
and Phase 3 studies of the IL -6 inhibitor tocilizumab in GCA.4,5
Exposure -response analyses of the two Phase 2 studies in RA using the immediate -release formulations 
(doses from 3 mg twice daily [BID] to 18 mg BID and 24 mg QD) indicated that the 6 mg BID dose 
(equivalent to the 15 -mg QD dose) approaches the plateau of efficacy in RA, and increasing the dose to 
12 mg BID (equivalent to the 30 -mg QD dose) appears to res ult in modest incremental efficacy 
benefit.19,20  A bioavailability study has demonstrated that a 15 mg QD regimen of the once -daily 
formulation provide equivalent daily area under the curve (AUC) and comparable maximum serum 
concentration (Cmax) and minimum serum concentration (C min) to 6 mg BID of the immediate -release 
capsule formulation used in Phase 2 studies in RA under fasting conditions.21
Results from the first two RA Phase 3 clinical trials (Study M13 -549 [SELECT -NEXT] and Study M13 -542 
[SELECT -BEYOND]) evaluating upadacitinib in subjects with moderate to severe RA showed that after 
12weeks of treatment, both doses of upadaci tinib (15 mg and 30 mg QD) met the study's primary 
endpoints of ACR20 and Low Disease Activity (LDA).  Key secondary endpoints were also achieved.  
Study M13 -549 evaluated upadacitinib compared to PBO in subjects who did not adequately respond to 
treatment with conventional -synthetic disease -modifying antirheumatic drugs (csDMARD -IR), while 
Study M13 -542 evaluated upadacitinib compared to PBO in subjects who did not adequately respond to 
treatment with biologic DMARD antirheumatic drugs (bDMARD -IR).  Result s from the Phase 2 and 
Phase 3 RA studies support the use of upadacitinib 15 mg as an efficacious dose in RA, and this dose is 
also expected to be efficacious in GCA.
In addition, a 7.5 mg dose will also be evaluated to ensure the minimal efficacious dose in GCA is 
characterized.  Since GCA affects an older population with co -morbid conditions and requires initiation 
of high dose CS, this population is potentially at greater risk of infections.  As such, a 7.5 mg dose may 
provide an optimal benefit/risk pro file to support chronic administration in GCA patients.
The doses to be evaluated in Study M16 -852 (upadacitinib 7.5 mg and 15 mg QD) are predicted to 
provide exposures that are lower than the no -observed- adverse -effect level (NOAEL) exposures from 
the pre clinical toxicology studies as well as the highest exposures that were previously evaluated and 
found to be safe and well tolerated in healthy volunteers in Phase 1 studies and in subjects with RA or 
CD in Phase 2 studies.  There is now extensive patient e xposure to upadacitinib 15 and 30 mg QD in the 
ongoing Phase 3 RA program with a preliminary safety profile consistent with Phase 2 studies of 
upadacitinib as well as the safety profile observed with JAK inhibitors as a class.  Age in adults has no 
impact on upadacitinib pharmacokinetics based on population pharmacokinetic analyses across Phase 1, 
Page 21 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023-505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.RA Phase 2, and CD Phase 2 studies.  Results from hepatic and renal impairment studies of upadacitinib 
suggest a limited increase in upadacitinib exposure with he patic or renal impairment.  Therefore, 
subjects with GCA are not expected to have a clinically relevant difference in upadacitinib plasma exposures from previous observations in subjects with RA.
Efficacy in GCA was demonstrated for an IL -6 receptor inhibi tor, tocilizumab, using doses that were 
efficacious in RA (162 mg subcutaneous [SC] injection once weekly and 162 mg SC every 2 weeks).
4,5
Therefore, the 7.5 mg and 15 mg QD upadacitinib doses selected for Study M16 -852, dosed for up to 
104 weeks are expected to provide an acceptable efficacy an d safety profile.
5STUDY ACTIVITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria in order to be included in the study.  Anything other than 
a positive response to the questions below will result in exclusion from study participation.
Disease Activity
1.Diagnosis of GCA according to the following criteria:
Adult male or female, at least 50 years of age
History of ESR ≥ 50 mm/hour or high sensitivity C- reactive protein (hsCRP)/CRP ≥ 1.0 mg/dL
Presence of at least one of the following:
Unequivocal cranial symptoms of GCA (new -onset localized headache, scalp tenderness, 
temporal artery tenderness or decreased pulsation, ischemia -related vision loss, or 
otherwise unexplained mouth or jaw pain upon mastication), or
Unequivocal symptoms of PMR (shoulder and/or hip girdle pain a ssociated with 
inflammatory morning stiffness).
Presence of at least one of the following:
Temporal artery biopsy revealing features of GCA, or
Evidence of large vessel vasculitis by angiography or cross -sectional imaging (such as 
magnetic resonance imaging [MRI], computed tomography [CT] or positron emission 
tomography [PET]), assessed by a qualified radiologist experienced in evaluating large vessel vasculitis, or ultrasound of temporal arteries assessed by a qualified physician experienced in evaluating large vessel vasculitis.
2.Active GCA, either new onset or relapsing, within 8 weeks of Baseline.  Active disease is 
defined by the presence of an ESR ≥ 30 mm/hr or hsCRP/CRP ≥ 1 mg/dL AND at least one of the 
following:  unequivocal cranial symptoms of GCA, unequivocal symptoms of PMR, or other features judged by the investigator to be consistent with GCA or PMR flares.
3.Subjects must have rece ived treatment with ≥ 40 mg predniso ne (or equivalent) at any time 
prior to Baseline and be receiving prednisone (or prednisolone) ≥ 20 mg QD at Baseline.
Page 22 of 155
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023-505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
4.Subjects must have GCA that, in the opinion of the investigator, is clinically stable to allow the 
subject to safely initiate the protocol -defined CS taper.
Contraception
5.Women of childbearing potential must not have a positive serum pregnancy test at the 
Screening Visit and must have a negative urine pregnancy test at the Baseline Visit prior to study 
drug dosing. Note:  subjects with borderline serum pregnancy test at Screening must have a serum pregnancy test ≥ 3 days later to document continued lack of a positive result.
6.If female, subject must be either postmenopausal, OR permanently surgically sterile OR, for 
women of childbearing potential, practicing at least 1 protocol -specified method of birth control 
(Section 5.2) that is effective from Study Day 1 through at least 30 days after the last dose of 
study drug.  Additional local requirements may apply; country -specific requirements are 
provided in Section 5 of the Operations Manual.
7.Female subjects must not be pregnant, breastfeeding, or considering becoming pregnant 
during the study or within 30 days after the last dose of study drug.
Consent
8.Subjects must be able to understand and adhere to all protocol requirements an d must 
voluntarily sign and date an informed consent, approved by an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB), prior to the initiation of any screening or study -specific 
procedures.
9.Are willing and able to comply with procedures required in this protocol.
Laboratory Values
10.Laboratory values must meet the following criteria within the screening period prior to the 
first dose of study drug:  
Serum aspartate transaminase ≤ 2 × upper limit of normal (ULN)
Serum alanine transaminase ≤ 2 × ULN 
Estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) by simplified 4- variable Modification of Diet in 
Renal Disease formula ≥ 30 mL/min/1.73 m2
Total white blood cell (WBC) count ≥ 2,500/µL
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1,50 0/µL
Platelet count ≥ 100,000/µL
Absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) ≥ 750/µL
Hemoglobin ≥ 9 g/dL.
Page 23 of 155
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023-505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Subject History
11.Subject is judged to be in good health as determined by the Principal Investigator, based 
upon the results of medical history, laboratory profile, physical examination, chest x -ray (CXR), 
and a 12 -lead electrocardiogram (ECG) performed during Screening.
12.Subject must not have a history of clinically significant (per investigator's judgment) drug or 
alcohol abuse within the last 6 months.
13.Subject must have no current or past history of infection including:
No history of two or more episodes of herpes zoster, or one or more episodes of 
disseminated herpes zoster;
No history of one or more episodes of disseminated herpes simplex (including eczema 
herpeticum);
No human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection defined as confirmed positive anti -HIV 
antibody (HIV Ab) test;
Subject does not have active tuberculosis (TB) and does not meet TB exclusionary 
parameters (specifi c requirements for TB testing are provided in the operations manual);
For subjects in Japan:   No positive result of beta -D-glucan or two consecutive indeterminate 
results of beta -D-glucan (screening for Pneumocystis jirovecii infection) during the Screening 
Period;
No active infection(s) requiring treatment with intravenous anti -infectives within 30 days, or 
oral/intramuscular anti -infectives within 14 days prior to the Baseline Visit;
No chronic recurring infection and/or active viral infection that, based on the investigator's 
clinical assessment, makes the subject an unsuitable candidate for the study;
No active hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV) defined as:
HBV:  hepatitis B surface antigen (HBs Ag) positive (+) or detected sensitivity on the HBV 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) qualitative test for 
subjects who are hepatitis B core antibody (HBc Ab) positive (+) (and for hepatitis B surface antibody (HBs Ab) positive [+] subjects in Japan only);
HCV:  HCV RNA de tectable in any subject with anti -HCV antibody (HCV Ab).
Confirmed active COVID -19:  the Baseline Visit must be at least 14 days from the onset of 
signs/symptoms or positive SARS -CoV-2 test; symptomatic subjects must have recovered, 
defined as resolution of fever without use of antipyretics and improvement of sy mptoms;
Suspected COVID -19:  subjects with signs/symptoms suggestive of COVID -19, known 
exposure, or high -risk behavior should undergo molecular (e.g., PCR) testing to rule out 
SARS -CoV-2 infection or must be asymptomatic for 14 days following potential exposure.
14.Subject must not have any underlying medical disease or problems including but not limited 
to the following:
Recent (within past 6 months) cerebrovascular accident, myocardial infarction, coronary 
stenting, and aorto -coronary bypass sur gery or other ischemic events unrelated to GCA
Page 24 of 155
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023-505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Uncontrolled hypertension defined by a confirmed systolic blood pressure > 160 mmHg or 
diastolic blood pressure > 100 mmHg
Has been a previous recipient of an organ transplant which requires continued immunosu ppression
History of gastrointestinal perforation (other than due to appendicitis or mechanical injury), 
diverticulitis or have a significantly increased risk for gastrointestinal perforation per the 
investigator's judgment
Conditions that could interfere with drug absorption including but not limited to short 
bowel syndrome
History of any malignancy except for successfully treated non- melanoma skin cancer or 
localized carcinoma in situ of the cervix.
15.Subject must not have undergone any major surgical procedure (except cutaneous 
procedures) within 60 days prior to the Baseline and must not have any planned surgery during 
the trial that would impact study procedures or assessments.
16.Subject must not be permanently wheelchair -bound or be dridden.
17.Subject must not have any clinically significant medical condition or any other reason which, 
in the opinion of the investigator, would make the subject an unsuitable candidate to receive study drug or would put the subject at risk by participating in the study.
Concomitant Medications
18.Subject has not been treated with any investigational drug of chemical or biologic nature 
(see Section 5.3for additional information on biologic therapies) within a minimum of 30 days 
or five half- lives (whichever is longer) prior to the first dose of study drug or is not currently 
enrolled in another interventional clinical study.
19.Subject mus t have no systemic use of known strong cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) inhibitors 
from Screening through the end of the study or strong CYP3A inducers 30 days prior to study drug administration through the end of the study (refer to Table 1in Section 5.3for examples of 
commonly used strong CYP3A inhi bitors and inducers).
20.Subject must not have received any live vaccine within 4 weeks (8 weeks for subjects in 
Japan) prior to the first dose of study drug, or expected to need live vaccination during study participation including at least 4 weeks (8 weeks for subjects in Japan) after the last dose of study drug.
21.Subject must not have had prior exposure to any JAK inhibitor (including but not limited to 
upadacitinib, tofacitinib, ruxolitinib, baricitinib, and filgotinib).
22.Subject must not have been treated with an interleukin -6 (IL -6) inhibitor (including but not 
limited to tocilizumab, sirukumab, and sarilumab) within 4 weeks of Baseline.  Subjects previously treated with an IL -6 inhibitor must not have experienced diseas e flare during 
treatment.
Page 25 of 155
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023-505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
23.Subject must not have received a biologic or non -biologic DMARD within at least five times 
the mean terminal elimination half -life of a drug or must follow the washout period specified 
below:
Anakinra within 1 week of Baseline;
Methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, cyclosporine, azathioprine, or mycophenolate within 
4 weeks of Baseline;
≥8 weeks for leflunomide if no elimination procedure was followed, or adhere to an 
elimination procedure (i.e., 11 days with cholestyramine or activated charcoal or as per local label) ;
Cell- depleting agents (e.g., anti -CD 20) or alkylating agents including cyclophosphamide 
within 6 months of Baseline.
24.Subject must not have chronic use of systemic (oral, intravenous, and/or intra muscular) CS 
for > 4 years or if ≤4 years, an inability, in the opinion of the investigator, to withdraw from CS 
treatment through the protocol -defined taper regimen.
25.Subject must not have used oral CS for conditions other than GCA within 4 we eks of Baseline 
or intravenous CS within 4 weeks of Baseline.  Subjects must not have had > 2 courses of systemic CS therapy to treat conditions other than GCA within 1 year prior to baseline.
26.Subject must not have a history of an allergic reaction or significant sensitivity to 
constituents of the study drug (and its excipients) and/or other products in the same class, or to corticosteroids.
27.Subject must not have received oral Traditional Chinese Medicines within 4 weeks prior to 
Baseline (refer to Section 5.3).
5.2 Contraception Recommendations
Contraception Requirements for Females
A woman who is permanently surgically sterile or postmenopausal is not considered to be a woman of childbearing potential and is not required to follow contraception recommendations.
Surgically sterile is defi ned as:
Bilateral oophorectomy (surgical removal of both ovaries); or
Bilateral salpingectomy (surgical removal of both fallopian tubes); or
Hysterectomy (surgical removal of uterus).
Postmenopausal is defined as:
Age > 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an alternative medical cause; or
Age ≤ 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an alternative medical cause 
AND a follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) level >30 mIU/mL.
Page 26 of 155
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.For a woman who is ≤ 55 years of age and is not perman ently surgically sterile, as defined above, and 
has had no menses for 12 or more months, FSH should be tested at Screening .
If FSH is not tested, it is assumed that the subject is of childbearing potential and 
protocol -specified contraception is required.
If the FSH is tested and the result is consistent with post -menopausal status, contraception is 
not required.
If the FSH is tested and the result is consistent with pre -menopausal status, contraception is 
required and pregnancy testing requirements for wo men of childbearing potential must be 
followed as described in the Study Activities Table ( Appendix D).
A woman who does not meet the definition o f postmenopausal or permanently surgically sterile is 
considered of childbearing potential and is required to practice at least one of the following highly 
effective methods of birth control that is effective from Study Day 1 (or earlier) through at least 30 days 
after the last dose of study drug:
Combined (estrogen and progestogen containing) hormonal contraception (oral, intravaginal, 
transdermal, injectable) associated with the inhibition of ovulation, initiated at least 30 days 
prior to Study Day 1.
Progestogen -only hormonal contraception (oral, injectable, implantable) associated with 
inhibition of ovulation, initiated at least 30 days prior to Study Day 1.
Bilateral tubal occlusion/ligation ( For subjects in Japan:   Bilateral tubal ligation).
Vasectomiz ed partner(s), provided the vasectomized partner has received medical confirmation 
of the surgical success and is the only sexual partner.
Intrauterine device (IUD).
Intrauterine hormone -releasing system (IUS).
True abstinence (if acceptable per local requirements):  Refraining from heterosexual 
intercourse -when this is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject.  Periodic 
abstinence (for example, using calendar, ovulation, symptothermal, post -ovulation methods) 
and withdrawal are not acceptable.
If required per local guidelines, male or female condom with or without spermicide OR cap, diaphragm 
or sponge with spermicide should be used in addition to one of the highly effective birth control 
methods listed above (excluding true abstin ence).
If during the course of the study a woman becomes surgically sterile or post -menopausal (defined 
above) and complete documentation is available, contraceptive measures as defined above are no 
longer required.
It is important to note that contracepti on requirements described above are specifically intended to 
prevent pregnancy during exposure to the investigational therapy upadacitinib.
Page 27 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Contraception recommendations related to use of concomitant therapies prescribed per standard of 
care should be base d on the local label.
Contraceptive counseling 
At each visit, the study staff should review the pregnancy avoidance recommendations with each female 
of childbearing potential and document this discussion in the subject's source records.
Females for whom t he childbearing potential changes during the study due to meeting any of the 
criteria for non -childbearing potential above do not need to continue using birth control during or 
following study drug treatment.
Additional local requirements may apply; refer to Section 5 of the Operations Manual for 
country -specific requirements.  For participating countries having no additional country specific 
requirements, the above -mentioned contraceptive requirements should be followed in full.
5.3 Prohibited Medications and Therapy
Biologic Therapies 
Subjects must have discontinued any biologic therapies with immunosuppressive potential prior to the 
first dose of study drug as specified in the washout procedures (Eligibility Criterion 23, Section 5.1).  For 
all other biologic therapies, contact the AbbVie Therapeutic Area Medical Director (TA MD) for the 
washout period required prior to the first dose of study drug.
Biologic therapies with immunosuppressive potential are prohibited medications through the end of 
study drug administration, and include, but are not limited to, the following:
Abatacept
Adalimumab
Anakinra
Anifrolumab
Belimumab
Certolizumab
Dupilumab
Etanercept
Golimumab
Guselkumab
Infliximab
Ixekizumab
Lebrikizumab
Natalizumab
Page 28 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Nemolizumab
Rituximab
Risankizumab
Sarilumab
Secukinumab
Tocilizumab
Tralokinumab
Ustekinumab
Vedolizumab
Immunosuppressants
Introduction of additional systemic immunosuppressants (such as methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, 
cyclosporine, azathioprine, or mycophenolate) concurrent with study drug is prohibited from 4 weeks 
prior to first dose of study drug through the end of the s tudy.  Subjects who discontinue study drug may 
receive treatment with immunosuppressants in accordance with the investigator's best clinical 
judgment, irrespective of whether or not the subject decides to continue participation in the study.
Parenteral Cor ticosteroids
Intra- articular, trigger -point/tender point injection, intra -bursa, or epidural administration of CS is not 
permitted during Period 1 of the study.  Section 5.4describes use of CS for non- GCA -related conditions 
that is allowed during the study.  During Period 2 of the study, one intra -articular, trigger -point/tender 
point injection, intra -bursal injection, epidural, or intra -muscular in jection is allowed for 
non-GCA -related conditions if it meets the permitted amount of CS allowed in Period 2 as described in 
Section 5.4.
Strong CYP 3A Inhibitors or Inducers 
Systemic use of known strong CYP3A inhibitors is prohibited from Screening through the end of the 
study and strong CYP3A inducers are prohibited from 30 days prior to study drug administration through 
the end of the study.  Commo nly used strong CYP3A inhibitors and inducers are listed in Table 1. In 
addition, herbal therapies and other traditional medicines with unknown effects on CYP3A are not 
permitted from Screening through the end of study drug administration.
Page 29 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 1. Examples of Commonly Used Strong CYP3A Inhibitors and Inducers
Strong CYP3A Inhibitors Strong CYP3A Inducers 
Boceprevir 
Ceritinib
Cobicistat 
Clarithromycin 
Conivaptan 
Grapefruit (fruit or juice) 
Idelalisib
Itraconazole 
Ketoconazole 
Mibefradil 
Nefazodone 
Nelfinavir 
Posaconazole 
Ritonavir (alone or in combination danoprevir, 
elvitegravir, indinavir, lopinavir, nirmatrelvir, 
paritaprevir, saquinavir, telaprevir ,tipranavir , 
ombitasvir and/or dasabuvir )
Telithromycin 
Troleandomycin 
Voriconazole Apalutamide
Carbamazepine
Enzalutamide
Ivosidenib
Lumacaftor
Mitotane
Phenytoin
Rifampin (Rifampicin)
Rifapentine
St. John's Wort
Avasimibe
Investigational Drugs
The use of any investigational drug within 30 days or five half -lives of the drug (whichever is longer) is 
prohibited.  Investigational drugs are also prohibited during the study.
Vaccines
If the subject and investigator choose to administer live vaccines with replicating potential , these 
vaccinations must be completed (per local label) at least 4 weeks (8 weeks for subjects in Japan) before 
first dose of study drug.  Live vaccinations with replicating potential are prohib ited during the study 
participation including at least 30 days after the last dose of study drug.
Examples of live vaccines with replicating potential include, but are not limited to, the following:
Monovalent live influenza A (H1N1) (intranasal);
Seasonal trivalent live influenza (intranasal);
Herpes zoster (Zostavax®, live attenuated);
Rotavirus;
Varicella (chicken pox);
Page 30 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Measles -mumps -rubella or measles -mumps- rubella -varicella;
Oral polio vaccine;
Smallpox/monkeypox vaccine capable of replicating (ACAM2000®);
Yellow fever;
Bacille Calmette -Guérin (BCG);
Typhoid (oral).
Administration of inactivated (non -live) vaccines is permitted prior to or during the study according to 
local practice guidelines.  Examples of common vaccines that are inactivated , toxoid or biosynthetic 
include, but are not limited to, injectable influenza vaccine, pneumococcal, Shingrix (zoster vaccine, 
recombinant, adjuvanted), pertussis (Tdap), and SARS -CoV-2 (inactivated, messenger RNA [mRNA], 
RNA).  Whenever possible, subject s should not have received a COVID -19 vaccination in the 7 days prior 
to randomization or plan to receive a COVID -19 vaccination within the first 7 days after initiation of 
study drug. Viral vector vaccines that are not of replicating potential (such as Co nvidecia and Convidecia 
Air to treat Covid -19) are allowed. 
JAK/TYK2 Inhibitors
JAK Inhibitors are prohibited during the study . Oral and topical JAK/TYK2 inhibitors (e.g., commercial 
upadacitinib [Rinvoq®], tofacitinib [Xeljanz®], ruxolitinib [Jakafi®; Op zelura®], baricitinib [Olumiant®], 
peficitinib [Smyraf®], abrocitinib [PF- 04965842], and Cibinqo®], filgotinib) [Jyseleca®], fedratinib [Inrebic 
®], and deucravacitinib [Sotyktu™])
5.4 Prior and Concomitant Therapy
Any medication or vaccine (including over the counter or prescription medicines, vitamins and/or herbal 
supplements) that the subject is receiving within 30 days prior to Screening and/or receives during the 
study must be recorded along with the reason for use, date(s) of administration including st art and end 
dates, and dosage information including dose, route and frequency must be recorded in the eCRF.  Also, 
medications taken for GCA since date of diagnosis (based on subject recollection and available medical 
records) should be entered into the ap propriate eCRF inclusive of the dates of first and last dose, 
maximum dosage taken, route of administration and reason for discontinuation, if known.
Subjects must be consented for the study prior to discontinuing any prohibited medications for the 
purpose of meeting study eligibility.
Throughout the study, addition of a biologic or non -biologic immunomodulators other than CS while 
taking blinded study drug (upadacitinib or PBO) is not permitted for rescue.
Inhaled and nasal CS for stable medical conditions are allowed during the study but must have been at a 
stable dose for ≥ 4 weeks prior to the Baseline Visit.  Short -term use ( ≤ 10 days) of CS (oral, inhaled, 
nasal, intravenous, or intramuscular) for non -GCA -related conditions for events such as exacerbat ion of 
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, allergic reactions, or serious infection when additional 
CS may be required to prevent adrenal insufficiency (a total of up to 100 mg of prednisone or equivalent 
Page 31 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.through 52 weeks in Period 1 and a tot al of up to 100 mg of prednisone or equivalent through 52 weeks 
in Period 2) is allowed during the study.
Subjects should be treated with anti -platelet therapy (aspirin or clopidogrel) at the discretion of the 
investigator and in accordance with local stan dard -of-care practice.
Subjects should receive oral calcium and 25 -hydroxy vitamin D supplementation (calcium
1200 –1500 mg and vitamin D 800 –1000 IU daily in divided doses), and/or bisphosphonate therapy 
(e.g., alendronate 70 mg weekly or zolendronate 4 mg annually), unless contraindicated, at the 
discretion of the investigator and in accordance with local standard -of-care practice for the prevention 
of glucocorticoid -induced osteoporosis.  Study participants with documented osteoporosis should be 
treat ed with approved drugs for osteoporosis according to local standard- of-care practice or clinical 
guidelines (e.g., National Osteoporosis Foundation [NOF]).
Any questions regarding concomitant or prior therapy should be raised to the AbbVie TA MD or AbbVie 
emergency contact.  Information regarding potential drug interactions with upadacitinib can be located 
in the upadacitinib Investigator's Brochure.
5.5 Discontinuation from Study Drug or Subject Withdrawal from Study
Subjects can request to be discontinued fro m participating in the study at any time for any reason 
including but not limited to disease progression or lack of response to treatment.  The investigator may 
discontinue any subject's participation at any time for any reason, including but not limited t o disease 
progression, lack of response to treatment, an AE, safety concerns, or failure to comply with the 
protocol.
Subjects will have study drug discontinued immediately if any of the following occur:
Abnormal laboratory results or AEs that either meet the criteria of discontinuation of study 
drug, as stated in Section 6.2or rule out safe continuation of study drug.
Serious infection (e.g., sepsis) that cannot be adequately controlled by anti -infective treatment 
or would put the subject at risk for continued participation in the trial as determined by the 
investigator.
Confirmed diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolus or noncardiac, 
non-neurologic arterial thrombosis.
The investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject.
The subject requests withdrawal from the study.
Inclusion or exclusion criteria violation was noted after the subject started the study drug, when 
continua tion of the study drug would place the subject at risk .
Introduction of prohibited medications or dosages when continuation of the study drug would 
place the subject at risk .
Subject is non -compliant with TB prophylaxis (if applicable) or develops active TB at any time 
during the study.
The subject becomes pregnant while on study drug.
Page 32 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Any m alignancy, except for alocalized nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC) or acarcinoma in -situ 
of the cervix which can successfully be treated at its localization .
The investi gator determines the subject is significantly non -compliant with study procedures .
Subject develops a gastrointestinal perforation (other than due to appendicitis or mechanical 
injury).
The subject experiences a serious hypersensitivity reaction without an alternative etiology.
At Week 52, subject does not meet criteria for continuation into Period 2.
When the study drug upadacitinib or PBO are discontinued, the study drug CS dispensed by the Sponsor 
must also be discontinued.  After discontinuation of study drug (upadacitinib or PBO and CS dispensed 
by Sponsor), CS will be prescribed by the investigator and dosing will be based on the investiga tor's 
judgment and in accordance with local standard of care.  Medications prescribed by the investigator 
should be documented on the concomitant medication eCRF.
Unless subjects request to discontinue from participating in the study (withdrawal of informe d consent), 
subjects who prematurely discontinue study drug should continue to be followed for all regularly 
scheduled visits for the period from which they discontinued (refer to Section 5.6).
For subjects to be considered lost to follow -up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the final status of the subject.  At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made and 
1certified letter must be sent and documented in the subject's source documentation.
AbbVie may terminate this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site.  The study may be 
discontinued or terminated in case of an unacceptable risk, any relevant toxicity, or a negative change in 
the risk/benefit assessment.  This might include the occurrence of AEs with a character, severity or 
frequency that is new in comparison to the existing risk profile.  In addition, data deriv edfrom other 
clinical trials or toxicologica l studies which negatively influence the risk/benefit assessment might cause 
discontinuation or termination of the study.  The investigator may also stop the study at his/her site if 
he/she has safety concerns.  If AbbVie terminates the study for safety re asons, AbbVie will promptly 
notify the investigator.  Advance notice is not required by either party if the study is stopped due to 
safety concerns.
5.6 Follow -Up for Study Drug Discontinuation or Subject Withdrawal 
from Study
Discontinuation of Study Drug and Continuation of Study Participation
Following discontinuation of study drug, the subject should be treated in accordance with the 
investigator's best clinical judgment, irrespective of whether or not the subject decides to continue 
participation in the st udy.
If a subject prematurely discontinues study drug, the procedures outlined for the Premature 
Discontinuation Visit (PD Visit) should be completed as soon as possible, preferably within 2 weeks, and 
preferably prior to initiation of another therapy.  In addition, a 30 -Day Follow -up Visit after the last dose 
of study drug is required to ensure all treatment -emergent AEs/serious adverse events (SAEs) have been 
Page 33 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.resolved.  The Follow -Up Visit is not applicable for subjects who discontinued study drug and con tinued 
study participation and completed at least 1 study visit at least 30 days after last dose of study drug.
To minimize missing data for efficacy and safety assessments, subjects who prematurely discontinue 
study drug treatment should continue to be fo llowed for all regularly scheduled visits for the period 
from which they discontinue as outlined in the Activity Schedule ( Appendix D), unless subj ects have 
decided to discontinue the study participation entirely (withdrawal of informed consent).  That is, 
subjects who discontinue study drug during Period 1 should continue to follow the visit schedule for the 
remainder of Period 1, but not continue i nto Period 2.  Subjects who discontinue study drug during 
Period 2, should follow the visit schedule for the remainder of Period 2.  As noted in the Activity 
Schedule ( Appendix D), at the visits after study drug discontinuation, subjects should adhere to all study 
procedures except for dispensing study drug or reviewing returns and accountability, 
dispensing/reviewing study drug instructions, dosing d iaries, pharmacokinetic sample collection, and 
sample collection for exploratory research.  Subjects should be advised on the continued scientific 
importance of their data even if they discontinue treatment with study drug early.
Premature Discontinuation of Study (Withdrawal of Informed Consent)
Subjects may withdraw from the study completely (discontinuation of study drug treatment and study 
participation; withdrawal of informed consent) for any reason at any time.  If a subject prematurely 
discontinues s tudy drug treatment and study participation (withdrawal of informed consent) 
simultaneously, the procedures outlined for the PD Visit should be completed as soon as possible, 
preferably within 2 weeks, and preferably prior to initiation of another therapy.
If a subject discontinues from study (withdrawal of informed consent) following a previous 
discontinuation of study drug that resulted in an initial PD Visit, a second PD Visit is not required.
If a subject is discontinuing at Week 52 because they do not meet the criteria to enter Period 2, a 
separate PD Visit is not needed; instead, the Week 52 Visit should be performed.  In addition, a 30 -day 
Follow -Up Visit after the last dose of study drug should occur to ensure all treatment emergent
AEs/SAEs have bee n resolved.  This visit may be a telephone call if a site visit is not possible.
For subjects to be considered lost to follow -up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the subject's final status, including the date of the last study dru g dose and the primary 
reason for discontinuation of study drug or study participation.  The information will be recorded on the 
appropriate eCRF page.  However, these procedures should not interfere with the initiation of any new 
treatments or therapeutic modalities that the investigator feels are necessary to treat the subject's 
condition.  At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made and 1 certified letter must be sent and 
documented in the subject's source documentation.
If a subject withdraws from stud y follow up or withdraws permission for the collection of their personal 
data, the study staff may still use available public records to obtain information about survival status 
only, as appropriate per local regulations.
Page 34 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.7 Assessment of Disease Activity
Assessment of GCA Signs and Symptoms
Clinical signs and symptoms of GCA will be evaluated at every study visit according to the schedule of 
assessment and entered into the eCRF.  GCA signs and symptoms include the following:
Fever (> 38°C or 100.4°F)
Sympt oms of PMR (morning stiffness and/or pain, in the shoulder and/or hip girdles)
Localized headache, temporal artery or scalp tenderness
Visual signs or symptoms such as acute or subacute vision loss due to arteritic anterior ischemic 
optic neuropathy, trans ient blurry vision (generally monocular or at least affecting one eye at a 
time, but potentially affecting both eyes)
Jaw or mouth pain
New or worsened extremity claudication
Other features judged by the Clinical Assessor to be consistent with a GCA or PMR flare.
Acute Phase Reactants:  High Sensitivity C -Reactive Protein (hsCRP) and Erythrocyte 
Sedimentation Rate (ESR)
Knowledge of the laboratory results for hsCRP may result in inadvertent unblinding of a subject's 
treatment.  Therefore, after the Baseline Visit, hsCRP results (analyzed and reported by the central 
laboratory) will not be made available to the Sponsor, the investigator, study site personnel, orthe 
subject through the duration of the study. The Sponsor will be blinded to the hsCRP results u ntil the 
time of the primary analysis .  
After the Screening visit, ESR results (analyzed and reported by the local laboratory) will not be made 
available to the Sponsor, the investigator, the subject, and study site personnel , with the exception of 
the lo cal Laboratory Assessor to prevent biased efficacy assessment.  A local Laboratory Assessor will be 
assigned at each study site to review ESR results.  Only the Laboratory Assessor is permitted to review 
ESR results and will advise the investigator of any ESR measurement >30 mm/hr.
5.8 Study Drug
Study drug includes the investigational product (IP) of upadacitinib and matching upadacitinib PBO as 
well as CS therapy (open label or blinded prednisone/prednisolone and matching CS PBO) included as 
part of the pro tocol -defined CS taper.
Study drug will be taken orally once daily beginning on Day 1 (Baseline) and should be taken at 
approximately the same time each day, with or without food.  Subjects will be instructed to return all 
drug containers (even if empty) t o the study site personnel at each study visit; study site personnel will 
document compliance.
Page 35 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.AbbVie will supply upadacitinib, matching upadacitinib PBO, as well as open -label and blinded CS 
therapy (prednisone or prednisolone) and matching CS PBO include d as part of the protocol -defined CS 
taper.
All study drug (IP and CS) must be stored at controlled room temperature (15° to 25°C/59° to 77°F).  US 
sourced prednisone 20 mg will need to be stored protected from light and moisture.  Study drug will be 
packa ged in quantities sufficient to accommodate study design.
In cases of state of emergency or pandemic situations, study drug shipment can be made from the study 
site to the subject if allowed by local regulations.  Refer to the Operations Manual in Appendix Gfor 
details on direct -to-patient (DTP) shipment of study drug.  
Each kit will be labeled per local requirements and this label must remain affix ed to the kit.  Upon 
receipt, study drug should be stored as specified on the label and kept in a secure location.  Each kit will 
contain a unique kit number.  This kit number is assigned to a subject via interactive response 
technology (IRT) and encodes t he appropriate study drug to be dispensed at the subject's corresponding 
study visit.  All blank spaces on the label will be completed by the site staff prior to dispensing to 
subjects.  Study drug will only be used for the conduct of this study.
Upon comp letion of or discontinuation from study treatment, all original study drug units (containing 
unused study drugs) will be returned to the sponsor (or designee) or destroyed on site.  All return or 
destruction procedures will be according to instructions fro m the sponsor and according to local 
regulations following completion of drug accountability procedures.
Individual study drug information is presented in Table 2.
Page 36 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 2. Identity of Study Drug
Investigational 
Product (IP) IPIP Placebo 
(PBO)Corticosteroid 
(CS) CS CS PBO
Name upadacitinib upadacitinib Matching 
upadacitinib 
PBOPrednisone/ 
PrednisolonePrednisone/ 
PrednisoloneMatching 
CS PBO
Blinded or 
Open LabelBlinded Blinded Blinded Open Label 
(doses 
≥20mg)Blinded 
(doses 
<20mg)Blinded
Mode of 
AdministrationOral Oral Oral Oral Oral Oral
Strength 15 mg 7.5 mg N/A 1,a5, 10 and 
20 mg1, 2, 5 and 
10 mgN/A
Dosing 
Regimen1 upadacitinib 
15 mg tablet1 upadacitinib 
7.5 mg tablet1 upadacitinib 
matching PBO 
tabletPer Tapering 
SchedulebPer Tapering Schedulea
Dosage Form Tablet Tablet Tablet Tablets/ 
CapsulesCapsules
Frequency of 
administrationQD QD QD QD QD
a. The 1 -mg prednisone/prednisolone open -label dose is not needed for protocol -defined open -label taper, but may be used 
for escape therapy, if needed (Corticosteroid Escape Therapy during the Study).
b. The CS tapering schedule is provided in Appendix E.
Corticosteroid Therapy as Study Drug
There are two phases to the CS (prednisone or prednisolone) taper regimen:
Open- label taper, for CS dosages from 60 mg/day to 20 mg/day
Blinded taper, for CS dosages < 20 mg/day.
Starting at Baseline, all subjects will switch from CS obtained outside of the study to open -label oral 
prednisone or pred nisolone provided by the Sponsor at a dose of 20, 30, 40, 50, or 60 mg QD.  The initial 
dose of prednisone or prednisolone will be at the discretion of the investigator, based on disease 
severity and comorbid medical conditions, but should be at a minimum of 20 mg QD at Baseline.  At 
Baseline, if a subject is on a dose other than 20, 30, 40, 50, or 60 mg QD, the dose should be rounded up 
or down, as clinically indicated per investigator discretion, to the nearest of these doses.  Subjects will 
follow the CS Tapering Schedule as per Appendix E, completing the open -label phase and transitioning 
to the blinded phase of tapering depending on the CS dose at baseline (i.e., subjects starting on 
20mg/day will transition to the double -blind phase of tapering more quickly than patients starting on 
60mg/day).
Page 37 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Open- label prednisone or prednisolone will be provided until the dose is tapered to less than 
20mg/day .  Subsequently, blinded CS therapy and/or matching CS PBO will be provided for the 
remaining blinded taper regimen.  While receiving blinded CS therapy, subjects will receive 1 carton 
containing 3 bottles of CS study drug per week and will be instructed t o take 1 capsule per bottle per 
day; the 3 capsules combined will be equivalent to the weekly dose according to the CS Tapering 
Schedule ( Appendix E).
Corticosteroid Escape Therapy during the Study
Subjects who require CS escape therapy for their GCA disease will be deemed non- responders in the 
primary analysis.  Any use of CS for escape therapy throughout the study will be documented in the 
eCRF.
Period 1:
At every visit, an assessment of subject's disease will be made to assess if the subject can adhere to the 
CS tapering schedule.  If subject has no flare of GCA and is able to follow the CS tapering schedule, the 
subject will continue receiving prot ocol -defined blinded or open label CS therapy in the study.
In Period 1, disease flare is defined as an event determined by the investigator to represent recurrence 
of GCA signs or symptoms or an ESR measurement ≥30 mm/hr (attributable to GCA), AND requir ing an 
increase in CS dose.
Subjects who experience disease flare or are unable to adhere to the protocol -defined CS tapering 
regimen during open -label tapering of prednisone (at doses of 60 mg/day to 20 mg/day) should stop the 
protocol -defined CS taper an d receive open -label escape therapy with prednisone or prednisolone at 
the discretion of the investigator.  Ongoing CS use and subsequent tapering will be at the discretion of 
the investigator.  While on open- label CS escape therapy, the subject should con tinue in the study for 
the full 52 weeks and receive blinded study drug (upadacitinib or PBO).  If, after 2 weeks of open -label 
CS escape therapy, the investigator believes it is medically necessary to treat the subject with other 
available treatments, bli nded study drug (upadacitinib or PBO) and CS should be discontinued and the 
subject should be managed based on standard -of-care therapies, which may include tocilizumab.  After 
discontinuation of study drug (upadacitinib or PBO and CS dispensed by Sponsor) , CS will be prescribed 
by the investigator and dosing will be based on the investigator's judgment and in accordance with local 
standard of care.  Medications prescribed by the investigator should be documented on the 
concomitant medication eCRF.  Subject s who are discontinued from study drug during Period 1 should 
continue to follow the visit schedule for the remainder of Period 1 (Section 5.6).
Subjects who experience disease flare or are unable to adhere to the protocol -defined CS tapering 
regimen during the blinded protocol -defined CS taper should stop the protocol -defined CS taper and 
receive open -label escape therapy with prednisone or prednisol one starting with at least 20 mg/day at 
the discretion of the investigator.  Ongoing CS use and subsequent tapering will be at the discretion of 
the investigator.  While on open- label CS escape therapy, the subject should continue in the study for 
the full 52 weeks and receive blinded study drug (upadacitinib or PBO).  If, after 2 weeks of open -label 
CS escape therapy, the investigator believes it is medically necessary to treat the subject with other 
available treatments, blinded study drug (upadacitinib o r PBO) and CS should be discontinued and the 
subject should be managed based on standard -of-care therapies, which may include tocilizumab.  After 
discontinuation of study drug (upadacitinib or PBO and CS dispensed by Sponsor), CS will be prescribed 
Page 38 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.by the investigator and dosing will be based on the investigator's judgment and in accordance with local 
standard of care.  Medications prescribed by the investigator should be documented on the 
concomitant medication eCRF.  Subjects who are discontinued from stu dy drug during Period 1 should 
continue to follow the visit schedule for the remainder of Period 1 (Section 5.6).
Subjects who receive CS escape th erapy will be eligible to continue in Period 2 if meeting criteria for 
study continuation outlined in Section 4.1 .
Period 2
In Period 2, disease fl are is defined as an event determined by the investigator to represent recurrence 
of GCA signs or symptoms or an ESR measurement ≥30 mm/hr, AND requiring initiation of CS.  Subjects 
who experience disease flare in Period 2 (blinded extension phase) should receive an escape regimen of 
open -label prednisone or prednisolone at investigator's discretion.  Thereafter, open -label escape CS 
taper will be based on the investigator's judgment and in accordance with local standard -of-care.  At the 
investigator's dis cretion, these subjects may also discontinue study drug (upadacitinib or PBO and CS 
dispensed by Sponsor) and receive treatment in accordance with local standard -of-care, which may 
include tocilizumab, and should continue to follow the visit schedule for t he remainder of Period 2 
(Section 5.6).  After discontinuation of study drug (upadacitinib or PBO and CS dispensed by Sponsor), CS 
will be prescrib ed by the investigator and dosing will be based on the investigator's judgment and in 
accordance with local standard of care.  Medications prescribed by the investigator should be 
documented on the concomitant medication eCRF.
5.9 Randomization/Drug Assignment and Blinding
All subjects will be assigned a unique identification number by the IRT at the Screening Visit.  For 
subjects who rescreen, the screening number assigned by the IRT at the initial screening visit should be 
used.  Subjects may only be rescreen ed one time without prior AbbVie approval.  For additional 
re-screening, AbbVie TA MD approval is required.
All screening activities must be completed and reviewed prior to enrollment.  Subjects who meet the 
eligibility criteria will proceed to enrollment via the IRT system on Day 1 (Baseline Visit of Treatment 
Period 1).  The IRT will assign a randomization number that will encode the subject's treatment group 
assignment according to the randomization schedule generated by the statistics department at AbbV ie.  
A subject number is assigned at screening via IRT.  Enrolled subjects will keep their screening number as 
their subject number throughout the study.
This study is designed to enroll 420 subjects to meet scientific and regulatory objectives without 
enrolling an undue number of subjects in alignment with ethical considerations.  Subjects in screening 
will be permitted to enroll even if the target number of subjects has been enrolled.
Randomization of all subjects, except for those in Japan, will be strat ified by baseline CS dose 
(prednisone or prednisolone > 30 mg or ≤ 30 mg), prior use of an IL -6 inhibitor, and whether entering 
the study with new onset or relapsing disease.  In Japan, the study will attempt to include a minimum of 
8 subjects; no stratifi cation will be utilized for randomization, however, data on all 3 stratification 
factors will be collected.  In Period 1, subjects will be randomized in a 2:1:1 ratio (upadacitinib 15 mg + 
Page 39 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.26-week CS taper regimen, upadacitinib 7.5 mg + 26 -week CS taper re gimen, or PBO + 52 -week CS taper 
regimen).
In Period 2, subjects from the Period 1 upadacitinib group who achieve remission for at least 24 weeks 
prior to the Week 52 visit (at the end of Period 1) will be re -randomized to either continue on 
upadacitinib o r switch to PBO (Section 4.1); re-randomization will be stratified by baseline disease status 
(new onset or relapsing disease).  Subjects from the P eriod 1 Placebo group who achieve remission for 
at least 24 weeks prior to the Week 52 visit (at the end of Period 1) will continue to receive PBO.  In 
Period 2, subjects previously on upadacitinib will be re -randomized in a 2:1 ratio (upadacitinib [same 
dose as Period 1] or PBO).  Subjects who were assigned to PBO in Period 1 will continue to receive PBO.  
At Week 52, subjects who have absence of GCA signs and symptoms AND are CS -free, but do not meet 
the above remission criteria will continue in Period 2 on their originally randomized treatment 
assignment.  All other subjects will be discontinued from study drug at the end of Period 1.
All AbbVie personnel with direct oversight of the conduct and management of the trial (with the 
exception of AbbVie Drug Supply Management Team) will remain blinded to each subject's treatment 
until the last subject completes the Week 52 visit.  After the last subject completes the Week 52 visit the 
Sponsor will be unblinded to Period 1 and Period 2 study drug assignments to facilitate regulatory filings.  
The investigator, study site personnel, and the subject will remain blinded to each subject's treatment 
throughout the study.  To maintain the blind, upadacitinib tablets and matching PBO tablets as well as 
CS capsules and m atching PBO capsules provided for the study will be identical in appearance.  The IRT 
will provide access to unblinded subject treatment information in the case of a medical emergency.
In the event of a medical situation that requires unblinding of the stu dy drug assignment, the 
investigator is requested to contact the AbbVie TA MD prior to breaking the blind.  However, if an 
urgent therapeutic intervention is necessary which warrants breaking the blind prior to contacting the 
AbbVie TA MD, the investigator can directly access the IRT system to break the blind without AbbVie 
notification or agreement.  Unblinding is available in the IRT system via the Unblind Subject transaction, 
which is available only to the investigator.  If the IRT system is unavailable, unblinding may occur by 
contacting the technical support of the IRT vendor via either phone (preferred) or email 
(support@endpointclinical.com).  For country -specific phone numbers, please see the following website:  
(http://www.endpointclinical.com/help -desk/).
In the event that the blind is broken before notification to the AbbVie TA MD, we request that the 
AbbVie TA MD be notified within 24 hours of the blind being broken.  The date and reason that the blind 
was broken must be conveyed to AbbVie and recorded on appropriate eCRF .
5.10 Protocol Deviations
AbbVie does not allow intentional/prospective deviations from the protocol except when necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects.  The investigator is responsible for complying with all 
protocol requirements, writt en instructions, and applicable laws regarding protocol deviations.  Protocol 
deviations are prohibited except when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects.  If 
a protocol deviation occurs (or is identified, including those that may be due to the COVID -19 
pandemic), the investigator is responsible for notifying IEC/IRB, regulatory authorities (as applicable) 
and AbbVie.  In Japan, the investigator will record all protocol deviations in the appropriate medical 
records at the site.
Page 40 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, or oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the 
physical characteristics, identity, quality, purity, potency, durability, reliability, safety, e ffectiveness, or 
performance of a product/device.  Complaints associated with any component of this investigational 
product must be reported to AbbVie.
Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the drug component of the product.
Fora product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the 
labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product must be reported to AbbVie within 
1business day of the study site's knowledge of the event.  Product complaints occurring during the 
study will be followed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
Reporting will be done via electronic data capture (EDC). The date the product complaint details are 
entered into EDC and the form is saved represents the date reported to AbbVie. A back -up paper form 
will be provided for reporting complaints related to unassigned product or in the event of an EDC system 
issue. If a back -up paper form is used, the date the form is emailed to RD_PQC_QA@abbvie.com 
represents the date reported to AbbVie.
All follow -up information is to be repo rted to the sponsor (or an authorized representative) and 
documented in source as required by the sponsor. Product complaints associated with adverse events 
will be reported in the study summary. All other complaints will be monitored on an ongoing basis. 
Product complaints occurring during the study will be followed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
Medical Complaints/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject 
administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with 
this treatment.  An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally asso ciated with the use of a medicinal 
(investigational) product, whether or not the event is considered causally related to the use of the 
product.
The investigators will monitor each subject for clinical and laboratory evidence of AEs on a routine basis 
thro ughout the study.  All AEs will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion.
An elective surgery/procedure scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an AE if the 
surgery/procedure is being performed for a pre -existing condition and the surgery/ procedure has been 
Page 41 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.pre planned prior to study entry.  However, if the pre -existing condition deteriorates unexpectedly 
during the study (e.g., surgery performed earlier than planned), then the deterioration of the condition 
for which the elective surgery/p rocedure is being done will be considered an AE.
If an adverse event, whether associated with study drug or not, meets any of the following criteria, it is 
to be reported to AbbVie clinical pharmacovigilance as a serious adverse event within 24 hours of the 
site being made aware of the serious adverse event (refer to Section 4.3 of the Operations Manual for 
reporting details and contact information):
Death of Subject An event that results in the death of a subject.
Life-Threatening An event that, in the opinion of the investigator, would have 
resulted in immediate fatality if medical intervention had not been 
taken.  This does not include an event that would have been fatal if it 
had occurred in a more severe form.
Hospitalization or 
Prolongation of 
Hosp italizationAn event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length 
of time or prolongs the subject's hospital stay.  This does not include 
an emergency room visit or admission to an outpatient facility.
Congenital Anomaly An anomaly detected at or after birth, or any anomaly that results in 
fetal loss.
Persistent or Significant 
Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condition that substantially interferes with 
the activities of daily living of a study subject.  Disability is not 
intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, 
and accidental trauma (e.g., sprained ankle).
Important Medical Event 
Requiring Medical or Surgical 
Intervention to Prevent 
Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately life -
threatening or result in death or hospitalization, but based on 
medical judgment may jeopardize the subject and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outc omes 
listed above (i.e., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, 
prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity).  Additionally, any elective or 
spontaneous abortion or stillbirth is con sidered an important 
medical event.  Examples of such events include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room 
or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.
All AEs reported from the time of study drug administration until 30 days after discontinuation of study 
drug administration will be collected, whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the subject.  In 
addition, SAEs and protocol -related nonserious AEs will be collected from the time the subject signs the 
study -specific informed consent.
Page 42 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The following definitions will be used for Serious Adverse Reactions (SAR) and Suspected Unexpected 
Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR) :
SAR Defined as all noxious and unintended responses to an IMP related to any dose 
administered that result in an SAE as defined above.
SUSAR Refers to individual SAE case reports from clinical trials where a causal 
relationship between the SAE and the IMP was suspected by either the sponsor 
or the investigator, is unexpected (not listed in the applicable Reference Safety 
Information) and meets one of the above serious criteria.
AbbVie will be responsible for Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reacti ons (SUSAR) reporting for 
the Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) in accordance with global and local guidelines.
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may 
indicate a trend or risk to subjects.
Adverse Events of Special Interest
The following AEs of special interest will be monitored during the study:
Serious infections
Opportunistic infections
Herpes Zoster
Active TB
Malignancy (all types)
Adjudicated Gastrointestinal Perforations
Adjudicated MAC E
Anemia
Neutropenia
Lymphopenia
Renal dysfunction
Hepatic disorder
Elevated CPK
Adjudicated Embolic and thrombotic events (non -cardiac, non -central nervous system [CNS])
In addition to the AESIs listed above, the following adverse events will also be monitored during the 
study: Bone Fracture; Retinal detachment.
Page 43 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Study Drug
Investigators will rate the severity of each AE according to the National Cancer Institute Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0, which can be accessed at:  
http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm#ctc.
If no grading criteria are provided for the reported event, then the event should be graded follows: 
Mild (Grade 1) Asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or diagnostic observations only; 
intervention not indicated
Moderate (Grade 2) Minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; limiting age -
appropriate instrumental activities of daily living (ADL)
Severe (Grade 3 –5)
Grade 3 Severe or medically significant but not immediately life -threatening; 
hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization indicated; disabling; 
limiting self- care ADL (self- care ADL refer to bathing, dressing and 
undressing, feeding self, using the toilet, taking medications, and not 
bedridden)
Grade 4 Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated
Grade 5 Death related to AE
The investigator will assess the relationship of the AE to the study drugs upadacitinib (or matching 
placeb o) and prednisone/prednisolone (or matching placebo).  Summary of CS -related AEs will be based 
on this assessment.
The investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of the AE to the use of study 
drug:
Reasonable Possibility –After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, 
clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is sufficient evidence (information) to suggest 
a causal relationship.
No Reasonable Possibility –After cons ideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is insufficient evidence 
(information) to suggest a causal relationship.
For causality assessments, events assessed as hav ing a reasonable possibility of being related to the 
study drug will be considered "associated."  Events assessed as having no reasonable possibility of being 
related to study drug will be considered "not associated."  In addition, when the investigator ha s not 
reported a causality or deemed it not assessable, AbbVie will consider the event associated.
If an investigator's opinion of no reasonable possibility of being related to study drug is given, another 
cause of event must be provided by the investigato r for the SAE.
Page 44 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Pregnancy
While not an AE, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 1 working day of the 
site becoming aware of the pregnancy. If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject information regarding 
the pregnancy and the outcome will be collected.  
Subjects should avoid pregnancy throughout the course of the study, starting with the Screening Visit 
through 30 days after the last study drug administration for female subjects.  Results of a positive 
pregnancy test or confirmation of a pregnancy will be assessed starting with the Screening Visit through 
the final study visit.  
Subjects who become pregnant during the study must be discontinued (Section 5.5).
The pregnancy outcome of an elective or spontaneous abortion, stillbirth or congenital anomaly is 
considered a SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours of the site becoming aware of the 
event.
6.2 Toxicity Management
The toxicity management of the AEs including AEs of special interest consists of safety monitoring 
(review of AEs on an ongoing basis, and periodical/ad hoc review of safety issues by a safety data 
monitoring committee), and if applicable, interruption of study drug dosing with appropriate clinical 
management and/or discontinuation of the subjects from study drug.  The management of specific AEs 
and laboratory parameters is described below. 
For subjects who discontinue study drug but continue study partici pation and are on standard of care 
therapies, these toxicity management requirements do not apply (including alerts from the central lab) 
and any intolerability to standard of care therapies should be managed by the prescribing physician. 
Serious Infectio ns:  Subjects should be closely monitored for the development of signs and symptoms of 
infection during and after treatment with study drug.  Study drug should be interrupted if a subject 
develops a serious infection.  A subject who develops a new infection during treatment with study drug 
should undergo prompt diagnostic testing appropriate for an immunocompromised subject.  As 
appropriate, antimicrobial therapy should be initiated, and the subject should be closely monitored.  
Study drug may be restarted once the infection has been successfully treated.  Subjects who develop 
active TB must be permanently discontinued from study drug. 
Herpes Zoster:   If a subject develops herpes zoster, consider temporarily interrupting study drug until 
the episode resolve s.
Gastrointestinal Perforation:   Subjects presenting with the onset of signs or symptoms of a 
gastrointestinal perforation should be evaluated promptly for early diagnosis and treatment.  If the 
diagnosis of gastrointestinal perforation (other than due to appendicitis or mechanical injury) is 
confirmed, the subject must be permanently discontinued from study drug.
Major Cardiovascular Event:   For subjects who develop a major cardiovascular event (MACE:  acute 
myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accident [stroke]) while on study drug, the investigator should 
Page 45 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.evaluate the benefit/risk of, and discuss with the TA MD whether it is appropriate to continue study 
drug.
Malignancy:   Subjects who develop malignancy other than NMSC or carcinoma in situ of the cerv ix must 
be permanently discontinued from study drug.  Information including histopathological results should be 
queried for the confirmation of the diagnosis.  Periodic skin examination is recommended for subjects 
who are at an increased risk for skin canc er.  Subjects who develop malignancies should be referred to 
appropriate specialists and managed as per standard of care.
Muscle- related symptoms:   If a subject experiences symptoms suggestive of myositis or 
rhabdomyolysis, consider checking CPK and aldola se with clinical management and/or study drug 
interruption as deemed appropriate by the investigator.
Thrombosis Events: Subjects who develop symptoms of thrombosis should be promptly evaluated and 
treated appropriately.  If the diagnosis of deep vein thr ombosis, pulmonary embolus or noncardiac, 
non-neurologic arterial thrombosis is confirmed, the subject must be discontinued from study drug.
ECG Abnormality:   Subjects must be discontinued from study drug for an ECG change considered 
clinically significant and with reasonable possibility of relationship to study drug, OR a confirmed 
absolute QT interval corrected for heart rate using Fridericia's formula (QTcF) value > 500 msec. 
COVID -19:  Study drug should be interrupted in subjects with a confirmed diagn osis of COVID -19.  
Consider interrupting study drug in subjects who show signs and/or symptoms with suspicion of COVID -
19.  Study drug may be restarted once the infection has resolved, or 5 days have passed since the 
COVID -19 positive test result (whicheve r comes last) .  The COVID -19 eCRF must be completed.
Management of Select Laboratory Abnormalities:   For any given laboratory abnormality, the 
Investigator should assess the subject, apply the standard of care for medical evaluation and treatment 
following any local guidelines.  Specific toxicity management guidelines for abnormal laboratory values 
are described in Table 3, and may require a supplemental eCRF to be completed.  For subjects with 
ongoing laboratory abnormalities which require data entry into an eCRF, an additional eCRF related to 
subsequent laboratory abnormalities is only required if the subject has relevant changes in history (e.g., 
new o nset signs or symptoms) or laboratory values which have returned to normal reference range or 
its Baseline value followed by subsequent laboratory abnormalities meeting toxicity guidelines 
(considered a new event).  All abnormal laboratory tests that are c onsidered clinically significant by the 
investigator will be followed to a satisfactory resolution.  If a repeat test is required per Table 3, the 
repe at testing must occur as soon as possible. 
Page 46 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 3. Specific Toxicity Management Guidelines for Abnormal Laboratory Values
Laboratory Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline for Upadacitinib and Matching Placebo
Hemoglobin  If hemoglobin < 8 g/dL, interrupt study drug dosing and confirm by repeat testing 
with a new sample.  If confirmed, continue to withhold study drug until 
hemoglobin value returns to ≥ 8 g/dL.
OR
 If hemoglobin decreases ≥ 3.0 g/dL from baseline without an alte rnative etiology, 
interrupt study drug dosing and confirm by repeat testing with new sample.  
 If hemoglobin decreases ≥ 3.0 g/dL from baseline and an alternative etiology 
is known or the hemoglobin value remains in the normal reference range, the 
subject may remain on study drug at the investigator's discretion.  
 If confirmed, continue to withhold study drug until hemoglobin value returns 
to within 3.0 g/dL from baseline.
Absolute neutrophil 
count (ANC) If confirmed < 1000/μL by repeat testing with new s ample, interrupt study drug 
dosing until ANC value returns to ≥ 1000/ μL.
 For confirmed < 500/μL, if value returns to ≥ 1000/μL, restarting study drug is 
allowed if there is an alternative etiology identified; documentation should 
include reason rechallenge is expected to be safe for the subject.  Study drug 
should be discontinued if no alternative etiology can be found.
Absolute lymphocyte 
counts (ALC) If confirmed < 500/μL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug dosing 
until ALC returns t o ≥ 500/ μL.
Total white blood cell 
count If confirmed < 2000/μL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug dosing 
until white blood cell count returns to ≥ 2000/ μL.
Platelet count If confirmed < 50,000/μL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug 
dosing until platelet count returns to normal reference range or its baseline value. 
Page 47 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Laboratory Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline for Upadacitinib and Matching Placebo
Aspartate 
aminotransferase 
(AST) or alanine 
aminotransferase 
(ALT) Interrupt study drug if any of the following scenarios are confirmed by repeat testing 
of AST/ALT:
 ALT or AST > 3 × ULN and either a total bilirubin > 2 × ULN or an international 
normalized ratio (INR) > 1.5 :
 A separate blood sample for INR testing will be needed to measure INR at the 
time of repeat testing for ALT or AST.  A repeat test of INR is not needed for 
determination if above toxicity management criteria are met.
 If a creatine phosphokinase (CPK) value is not available, a CPK should be 
drawn to exclude AST/ALT elevations related to muscle injury 
 ALT or AST > 3 × ULN along wi th new appearance of fatigue, nausea, vomiting, 
right upper quadrant pain or tenderness, fever, rash, and/or new -onset 
eosinophilia.
 ALT or AST > 5 × ULN for more than 2 weeks.
If ALT or AST > 8 × ULN, interrupt study drug immediately, repeat testing with a new 
sample, and if repeat test confirms result contact the TA MD. 
 Subjects with HBc Ab+ (irrespective of HBs Ab status) and negative HBV DNA at 
screening who develop the following should have HBV DNA by PCR testing 
performed within 1 week (based on init ial elevated value): 
 ALT > 5 × ULN OR
 ALT or AST > 3 × ULN if an alternative cause is not readily identified.
 A separate blood sample for HBV DNA PCR testing will be needed at the 
time of repeat testing for ALT or AST.   
A positive result for HBV DNA PC R testing will require immediate interruption of study 
drug (unless not acceptable by local practices).  Within 1 week of the first episode of a 
positive HBV DNA PCR test, a hepatologist consultation should occur for 
recommendation regarding subsequent tre atment.
Subjects who meet any of the above criteria should be evaluated for an alternative 
etiology of the ALT or AST elevation and managed as medically appropriate.  The 
investigator should contact the AbbVie TA MD to discuss the management of a subject 
when an alternative etiology has been determined.  The alternative etiology should be 
documented appropriately in the eCRF.  If ALT or AST values return to the normal 
reference range or its Baseline value, study drug may be restarted.  If restarting study 
drug, documentation should include reason rechallenge is expected to be safe.  Study 
drug should be discontinued if no alternative etiology can be found and ALT or AST 
elevations persist. 
For any confirmed ALT or AS T elevations > 3 ULN, complete the appropriate 
supplemental hepatic eCRF(s). 
Serum Creatinine  If serum creatinine is > 1.5 × the baseline value and > ULN, repeat the test for 
serum creatinine (with subject in an euvolemic state) to confirm the results. If the 
results of the repeat testing still meet this criterion, then interrupt study drug and 
re-start study drug once serum creatinine returns to ≤ 1.5 × baseline value.
For the above serum creatinine elevation scenarios, complete the appropriate 
supplem ental renal eCRF(s).
Page 48 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Laboratory Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline for Upadacitinib and Matching Placebo
Creatine 
Phosphokinase Investigators should complete the supplemental elevated CPK eCRF for the below CPK 
elevation scenarios or if CPK increase is considered to be an AE by the investigator.
 If a subject experiences any symptoms suggestive of myositis or rhabdomyolysis, 
blood for measuring CPK and aldolase levels should be drawn with clinical 
management as deemed appropriate by the investigator .
 If confirmed CPK value ≥ 4 × ULN and there are no symptoms suggestive of 
myositis or r habdomyolysis, the subject may continue study drug at the 
investigator's discretion after evaluation . 
 If CPK ≥ 4 × ULN accompanied by symptoms suggestive of myositis or 
rhabdomyolysis, interrupt study drug and contact AbbVie medical monitor.
Urgent and Emergency Surgeries
For urgent and emergency surgeries the following rules will apply:
If the subject must undergo an urgent or emergency surgery, the study drug should be 
interrupted at least 1 week prior to a planned urgent surgery if possible, or at the time of an 
emergency surgery.  After surgery, allow reintroduction of study drug once the physician has 
examined the surgical site and determined that it has healed and there is no sign of infection.
Elective surgery, and interruption of study drug for su ch a surgery, should be avoided until after 
the Week 52 visit has been completed.  If elective surgery is considered prior to the primary 
endpoint visit, it must be discussed with the TA MD and performed with TA MD approval. If the 
subject undergoes electi ve surgery, the study drug should be interrupted at least 1 week prior to 
the planned surgery.  Allow reintroduction of study drug once the physician has examined the 
surgical site and determined that it has healed and there is no sign of infection.
6.3 Data Monitoring Committee
An independent, external DMC will be established for periodic review of unblinded safety data and to 
alert AbbVie to possible safety concerns related to the conduct of the study to ensure subject safety.  
The DMC will review safety dat a of the first 80 enrolled subjects through 8 weeks of treatment to 
determine if there are any significant safety concerns that would warrant any study action.  Thereafter, 
the DMC will review safety data on a regular basis and as needed based on the accum ulating safety data 
and will provide recommendations to AbbVie. 
The DMC Charter will describe the roles and responsibilities of the DMC members, frequency of data 
reviews, and relevant data to be assessed.  Communications from the DMC to the Study Team wi ll not 
contain information that could potentially unblind the team to subject treatment assignments.
In addition, the DMC will conduct a futility analysis as described in Section 7.5.
Page 49 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.4 Cardiovascular Adjudication Committee
An independent committee of physician experts in cardiovascular adjudication will be utilized to assess 
potential cardiovascular AEs in a blinded manner as defined by the Cardiovascular Adjudication 
Committee charter.
7STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
An unblinded analysis for Period 1 will be conducted after all subjects have completed Week 52or have 
prematurely discontinued the study prior to Week 52.  An unblinded analysis for Period 2 will be 
conducted after all subjects have completed Week 104 or have prematurely discontinued the study 
prior to Week 104.  Additional unblinded analysis in Period 2 may be conducted for regulatory purposes .  
To maintain integrity of the trial and avoid introduction of bias, study sites and subjects will remain 
blinded until all subjects have completed Period 2 (Week 104). 
Statistical analys es will be described and fully documented in the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) .  The 
statistical analyses will be performed using SAS (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina, USA).
7.2 Definition for Analysis Populations
The Full Analysis Set (FAS) will be defined for Period 1 and Period 2.  The FAS population in Period 1
(FAS1) includes all randomized subjects who received at least 1 dose of study drug in Period 1.  The FAS 
population in Period 2 (FAS2) is defined as all subjects who achieve d remission for at least 24 
consecutive weeks prior to the Week 52 Visit (at the end of Period 1 ) and received at least 1 dose of 
study drug in Period 2.   In addition, an exploratory analysis set will be defined for Period 2 to include all 
subjects who did not meet these remission criteria (i.e ., achieve remission for at least 24 weeks prior to 
the Week 52 Visit) but continued in Period 2 on their originally randomized treatment assignment.  
Primary efficacy analysis for primary and key secondary endpoints will be carried out on the FAS1
population in Period 1 and on the FAS2 population in Period 2.  Exploratory efficacy analyses for Period 2 
will be conducted for selected variables for the exploratory analysis set.  Subjects will be grouped 
according to treatment as randomized.  
The Per- Protocol Analysis Set will be defined to represent a subset of the FAS 1subjects without any 
major protocol violations during the study which are expected to impact the primary endpoint.  Subjects 
to be excluded from the Per- Protocol Population will be id entified before the Week 52 database lock.  
The Per- Protocol Population will be used to analyze the primary efficacy endpoint in a sensitivity 
analysis.  Additional analyses may be conducted on the Per -Protocol Analysis Set in order to evaluate the 
impact of major protocol violations.
The Safety Analysis Set will be defined for Period 1 and Period 2.  The Safety Analysis Set in Period 1 will 
consist of all subjects who received at least 1 dose of study drug in Period 1.  The Safety Analysis Set in 
Period 2 will consist of all subjects who received at least 1 dose of study drug in Period 2.  For the Safety 
Page 50 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Analysis Set, subjects are assigned to a treatment group based on the treatment actually received, 
regardless of the randomized treatment.
7.3 Statistical Anal yses for Efficacy
Analysis of Primary and Key Secondary Endpoints in Period 1
For the global analysis, the overall type I error rate of the primary and ranked key secondary endpoints 
for the 2 upadacitinib doses will be strongly controlled using a graphica l multiple testing procedure. 
Specifically, the testing will utilize the endpoint sequence of primary endpoint followed by key 
secondary endpoints in the order as specified in Section 3.2and Section 3.3.The testing will start with 
the primary endpoint of 15mg QD with α = 0.05.  Continued te sting will follow a pre -specified α transfer 
path, which includes downstream transfer along the endpoint sequence within each dose as well as 
cross -dose transfer.  The testing of 7.5 mg QD dose will start with transferred αif endpoint 7 in 
Section 3.3of the 15 mg QD dose is significant .  The group of endpoints labeled as 8 in Section 3.3will 
be tested using the Hochberg procedure, conditional on significance of higher ranked endpoints.  More 
details of the graphical procedure will be specified in the SAP.   An alternative testing procedure wil l be 
done for the regulatory purposes in Japan.  More details of the graphical procedure will be specified in 
the SAP.  Unless otherwise specified, all statistical tests will be performed at a 2 -sided significance level 
of 0.05.
The primary analysis will b e conducted after all subjects have completed the Week 52 visit or have 
prematurely discontinued from the study prior to Week 52.  For the primary efficacy endpoint, the 
upadacitinib groups will be compared with the PBO group using the Cochran -Mantel -Haens zel method 
adjusting for stratification factors.  The primary approach for handling missing data will be Non -
Responder Imputation incorporating multiple imputation (NRI -MI). Subjects with missing data will be 
counted as non -responders, except when missing at random can be reasonably assumed, which will be 
handled by multiple imputation. For example, missing due to COVID -19 logistical restriction or due to 
political conflict will be handled by multiple imputation. A sensitivity analysis will be performed based on 
As O bserved analysis in which subjects with missing components of sustained remission at Week 52 will 
be excluded from analysis.  Other key binary endpoints will be analyzed similarly.  
For continuous chan ge from baseline endpoints such as change from baseline in SF -36, PGA, EQ -5D-5L 
and FACIT -Fatigue , comparisons between the upadacitinib treatment groups and the PBO group will be 
carried out using the Mixed- Effect Model Repeat Measurement (MMRM) model with treatment group, 
visit, treatment -by-visit interaction, and stratification factors as the fixed factors and the corresponding 
baseline values as the covariates.  TSQM, PGIC value will be analyzed using an MMRM model with 
treatment group, visit, treatment -by-visit interaction and stratification factors as the fixed factors.  For 
cumulative CS dose, comparisons between the upadacitinib treatment group and the PBO group will be 
analyzed using a van Elteren test stratified by stratification factors.  The media n total cumulative 
prednisone dose over the 52 weeks for each treatment group and the corresponding 95% CI for the 
median will be presented.
For time -to-event endpoints, median time -to-event will be reported for each treatment group.  
Comparisons between t he upadacitinib group and the PBO group will be conducted using stratified log 
Page 51 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.rank test; additional analyses may be conducted using Cox's regression to include baseline values and 
stratification factors as covariates.
For count endpoints, comparisons betw een the upadacitinib treatment group and the PBO group will be 
carried out using Poisson regression model with treatment group and stratification factors as covariates, 
adjusting for exposure duration. 
Other Efficacy Variables
Additional efficacy variable s are listed in Section 3.3and will be summarized for Period 1 and 2.  For all 
the additional efficacy variables in Period 1, the summary statisti cs and the statistical method will be the 
same as the corresponding variables described in the primary and key secondary analyses.  For all the 
additional efficacy variables in Period 2, descriptive statistics will be provided for each treatment group 
sequ ence .  For binary endpoints, frequencies and percentage with 95% CI using normal approximation 
will be reported for each treatment group and 95% CI will be reported for treatment difference.  For 
continuous endpoints, the mean, standard deviation, 95% CI, median, and range will be reported for 
each treatment group and 95% CI will be reported for treatment difference.  For time -to-event 
endpoints, median time -to-event will be reported for each treatment group.  For count endpoints, the 
exposure duration adju sted event rates will be reported for each treatment group.
Sample Size Estimation
The planned total sample size of 420 subjects with a 2:1:1 ratio (upadacitinib 15 mg QD: upadacitinib 
7.5mg QD: PBO QD) was determined to have at least 90% power to detect a 20% difference in sustained 
remission rate at Week 52 between the upadacitinib 15 mg arm and the PBO arm (assuming a response 
rate of 40% in the PBO arm), using Fisher's exact test, with an overall two -sided alpha = 0.05.
7.4 Statistical Analyses for Safety
Safety analyses for Period 1 and Period 2 alone and long -term safety analyses for Period 1 and Period 2 
combined will be carried out using the Safety Analysis Set in Period 1 (for safety analyses for Period 1 
alone and Periods 1 and 2 combined) as well as the Safety Analysis Set in Period 2 (for safety analyses 
for Period 2 alone) respectively, and will be based on treatments actually received regardless of the 
randomly assigned treatment.  
Safety will be assessed by treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAE s), physical examination, laboratory 
assessments, ECG, and vital sign results.  The number and percentage of subjects experiencing TEAEs by 
treatment group will be tabulated by the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) system 
organ class (SOC) and preferred term (PT).  In addition, summaries of SAEs and TEAEs by severity and 
relationship to study drug as assessed by the investigator will be provided.  SAEs, severe TEAEs, and 
TEAEs that lead to premature study discontinuation will be listed. Changes in vital signs, physical 
examination results, and clinical laboratory variables at each visit as compared to baseline will be 
summarized.  Shift of laboratory values from baseline to defined time points will be tabulated.
Missing safety data will not be imputed.
Page 52 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.5 Interim Analysis
In addition to periodic review of safety data (Section 6.3), the DMC will conduct a futility analysis to 
assess lack of efficacy once the first 140 enrolled subjects complete 24 weeks of treatment 
(approximately 70 subjects in the 15 -mg active treatment arm; 35 subjects in the 7.5 -mg active 
treatment arm and 35 in the PBO arm).  A futility recommendation will be made when the futility 
criterion is met.  Further details will be provided in the DMC Charter.
8ETHICS
8.1 Independent Ethics Committee/Inst itutional Review Board 
(IEC/IRB)
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant materials will be 
submitted to the IEC/IRB for review and approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the informed 
consent form(s) must be obtained before any participant is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol 
will require review and approval by the IEC/IRB before the changes are implemented to the study.  In 
addition, all changes to the consent form(s) will be IEC/IRB approved.
8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, ICH guidelines, 
applicable regulations and guidelines governing clinical study conduct and the ethical principles that 
have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  Responsibilities of the investigator are specified in 
Appendix B.
In cases of state of emergency or pandemic situations leading to d ifficulties in performing 
protocol -specified procedures, AbbVie will engage with study site personnel in efforts to ensure the 
safety of subjects, maintain protocol compliance, and minimize risks to the integrity of the study while 
trying to best manage s ubject continuity of care.  This may include alternative methods for assessments 
(e.g., phone contacts or virtual site visits), alternative locations for data collection (e.g., use of a local lab 
instead of a central lab), and shipping investigational prod uct and/or supplies direct to subjects to 
ensure continuity of treatment where allowed.  Refer to the Operations Manual for additional details.  In 
all cases, these alternative measures must be allowed by local regulations and permitted by IRB/IEC.  
Invest igators should notify AbbVie if any urgent safety measures are taken to protect the subjects 
against any immediate hazard.
8.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical 
study identifiers or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie.
Page 53 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the 
data reported. All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, 
accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Clinical site monitoring is conducted 
to ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are protec ted, that the reported trial data 
are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the 
currently approved protocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable local regulatory 
requirement(s).
The investi gator(s)/institution(s) will permit study -related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB review, and 
regulatory inspection(s), providing direct access to source data documents.  
Electronic case report forms (eCRFs) must be completed for each subject screened and/or enrolled in 
this study.  These forms will be used to transmit information collected during the study to AbbVie and 
regulatory authorities, as applicable.  The eCRF data for this study are being collected with an electronic 
data capture (EDC) system called Rave®.  All data entered into the eCRF will be recorded by investigative 
site personnel in the EDC system and will be supported by source documentation.  
The eCRFs will be reviewed periodically for completeness, legibility, and acceptability by AbbVie 
personnel (or their representatives).  AbbVie (or their representatives) will also be allowed access to all 
source documents pertinent to the study in order to verify eCRF entries.  The investigator will review the 
eCRFs for completeness and accuracy and prov ide his or her electronic signature and date to eCRFs as 
evidence thereof.   
Data from the EDC system will be archived on appropriate data media (CD -ROM, etc.) and provided to 
the investigator at that time as a durable record of the site's eCRF data.  
Incases of state of emergency or pandemic situations, remote data review and verification of data may 
be employed if allowed by the local regulatory authority, IRB/IEC, and the study site.
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial i s conducted with a quality management system that will define 
quality tolerance limits in order to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results.  Data 
will be generated, documented and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP a nd applicable 
regulatory requirements.
Individual results will not be reported to anyone not directly involved in this research other than for 
regulatory purposes.  
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end- of-study is defined as the date of the last subject's las t visit.
Page 54 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.12 REFERENCES
1.Alba MA, Garcia- Martinez A, Prieto -Gonzalez S, et al.  Relapses in patients with giant cell 
arteritis:  prevalence, characteristics, and associated clinical findings in a longitudinally followed 
cohort of 106 patients.  Medicine (Balti more).  2014;93(5):194 -201.
2.Proven A, Gabriel SE, Orces C, et al.  Glucocorticoid therapy in giant cell arteritis:  duration and 
adverse outcomes.  Arthritis Rheum.  2003;49(5):703 -8.
3.Unizony S, Arias -Urdaneta L, Miloslavsky E, et al.  Tocilizumab for the treatment of large -vessel 
vasculitis (giant cell arteritis, Takayasu arteritis) and polymyalgia rheumatica.  Arthritis Care Res 
(Hoboken).  2012;64(11):1720 -9.
4.Villiger PM, Adler S, Kuchen S, et al.  Tocilizumab for induction and maintenance of remission i n 
giant cell arteritis:  a phase 2, randomised, double -blind, PBO -controlled trial.  Lancet.  
2016;387(10031):1921 -7.
5.Stone JH, Tuckwell K, Dimonaco S, et al.  Efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in patients with giant 
cell arteritis:  primary and secondary outcomes from a phase 3, randomized, double -blind, 
placebo -controlled trial [abstract].  Arthritis Rheumatol.  2016;68 (Suppl 10). 
6.O'Shea JJ, Holland SM, Staudt LM.  JAKs and STATs in immunity, immunodeficiency, and cancer.  
N Engl J Med.  2013;368(2):161 -70. 
7.Rawlings JS, Rosler KM, Harrison DA.  The JAK/STAT signaling pathway.  J Cell Sci.  
2004;117 (Pt8):1281 -3.
8.Borchers AT, Gershwin ME.  Giant cell arteritis:  a review of classification, pathophysiology, 
geoepidemiology, and treatment. Autoimmun Rev.  2012;11(6 -7):A544 -54.
9.Murray PJ.  The JAK -STAT signaling pathway:  input and output integration.  J Immunol.  
2007;178(5):2623 -9.
10.Ghoreschi K, Laurence A, O'Shea JJ.  Janus kinases in immune cell signaling.  Immunol Rev.  
2009;228(1):273 -87.
11.Deng J, Younge BR, Olshen RA, et al.  Th17 and Th1 T -cell responses in giant cell arteritis.  
Circulation.  2010;121(7):906 -15.
12.Weyand CM, Younge BR, Goronzy JJ.  IFN -gamma and IL -17:  the two faces of T -cell pathology in 
giant cell arteritis.  Curr Opi n Rheumatol.  2011;23(1):43 -9.
13.Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ.  Immune mechanisms in medium and large -vessel vasculitis.  Nat Rev 
Rheumatol.  2013;9(12):731 -40.
14.Zhang H, Watanabe R, Berry GJ, et al.  Inhibition of JAK -STAT signaling suppresses pathogenic 
immune responses in medium and large vessel vasculitis.  Circulation.  2017.  [Epub ahead of 
print].
15.Unizony S, Arias -Urdaneta L, Miloslavsky E, et al.  Tocilizumab for the treatment of large -vessel 
vasculitis (giant cell arteritis, Takayasu arteritis) and polymyalg ia rheumatica.  Arthritis Care Res.  
2012;64(11):1720 -9.
Page 55 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.16.Xenitidis T, Horger M, Zeh G, et al.  Sustained inflammation of the aortic wall despite tocilizumab 
treatment in two cases of Takayasu arteritis.  Rheumatology (Oxford).  2013;52(9):1729 -31.
17.Adler S, Reichenbach S, Kuchen S, et al.  Termination of tocilizumab treatment in giant cell 
arteritis:  follow -up of patients after the RCT.  Arthritis Rheumatol.  2016;68 (Suppl 10). 
18.AbbVie.  Upadacitinib Investigator's Brochure Edition 12.  16 August 2021.
19.Kremer JM, Emery P, Camp HS, et al.  A phase IIb study of ABT -494, a selective JAK- 1 inhibitor, in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis and an inadequate response to anti -tumor necrosis factor 
therapy.  Arthritis Rheumatol.  2016;68(12):2867 -77.
20.Genovese MC, Sm olen JS, Weinblatt ME, et al.  Efficacy and safety of ABT -494, a selective JAK- 1 
inhibitor, in a phase IIb study in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and an inadequate response 
to methotrexate.  Arthritis Rheumatol.  2016;68(12):2857 -66.
21.Mohamed ME, Zeng J, Song IH, et al.  Pharmacokinetics of ABT -494 with the once -daily 
extended -release tablet formulation being utilized in the ongoing rheumatoid arthritis phase 3 
trials [abstract].  Arthritis Rheumatol.  2016;68 (Suppl 10).
Page 56 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A.STUDY SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS A ND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
Ab antibody
AD atopic dermatitis
ADL activities of daily living
AE adverse event
ALC absolute lymphocyte counts
ALT alanine aminotransferase
ANC absolute neutrophil count
AST aspartate aminotransferase
AUC area under the curve
AxSpA axial spondyloarthritis
bDMARD biologic disease modifying antirheumatic drugs
BID twice daily
CD Crohn's disease
CGC common gamma chain
Cmax maximum serum concentration
Cmin minimum serum concentration
CL/F oral clearance
CNS central nervous system
COVID -19 coronavirus disease –2019 (coronavirus SARS -CoV-2)
CPK creatine phosphokinase 
CRP C-reactive protein
CS corticosteroid(s) 
csDMARD -IR conventional -synthetic disease modifying antirheumatic drugs
CT computed tomography
CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
CXR chest x -ray
CYP3A cytochrome P450 3A
DMARD disease modifying antirheumatic drugs
DMC data monitoring committee
DTP direct- to-patient
Page 57 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.ECG electrocardiogram
eCRF electronic case report form
EDC electronic data capture
ESR erythrocyte sedimentation rate
EQ-5D-5L EuroQol Five Dimensions Five Levels Questionnaire
FACIT -Fatigue Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy -Fatigue
FAS Full Analysis Set
FSH Follicle -stimulating hormone
GCA giant cell arteritis
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GFR glomerular filtration rate
HBc Ab hepatitis B core antibody
HBs Ab hepatitis B surface antibody
HBV hepatitis B virus
HCV hepatitis C virus
HCV Ab hepatitis C virus antibody
HIV human immunodeficiency virus
HLA human leukocyte antigens
hsCRP high sensitivity C -reactive protein 
ICH International Council for Harmonisation
IEC independent ethics committee
IFN-γ interferon -gamma
IL interleukin
IL-6 interleukin-6
IMP Investigational Medicinal Product
INR international normalized ratio
IP investigational product
IR inadequate response
IRB institutional review board
IRT interactive response technology
IUD intrauterine device
IUS intrauterine hormone -releasing system
JAK Janus kinase 
JAK1 Janus kinase 1
Page 58 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.LDA low disease activity
MACE major adverse cardiovascular event
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
MMRM mixed- effect model repeat measurement
NK natural killer (cells)
NMSC non-melanoma skin cancer
NOAEL no-observed -adverse -effect level
NOF National Osteoporosis Foundation
NRI non-responder imputation
PBO placebo
PCR polymerase chain reaction
PCS Physical Component Score
PD Premature Discontinuation
PD Visit Premature Discontinuation Visit
PET positron emission tomography
PGA Patient Global Assessment
PGIC Patients' Global Impression of Change
PK pharmacokinetic(s)
PMR polymyalgia rheumatica
PPD purified protein derivative
PsA psoriatic arthritis
PT preferred term
QD once daily
QTc QT interval corrected for heart rate
QTcF QT interval corrected for heart rate using Fridericia's formula
RA rheumatoid arthritis
RNA ribonucleic acid
SAE serious adverse event
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan
SC Subcutaneous
SF-36 Short Form 36
SOC system organ class
STAT Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription
Page 59 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.SUSAR Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions
TB tuberculosis
TA MD Therapeutic Area Medical Director
TEAE Treatment -emergent adverse event
TNF tumor necrosis factor
TSQM Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire for Medication 
Tyk2 tyrosine kinase 2
UC ulcerative colitis
ULN upper limit of normal
V/F apparent volume of distribution
WBC white blood cell
Page 60 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B.RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M16 -852:  A Multicenter, Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled Study to Evaluate the 
Safety and Efficacy of Upadacitinib in Subjects with Giant Cell Arteritis:  SELECT -GCA
Protocol Date:  31May 2023
Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the International Council for Harmonisation 
(ICH) Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and local regulations and guidelines governing the study at the site 
location.  In signing the Investigator Agreement, the investigator is agreeing to the following:
1.Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and operations manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying 
AbbVie and the appropriat e Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee 
(IEC), except when necessary to protect the subject from immediate harm.
2.Personally conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3.Informing all subjects, or persons used as control s, that the drugs are being used for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requirements relating to informed consent and 
ethics committees (e.g., IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4.Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investigation(s) to AbbVie.
5.Reading the information in the Investigator's Brochure/safety material provided, including the 
instructions for use and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6.Informing all a ssociates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
7.Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all study -related documents until notification from AbbVie.
8.Maintaining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and al l of its amendments.
9.Reporting promptly, all changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involving 
risks to human subjects or others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, 
institution director) and/or directly to the ethics committees and AbbVie.
10.Providing direct access to source data documents for study -related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed)
Page 61 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C.LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Immunology Development
Statistics
Statistics
Page 62 of 155 

STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX D.ACTIVITY SCHEDULE
The following table shows the required activities across Period 1 and Period 2; the individual activities 
are described in detail in the Operations Manual .  Allowed modifications due to a state of emergency or 
pandemic situation are detailed within the Operations Manual.
Page 63 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.h. Subjects with a negative TB test result at Screening (or the most recent evaluation) will have an annual TB follow -up test performed , with the same type of TB test used at 
Screening (e.g., QuantiFERON -TB Gold Test or Local PPD Skin Test) , if the subject is still taking the study drug.  If an annual TB test is newly positive (seroconversion), a CXR 
needs to be performed as soon as possible to aid in distinguishing ac tive versus latent TB.  During the study, subjects with new evidence of latent TB should initiate prophylactic 
treatment immediately per local guidelines and complete at least 6 months of prophylaxis (or per local guidelines, whichever is longer).  TB prop hylaxis should be initiated, and 
study drug should not be withheld.  Two to 4 weeks later, the subject should be re -evaluated (unscheduled visit) for signs and symptoms, as well as laboratory assessment of 
toxicity to TB prophylaxis.  Newly initiated proph ylactic treatment should be captured in the eCRF and in the source documents.
i. Women of childbearing potential are required to have monthly pregnancy testing.  At Weeks 32, 40, 48, 64, 72, 76, 84, 88, 96, and 100, women of childbearing potential may 
have an unscheduled office visit for required monthly pregnancy testing or elect to perform the required monthly testing at home w ith test kits provided by the site.  Additional 
testing may be required per local requirements.
j. Serum pregnancy testing is requ ired at Baseline only if urine pregnancy testing is positive, or if serum pregnancy testing is required at Baseline per local practices.
k. FSH should be tested at Screening if the female subject is ≤ 55 years of age AND has had no menses ≥ 12 months AND h as no history of permanent surgical sterilization (Refer to 
Section 5.2for further details regarding definition of postmenopausal).
l. For subjects in Japan with HBs Ab+ and/or HBc Ab+ and negative HBV DNA at screening, HBV DNA PCR test should be performed every 1 2 weeks (as necessary, unscheduled 
visits may be needed).  HBV DNA PCR testing every 12 weeks is not necessary when the subject has a history of HBV vaccine and HBs Ab+, HBc Ab –.
m. After the Baseline Visit, results of hsCRP (central laboratory) will be blinded to the Sponsor, the investigator, the subject , and study site personnel.  After the Screening Visit, 
results of ESR (local la boratory) will be blinded to the Sponsor, the investigator, the subject, and study site personnel with the exception of the l ocal Laboratory Assessor 
assigned at each study site (see Section 5.7for additional information).
n. Applies to Period 1 only.
o. Subjects who achieved remission for at least 24 consecutive weeks prior to the Week 52 Visit (at the end of Period 1) will be re-randomized into Period 2.  Remission is defined 
as absence of GCA signs and symptoms AND adherence to the protocol -defined CS taper regimen or corticosteroid -free.  At Week 52, subjects who have absence of GCA signs 
and symptoms AND are CS -free at the Week 52 visit, but do n ot meet remission criteria (i.e., achieve remission for at least 24 consecutive weeks prior to the Week 52 Visit )will 
continue in Period 2 on their originally randomized treatment assignment.  All other subjects will be discontinued from study drug and th e study at the end of Period 1.
p. Dosing instructions will be provided at the Baseline Visit and replaced if lost or damaged.
q. Approximately 2 days prior to each visit with scheduled pharmacokinetic (PK) sample collection, site personnel will contact s ubjects as reminder to document dosing 
information on dosing diary and to bring completed dosing diary to the visit.  Additional details are provided in the Operati ons Manual.
Note 1. Visit window is ± 2 days for Period 1 (Week 2 through Week 52 Visit) and ± 2 days for Period 2 (Week 56 through Week 104 Visit).  Any of the procedures may be 
performed at an unscheduled visit at the discretion of the investigator.  
Note 2. Subjects who choose to discontinue study drug treatment, but continue to participate in the study, should complete a Premature Discontinuation Visit (PD Visit) as 
soon as possible, preferably within 2 weeks.  Afterwards, subjects should follow the regular visit schedule for the period fr om which they discontinue and adhere to all 
study proce dures except for dispensing study drug, or reviewing returns and accountability, dispensing/reviewing study drug instructions , dosing diaries, PK sample 
collection, and sample collection for exploratory research.  That is, subjects who discontinue study dr ug in Period 1 should complete the visits in Period 1, but not 
continue to Period 2.  Subjects who discontinue study drug in Period 2, should complete the visits in Period 2.  In addition, all future CS escape therapy and 
efficacy -driven discontinuation cr iteria no longer apply. 
Page 68 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E.CORTICOSTEROID TAPER ING SCHEDULE
Baseline 20 30 40 50 60 Baseline 20 30 40 50 60
Wk 1 17 25 35 40 50 Wk 1 15 25 35 40 50
Wk 2 17 20 30 35 40 Wk 2 12 20 30 35 40
Wk 3 15 17 25 30 35 Wk 3 12 15 25 30 35
Wk 4 15 17 20 25 30 Wk 4 10 12 20 25 30
Wk 5 12 15 17 20 25 Wk 5 9 12 15 20 25
Wk 6 10 15 17 17 20 Wk 6 8 10 12 15 20
Wk 7 10 12 15 17 17 Wk 7 7 9 12 12 15
Wk 8 10 10 15 15 17 Wk 8 6 8 10 12 12
Wk 9 10 10 12 15 15 Wk 9 6 7 9 10 12
Wk 10 9 10 10 12 15 Wk 10 5 6 8 9 10
Wk 11 9 10 10 10 12 Wk 11 5 6 7 8 9
Wk 12 9 9 10 10 10 Wk 12 4 5 6 7 8
Wk 13 9 9 10 10 10 Wk 13 4 5 6 6 7
Wk 14 8 9 9 10 10 Wk 14 3 4 5 6 6
Wk 15 8 9 9 9 10 Wk 15 3 4 5 5 6
Wk 16 8 8 9 9 9 Wk 16 2 3 4 5 5
Wk 17 8 8 9 9 9 Wk 17 2 3 4 4 5
Wk 18 7 8 8 9 9 Wk 18 1 2 3 4 4
Wk 19 7 8 8 8 9 Wk 19 1 2 3 3 4
Wk 20 7 7 8 8 8 Wk 20 0 1 2 3 3
Wk 21 7 7 8 8 8 Wk 21 0 1 2 2 3
Wk 22 6 7 7 8 8 Wk 22 0 0 1 2 2
Wk 23 6 7 7 7 8 Wk 23 0 0 1 1 2
Wk 24 6 6 7 7 7 Wk 24 0 0 0 1 1
Wk 25 6 6 7 7 7 Wk 25 0 0 0 0 1
Wk 26 5 6 6 7 7 Wk 26 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 27 5 6 6 6 7 Wk 27 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 28 5 5 6 6 6 Wk 28 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 29 5 5 6 6 6 Wk 29 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 30 4 5 5 6 6 Wk 30 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 31 4 5 5 5 6 Wk 31 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 32 4 4 5 5 5 Wk 32 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 33 4 4 5 5 5 Wk 33 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 34 3 4 4 5 5 Wk 34 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 35 3 4 4 4 5 Wk 35 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 36 3 3 4 4 4 Wk 36 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 37 3 3 4 4 4 Wk 37 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 38 2 3 3 4 4 Wk 38 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 39 2 3 3 3 4 Wk 39 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 40 2 2 3 3 3 Wk 40 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 41 2 2 3 3 3 Wk 41 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 42 1 2 2 3 3 Wk 42 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 43 1 2 2 2 3 Wk 43 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 44 1 1 2 2 2 Wk 44 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 45 1 1 2 2 2 Wk 45 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 46 0 1 1 2 2 Wk 46 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 47 0 1 1 1 2 Wk 47 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 48 0 0 1 1 1 Wk 48 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 49 0 0 1 1 1 Wk 49 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 50 0 0 0 1 1 Wk 50 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 51 0 0 0 0 1 Wk 51 0 0 0 0 0
Wk 52 0 0 0 0 0 Wk 52 0 0 0 0 0
Open-label taper until 20 mg 
*Prednisone or PrednisoloneBlinded 52-Wk Costicosteroid* Taper (Dose in mg) Blinded 26-Wk Corticosteroid* Taper (Dose in mg)
Page 69 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX F.PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Versions 
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 27 March 2018
Version 2.0 05 September 2018
Version 2.1 (VHP) 15 February 2019
Version 3.0 28 March 2019
Version 4.0 27 March 2020
Version 5.0 09 December 2020
Administrative Change 1 13 October 2021
Version 6.0 29 March 2022
Administrative Change 2 (Japan Only) 08 August 2022
Summary of Protocol Changes:
The following changes were made in Version 7.0 of this protocol:
Protocol
Title page, Footer: Added EU CT number.
Rationale : To provide EU CT number. 
Section 1, Synopsis: Updated Objectives and Endpoints, Study Drug and Duration of Treatment, 
date.
Rationale : To align with protocol updates.
Section 2.2, Benefits and Risks to Patients: Updated AEs observed in patients receiving JAK 
inhibitors, added results of ORAL Surveillance study, a study of a different JAK inhibitor.
Rationale : To align with known AEs and to provide additional detail based on the ORAL 
Surveillance study to support the current research. 
Section 3.3, Secondary Endpoints: Updated title to Multiplicity -Controlled Secondary Endpoints 
and Additional Endpoints.
Rationale: To clarify that the secondary endpoints will be multiplicity -controlled .
Section 3.3, Secondary Endpoints:  Updated language of several of the endpoints.
Rationale: For correction, clarification, and/or alignment without actual change to the 
definitions of the existing endpoints.
Section 3.3, Secondary Endpoints; Section 7.3, Statistical Analyses for Efficacy; Appendix D, 
Activity Schedule: Updated FACIT -F to FACIT -Fatigue .
Rationale: To clarify FACIT -Fatigue (13 item) is the PRO being used in this trial.  
Page 70 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Section 5.2, Contraception Recommendations
Updated criteria for FSH levels for postmenopausal females .
Rationale: To align with criteria for postmenopausal females.
Added language for contraceptive counsel ing.
Rationale : To clarif ycontraception requirements in subjects whose childbearing potential 
changes during the study. 
Section 5.3, Prohibited Medications and Therapy: 
Updated lists of prohibited biologic therapies, prohibited JAK inhibitors, examples of live 
vaccines, and examples of commonly used strong CYP3A inhibitors and inducers. Indicated 
that viral vaccines that cannot repli cate are not prohibited and that herbal therapies and 
other traditional medicines with unknown effects on CYP3A are prohibited.
Rationale:   To update the lists of prohibited biologic therapies and JAK inhibitors to align 
with currently approved medications, to align with current knowledge of CYP3A inhibitors 
and inducers, and to clarify that live vaccines without replicating potential are permitted 
during the study.   
Section 5.5, Discontinuation from Study Drug or Subject Withdrawal from Study:
Updated malignancy language.
Rationale:  Toclarify that subjects with non -melanoma skin cancer and carcinoma in situ of 
the cervix may only remain in the study if the cancer can be successfully removed at its 
localization.   
Removed language that the AbbVie TA MD may mandate individual subject discontinuation.
Rationale: To minimize the introduction of bias if discontinuation is requested without clear 
safety criter ia for discontinuation.   
Updated language for study termination .
Rationale : For clarification that advanced notice is not required for study termination.
Section 5.6, Follow -Up for Study Drug Discontinuation or Subject Withdrawal from Study : 
updated description of 30 -day follow -up visit to indicate treatment -emergent AEs/SAEs.
Rationale : For clarification that only treatment -emergent AEs will be reviewed during the follow -
up visit.
Section 5.7, Assessment of Disease Activity: Indicated that hsCRP willremain masked until the 
end of the study for the investigators, site staff and subjects , and that the Sponsor will be 
unmasked to the hsCRP results at the time of primary analysis.
Rationale: To clarify the current language to ensure we maintain the integrity of the blind.
Section 5.8, Study Drug: Updated disease flare definition ESR measurement to ≥30 mm.
Rationale : To correct inconsistencies throughout protocol and operations manual documents. 
Section 6.1, Complaints and Adverse Events: 
Added language to describe electronic data capture (EDC) reporting.
Page 71 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Rationale : To align with electronic data capture procedures .
Updated language for SAE reporting.
Rationale : To align with SAE reporting to AbbVie clinical p harmacovigilance.
Added language f or Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) reporting .
Rationale : To align with SUSAR reporting procedures .
Added retinal detachment and bone fracture as AEs that will be monitored during the study .
Rationale: To align with update s to the AEs monitored per regulatory request .
Section 6.2, Toxicity Management: Added language for muscle -related symptoms, Updated 
language for COVID- 19, Updated guidelines for AST or ALT , Updated guidelines for creatine 
phosphokinase , indicated that the medical monitor and not the TA MD should be contacted if 
CPK ≥ 4 × ULN is accompanied by symptoms suggestive of myositis or rhabdomyolysis .
Rationale: To provide clarification of study drug management for respective
events
Updated lang uage for urgent and emergency surgeries.
Rationale: To clarify the circumstances under which elective surgeries may be considered.
Section 7.2, Definition for Analy sis Populations : Clarified that the FAS in Period 2 is defined as all 
subjects who achieved sustained remission for at least 24 consecutive weeks prior to Week 52 
visit.
Rationale : For clarification. 
Section 7.3, Statistical Analyses for Efficacy: Added language for NRI -MI.
Rationale: To align with statistical approaches to handling missing data.
Appendix D, Activity Schedule: Indicated that for subjects with a negative TB test at Screening or 
most recent evaluation, an annual TB re -test will be performed if subject is still taking study 
drug.
Rationale: For clarification that re -test is only performed if subject is still taking study drug.
Oper ations Manual
Section 2.1, Individual Treatment Period Visit Activities: Updated 30 -day Follow -Up visit to 
include phone call , updated description of 30 -day follow -up visit to indicate treatment -
emergent AEs/SAEs , indicated that for subjects with a negativ e TB test at Screening or most 
recent evaluation, an annual TB re -test will be performed if subject is still taking study drug .
Rationale : To allow more flexibility if there are no safety issues necessitating an in -person visit , 
and f or clarification that only treatment- emergent AEs will be reviewed during the follow -up 
visit.
Page 72 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Section 2.1, Individual Treatment Period Visit Activities ; Section 3.6, Quality of Life and Patient -
Reported Outcomes; Appendix C, Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy – Fatigue 
(FACIT -Fatigue) Scale Example: Updated FACIT -F to FACIT -Fatigue .
Rationale: To clarify FACIT -Fatigue (13 item) is the PRO being used in this trial. 
Section 3.10, Vital Signs: indicated that blood pressure, pulse rate, body temperature, and 
respirat ory rate should preferably be performed before blood draws are performed.
Rationale: For clarification on timing of procedures related to collecting vital signs.
Section 3.12, Chest X -Ray (CXR): Clarified language for assessment of CXR to rule out active T B.
Rationale: To clarify CXR procedures associated with TB assessment.
Section 3.18, Clinical Laboratory Tests:
Updated standard of care to be applied by the investigator for laboratory test values outside 
of the reference range related to AE reporting.
Rationale: To clarify when an abnormal laboratory test should be considered an AE .
•Updated disease flare definition from > 30 mm/hr to ≥30 mm/hr, indicated where the 
investigator and the independent ESR assessor should document the ESR result, and 
clarified that the ESR results will be entered by a person who is not doing the clinical 
assessment .
Rationale: Clarification about where to do cument communications between the laboratory 
assessor and the investigator regarding ESR ≥30 or < 30, clarification about who should 
enter the actual ESR values and when they should be entered (to reduce the risk of 
investigator bias).
•Updated pregnancy testing.
Rationale: For clarification on procedures related to pregnancy testing.
Indicated that for TB testing, the investigator has the responsibility to follow local guidelines 
in the detection and treatment of active or latent TB , Updated language for positive TB 
assessment.
Rationale: For clarification on procedures related to TB laboratory testing.
Indicated that for subjects with a negative TB test at Screening or most recent evaluation, an 
annual TB re -test will be performed if subject is still taking study drug.
Rationale: For clarification that re -test is only performed if subject is still taking study drug .
Section 4.1, Methods of Timing and Safety Assessment: added eCRFs for Bone Fracture and 
Retinal Detachment.
Rationale: To comply with health authority request .
Section 4.3, Reporting Adverse Events and Intercurrent Illnesses: Added contact for safety 
concerns.
Rationale: To align with appropriate safety contact information.
Section 5.1, Additional Contraception -Related Eligibility Criteria and Requirements for Canada : 
updated criteria to indicate that a female subject of childbearing potential must be practicing 2 
Page 73 of 155 
STUDY M16 -852  |  Version 7.0  |  EU CT 2023- 505476- 29-00
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.forms of contraception from Baseline through at least 30 days after the last dose of study drug, 
updated ages for postmenopausal def initions.
Rationale: For correction and internal consistency within the document. 
Updated description of "double barrier" methods of contraception to clarify that the double 
marrier method is not considered a highly effective method of contraception  
Rationale : To align with CTFG guidance. 
Added Section 5.3, Japan -Specific Requirements , added reference to Section 5.3 in Section 5.4.
Rationale: To align with requirements for study drugs for which safety information is reported in 
Japan.
Section 6.4, Selec tion and Timing of Dose for Each Subject: Updated language regarding how to 
handle an interruption of upadacitinib/matching PBO dosing > 14 consecutive days during the 
first 24 weeks or > 21 consecutive days after Week 24 .
Rationale : To advise discussion w ith TA MD before discontinuation .
In addition to the above modifications, this Amendment contains minor text edits as needed for 
consistency and clarity.
Page 74 of 155 