 
 
UTHSCSA tracking number: HSC20150321H  
 
15-321H, Bowden, Form BB, 03 -15-16, AMD  
Version 2: March 15, 2016  Comparative Effectiveness of Two Self -Assessment Tools : KIOS -Bipolar  or eMoods:  
A Randomized, Open 52 Week Study for Persons with Bipolar Disorder  
 
 
        C Bowden, V Singh, C Martinez, S McElroy , R El-Mallakh, J Mintz . 
 
Abstract/Project Summary  
 
A. Objecti ve: What we propose to do   
 
Bipolar  disorder (BD) is  a complex  chronic  illness  characterized  by recurrent,  often  dramatic  mood  changes.  Self-
management of BD is an important  component  of treatment, but is likewise  complex  and can be fraught  with 
difficulti es, including  misunderstanding  of the condition  and a lack of self-awareness.  Combined  with the 
nationwide  shortage  of mental healthcare  providers  and the advent  of the Affordable  Healthcare  Act, patients  are 
assuming  an increased  role in understanding  and managing  their chronic  conditions.  At the same  time, the 
emergence  of mobile  health  and computational tools  are engaging  patients  in self-management  by enabling  timely  
access  to information  and resources.  
 
The goal of this project  is to complete  the devel opment of a patient -centered  software  system and  mobile  app to 
assist in  managing  bipolar  disorder. In Phase  I, we developed  a novel  computational  tool known  as KIOS -Bipolar . 
Based  on concepts  from nonlinear  systems  (chaos) theory, KIOS -Bipolar  tracks  multiple interacting  symptoms  to 
determine  the precise  state  of a BD patient.  Once  the patient's  state  is identified  and the trajectory  of the patient is 
established, KIOS -Bipolar  produces  advice  specific  to the patient's  condition  to help manage  the course  of the 
disease.  To facilitate user convenience for  the software,  KIOS - Bipolar  was converted  to an online  tool with mobile  
access.  Twenty  bipolar  patients  evaluated  KIOS -Bipolar  in a twelve  week  field trial. No  technical problems  with the 
software  were  obser ved and results  showed  that patients  had significantly  more  reductions  in symptom severity 
than increases. The  development  of this innovative  tool to help patients  self-manage  BD has the potential  to 
profound ly impact  public  health  and achieve  significant  commercial  success.  
 
This Phase  II study  has the specific  aim of evaluat ion of KIOS -Bipolar in  a randomized , open 52 week 
effectiveness study of 12 0 bipolar subjects in current treatment at three socioeconomically diverse academic 
health sc ience centers. C oncurrent with this clinical effectiveness study, the research team, funded by the same 
NIH grant,will refine  prototype software and integrate  data security  and establish  quality  standards into the KIOS -
Bipolar system.  
 
 The clinical trial will: 
a. Assess  aggregate  time spent  in seven  primary clinical  states  of BD (remitted;     subsyndromal  
depression,  mania  or mixed  state;  and syndromal  depression,  mania  or mixed  state).  
b. Assess the weekly completion  of KIOS-Bipolar  and eMoods.  
c. Determine  indices  of patient  satisfaction  with the format, ease  of use, time required  and patient  
motivation  for continuing  use of the patient  tools  both during  the trial and following  completion.  
d. Determine  patient  satisfaction  with the clinical  information  on BD illness  trajectory and  recommendations  to 
facilitate  good  health  and effective  interventions.  Note that eMoods  does  not provide  this element  of information,  
therefore  no comparative  data will be feasible  for this one objective . 
e. Assess  patient  scored  life function  indices (Life Fu nction Questionnaire ( LFQ) over the 52 week  period  of the 
study.  
f. Assess the relationship  between  the 8 symptom  items  in K-B with relevant  items  rated  both by clinicians  and 
as self-assessments  by patients  at seven  time points (week  0, 8, 16, 24, 32, 40  and 52) in the study.  These  are times  
at which  clinical  care visits  will routinely occur, and therefore  will not add either to extra  burden  on the participants,  or 
extra  contact  time with staff. Subjects randomized  to eMoods  will be similarly scheduled,  with the correlations limited  
to those  feasible  with the eMoods  product.  Self-assessments  with the 27 item BISS -Self are routinely obtained  as 
part of regular treatment visits.  
 
 
UTHSCSA tracking number: HSC20150321H  
 
15-321H, Bowden, Form BB, 03 -15-16, AMD  
Version 2: March 15, 2016    
Table 1. Schema  for Randomized  Clinical  Trial  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 
clinician administered scale will be the 42 item Bipolar Inventory of Symptoms Scale ( BISS ), however  comparisons will 
be limited  to the symptom  areas  represented  in both K-B and eMoods,  e.g., depression  and mania  subscales;  
depression,  mania,  irritability and  anxiety domains .  The BISS Self  (BISS -S) is a 27item scale covering similar 
symptom s to the BISS, but answered as yes/no, rather than the 0 -4 range of the BISS.  The MINI is a structured 
diagnostic  interview providing current and lifetime ps ychiatric diagnoses, requiring approximately 20 minutes.  
g. Estimate  the utility of  ancillary features  of Kios-Bipolar  or eMoods.  These  features  include  capability to 
submit  to the investigative staff displays  of symptom  trajectories for the patient’s medical  record  and visual  displays  of 
selected  aspects  of the patient’s  illness/wellness.  No transmission of data to treating clinical staff will occur as 
component of this study.  
h. Assess  sensitivity of  K-B assessed  improvement  or worsening  by comparison  with asse ssment  by BISS -
Self and BISS -42. 
 
B. Sample  Size and Enrollment:  
One hundred twenty (120) participants, 50 at UTHSCSA  site, and 35 each at The University of Louisville 
Research Foundation, Inc.  and The University of Cincinnati, will be involved in the clin ical trial in Aim 2. All 
study participants will sign informed consent forms prior to being enrolled and will be recruited from the 
UTHSCSA, the University of Louisville or the University of Cincinnati.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Male  or female  outpatients  18 years of age or older  
2. Bipolar  I or II disorder  as assessed  by MINI 6.0 
3. In psychiatric  outpatient treatment at UTHSCSA,  University of Louisville,  or Lindner Center  of 
Hope, Mason  Ohio  
4. Currently  taking  mood stabilizer  or second  generation  antipsychotic  for 4 weeks  or longer  
5. Ability  to access  Kios-Bipolar  or eMoods  (via computer,  smartphone  or tablet ) 
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  
1. Unwilling  or unable  to comply  with study  requirements  
2. Drug/alcohol dependence  within  the past 30 days  
 
 
Early termination:  
 
 Participation  in the study will  be terminated  if a patient  has a score  of 4 on the BISS  suicide  item,  BISS -
Depression  Scale  ≥ 50, or BISS  Mania  Scale  ≥35 for 4 consecutive  weeks,  or if the treating  psychiatrist  determines 
that a patient  poses an  imminent  risk of self-harm.  
 
C. Hypotheses:  
 
a. Patients randomized  to KIOS - Bipolar  compared  with those  randomized  to eMoods  will have  a  higher  
proportion  of time in remitted  status,  lower  proportion  in syndromal  status (Manic,  depressed,  mixed)  and higher Week  0 1-7 8  9-15 16    17-51  24, 32, 40  52 RS 
MINI -6.0, Demographics/course  of illness  X         
K-TABS/eMoods  X X X X X X  X  
Life Functioning  Questionnaire  X  X  X    X  
BISS -42, X  X  X  X  X  
BISS Self -Assessment  X  X  X  X X X 
KIOS NIH Software Evaluation 
Form      X   X  
 
 
UTHSCSA tracking number: HSC20150321H  
 
15-321H, Bowden, Form BB, 03 -15-16, AMD  
Version 2: March 15, 2016  LFQ scores.   
b. Persistence  with use of KIOS- Bipolar  and eMoods  will not differ.  Persistence  is defined  as 1) the 
proportion  of subjects  who complete  weekly scheduled  use of the bipolar  self-assessment  scales  and 2) completion  
of the 52 week  self-assessment  protocol.  
c. The proportion  of on-time completion  of assessments  will not differ  between groups.  
d. Subject  satisfaction,  assessed  by qualitati ve questionnaires  completed  by subjects during  and 
principally shortly  following  completion  or discontinuation  of the trial, will not differ between  groups.   
e. LFQ subscales  will be associated  with superior outcomes for the KIOS-Bipolar group . 
f. Correlations  between  scores  on items  included  in KIOS - Bipolar  and similar  items  on the BISS  SR and 
the BISS  42 will be conducted.   Strength  of association  will be higher between  KIOS - Bipolar and BISS  
comparisons than  eMoods -BISS  comparisons.  
g. Aggregate  changes for the KIOS - Bipolar  items and  corresponding  eMoods  items  will indicate  greater 
proportions of decreased  scores  for KIOS - Bipolar    
 
 
D. Measures  of clinical  status  – BISS  and K-B 
 The BISS  (Bipolar  Inventory of Symptoms  Scale)  is a 42 item,  structured,  clinician -administered  rating  scale  
that has demonstrated  good  sensitivity to change  across  the life span.21-24 Unlike  traditional scales,  which  
focused  on inpatient  samples,  the BISS  was developed  with a focus  on outpatients.  The scale  yields  an 
overall  severity of  illness  score  and five domain  scores (for manic,  depressive,  anxious,  irritable,  and 
psychotic  elements,  with the latter established  in exploratory  factory  analyses).22 The psychometric 
characteristics  of the BISS  were  established  in studies  on over 400 patients in  all clinical  states  of BD. Table  
2 provides  the BISS  clinician -rated  items from which  the KIOS -BIPOLAR items  were  derived  and the KIOS -
BIPOLAR questions  that the patients  will answer.  The final design  for the user input  will be determined  in Aim 
1.1. 
 
Table  2. BISS  Item and Corresponding  KIOS -BIPOLAR   Questionnaire  
BISS  Item KIOS -BIPOLAR   Question  
Affective  Lability  Have  your emotions  shifted  fairly suddenly  at times?  
Sadness  Have  you felt depressed,  sad or down?  
Irritability  Have  you felt easily irritated,  angry  or resentful?  
Pessimism  Have  you been  discouraged,  pessimistic  or felt hopeless?  
Anxiousness  Have  you felt tense  or anxious?  
Less  Need  for Sleep  Were  there  nights  you needed  less sleep  than usual?  
Psychomotor  Slowing  Have  you felt slowed  down?  
Energetic  Have  you had more  energy  than usual  to do things?  
 
 
 
Software: Subjects assigned  to KIOS -Bipolar  will have  the app loaded  onto their preferred  device.  The program  is 
available  for iPhone  and Android  devices,  and accessible  on a pc. The research  coordinator  will demonstrate  the KIOS -
Bipolar  operation  with the subject  and ask the subject  if he/she  has any  questions  about  the procedures of the trial. A 
phone  number and  email  address will  be provided  to allow  the subject  to make  contact  if any question  arises  after 
leaving  the clinic.  The data entry procedure  will take less than  5 minutes per  session,  with most  subjects completing  
their entries  in 2 minutes.  
For participants who have been randomized to the eMoods App an additional procedu re will occur. After each 
completed weekly entry on eMoods, the participant will have the option to email the results to the Research 
Coordinator weekly or postpone sending data until their scheduled research visit . 
 
The subject  will be told that an email , text, or push  notification  reminder will be sent one day after a missed  scheduled  
assessment.  The participants phone number will be shared with a third -party (Twilio) solely for the purpose of reminding 
the participant to complete their questionnaire.   This information will only be used for the administration of the push 
notification and will be kept strictly confidential.  The participant will  not have   the option to opt out of the notification. For 
participants randomized to KIOS -Bipolar, a text message r eminder will be sent one day after a missed scheduled 
assessment. The participant's phone number will be added to New Patient  section in KIOS -Bipolar.     
 
 
UTHSCSA tracking number: HSC20150321H  
 
15-321H, Bowden, Form BB, 03 -15-16, AMD  
Version 2: March 15, 2016   
It should  be noted  that the Summary Statement  contained  a criticism  that email  reminders prior to expected  assessment  
days would  be a direct  intervention  that confounds weekly reporting  adherence.  Because  the reminder will  be sent after 
the scheduled  assessment  day, we are still able to judge  adherence  to the study schedule;  the response  to the 
notificat ions will provide  a relevant  secondary outcome  measure.  In addition,  many subjects in  the Field  Trial requested  
this feature,  which  will almost  certainly be  included  as an option  in the commercialized  version  of KIOS -Bipolar . 
     Study participants assign ed to eMoods  will also have  the software  downloaded  on their device  (Either Android  phone 
or computer) and the procedure  of demonstrating  the software  and providing  contact  information  described  above  will 
be followed.  In the case  that the IOS version  of eMoods  is not available  by the time the study begins,  the 
randomization  of subjects  will be stratified  by device  to ensure  equal  representation  in the treatment  groups.  
 
     Participation  in the study will  not impact  the patient’s  routine  clinical  care for his/her  bipolar condition.  However,  
some  subjects may want to discuss their KIOS -Bipolar  or eMoods  experience  with their psychiatrist  and/or 
psychologist,  and will be permitted  to do so. 
 
Participants randomized to their assigned group who are unable to c omplete their weekly entries based on the 
following criteria:  techni cal difficulties completing the  weekly entry, difficulty emailing data to Research 
Coordinator  (for eMoods group) , and any other t echnical issues that may arise throughout the course of th e study 
will have the option to switch to the other group . The participants who have been switched to the other group will 
have to complete a BISS self -report form  along with a weekly entry from the newly assigned group .  
 
Focus g roup(s): There will be an addition of one group at approximately Week 8. The group will have 
10participants and the focus of the group will be related to participants experience with mood charting . 
Recruitment for g roup 1 will consist of participants who are not currently enrolled in the 52 -week comparative 
study. One half of the group will be participants who have experienced with mood charting and the other half will 
be participants with no prior mood charting experience. T he focus of  the first group will consist of the participan ts 
experience with mood charts as well as polling the participants on their preferences for logging in, graphs, and 
other software features.  
 
Additionally, there will be a focus group at approximately Week 16. The focus group will consist of 10 participan ts 
who are currently randomized to the KIOS -Bipolar app. The focus of the second group will be related to their 
experience using the KIOS -Bipolar app along with suggestions for improvements. The participants will be polled 
on their preferences related to but not limited to logging in, graphs, advice, as well as other  KIOS -Bipolar software  
features.  
ASSESS KIOS -BIPOLAR OR eMOODS:  
 
a. At the beginning  of the study  subjects will be provided  preformatted  evaluation  sheets and  will be 
encouraged  to note observatio ns regarding  ease/benefits  of use, impediments to use, and suggestions for 
additional  features that  would  enhance  the utility of  KIOS -Bipolar   or eMoods  for sustained  health.  
b. We will ask the subjects to estimate  how completing  the KIOS -Bipola r /eMoods  asse ssments contributed  to 
their self-awareness,  attitude,  and overall  sense  of satisfaction  with their health  status.  
c. We will assess the sensitivity of  KIOS -Bipolar  to identify  improving  or worsening  by comparing  the 
concordance  between  subject -assessed  items  with staff -administered  BISS  items  that address similar  
symptoms.  
 
Plan  of analysis: The primary aims  of the analyses  are to investigate  patterns  of adherence  and attrition.  The term 
adherence  refers to the extent  to which  participants  follow  the weekly completion  of KIOS-Bipolar ’s  eight  pivotal  
symptoms  of bipolar  disorder. Adherence  will be measured  through  such  usage  indicators as  the proportion  of weeks 
completed  on time,  the proportion  completed  only with  follow -up prompts,  and the number  of weeks n ot submitted.  
Proportions of stable  trajectories or improving  trajectories are of primary interest.  With n=90  subjects  (which allows for 
as many as 30 of the enrolled 120 subjects to have met some criterion for early termination)  in the study  we will be able 
to estimate  any proportion  within  0.10 with 95% confidence.  For proportions  larger than  0.9 we will be 95% confident  we 
are within  0.06 of the true proportion.  For a trajectory  neither  improving  nor degrading  there  should  be a 0.5 proportion 
 
 
UTHSCSA tracking number: HSC20150321H  
 
15-321H, Bowden, Form BB, 03 -15-16, AMD  
Version 2: March 15, 2016  of each.  For any hypothesis test for a proportion  improving  or degrading,  i.e. not 0.5, we have  0.80 power  at two tail 
significance  of 0.05 to detect  0.65 different  from 0.5 with n=90  subjects.  For subgroups  of patients with  n=45  we can 
detect  0.71 different  from 0.5 and with n=30  we can detect  0.74 different  from 0.5. When  comparing  proportions of two 
subgroups  of subjects,  we will be 95% confident  that the difference  in proportions  of the two subgroups is  less than  0.25 
for subgroups of n=30  and smaller than  0.20 for subgroups  of size 40. If the proportions  are larger than  0.9 (i.e. less 
variable),  then we will be 95% confident  that the difference  in proportions of two subgroups  with n=30(45) is  less than 
0.15 (0.12).  
Assumptions needed  for each  analysis  will be exam ined to assure  they are reasonably well met and the 
conclusions  are valid.  End of study overall  improvement  or not  for each  measure  can be analyzed  with logistic  
regression  using  covariates  and predictors  of interest.  By focusing  analyses  on proportions  and changes in  trajectories,  
each  subject  will serve  as their own control  and trends in  improved  scores,  symptoms  and behavior  may be identified.  
Initially,  we will also assess  the effects  of site, ethnicity,  and bipolar  disorder  subtype  (BD I, BD II), but none of these  
factors will  be retained  in the final model  if they are not shown  to be significant  moderating  factors.  
The rate of dropout  at any given  time will be modeled  through  logistic regression  models,  with health,  
socioeconomic,  and treatment  factors  as explanatory variables . The impact  of quality of  life on dropout  will be 
assessed  similarly.  
 
Outcome  Measures  from  KIOS  Analytics: Knowledge  Base  performance  metrics will  be computed  to measure  
the effectiveness  of the content  provided  to patients.  These metrics  take several  forms  and are based  on changes  in the 
symptom  scores  for all subjects  in the field trial (see Phase  I Final  Report).  Changes in  the symptom  scores  provide  a 
global  measure  of efficacy.  Each  of these  measures  can be computed  as a function  of changes,  either over the course  
of the entire  field trial or at each  incremental  assessment.  This latter  approach  will provide  a measure  of effectiveness  
over time.  Other KIOS  analytic  methods will  reveal  which  specific  content  in the knowledge  base needs improvement.  
Behavioral  frequency  analysis  will show  which  patient  states  are entered  most  frequently.  Behavioral  transition  analysis  
will show  which  conditions  are precedents to undesirable  states.  
 
Implementation  of Clinical  Trial  Results  into Final Product:  The results of the randomized  trial will be used  to 
make  further refinements to KIOS -Bipolar . The KIOS -generated  results will  be used  to guide  changes to the knowledge  
base.  Suggestions  about  additional  features will  be considered  in developm ent of the commercialization  plans.  
ROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 RISKS TO HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
a. Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics, and Design  
 
     The collaborating sites are the UTHSCSA, the University of Louisville and the University of Cincinnat i.  
Under the direction of Dr. Bowden, Biomedical Development Corporation will create an identical set of  study 
binders containing source documents and case report forms for each of the study sites. Each site  will have a 
designated study coordinator who wi ll be responsible for obtaining, managing and protecting  the data. All study 
materials will be kept under lock and key. The study sites will be monitored  throughout the project period by 
BDC for study compliance, including a preliminary monitoring visit pr ior to the initiation of the trial to ensure that 
the study site is adequately equipped and staffed to perform  the trial.  

     The Federal Wide Assurance number for the UTHSCSA is FWA00005928. The Assurance of  
Compliance number for the UTHSCSA is IRB00000553. The Federal Wide Assurance number for the  
University of Louisville is FWA00002211. The Federal Wide Assurance number  for the University of  Cincinnati 
is 00003152. The Federal Wide  Assurance number for Biomedical Development Corporation  is FWA0000749.  
 
b. Sources of Materials  
▪Individuals enrolled into the study will be assigned study password -protected ID numbers.  
▪All information obtained from human volunteers will be utilized strictly for research purposes.  
 
 
UTHSCSA tracking number: HSC20150321H  
 
15-321H, Bowden, Form BB, 03 -15-16, AMD  
Version 2: March 15, 2016  Information to be collected includes: demographic data, MINI -6.0, self -reported symptoms via the KTABS  or 
eMoods (i.e., online questionnaire), Life Functioning Qu estionnaire, BISS and subjective  information regarding 
the user experience with the software.  
▪Information will be collected, handled and stored according to the HIPPA regulations and study  participants 
will be asked to read a Privacy Notice and sign a Research Authorization (HIPPA consent ).  Study participants 
will be given a copy of the signed c onsent  
form for his/her records.  
 
c. Potential Risks  
 
▪There are only minimal risks associated with participation in this  study. There is no intervention component 
in the trial.   None of the planned activities are likely to be stressful to the subjects. H owever, it is possible that a  
subject could worsen in a time frame between clinic treatment visits. We will convey the evidence of the  
person’s worsening to his/her psychiatrist or other therapist.  
 
d. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
 
Recruitment and Inf ormed Consent  
▪Participants will be individually recruited from the respective study sites. The methods of this research  as 
well as the Informed Consent Document and all recruiting materials will be approved by the  Institutional 
Review Boards at the UTHSCSA, University  of Louisville, and the University of Cincinnati,  respectively.  
▪Study volunteers will have a detailed discussion of the study requ irements and procedures with  Drs. 
Bowden, McElroy, El -Mallakh or the study coordinator at the respective sites. All informat ion regarding  the 
study procedures will be provided to the subjects in understandable layma n terms on an IRB  approved  
informed consent form. Participants will receive up to $600 for participation ( Baseline visit , Weeks 8, 16, 24, 
32, 40, and 52 at $ 10/appo intment plus the 52 weekly activities at $10/self -assessment ) for a total of up to 
$600 . Focus group participants will be compensated for their participation with a $20 local state voucher.  
 
At the UT Health Science Center, payment for study related proce dures will be paid through use of the 
Mastercard. Compensation will be automatically credited after completion of each study visit.   Name, address 
and date of birth will be shared with a third -party solely for the purposes of compensation processing.   This 
information will only be used for the administration of the compensation (ClinCard) and will be kept strictly 
confidential.   
  
In addition to the compensation on the card, the participant may also elect to receive study -related messages 
(text and/or email ).  
 
e. Protections Against Risk  
 
Minimal risk to subjects or subject’s privacy is anticipated. Nonetheless, we recognize the need for strict  
protection of confidentiality in this study. To address this, records of patients will be retained as required  by 
statute in locked files. All computer files will be password protected. Subjects will be identified in  common -use 
computer files by ID number only. Research reports and publications will report only  group data and not 
individual names. Identities of subjec ts will not be revealed in the publication or  presentation of any results 
from this project. All investigators and research staff at the respective  institutions have completed the 
requirements for human research subjects’ protection. All investigators  and research staff at BDC have 
completed the requirements for human subjects’ protection. The study  will be performed in accordance with 
HIPPA regulations and approved by the IRBs at the UTHSCSA,  the University of Louisville and the University 
of Cincinnati.  
 
 
UTHSCSA tracking number: HSC20150321H  
 
15-321H, Bowden, Form BB, 03 -15-16, AMD  
Version 2: March 15, 2016   
Participation in the study will be terminated if a patient has a score of 4 on the BISS suicide item, BISS  
Depression  Scale ≥ 50, or BISS Mania Scale ≥35, or if the treating psychiatrist  determines that a patient poses 
an imminent risk of self -harm.  
 
All subjects enrolled in the trial will have been under care of a psychiatrist at their respective institutions  prior to 
enrolling in the study. All subjects will continue to receive evidence -based care provided by  outstanding 
psychiatrists at the three sites. Participation in the study will not impact the patient’s routine  clinical care for 
his/her bipolar condition. The study’s planned visits  will generally be scheduled to  coincide with the patient’s 
regularly  scheduled clinic visits  both for convenience and  in order to not interfere with regular care.  
 
 
f. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Human Subjects and Others  
 
Study participants may benefit by becoming more aware of their changing symptoms and improving  their ability 
to manage and track thei r bipolar disorder.  
The results of the research may yield benefits to the class of persons with bipolar disorders, whose  
treatment interventions, both in research studies and in routine clinical settings, may be optimized and  made 
more effective consequent  to the utilization of the K -B recommended interventions.  
 
IMPORTANCE OF THE KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED  
 
▪Psychiatric investigators, health care providers and government officials have all recognized that  current 
guideline based treatments are limited in mini mally personalizing interventions based on  mediating variables 
that dynamically occur during treatment. The potential application of more  personalized and evidence based 
intervention strategies could reduce the functional and morbidity  burdens of bipolar d isorders, which are a 
significant U.S. public health problem.  
▪Subjects will be subject to only minimal risk, as the study contains no intervention component. The  minimal 
risks of the study seem reasonable in consideration of the potential that K -TABS has to  improve care of bipolar 
disorder and reduce healthcare uti lization and costs.   
 
DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
 
This Data and Safety Monitoring Plan is intended to ensure the safety of participants in the Clinical Trial  and 
the validity and integrity of the data and reporting. Biomedical Development Corporation (BDC) maintains  a 
chartered Independent Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) that will review the study prior to initiation.  
BDC is the sponsor for the Clinical Trial and also serves the role of data coordinator. The Clinical Trial is to be  
performed in  compliance within the guidelines of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the IRBs of the  
UTHSCSA, University of Louisville, and the University of Cincinnati. The Principal Investigator of the Clinical  
Trial (PI) is Charles Bowden, M.D.  
 
Monitoring the progress of the Clinical Trial  
 
  Responsibilities for Monitoring the Clinical Trial follow:  
 
1. The PI is responsible for continuously monitoring the conduct of the trial and is the primary  individual 
charged with identification and reporting of all AE a nd SAE occurrences.  
 
 
 
UTHSCSA tracking number: HSC20150321H  
 
15-321H, Bowden, Form BB, 03 -15-16, AMD  
Version 2: March 15, 2016  2. On site monitoring is also conducted by the Regulatory Manager at BDC who provides  systematic 
monitoring for the following central elements: protocol eligibility (direct source  documentation of 
eligibility as defined in the protocol), appropriateness of consent  documentation, and timeliness and 
accuracy of data, including the timeliness of reporting  adverse events and serious adverse events. 
Monitoring for central elements will be performed  on all subjects. Reports to BDC documenting th e 
central elements are generated at six month  intervals. Other monitoring reports are generated as 
needed or requested.  
 
 
3. Assuring Compliance with Requirements for Reporting Adverse  Events : All adverse events (AE) and 
serious adverse event (SAE) forms are submitted by the PI directly to  the IRB and BDC. BDC is 
responsible for submitting AE and SAE reports as required to the DSMB  and NIH including OHRP.  
 
Monitoring by the Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
 
The DSMB includes a minimum of four recognized  clinical investigators and two or more  representatives from 
the Sponsor including Gregg Siegel, President of BDC. The Board convenes  every six months to review 
materials. The validity of the data is based upon the Clinical Trial  infrastructure and the req uirements for 
primary monitoring by the PI and the Regulatory Manager as  summarized above. Reports of the DSMB are 
submitted independently to BDC and subsequently  forwarded to the IRB, with a copy to the Principal 
Investigator.   
ION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES  
We will endeavor to ensure that both sexes are adequately represented in the study. Based on epidemiologic  
studies (e.g. the Epidemiologic Catchment Area Program) and the composition of the patient population of the  
proposed sites, we anticipate that appr oximately 50% of the participants will be women.  
 
We plan to include representatives of all minority groups in the proposed research. We have specifically  
included sites with demonstrated ability to recruit underrepresented minority groups and will review recruitment  
and enrollment efforts periodically to ensure that we are making every effort possible to enroll a represe ntative 
sample. We expect to maintain or exceed 30% minority representation in the study. In particular, we expect  
that at least 15 % of s ubjects enrolled will be Hispanic and that at least 15 % will be African American.  
INCLUSION OF CHILDREN  
We are including children ages 18 -21. We will include only individuals 18 or older because we are not targeting  
a pediatric population (ages younger th an 18). Additionally, the proposed sites are adult outpatient clinics and  
thus, the principal investigators and study staff have expertise in treating adults. We anticipate that children  
ages 18 -21 will constitute approximately 5% of the sample.  
 
 
 