Detailed Protocol 1  ORGANIZATION OF DETAILED PROTOCOL  Title: Boston-Harvard Burn Injury Model System: Cortical modulation with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for neuropathic symptoms following burn injury.  Protocol #: 2012-p-001996 Date: 03/21/2016  I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  Pain and itch are two major long-term neuropathic symptoms that occur after burn injury, reported in as high as 70% of burn survivors with large burn injuries  (illustrated by collaborators Ryan[1] and Schneider[2], and others [3-11]). Psychological symptoms, including depression, anxiety, and PTS, are also a significant burden, affecting nearly 50% of burn survivors[12]. Furthermore, all the above complications play a large role in functional, psychosocial, and occupational outcomes [12-20], as illustrated by several of our collaborators [21-23]. Pain, itch, and psychological symptoms are primary causes of disability as well as significant barriers affecting burn survivors’ return to work, with 28% not employed at long term follow-up[15, 21]. The high prevalence rates of these complications underscore the ineffectiveness of current treatments [10, 24]. Additionally, there is a wide range of complications associated with current therapeutic approaches to pain, itch, and psychological symptoms, particularly with long-term use of narcotics and other medications [10, 24-28]. Thus there remains an unmet clinical need for safe and effective long-term treatments of these common burn injury problems.   Pain, itch, and psychological symptoms are processed by common neural circuits, despite having distinct underlying mechanisms. Each is associated with a disruption of normal brain processing and they can affect one another[29, 30]. For example, psychological symptoms often increase when pain is present[31-37]. Furthermore, specific neural areas have been identified that impact pain, itch, and emotional processing[38-40]. Thus, treatments that target these common circuits offer a new potential therapeutic avenue for treatment of these refractory symptoms.  A recent Burn Care State of the Science review discusses the significant impact of pain, itch, depression, PTS, and community reintegration on burn injury patients and identifies the need for additional research in these areas[41].  There are clinical and neurophysiologic associations between pain, itch and psychological impairments [31, 32, 34-36, 42]. From a clinical perspective, investigators determined that chronic pain patients were often depressed or anxious, depressed and anxious patients often experienced chronic pain, and anxious pain patients were often already depressed; these associations suggest the interconnected nature of these problematic outcomes commonly found in burn survivors [35, 36].  From a neurophysiological perspective, the connections between these symptoms are due to common neural structures that are highly activated in pain, itch, and psychological impairments. The insula, prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and amygdala are examples of neural areas associated with each condition. Several studies indicate this. For instance, Bar and colleagues [43] illustrated that there is a neural connection between emotional processing and pain; they assessed the effect of applied thermal pain on 13 patients with Major Depressive Disorder and 13 healthy 
Detailed Protocol 2  controls. In comparison to healthy controls, depressed patients displayed significantly greater activation in their MRI scans in specific areas of the brain (Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC), Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex, thalamus, and insula) and a strong increase in blood flow to these areas. Itch pathways are also shared with emotional and pain processing pathways [38]. In a study of 6 healthy subjects with clinically induced itch sensations on their forearms, MRI scans revealed significant activation of the primary sensory cortex areas, an area also associated with emotional processing. [38] These studies illustrate the common neural circuits of pain, itch and psychological symptoms. In summary, burn injury is associated with plastic changes in the brain that cause neural dysfunction (see figure); the presence of pain, itch, and/or psychological problems can amplify processing of each other due to shared neural structures. It is because of this dysfunction that current treatments are limited, as they do not directly target these shared areas of the brain [44, 45].    
                                                                                                                                                               The development of a safe and powerful method of noninvasive brain stimulation for treatment of pain using transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) can have beneficial effects in these clinical outcomes that have a significant impact on the burn population. Prior research has also shown its beneficial effects on neuropathic [46] (i.e. pain and itch) and psychological symptoms [47-53]. Our laboratory is a world leader in noninvasive brain stimulation methods, particularly for rehabilitation populations [47, 48, 50-52, 54-64]. This safe, low-cost technique reverses some of the maladaptive brain changes described above. Numerous studies, including many from our group, have confirmed the safety of this technique [51, 52, 54, 55, 65-70] and its effect to reduce pain[54-56, 60, 62]. We also performed a pilot study examining tDCS in burn patients with pain and found the intervention to be a safe, well-tolerated, and feasible intervention in this population 
Dysfunction of Neural Pathways in Burn 

Detailed Protocol 3  [46]. Finally, we have shown using EEG assessments that tDCS induces measureable changes in the brain (as proposed in this protocol)[59].   Contributions to the Field of Burn Injury Rehabilitation: Given encouraging preliminary results and a burgeoning interest in burn injury outcomes [5, 71, 72], there is a pressing need to assess the effects of tDCS on burn pain, itch, and psychological symptoms in an appropriately-designed clinical trial. The degree and duration of pain reduction itch reduction, and psychological symptom improvement after tDCS treatment remains unknown in this population, as well as the effects of repeated applications of tDCS. Additionally, there are no studies measuring the effects of tDCS on functional outcomes such as employment, community integration, and quality of life. This study will seek to fill these gaps in knowledge, and in the process will develop this device for clinical use. This study may also lead to future testing for portable use, such as at home. This would provide a cheap, simple, and safe noninvasive treatment for these common complications of burn injury.  tDCS: A Powerful Tool to Induce Plastic Changes in the Brain:  tDCS is a noninvasive method of brain stimulation, based on the application of a weak direct current to the scalp, which runs between an anode and cathode electrode . During tDCS treatment low amplitude direct current, applied via scalp electrodes, enters the brain. A sufficient current penetrates the brain to modify the potential of neurons to fire, despite shunting of current by the scalp and skull[73]. tDCS thus influences the level of cortical excitability and modulates the firing rate of neurons in targeted areas of the brain. When applied for a sufficient duration, tDCS can alter brain function beyond the stimulation period [74], creating lasting and cumulative effects. Recent human studies have confirmed that anodal stimulation increases cortical excitability while cathodal stimulation decreases it [66, 74, 75].   tDCS offers many advantages as a therapeutic tool: (1) Small-sized electrodes and stimulator allows portable home use for immobile patients unable to travel to appointments or those living in remote locations; (2) tDCS is a simple and inexpensive technique that can easily be translated for use in clinical practice; (3) tDCS induces current in cortical areas [73, 76, 77] that result in significant modulating effects. For instance, 13 minutes of tDCS stimulation can modify brain excitability for up to 2 hours[74, 78]; (4) tDCS is a safe technique; (5) Compared to pharmacological approaches, tDCS treatment targets focal brain areas, avoiding systemic adverse effects[79]; and (6) Anodal tDCS of a single brain region, the DLPFC, can induce clinically significant effects on three major symptom groups relevant to the burn population: pain, itch, and psychological symptoms.  EEG is another common noninvasive technique used for measuring electrical activity of the brain and continuous plastic changes. It provides an objective understanding of the effects of electrical activity on different areas of the brain, such as those induced by tDCS. EEG only measures brain activity and does not induce electrical current. This technique is noninvasive and has been used extensively in clinical practice for diagnosis of neurological conditions. There are no risks associated with EEG other than mild discomfort caused by the tightness of the net holding the electrodes in place, which can be easily adjusted  
Detailed Protocol 4  Given the critical need to develop new therapeutic approaches for patients suffering from chronic neuropathic pain due to burn injuries, the goal of this proposal is to investigate a novel therapeutic approach using brain stimulation to treat these patients.  II. SPECIFIC AIMS  The overall goal for this project is to develop a novel treatment using transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for patients with neuropathic burn symptoms such as pain or itching. Because the interventions to date for this group of patients (mainly drugs) have been marked by limited clinical effectiveness [14], the results of this study will represent an initial, significant step toward providing a new therapeutic alternative to this group of patients. Finally we will also collect neurophysiological data to understand further the mechanistic effects of this novel intervention and compare with the use of tDCS for other chronic pain syndromes.  The following aims will be explored in this study:  Aim 1 - To assess the effects of tDCS treatment on neuropathic symptoms: pain or itching – following burn injury. We will determine the magnitude of pain reduction with the modified Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) and itch severity/activity with the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) and 5-D Scales in active tDCS compared with sham tDCS. Our first hypothesis is that active tDCS will be associated with a larger pain or itching reduction assessed by BPI and Itch VAS/5-D.   Aim 2 - To assess the impact of tDCS treatment on the psychological outcomes of depression, PTS, and anxiety. We will determine the severity of depression with the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), PTS symptoms with the Impact of Event Scale Revised (IES-R), and anxiety symptoms with VAS for anxiety, in active versus placebo stimulation.  Our second hypothesis is active tDCS will have a greater effect on physiologic outcomes at 12 months as compared to placebo tDCS treatment in subjects with burn injury  and psychological symptoms.    Aim 3 - To assess the impact tDCS treatment on functional outcomes, including quality of life, community integration, sleep, and employment. Due to its effects on pain, itch, and psychological symptoms, we expect that tDCS treatment will result in significant gains in functional outcomes such as qualify of life, community integration, and employment. We will determine overall quality of life using the veterans RAND 36 Item Health Survey (VR-36), community integration using the Community Integration Questionnaire (CIQ), and return-to-work with a simple employment status questionnaire. We will evaluate sleep using Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), Insomnia Severity Scale (ISS), VAS sleep scale, and a short sleep diary. We will look at the difference between active versus placebo stimulation. Our hypothesis is if active tDCS will have a greater effect on functional outcomes at 12 months compared to placebo tDCS in subjects with burn injury pain.  Aim 4 - To determine the measurable brain changes that occur in burn pain and how they are impacted by tDCS vs. placebo treatment, using a device that quantifies cortical activity (EEG). We will examine brain plasticity changes with auditory and somatosensory Event Related Potentials (ERPs), using the EEG device as a neural activity marker. The somatosensory ERP will be the third secondary outcome. We hypothesize that active tDCS will decrease somatosensory ERP 
Detailed Protocol 5  amplitudes as compared to placebo in patients with burn pain and that changes in ERPs will correlate with other primary outcomes.  Aim 5 - To assess the cost/effectiveness of the impact of a 10-and 5 day period of tDCS treatment on cost per quality adjusted life saved using the pain visual analogue scale and VR-6D/VR utility metric as compared with sham tDCS.  III. MEDICAL MONITOR    Responsibilities of the Medical Monitor   The medical monitor is required to review all unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects or others, serious adverse events and all subject deaths associated with the protocol and provide an unbiased written report of the event.  At a minimum, the medical monitor must comment on the outcomes of the event or problem and in case of a serious adverse event or death, comment on the relationship to participation in the study.  The medical monitor must also indicate whether he/she concurs with the details of the report provided by the principal investigator.   This person must also be available by pager during the course of each study session.  Medical Monitor:   Nevena Zubcevik, DO Professor, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical School   IV. SUBJECT SELECTION  We will select 60 subjects that have burn injury and meet the following criteria:  Inclusion Criteria: 1. Providing informed consent to participate in the study 2. Age 18 or older 3. Burn injury with pain and/or itch that is moderate to severe (at least 4 on the visual analogue scale during the previous 3 weeks)  4. Burn injury occurred at least 3 weeks prior to enrollment. Patient must be discharged from acute inpatient care.  (Patient can be enrolled in either inpatient rehabilitation and/or outpatient care)  Exclusion Criteria: 1. Subjects with burns in scalp in the area of electrode placement (i.e. within 4 cm of the DLPFC and the reference site) as the electrode may cause irritation to the injuries 2. Psychiatric disorders that have led to hospitalization within the past 6 months or signs of suicidality 3. Learning disorders that may affect the patient’s ability to complete assessments. 4. Unstable conditions preventing travel to the study site 
Detailed Protocol 6  5. Current use of any anti-epileptic medications or dopaminergic medications known to reduce or inhibit the benefits of tDCS treatment: carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin 6. Contraindications to tDCS including implanted metal plates in the head or implanted brain medical devices 7. Pregnancy 8. History of other neurological conditions associated with structural anatomical changes (i.e. stroke, brain injury, Parkinson’s)   All subjects receiving outpatient and inpatient care at SRH are eligible for the study and will be sought to participate through publicity flyers. SRH provides outpatient services to the Boston area so we anticipate our recruitment procedures will reflect the distribution of races/ethnicities in the surrounding communities.   The safety of tDCS in the pregnant population has not been assessed and therefore pregnant women will be excluded. Women of child-bearing potential will be required to take a urine pregnancy test during screening process as well as at the end of each week of stimulation. If a subject becomes pregnant during the course of the study, she will be withdrawn from the study.  Concurrent Pain Medication Use: Although pain medications can confound the effects of tDCS, we consider it to be unethical to require subjects to discontinue pharmacologic treatment for pain over the course of the study as a criterion for enrollment. In addition, to increase generalizability, it is important to recruit subjects using pain medications. Therefore, we will require subjects (who enroll as an outpatient) to maintain stable doses of pain medications for at least 1 month prior to beginning the study and to not introduce new drugs during the trial. For those who enroll in the study as an inpatient, we understand that it may not be possible to keep stable doses of medications. Thus, we will notify the patient’s physician and nurses of his/her participation in the study to facilitate participation. We will track any medication changes as they may occur.  We will not withdraw the subject if he/she must change medications/dosage. However, if any subject begins on any medications as listed above in the exclusion criteria, he or she will be withdrawn from the study.    V. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  Potential subjects will be identified by the following sources:  1. Attending physicians may refer their neuropathic burn pain or itching patients to the study. Patients should not be in acute care hospital; subjects may be recruited from inpatient rehabilitation and outpatient care. We will provide collaborating physicians with study information sheets and flyers.  • Medical records may be pre-screened to identify potential subjects to be seen by collaborating physicians in-office, such that the approved recruitment materials can be provided to the physician (i.e., study letter and information summary sheet) prior to the scheduled appointment. Study staff will not contact potential subjects directly.  Collaborating physicians will provide the prospective subjects with the 
Detailed Protocol 7  approved study material, and encourage prospective subjects to contact a co-investigator on this study, if they have interest or questions regarding the trial. 2. Flyers posted in the outpatient specialist clinics, and around the Boston area. 3. Internet advertisements posted on websites. 4. Via the Partners Research Patient Data Registry (RPDR)  5. We will register this study on ClinicalTrials.gov. 6. Patients who agree to be contacted for research through the National Database portion of the BH-BIMS Model System 7. Email distribution lists   Eligible subjects will contact or give permission to be contacted by a co-investigator to obtain more information about the study and give informed consent. At the first point of contact (usually a phone call), study co-investigator will administer a phone screening questionnaire, which will involve some sensitive medical information. Once the phone screening process is complete, the information gathered by the co-investigator will be taken to the PI of the study for further review. Additionally, the consent form and other study materials will be sent to the subject in advance, so that they may consider the details of the study prior to enrollment. Once the PI agrees that the subject is thus far eligible, the subject will then again be reached to schedule their first visit. Data obtained from screening will be stored in a locked filing cabinet in the lab.  Informed consent will be obtained by an investigator (not involved in the subject’s care) at SRH. The subject will meet with a co-investigator. The test procedures will be described and the testing equipment will be shown to the subject. A co-investigator will clearly explain all the procedures and risks of the testing outlined in the consent form. The study will be divided into three parts: Part I (Visit 1), Part II (Visit 2-14), and Part III (Visit 15-23). Subjects will consent to participate to each part one at a time. It will be explained to them that they will have the option to enroll in later parts of the study if they desire. Completion of each preceding part of the study will be required prior to enrollment into the next part.   A separate consent form will be needed for each three parts of the enrollment. For each part, the subject will be given an hour to consider their decision and will be encouraged to ask questions, both during the initial interview and throughout the study. The PI or a co-investigator will answer any questions regarding the study at the time consent is given.  Once enrolled, the subject may pause or terminate his/her participation at any time during the study.  Informed Consent Procedure:  The following outlines the consenting process (also see diagram in following page):  • Part I: Subjects will be first presented with the option to enroll into Part I (Visit1) only of the study. They will be explained that at the completion of Part I, they retain the ability to decline or further enroll into Part II (Visits 2-14) and then Part II (Visits 15-23). The study visit of Part I will be fully explained as well as a summary of what will happen in Parts II and III should they decide to continue and the overall purpose of the study. They will sign a consent form for this phase of the study (Part I) 
Detailed Protocol 8  • Part II: For subjects continuing to Part II, they will be told at this completion of this part, they retain the ability to decline or further enroll into Part III (Visits 15-23). Each study visit of Part II will be fully explained as well as a summary of what will happen in Parts III should they decide to continue and the overall purpose of the study. They will sign a separate consent form for this phase of the study (Part II). • Part III: At the completion of Part II, subjects will again be presented to either decline further participation or enroll into Part III (V15-V23) of the study. The study visits of Part II will be fully explained and the overall purpose of the study. They will sign a separate consent form for this phase of the study (Part II. 
   VI. STUDY PROCEDURES  

Detailed Protocol 9  We will select sixty participants that have burn injury and meet the inclusion criteria proposed. Study visits will take place at either Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital (SRH) or Spaulding Rehabilitation Network Research Institute (SRN-RI). Subjects will be thoroughly informed of their study visit location prior to enrollment.  Please note: for subjects who enroll as inpatient into the study, we will coordinate with the appropriate care outlets to ensure that the procedures of the study will not interfere with their standard of care. This includes, but is not limited to: physicians, therapists and nurses working with the patient. We will schedule inpatients as their clinical schedule allows – preferably after 3pm – unless the patient specifies otherwise. We will also attempt to target patients toward the end of their rehab stay when they are less medically complicated (ex. fewer changes in medications/treatments etc.) and may be more independent in their travel. When possible/feasible, we will also complete study visits in the patients’ room in order to limit time off of the floor.  Subjects will receive either (i) active tDCS; or (ii) sham tDCS in a randomized double blind design. Randomization assignment will be kept in a locked cabinet accessible only to the unblinded study investigator.   The study will occur in three parts, where the subject consents to Part I (Visit 1), then if they choose to continue, they may consent to Part II (Visits 2-14). After completion of Part II, they may then choose to consent to Part III (Visits 15-23).   If the subject receives sham stimulation over his/her participation, he/she may re-enroll to an open-label portion of the study to receive 10 sessions of active tDCS stimulation.  Part I Study Flow: o 1 Visit (Baseline) only   Part II Study Flow: o 10 sessions of tDCS stimulation over 2 weeks o 3 Follow-up visits (over a period of about 2 months) – at approximately 2, 4 and 8 weeks after the first 10 sessions of stimulation  Part III Study Flow: o 5 sessions of tDCS over 1 week o 3 Follow-up visits (over a period of about 2 months) – at approximately 2, 4, and 8 weeks after the final 5 sessions of stimulation. o 1 Final Follow-up visit at about 12 months after you enroll in Part I of the study.   Pre-screening Procedures: During the pre-screening process, the subject will contact a co-investigator of the study by phone. During this call, the co-investigator will discuss in greater depth the details of the study. In the privacy of the laboratory, the co-investigator will ask the subject questions from the following: 1) Phone screening questionnaire 
Detailed Protocol 10  2) tDCS contraindications checklist  If a subject indicates feelings of suicide during screening (responds yes to the question “Do you have feelings of suicide?”), the subject will be provided with information on how to contact the MGH ED Acute Psychiatry Service.   Once this information is collected, the co-investigator will consult with the principal investigator, who will give final approval for the subject to come to Spaulding for the screening procedure. The pre-screening process will last approximately half an hour.   Detailed Study Outline:  Part I Visit (V1)  Visit 1 (approx. 2 hours) Screening and Baseline  Screening Procedures: a review of inclusion/exclusion criteria will be conducted to determine the subject’s eligibility for enrollment. Study procedures will be reviewed with the subject, and documentation of informed consent for Part I will be obtained. During screening the following procedures will be completed:  • Discuss study-specific procedures with the subject  • Review inclusion and exclusion criteria  • Obtain a signed and dated consent form. • Urine pregnancy exam (if applicable) • Randomization   Randomization: Subjects will be randomized to either receive active or sham tDCS treatment through a randomization approach using random blocks of 4 and 6.  Stimulation assignment will be concealed from patients, clinicians, and research staff.  Baseline Assessment: If the subject is found to be eligible through the screening and consent process, and enrolls in the study, the following baseline assessments will take place during this visit:  o Demographic Data Collection o Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for anxiety o Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) o Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for itching severity and activity o For patients reporting itch, we will also use the Questionnaire for pruritus assessment 5-D Itch scale [80]  o Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) o Impact of Event Scale  Revised (IES-R) o Veterans RAND 36 Item health survey (VR-36) 
Detailed Protocol 11  o Community Integration Questionnaire o Primary and Secondary Employment status o Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) o Insomnia Severity Scale (ISS) o VAS Sleep o Measurement of brain changes using EEG to quantify the cortical activity  Part II Visits (V2 through V14)  Visit 2-11 (approx. 1 hour) Stimulation Visits  Before the stimulation session, the subject will complete:  o Explain and give the subjects a pain medication diary which they will keep for the duration of the study o Review Pain Medication Diary [Visit 11 only] o Review Sleep, pain and/or itch Diary [Visit 11 only] o Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for anxiety  [Visit 11 only] o Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) [Visit 11 only] o For patients reporting itch, we will also use the Questionnaire for pruritus assessment 5-D Itch scale [Visit 11 only] o Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) [Visit 11 only] o Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for itching severity and activity [Visit 11 only]  Stimulation Session: - Subjects will be randomly allocated to receive either active or sham tDCS • Active Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS): Stimulation will occur with the anodal electrode placed over the primary motor cortex (contralateral to the most (or predominant) painful side) and the cathode will be placed over the contralateral supra-orbital area. The primary motor cortex will be localized using the 10/20 EEG system (C3 or C4) and this is a reliable method for the technique of tDCS [54]. This is the montage that had positive results in two trials using tDCS to treat chronic pain [54, 81]. In active tDCS, 2 mA of transcranial direct current stimulation will be applied for 20 minutes. The electrodes will have the size of 35cm2 each. Furthermore, current intensity will be gradually increased at the beginning of the session, and decreased at the end of the session to diminish its perception. • Sham tDCS: For sham tDCS, the same montage will be used; however current will be applied only for 30 seconds – It should be noted that less than 3 minutes of tDCS induces no effects on cortical excitability (Nitsche et al., 2000) and also using 30 seconds of sham is a reliable method of blinding as shown by a randomized controlled study [82].  After the stimulation, the subject will complete: • tDCS Side Effects Questionnaire  Visit 12-14 (approx. 1 ½ hour) 
Detailed Protocol 12  Follow-up Visits – will occur at 2 weeks (+/- 7 days), 4 weeks (+/- 10 days), and 8 weeks (+/- 10 days) post-stimulation  During these visits, the subject will complete: o Review Pain Medication Diary o Review Sleep Diary [Visit 12 only] o Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for anxiety   o Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) o Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for itching severity and activity   o For patients reporting itch, we will also use the Questionnaire for pruritus assessment 5-D Itch scale o Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) o Veterans RAND 36 Item health survey (VR-36) o Impact of Event Scale  Revised (IES-R) o Community Integration Questionnaire o Primary and Secondary Employment status o Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) [Visit 12 only] o Insomnia Severity Scale (ISS) [Visit 12 only] o VAS Sleep [Visit 12 only] o EEG  Part III visits (V15 through V23)  Visit 15-19 (approx. 1 hour) Stimulation Visits  Before the stimulation session, the subject will complete: o Review Pain Medication Diary [Visit 19 only] o Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for anxiety  [Visit 19 only] o Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) [Visit 19 only] o Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) [Visit 19 only] o Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for itching severity and activity  [Visit 19 only]  o For patients reporting itch, we will also use the Questionnaire for pruritus assessment 5-D Itch scale [Visit 19 only]  Stimulation Session: The subject will undergo 20 minutes of tDCS stimulation (either active or sham)  After the stimulation session, the subject will complete: o Adverse Effects Questionnaire Validation of blinding [Visit 19 only] o tDCS Side Effects Questionnaire  Visit 20-23 (approx. 1½ hour) Follow-up Visits – will occur at 2 weeks (+/- 7 days), 4 weeks (+/- 10 days), and 8 weeks (+/- 10 days) post-stimulation. Visit 23 occurs 52 weeks post-enrollment (+/- 1 month). During these visits, the subject will complete: 
Detailed Protocol 13  o Review Pain Medication Diary o Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for anxiety   o Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) o Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for itching severity and activity   o For patients reporting itch, we will also use the Questionnaire for pruritus assessment 5-D Itch scale o Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) o Veterans RAND 36 Item health survey (VR-36) o Impact of Event Scale  Revised (IES-R) o Community Integration Questionnaire o Primary and Secondary Employment status o EEG  Summary of Study visits  Part I Part II of Trial Part III of Trial Baseline Stimulation Follow-up Stimulation Follow-Up V1 V2-10 V11 V12-14 V15 -18 V19 V20-23 Consent/Screening,  Demographic data X       Visual Analog Scale for anxiety X  X X  X  Brief Pain Inventory X  X X  X X Visual Analog Scale for itch severity and activity (for patients reporting itch only ) X  X X  X X 5-D scale (for patients reporting itching only) X  X X  X X Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) X  X X  X X Impact of Event Scale Revised (IES- R) X   X   X Veterans RAND 36 item Health Survey (VR-36) X   X   X Community Integration Questionnaire (CIQ) X   X   X Primary and Secondary Employment status X    X   X Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) X   X  (V12 only)    Insomnia Severity Index X   X  (V12 only)    VAS Sleep X   X  (V12 only)    Sleep, pain and/or itch diary (to review)  X X X  (V12 only)    Medical History Form X       tDCS stimulation & Side Effects  X X  X X  Blinding Assessment      X  Pain Medication Diary (to review) X  X X  X X Assessment of cortical activity (EEG) X   X   X Approximate Visit Time 2 hours 1 hour 1 ½ hours 1 hour 1 ½ hours 
Detailed Protocol 14   DESCRIPTION OF ASSESSMENTS  Demographic Assessment: We will record the following baseline characteristics: age, sex, race/ethnicity and level of education.  VAS for Anxiety: This is a self-evaluation scale that ranges from 0 to 10, where 0 means no anxiety and 10 means the worst anxiety ever. This scale is used extensively in our tDCS studies [46, 54-56, 60, 62].  Modified Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) – main outcome: The BPI is a short self-assessment questionnaire that provides information on various dimensions of pain including how pain developed, the types of pain a patient experiences, and time of day pain is experienced, as well as current ways of alleviating pain [83]. The BPI also consists of the VAS Pain scale, a simple 10- point scale (0 = ‘‘no pain’’, 10 = ‘‘pain as bad as you can imagine’’) measuring a patients’ worst pain and least pain, on average and at present time. The Brief Pain Inventory provides information on the intensity of pain (the sensory dimension) as well as the degree to which pain interferes with function (the reactive dimension). According to several previous studies on pain in spinal cord injury, the BPI is an effective measure, as shown by both our group [54] and other studies [84]  Itching Severity: We will measure severity of itching using a VAS for itching severity. This is a 0 to 10 scale, where 0 indicates no intensity and a 10 indicates unbearable intensity of itching. This scale has been previously used in a study investigating treatment of refractory itching in burn patients. We will also have subjects keep a record of itching/pain severity using this scale in a diary through visit 12.  Itching Activity: We will also measure scratching activity using VAS for scratching activity. This is a 0 to 10 scale, where 0 indicates no activity of scratching and a 10 indicates frequent scratching activity. This scale has been previously used in a study investigating treatment of refractory itching in burn patients. We will also have subjects keep a record of itching/pain activity using this scale in a diary through visit 12.   5-D Itch scale: We will use this scale to measure five dimensions of itch: degree, duration, disability, and distribution. It is a valid and reliable for measuring itch and changes in itch over time  Beck Depression Inventory (BDI): The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) is a 21-item test presented in multiple-choice format that measures the presence of and the degree of depression in adults [85]. If an enrolled subject gives a response of a of 1, 2 or 3 on question 9 on the BDI, the subject will be withdrawn from the study and the medical coverage will be contacted immediately by research staff to provide further evaluation and action to protect the subject (i.e. if the subject needs to be escorted or referred to the MGH ED Acute Psychiatry Service).   Impact of Event Scale Revised (IES-R): This 22-item scale is designed to measure severity of PTS symptoms associated with a traumatic event. These symptoms correspond to the symptoms 
Detailed Protocol 15  contained within the DSM-IV. Subjects are asked to rate their level of distress associated with the event on a 0-4 scale (0 means not at all distressed, 4 means extremely distressed). This scale has been extensively validated[86]  Veterans RAND 36 Item Health Survey (VR-36): The VR-36 was developed by our collaborators [87]. This survey was developed from the Veterans Health Study and includes both physical and psychological domains as a measure of overall quality of life. There are eight domains total including: bodily pain, role limitations due to physical problems, physical functioning, general health perception, vitality, social functioning, and role limitations due to mental health issues. This measure is valid and reliable[87].    Community Integration Questionnaire (CIQ): This instrument measures home integration competency, social integration, and productive activity[88]. It assesses levels of independence and interdependence. It includes questions about leisure activities, social interactions, travel/mobility, and daily activities; it contains a rating scale of how easily these items are accomplished (i.e. often/never, done alone/done with someone else, full time/not applicable).  This assessment has been validated for use[88].  Primary and Secondary Employment Status: As part of the vocational sub-aim of this study, we will assess the employment status, and in particular the intention to seek employment, of each subject. Codes include: unemployed, unemployed but searching for work, part time or full time student, employed, or retired. These are the same employment rating scale codes used already in the model systems database.  Sleep Assessments: We will measure sleep outcomes using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Insomnia Severity Scale, and VAS for sleep. We will also have the subjects keep a very short diary looking at sleep for the first 4 weeks of the study.  Medication Use Questionnaire and Diary: We will obtain a medication use history at study entry using a standardized questionnaire similar to that used in our prior tDCS studies, and update this information at each subsequent visit. We will also monitor patient medication throughout the course of the study using a subject Medication Diary. Participants will be required to record medications daily in a pain medication diary. Participants will be instructed to keep the pain medication diary throughout the baseline, treatment, and follow-up period. This diary will be maintained until completion of the study.  tDCS Stimulation Side Effects Questionnaire: At each stimulation session, subjects will complete a questionnaire to evaluate potential adverse effects of tDCS (tingling, burning sensation, headache, neck pain, mood alterations) on a 5-point scale. The scale will also be administered at follow-up. Subjects will be asked whether they have experienced any side effects in an open-ended manner and they will be specifically asked about headache, neck pain, scalp pain, burning sensation, tingling, skin redness, sleepiness, trouble concentrating, and acute mood change. If any side effects are reported, the degree of relatedness to the tDCS intervention will be assessed.  
Detailed Protocol 16  Validation of blinding: This questionnaire asks the rater and subjects whether treatment was sham or active tDCS. Respondents will rate their level of confidence for their response on a scale of 0 to 5, with 0 representing no confidence and 5 representing total confidence.  Cortical activity assessment with electroencephalogram (EEG): EEG activity will be assessed in all participants using standardized procedures EEG will be sampled using an electrode cap, which places the electrodes in the standard 10-20 international placement system.  Ground electrode is built into the cap and will be at site AFZ.  All electrodes are recorded as active so that various montages may be examined post recording for accuracy of data inclusion.  EEG analysis will be performed with a linked ear reference montage and a weighted average reference montage.  In addition to baseline data, the subject will complete two tasks for measurement of event related potentials.   VII. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  As study outcomes will be measured at baseline and several timepoints up to 12 months (post-enrollment), continuous and categorical outcomes will be analyzed by methods of longitudinal analysis using generalized estimating equations with an unrestricted covariance matrix, to estimate model parameters and test hypotheses. Tests of equality of the change from baseline to 12 months in the two treatment groups will be based on the estimate of the time (12 months versus baseline) by treatment interaction. This will allow participants who are seen at some follow-up visits but not at 12 months to contribute to the analysis. Time to event variables such as time to return-to-work will be analyzed by proportional hazards regression and Kaplan Meier estimation of time to event distributions. Midway through the study, a power analysis will be performed to reassess the sample size needed to successfully complete this project. In this analysis, we will only look at the variability parameters (variance) and compare it to the one estimated before the study. We will not look at the effect estimates and therefore do not anticipate Type I error increase.  This power analysis will be performed by a staff member (Co-Investigator) not involved with the analysis and conduct of the study. All blinded staff members will remain blinded. The primary endpoint for this study is pain intensity as measured by the BPI. The study will have three secondary endpoints: itch as measured by the VAS scale, depression as measured by BDI and neural activity changes measured by somatosensory ERPs. These secondary outcomes represent three domains in which tDCS are anticipated to be effective. The same analytic approach will be employed in the analysis of the primary and secondary outcomes. For the outcomes, exploratory univariate analysis comparing active vs. placebo tDCS will be conducted. If a significant treatment effect is detected, similar adjusted longitudinal regression analysis will be performed; however these analyses will be considered hypothesis generating a p values interpreted cautiously given the increased likelihood of a false positive result given the false positive problem.  The sample size was chosen to test the null hypothesis of no treatment on the BPI with a power of 0.8 to detect a clinically meaningful treatment effect. We specified a two sided Type 1 error rate of 0.05 for all analyses. Assuming that the between-patient standard deviation of BPI from baseline 
Detailed Protocol 17  to 12 months will be 1.2, a completed sample size of 52 will achieve power of 0.8 to detect a difference in mean change of BPI between treatment groups of 0.96, that is, an effect size of 0.8. Anticipating that retention will be sufficient to achieve at least 85% of the precision provided by complete follow-up of all participants, the study will enroll 60 participants. For the secondary endpoints, assuming no adjustment for multiple comparisons, the study will again have power of 0.8 to detect effect size of 0.8.  All primary analyses will employ the intent-to-treat approach.  If there is appreciable non-adherence to the tDCS treatment protocol, exploratory analyses based on per-protocol methods will also be performed.  In multivariate analysis, we will adjust for important baseline variables, including medication use, age and baseline clinical severity using regression models.   In exploratory analyses, we will employ structural equation modeling[89] to investigate the extent to which effects of treatment on pain, itch, and psychological outcomes are mediated through shared pathways represented by latent variables.  Mediation analysis[90] will be employed to investigate whether changes in pain are due to direct effects from tDCS or indirect tDCS-induced changes in psychological and functional outcomes (see figure, regarding Mediation Analysis—MacKinnon 2007[90]). A direct effect of tDCS on pain is implied if the treatment effect (active vs. placebo tDCS) cannot be substantially explained by changes in psychological or functional outcomes.     Data forms and questionnaires will be coded in a standardized manner, and double-entered into the Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap). The PI will oversee quality assurance of forms and study databases. Analyses will be conducted using SAS 9.3 and Stata 11.  We plan to calculate an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of the costs in dollars per unit of health gained or QALY gained for each of the arms. We can compare the difference of the differences of the two arms using the ICER for the RCT (tDCS treatment as compared with Sham tDCS). Separate stratified analysis also will be done for a 10- and a 5-day period of tDCS treatment versus the SHAM tDCS.  We plan to use dual boot strap analysis to assess stochastic variation along with a Bayesian sensitivity analysis to assess additional sources of error or bias in outcomes and cost.  If, as is likely, tDCS treatment compared to SHAM tDCS  therapy offers better outcome at higher cost, at least in some of the replicates in the sensitivity analyses, then the question will arise as to whether tDCS treatment is cost-effective.  This would seem to be the cost if most of the time the ICER is below an agreed to society threshold.  However, such a formal threshold does not exist, and is a policy rather than a societal question.  This can be addressed in a cost-effectiveness acceptability curve (Briggs et al. 1998).  In this analysis the threshold for a service being considered cost-effective is varied on the x axis and the probability of being cost effective on the y axis.  This graph can be formed for both the dual bootstrap analysis and the Bayesian sensitivity analysis (Claxton et al. 2005). This will permit us to determine the probability that tDCS treatment offers good value for any threshold for an ICER to be considered cost-effective.   VIII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation 
Detailed Protocol 18  This is a technique that poses a non-significant risk to subjects. The safety of this technique has been addressed and tested by multiple researchers (e.g., Hummel, et al., (Hummel and Cohen, 2005); Fregni, et. al., (Fregni et al., 2006a, Iyer et al., 2005); Nitsche, et al., (Nitsche et al., 2003c, Nitsche et al., 2003b, Nitsche et al., 2003a), (Nitsche et al., 2004); Priori, et al., (Priori, 2003)) who have concluded that tDCS, as applied in a manner similar to our proposed protocol, induces only temporary mood, cognitive / motor effects, and no negative side effects. More than 30 research studies involving hundreds of subjects have been published using tDCS. Hundreds more subjects have undergone tDCS for unpublished pilot research (Nitsche et al., 2003c). No undesirable or long-lasting effects have been reported, nor have any subjects reportedly abandoned a study due to discomfort. The most common side effects according to a recent consensus are: headache, dizziness, nausea, itchy sensation as well as irritation under the area of the electrodes (Nitsche et al., 2008).  Researchers at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), Iyer et al., (2005) (Iyer et al., 2005) conducted a safety study on tDCS, investigating 20-minute sessions of 1 mA and 2 mA current stimulation with healthy controls (n=103). No negative effects were identified. Nitsche and colleagues (2004) found no measurable structural changes in brain tissue due to tDCS (Nitsche et al., 2004).   Finally, two recent studies showed that several sessions of tDCS are safe to be used in chronic pain syndromes such as fibromyalgia and spinal cord injury (Fregni et al., 2006c), (Fregni et al., 2006a). Thus, a growing body of research from different laboratories has shown that tDCS is a safe, noninvasive and painless technique for modulating neural excitability, with measurable but only transient effects. The protocol described here uses stimulation levels that fall well within safety limits established by basic research investigating neural tissue damage, as well as numerous studies applying tDCS with human subjects (Nitsche et al., 2003c), (McCreery et al., 1990a), (McCreery et al., 1990b), (Yuen et al., 1981). In addition, we have performed several studies in PD using tDCS and did not find adverse effects associated with this technique [91, 92].  Questionnaires All questionnaires will be administered in the privacy of a closed lab. If subjects feel uncomfortable in answering any of the questions they may stop the study at any time.  Electroencephalography (EEG): The EEG test is performed to measure the electrical activity in the brain and to examine the dynamic changes. It also allows for better understanding of the effects of electrical activity generated in different areas of the brain. EEG only measures brain activity and does not induce electrical current in the brain. It is non-invasive and has been used extensively in clinical practice for diagnosis or neurological conditions such as epilepsy. There are no risks associated with EEG other than a mild discomfort caused by the tightness of the net. The investigator will adjust the net to allow for the comfort of the subject.   
Detailed Protocol 19  IX. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  The knowledge will be valuable to burn injury patients and their family members, physicians who treat burn patients, and community members. The results of these studies may benefit subsequent future subjects if tDCS proves effective in improving the perception of subjects’ neuropathic symptoms. We envision that in the near future the information obtained from the proposed research will provide a better understanding for chronic burn pain.   X. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  Safety will be monitored by tDCS Adverse Effects Questionnaire.  Adverse events, data, and procedures will be reviewed by Dr Fregni and his team.  All expected and unexpected adverse outcomes will be reported to the IRB according to the Adverse Event Reporting guidelines.  A trained co-investigator on the study will administer the tDCS stimulation, sensory exams and other evaluations. Prior to performing study procedures, the study staff member was trained in the techniques of tDCS as well as all aspects of the evaluations. This study staff member was then evaluated by the PI of the study. The PI has given confirmation that the co-investigator is qualified to administer the stimulation and the evaluations.  All procedures in the Neuromodulation Center will be performed by research personnel having Basic Life Support (BLS) certification.  All staff performing study procedures must have reviewed and understand hospital and building 79-96 emergency procedures.  Additionally,  a one-sheet medical information summary, highlighting important medical issues (pertinent PMH, medications, allergies, functional limitation/neurologic deficits, emergency contact, PCP) will be available for each patient participating as the initial page of their study binder. Therefore, in case of emergency, the clinician will have this information easily accessible.  Emergency Procedure Plan  Testing of research subjects in experiments from the Neuromodulation Center will be conducted in two sites (79-96 Neuromodulation Center and SRH). Subjects will be preferentially tested at SRH when equipment for testing and stimulation allows.  Stimulation sessions will take place in 79/96 if there is an equipment restriction or scheduling conflict that would affect the scientific validity of the protocol (ie, would cause a missed visit during the 2 weeks of daily stimulation visits). All assessment based visits will be conducted in 79/96 (under the coverage plan explained below) as these tests require sensitive equipment which cannot be moved between 79/96-SRH after having already been calibrated and tested here.   79-96 Neuromodulation testing  Testing in the 79-96 building will take place with in-house licensed clinicians available (physician or RN). To ensure that coverage is available, one of the coordinators of the Neuromodulation lab will send out weekly e-mails to in-house clinicians to confirm their schedules for the following 
Detailed Protocol 20  week.  Additionally, daily e-mails will be sent to all laboratory members with the medical coverage schedule for the day. The clinicians will be copied on these daily e-mails, and thus can let the Neuromodulation lab know if something has changed in their schedule. Finally, these weekly schedules will be posted on a white board in the main reception area of the lab so that all staff may readily see who is available when.   Should an emergency arise during stimulation that requires immediate medical attention, the investigator will use the established emergency procedures for 79/96. This includes alerting the in-house clinician, dialing the emergency number (9-911) and reporting the nature and location of the medical emergency. Staff will assist the clinician as directed until EMS arrives. After using this system, the investigator will follow the Laboratory and IRB policies for adverse event reporting, including notification of the Principal Investigator and the Medical Monitor and filing of an adverse event report.  Should any minor incidents occur during stimulation that do not require immediate medical attention, the PI or licensed physician will be contacted to assess these issues and initiate appropriate action.   SRH testing – Research Floor Whenever is possible, testing in SRH will be prioritized especially for patients participating in the stimulation sessions, when equipment permits. Coverage for emergencies during hospital testing (SRH) is the emergency response team.  The team is activated by dialing 8-6666, giving location and type of emergency.  If due to equipment restrictions (ie, sensitive equipment that cannot be moved between 79-96 and SRH) or scheduling conflicts prevents subjects from being able to be stimulated in SRH, subjects may receive stimulation in 79-96 in accordance with the plan listed above in order to maintain the scientific validity of the protocol.   In addition to this support, the Principal Investigator or a licensed physician familiar with the research study will be available either on-site or available by pager, for all stimulation sessions. If this PI is unavailable, this licensed physician will be available to assist with identification and notification of emergencies.   The Principal Investigator will be responsible for data monitoring, accuracy and completeness of data collection, and data storage. Data will be reviewed at completion of each subject’s participation in the study.  A Data Safety Monitoring Board will be established for this study, comprised of a clinician with expertise in noninvasive brain stimulation (Lotfi Merabet, OD, PhD), a physiatrist with significant research experience who specializes in pain (Nitin Jain, MD, MSPH), and a burn injury survivor (Diana Tenney). The members of the board will work closely with the human subjects safety board (IRB) at BH-BIMS to oversee the welfare of all participants in this clinical trial. The board will meet three times over the course of the study, specifically after 20, 40, and 60 patients are enrolled. During each monitoring period, the DSMB will report to the IRB and study PI on data integrity, protocol adherence, and study participant safety issues. The DSMB will focus on adverse events and reasons for loss to follow up, raising any concerns or issues with the PI, and recommending to 
Detailed Protocol 21  the IRB and PI the continuation, modification, or conclusion of the trial, while protecting the confidentiality of the trial data.      
Detailed Protocol 22   XI. REFERENCES   1. Ryan CM, M., Schneider JC, Kazis LE, Lee A, Li N, Palmieri T, Pidcock F, Reilly D, Tompkins RG., The Young Adult Outcome Questionnaire. J Burn Care Res 2012. 33(S128). 2. Schneider, J.C., et al., A descriptive review of neuropathic-like pain after burn injury. J Burn Care Res, 2006. 27(4): p. 524-8. 3. Holavanahalli, R.K., P.A. Helm, and K.J. Kowalske, Long-term outcomes in patients surviving large burns: the skin. J Burn Care Res, 2010. 31(4): p. 631-9. 4. Malenfant, A., et al., Prevalence and characteristics of chronic sensory problems in burn patients. Pain, 1996. 67(2-3): p. 493-500. 5. Parnell, L.K., et al., Assessment of Pruritus Characteristics and Impact on Burn Survivors. J Burn Care Res, 2012. 6. Goutos, I., P. Dziewulski, and P.M. Richardson, Pruritus in burns: review article. J Burn Care Res, 2009. 30(2): p. 221-8. 7. Van Loey, N.E., et al., Itching following burns: epidemiology and predictors. Br J Dermatol, 2008. 158(1): p. 95-100. 8. Casaer, M., et al., Pruritus in patients with small burn injuries. Burns, 2008. 34(2): p. 185-91. 9. Vitale, M., C. Fields-Blache, and A. Luterman, Severe itching in the patient with burns. J Burn Care Rehabil, 1991. 12(4): p. 330-3. 10. Zachariah, J.R., et al., Post burn pruritus-A review of current treatment options. Burns, 2012. 11. Ahuja, R.B., et al., A comparative analysis of cetirizine, gabapentin and their combination in the relief of post-burn pruritus. Burns, 2011. 37(2): p. 203-7. 12. Madianos, M.G., et al., Psychiatric disorders in burn patients: a follow-up study. Psychother Psychosom, 2001. 70(1): p. 30-7. 13. Moi, A.L., et al., Impaired generic health status but perception of good quality of life in survivors of burn injury. J Trauma, 2006. 61(4): p. 961-8; discussion 968-9. 14. Latarjet, J. and M. Choinere, Pain in burn patients. Burns, 1995. 21(5): p. 344-8. 15. Mason, S.T., et al., Return to work after burn injury: a systematic review. J Burn Care Res, 2012. 33(1): p. 101-9. 16. Van Loey, N.E. and M.J. Van Son, Psychopathology and psychological problems in patients with burn scars: epidemiology and management. Am J Clin Dermatol, 2003. 4(4): p. 245-72. 17. Oster, C., M. Willebrand, and L. Ekselius, Health-related quality of life 2 years to 7 years after burn injury. J Trauma, 2011. 71(5): p. 1435-41. 18. Pavoni, V., et al., Outcome predictors and quality of life of severe burn patients admitted to intensive care unit. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med, 2010. 18: p. 24. 19. Reeve, J., et al., Functional and psychological outcomes following burn injury: reduced income and hidden emotions are predictors of greater distress. J Burn Care Res, 2011. 32(4): p. 468-74. 
Detailed Protocol 23  20. Corry, N.H., B. Klick, and J.A. Fauerbach, Posttraumatic stress disorder and pain impact functioning and disability after major burn injury. J Burn Care Res, 2010. 31(1): p. 13-25. 21. Schneider, J.C., S. Bassi, and C.M. Ryan, Employment outcomes after burn injury: a comparison of those burned at work and those burned outside of work. J Burn Care Res, 2011. 32(2): p. 294-301. 22. Schneider, J.C., S. Bassi, and C.M. Ryan, Barriers impacting employment after burn injury. J Burn Care Res, 2009. 30(2): p. 294-300. 23. Tan, W.H., et al., Outcomes and predictors in burn rehabilitation. J Burn Care Res, 2012. 33(1): p. 110-7. 24. Sheridan, R.L., et al., Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Weekly clinicopathological exercises. Case 6-2004. A 35-year-old woman with extensive, deep burns from a nightclub fire. N Engl J Med, 2004. 350(8): p. 810-21. 25. Chan, B.K., et al., Opioids in chronic non-cancer pain. Expert Opin Pharmacother, 2011. 12(5): p. 705-20. 26. Manubay, J.M., C. Muchow, and M.A. Sullivan, Prescription drug abuse: epidemiology, regulatory issues, chronic pain management with narcotic analgesics. Prim Care, 2011. 38(1): p. 71-90, vi. 27. Gagliese, L. and R. Melzack, Chronic pain in elderly people. Pain, 1997. 70(1): p. 3-14. 28. Pal, S.K., J. Cortiella, and D. Herndon, Adjunctive methods of pain control in burns. Burns, 1997. 23(5): p. 404-12. 29. Nicholson, B. and S. Verma, Comorbidities in chronic neuropathic pain. Pain Med, 2004. 5 Suppl 1: p. S9-S27. 30. Nicholson, B.D., Evaluation and treatment of central pain syndromes. Neurology, 2004. 62(5 Suppl 2): p. S30-6. 31. McCracken, L.M., S.D. Faber, and A.S. Janeck, Pain-related anxiety predicts non-specific physical complaints in persons with chronic pain. Behav Res Ther, 1998. 36(6): p. 621-30. 32. McWilliams, L.A., B.J. Cox, and M.W. Enns, Mood and anxiety disorders associated with chronic pain: an examination in a nationally representative sample. Pain, 2003. 106(1-2): p. 127-33. 33. Bair, M.J., et al., Depression and pain comorbidity: a literature review. Arch Intern Med, 2003. 163(20): p. 2433-45. 34. Krishnan, K.R. and R.D. France, Chronic pain and depression. South Med J, 1987. 80(5): p. 558-61. 35. Krishnan, K.R., et al., Chronic pain and depression. I. Classification of depression in chronic low back pain patients. Pain, 1985. 22(3): p. 279-87. 36. Krishnan, K.R., et al., Chronic pain and depression. II. Symptoms of anxiety in chronic low back pain patients and their relationship to subtypes of depression. Pain, 1985. 22(3): p. 289-94. 37. Loyland, B., et al., The relationship between chronic pain and health-related quality of life in long-term social assistance recipients in Norway. Qual Life Res, 2010. 19(10): p. 1457-65. 38. Darsow, U., et al., Processing of histamine-induced itch in the human cerebral cortex: a correlation analysis with dermal reactions. J Invest Dermatol, 2000. 115(6): p. 1029-33. 
Detailed Protocol 24  39. Kleyn, C.E., et al., A temporal analysis of the central neural processing of itch. Br J Dermatol, 2012. 166(5): p. 994-1001. 40. Mochizuki, H., et al., Imaging of central itch modulation in the human brain using positron emission tomography. Pain, 2003. 105(1-2): p. 339-46. 41. Esselman, P.C., et al., Burn rehabilitation: state of the science. Am J Phys Med Rehabil, 2006. 85(4): p. 383-413. 42. Robinson, M.J., et al., Depression and pain. Front Biosci, 2009. 14: p. 5031-51. 43. Bar, K.J., et al., Increased prefrontal activation during pain perception in major depression. Biol Psychiatry, 2007. 62(11): p. 1281-7. 44. Diseases, N.I.o.A.a.M.a.S., http://www.niams.nih.gov/News_and_Events/Meetings_and_Events/Roundtables/2010/itch_roundtable.asp. 2010. 45. Health, N.I.o., http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-12-131.html. 2012. 46. Santos-Portilla, A., Villamar, M.F., Schneider, J.C., Ryan, C.M., Fregni, F., A feasibility study assessing cortical plasticity in chronic neuropathic pain following burn injury. Journal of Burn Care and Research, 2012 (In Press). 47. Boggio, P.S., et al., Go-no-go task performance improvement after anodal transcranial DC stimulation of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in major depression. J Affect Disord, 2007. 101(1-3): p. 91-8. 48. Boggio, P.S., et al., A randomized, double-blind clinical trial on the efficacy of cortical direct current stimulation for the treatment of major depression. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol, 2008. 11(2): p. 249-54. 49. Boggio, P.S., et al., Noninvasive brain stimulation with high-frequency and low-intensity repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder. J Clin Psychiatry, 2010. 71(8): p. 992-9. 50. Brunoni, A.R., et al., Sertraline vs. ELectrical Current Therapy for Treating Depression Clinical Trial--SELECT TDCS: design, rationale and objectives. Contemp Clin Trials, 2011. 32(1): p. 90-8. 51. Fregni, F., et al., Treatment of major depression with transcranial direct current stimulation. Bipolar Disord, 2006. 8(2): p. 203-4. 52. Fregni, F., et al., Cognitive effects of repeated sessions of transcranial direct current stimulation in patients with depression. Depress Anxiety, 2006. 23(8): p. 482-4. 53. Murphy, D.N., P. Boggio, and F. Fregni, Transcranial direct current stimulation as a therapeutic tool for the treatment of major depression: insights from past and recent clinical studies. Curr Opin Psychiatry, 2009. 22(3): p. 306-11. 54. Fregni, F., et al., A sham-controlled, phase II trial of transcranial direct current stimulation for the treatment of central pain in traumatic spinal cord injury. Pain, 2006. 122(1-2): p. 197-209. 55. Fregni, F., et al., A randomized, sham-controlled, proof of principle study of transcranial direct current stimulation for the treatment of pain in fibromyalgia. Arthritis Rheum, 2006. 54(12): p. 3988-98. 56. Fregni, F., et al., Clinical effects and brain metabolic correlates in non-invasive cortical neuromodulation for visceral pain. Eur J Pain, 2011. 15(1): p. 53-60. 57. Zaghi, S., et al., One-year rTMS treatment for refractory trigeminal neuralgia. J Pain Symptom Manage, 2009. 38(4): p. e1-5. 
Detailed Protocol 25  58. Valle, A., et al., Efficacy of anodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for the treatment of fibromyalgia: results of a randomized, sham-controlled longitudinal clinical trial. J Pain Manag, 2009. 2(3): p. 353-361. 59. Nakamura-Palacios, E.M., et al., Auditory event-related potentials (P3) and cognitive changes induced by frontal direct current stimulation in alcoholics according to Lesch alcoholism typology. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol, 2011: p. 1-16. 60. Roizenblatt, S., et al., Site-specific effects of transcranial direct current stimulation on sleep and pain in fibromyalgia: a randomized, sham-controlled study. Pain Pract, 2007. 7(4): p. 297-306. 61. Soler, M.D., et al., Effectiveness of transcranial direct current stimulation and visual illusion on neuropathic pain in spinal cord injury. Brain, 2010. 133(9): p. 2565-77. 62. Fenton, B.W., et al., A preliminary study of transcranial direct current stimulation for the treatment of refractory chronic pelvic pain. Brain Stimul, 2009. 2(2): p. 103-7. 63. Faber, M., et al., Top down prefrontal affective modulation of tinnitus with multiple sessions of tDCS of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Brain Stimul, 2011. 64. Boggio, P.S., S. Zaghi, and F. Fregni, Modulation of emotions associated with images of human pain using anodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). Neuropsychologia, 2009. 47(1): p. 212-7. 65. Iyer, M.B., et al., Safety and cognitive effect of frontal DC brain polarization in healthy individuals. Neurology, 2005. 64(5): p. 872-5. 66. Nitsche, M.A., et al., Modulation of cortical excitability by weak direct current stimulation--technical, safety and functional aspects. Suppl Clin Neurophysiol, 2003. 56: p. 255-76. 67. Nitsche, M.A., et al., Safety criteria for transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) in humans. Clin Neurophysiol, 2003. 114(11): p. 2220-2; author reply 2222-3. 68. Nitsche, M.A., et al., MRI study of human brain exposed to weak direct current stimulation of the frontal cortex. Clin Neurophysiol, 2004. 115(10): p. 2419-23. 69. Nitsche, M.A., et al., Level of action of cathodal DC polarisation induced inhibition of the human motor cortex. Clin Neurophysiol, 2003. 114(4): p. 600-4. 70. Priori, A., Brain polarization in humans: a reappraisal of an old tool for prolonged non-invasive modulation of brain excitability. Clin Neurophysiol, 2003. 114(4): p. 589-95. 71. Morris, V., et al., Itch assessment scale for the pediatric burn survivor. J Burn Care Res, 2012. 33(3): p. 419-24. 72. Nedelec, B., et al., Double-blind, randomized, pilot study assessing the resolution of postburn pruritus. J Burn Care Res, 2012. 33(3): p. 398-406. 73. Wagner, T., et al., Transcranial direct current stimulation: a computer-based human model study. Neuroimage, 2007. 35(3): p. 1113-24. 74. Nitsche, M.A. and W. Paulus, Sustained excitability elevations induced by transcranial DC motor cortex stimulation in humans. Neurology, 2001. 57(10): p. 1899-901. 75. Nitsche, M.A. and W. Paulus, Excitability changes induced in the human motor cortex by weak transcranial direct current stimulation. J Physiol, 2000. 527 Pt 3: p. 633-9. 76. Miranda, P.C., M. Lomarev, and M. Hallett, Modeling the current distribution during transcranial direct current stimulation. Clin Neurophysiol, 2006. 117(7): p. 1623-9. 77. Wagner, T., A. Valero-Cabre, and A. Pascual-Leone, Noninvasive human brain stimulation. Annu Rev Biomed Eng, 2007. 9: p. 527-65. 
Detailed Protocol 26  78. Romero, J.R., et al., Subthreshold low frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation selectively decreases facilitation in the motor cortex. Clin Neurophysiol, 2002. 113(1): p. 101-7. 79. Brunoni, A.R., et al., A systematic review on reporting and assessment of adverse effects associated with transcranial direct current stimulation. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol, 2011: p. 1-13. 80. Elman, S., et al., The 5-D itch scale: a new measure of pruritus. Br J Dermatol. 162(3): p. 587-93. 81. Fregni, F., et al., A randomized, sham-controlled, proof of principle study of transcranial direct current stimulation for the treatment of pain in fibromyalgia. Arthritis Rheum, 2006. 54(12): p. 3988-3998. 82. Gandiga, P.C., F.C. Hummel, and L.G. Cohen, Transcranial DC stimulation (tDCS): a tool for double-blind sham-controlled clinical studies in brain stimulation. Clin Neurophysiol, 2006. 117(4): p. 845-50. 83. Cleeland, C.S. and K.M. Ryan, Pain assessment: global use of the Brief Pain Inventory. Ann Acad Med Singapore, 1994. 23(2): p. 129-38. 84. Bryce, T.N., et al., Pain after spinal cord injury: an evidence-based review for clinical practice and research. Report of the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research Spinal Cord Injury Measures meeting. J Spinal Cord Med, 2007. 30(5): p. 421-40. 85. Beck, A.T., et al., An inventory for measuring depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 1961. 4: p. 561-71. 86. Weiss, D.S., Marmar, C.R., The Impact of Event Scale-Revised. Assessing Psychological Trauma and PTSD: A Practitioner’s Handbook, ed. T.M.K. J.P. Wilson. 1997, New York: Guilford Press. 87. Selim, A.J., et al., Updated U.S. population standard for the Veterans RAND 12-item Health Survey (VR-12). Qual Life Res, 2009. 18(1): p. 43-52. 88. Willer, B., K.J. Ottenbacher, and M.L. Coad, The community integration questionnaire. A comparative examination. Am J Phys Med Rehabil, 1994. 73(2): p. 103-11. 89. Hoyle, R.E., Handbook of Structural Equation Modeling. 2012, New York: Guilford Press. 90. MacKinnon, D.P., A.J. Fairchild, and M.S. Fritz, Mediation analysis. Annu Rev Psychol, 2007. 58: p. 593-614. 91. Boggio, P.S., et al., Effects of transcranial direct current stimulation on working memory in patients with Parkinson's disease. J Neurol Sci, 2006. 92. Fregni, F., et al., Noninvasive cortical stimulation with transcranial direct current stimulation in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord, 2006.    