 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A comparison of fidaxomicin and oral vancomycin for the 
treatment of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in 
hospitalized patients receiving concomitant antibiotics for the 
treatment of c oncurrent infections  
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
September  4, 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Merck  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Template  is Proprieta ry and Shall  not be  Reproduced  
Effective  Date 13Aug2014  1 /10  
  
   Study  Title:  A comparison  of fidaxomicin  and oral vancomycin  for the treatment  of Clostridium 
difficile  infection  (CDI)  in hospitalized  patients  receiving  concomitant  antibiotics  for 
the treatment  of concurrent  infections  
  Protocol  Version  Date:  04Sep2019  
  Protocol Version Number:  4.0 
  Primary  Study Principal Investigator  Name:  Krishna Rao, MD, MS  
Primary  Coordinating Center  Address:  University  of Michigan Health System  
1500 E. Medical Center Drive  
Ann Arbor,  MI  48109  
Secondary Performance Si te Address:  St. Joseph Mercy Ann Arbor Hospital  
5301 McAuley Dr . 
Ypsilanti, MI 48197  
 Site Principal Investigator:  Anurag Malani, MD  
 
1 STUDY RATIONALE/BACKGROUND  
Administration  of concomitant  antibiotics  (CA)  is a known risk factor  for treatment  failure  in 
the treatment  of CDI,  as well as for recurrence  of CDI.  Recent  data suggested  that among  
patients  receiving  CA, fidaxomicin  200 mg twice  daily  is superior  to oral vancomycin  125 
mg four times  daily  with clinical  cure rates of 90.0%  and 79.4%,  respectiv ely (p= 0.04)1. 
While  these  data are encouraging,  many  clinicians  remain  unclear  on how  to apply  these  
data to patient  care as a conservative  definition  for CA was  used in this trial (any patient  
who received  ≥ 1 dose of antibiotic  was considered  to have CA.) Additionally,  patients  were  
excluded  from  the trial if it was expected  that they would  require  ≥ 7 days of CA2.  
Therefore,  the clinical  question  still remains  of how to apply  these  data to the real world  
patient  who requires  a long course  of CA and  develops  CDI while  on therapy.  We therefore  
propose  an open  label,  comparative  and prospective  study  to compare  fidaxomicin  200 mg 
twice  daily  vs oral vancomycin  125 mg four times  daily  for the treatment  of CDI among  
patients  who are receiving  a long  course  of CA. 
 
2 STUDY HYPOTHESIS  
Fidaxomicin  will be superior  to vancomycin  with respect  to clinical  cure for patients  with 
CDI requiring  a long  course  of broad  spectrum  CA for the treatment  of concomitant  
systemic  infections.  
 
 
2.1 PRELIMINARY DATA  
This Merck  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Template  is Proprieta ry and Shall  not be  Reproduced  
Effective  Date 13Aug2014  2 /10  
           The only preliminary  data are the Mullane  paper  data,  which  are described  above.  
 
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES  AND  ENDPOINTS  
3.1 STUDY  OBJECTIVES  
3.1.1 PRIMARY  OBJECTIVES:  
To compare  the clinical  cure rate using  fidaxomicin  compared  to oral vancomycin  for 
the treatment  of CDI in patien ts requiring  CA.  
3.1.2 SECONDARY  OBJECTIVES:  
To compare  the impact  of therapy  (fidaxomicin  versus  vancomycin)  on recurrence,  
length  of stay, ICU length  of stay (when  applicable),  time to resolution  of diarrhea*,  
rates of colectomy,  and 30 day  mortality  (both  attributable  and all cause)  in patients  
with CDI requiring  CA for concomitant  systemic  infections . 
 
* Two definitions  of time to resolution  of diarrhea  will be analyzed.  The first, which  
will be a component  of clinical  cure,  is consistent  with published  CDI literature  and 
will be defined  as ≤ 3 unformed  stools  for 2 consecutive  days maintained  until the 
end of therapy  and for 2 days afterward.  The second  definition,  which  has important  
infection  control  implications,  is complete  resolution  of diarrhea,  which  would  
facilitate  removal  of the patient from  contact  isolation . 
 
3.2 STUDY  ENDPOINTS  
3.2.1 PRIMARY  ENDPOINT:  
Clinical  cure 
3.2.1.1  PRIMARY  ENDPOINT  DEFINITION:  
Resolution  of diarrhea  (≤3 unformed  stools  for 2 consecutive  days maintained  
until the end of therapy  and for 2  days afterward ). Clinical  failure  will be 
defined  as persistent  diarrhea  and/or  the need for additional  treatment  for 
CDI at the end of study  therapy.  
 
3.2.2 SECONDARY  ENDPOINT(S):  
Recurrence,  length of stay ( LOS), ICU LOS, time to resolution  of diarrhea  (total),  
rates of colectomy  due to CDI,  30 day mortality,  and 30 day  readmission . 
 
3.2.2.1  SECONDARY  ENDPOINT  DEFINITION(S):  
Recurrence :  defined  as all three  of the following  within  4 weeks  after 
successfully  completing  study  treatment:  reappearance  of symptoms  of CDI 
(>3 unformed  stools  in a 24 hour  period), a positive  stool  test for C. difficile  
(Figure 1 ), and the need for retreatment  with an agent  active  against  C. 
difficile . 
 
Length  of Stay:   defined  as the length  of stay from  the time of study  
enrollment  until discharge  from  the hospital . 
 
ICU length  of stay:  pertinent  to patients  in the ICU at the time of study  
This Merck  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Template  is Proprieta ry and Shall  not be  Reproduced  
Effective  Date 13Aug2014  3 /10  
 enrollment and patients  admitted  to the ICU within  48 hours  after study  
enrollment/ C. difficile  onset.  Defined  as the length  of stay from  enrollment  in 
the study  until discharge  from  the ICU. 
 
• Time  from  study  enrollment  to resolution  of diarrhea  (as 
defined  earlier in 3.1.2)  
• Rates  of colectomy  due to  CDI 
• 30 day  mortality,  both overall  and attributable  
 
Subgroup  analysis:   A subgroup  analysis  will be performed  analyzi ng the above  
outcomes  in patients  with severe  disease  (defined  as Scr ≥ 1.5 mg/dL  or WBC 
≥ 15,000  cells/mm3)  and also for those  with mild-moderate  disease . 
 
4 STUDY DESIGN  
4.1 SITE  
This study  will be performed  at The University of Michigan  and at St. Joseph’s 
Mercy Ann Arbor Hospital.  
4.2 INCLUSION/EXCLUSION  CRITERIA  
4.2.1 INCLUSION  CRITERI A 
▪ Patients 18 years of age or older  with >3 unformed stools/24 hours with 
positive stool test for C. difficile . 
 
▪ Patients  receiving  ≥ 1 high or medium  risk antibiotic  for treatment  of an 
infection  other  than CDI,  for an  anticipated  duration  of ≥ 5 days from the 
time of enrollment  
• High  risk: carbapenems, 2nd-4th generation  cephalosporins,  
fluoroquinolones,  clindamycin,  and beta-lactam/beta -lactamase  
inhibitor  combinations   
• Medium  risk: 1st generation  cephalosporin,  macrolides *, and 
aztreonam  
o *The macrolide w ould be considered to be low risk   if 
patients are receiving intermittent macrolides for 
prophylaxis only and not for treatment of an acute 
infection  
 
4.2.2 EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
• Patients  with severe -complicated  disease  that would  compromise  oral 
therapy  (hypotensi on or shock, ileus or bowel obstruction, megacolon ) 
 
• Patients  with an allergy  to oral  vancomycin  or fidaxomicin  
 
This Merck  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Template  is Proprieta ry and Shall  not be  Reproduced  
Effective  Date 13Aug2014  4 /10  
 • Patients  anticipated  to receive metronidazole  after enrollment  
 
• Patients  who already  received  oral vancomycin  or metronidazole  (either  oral 
or intravenous)  for > 24 hours  within  the preceding  72 hours  at the time of 
enrollment  
 
• Patients  anticipated  to receive  adjunctive  C. difficile  therapy  (rifaxamin,  
nitazoxanide,  tigecycline)  after enrollment  
 
• Patients who are on laxatives  before they are enro lled into the study , such as 
lactulose, if:  
o Patients have had a recent dose adjustment ; 
o Baseline number of bowel movement while on laxatives is unknown.  
o Number of bowel movements and/or consistency has not change d from 
baseline.  
• Patients who have had colo stomy or ileostomy  
• Patients who will have colostomy or ileostomy after enrollment and before 
study ends  
• Patients who are or will be on long -term (>12 weeks) medium or high -risk 
antibiotics prophylaxis after enrollment  
 
4.3 SAMPLE  SIZE  
4.3.1 NUMBER  OF CHARTS  TO BE REVIEWED  
Not applicable  
 
4.3.2 NUMBER  OF SUBJECTS  TO BE ENROLLED  
1500 patients  will be expected  over the study  period  (2.5 years)  at the sites.  During  
study  assessment  it was determined  that ~ 41% of all patients  at the sites would  be 
eligible  for the study  (having CDI while  on a high or medium  risk CA for an 
expected  duration  of ≥ 5 days,  and having  not received  24 hours  of pre-treatment  of 
vancomycin  or metronidazole)  leaving  615 eligible  patients  over the study  period.  
Given  the open  label  nature  of this study  we anticipate  being  able to enroll  200 of 
these  eligible  patients,  100 to each treatment  arm, based on the low drop -out rate  
(<2%) that we have seen thus far .  This would  allow us to have approximately  100 
evaluable  patients  in each study  arm. 
 
4.3.3 SAMPLE SIZE  DETERMINATION  
We hypothesize  that the clinical  cure discrepancy  should  be greater  than the 
discrepancy  reported  by Mullane  and colleagues  because  more  patients  who are 
receiving  long course  of CA will  fail to reach  clinical  cure on vancomycin.  
Therefore , our power  calculations  are based  off an expected  90% cure rate with 
fidaxomicin  and 75% with vancomycin , and a total sample number of 200 . In order  
to have 80% power,  with an alpha  of 0.05,  100 patients  will need  to be randomized  
into each arm (total  n = 200). 
 
This Merck  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Template  is Proprieta ry and Shall  not be  Reproduced  
Effective  Date 13Aug2014  5 /10  
 4.4 SCREENING,  RANDOMIZATION,  BLINDING  
4.4.1 SCREENING  PROCEDURE  
Patie nts will be screened  for inclusion  by real time surveillance  of positive  C. 
difficile  results  per the local standard of care C. difficile  testing platform  and 
assessed for eligibility using the Stool Testing Algorithm for C. difficile  (Figure 1) . 
Study  personnel  will receive  all positive  results  in real time and will then screen  
the patient  for inclusion  and exclusion  criteria.  Screening  will occur  7 days a 
week.  If a patient  meets  inclusion  criteria  the study  staff will approach  the primary  
team  and with t heir approval  the patient  for enrollment.  
4.4.2 RANDOMIZATION  
Patients  will be stratified  for randomization  based  on two criteria:  severity  of CDI,  
and CDI episode  (stratified  into first episode/first recurrence  or > 1 recurrence) . 
 
Once  a patient  is enrolled  in the study,  study staff  will randomize  patients  utiliz ing 
a randomization  binder  stored electronically by the coordinat ing center . The patient  
will be placed  in an open  label  treatment  arm as described  below.  
 
4.4.3 BLINDING  
The study  is open  label  so this is not applicable.  
 
4.5 REGULATORY AND  ETHICS  
4.5.1 INFORMED CONSENT  
Study staff  will acquire  informed  consent  at the time of patient  enrollment  either  
from  the patient  or their legally authorized representative ( LAR ). 
 
4.5.2 INSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW  BOARD/ETHICS  COMMITTEE  
The coo rdinating center IRB, IRBMED at the University of Michigan, will review 
and approve the protocol followed by local IRBs at all performance sites.  
 
4.5.3 INVESTIGATIONAL  NEW  DRUG  (IND)  FILING  
Not applicable.  Both  agents  are standard  of care treatments  for C. difficile infection  
and have an FDA indication  for treatment  of C. difficile  infection.  
 
5 STUDY PROCEDURES  
5.1 TREATMENT  
All patients  with a positive  stool  test for C. difficile  (Figure 1) at the study  
hospitals  will be screened  for inclusion.  Patients  will be eligible for inclusion  if 
they are being  treated with ≥ 1 concomitant  high risk or medium  risk antibiotic  
for treatment  of another systemic  infection  and the anticipated  duration  of therapy  
with the CA per the physician  of record  is ≥ 5 days from  the time of study 
enrollment  (i.e. enrollment  day.)  Eligible  patients  will be randomized  to receive  
open -label  fidaxomicin  200 mg twice  daily  or vancomycin  125 mg orally  four 
times  daily  for 10 days or until the end of the duration  of CA exposure,  whichever  
is longer.  Patients  will be allowed  to have received  up to 24 hours  of C. difficile  
This Merck  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Template  is Proprieta ry and Shall  not be  Reproduced  
Effective  Date 13Aug2014  6 /10  
 therapy  prior  to study  enrollment.  
Intervention:   Fidaxomicin  200 mg PO BID vs. Vancomycin  125 mg PO QID  
5.2 PROCEDURES  
Schedule  of Procedures  / Study Events  
 
Scheduled  Assessment  or Procedure  Study  Day 
-1 to 1 
(Baseline)  Daily  while  
in hospital  EOT  TOC  
Physical  Exam  X    
Standard of care lab  results  X X X X 
Temperature  X X X X 
Number  of unformed  bowel  movements/ 24 hours  X X X X 
Adverse Events  X X X X 
 
* Laboratory  values  will be recorded  as ordered  and evaluated  by attending  team  
caring  for the patient  outside  of this study.  The standard of care lab resu lts that 
will be collected from subject  medical record s as a part of the study are your 
white blood cell count, platelets, ALT, AS T, total bilirubin, albumin, 
prothrombin time, serum creatinine, lactic acid, and carbon dioxide.  No 
laboratory  values  will be ordered  by study  personnel  or charged  to the study.  If 
the patient  has left the hospital before  end of treatment (EOT)  or Test of  Cure 
(TOC ), they will be instructed  to monitor  their symptoms  daily  and keep note of 
fevers  and number  of bowel  movements.  Follow  up phone  calls to assess  cure and 
recurrence  will be made  at the EOT and TOC dates  when  necessary.   
 
5.3 ADVERSE  EVENT REPORTING  
5.3.1 DEFINITIONS  
A mild adverse  event is one that is noticeable to the investigator,  physicians  
caring  for the patient  and/or  the patient,  however  does not interfere  with routine  
clinical  care and requires  no specific  intervention.  An example  of this would  be 
mild nausea  from  study  medication.  
A moderate  adverse  event  interferes  with routine  clinical  care,  however  responds  
to symptomatic  management.  An example  would  be vomiting  that responds  to 
anti-emetic  therapy.  
A severe  adverse  event is one that limits  the subject’s  ability  to perform  
routine  activities  and does not respond  to symptomatic  treatment.  An adverse  
event  would  also be considered  severe  if it worsens  clinical  prognosis,  
requires  escalation  in level  of care (i.e. ICU admission),  or negatively  impact s 
outcome  variables.  An example  of this   would be  anaphylactic  shock  
secondary  to the  study  medications.  
5.3.2 RELATIONSHIP TO STUDY MEDICATION  
The following  criteria  will be used to determine  relatedness  to the study  medication:  
 
Not Related:  an AE with a temp oral relationship to the drug  administered  that 
makes  a causal  relationship  improbable,  and/or  for which  other  drugs  or 
underlying  or concurrent  disease provide  a plausible explanation . 
Unlikely  Related:  an AE that has a plausible temporal relationship  to the drug  
This Merck  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Template  is Proprieta ry and Shall  not be  Reproduced  
Effective  Date 13Aug2014  7 /10  
 administered,  but for  which other causative factor(s) more likely  account  for the  
event  and where  dechallenge  (withdrawal  of drug  treatment)  or dose reduction  
was not felt clinically  indicated  or improvements  on dechallenge or dose 
reduction  have not been  observed . 
Possibly  Related : an AE that has a plausible temporal relationship  to the drug  
administered,  but for  which other  causative  factor(s) could  account  for the event  
and where improvements  on dechallenge or dose reduction  may or may not have 
been observed.  
5.3.3 EXPECTEDNESS  OF AE 
An AE is considered  unexpected if the  specificity  or severity  is not consistent  
with the  applicable  product  information  for either fidaxomicin or vancomycin.  
 
5.3.4 RECORDING  AND  REPO RTING A SAE  
5.3.4.1  STUDIES  NOT  PERFORMED  UNDER  AN IND 
Adverse  Events  (AEs)  will be recorded  on the case report  form  in REDCap . 
Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) and non -serious AEs will be reported  to the 
performance site  IRBs in accordance with local  guidelines.  SAEs  meeting the 
NIH definition of Unanticipate d Problem  will be reported to the FDA.  
Coordinating center staff  will also work  with Cubist/Merck  as necessary  to 
address  any AE's related  to study  product.  
 
5.3.4.2  STUDIES  PERFORMED  UNDER  YOUR  OWN IND 
          Not Applicable.  
 
6 DATA COLLECTION  AND  ANALYSIS  
6.1 DATA  COLLECTION  
Data collection  will be completed  by performance site using  a standardized  data 
collection  form  provided by the coordinating center through R EDCap with all 
relevant  patient -specific  and treatment -related  information.  
6.2 DATA  VALIDATION  
 Members  of each performance site’s  study  team  who do not participate in data entry  
will validate  clinical  outcomes,  as reported  in the data collection  form,  in 10% of 
patient  cases.  If significant  discrepancies  are found  in ≥ 10% of the analyzed  cases,  
then full validation  will occur  for all patient  cases.  
 
6.3 DATA / STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
All statistical  analyses  will be performed  by the coordinating center  via SAS version  
9.3. For objective  1, the clinical  cure rates of the two treatment  arms  will be compared  
using  Fisher’s  exact  test. Other  analyses relevant  to objective  1 will be performed  with 
Chi Square  test, Student  t test and Wilcoxon  rank sum test. Multivariate  models  will be 
constructed  using  logistic  regressions  to ident ify individual  factors  associated  with 
either  cure or failure.  Variables  associated  with cure or failure  in the bivariate  analyses  
with p values  < 0.10 will be put into the multivariate  models.  Treatment  arm will be 
forced  into the model  as appropriate  and other  variables  that the investigators  deem  
This Merck  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Template  is Proprieta ry and Shall  not be  Reproduced  
Effective  Date 13Aug2014  8 /10  
 clinically  relevant  may be placed  in the model  as appropriate. For objective  2, analyses  
will be conducted  using  the same  tests as above  and multivariate  modeling  will also be 
performed.  For the time to resoluti on of diarrhea,  cox proportional hazard  models  will 
be performed  to compare  the two groups.  
 
For patients  who are lost to follow  up, their endpoints  that have not yet been assessed  
(recurrence,  readmission,  and potentially  cure)  will be considered  indeterm inate.  Two 
analyses  will be done,  one where  these  patients  are omitted  (clinically  evaluable  
population),  and one where  these  patients  are failures  (intent  to treat).  
 
7 PUBLICATION  
It is expected  that this will be a high impact  article  and we will target  Clinical  Infectious  
Diseases  for publication.   Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 
(ICAAC ), IDWeek, or European Congress of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 
(ECCMID ) are potential  places  for abstract  submission  depen ding on the time of year that 
results  are finalized.  
 
8 TIMELINE  
IRB approval x 3 months   
Study duration  x 48 months  
Manuscript  preparation  x 3 months  
 
 9 REFERENCES  
Mullane  KM et.al.  Efficacy  of Fidaxomicin  Versus  Vancomycin  as Therapy  for 
Clostridium  Diffi cile Infection  in Individuals  Taking  Concomitant  Antibiotics  for Other  
Concurrent  Infections.  Clin Infect  Dis. 2011;  53(5):  440-7. 
 
Louie TJ et al.  Fidaxomicin versus Vancomycin for Clostridium difficile Infection . N Engl J 
Med 2011; 364:422 -431. 
 
Cohen S H, et al.  Clinical practice guidelines for Clostridium difficile infection in adults: 
2010 update by the society for healthcare epidemiology of America (SHEA) and the 
infectious diseases society of America (IDSA).  Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2010; 
31(5):431 -55. 
 
This Merck  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Template  is Proprieta ry and Shall  not be  Reproduced  
Effective  Date 13Aug2014  9 /10  
 Figure 1. Performance site  Stool Testing Algorithm for C. difficile , 
Abbreviations: EIA, enzyme immunoassay; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase.  
 
 