 
 
BT-11-201-Protocol -Nov320  Page 1 of 7 
   
 
 
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
 
 
Protocol Number: BT-11-201; Phase 2  
 
US IND Number:  138071  
 
EudraCT Number:  2018 -005086 -39 
 
 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled, Double -Blind , Multicenter Study to Evaluate Efficacy and 
Safety of Oral BT -11 in Mild to Moderate Ulcerative Colitis  
 
 
Protocol Amendment 03 
03 November  2020  
 
 
 
Sponsor:  Landos Biopharma Inc.  
 
Clinical Research Organization:  [redacted ] 
 
 
* Confidentiality Statement  
The information contained in this document is privileged and confidential.  Any disclosure is prohibited unless such disclosure is required by applicable 
laws and regulations.  Persons to whom the information is disclosed must be informed that the information is privileged and confidential and it may 
not be further disclosed by them.  
  
 
 
BT-11-201-Protocol -Nov320  Page 2 of 7 
 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
Title  
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled, Double -Blind, Multicenter Study to Evaluate Efficacy and Safety of Oral BT -
11 in Mild to Moderate Ulcerative Colitis  
Objectives  
The primary objective of this study is to establish the efficacy of oral BT -11 in inducing clinical remission at Week 
12 in subjects with mild to moderate ulcerative colitis (UC).  
The secondary objectives of this study are to evaluate  the following at Week 12 : 
1. The effects of BT -11 on disease activity measured by symptoms, endoscopy, histology , and biomarkers  
2. Health -related quality of life  
3. The pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of BT -11 
4. Safety  
The exploratory objective s of this study are to  evaluate the following through Week 30 : 
1. The effects of BT -11 on disease activity measured by symptoms, endoscopy, histology, and biomarkers  
2. Health -related quality of life  
3. The PK parameters of BT -11 
4. Safety  
5. Target engagement and mechanism of action  
6. The association of drug exposure in colonic mucosal tissue biopsies with clinical, endoscopic, 
histopathologic, cellular, and molecular outcomes  
Study Design  
This is a phase 2 randomized, placebo -controlled, double -blind, parallel -group  multicenter study  with an optional 
open -label extension (OLE) period . The purpose of this study is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of oral BT -11 
compared to placebo in subjects with mild to moderate UC.  
This study includes 3 p eriod s: induction, maintenance, and an optional  OLE period .  
Induction Period : 
Following a 28 -day screening period , a total of 195 subjects with mild to moderate UC (total Mayo Score 4 -10; 
Mayo  endoscop ic subscore [MES] ≥ 2) are planned to be enrolled into t his study from approximately 46 sites in 
Europe and the United States. Eligible subjects will be randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive BT -11 low-dose 
(500 mg), BT -11 high-dose (1,000  mg) or placebo. Each of the treatment arms will comprise 65 subjects. The 
randomization will be stratified by prior exposure to biologic therapy for UC (yes/no ; exposed population limited 
to 30% of total sample ) and corticosteroid use at baseline (yes/no).   
A data lock and final induction phase analysis of  the Week 12 primary endpoint, Week 12 key ranked secondary 
endpoints , and Week 12 AE listings  will be conducted after all subjects have reached Week 12. At the Week 12 
Visit, subjects who are responders (clinical response and/or clinical remission) and meet all other maintenance 
continuation requirements may continue blinded study drug until central endoscopy results are available (within 
approximately 1 week of the endoscopy) for confirmation  of eligibility  for the maintenance period . Subjects who 
are nonresponders at Week 12, or who lose response during the maintenance period , or who complete the Week 30 
study will be eligible for the  optional  OLE period . 
 
 
BT-11-201-Protocol -Nov320  Page 3 of 7 
 Maintenance Period :  
All subjects who complete the induction period  and are responders at Week 12 will enter the 18 -week maintenance 
period . Subjects who continue to the maintenance period  will receive the same blinded study drug as the induction 
period  until Week 30. If a subject loses re sponse during the maintenance  period , they may have the option to move 
into the OLE after completing the early termination visit.  
OLE  Period : 
Subjects who a) completed the induction period and were nonresponders at Week 12 , or b) lost response during the 
maintenance  period , or c) completed the blinded maintenance period (through Week 30) of that study  will have the 
option to enter the OLE  period . Eligible subjects will start open label treatment within approximately 2 weeks after 
their last dose of study drug  in the induction or maintenance period . Subject s who are classified as nonresponders 
after 12 weeks of therapy in  the OLE will be discontinued from the study. Subje cts who continue to respond to 
study treatment will have the option of remaining on BT -11 until the therapy becomes commercially available , or 
until the sponsor decides to terminate the study  or offers an alternate OLE study . 
Study Population  
The study will include 195 subjects with mild to moderately active UC . Subjects with prior exposure to biologic 
therapy will be limited to 30% of the total sample.  After 58 subjects with prior exposure to biologic therapy have 
been randomized  into the inductio n period , recruitment will be limited to biologic -naïve subjects.  
Key inclusion criteria: male and female subjects aged 18 to 75 years with a diagnosis of UC for at least 3  months; 
mild to moderate UC defined by a total Mayo Score of 4  to 10 with MES ≥ 2 ( confirmed by central reader); prior 
biologic must have stopped at least 8 weeks before study and previous biologic treatment failure is limited to 1 
class of biologic;  5-aminosalicylates  (max 4.8  g/day) and oral corticosteroids (max 20  mg/day prednisone or  
equivalent) must be stable for the 12-week induction period . 
Key exclusion criteria: severe UC defined by modified Truelove and Witts criteria; disease activity limited to distal 
15 cm (proctitis); treatment with immunosuppressant within 25 days prior to randomization; current bacterial or 
parasitic pathogenic enteric infection; live virus vaccination within 1 month prior to screening.  
Maintenance Continuation Criteria : 
Key maintenance continuation  criteria : meeting eligibility requirements for clinical response and/or clinical 
remission at Week 12, centrally read confirmation of response is received within 2  weeks of completing the Week 
12 visit, and agreeing to a corticosteroid tapering regimen starting at W eek 12 with maint enance of  stable doses of 
any other nonprohibited concomitant medications for UC during the rest of the study.  
OLE Continuation Criteria : 
Key OLE  inclusion criteria: All subjects who a) completed the induction period of that study and were 
nonresponders at Week 12 of the induction p eriod , or b) lost response during the maintenance p eriod , or c) 
completed the blinded maintenance period (through Week  30). Eligible subjects will start open label treatment 
within approximately 2 weeks after their last dose of study drug in the induction or maintenance period . 
Key OLE exclusion criteria: Experiencing a serious adverse event (SAE) that was considered rela ted to study drug 
during participation in the induction or maintenance p eriod ; pregnancy or lactation in females; diagnosis, 
medication, or change in circumstance since enrollment in the induction or maintenance p eriod  that meets certain 
exclusion criteria  from that period.  
 
 
BT-11-201-Protocol -Nov320  Page 4 of 7 
 Treatments, Dosage, and Administration  
Subjects will be randomized to receive BT -11 low-dose (500 mg), BT -11 high-dose (1,000  mg), or placebo  once  
daily for 12 weeks  during the induction p eriod  of the study . Subjects who continue to the maintenance period will 
remain in the same blinded treatment group to which they were originally randomized. Authorized personnel at the 
investigative site will administer the first dose of the study drug or placebo in a blinde d fashion. All tablets 
administered (placebo and BT -11) will have the same appearance and size. Each subject will receive blister packs 
of the study drug ( high-dose BT-11, low-dose BT-11, or placebo).   
In the OLE, all subjects will receive BT -11 high -dose (1,000 mg) and study treatment will not be blinded.  
  
 
 
BT-11-201-Protocol -Nov320  Page 5 of 7 
 A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled, Double -Blind, Multicenter Study to Evaluate Efficacy and Safety of Oral BT -11 in 
Mild to Moderate Ulcerative Colitis  
 
BT-11-201, Phase 2  
 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
Version 01 
November 6, 2020  
 
 
Status: Effective  
 
 
Prepared by:  [redacted ] 
Sponsor:  Landos Biopharma Inc.  
 
Efficacy Evaluations  
Induction and Maintenance:  
Primary Efficacy Endpoint : 
• Clinical remission  rate at Week 12 , defined using the 3-component modified  Mayo Score as a rectal 
bleeding subscore of 0 , a stool frequency subscore of 0 or  1, and an endoscopic subscore of 0 or 1   
Statistical Methods  
A sample size of 65 randomized subjects to each of 3 treatment groups during the induction period is 
expected to provide  evaluable data on approximately 63 subjects per group at Week 12. This sample size 
will allow for the detection of a 17 -percen tage poin t change in remission rate (assuming a 5% placebo 
endoscopic remission rate) between groups , with a type I error rate of <  0.05 and 80% power.  
Efficacy analyses will primarily be based on the modified intent -to-treat (mITT) analysis set. A robustness  
analysis of the primary and key secondary efficacy endpoints  will also be performed on the per-protocol 
(PP) analysis set . Statistical tests will be 2 -sided and performed at the 0.05 level of significance.  
The proportion of subjects with clinical remission at Week 12 ( defined using the 3 -component modified 
Mayo Score as a rectal bleeding subscore of 0, a stool frequency subscore of 0 or 1, and an end oscopic 
subscore of 0 or 1) for each group will be tested with a Cochran -Mantel -Haenszel test, stratified with respect 
to previous use of biologic  therapy (yes/no ; exposed population limited to 30% of total sample ) and oral 
corticosteroid use at baseline (yes/no).  
A closed hierarchical procedure will be used to control for multiple comparisons. The order of testing will 
begin with high dose  versus placebo at Week 12. If this result is significant at the 2 -sided P < .05 then the 
low-dose versus placebo at Week 12 will be tested, followed by subsequent ranked  key secondary analyses . 
In this regard, the first ranked secondary endpoint will be  tested first for the high dose , and subsequently 
for the low dose provided  P < .05 for the high dose . Testing will continue  in a similar manner for the 
subsequent ranked secondary endpoints with high dose tested prior to low dose.  If at any point in this 
sequential procedure the P <  .05 is not met, the testing procedure will be terminated. All subsequent 
analyses would be considered exploratory.  
A data lock and final induction phase data analysis of Week 12 primary endpoint, Week 12 key ranked 
secondary endpoints , and Week 12 AE listings  will be performed  when all subjects have completed the 
induction p eriod  (or discontinued study treatment). To minimize any bias being introduced into the analysis, 
all data during the assessment period  associated with the primary endpoint , key ranked secondary endpoints , 
or AE listings as of Week 12  must have been monitored, the induction period statistical analysis plan ( SAP) 
must be finalized and approved, and definitions of analysis  populations must be finalized (including 
classification of significant protocol deviations and decision regarding exclusion of any subjects fro m the 
induction study analysis)  before the partial database lock and before unblinding . 
As this will be the final analysis of the primary  and key  ranked secondary endpoint s, no adjustment of type 
I error will be performed . The induction analysis will be conducted by a limited number of preidentified 
team members who do not have direct site contact or data entry/validation responsibilities. Unblinding 
details will be specified in the un blinding plan section of the SAP or in a separate unblinding plan document. 
Information that may unblind the study during the final analyses  of induction data  will not be reported to 
study sites or the blinded study team until the study has been unblinded . 
A second analysis (maintenance data lock and analysis) will be performed  to assess the  remaining Week 
12 secondary  and exploratory endpoints and the  Week 30 efficacy and safety results after all subjects have 
completed the maintenance period (or discontinued study treatment). No type 1 error adjustment will be 
necessary for the analyses of the additional non -ranked secondary endpoints and exploratory endpoints . 
BT-11 Oral  
Phase 2 Ulcerative Colitis  Protocol BT-11-201 
Amendment  03 
 
BT-11-201-Protocol -Nov320  Page 7 of 7 
 This will be the final an alysis for m any of the  secondary and  exploratory efficacy endpoints  out to Week 
30. Once the maintenance data lock is complete, the study will be unblinded.  
Before each data lock, the applicable SAP must be finalized as well as coding of events, medications and 
assessment of any major protocol deviations.  
The final database lock and analysis of the OLE period data will be carried out when the study ends.  
 