Revision  date:  Febraury 27, 2018  
 
 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis  
 
Page 1 of 12   
1) Protocol  Title  
Pilot study  for the use of photodynamic therapy  in the treatment  of 
seborrheic  dermatitis.  
 
2) Author of Protocol  
UC Davis  Researchers:  
Principal  Investigator:   Nasim Fazel,  MD, DDS,  Department  of Dermatology  
Co- Principal  Investigator:   Raja Sivamani,  MD, MS, Department  of Dermatology  
 
3) IRB Review  History  
The IRB reviewed  the protocol  and requested  that the FDA  determines  
whether an IND is needed  or exempt.  
 
4) Objectives  
a) To determine the efficacy  of photodynamic therapy  (PDT) in the  treatment of  
seborrheic dermatitis.  
 
b) To determine how PDT  alters  the skin microbiome  in subjects  with seborrheic  
dermatitis  before  and after treatment.  
 
c) To determine how PDT  alters  sebum  secretion  rates in subjects  with seborrheic  
dermatitis  before  and after treatment.  
 
We hypothesize that  PDT will  be efficacious  in the  treatment  of seborrheic  
dermatitis.  
5) Background  
Seborrheic dermatitis  is a common  chronic inflammatory  disorder  with a prevalence  
estimated  at 3-5% [1, 2].  Although  the exact pathophysiology  is unclear,  seborrheic  
dermatitis  is more prevalent  in indviduals  that are more heavily  colonized  with the 
Malassezia  spp fungal  organism,  those  with more  residual  sebum  (for example  in 
neuropathic patients  such as in Parkinson’s  disease) , and in those  with higher  sebum  
production,  which  leads  to more lipid byproduct  build up [2]. Current  topical  
treatments  include the use of topical  antifungals,  topical  steroids,  and topical  
calcineurin  inhibitors  [3, 4]. The success  of topical  treatments  requires  long-term 
use and depends on the  compliance of the patient.  Furthermore,  these treatments  
can expose  patients  to potential  side effects  such as atrophy,  thinning  of the skin  
and telangiectasias  in response  to topical  steroids.  Therefore,  alternative therapies  
that provide long -term control are needed.  
 
This pilot project  investigates  the use of PDT may be useful in the  treatment of  
seborrheic dermatitis  based on the  following:  1) The Malassezia  spp is capable of 
forming  biofilms  [5], 2) PDT has  been shown  to be effective  against  Malassezia spp  
[6, 7], 3) PDT can  break  up bioflims  of both bacterial  and fungal  origin  [8], and 4) 
Revision  date:  Febraury 27, 2018  
 
 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis  
 
Page 2 of 12   
benzoyl  peroxide,  a prooxidant treatment  similar to  PDT,  has been shown  to be 
effective in the  treatment  of seborrheic dermatitis  [9]. 
 
6) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Healthy  subjects  18 years  or older with  seborrheic  dermatitis  of the face will be  
included.  
 
Subjects who are taking systemic corticosteroids  (at doses  of prednisone  greater  
than or equal  to 5 mg daily) or  antibiotics  (PO, IM or IV) will have to undergo a 4 
week “wash -out” period before participating in the study. Subjects who are using 
topical  anti-fungals,  steroids,  antibiotics,  permethrin,  or calcineurin  inhibitors will 
have to wait 2 -weeks before enrolling. Washout will  only occur if subject signs this 
consent form and the prescribing physician advises for a washout following 
consultation.  Women who have started new birth control regimens within the last 
two months will have to wait until two months after the start of th eir regimen.  
 
Recruited  subjects  will be permitted  to use  bland  emollients,  but they  will instructed  
to refrain  from  using  topical emollients  such as PromiseSeb®  which  have been 
clinically  studied  for the treatment  of seborrheic dermatitis.  The exclusion criteria  
will also include the presence of other  untreated  inflammatory  conditions  (such  as 
lupus, atopic dermatitis,  or psoriasis) or untreated  malignancies  on the face 
(including  skin cancers  such as basal  cell carcinoma,  squamous  cell carcinoma  and 
melan oma).  
 
Any subjects with known  or suspected  hypersensitivity  to any constituent  of the 
study  medication  or a history  of photosensitivity  due to conditions  such as lupus  
erythematosus  and porphyria  will be excluded.  Subjects  who have had 
photodynamic therap y (PDT)  to the  face for any reason within  the past year will be 
excluded  as well.  
Adults  unable to consent,  individuals  under the age of 18, pregnant  or breastfeeding  
women  and prisoners  will be excluded  from  the study.   
 
7) Study -Wide Number of Subjects  
12 
 
8) Study -Wide Recruitment  Methods  
Patients  will be recruited  from  the outpatient  dermatology  clinics  in the  department  
of Dermatology  at UC Davis . We also recruit participants who live within a 100 
mile radius of the dermatology clinics  in Sacramento . They  will be reassured  that 
their participation  or non- participation  in the  study  will not affect  the level of  
clinical  care received.  
Recruitment  flyers  are attached.  
 
9) Compensation to the Subjects  
At the end of visit two, the patient  will be paid $40 for comple ting visits one  and 
two. If the patient  does not follow up for visit 2, they  will receive no compensation.  
At the end of visit three,  the patient  will be paid an additional  $20 for completing  
Revision  date:  Febraury 27, 2018  
 
 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis  
 
Page 3 of 12  visit three.  We will make the payments  using gift cards.  
 
10) Study  Timelines  
Revision  date:  Febraury 27, 2018  
 
 
  
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis  
 
Page 4 of 12   
The research  subject  will require 4 visits that are spaced  2-10 weeks  apart  as 
outlined  in the  attached  protocol. Each  visit will take a total of  1.5 hours.  We 
estimate that  each subject will participate for  a total of 3-4.5 months from  initiat ion 
of enrollment  to completion  of the study.  
 
11) Study  Endpoints  
The primary  endpoint  of the study  is recruitment  of a sufficient  number of patients  
(12) who  complete two  treatments  of photodynamic  therapy  to the  face with  
grading  of the severity  of seborrhe ic dermatitis  before each  treatment  and after each 
follow -up period.  
 
The secondary  endpoints  for the study  are obtaining  swabs for microbiome  analysis  
and facial  sebum  production rates before each  treatment and after each follow -up 
period.  
 
12) Procedures  Involved  
Duration  of seborrheic dermatitis,  previous  treatments  for seborrheic dermatitis and 
patient  response to the  treatments  will be recorded.  Facial  photography  will be  done  
for grading  the Seborrhea  Area and  Severity Index  Face (SASI -F). All seborrheic  
dermatitis  patients  will be graded  using  the SASI -F [3]. This score is a composite  
score as  follows:  the area index, also known  as the relative area of facial  
involvement,  is denoted  as a fraction  of 1 with the normal  hairline  defining the  
boundaries  of the face.   Erythema and  scale  are separately  scored  on a 5-point scale  
using  the definitions used to conduct  Psoriasis  Area and  Severity Index  scoring  (ie, 
0 = none,  1 = slight,  2 = moderate,  3 = striking,  and 4 =  exceptionally  striking).  
The scores  for erythema  and scale  are then summed  and multiplied  by the relative  
area of facial  involvement ratio.   The maximal score is 8 whereas  no involvement  
would  have a score  of 0.  The inclusion  criteria  will be similar to the  previous  trial 
that used the SASI -F in their  analysis  [3]. This study  will consist  of subjects with 
an erythema score  of at least one with  the presence  of at an area index  of 5% or 
more.  
This study  will be a single blinded,  randomized,  intra-individual  comparison  study  
consisting  of a total of 12 subjects.   Patients  will be randomized  by utilizing  an 
online  randomizer.   A power  analysis  is not truly  applicable because this is  a pilot 
study  that utilizes a  potential  treatment  for seborrhei c dermatitis  that has not been  
previously  investigated.   We plan to  recruit  up to  12 patients.  The treatment  will 
consist  of split-face comparisons  of no application  of aminolevulinic acid  (ALA) vs 
ALA application  to either  half of the face.  Prior to ALA application,  the face will be 
swabbed  for microbiome  analysis.   A schematic  for the split-face study  is shown  in 
Figure 1.  After the ALA  application,  the subjects  will incubate with  the ALA on 
their face per the standard  PDT protocol  used at UC Davis  Derm atology  clinic for 
facial  PDT treatments.  The side of the face being  treated  will remain  the same 
during all treatments.   The investigator  applying  the ALA to the patient  will be 
aware of which  side is receiving  treatment  and which  side is not, but  the patient 
will be blinded.   For the placebo,  Demo Levulan Kerastick, which contains no active 
ingredient and is enclosed in same cardboard sleeve and cap, will be applied to the 
other side of the face to mimic the surface of the ALA application stick.  
Revision  date:  Febraury 27, 2018  
 
 
  
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis  
 
Page 5 of 12   
After the ALA  incubation is completed,  the subjects will be exposed  to a treatment  
dose of blue light from a  Blu-U unit  per UC  Davis Dermatology  clinic protocol  for 
PDT treatments.  
Calibrated  facial  pictures  will be used for blind grading  utilizing  the SASI -F scoring 
system.  
 
A flow diagram  of the protocol is shown  in Figure  2.  The topical  ALA used for this 
study  will be Levulan®  Kerasticks  (DUSA Pharmaceuticals,  Inc.).  Facial  sebum  
production  rate will  be measured  with SebuMeter®.  The swabbing  for the 
microbiome  will be performed  as non-invasive swabbing  from the  face that  will not 
cause the patient any pain or discomfort.   For the blue light treatment,  the total light 
dose to the  face will  be consistent with the currently  used standard  facial  exposure  
PDT protoc ols at UC Davis.  
 
After the third visit, patients have the option of  being  seen in the  regular  
dermatology  clinics.   Based on the  disease severity, a  treatment  modality  will then 
be selected  and administered  for the untreated  side of the face.  
 
The Levulan  Kerasticks and Demo Levulan Kerastick s are stored at  the 
Investigatio nal Drug Services (IDS) , a Div ision of the Pharmacy Departmen at the 
University of California, Davis . IDS dispenses the Kerasticks  upon the 
investigators’ request.   
 
13) Data  and Specimen Ba nking  
N/A 
 
14) Data  Management  
This study  will be a single blinded,  randomized,  intra-individual  comparison  study  
consisting  of a total of 12 subjects.   A power  analysis is not truly  applicable  because  
this is a  pilot study  that utilizes a  potential  treatment  for seborrheic dermatitis  that 
has not been  previously  investigated.   We plan to recruit  up to 12 patients.  
 
SASI -F scores  and the SebuMeter®  measurements  will be compared  within  the 
treatment  group  and an intra-individual  comparison  will be performed  by paired  
statistical  testing  such as the paired  t-test. A p-value  of 0.05 or  less will be 
considered  significant.   All of the assessors  will be blinded  to the  treatment  groups.  
The primary  endpoint  will be  complete clearance  of the seborrheic dermatitis  as an 
intra-individual  comparison  and statistically  analyzed  with a two-sided  paired  t-test. 
All participants  will be included  in the  study  on an intent -to-treat basis.  
 
15) Provisions  to Monitor the Data  to Ensure the Safety  of Subjects  
Revision  date:  November 2, 2018  
 
  
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis  
 
 
Page 6 of 12  The subjects  will be monit ored clinically  during  the treatment  for any evidence  of 
side effects  such as pain or  blisters.  All of the treatments  are done  with topical  
ALA,  which  is an FDA approved  drug.  
 
No regular blood draws  or labs will be necessary.   No systemic  effects  are 
anticipated  because  all of the treatments  are localized topical  applications.  
 
However,  the patient  will be given  a contact  number  on the  consent forms  in case 
there are any treatment  related adverse effects  such as erythema,  blisters,  pain, or  
secondary  infec tion. Any side effects  will be noted  in a secure document.  
Secondary  infections  will be treated  with appropriate antibiotics  and local  
inflammation  will be treated  with topical  steroids  as necessary.  
 
16) Withdrawal  of Subjects  
Subjects  may be withdrawn  withou t their consent  if they acquire any medical  issues  
during  the study  period which  require the use of any other  topical  medications, oral 
or parenteral  steroids,  oral or  parenteral  antibiotics.  They  may also be withdrawn  if 
they are found  to have any abnorma l sensitivity/allergy  to the  ALA.  
 
If a subject  is to be  withdrawn  without  their consent, they  will be contacted  and the 
reason(s) for their  withdrawal  will be explained  in full. No further data will be  
collected  from the  subject.  
 
17) Risks  to Subjects  
There is a low chance for  any physical,  psychological,  social  or legal injury  from  
participation  in the  study.  The patient  will be warned of  the standard  risks of 
treatment  with topical  ALA including  erythema,  pain,  blisters,  increased  temporary  
photosensitivity  for 24 hours after treatments,  and risk for hyper - and 
hypopigmentation.  
 
These potential  adverse  events  will be localized  and can be adequately  managed  
and controlled  with wound care and topical  antibiotics, if  the subject  were  to 
develop  a secondary  infection at the treatment  sites.  It is also possible,  although  
unlikely,  that the subject  may develop contact  dermatitis  after exposure  to the  
topical  ALA.  This can be adequately  managed  with topical  steroids  and topical  
antibiotics,  if necessary.  
 
18) Potential  Benefits  to Subjects  
The individual  subject  may benefit  from the  treatment,  but this cannot  be 
guaranteed  since this study  aims  to explore  the efficacy  of PDT in the  setting  of 
seborrheic dermatitis.   The greater community  of patients  with seborrheic  derm atitis  
would  benefit  as this study  would  provide  more insight  into the  efficacy  of PDT for  
the treatment  of seborrheic  dermatitis.  
Revision  date:  November 2, 2018  
 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis   
 
Page 7 of 12   
Given  that half of the subjects’  face will  receive the standard PDT treatment, as per 
the dermatology  clinic protocol  for actinic keratoses on the  face,  there  is the 
possibility  that the treatments  will concurrently  treat their actinic keratoses.  
 
19) Vulnerable Populations  
N/A 
 
20) Multi -Site Research  
N/A 
 
21) Community -Based Participatory  Research  
N/A 
 
22) Sharing  of Results  with Subjects  
N/A 
 
23) Setting  
The subjects  will be recruited  from  the patients  that attend  the dermatology  clinics  
at the UC Davis  Dermatology  clinic . 
 
Research  activities  will be conducted  at the UC Davis Dermatology  Department  
(3301  C Street,  Suite  1300/1400).  
 
24) Resources  Available  
The Dermatology  department and clinic at  UC Davis is available for use and the  
support  staff within  the department  should be  sufficient  to conduct  the study.  
The personnel  involved  in this study,  their qualifications and their roles  are as 
follow s: 
Nasim Fazel,  MD, DDS,  MAS : Clinical  Associate Professor,  Principal  
Investigator.  
-Experienced  dermatologist with expertise in both  seborrheic dermatitis  and PDT.  
-Role:  Study  design,  grading  of treatment  site, involved  in PDT procedure,  patient  
recruitm ent, facial  photography,  specimen  collection,  and data analysis.  
Raja  Sivamani,  MD,  MS: Assistant  Professor of Dermatology,  Co-Principal  
Investigator.  
- Experienced  in the  use of PDT.  
-Role:  Study  design,  patient  recruitment,  involved  in PDT procedure,   facial 
photography,  specimen  collection,  grading  of treatment  site, and data analysis  
Research  assistants : Undergraduate  students,  medical students and junior  
specialist.  
 
Revision  date:  November 2, 2018  
 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis   
 
Page 8 of 12   
- Role:  Patient  recruitment,  blue light exposure, facial  photography,  specimen  
colle ction,  organization  of data 
Coordinator s:  
- Role: Patient  recruitment,  blue light exposure, facial photography,  grading  
of treatment  site, specimen  collection,  data analysis  
 
Seborrheic dermatitis  is one  of the most common  conditions  encountered  in 
dermat ology  and among our  patients.  Therefore,  we will  have a sufficient  
recruitment  pool to meet  our required  number  of subjects.  
 
Photodynamic therapy  is frequently  used at the Dermatology  clinic and we do 
not expect  significant  adverse  effects.  However,  the patient  will be asked  to 
contact  the dermatology  attending  on-call in the  event that there is an adverse  
effect.  
 
To ensure that  all assisting  personnel  are aware  of the research  protocols, we  will 
have a pre-recruitment  meeting  followed  by regularly  schedu led meetings  to 
discuss  duty expectations, the  protocol,  study  progress,  and any changes  as 
needed.  
 
 
25) Prior  Approvals  
N/A 
 
26) Recruitment Methods  
We will recruit  from  the patients  that attend  the outpatient dermatology  clinic at  UC 
Davis  using  flyers  with contact  numbers  of the research  team. We also use UC 
Davis Study Pages website . Patients  will be assured  that their clinical  care will not 
be affected  by their participation  or non- participation  in the  study.  
 
Recruitment  flyers  are attached.  
 
27) Local  Numb er of Subjects  
A total of 12 subjects  will be recruited.  
 
28) Confidentiality  
This study  is not a  multicenter study.  All of the data will be stored  in secured  data 
files in a password -protected  computer within  a locked room.  All of the subjects  
will be coded  with the codes listed  in a separate password  protected  file.  All paper  
files of the subjects  will be stored  in a locked cabinet  within  a locked  room. Dr. 
Fazel,  Dr. Sivamani,  and the research  coordinator  will have access  to the  paper  files 
and password  protected  data files.  
 
Subjects’ images may be used for educational purposes, publications and/or 
presentations at conferences, and scientific meetings.  Pictures will be used without 
using any identifying information or features.  We will follow the institut ional policy 
for the use of recorded material for educational purposes and/or presentations at 
Revision  date:  November 2, 2018  
 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis   
 
Page 9 of 12  conferences, scientific meetings etc... that is outside of the research:  
http://intranet.ucdmc.ucdavis.edu/policies/hospital_policies_and_procedures/consents
_legal_documents/1426.shtml  
 
 
29) Provisions  to Protect the Privacy  Interests  of Subjects  
To protect  subjects'  privacy  interests,  data and/or specimens  will be labeled  with a 
code that  the research  team can link to personal  identifying  information  when  
acquired.   The code  sheet  will be secured  and kept separate from  the dataset.   Only  
authorized  research  personnel will have access  to this information.  All paper  
records  containing  study  data will  be stored  in a study  binder.  This study  binder  
will be securely  stored  in a locked  cabinet,  in a locked office,  in the  UC Davis  
Department  of Dermatology  at 3301 C St, Suite  1400, Sacramento,  CA 95816.  Any 
study -related  electronic information  will be kept in a password -protected  computer  
database.   Only  the PI, study  staff,  IRB and other  authorized/designated  governing  
bodies  and individuals  will be allowed  to access  these study -related  documents. All 
HIPAA,  IRB, State,  and Federal  policies  and guidelines  will be followed  to ensure  
patient  confidentiality.  
 
Patient  photograph s taken during  this study  will be handled  according  to the  UC 
Davis  Dermatology  clinic  protocol,  which  is as follows.  Photographs  will be taken  
with the clinic’s  cameras  (which  never  leave  the clinic),  uploaded  to the  patient’s  
electronic medical  record, and deleted from the  camera.  
 
Interviews  with patients  will be conducted  in a private  clinic room.  The participant  
may choose not to answer any or all of the questions during  the interview,  or they 
may stop the  interview at  any time,  if they are uncomforta ble or unsure  about the  
study.  
 
30) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
If the patient  is injured  as a result  of being  in the  study,  the University  of California  
will provide necessary  medical  treatment.   Depending  on the  circumstances, the  
costs  of the treatment  may be covered  by the University  or may be billed to the 
patient’s  insurance company.  The University  and the study  sponsor  do not  
normally  provide  any other  form  of compensation  for injury.  
 
31) Economic Burden to Subjects  
The patient  will need to com e to the  dermatology  clinic  for the PDT treatments.  As 
such,  they will need to pay  for the expense  of travel. Although  this may  be offset  by 
compensation  for participation in the  study,  the patient will need  to pay for the 
travel  expense  ahead  of receiving  their compensation.  
 
32) Consent Process  
Written  consent  will be obtained  from  patients  at the UC Davis  outpatient  
Dermatology  clinic in Sacramento.   We will be following  the SOP:  Informed  
Consent  Process  for Research.   After obtaining  consent, there will  be a two-week  
waiting  period before initiating  treatment  so that the patient  may begin  using  only 
Revision  date:  November 2, 2018  
 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis   
 
Page 10 of 12  Dove soap  and stop using  any other  products to their face.  If the patient is using 
systemic treatment they will have to wait 4 weeks before participating, and if  the 
patient is using topical treatment they will have to wait 2 weeks before participating. 
Patient will also be provided a moisturizer and sunscreen to use as needed. Patient 
will be encouraged to use sunscreen following PDT treatments.  
 
Only  English -speaking,  adult subjects  who are not cognitively  impaired  and are 
able to consent  will be recruited.  
 
33) Process  to Document  Consent in Writing  
 
Written  documentation  of consent  process  will be obtained  (please see  attached  
Consent  document).  This includes sign ing of the standardized consent form and 
HIPPA as well as an additional consent form that outlines permission to use 
photographs/recordings for publications/conferences/training purposes. In 
combination, this consent process will follow UCDHS policies rela ted to this studya 
and allow use of photographs obtained for conferences/trainings /publications.  
 
34) Drugs  or Devices  
Aminolevulinic acid  (ALA) and  the Blu-U unit are routinely  used for delivering  
PDT treatments in the  dermatology  clinic . The Levulan Kerast icks and Demo 
Levulan Kerastick s will be at  the Investigatio nal Drug Services (IDS) , a Div ision of 
the Pharmacy Departmen at the University of California, Davis . IDS dispenses the 
Kerasticks  upon the investigators’ request.  They will be used as per the UC Davis  
Department  of Dermatology  protocol for PDT  treatments.  PDT is not an 
investigational  drug or device.  
Levulan Keastick is approved by the FDA for the treatment of actinic keratosis. The 
FDA has exempeted this protocol from the IND regulati ons. 
Referen ces: 
1. Palamaras,  I., K.P. Kyriakis,  and N.G.  Stavrianeas,  Seborrheic dermatitis: lifetime  
detection  rates.  J Eur Acad  Dermatol  Venereol,  2012. 26(4): p. 524-6. 
2. Sampaio,  A.L.,  et al., Seborrheic  dermatitis.  An Bras Dermatol,  2011. 86(6): p.  
1061 -71; quiz 1072-4. 
3. Papp,  K.A.,  et al., Single -blind, randomized  controlled  trial evaluating  the 
treatment  of facial  seborrheic dermatitis  with hydrocortisone 1% ointment  
compared  with tacrolimus  0.1%  ointment  in adults. J Am Acad  Dermatol,  2012.  
67(1): p. e11-5. 
4. Naldi,  L. and A. Rebora,  Clinical  practice.  Seborrheic dermatitis.  N Engl  J Med,  
2009. 360(4): p. 387-96. 
5. Figueredo,  L.A.,  et al., Biofilm  formation  of Malassezia  pachydermatis  from  dogs.  
Vet Microbiol,  2012.  
6. Lee, J.W., B.J. Kim,  and M.N.  Kim,  Photodynamic therap y: New  treatment  for 
recalcitrant  Malassezia  folliculitis.  Lasers  in Surgery  and Medicine,  2010.  42(2): 
p. 192-196. 
7. Lee, J.W., et al., Topical  photodynamic therapy with methyl  aminolevulinate may  
be an alternative therapeutic  option for the  recalcitrant  Malassezia  folliculitis.  
International  Journal of  Dermatology,  2011. 50(4): p. 488-490. 
8. Biel,  M.A.,  Photodynamic therapy of bacterial  and fungal biofilm  infections.  
Revision  date:  November 2, 2018  
 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of 
seborrheic dermatitis   
 
Page 11 of 12  Methods  Mol Biol,  2010. 635: p. 175-94. 
9. Bonnetblanc,  J.M. and P. Bernard,  Benzoyl peroxide  in seborrheic dermatitis.  
Arch  Dermatol,  1986. 122(7): p. 752.  
Revision  date:  November 2, 2018  
 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Pilot study for the use of photodynamic therapy in the treatment of seborrheic 
dermatitis   
 
Page 12 of 12   
Figure 1. Schematic for the split-face study.  The C and M groups  will be randomized to  
the right  or the left side of the face by binary  randomization.  
 
 
Figure 2. Seborrheic  Dermatitis  PDT Study Protocol  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
END  OF STUDY  
 
 
 
 Visit 2 
1. Urine pregnancy test for female subjects. If the woman is postmenopasual or if the woman does not have a uterus, then they will be exempted from pregnancy testing  
2. Facial  photography  for SASI -F grading  and erythema and scale grading  
3. Measure  facial  sebum production  rates  with SebuMeter®  
4. Apply  ALA to treatment  side and sham  ALA to control  side 
5. Incubate  ALA for one hour 
6. Expose  to blue light per UC Davis  Dept  of Dermatology  stand ard protocol  Visit 0  
1. Medical history and inclusion/exclusion criteria  
2. sign the consent forms  
 
Visit 1  
1. Urine pregnancy test for female subjects. If the woman is postmenopasual or if the woman does not have a uterus, then they will be exempted from p regnancy testing  
2. Facial photography for SASI -F grading and erythema and scale grading  
3. Swab facial sites for microbiome  analysis  
4. Measure  facial  sebum production  rates  with SebuMeter®  
5. Apply  ALA to treatment  side and sham  ALA to control  side 
6. Incubate  ALA for one hour 
7. Expose  to blue light per UC Davis  Dept  of Dermatology  standard  protocol  
2-4 week  interval  
 
 2-4 week  interval  
Visit 3 
1. Facial  photography  for SASI -F grading  and erythema and scale grading  
2. Swab facial sites for microbiome  analysis  
3. Meas ure facial sebum production rates with SebuMeter®  
 
 Recruit total of 12 subjects  
Binary  randomization  for treatment  of right versus  left face as the control  
 
2-10 week interval  