COVER PAGE  
A Novel Application of Exparel for Postoperative Pain Management in Shoulder 
Arthroplasty and Humerus Fracture Fixation  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
4/14/2015 
 
             
 
 
A Novel Applic ation of Exparel for Postoperative Pain Management in Shoulder Arthroplasty 
 
Shoul der arthroplasty is the fastest growing joint replacement surgery in the U S, therefore 
effective pain management is critical and leads to early mobilization and rehabilitation, proven factors in 
patient satisfaction and clinical outcomes. This random ized co ntrolled clinical trial is the first to establish 
the utility of liposomal bupivacaine-based m ultimodal analgesic regimen in patients und ergoing shou lder 
arthroplasty.  We  will evaluate the potential promises of liposo mal bupivacaine to addr ess many of the 
shortcomings associated w ith interscalene blocks, including a favorable safety profile, decreased cost, 
increased du ration of effect, and a  potential improvement in functional outcomes and f aster return to 
activities of daily living. 
Shoulder  arthroplas ty patients  have unique  postop erative goals for mobi lization and 
rehabilitation that are often limited by pain. Current pain management  schemes are subopti mal. 
liposom al bupivacaine  (Exparel) is a promising new agent, still untested in shoulder  arthroplas ty 
patients, and may improve outcom es such a s opioid use, pain control, patient satisfaction, and 
shoulde r function. This study aims to measure these outcom es in order to show th at Exparel is 
superior to continuous  interscalene block in reducing postope rative pain and healthcare cost and 
improving  functional outcomes  and pa tient satisfaction, which will hope fully lead to a 
widespread change in clinical practice for shoul der surgery. 
With the mount ing evidenc e that a liposom al bupivacain e-based multimodal  analgesic 
regimen results in statistically significant and clinically meaningful reductions in opioi d 
consumpt ion, short er length of stay and low er inpatient costs for  general surgery procedu res, it is 
important we examine its use in orthopaedics. The potential  benefits of liposom al bupivacaine 
are significant enough to cause a wid espread shift in clinical practice for po stope rative pain 
management  after total joint replacement.  However, many providers are unconvinc ed regarding 
the potential utility and benefit of this  agent due to current lack of evidence in orthopaedics. 
Results from this study may show t hat liposomal  bupiva caine  is superior to patient controlled 
continuous  interscalene block for postope rative pain management  in terms of d ecreased 
postope rative pain, decreased opioi d use, less c omplications and improve d patient satisfaction and 
shoulde r function in shoulder  arthroplas ty patients. If the hypothesis  is confirmed,  this study will 
promote  the use of liposom al bupivacain e-based multimodal analgesic regimen over continuous  
interscalene block as a method of postoperative pain control  for shoulde r arthroplas ty patients. 
 
HYPOTHESES& SPECIFIC AIM  
Hypothesis  – Liposomal  Bupiva caine based multimodal  analgesia will provide improve d 
postope rative pain control, reduction in amount  of opioi d suppl ement ation, decreased 
compl ications and quicke r return to function compa red to current standard of care pain 
management  for patients unde rgoing shoulde r arthroplas ty surgery. 
 
Speci fic Aim 1 
To assess the  impa ct of liposomal  Bupivac aine compar ed to standard of care continuous 
peripheral  nerve cathet er in terms of postoperat ive pain control  after shoul der arthroplasty 
surger y. 
Speci fic Aim 2 
To evaluat e amount of  supple mental opioi d usage  by patients after liposomal  Bupivac aine as 
compar ed to that used by patients treated with control led continuous  peripheral  nerve block 
(CPN B) after shoul der arthroplasty  surgery. 
Speci fic Aim 3 
Test the safety of liposomal  Bupivac aine compar ed to control led continuous  peripheral  nerve 
block  when used for  postope rative pain manage ment in pat ients unde rgoing  shoulde r 
arthr oplasty. 
Speci fic Aim 4 
Compare  functional  recovery  for patients treated with liposomal  bupi vacaine versus continuous 
peripheral  catheter for postope rative pain manage ment after shoulder arthroplas ty surger y. 
 
Study Design 
Patients will be  screened within 30 da ys prior  to their scheduled surgical procedur e. At the 
screening visit, eligibility criteria will be assessed, a  compl ete history and phy sical exam and 
pregnancy test will be performed (for pr emenopa usal women  only), and concomitant 
medi cations and na rcotic usage will be recorded. Training on self-assessment  measures will also 
be conduc ted. Patients  meeting inclus ion criteria will be consented at prescreening visit for 
participation  in this study by a study coordina tor or PI. 
At baseline (1week prior to surgery) a physical examination, medi cal history, and pain 
assessment  using  a 11 po int nume ric rating scale at rest (NRS-R) and with  activity(NRS-A) will 
be collected.  Patients  will then be enroll ed and randomized into the study in one of two groups. 
All patients  will receive  standard of care preoperative analgesia. Preoperatively, the 
anesthesio logist will administer a 60mL single bolus brachial  plexus nerve block with 0.5% 
bupiva caine  to all patients. Patients in Group 1 will  also unde rgo cathe ter placement  at this time 
and continue to receive  continuous peripheral nerve block (CISB) with 0.125%  bupiva caine  at a 
rate of 6 mL/hour  postop eratively, allowing for the maximum dose to be administered over 100 
hours.  Patients  in Group 2 will  receive  only the single shot peripheral nerve block 
preoperatively. 
All patients  will then receive standard of care general anesthesia  with appropriate 
intraoperative doses of fe ntanyl or analogs equiva lents. Patients in Group 2 will  receive  local 
tissue infiltration with liposom al bupivacaine  intra-operatively in addit ion to the previous ly 
administered single shot peripheral nerve block to cover early postope rative pain. The study 
medi cation will be diluted to the recom mended total volume of 60m L with 0.9% nor mal saline, 
and administered via recommended movi ng needle technique  during the surgical procedure. The 
study drug administration will be done  prior  to prosthet ic implant ation (36ml) and after 
prosthe tic implant ation (12mL into the capsul e and rotator cuff mus culatu re) and wound du ring 
closure  (12mL). The techniqu e used has been validated and de monstr ated success for total knee 
replacements  as well as case series for to tal shoulder  arthroplasty. 
Post-operatively, the patients will be  continued on ora l acetaminophen and ce lecoxib for 
96 hour s after surgery when oral medications are tolerated. If postsur gical p ain cannot be 
managed with nonna rcotic medi cations then patients will receive  an appropriate rescue dose of 
intravenous  morphine  or 5 mg  oral oxycodone  on a request basis on ly for breakthrou gh pain. 
Post-operat ively all patients will be  assesse d for pa in every 2 hou rs by the nurse  using  the 
Num eric Ranking Scale (NRS-A, and NR S-R) for pain (0=no pain, 10= worst pain)  for the  first 
36 hour s or until  disch arge, and scores will be record ed in the medi cal record and stu dy log 
book.  All  doses and times of narcotics administered during the inpatient  stay will be recorded in 
the medical record and stu dy log book.  All  opioid doses will be conve rted to mg  morphine 
equival ents. Following disch arge, telephone  evaluations will be conduc ted on postope rative days 
2, 7 a nd 30 da ys by the research associate or PA.  These interviews will collect data includi ng 
pain scales, narcotic usage, patient satisfaction with postope rative anesthesia/p ain control, reason 
for not  using  medi cation, opioi d related side effects, catheter related side effects, and use of othe r 
pain control methods  from each consented participant  prospect ively, this data will be recorded 
using  a standardized outcomes  data collection form. Follow up postope rative assessments wi ll 
include  the above  pain scores and na rcotic usage logs as well as additional  stand ard functional 
outcome  assessments.  These assessments wi ll occur at 2 week, 6 w eek and 3 mont hs post- 
operative clinic visits as per standard of care. 
Primary outcom es measures will pertain to patient pain scores and na rcotic usage until 
disch arge and thro ugh day 30 postope rative.  Seconda ry outcom es will include time to 
discha rge, patient satisfaction with post-surgical anesthesia  at discharge, and time to resumpt ion 
of work or no rmal activities. Safety outcome  measures will include , vital signs, wound h ealing 
status,  neuropraxia, any adverse events (classifi ed as being related to opioid, liposomal 
bupiva caine,  or cathe ter), and pa tient responses r egarding  hospital  readmissions , unplanne d 
medi cal visits or health related problems.  Short term functional assessme nts of shoulde r function 
will also be measur ed at follow up clinic visits (2 weeks and 6 weeks post-operatively) and 
reported as secondary outcom es. These outcome  measures are all well described and validated 
for use  in out comes f ollowing  shoulde r surgery. The scores all assess the p atients’ subj ective 
quantification of pain and ability to complete  functional activities. The Const ant Score elaborates 
on thi s to include an obje ctive physician assessm ent of shoulder  range of motion and str ength. 
 
Statistical Anal ysis 
Power calculations for this study are based on previous  studi es utilizing liposom al 
bupiva caine.  These studi es also utilized area under the curve of visual  analogue scale and 
predicted that in order to de tect a 30%  difference with a powe r of >80% a nd a significance level 
of 0.05  a  minimum of 25 pa tients would be  need ed in each treatment group. 
Cont inuous  parameters will be summarized using  descriptive  statis tics and cat egorical 
parameters will be summarized using  number  and percentage of subj ects. The proportions  of 
subject that require  opioi ds ve rsus those tha t do n ot wi ll be c ompa red usi ng Fischer’s exact test 
or chi-squared test as appropriat e. All doses of opi oids will be  conve rted to morphine  equival ents 
to allow  for compa rison. Total narcotic consumpt ion and cumul ative pain scores will be calculated 
as the area under the curve (AUC) using  the trapezoidal  method. The total narcotic consum ption, 
cumul ative pain scores, functional outcome  scores, time to first rescue opioi d dose, and le ngth of 
hospi tal stay will be compared between g roups usi ng student  t-test with treatment group as the 
main effect. All statis tics will be performed using  SPSS softw are (IBM SPSS S tatistics for 
Windows, Version 22.0. A rmonk, NY: IBM Corp) 