IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The anti-inflammatory effect of prop hylactic macrolides on  children with chronic lung  
disea se: a double blinded RCT 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version date: 10/09/2015   
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   PROTOCOL 
 
 
 
The anti-inflamm atory effect of prop hylactic macrolides on  chil dren with 
chronic lung  disea se: a double blinded RCT 
 
 
 
 
Principal Inves tigator: 
 
 
Ricar do A. Mosquera,  MD UT Health Science Center 
 
 
 
Co-Investigators:  
 
 
Cheryl Samuels,  RN PNP                                                UT Health Science Center 
Susan Wootton,  MD                                                         UT Health Science Center 
Cindy Jon, MD                                                                    UT Health Science Center 
Claudia Pedroza, PhD                                                     UT Health Science Center 
Elenir Avritscher, MD, PhD, MBA                                UT Health Science Center 
Aravind  Yadav, MD                                                          UT Health Science Center 
Tomika Harris, PNP                                                         UT Health  Science Center 
 
Research Nurse/Coordinators: 
 
Ana Maria  Gome z-Rubio UT Health  Science Center 
 
 
Contact  Person(s): 
Ricar do A. Mosquer a, MD 
Division of Pulmonolo gy 
Department  of Pediatrics, University of Texas 
 
6410 Fannin St 
 
Houston, TX 77030 
 
 (office) 
 
 (pager) 
 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   Research Aims 
Primary Aims: 
 
1. To determine if prophylactic use of azithromy cin will reduce the total number of 
unsc heduled  face-to-face physician visit  for respirato ry related illness in a cli nic, urgent 
care, emer gency room  or hospital setting during the 3-6 month study perio d, and 
subse quent  2 months follow-up. 
Second ary Aim: 
 
1. To determine if the admin istrat ion of azith romycin will ha ve similar  number  of adverse 
side effects,  or adverse  even ts leading to unsc heduled  clinic, urgent care, emer gency room 
or hospital visit as compared  to place bo during the 3-6 month study  period  and the 
following 2 months. 
2. To determine if the use of azithromycin will reduce healthca re cost  associ ated with 
 
respirato ry illness during the 3-6 month study period  and 2 month follow-up perio d. 
 
 
Exploratory Outcom es: 
 
1. Using a standardize nasal wash procedure, respirato ry sam ples will be  collected at 
enrollmen t, at end of study, and during acute  respirato ry illness requiring face-to-face 
provider interact ion. Children with a trac heost omy will have both a nas al wash sam ple and 
a tracheal  aspirate  sample collected. The  respirato ry sam ples will be  stabilized  with a 
unive rsal transport media, processed  and stored at -80 C for future testing. Testi ng will be 
performed  for cytokines/chemo kines; other biomarkers of disease such  as LDH, MPO, and 
caspase; viral and bact erial respirato ry pathogens; and microbiome. 
 
2. To determine if prophylactic use of azithromycin will reduce level of airway resistance as 
measu red by an Airwave Oscill ometry  System in subjects  above 2 years of age,  at the time 
of respirato ry illnesses,  during the 3-6 months intervention. 
 
 
3. To determine if prophylactic use of azithromycin will reduce the total number of 
unsc heduled  face-to-face physician visit  for respirato ry related illness in a cli nic, urgent 
care, emer gency room  or hospital setting during the following 12 months after the 
intervention. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015    
 
 
 
Background  
 
 
 
For the past 3 years, the High  Risk  Children’s Clinic at UTP  (HRC C) has been 
providing a me dical home for medically complex children. We have  demonstrat ed 
major benefits (e.g., 50% fewer  serious  illnesses & 55% fewer  hospital days)  and 
savings  (~$1 0K/chi ld/year) from the comprehensive  care provided in our 
enhanc ed medical home to hi gh-risk chronically ill children--including patients with 
chronic lung disease (CLD). These benefits have not been previo usly shown for 
medical homes for patients of any kind or age.1,2 These  benefits result  primarily  
from 24/7 access  by phone to dedicated and experie nced caregivers directed  by a 
pediatric pulmonolo gist. The clinic offers same  day appointmen ts and provides 
comprehensive  coordination of care for this population.  We now  aim to further  cut 
morbidity rates by developing specific  outpatient interventions to augment 
comprehensive  care  for each major disor der that we treat. 
 
 
A significa nt portion (44%) of our patients in the High Risk  Children clinic are 
chronically  ill children who have some  form of CLD including patients with 
bronchopul monary dysplasia  (BPD).  Chronic lung disease, as defined by the ATS 
statement  from 200 2, is “a he terogeneous  group of respirato ry diseases of infancy 
that  usually evolves from an acute respirato ry disor der experi enced  by a newbo rn 
infant.” Specificall y, infants with bronchopul monary dysplasia, defined as the need 
for supplemen tal oxygen thera py in children past 28 days born under 32 weeks 
gestation.3    These  infants often incur  long-term pulmonary function  abno rmalit ies, 
including oxygen dependency after  discha rge, recurrent respirato ry infections,  and 
other  reactive airway diseases. From our data, we have  learned that  many of  the 
hospital admissions  in our group of patients were relat ed to respirato ry infections 
(37%) during the winter season.  Despite vaccin ation rates of nearly 100 %, 
admin istrat ion of Palivizumab to all of  those  eligible patients and acce ss to our 
comprehensive  care  clinic, viral respirato ry illnesses  continue to cau se considerable  
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   morbidity and high healthcare costs.  Innovative new prophylactic treatme nts are 
needed. 
 
 
Macrolides have rece ived considerable  attention for their anti-inflammatory and 
imm unomo dulat ory actions  beyond the antibacterial effect. Such properties may  ensure 
some efficacy  agai nst a wide spectrum of respiratory viral infect ions.4 Rece nt studies, 
including a study performed  in our lab with elderly  BALB/c mice infected with RSV, 
have shown that the high mortality rate of respirato ry virus infect ions is a result  of a 
neutrophilic  overact ive inflam matory response.5 A recently published  study examin ed 
the inflam matory response  in hospitalized infants with RSV  and e valuated the 
predictive value of cytokines in nasopharyngeal aspirate  in comparison to disease 
seve rity and found  an increase in Th1 and Th2 cytokines.6 Respirato ry viral infect ions 
are characte rized by the appearance  of cytokine storms which  are an ext reme 
production and secre tion of numerous pro-inflammatory cytokines. Severity  of infect ion 
is closely  related to vi rus-induced cytokine dysregulatio n, which  is responsi ble for the 
developme nt of fatal clinic al symptoms, such  as mass ive pulmonary edema,  acute 
broncho pneumonia, alveolar  hemo rrhage, and acute respirato ry distress s yndrome.4 
Macrolides down-regulate  the inflam matory casca de, attenuate  excessive cytokine 
production in viral infect ions,  and may  reduce virus-related exace rbation. Clinical trials 
have  demonstrat ed contr oversial  results  in the effects  of mac rolides in respirato ry viral 
infect ions.7  To date, studies have only  eval uated macrolide use as a trea tmen t, not as a 
prophylactic therapy. Long-term therapy with the mac rolide antibiot ic erythromycin 
was shown to alter  the clin ical co urse of diffuse pan b ronchiolit is in the late 1980s.8 
Since that time,  mac rolides have  been found to ha ve a 
large number of anti-inflammatory properties in addition to being antimicrobials. These 
observations  provided the rationale for many stu dies performed  over the last deca de to 
assess the usefu lness of mac rolides in other  inflammatory  airways diseases, such  as 
cystic fibrosis,  asthma, COPD,  and bronchiolit is oblit erans syndrome.9  One R CT looked at 
the daily  use of mac rolides for up to six weeks to prevent  broncho pulmonary dysplasia  
in prema ture infan ts in a NI CU setting and found  the neonates to have better outc omes  
without an increase in adverse  effects .10 However, chronic use of mac rolides 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   has not be en studied to prevent  respirato ry infection  complications in patients with 
 
CLD of infancy. We will test the hypothesis  that prophylactic macrolides are effective  in 
reducing the seve rity of respirato ry viral illness  and that  this is associ ated with the 
preven tion of the full activat ion of an inflammatory casca de. 
 
 
 
 
Study Design and Methods 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview: 
 
This pilot ran domized control trial (RCT) will enroll 92 children from 6 months to 
 
<6 years of age that  have chronic lung disease (CLD) such as broncho pulmonary 
dysplasia  during two seasons  of respirato ry illnesses  defined as 1st October to 31st 
March of each year (2015-2016 Season and 2016-2017 Season). If the min imum 
number  of patients (n=92) in Season 1 is achieved, we will then  perform an interim 
analysis of the data. These  children will all be  patients who receive their primary 
medical care from either the High Risk  Children Clinic or the similar  High Risk  Infant 
Clinic that c ares for prema ture infan ts from discharge until age 2. Clinic records will 
be screened to determine eligibility. Patients that have  paren tal cons ent will be  
given  a baseline EKG, a nasal as pirate, an oscil lometer reading (over 2 years of age 
 
only), and a three to six month supply of either  the medication or the place bo at an 
initial study visit. Both me dications will be  taken once  a day for three days a week: 
Monday, Wednesday and Friday. The azithromycin medication will be  dosed  at 5 
mg/kg/day. Adjustmen ts in dosage  amo unt will be  made with a ny new weights 
obtained during the trial perio d. Any child  that  is eligible to receive Palivizumab 
will be  given  this every 28-30 days in clinic as per usual care.  Patients  will be 
followed on a monthly basis and closely  monitored for adverse  reactions;  this will 
occur by phone, in clinic during their regularly scheduled  appointmen ts, and/or 
during any necess ary illness visits. Any children with adverse  reactions  will 
discon tinue the medication, but will cont inue to be followed clinically. At any clin ic 
visit in which  a child presents with respirato ry infection s, inclu ding pneumonia, 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   upper respirato ry illness, bronchiolit is, etc., he/she will ha ve an additional nasal 
aspirate  and/or trac heal aspirate  if applicable and an oscill omet er reading (only  for 
children >2 years) performed. At the completion  of the 3-6 months treatme nt phase, 
each child will have a final nasal aspirate and/or trac heal aspirate  if applicable, and 
an oscill omet er reading performed. Data  will continue to be collected  for the 
following 2 months (April 1st to May 31st), to moni tor for respirato ry illnesses and 
possi ble side effects. 
 
 
Study Population: 
 
High risk children between the c hronolo gical age of  6 months and 6 years who atte nd 
either  the High  Risk  Children’s Clinic or the  High Risk  Infant  Clinic at UTP  will be 
screened by the rese arch nurse, and additional help will be  provided by the clinic 
providers. The high risk infant  clinic follows prema ture infan ts born  before 32 weeks 
gestation for their first 2 years of life; the high  risk pediatric clinic  follows medically 
complex children who have had at least 3  ED visits, 2 hospitalizations, and/or 1 PICU 
visit within  the last ye ar for a chronic health condition. 
 
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: 
 
Children who belong  to either the H igh Risk  Infant Clin ic or the High Risk  Children’s 
Clinic and that  have been diagnosed with a chronic lung disease as defined by ATS by a 
medical provider will be inclu ded.3 Chronic lung disease (CLD) is the final common 
pathway of a he terogeneous  group of pulmonary disorders that s tart in  the neonatal 
perio d. Often the inciting factor  is bronchopul monary dysplasia  (BPD), a ch ronic 
condition that can develop  after  prema ture birth and respirato ry distress syndrome 
due to su rfacta nt deficiency. Myriad other  conditions  can also cause airway and 
parench ymal inflam mation that lea ds to ch ronic airflow obstruction, increased work of 
breathing, and airway h yper reactivity. Usually  the inciting facto rs are not o nly the 
underlying disor ders, but also the  effects  of the supportive treatme nt, inclu ding 
mec hanical ventilatio n, barotrau ma, and oxygen toxicity. These aggressive 
interventions  for serious  neonat al and infant lung diseases are often responsi ble for 
much of the chronic pulmonary abnormalit ies that fo llow. 3Exclusion criteria  inclu de 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   children with cystic fibrosis  or bronchiec tasis,11 because  the prophylactic use of 
mac rolides has already demonstrat ed value  and become  usual care  for these patients. 
Children with cardiac arrhythmias  will be  excluded, due to the  poten tial increase  in 
cardiovascular  death that has been shown in the adult populatio n12. Patients with 
cyanotic heart dise ase would be excluded. Children with colitis will al so be excl uded 
due to the  poten tial effects to the  gastrointestinal flora.  In addition, any c hild with a 
known macrolide allergy or child who is taking  any medication that has  a kno wn 
interaction  with  macrolides, and any child with kidney or liver failure will also be 
excluded. Patients with short-bowel syndrome would also be  excluded due to 
malabso rption of medication. 
 
 
Once patients are screened for eligibility, families  will be a pproache d, either over the 
phone  or at a regularly scheduled  office visit.  Informed  written cons ent will be 
obtained in the clinic from the parent  or legal guardian of each  eligible child  by any of 
the co-investigato rs or the rese arch nurse at the time of enrollmen t. Either  the research 
nurse or another  clinical member  of the HRCC team will then  collect a n asal as pirate 
sam ple at the  first study visit (descri ption in Laboratory section). The nasal aspirate  
will be  stored and studied after  the conclusion  of the treatment  phase  for its levels of 
 
myleoperoxydase, cytokines, respirato ry virology, and micro biome. In addition, all 
patients 2 and older will have a spirometry  reading performed  using a  TremoFlo  airway 
oscill ometry  system (iOS) manu factu red by Thorasys. With  the iOS, the child  breathes 
normally  into the mac hine and lung  function  is measu red by a gen tle multi-frequency 
airway against the patient’s respirato ry airflow.  A bas eline EKG will be  obtained on all 
patients. 
 
 
Study Procedures: 
 
Patients will be  randomized by the REDCap statistical program in a double blind 
man ner. Parents will t hen be provided with a medication or place bo for the duration of 
the study. Patients would be recruited  for this study on a rolling basis from Octob er 1st 
to Decem ber 31st, and all patients comple ting the intervention part of  the protocol  on 
31st March at the end of the season. Half of the patients will receive azithromycin at a 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   dose of 5 mg/kg to be  given once a day on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. The other 
half, the control group, will be  provided with a place bo medication of similar  taste, 
color, texture, and consis tency, also to be taken  once  a day on Monday, Wednesday, and 
Friday. Both the  study me dication  and the placebo will be  dispensed from Corner 
Compounding Phar macy, mixed with a fish-oil base  to ensure a shelf  life of more than 
six months, and flavored with citrus to impro ve palatability. Parents will be  cont acted 
biweek ly, either  in clinic or by phone, to moni tor for any adverse  reactions, including 
rash,  nausea,  vomiting, diarrhea, or abdominal cramping. If a significa nt adverse 
reaction  occurs, the medication will be  discon tinued. If an aller gic reaction (such as 
rash or shortness of breath) is noted, the blind  will be  broken by Research Coordinator 
Ana Gomez-Rubio, who is not involved with the project.  This un-blind ing will be  done 
to no te if it is an allergy to the  medication. 
 
 
After the initial appointmen t, at any face to face  encounter (unsc heduled sick  visit or 
hospital admission  Monday through Friday) in which  the patient presents with 
respirato ry symptoms, the patient will be  eval uated by the rese arch nurse or one of the 
co-investigators.  Specificall y, if a patient presents with the following symptoms: cough, 
wheeze,  tachypnea, rhinorrhea,  increased respirato ry secre tions,  hypoxemia, and/or an 
increased oxygen requireme nt, an additional nasal aspirate  sample/and trac heal 
aspirate  if applicable, and an oscill omet ry reading (for patients over 2 years of age)  will 
be performed. These  samples  will also be  stored in the office of Dr. Piedra. At the 
concl usion  of the 3-6 months  trea tment  phase, a fin al nasal as pirate/and trac heal 
aspirate  if applicable sampl e. Oscillo meter reading will also be performed for those 
above 2 years of age while the patients are in clinic for an office visit at the end of the 
study visit and during each sick  clinic visit for respirato ry illness. There will be no 
expected/a dditional study visits and no compensation will be  provided for paren ts or 
patients. 
 
 
Risk s: 
 
Pote ntial risks  inclu de an allergic reaction  or adverse  reaction  to the medication or 
place bo. Examples of  poten tial side effects  include nause a, vomiting, diarrhea,  and skin 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   reactions.  In addition, there may be an  increased risk of diaper rash and/or oral thrush 
with the increased use of antibiot ics. Another  adverse  outcome  of azithromycin has 
been an increase in pyloric stenosis  with both prenatal and infant exposure for the first 
4 months of life, and benefit in this age group must outweigh this poten tial risk. 13 
 
However, our population  for this project will begin at 6 months of age. Each of these 
risks and any other  unexpec ted outcomes  will be mon itored at any visits to the clini c, or 
with biweekly phone  calls if  no visits have  been sche duled  in the previous two weeks. 
The primary  benefit we hope  to see is a reduction in the number of  respirato ry illness 
related office visits. With  the anti-inflammatory properties of the macr olide, we predict 
an overall  reduction in the seve rity of respirato ry illnesses during the study perio d. 
Add itionally, we will monitor data for a 2 month period following last a zithromycin 
admin istrat ion. This reduction may  lead  to a decrease in the number of unsc heduled 
office visits, emer gency room  visits, and hospital admissions.  With  less face to face 
provider encount ers, there  will be  less opportunity for poten tial expo sure to other 
viruses, as well as  less time away  from home or work for the patients’ paren ts and, 
poten tially, decreased health care  related cost s. 
 
 
Study Outcomes  
 
1.   In the trea tment  group, we expect a  20% total reduction in face to face 
encounters (defined as unsc heduled  sick visits, emer gency room  visits, and 
hospital admissio ns) for respirato ry symptoms with the prophylactic use of 
azithromycin, as comp ared to the  control  group. 
a.   In the trea tment  group, we expect to ha ve a 20% decrease in the number 
of unsc heduled sick  visits due to respirato ry illness during the 3-6 month 
study period  with the prophylactic use of azithromycin, as comp ared to 
the control group .  
b.   In the trea tment  group, we expect to ha ve a 20% decrease in the number 
of Emergency Room visits due to respirato ry illness during the 3-6 month 
study period  with the prophylactic use of azithromycin, as comp ared to 
the cont rol group.  
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   c. In the trea tment  group, we expect to ha ve a 20% reduction in the number 
of hospital admissions  due to respirato ry illness during the 3-6 month 
study period  with the prophylactic use of azithromycin, as comp ared to 
the control group.  
 
 
2.   In the trea tment  group, we  expect a 1 0% total reduction (as comp ared to 
baseline) in the level of myeloperoxidase in the nasopharyngeal  secretions 
collected during respirato ry illnesses  that re quire a face to face  provider 
encounter, as comp ared to the contr ol group.  
 
 
3.   In the trea tment  group, we expect  a 10% total reduction in the level of pro- 
inflammatory cytokines in the nasopharyngeal  secretions  collect ed during 
respirato ry illnesses  that re quire a face to face  provider encount er, as 
compared  to the  contr ol group.  
 
 
4.   In the trea tment  group, we expect  a 10% reduction from baseline in the level 
of airway obstr uction  as measu red by a tremoFlo Airwave Oscill ometry 
System during the 3-6 month study period,  respirato ry illness and at the 
concl usion  of the intervention phase. 
 
 
5.   We expect  no significa nt difference  in adverse  side effects  between the 
trea tment  group receiving  the mac rolide and the control group receiving the 
place bo during the 4 month  study. 
 
 
6.   We expect the  intervention to be cost-effective  from a healthcare  system 
persp ective. 
 
 
Labora tory Evaluation 
 
 
 
Microbiologic studies for the secon dary hypothes es will be  conducted under the 
direct ion of Dr. Pedro A. Piedra, the Clinical Director  of the Respirato ry Virus Diagnost ic 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   Laboratory at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Te xas. The study involves 
collecting 2-8 nasal as pirates from each patient. Nasal aspirate  sam ples will be  tested 
to measure the levels of  myeloperoxidase; we will also use ELISA tests to measure the 
levels of specific pro-inflammatory cytokines, inclu ding IL-8 and IL-6, and PCR,  in order 
 
to sc reen for seve ral major respirato ry viral pathogens. 
 
 
 
Nasal aspirate  specimens will be  collected at the first visit, the final visit, and during any 
episodic respirato ry sick  visits at clinic or at Children Memo rial Hermann  Hospital. 
These  samples  will all be  frozen and stored until the completion  of the trial.  For the 
collection, the child will be  placed supine, 2 ml of  normal saline will be  instilled into one 
nostril,  and then  an 8 or  10 French suction  catheter (depending on the size of the 
patient) will be  used  to remo ve the mucus. This procedure will be performed  once  on 
each nost ril. After the specimen  collection from both  nostril s, 2 ml of normal saline will 
be suctio ned through the cathe ter to clear the  tubing and  to insure that a  standard 
volume of aspirate  is obtained. All specimens will be  placed  on ice in a bio-hazard bag 
and then  collected by study person nel. After collection  by study personnel, the 
specimen  will be imm ediately diluted  (1:1 solution) with viral transport medium  (15% 
glycerol in  Iscove’s me dia).   The final solution (aspirated specimen  mixed with viral 
trans port medium)  will cont ain a maximum  of 9 mls (with a range of 3-9 mls). After 
dilutio n, the  specimens will be  imme diately refrigerated in the HRCC refrigerator at 37 
degrees, until trans portation to the  freezers at the Department  of Pathology at Baylor, 
where they will be  stored at -80oC. 
 
 
Specimen Handling / Storage 
 
Nasal aspirate  specimens will be  trans ported by study person nel from the  HRCC 
refrigerators to Dr. Piedra’s la boratory.  Once received, the dilution will be  separat ed 
into 0.5 – 1 ml aliquots  and snap  frozen to -80º C. Samples will be  thawed and 
centrifuged at 1,000g for 10 minut es at room  temperature. This clarified 
nasopharyngeal  lava ge fluid  supernatant will be  used  to measu re the levels of 
myeloperoxidase, will undergo cytokine analysis, and will be  screened for up to 5-6 
major respirato ry viruses. Remain ing volumes  will be  stored for future studies, 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   including studies for additional biomarkers, such  as Flu A, Flu B or  other viruses  All 
specimens  will be transported to Dr. Piedra’s la boratory Monday – Thursday between 
8am and 3pm and Friday between 8am and 1pm by involved research person nel 
 
walking to the  labo ratory.  Specimens  rece ived Friday afternoon  will be stored in clinic 
freezer until Monday morning. For during the weekend episodes, sam ples will be 
collected on Monday and properly  marked with date and time of ER/Hospital visit and 
date and time of sam ple coll ection.  Samples will be stored for one year after  the 
completion of the stu dy at Dr. Piedra’s la boratory, and will be  destroyed after  the on e- 
year perio d. Neither sam ples nor data will be sha red outside of the University of Texas. 
 
 
Labeling 
 
 
 
Specimens  collected  for this study must be easily distinguishable  from other  labo ratory 
specimens  stored in the Department  of Pathol ogy refrigerators and laboratory freezers. 
ID numbers  will be  pre-assigned and pre-printed on a label f or each specimen.  The date 
(mm/dd/yr) and time (hh:mm) of specimen  collection  must be written on the label. The 
ID number used for the case  report form must match the  ID number  used on the 
specimen  (eg, first patient 001 should be typed on the specimen  labels and case  report 
form). Specimens will also be  labeled  with date (mm/dd/yr) and time (hh:mm) of 
symptoms onse t. 
 
 
Laboratory Procedures 
 
 
 
The level of  myeloperoxidase will be  measu red using reagent tests, and seve ral cytokines 
that are mar kers of inflammation will be tested using E LISA tests.  These  tests are  
routinely  performed in Dr. Piedra’s la boratory and details of  the primers and pr obes to 
be used  are found  in a 2005 article by Beckham et al. 14 In addition, RT-PCR  assays will 
be performed  using  TaqMan-based primers  and probes to detect the presence of 5- 
6 major respiratory viruses,  and the rema ining volume of aspirate  will be stored for 
future studies of additional biomarkers. Nasal aspirate  sam ples will be  collected for 
assay of up to 4 cytokines and chemo kines. Samples  will be  tested acco rding to the  
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   manu factu rer’s instructions.  Samples a nd serial dilutio ns of the cytokine standards will 
 
be incub ated with anti-human  cytokine-coat ed beads in a 96 -well filtration plate.  
 
 
 
Data Analysis  Plan 
 
 
 
Patients will be  randomized to one of two different branches  by the REDCap data 
base  randomization program. This will be a double-blind  place bo controlled study. 
Standard frequentist and Bayesian analyses will be performed  using an  intent-to- 
treat  approach.  Total hospital days, total ER visits (counting  one day for each ER 
visit), and unsc heduled  clinic visits (counting  one day for each visit) for respirato ry 
symptoms will be  analyzed and related to treatment (Azithromycin vs Plac ebo), 
with logistic regression models and the trea tment  group as a co varia te and random 
intercept to acco unt for within patient correlation (due to m ultiple ED visits). To 
assess the probability of benefit, we will use Bayesian hiera rchical models with 
interaction  terms between treatme nt groups (Azithromycin vs Place bo) and 
predefined poten tial moderators.  The groups will be s tratified  by palivizumab use 
and by trac heostomy  on chronic mecha nical ventilation. The conser vative Bayesian 
approach  of Dixon and Simon  allows us to shrink the subgroup estimat es to the 
overall  mean treatme nt effect.  For all Ba yesian analyses, prior distributions  for 
main  effects  will be  neutral ~N(0,1000), and Uniform (0,1000) for SD paramet ers. 
Neut ral and skeptical priors will be  used  for interaction  terms. Point estimat es of 
trea tment  effect and 95% credible intervals will be reported along with probability 
of trea tment  benefit. 
 
 
Sample  size and power 
 
Based  on data from our HRCC, we expect the  control group to have 1.6 encounters 
per child-year (SD=1.66). Assu ming a two-sided alpha =  0.05, a sample  size of 90 
(45/group)  will have 80% power to detect a difference  of 1 in the encount er rate 
between placebo and azithromycin groups (i.e., 1.6 vs 0.6 in encounter rate or 38% 
reduction).  Power  will be more limit ed for secondary outcomes  but Bayesian 
analyses will pro vide an estimate  of the probability of benefit in these outcomes.  
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015    
 
Limitations 
 
 
 
Parents may opt out of  allowing their child to partic ipate in the study due to the extent 
of the sam pling.  The standard of care for respirato ry illnesses may  include a nasal 
aspirate, but the  additional sampl ing at  the baseline  and concl usion  of the study is a 
devia tion from standard procedure. We will, however, emphasi ze the ease and low- 
invasive nature of both  the nasal as pirate specimen  collections  and the oscillometer 
readings. In addition, paren ts may  opt out of partic ipating if the ir child’s medical 
diagnosis  or current health status is too  emoti onally overwhelming, or if they  have 
concerns  regarding the prophylactic admin istrat ion of an  antibiot ic for 3-6 months. We 
will ob tain res pirato ry sam ples from patients that are admitted Monday through  Friday 
during busin ess hours, but it will be  difficult  to obt ain nasal sa mples from the 
Emergency Departmen t, on weekend admission s, and afterhours. For sick  episodes 
occurring weekends and afterhours we will c ollect samples  on the next busin ess day 
morning. Parents may also not a dhere to the admin istering the medication/place bo 
three days a week. 
 
 
Confidenti ality 
 
 
 
Every effort will be  made to protect  the privacy  of the subjects. Unique identifiers will 
not be  stored in the final database that  will be  used  for analytic purposes. Informat ion 
such as age,  sex, and race will be  collected to examine  the patterns of interaction  in 
different  demo graphic subgroups.  
 
 
Specimens  will be s ent to Baylor College of Medicine for processi ng and testing. 
Specimens  will be  coded with study  ID numbe rs and will not have  any person al 
informat ion. 
 
 
Upon completion  of the study, elect ronic data will be  retained by the principal 
investigator  (R. Mosqu era) at his  University of Texas Medical School office. All data 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   forms will be  kept in a locked file cabinet and elect ronic files will be  passw ord 
protected.  Subjects  will not be directly  identifiable. The PI, co -investigators, and 
designated study staff will use  the informat ion for data analysis and manuscript 
preparat ion. 
 
 
 
 
Interpre tation and Potential Importance of Findings 
 
 
 
A subst antial portion of our high risk chronically  ill children have some  form of 
chronic lung disease, including patients with tracheostomi es, bronch opulmonary 
dysplasia, and chronic respirato ry failure requiring mechan ical ventilation.  Most of 
the hosp ital admissions  in this group of patients were related to respirato ry 
infections  in children less than  6 years of age ( 37% during the winter season for the 
previo us 3 years). Despite vaccin ation rates of nearly 100% and 24/7 access  to our 
clinic, viral respirato ry illnesses  continue to ca use cons iderable  morbidity and high 
healthcare costs.  Innovative new prophylactic treatme nts are needed. 
 
 
With  this proposal,  we will determine if the prophylactic use of azithromycin will 1) 
reduce the number of days when unsc heduled medical treatme nt heal th care relat ed 
encounters was given outside the home, 2) reduce the number of  eme rgency room 
visits, hospitalizations  and clinic visits due to respirato ry illness, 3) reduce the level of 
myeloperoxydase and pro-inflammatory cytokines during viral illnes ses requiring face 
to face  physician interaction, 4) demonstrate  a reduction in airway obstruction  as 
measu red by an oscill omet er 5) have a similar  safe  profile comp ared to the  place bo, and 
6) demonstrate  cost -effectiven ess of mac rolides use. Understa nding the anti- 
inflammatory effects  of azithromycin when used as a prophylactic drug will provide 
important insight into the preven tion of more serious  sequelae  of respiratory 
infections.  In particula r, this proposal  will contribute  to understa nding disease in 
children ages  6 months to 6 years with chronic lung disease, a populat ion that  has a 
higher rate of hospitalizations  for respirato ry symptoms. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015    
 
 
 
1. Hom er CJ, Klatka K, Romm D, et al. A review  of the eviden ce for the medical 
home for children with sp ecial health care needs. Pediatrics. Oct 
2008;122(4 ):e922 -937. 
 
2. Jackson GL, Powers BJ, Chatt erjee R, et al. The  Patient-Centered Medical 
 
Hom eA Systematic Review. Annals of  internal m edicin e. 2013;158(3 ):169-178. 
 
3. Society AT. Statement on the Care of the Child with Ch ronic Lung Dis ease of 
 
Infan cy and Chi ldhood  2002. A ccessed 8/19 /14. 
 
4. Min JY, Jang YJ. Macrolide  therapy in respiratory viral infections. Mediators of 
inflammation.  2012;201 2:649570.  
5. Mosque ra RA, S tark JM, Atkins CL, et al. Functional and im mune response  to 
respiratory syncytial virus infection in aged BALB/c mic e: a search for  genes 
determining disease severity. Experimental lung r esearch.  Feb 2014;40(1 ):40-49. 
6. Moreno-Solis G, To rres-Borrego J, de la Torre-Aguilar MJ, Fernandez-Gutierrez 
F, Llorente-Cantarero FJ, Perez-Navero JL. Analysis of the  local and systemic 
inflammatory response in  hospitali zed infants with  respiratory syncitial virus 
bronchiolitis. Allergolog ia et immunopatho logia.  Jun 27 2014.  
7. Korppi M. Ma crolid es and bronchiolitis in infants. The Europ ean respiratory 
journal.  Jun 2007;29(6 ):1283-1284; author  reply 1284-1285.  
8. Friedlander AL, Albert RK. Ch ronic m acrolide  therapy in inflammato ry airways 
diseases. Chest. Nov 20 10;138(5 ):1202-1212.  
9. Cai Y, Ch ai D, Wang R, Bai N, Liang BB, Liu Y.  Effectiveness and s afety of 
macrolid es in cystic fibrosis patients: a meta-analysis and system atic review. The 
Journal of an timicr obial chemoth erapy. May 2011;66(5 ):968-978. 
10. Ballard H, Anstead, Mi cheal and Shook,  Lori. Azithromycin in the extremely low 
birth w eight infant for  the 
prevention of  Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia: a  pilot study. Bio M ed Centr al. 2007;8.  
 
11. Corvol H, T aytard J, Thouv enin G, Perisson C, Nathan N, Clement A. [Why use 
long-term m acrolide  therapy in pediatric  pulmonology?]. Archives de pediatrie : 
organe  officiel de la So ciete francaise de  pediatrie. Mar 2014;21(3 ):314-321. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-14-0476  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  10/09/2015   12. Ray WA, Mu rray KT, Hall K, Arbogast PG, Stein CM. A zithromycin and the risk 
of cardiovascular death. The New England journ al of medicin e. May 17 
2012;366(20 ):1881-1890. 
 
13. Lund M, Pasternak B, Davidsen R B, et al. Use of macrolid es in mother  and child 
and risk of  infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis: nationwide cohort stu dy. Bmj. 
2014;348 :g1908.  
 
14. Beckham JD, C adena A, Lin J, et al. R espiratory viral infections in p atients with 
chronic, obstru ctive pulmona ry disease. The Journal of infection. May 
2005;50(4 ):322-330. 