  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 1 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 1.  PROTOCOL  V6.1 (UPDATED 2019 -10-14) 
 
PROTOCOL TABLE OF CONTENTS          
 
SYNOPSIS    3 
 
1. STUDY OBJECTIVES   7 
 
 1.1   Primary Objective    7 
 1.2   Secondary Objectives   7 
 
2. BACKGROUND   8  
  
 2.1   Rationale     8 
 2.2   Supporting Data   10 
 
3. STUDY DESIGN   12 
 
4. SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF SUBJECTS   12 
 
 4.1  Inclusion Criteria   12 
 4.2  Exclusion Criteria   13 
 4.3  Enrollment Procedures   14 
 
5. STUDY INTERVENTIONS  15 
 
 5.1   Interventions, Administration, and Duration   15 
 5.2   Handling of Study Interventions  21 
 5.3   Concomitant Interventions   23 
 5.4   Adherence Assessment   24 
 
6. CLINICAL AND LABORATORY EVALUATIONS   25 
 
 6.1   Schedule of Evaluations   25 
 6.2   Data to  be Collected on Each Subject  27  
 6.3   Timing of Evaluations   27 
 6.4   Special Instructions and Definitions of Evaluations   39 
 
7. MANAGEMENT OF ADVERSE EVENTS   43 
 
8. CRITERIA FOR INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION   43 
 
9. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS   44 
 
 9.1   General Design Issues   44 
 9.2   Outcomes   45 
 9.3   Meeting Recruitment Targets   49 
 9.4   Data Monitoring   50 
 9.5   Formal Inte rim Analysis  55 
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 2 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
10. DATA COLLECTION, SITE MONITORING, AND ADVERSE EVENT    56 
  REPORTING   
 
 10.1   Records to be Kept   56 
 10.2   Role of Data Management   57 
 10.3   Quality Assurance   57 
 10.4   Adverse Event  Reporting   61 
 
11. HUMAN SUBJECTS   62 
 
 11.1   Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review and Informed Consent   62 
 11.2   Subject Confidentiality   62 
 11.3   Study Modification/Discontinuation   62 
 
12.   PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS   62 
 
13.   REFERENCES  64 
 
  
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 3 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 SYNOPSIS  
 
Study Title:  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT Trial)  
 
Objectives  
 
Primary Objective:  
Our primary goal is to test the hypothesis that early high dose recombinant human erythropoietin 
(Epo) treatment of preterm infants born between 2 4-0/7 and 27 -6/7 weeks of gestation will 
improve long -term neurodevelopmental outcomes measured at 22-26 months (referred 
throughout the do cument also as “2 year (s)”) corrected age. Specifically, we will determine  
whether Epo decreases the combined outcome of death or neurodevelopmental impairment (NDI) 
at 22-26 months corrected age .  
 
Impairment is defined as the presence of any one of the following: cerebral palsy ( CP), Bayley 
Scales of Infant and Toddler Develop ment, 3rd Edition (Bayley -III) Motor Standard Score, 
Language or Cognitive Standard Score  < 70 (severe, 2 SD below mean) or 85 (moderate, 1 SD 
below mean).1, 2 CP will be identified by standardized neurologic  exam and categorized as no CP, 
diplegic CP, hemiplegic CP, or quadriplegic CP. Severity of CP will be determined using the Gross 
Motor Function Classificat ion System (GMFCS) developed by Palisano.3, 4 
 
Secondary Objectives  
 To determine whether there are risks to high dose Epo administration in extremely low 
gestational age neonates (ELGANs) by examining, in a blinded manner, Epo -related safety 
measures comparing infants receiving Epo with those given placebo . As part of this aim, Epo 
pharmacokinetics will be determined.  
 To test whether Epo treatment decreases circulating inflammatory mediators and known 
biomarkers of brain injury over time.  
 To compare brain structure (as measured by MRI) in Epo treatment and control groups at 36 
weeks post menstrual age ( PMA ).  MRI assessments will include documentation of 
intracranial  hemorrhage ( ICH), white matter injury (WMI) and hydrocephalus ( HC), volume of 
total and deep gray matter, white matter and cerebellum, brain gyrification, inter -hemispheric 
distance, and tract -based spatial statistics (TBSS based on diffusion tensor imaging).  
 As an exploratory aim, we will determine which of the abov e MRI measurements best predict 
neurodevelopment at 22-26 months corrected age.  
 To determine the incidence of acute kidney injury (AKI) in this cohort of extremely low 
gestational age neonates  (REPAIReD ancillary study) . 
 
Study Design  
Prospective, m ulticen ter, randomized, double blind, placebo controlled trial.  
 
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 4 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Figure 1 depicts an overview of the proposed trial.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interventions and Duration  
Enrollment will occur prior to 24 hours of age.  After enrollment but prior to the first dose of study 
drug, a cranial ultrasound (CUS) will be obtained to document whether an intracranial hemorrhage 
has occurred prior to dosing  (while the goal will be to obtain the ultrasound prior to study drug 
dosing , a 6 hour grace period will be allowed) . Baseline blood will be drawn to measure Epo 
concentration, inflammatory mediators and biomarkers of brain injury. Subjects will be 
randomized to Epo treatment or placebo  by the data coordinating center (DCC). Each subject will 
be on the study (intervention + time off intervention) until completion of the follow -up visit at 22-
26 months corrected age.  After the in -person 2 -year visit, with parental permission, PENUT 
subjects will continue to be followed at 6 -month in tervals by phone.  
 
Study Drug  
Drug Dosages and Routes of Administration  
Subjects will be randomized to Epo treatment or placebo .  
 
Initially, subject will receive Epo 1000 units /kg or placebo IV every 48 ± 2 hours x 6 doses (during 
the first 2 weeks of life when physiologic vulnerability is highest).  
 
This will be followed by maintenance Epo 400 units/kg subcutaneously , or sham injection , 
Monday, Wednesday and Friday,  during the period of oligodendrocyte vuln erability (to 32 -6/7 
weeks). Controls will not receive any injections.  Maintenance study drug doses will begin  on the 
day closest to completing the high dose series.  
 
To maintain the blind  in the maintenance portion of the treatment period , control infants will have Figure 1. Study Overview  
 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 5 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 an empty  syringe dispensed from pharmacy. Infants assigned to placebo will not  undergo any 
subcutaneous maintenance  injections. All blinded doses will be dispensed in a n opaque  bag with 
tamper resistant tape . Maintenance treatme nts will be administered behind blinds  or curtains . 
After Epo injection or sham injection (no shot), all infants will have a 2” by 2” gauze placed over 
the “injection site” , and this will be covered and wrapped with gauze that is taped to itself, so no 
adhesive touches the child’s skin . 
 
Group 1 (Epo) : 
1. High dose Epo (1000 units/kg) will be administered intravenously every 48 hour s x 6 
doses. Dosing will be based on birth weight.  Study drug may be administered by the 
bedside nurse or a research nurse, giv en that the study drug appears identical.  
 
2. Maintenance Epo (400 units/kg) will be administered by subcutaneous injection three 
times weekly. Dosing will be adjusted weekly after the subject has regained birth weight. 
A nurse who is not directly involved  with the care of the patient, and who will maintain 
confidentiality will administer all treatments . A cohort of charge nurses, or General Clinical 
Research Center (GCRC) nurses would be ideal for this task.  
 
 Group 2 (Placebo) : 
1. Placebo (saline) will be  given intravenously every 48 hours x 6 doses. The volume of 
the saline placebo will be equivalent to the volume which would be administered if the 
subject was receiving active drug.  Study drug  may be administered by the bedside nurse 
or a research nurse, given that the study drug  appears identical.  
    
2. Empty syringes (SHAM doses) will be delivered to infants in the control group however 
they will not undergo subcutaneous injections. Maintenance doses will be administered 
behind blinds  or in a private ro om, and the “injection site” will be covered as described 
above . A nurse who is not directly involved with the care of the patient, and who will 
maintain confidentiality will administer all treatments . A cohort of charge nurses, or 
General Clinical Researc h Center (GCRC) nurses would be ideal for this task.  
 
Exceptional situations:  
 If a dose of study drug is unavoidably delayed or missed, the dose should be given as soon 
as possible. This should be recorded as a study deviation. The normal schedule of 
administration should then be resumed. At least 24 hours must separate the high dose study 
drug doses. This allows the plasma Epo concentration to return to baseline.  
 
 If severe edema (anasarca) or other circumstances prohibit the use of subcutaneous 
injection, up to three doses of Epo or saline placebo may be given intravenously  using the 
normal IV protocol . In this case, pharmacy must be notified so they can provide an 
appropriate study drug formulation for IV use (sa line rather than an empty syringe used for 
sham injection) .  This should not be recorded as a deviation  for up to 3 doses.  Subsequent 
IV doses would be considered a deviation.  
 
 If the baby’s IV is removed prior to completing the 6 intravenous study drug d oses, the dose 
can be administered subcutaneously.   This should be recorded as a study deviation.  
 
Interventions that each subject will experience:  
1. Cranial  ultrasound prior to study drug dosing (all subjects)  
2. Intravenous study drug treatment (Epo or placebo) for 6 doses, day 1 -11 (all subjects)  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 6 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 3.  Epo group:  Subcutaneous Epo injections three times a week until 32 -6/7 weeks PMA; 
Control group: Sham injections  (no shots)  three times a week until 32 -6/7 weeks PMA  
4.  Iron supplementation (all infants)  
5. Timed blood draws totaling 2  mL during the  first 2 weeks of life  (see Figure 3)  
6. Ten timed, sequential urine collections from study entry to discharge  
7. Brain MRI at 36 weeks PMA (220 subjects only)  
8. Follow -up phone calls at 4, 8, 12, 18 months corr ected age  
9. Follow -up visit at 22-26 months corrected age will include: Blood pressure, weight, 
(optional ) blood draw (0.5 mL), urine collection , standardized neurologic exam, GMFCS 
evaluation, Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, 3rd Edition,  and M-CHAT -
R questionnaire . 
10. Follow -up phone calls will continue at 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, 60 months corrected age.  
 
Sample Size and Population  
In order to maintain 752 (376 per arm) who survive and are followed at 22 to 26 months corrected 
age, we will enroll a total of 940 subjects. This number accounts for attrition due to death, loss to 
follow -up, and accounts for multiple births. The Vermont Oxford Network reports that 25% of 
ELBW infants are from multiple births a nd a variance inflation factor would therefore involve the 
expected cluster size (1.25) and the within -cluster correlation (ρ) and equal:   1 + (1.25 -1) ρ. If the 
within sib -ship correlation is 0.50 then the variance inflation factor (VIF) would be 1.125 im plying 
a 12.5% (n=94) increase in target sample size necessary to retain appropriate power . Due to 
withdrawal or attrition by 2 years, we anticipate losing 12.5% of the  effective sample size of 752 
and will therefore in crease the overall sample by an addit ional 94 subjects for a total enrollment 
target of n=940 subjects.  
 
Qualified infants less than 24 hours of age of both sexes and all races will be entered into the 
study if their parents or legal guardians consent.  
 
Randomization will be stratified by si te, multiple births,  and by gestational age: 24-0/7 to 25 -6/7 
and 26 -0/7 to 27 -6/7. We will use block randomization within site using variable blocks of size 4 , 
6, 8 and 10 subjects. Using block randomization ensures that equal numbers of subjects are 
randomized to the intervention and control arm and that the two groups are balanced at period 
enrollment intervals. For multiple births (twins, triplets) all infants will be randomized into the same 
treatment group (e.g. effective randomization of the mother).   
 
Table 1. Frequently Used Abbreviations:  
BDNF  Brain derived neurotrophic factor  MDI Mental developmental index  
BPD Bronchopulmonary dysplasia  NDI Neurodevelopmental impairment  
CCC  Clinical coordinating center  NEC  Necrotizing enterocolitis  
CP Cerebral palsy  NICU  Neonatal intensive care unit  
DCC  Data coordinating center  PDA      Patent ductus arteriosus  
DEHSI  Diffuse excessive high signal intensity  PDI Psychomotor developmental index  
ELGANs  Extremely low gestational age neonates  PMA  Postmenstrual age 
Epo Erythropoietin  PVL Periventricular leukomalacia  
EpoR  Epo receptor  ROP  Retinopathy of prematurity  
GMFCS  Gross motor function classification system  SOP  Standard operating procedure  
HC Hydrocephalus  SC Subcutaneous  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 7 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 IV Intravenous  TBSS  Tract based spatial statistics  
ICH Intracranial  hemorrhage  VON     Vermont Oxford Network  
M-CHAT -R Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers  WMI White matter injury  
  
 
1. STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
1.1 Primary Objective  
Hypothesis  1. Epo treatment from 24 hours to 32 -6/7 weeks PMA of ELGANs will safely decrease 
the combined outcome of death or NDI from 40% to 30% measured at two years corrected  age.  
 
Objective 1 . Our primary goal is to test the hypothesis that early high dose recombinant human 
erythropoietin (Epo) treatment of preterm infants born between 24 -0/7 and 27 -6/7 weeks of 
gestation will improve long -term neurodevelopmental outcomes measured at 22-26 month s 
corrected age .  
 
1.2   Secondary Objectives  
Hypothesis 2 . High dose Epo will be safe to administer from birth to 32 -6/7 weeks of gestation in 
this population of ELGANs.  
 
Objective  2. To determine whether there are excess adverse events in Epo treated EL GANs 
compared to control infants. Three time periods will be considered: 1. Safety during the treatment 
period; 2. Safety during the initial hospitalization; and 3. Long term outcomes. Timed Epo 
concentrations will be measured to monitor for drug accumulat ion and safety. A Population 
Pharmacokinetic Analysis will be done using these data.  
 
Hypothesis 3 . Therapeutic Epo administration during the period of oligodendrocyte vulnerability 
(24-32 weeks of gestation) will promote normal brain development by incre asing brain derived 
neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ), decreasing circulating inflammatory mediators, and thereby 
decreasing biomarkers of brain injury.  
 
Objective  3. To test whether Epo treatment changes sequential measures of BDNF, circulating 
inflammatory medi ators and known biomarkers of brain injury in preterm infants.  
 
Hypothesis 4 . Epo treatment will improve brain development as assessed by MRI at 36 weeks 
PMA.  
 
Objective  4. To compare brain structure (as measured by MRI) in Epo treatment and control 
groups  at 36 weeks PMA. MRI assessments will include documentation of intracranial  
hemorrhage ( ICH), white matter injury (WMI) and hydrocephalus (HC), volume of total and deep 
gray matter, white matter and cerebellum, brain gyrification, inter -hemispheric distan ce, and tract -
based spatial statistics (TBSS ) based on diffusion tensor imaging. As an exploratory aim, we will 
determine which of the above MRI measurements best predict neurodevelopment (CP, cognitive 
and motor scales) at 22-26 months corrected age.  
 
Hypothesis 5 .  Epo treatment may affect kidney development and incidence of acute kidney injury.  
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 8 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Objective 5 .  To establish the incidence of acute kidney injury in ELGANs, and to determine 
whether Epo treatment influences this . 
2. BACKGROUND  
2.1 Rationale  
Study Population . ELGANS are at high risk of death or NDI. In fact, of 9 ,575 ELGANs born 
between 2003 and 2007 and admitted to the NICU,  death or NDI occurred in 91%, 80%, 66% and 
56% of those born at 24, 25, 26 and 27 weeks gestation, respectively .5 These sobering statistics 
do not include infants that died before admission to a NICU, or those who died within 12 hours of 
admission. Majo r morbidities, which include CP, deafness, blindness, and mental disabilities , are 
present in 50% of surviving  extremely preterm infants at school age.6-19  Long -term follow -up 
studies are now increasingly identif ying behavioral dysfunctions such as attention deficit disorder 
and autism spectrum disorder.20-24 Sequelae of extreme prematurity are a tremendous burden to 
the individuals, their families, and to our health care system, accounting for nearly half of the 
health care dollars spent on newborn care. Clearly, a neuroprotective intervention that improved 
outcomes for ELGANs would be profoundly beneficial both to the individual, the family and to 
society.25, 26 We have chosen to study ELGANs born between 24 -0/7 and 27 -6/7 weeks of  
gestation because of their high likelihood of poor outcome, and the absence of therapeutic 
interventions to improve outcome. Because these infants are at such high risk of death or 
impairment, a strategy of prophylactic intervention is reasonable as there  is great potential for 
benefit.25, 26   
 
Restrictions:  Babies born at 23 -0/7 to 23 -6/7 will be excluded from  this study because their 
mortality and morbidity is too high. At this time, best estimates of death rates are 74%, and 
unimpaired survival rates are 1%.5, 19 More mature babies are also excluded because their risk of 
poor outcomes is lower, thus prophyla ctic use of an unproven therapy is not indicated.  
 
Intervention Regimen . Study infants in the Epo group will receive 6 IV doses of 1000 U/kg during 
the first 2 weeks of life when physiologic vulnerability is highest. This will be followed by 
maintenance dosing of 400 U/kg SC 3 times  per week during the period of oligodendrocyte 
vulnerability (to 32 -6/7 wks).  
 
Dose Justification.  The Epo dose, and 
duration of therapy chosen for this study is 
based upon available preclinical and 
clinical data for Epo neuroprotection.27 In 
rodent and ovine models of neonatal brain 
injury, Epo doses of 1000 -5000 U/kg/dose 
result  in sustained neuroprotection, 
improving both short and long -term 
structure and function.28-31 Higher doses 
are needed for neuroprotection due to the 
low percentage of circulating Epo that 
crosses the blood brain barrier.32 
 
Although doses as high as 3000 U/kg/dose 
are being tested in preterm infants without 
apparent adverse effects,33 preclinical data 
suggest that Epo neuroprotect ion has a U -shaped dosing curve, with too little or too much Epo Figure 2. Epo concentrations in human preterms 
compared with rat pups given 5000 U/kg s.c. or i.p.  
 
 
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 240200040006000800010000120001400016000
ELBW 500 U/kg i.v.
ELBW 1000 U/kg i.v.
Rats 5000 U/kg i.p.Rats 5000 U/kg s.c.
Epo Dose Time (h)Erythropoietin mU/mL
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 9 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 resulting in diminished efficacy.29, 34 In rats, repeated doses of 1000 -5000 U/kg show optimal 
neuroprotection. To estimate how neuroprotective Epo doses in rat pups relate to human 
pharmacokinetics, plasma Epo c oncentrations were measured in extremely low birth weight 
infants ( < 1000 g birth weight) after 500, 1000, and 2500 U/kg/dose.35 Nonlinear kinetics were 
noted, consistent with previous studies in neonates.36 In these infants, IV administration of 500 
and 1000 U/kg resulted in similar peak concentrations but faster clearance than were achieved in 
rat pups after 5000 U/kg (Figure 2).  Table 2 shows a comparison of pharmacokinetic indices in 
neonatal rats and humans. Doses of 1000 U/kg Epo resulted in area under the curve (AUC) 
measurements most similar to the most protective dose in rats.29 The 500 U/kg dose fell short 
(one third to one quarter the protective AUC), while 2500 U/kg was close to three times the optimal 
dose in rats. Mi nimum steady -state concentrations (mean = 576 mU/ml) were produced using the 
1000 U/kg/dose.  
 
Table 2. Epo Pharmacokinetics  
 Neonatal Rodents37 Preterm Infants < 1000 gm35 
Epo Dose  5000 U/kg s.c.  5000 U/kg i.p.  500 U/kg  1000 U/kg  2500 U/kg  
AUC (U*h)/L  117,677  140,331  31,412 ± 2780  81,498 ± 7067  317,881±22941  
Cmax (U/L)  6,224  10,015  8078 ± 538  14017 ± 1293  46467 ± 2987  
T1/2 Half -life (h)  8.4 6.7 5.4 ± 0.6  7.1 ± 0.7  8.7 ± 1.4  
 
What constitutes clinical significance?  Clinically significant studies are those that improve 
clinical practice and patient outcomes. Changes to clinical practice can occur slowly or rapidly 
depending on a number of factors: importance of the results, the size of the studies, risk of the 
therapy, and endorsement of medical associations such  as the AAP. Ibrahim  et al.  performed a 
13-item web -based questionnaire asking neonatologists what would convince them to adopt a 
new therapy in infants <  28 weeks of gestation. The survey assumed no adverse results of  
treatment. Responses are shown in Table 3. We also have examples of changes in clinical 
practice based on published trials. Prenatal steroids reduce the risk of death or morbidity in 
preterm infants < 32 weeks 
gestation with a risk reduction of 
over 40%.38 Despite this known 
benefit, change in clinical 
practice was slow, and required 
endorsement from ACOG. In 
contrast, therapeutic 
hypothermia for neonatal 
encephalopathy has been the 
subject of intense study, with 
multicenter randomized 
controlled trials pub lished in 2005 -2009.39-41 A meta -analysis of these studies reporting on 767 
infants showed benefits of cooling with a significant reduction in death or NDI at 18 months: typical 
Risk Ratio, 0.81 (95% Confidence Intervals, 0.71, 0.93), P=0.002. The number ne eded to treat 
(NNT) ranged from 7 -9 to prevent death or NDI. Cooling for neonatal encephalopathy has rapidly 
become the standard of care. Animal studies of neonatal Epo neuroprotection using appropriate 
dosing have shown improvement of 49 to 79%.27 Early clinical trials have shown safety and 
preliminary benefit. Neonatologists are comfortable  using this drug for erythropoiesis. We expect 
that Epo treatment will improve NDI -free survival compared to that seen in the ELGAN and NICHD 
trials. We expect that this benefit will translate into shorter and less complicated hospital stays 
and better neu rodevelopmental outcomes. This outcome of the trial would represent an important 
advance in the care of  ELGANs that could change the standard of care for high -risk infants. If Epo 
treatment  has no demonstrable benefit, or if adverse effects are observed, t his information will Table 3. Survey of Neonatologists.  “Would you 
change practice if a study showed treatment 
X…?” % would 
change  
N=226  
Reduced # Bayley scores < 80 by 25%  41 
Reduced # Bayley scores < 80 by 50%  66 
Improved Bayley scores by 10 points  56 
Decreased CP by 25%  50 
Decreased CP by 50%  81 
Study size 200 per arm  29 
Study size 400 per arm  64 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 10 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 also be useful in the field because Epo is currently used anecdotally in many NICUs, without trial -
based evidence, for some severely ill infants. The results of the PENUT trial will be of particular 
interest to pediatricians trained in  neonatal -perinatal medicine. This group of practitioners is 
largely centered in academic or medical centers and they attend several meetings each year 
where new information about treatment can be presented. The PENUT trial results will be 
presented at reg ional Pediatric Research Society meetings such as the Western and Eastern 
Society for Pediatric Research, and at national and international meetings including the Pediatric 
Academic Societies combined meetings, the European Society for Pediatric Research m eeting, 
the American Academy of Pediatrics meetings, and at other venues such as “Hot Topics in 
Neonatology” . 
 
Clinical Impact.  Mortality of extremely preterm infants has decreased,42, 43 but morbidity in 
survivors remains high due in part to increased survival of sicker infants. There remains an 
enormous burden of both medical and neurodevelopmental impairment in these children. Using 
the birth statistics for the US in 2009, we anticipate the magnitude of Epo treatment to translate 
as follows: with Epo treatment, the annual burden  of death or severe NDI will decrease from 40% 
(12,226 babies) to 30% (9,170 babies, primary outcome), and that death plus moderate or severe 
NDI will decrease from 60% (18,340 babies) to 40% (12,226 babies, secondary outcome). We 
anticipate this change wi ll derive primarily from improved neurodevelopmental outcomes. If Epo 
is proven to safely reduce combined morbidity and mortality of ELGANs, we anticipate a shift in 
neonatology practice that would improve the lives of babies and their families, and decrea se the 
cost of healthcare.  
 
2.2  Supporting Data  
Vulnerabilities of the preterm brain.  ELGANs are born during the second trimester when the 
fetal brain is rapidly increasing in size, shape and complexity.44-46 Proper brain development is 
vulnerable to interruption by hypoxia -ischemia, oxida nt stress, inflammation, and excitotoxicity, 
as evidenced by structural, biochemical, and cell -specific injury.47-53 Pre-oligodendrocytes, which 
emerge and mature between 24 and 32 wee ks of development, are particularly susceptible to 
injury, resulting in the WMI characteristic of preterm infants.47, 54-56 Although the transition from 
fetal to early postnatal life is the period of greatest vulnerability,57 ELGANs remain at risk for brain 
injury throughout the period of oligodendrocyte development.  
 
Epo Neuroprotection . Epo has anti -inflammatory, anti -excitotoxic,58 anti-oxidant,59 and anti -
apoptotic effects on neurons and oligodendrocytes, and promotes neurogenesis and 
angiogenesis, which are essential for injury repair and normal neurodevelopment. Epo effects are 
dose -dependent, and multiple doses are more effective than single dos es.28, 29, 60 Epo reduces 
neuronal loss and learning impairment following brain injury,61, 62 and even when initiated as late 
as 48 -72 hours after injury, there is evidence of improved behavioral outcomes, enhanced 
neurogenesis, increased axonal s prouting, and reduced WMI.63, 64  
 
Protective effects.  Perinatal inflammation (chorioamnionitis, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), or 
sepsis) is associated with increased risk of NDI.13, 65, 66 Microglial activation67 and increased 
cytokine expression, particularly TNF -, interleukin (IL) -6, and IL -8, have been associated with 
brain injury in preterm infants68, 69 and in animal models of neonatal brain i njury.70 Epo has 
demonstrated anti -inflammatory effects, which may contribut e to neuroprotection in the scenario 
of preterm birth and increased inflammatory activity.71-77  
 
White matter injury.  WMI is a common brain injury affecting preterm infants.48, 52, 55 Epo 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 11 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 decreases WMI in adult and neonatal animal models of brain injury30, 63, 78-83 and maybe in 
humans.84 Mechanisms for this may be Epo protection of vulnerable preoligodendrocytes: 
functional Epo receptors a re expressed by immature oligodendrocytes;  Epo promotes the 
proliferation, maturation and differentiation these cells,85 and protects them from injury induced 
by interferon -γ, LPS, and hypoxic -ischemia.63, 86, 87  
Apoptosis.  Neurons in the developing brain are more likely than adult neurons to undergo 
apoptosis if exposed to injurious stimuli,88, 89 and the anti -apoptotic properties of Epo may protect 
these vulnerable neurons.29, 90, 91  
 
Repair.  Epo stimulates growth factors req uired for normal brain growth  such as brain -derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and glial cell derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF).92, 93 Epo enhances 
neurogenesis,28, 60, 91, 93-96 angiogenesis, repair and plasticity, thus providing long lasting 
neuroprotective and trophic effects.60, 64, 94, 97-100  
 
Reactive Iron.  Iron is highly reactive and normally sequestered by transport proteins.  Unbound 
iron produces free radicals and subsequent oxidative injury. Preterm infants have measurable 
free iron, which increases after transfusions of red blood cells or during metabolic instability such 
as sepsis.101-104 In our phase I/II study of Epo administration to extremely low birth weight infants 
we observed a transient increase in reticulocytosis, indicating an increase in iron utiliz ation.105 
Epo may contribute to neuroprotection by decreasing free iron.  
 
Molecular mechanisms of Epo neuroprotection.  EpoR are present on neuron progenitor 
cells,93 neurons,106 astrocytes,85 oligodendrocytes,107 microglia,108 endothelial cells93 and 
erythrocyte progenitors. Epo has direct neuroprotective effects via EpoR binding: Epo -bound 
receptors dimerize to activate anti -apoptotic pathways via phosphorylation of JAK2, 
phosphorylation and activation of MAPK, E RK1/2, as well as the PI3K/Akt pathway and STAT5, 
which are critical in cell survival.90, 108 Epo also functions through indirect effects, increasing iron 
utilization by increasing erythropoiesis, and by decreasing inflammation73, 76 and oxidative 
injury.109, 110  
 
Translational trials of neonatal Epo neuroprotection are in progress.  Epo improved 
neurodevelopmental outcomes in two trials of term neonates with hypoxic -ischemic brain 
injury.111, 112 Retrospective studies of cohorts of preterm infants that received Epo for 
erythropoiesis compared to controls show improved outcomes.113-115 Two preliminary reports of 
preterm infants treated prospectively also show benefit:  
 
1) Preterm infants 500 to 1250 g treated with Epo (400 U/kg 3x/week) from birth to 35 weeks PMA 
had an average cumulative cognitive score 10 points higher than placebo/controls (98±14 Epo 
vs. 88±14 for controls).  Epo recipients also performed statistical ly better than controls on object 
permanence testing;116   
 
2) A phase III trial is ongoing in Switzerland to test the safety and neuroprotective efficacy of 3000 
U/kg/dose x 3 doses given in the first 3 days after birth to neonates (<1500 g, < 32 weeks PMA). 
This group has p resented preliminary data in abstract form on 100 infants showing that such 
dosing is safe, and that the Epo -treated group showed less WMI by MRI;84  
 
3) Follow -up of the infants studied in our phase I/II trial35 shows that Epo treatment correlated with 
improvement of cognitive (R= .22, p < 0.05) and motor (R = .15, p < 0.05) scores.117   
 
Known and potential risks of intervention : In adults, complications of prolonged Epo treatment 
include polycythemia, seizures, hypertension, stroke, myocardial infarction, congestive heart 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 12 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 failure, tumor progression, and shortened time to death. None of these adverse effects have been 
reported in Epo -treated neonates  in over 3000 patients enrolled in randomized controlled trials .118 
Epo trials in neonates for the purposes of testing its erythropoietic effect have shown it to be a 
safe drug for use in this population. There is robust data from preclinical animal work showing 
that Epo, when used at optimal doses ( 1000 -5000 U/kg), shows short and long term improvement 
in brain injury that approximates 50 -80%, and no safety issues have been discovered . Preterm 
infants administered Epo may be at increased risk of ROP and other as yet unknown 
complications.  
 
Federal ov ersight.  This study of high dose Epo for the purposes of neuroprotection of preterm 
infants is registered with the FDA (IND # 12656). Dr. Juul, University of Washington, Seattle WA 
is the holder of the IND. The trial has been registered with clinicaltrials.gov and has been assigned 
Identifier Number [STUDY_ID_REMOVED].  
 
3. STUDY DESIGN  
 
Study Overview.  This is a randomized, placebo controlled, double blind study of Epo 
neuroprotection in an ELGAN population. Figure 1 provides an overview of the study . 940 patients 
will be enrolled at 16 -18 sites across the country in order to evaluate 752 at 22-26 months  
corrected age . Enrollment and initial treatment with study drug will occur by 24 hours after birth. 
Subjects will be randomized to either Epo treatme nt or placebo , and treatment will continue until 
32-6/7 weeks PMA.  Short term, intermediate and long term safety measures will be determined 
by comparing Epo -treated and control infants. Mechanisms of Epo neuroprotection and potential 
biomarkers of outcom e will be sought by measuring sequential inflammatory cytokines and 
markers of brain injury. In a subset of subjects, a brain MRI will be done at 36 weeks PMA to 
determine whether Epo treatment preserves brain growth and decreases injury. After discharge 
from the hospital, phone contact will be made at 4 month intervals. Data will be collected on 
interval medical history and functional status. Face to face follow -up will occur at two years 
corrected age, at which time standardized neurodevelopmental assessm ents will be made. The 
primary outcome is death or severe NDI at 22-26 months corrected age, with a secondary 
outcome of death, severe or moderate NDI.  
 
4. SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF SUBJECTS  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 NICU Inpatients between 24 -0/7 and 27-6/7 weeks of gestation  
 24 hours of age or less  
 Arterial or venous access  
 Parental consent  
 
When calculating gestational age, the following hierarchy will be used in order of accuracy:  
1.  Gestational age by in vitro fertilization  
2.  Gestational age by first trimester assessment (0 to 14 -0/7 weeks)  
3.  Gestational age by second trimester assessment (up to 28 -0/7 weeks)  
4.  Last menstrual period (LMP)  
5.  Newborn maturational assessment  
 
We estimate, based on the ELGAN study, that 62% of subjects will hav e the most accurate dating 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 13 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 based on #1 or #2, that 29% will have dating based on second trimester fetal ultrasound, 7% by 
menstrual dating, and only 1% by postnatal physical exam.  
 
Postnatal age will be calculated based on time and date of birth.  
 
Arterial  or venous access is considered to be a functioning peripheral intravenous catheter, a 
peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC), an umbilical venous (UVC) or arterial catheter 
(UAC). One of these catheters must be available for the administration of s tudy drug. It is 
preferable that the patient also have a catheter suitable for phlebotomy, although that is not an 
absolute entry criterion for the study.  
 
To be admitted into this study, the legal guardian of the patient must give written informed consent . 
Each site will obtain IRB approval for the study, and will have IRB approved consent forms 
available in English and a second language of their choosing . A translator will be provided for 
non-English  speaking individuals as needed.  If a translator is not available, the family will not be 
approached.  
 
4.2     Exclusion Criteria  
• Known m ajor life -threatening anomalies ( e.g. fetal diagnosis of brain, cardiac,  or renal 
malformations  
• Known or suspected  chromosomal anomalies  
• Severe hemato logic crises such as clinically evident disseminated intravascular 
coagulopathy , twin -twin transfusion such that 1 twin is not eligible  due to polycythemia or 
hydrops  
• Polycythemia (hematocrit >  65%)  
• Hydrops fetalis  
• Known c ongenital infection  such as toxopl asmosis, CMV, rubella or syphilis.   
• Prior administration  of erythropoietin  to the baby  
• Infant is likely to die due to severity of illness or withdrawal of support is being considered 
prior to enrollment  
 
As part of standard care of an extremely preterm inf ant, a CBC will be obtained within the first 24 
hours of life. If the HCT is >  65%, the patient will not be eligible for the study. If the PLT count is 
< 50K, or if there are clinical signs of bleeding, a coagulation panel will be checked to determine 
whet her there are signs of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. If this condition exists, the 
patient is not eligible for the study.  
 
All patients eligible for this study will be hospitalized in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). 
Many concurrent ill nesses are expected for this population of extremely preterm infants. These 
include, but are not limited to: ICH, periventricular leukomalacia (PVL), hydrocephalus (HC), 
respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), hypotension, pa tent 
ductus arteriosus (PDA), NEC, early and late onset sepsis, and retinopathy of prematurity  (ROP). 
None of these will exclude a child from study entry, but all will be considered in the safety 
evaluation of Epo.   
 
4.3 Enrollment Procedures.  
 
4.3.1 Screening . Admissions to the antepartum unit and to the NICU at each site will be screened 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 14 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 at least daily for admissions that are potentially eligible for the trial. This will be done by the 
research coordinator or their designee.  Once identified, the Atte nding health care provider will 
seek parental agreement for an investigator to meet and discuss the study. If the mother  is 
interested in learning more about the study, the attending health care provider can notify the 
research coordinator or investigator so they can discuss the study with the parent and seek 
consent. When possible, and if there is IRB approval for this, consent will be obtained prior to 
delivery. Many mothers of preterm infants are admitted to an antepartum service for bed rest, 
fluids and  observation. They are not acutely laboring, and the stress of imminent delivery is less 
acute. If permitted by the local IRB, these mothers will be approached during a time when they 
are able to fully evaluate the study and have opportunities for reflecti on and questions.  
 
4.3.2  A site screening log  will be maintained to document patients screened, reasons for 
ineligibility, and reasons for nonparticipation of eligible subjects. This document will be maintained 
by the site research coordinator or their des ignee and will contain  the following  information : 
screening number, screening date, patient surname , medical record number, date of birth,  
gender, eligibility (yes/no), whether they were enrolled, and if not enrolled, the reason why. If a 
subject is enroll ed, document that consent was obtained, and the study ID number.  
 
In addition, selected site screening information will be entered electronically and maint ained in 
the PENUT Portal data management system. Entered data will not contain patient names or 
medi cal record numbers. This cumulative log will be reviewed at regular interval s to determine 
enrollment and reasons for non -enrollment.  This information will be used to consider whether 
other recruitment methods should be used.   
 
4.3.3 Consent procedures.  Antenatal consent will be obtained when possible. The study 
investigator will obtain permission from the Maternal Fetal Medicine Attending to approach the 
mother to discuss the study. If consent is obtained prenatally, this will be re -confirmed at the tim e 
of the child’s birth  if required by the local IRB . Postnatally, permission to approach the family will 
be obtained from the Attending Neonatologist. The Attending health care provider will seek 
parental agreement for an investigator to meet and discuss t he study. If the parents are interested, 
the study investigator will discuss the study with family and seek consent in person. The 
consenting legal guardian will receive a copy of the consent form to review, and once signed, will 
be given a copy to keep. I deally,  if the Attending physician is also a study investigator, an alternate 
study investigator , or their designee , should  obtain consent, so as to avoid the appearance of 
coercion. If this is not required by the site IRB, an investigator who is also the Attending physician  
may obtain consent. Investigators will only approach family after infant’s attending heath care 
provider gives permission and family indicates that they are interested in further information about 
the study. No alteration in care will o therwise occur. The a ttending neonatologist and family can 
withdraw child from study at any time.  If permissible by the site IRB, phone consent may be 
obtained, but must be reaffirmed with the family when they are present. Investigator should retain 
origin al signed document.  The investigator will obtain c onsent in a room which ensures the privacy 
of the family, and which is free of potential coercive influences. Consent for participation must be 
obtained before  the baby is 24 hours of age.  Consent for parti cipation the continued phone 
contacts may be obtained at the 2 -year in -person visit, or by phone.  
 
A certified interpreter will be provided  if a family has limited o r no English speaking abilities . They 
will review the consent form with the family, and int erpret the verbal explanation of the study 
during the discussion between the Investigator and the family members. If individual sites have a 
large population of non -English speakers, consent forms will be translated into the appropriate 
languages. If an in terpreter is not available in a timely manner, the family will not be approached.  
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 15 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 The parents of the research participants will be given opportunity to review the study both verbally 
and in writing. They will be given opportunity to ask questions of the i nvestigator prior to giving 
consent. A sample consent form is shown in Appendix 1.  
 
4.3.4  Randomization procedures. Site-specific study personnel associated with the PENUT 
Trial will screen and randomize patients by logging in to the PENUT Portal at www.penut -trial.org . 
Once it is confirmed that a patient meets inclusion criteria, does not have any exclusion criteria, 
and that consent and HIPAA  forms have been signed, t he DCC web page will generate  the patient 
study ID  for trial affiliated staff to pr ovide to the site pharmacy at the time of study drug ordering . 
The site pharmacy will then look up the study ID in the ir binder and dispense the blinded study 
drug as requested.   
 
5. STUDY INTERVENTIONS  
5.1 Interventions, Administration, and Duration  
All patients will be treated in the NICU. Each subject will be randomized to one of two groups after 
establishing eligibility and obtaining signed consent for study participation and HIPAA compliance. 
Interventions/Treatments will be as outlined in Table 4. Study drug will be administered according 
to the schedule shown in Figure 3. 
 
Cranial Ultrasound.  After written consent is obtained, but before administration of study drug, a 
cranial ultrasound will be done to document whether an intracranial hemorrhage has occurred. 
Results of this examination will not affect clinical care, eligibility, or randomiza tion for the study, 
but will be used as part of the safety analysis. Dr. Manjiri Dighe , a UW radiologist who will be 
blinded to the treatment groups and any clinical information about the child , will read the cranial 
ultrasound s. If a cranial ultrasound is  indicated based on the patient's condition, it will be ordered 
by the caregiver on site and read by the site radiologist as part of clinical care.  For more details 
please see the Cranial Ultrasound guidelines, Appendix 6.  
 
Phlebotomy:  Subjects will have four timed blood samples drawn during the first two weeks of life  
(see Figure 3). The first blood draw may be obtained from cord blood, if available. At the two year 
follow -up visit, an additional (optional ) blood sample of 0.5 mL will be drawn.  Figure 3.  
 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 16 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
Cerebral S pinal Fluid (CSF) : If a clinically -indicated spinal tap is ordered for an enrolled subject 
(e.g. to  rule out meningitis ), then residual CSF may be available for the PENUT study to collect.  
In that event, w e request 0.15 mL CSF be collected and frozen  for measurement of  CSF Epo 
concentration in any infant who undergoes a diagnostic lumbar puncture during the initial 
hospitalization . If residual CSF is available for the PENUT study, then a small  systemic blood 
sample (0.15 mL) will ideally  also be collected within one hour  of when the CSF sample is 
collected  and processed to plasma  as described above. These biologic specimens will be sent to 
the UW CCC lab for analysis. Diagnostic spinal taps provide a serendipitous opportunity to 
correlate circulating E po/cytokine levels with CSF levels.  If significantly elevated Epo 
concentrations are present, further analysis, either by Western blotting or MALDI TOF mass 
spectrometric measurement will be considered . If no blood can be obtained, CSF  should still be 
collected and sent to the CCC . 
 
Brain MRI:  A subset of 220 subjects will undergo a brain MRI at 36 weeks PMA. Prior to scanning, 
infants will be fed and swaddled. If needed, the patient can be immobilized using a MedVac Infant 
Vacuum Immobilization Bag (contou r Fabricators, Inc., Fenton, Michigan), or comparable device  
as per usual site practices for neonatal MRI scans .119 Per usual site practice , ear plugs, and /or 
ear covers [MiniMuffs® (Natus Medical Inc., San Carlos CA)] will provide noise reduction. Exams 
will be rescheduled if the child cannot be quieted sufficiently for the exam. Subjects will be 
monitored with an MRI -compatible pulse oximeter. A caregiver tra ined in MRI procedures and 
neonatal resuscitation will be in attendance.  
 
Table 4. Phase III Trial  
Time Line  Procedure  Sites  Control  Epo  
0-24 hours from birth  Consent  All All All 
Consent to 24 h  of age  Randomization  All All All 
Consent to 24 h  of age  Cranial  Ultrasound  All All All 
Consent to 24 h  of age  Baseline blood (0.5 mL) and 
urine sample (1 -2 mL) All All All 
Study day 1  Epo dose 1 IV All Placebo  Epo 1000 U/kg  
Study day 3  Epo dose 2 IV  All Placebo  Epo 1000 U/kg  
Study day 5  Epo dose 3 IV All Placebo  Epo 1000 U/kg  
Study day 3 -5 Urine sample (1 -2 mL)  All All All 
Study day 7  Epo dose 4 IV  All Placebo  Epo 1000 U/kg  
Study day 7  Blood draw #2 (0.5 mL)  All All All 
Study day 8  Begin iron supplementation per 
guidelines  All All All 
Study day 7 -9 Urine sample (1 -2 mL)  All All All 
Study day 9  Blood draw #3 (0.5 mL)  All All All 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 17 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
Epo Risks : In adults, complications of prolonged Epo treatment include polycythemia, s eizures, 
hypertension, stroke, myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, tumor progression, and 
shortened time to death.  
 
None of these adverse effects have been reported in Epo -treated neonates. No prospective 
studies of neonatal Epo treatment hav e reported group differences in the incidence of neonatal 
morbidities, including ICH, ROP, NEC, BPD, or late onset sepsis,120 but a Cochrane review 
reported  an increased risk of ROP with early treatment.121 This report was recently revised, with 
no statistical increase in ROP noted for early or late Epo administration.122 One retrospective 
report also described an increase in cutaneous hemangiomas in Epo -treated preterm infants.123  
 
In the 2 pilot studies of high dose Epo administered to preterm infants done , one  at the University 
of Washington Medical Center and  one in Switzerland, no increased risk of any complications 
were noted in a total of 60 treated patients, including ROP.33, 35 In the UW  study, we observed 5 
cases of severe ROP in 23 surviving controls compared to 6 of 24 Epo treated infants.35 
 Study day 9  Epo dose 5 IV  All Placebo  Epo 1000 U/kg  
Study day 11  Epo dose 6 IV  All Placebo  Epo 1000 U/kg  
First Monday, 
Wednesday or Friday 
following IV doses  Begin maintenance Epo vs. 
sham injections (nothing)  All No injection  Epo 400 U/kg  
Study day 1 4  1 day  Blood draw #4 (0.5 mL), Urine 
sample (1 -2 mL)  All All All 
Study week 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 
12 Urine samples (1 -2 mL)  All All All 
Continue study drug until 
32-6/7 weeks PMA  Maintenance Epo or sham 
injections (no  shots ) All No injection  Epo 400 U/kg  
36-0/7 to 36 -6/7 weeks   MRI MRI sites  110 per arm  110 per arm  
Discharge  Physical  exam , Urine sample   
and questionnaire  All All All 
4 m corrected age  Phone contact  All All All 
8 m corrected age  Phone contact  All All All 
12 m corrected age  Phone contact  All All All 
18 m corrected age  Phone contact  All All All 
22-26 m corrected age  Bayley III, Neuro exam, M-
CHAT -R All All All 
22-26 m corrected age  Weight, blood pressure, urine 
collection (1 -2 mL), and 
(optional ) blood draw #5 (0.5 
mL) All All All 
30 m chronological  age Phone contact  All All All 
36 m chronological age Phone contact  All All All 
42 m  chronological age Phone contact  All All All 
48 m chronological age Phone contact  All All All 
52 m  chronological age Phone contact  All All All 
60 m chronological age Phone contact  All All All 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 18 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Safety data from a  prospective  randomized controlled phase II trial of high dose Epo in 
Switzerland ( ClinicalTrials.gov: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ), in which 3000 U/kg daily was given to infants  26-
0/7 to 31-6/7 weeks of gestation at 3, 12 -18 and 36 -42 hours after birth (N=229 treated, 214 
controls) has been reassuring.  There were no relevant differences between the groups for short -
term outcomes including mortality, ROP , IVH, sepsis, NEC , and BPD.124 Higher hematocrit was 
noted at day 7 -10 in the treated group. Improved white matter was also noted at term corrected 
age by MRI.125, 126 
  
Three updated Cochrane reviews have been published rev iewing the safety and efficacy of Epo 
for erythropoietic purposes ,122, 127, 128 and another meta -analysis focused specifically on Epo and 
ROP.129 Conclusions from these reviews are as  follows: Epo , whether used early or late,  reduces 
the use of one or more RBC transfusion s, and the number of RBC transfusions per infant. No 
increase in any of the complications of prematurity are noted, i.e. use of erythropoietic doses of 
Epo are safe in  preterm infants. The safety of higher, neuroprotective doses has not yet been 
systematically evaluated in large population studies.  
 
Epo is a potent erythropoietic growth factor. Thus, high doses of Epo given for neuroprotective 
treatment might be expected to increase erythropoiesis, and possibly megakaryocytopoiesis. In 
neonatal rats, there is a transient increase in hematocrit following high -dose Epo,62 but in preterm 
infants, while 3 doses of high dose Epo increased reticulocytosis, they did not affect hematocrit, 
likely due to early phlebotomy losses.35 In term infants with neonatal encephalopathy, after up to 
6 doses of high dose Epo, hematocrit fell an ave rage of 14%, reflecting phlebotomy losses in 
these sick infants.130 The effect of brief treatments of high -dose Epo on iron balance is not known. 
Prolonged Epo treatment in neonates must be accompanied  by iron supplementation, and does 
improve erythropoiesis.116 This is, in fact, currently the primary indication for Epo use in neonates. 
Dosing of 400 U/kg/dose three times a week has been shown to decrease (but not eliminate) 
need for blood transfusions .131 
 
1) Safety during the high dose treatment period.  Serio us adverse events (SAEs) specific to 
Epo will be defined as any of the following during the treatment period:  
• Hypertension : subject required prolonged antihypertensive therapy (> 1 month) and/or will 
be discharged on medication  
 Polycythemia (central hemat ocrit > 65%, or hematocrit increase ≥ 15% not due to red blood 
cell transfusion)  
 Major venous or arterial thrombosis (involving a major vessel not related to an infusion line , 
requiring anticoagulation, or symptomatic such as causing superior vena cava syndrome ) 
 
Serious adverse events most likely related to prematurity will include  
 Severe pulmonary hemorrhage  (severe, e .g., need for increased respiratory support, positive 
pressure. Not pink tinged secretions with suctioning).  
 Necrotizing enterocolitis ( stage 2B or 3)  
 Severe sepsis : Blood c ulture -proven bacterial or fungal sepsis requiring blood pressure 
support or significant new respiratory support.  
 Intracranial hemorrhage (grade III or IV)  
 ROP requiring intervention (surgery or Avastin) . 
 
ROP  will be included as a severe adverse event, although due to the timing of screening, which 
begins at 31 weeks, it will most likely be too late to discontinue treatment. Each case of ROP will 
be reviewed in real time. Subjects will be screened for ROP as pe r the 20 06 guidelines: for  24-27 
week gestation infants, the first screening will occur at 31 weeks PMA.132 The timing of follow -up 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 19 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 ROP exams will be determin ed by findings on the initial exam.  
 
Resolution of SAEs : 
 NEC  
-When infant is able to take full feeds, or what is considered equivalent to full feeding for 
that particular infant.  If the child does not make it to full feedings due to short gut, note 
the method of feeding at the time of discharge (e.g. Home TPN)  
 
 ROP 
-When an infant is diagnosed by an ophthalmologist exam with mature vessels  
-They no longer require frequent follow up ophthalmology appointments   
 
 IVH 
-When shunt placement has occurred.  
-When sequential cranial ultrasounds show the ventricle size is stable or  getting smaller.  
 
 Hypertension  
-When hypertensive medications are discontinued  
-If infant is discharged on antihypertensive medications   
 
 Sepsis  
-When antibiotics are completed.  
 
 Thrombosis  
-When anti coagulation treatment ends . 
 
 Pulmonary Hemorrhage  
-When no more blood in tracheal secretions and with stable vent settings . 
 
Additional serious events which may be expected or unexpected include:  
 Death  
 Cardiac arrest  
 Other unexpected life threatening event  
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 20 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 The following flow diagram will be used to determine how to label an adverse event.  
Criteria for Temporarily Withholding/Stopping Study Drug  and/or Supplemental Iron.  
1. Polycythemia:  Central hematocrit (Hct) > 65%: Study drug  should be held until Hct is < 55%. 
2. Severe sepsis : Blood c ulture -proven bacterial or fungal sepsis requiring blood pressure 
support or significant new respiratory support. Supplemental iron  should be held until blood 
culture is negative for  72 hours.  Rationale:  Iron has been reported to be permissive for 
selected  gram -negative bacteria and might worsen the patient's condition during sepsis. 
There is no known relationship between Epo and sepsi s, so study drug does not need to 
be held.  
 3. Unexplained recurrent seizure  (unrelated to ICH, PVL or other known pathology): Study 
drug should be held until seizures are well controlled by medication. Restarting study drug 
will be determined by the Medical Monitor, DSMB, and CCC.  
4. Major venous or arterial thrombosis (clot).  
a. Study drug  should b e held for a ny thrombosis that is treated with a course of 
anticoagulation . 
b. Study drug  should be held for a ny symptomatic  thrombosis involving a major vessel 
(e.g. symptoms such as superior vena cava syndrome)   
Adverse	 Event	
Serious	 Not	 Serious	
Serious	 Adverse	 Event	
(SAE)	Adverse	 Event	
(AE)	
Epo	
Related	Not	 Epo	
Related	Epo	
Related	Not	 Epo	
Related	
Serious	
Adverse	
Reacon	 (SAR)	Serous	
Adverse	 Event	
(SAE)	Adverse	
Reacon	 (AR)	Adverse	 Event	
(AE)	
Expected	
Unexpected	
Serious	 Adverse	 Reac on	 (SAR)	
Suspected	 Unexpected	 Serious	
Adverse	 Reac on	 (SUSAR)	

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 21 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 5. Sustained hypertension  requiring medical intervention : Study drug  should be 
discontinued if blood pressure requires treatment.  When blood pressure returns to normal 
range (systolic blood pressure < 100 mmH g), study drug can be resumed. This is true even 
if patient is still being treated, but blo od pressure is being controlled.   
 
In the event that study drug is discontinued in any subject, sites will encourage parents to 
continue to allow their child to participate in the follow -up evaluations.  
 
2) Safety during the initial hospitalization.  Due t o the inherent vulnerability of this patient 
population, the rate of comorbidity is high , particularly in the most immature infants . The most 
current week -specific data for large populations of similar infants are provided by the neonatal 
research network (9575 infants of extremely low GA (22 –28 weeks),5 and by the ELGAN study 
group (1506 infants 23 -27 weeks).43, 133-136 We will use standard definitions of respiratory distress 
syndrome (RDS), BPD, ICH, PVL, early -onset and late -onset sepsis, NEC, patent ductus 
arteriosus (PDA), clinically diagnosed seizures (confirmed by EEG), hypertension, and ROP.5 We 
will track the incidence of each of these disorders for all enrolled subjects using REDCap data 
entry forms.  
 
Prior to study drug dosing, study staff will check subject ’s medical record for SAE s and 
criteria for temporarily w ithholding/ stopping study drug and/or supplemental iron.   
 
3) Long term outcomes.  During  the phone interview s that will occur at 4, 8, 12, 18 , 30, 36, 42, 
48, 54, 60  months , and at the face-to-face 2 year (22-26 months ) corrected age  visit, data will be 
obtained regarding interval hospitalizations, medication use, resource utilization, medical 
diagnoses, and oxygen requirement. At 12 months, parents will also be queried about their child’s 
development .  At two years corre cted age, weight, blood pressure, and n eurodevelopmental 
outcomes will be documented (neurologic exam, Bayley III scores, and M-CHAT -R evaluation) . 
Urine and blood will also be collected at this time.  
 
5.2 Handling of Study Interventions  
Procrit will be utilized for this study ( manufactured by Amgen, distributed by Centocor Ortho 
Biotech) . 
 
Study Drug Procurement by Site Research Pharmacies  
Investigational Drug Services or corresponding pharmacy services at each site will purchase 
single dose, preservative free vials of PROCRIT, Epoetin alfa, 2000 Units/mL (NDC 59676 -302-
01) for use on this study.  An inventory of drug will be purchased speci fically for this study. The 
invoices for the purchase of the Procrit will be retained at the site in the same manner that a study 
drug shipping receipt would be retained.  A copy of the invoice and the drug accountability logs 
must be submitted for reimbur sement  at approximately six month intervals by pharmacy.  
Because of the blinded nature of the PENUT Trial, the pharmacy must send this information 
directly to the CCC financial coordinator .  The study investigator(s) and coordinator(s) cannot 
review this information.   
 
Single -dose, Preservative -free Vial : Each 1 mL of solution contains 2000 Units of Epoetin alfa, 
2.5 mg Albumin (human), 5.8 mg sodium citrate, 5.8 mg sodium chloride, and 0.06 mg citric acid 
in Water for Injection, USP (pH 6.9 ± 0.3). This formulation contains no preservative.  
 
Preservative free normal s aline will be used as placebo for the first 6 doses, and will be provided 
by local sites.  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 22 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
Blinding/Drug Administration.  
After enrollment , the DCC will provide randomization information to t he site pharmacy. The site 
pharmacy will then dispense study drug in a closed container. Epo and placebo (saline) are the 
same in appearance, and will be labeled “study drug”. The first 6 doses of study drug will be 
administered IV push followed by 1 mL sa line flush given over 2 minutes . These IV doses can be 
administered either by the bedside nurse or a research nurse since the study drug will be blinded 
by the pharmacy . 
 
Maintenance Epo will be administered by subcutaneous  injection using a 27 or 30 gauge needle 
on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, beginning on the day closest to completing the high do se 
series. To maintain the blind , pharmacy will dispense “PENUT STUDY drug” in a syringe to all 
infants. Control infants will not  undergo any maintenance  injections. A nurse who is not directly 
involved with the care of the patient, and who will maintain confidentiality will administer 
treatments behind curtains or blinds . A cohort of charge nurses, or General Clinical Research 
Center ( GCRC ) nurses would b e ideal for this task. After injection or sham injection, all infants 
will have the injection site covered by a 2 x 2 gauze and wrapped with a gauze bandage, which  
is secured by taping it to itself .  The time, date, and study drug intervention will be docu mented 
for each drug administration event.  
 
Exceptional situations:  
 If a dose of study drug is unavoidably delayed or missed, the dose should be given as soon 
as possible. This should be recorded as a study deviation. The normal schedule of 
administration should then be resumed. At least 24 hours must separate the high dose study 
drug doses. This allows the plasma Epo concentration to return to baseline.  
 
 If severe edema (anasarca) or other circumstances prohibit the use of subcutaneous 
injection, up to three doses of Epo or saline placebo may be given intravenously  using the 
normal IV protocol . In this case, pharmacy must be notified so they can provide an 
appropriate study drug formulation for IV use (saline rather than an empty syringe used for 
sham injection) .  This should not be recorded as a deviation  for up to 3 doses.  Subsequent 
IV doses would be considered a deviation.  
 
 If the baby’s IV is removed prior to completing the 6 intravenous study drug doses, the dose 
can be administered subcutane ously.   This should be recorded as a study deviation.  
 
The risks of intravenous administration of medication include infiltration, infection, and possibl e 
bleeding. The risks of subcutaneous injections include bruising, pain at the site of injection, and 
infection.  
 
Iron supplementation:  Iron supplements (oral and intravenous preparations) will be obtained  
from each site pharmacy as per their usual practice.  
 
Iron Treatment Plan . Please see Appendix 7 .  
Maintaining iron sufficiency in a growing preterm infant is important for normal brain growth. 
Because of this, we have established iron guidelines that are to be followed at all sites. When 
enteral feedings are started, a standard iron containing formula will be used if breast milk is 
unavailable. Once infants (all subjects) have an enteral intake of 60 mL/kg/d  and are at least one 
week old , they will be started on enteral iron at a dose of 3 mg/kg/d total. Enteral iron will be 
increased to 6 mg/kg/d when infants achieve an enteral intake of 100  to 120  mL/kg/d.137 This is a 
well-tolerated dose that helps to prevent iron deficiency in preterm infants.137 Serum ferritin or 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 23 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 ZnPP/H ratios should be checked at 14 and 42 days, and iron adjusted accordingly . If the ferritin 
is not in the desired range at the 14 day check, please a djust the iron dose and recheck ferritin 
(or ZnPP /H) at 28 days (see figure). If subjects are not able to tolerate enteral feedings and oral 
iron supplements, they will be given maintenance iron parenterally as noted in Appendix 7.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We estimate that less than 20% of babies will receive one parenteral dose of iron, since feeding s 
are most often started by day 2 or 3, and advanced by 10 to 20 mL/kg/day. More than two 
parenteral doses will be rare. If the child is NPO for a prolonge d period, parenteral iron dosing 
should be adjusted based on serum ferritin or ZnPP/H.  
 
5.3 Concomitant Interventions  
Infants < 27 -6/7 weeks of gestation require treatment for associated problems of prematurity. 
Interventions include, but are not limited to, mechanical ventilation, sedation, treatment of 
seizures, treatment of PDA either medically or surgically, treatment of sepsis (bacterial or fungal), 
transfusions with packed red blood cells or platelets, treatment of NEC either medically or 
surgically,  and assessment and treatment for ROP. Preterm infants are also at risk for acute 
kidney injury and late hypertension. Data will be collected on associated conditions and 
medications used to treat them during the course of the subject enrollment.  
 
5.3.1  R equired Interventions . 1) Epo/ placebo  treatment as designated by randomization; 2) 
cranial  ultrasound within 6 hours of (preferably prior  to) first study drug dose; 3) iron 
supplementation; 4) blood drawing 2. 5 mL for Epo and biomarkers plus up to 1.2 mL f or iron 
studies; 11 urine samples obtained at baseline and study days  3-5, 7-9, 14 ±1 day , then during 
weeks 3, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12, and at the 2 year follow -up; 5) MRI at 36 weeks PMA depending on 
study site; neurodevelopmental follow -up at 22-26 months corrected age  at all study sites.  With 
parental permission, ongoing follow -up will be obtained by phone at 6 -month intervals.  
  

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 24 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 5.3.2  Prohibited Interventions.  Use of any erythropoietic agents such as Epo or Darbepoetin  
off protocol is prohibited for subje cts enrolled in this trial up to 44 weeks PMA.  
 
5.3.3  Precautionary Interventions.  The attending physician or responsible family member can 
remove a subject from the study at any time. If a subject develops any SAE presumed to be 
related to  study drug , study drug  will be discontinued  as determined by the site PI and  the CCC  
PI in consultation with the  Medical Monitor . 
 
5.4 Adherence Assessment  
All medication dosing will occur in the NICU and will be documented by the nurse and the 
pharmacy. Accuracy and compliance will be assessed by measured  Epo concentrations drawn 
as shown in Figure 3.  
 
A cranial ultrasound will be done before  (or within 6 ho urs of ) initial study drug dosing and will be 
logged into the PENUT Portal.  
 
Case report forms  (CRF) will be completed and entered into the PENUT Portal: baseline, high 
dose and discharge.  
 
In a subset of 220 subjects, a brain MRI will occur prior to disch arge at 36 weeks PMA, and will 
be documented. The research study coordinator  will log phone contacts after discharge, and the 
follow -up assessments will be documented on study forms, which will be submitted electronically 
to REDCap.  
 
All contact with families after discharge will be recorded  in the Follow -Up CRFs .  The follow -up 
phone calls at 4, 8, 12 , and 18 months corrected  age will assess medical health and functional 
condition  and remind parents of need for neurodevelopmental assessment. Attendanc e at follow -
up clinic for the in -person 2 year corrected age assessment will be documented . 
 
Protocol Violation/Deviation Reporting.   
Violations of the study drug administration protocol require completion of a Study  Deviations and 
Violation s form and notification to the CCC and DCC within 7 working d ays. Protocol deviations  
should also be recorded on the  Study Deviations and Violations form . 
 
Major protocol violations include: enrollment in light of exclusion criteria , consent obtained not in 
accordance with IRB guidelines , unblinding of study personnel , study drug administration or 
dosing error.  
 
Study deviations include:  failure to administer all doses of study drug, study drug administration 
deviated from  PENUT protocol , no baseline cranial  ultrasound done, no baseline blood drawn, 
baseline cranial  ultrasou nd delayed > 6 hours after 1st dose study drug  and first study drug dose 
give > 26 hours  of life  (24 hours plus 2 hours of wiggle room) . 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 25 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 6. CLINICAL AND LABORATORY EVALUATIONS  
6.1   Schedule of Evaluations  
Table 5. Evaluation  
Screening  
 
 
Pre-Entry  
(Prior to 24 hrs)  
Entry  
1-7 day  
7-10 days  
12-15 days  
28-42nd days 
32 w eeks PMA  
34-36 w eeks PMA  
Discharge  
4 months CA  
8 months CA 
12 months CA 
18 months CA 
24-26 months CA 
30 month s  
36 month s 
42 month s 
48 month s 
52 month s 
60 month s 
Screen admissions to 
antepartum unit and NICU  X  X                    
Documentation of Gestational 
Age   X                    
Informed Consent    X                    
Maternal Demographics and 
History     X                   
Screening Cranial ultrasounds     X  X    X             
Blood Pressure     X X X X X X X X     X       
Urine collection     X X X X
X X
X X X X     X       
Epo concentration     X X X X                
Adherence Assessments     X X X X                
Stored Plasma for biomarkers     X  X X                
Ferritin or ZnPP/H        X X               
MRI (subset of 220 subjects)           X             
Hematology 
(CBC/transfusions/phlebotomy 
loss) as available from clinical 
care    
 X   X X X  X     
       
Liver/kidney Function Tests (as 
clinically available)        X X X X X            
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 26 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Complete Physical Exam 
including weight, head 
circumference and length    
 X   X    X     
       
Telephone contact to review 
current status             X X X X  X X X X X X 
Comprehensive 
Neurodevelopmental 
Assessment    
             
X       
Page 27 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6 October 14, 2019  
 6.2 Data to be collected  on Each Subject  
Gestational age, birth weight, maternal history, placenta histology (intrauterine infection, insufficiency), Apgar 
scores at 1, 5 and 10 minutes, will be documented in addition to measures of maternal education, SES, and 
other factors known to affect cogni tive development (e.g. drug/alcohol exposure). NINDS common language will 
be used when possible. A cranial  ultrasound will be obtained prior to study drug dosing.  
 
6.3   Timing of Evaluations  
Data collection for hematology, chemistry, liver and kidney func tion will be as clinically available. These tests are 
done routinely in all extremely preterm infants as part of usual care, and will not be required as part of the study 
protocol. The research nurse or designee will collect these results from the medical record.  
 
Cranial  ultrasound s at baseline, 7 -10 days and at 36 weeks PMA  (30 days of age or later is acceptable) will be 
sent to UW CCC,  as will all brain MRI s. Analysis will be done using the most severe lesion noted.  
 
6.3.1  Pre -Randomization Evaluations  
These evaluations occur prior to the subject receiving any study interventions.   
 
Screening  
If appropriate, families will be approached for study entry while on the antepartum service, if delivery seems 
reasonably imminent. All NICU admissions will also be screened daily for eligible patients.  
 
Pre-Entry  
After birth, consent must be obtained by 24 hours of age to be eligible for study participation.  The time 
window for initiation of study intervention from birth is 24 hours.  
 
6.3.2  On -Study/On -Intervent ion Evaluations  
After consent is obtained, a cranial ultrasound must be obtained prior to , or within 6 hours , of the first study drug 
dose. Results of the cranial ultrasound will not affect randomization or clinical care. These data will be used for 
later analysis of outcomes only.   
 
Physical exam will be done at study entry, after the first 6 doses of intravenous study drug, and at discharge. 
Complete blood count s (CBC) drawn as part of clinical care will be recorded, as will laboratory evaluations of 
renal and hepatic function.  
 
Blood draws:  Blood draws are timed according to Study drug dosing (see Figure 3).  All subjects will have 5 
blood draws (0.5 mL volume each) as  part of this study . This blood will be used to determine plasma  Epo 
concentrations, biom arkers of brain injury, and the effect of Epo on systemic inflammatory response. The cell 
pellets will be frozen and saved for future studies that are beyond the scope of this study.  A final (optional ) blood 
draw will be obtained at the 2 -year follow -up visit.  This blood will be evaluated for renal function for the purposes 
of identifying markers of kidney injury at follow -up. 
 
Collection Schedule  
1. Day 0: Baseline - prior to first study drug dose  (may use cord blood)  
2. Day 7: 30 min after the 4th study drug dose (peak)  
3. Day 9: 30 min prior to the 5th study drug dose (trough)  
4. Day 14  ± 1 day : Denote the time of draw on sample  relative to drug dosing  
5. 22-26 months corrected age  
 
Blood draws will be synchronized with the clinically needed blood samples when possible. Epo measurements 
will be done in all subjects, and cytokine measurements (Aim 3) will be done in the subset of 2 20 subjects (1 10 
per arm)  who will also be undergoing a n MRI at 36 weeks PMA .  
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 28 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Following serum ferritin (0.4 mL) or ZnPP/H (0.1 mL) to assess iron status is strongly recommended  beginning 
at 14 days. If these lab values are outside the normal range, it is recommended that iron supplementation be 
adjusted, and  repeat labs (ferritin or ZnPP/H)  be followed more closely (at 2 -week intervals). This would increase 
the total blood volume drawn for study purposes by 0. 2 (if ZnPP/H is assessed) to 0.8 additional mL of blood (if 
ferritin is assessed). These volumes (Maximum of 2.8 mL) are within the IRB recommendations for infants of this 
weight: “Existing guidelines for blood sample volume limits (ranging from 1 –5% of total blood volume within 24 
hours  and up to 10% of total blood volume over 8  weeks) are consistent with the limited evidence available on 
“minimal risk” to children”.138 Given that the blood volume of premature infants ranges from 80 to 85 mL/kg, their 
total blood volume would range from 40 mL (80 x 0.5 Kg) to 85 mL (85 x 1  Kg). The maximum amount of blood 
to be drawn for study purposes is 2  + 0.8 mL = 2.8 mL, which is  within the guidelines.  
 
Blood draw precautions:  If there is a venous or arterial catheter in place appropriate for blood drawing, this will 
be used preferentially. If no access is available, standard neonatal phlebotomy techniques will be used.  
 
Urine co llections  
Rationale: Little is known about acute kidney injury (AKI) in extremely preterm infants. S erum creatinine (SCr) 
and urine output are not ideal markers to define AKI, especially in neonates. Even in adults, the increase in SCr 
is known to be a rel atively late occurrence. The use of SCr in neonates is complicated by the fact that in the first 
few days of life, it reflects maternal SCr.  
 
Urine biomarkers of cell injury/repair are felt to have great potential. However, before these novel biomarkers 
can be used clinically, we must evaluate their ability to predict a SCr rise, as well as short and long -term clinical 
outcomes. The goal of collecting detailed information about renal function in these infants is ultimately to improve 
the ability to diagnose  AKI, and to better understand the epidemiology and pathophysiology of AKI  in extremely 
low gestational age neonates . BUN and creatinine are commonly checked as part of routine care of extreme 
preterm infants. When obtained for clinical indications, these values will be recorded.  
 
Neonatal AKI has been classically defined by oliguria/anuria and/or a persistent SCr elevation. We will use 
categorical definitions to make the diagnosis of AKI, similar to definitions published by KDIGO (2012) 
http://www.kdigo.org  and the AKIN groups (2007). Jetton , et al., proposed a modification of the adult Acute 
Kidney Injury Network Criteria (AKIN) definition of AKI as a standardized definition of AKI for neonates based on 
a rise in SCr from a previously documented low, rather than on an absolute SCr threshold.  
 
Stage 0 : No change or rise <  0.3 mg/d L 
Stage 1:  Increase in SCr 0.3  mg/dL or a SCr 150 –200% from previous trough value  
Stage 2 : Increase in SCr 201–300% from previous trough value  
Stage 3:  Increase  in SCr > 300% from previous trough value or 2.5  mg/dL or need for  dialysis  
 
Urine will be obtained at timed intervals as shown in Figure 4. With the exception of the initial urine, which will 
be collected at the time of enrollment, if the date of urine collection falls on a Saturday or Sunday , the urine will 
be collecte d on the closest weekday.  Do not delay study drug dosing if no urine is available at enrollment, but 
still obtain first urine available.  Urine samples are requested at the time of enrollment, on day 3 to 5, day 7 to 9, 
with a preference for day 7 if that  is possible, day 14  ± 1 day, and then during week 3, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12. If 
possible,  pick one day of the week to collect urines, and do this consistently. This is to minimize the work for the 
site coordinator as much as possible.  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 29 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
 
The u rine samples will be banked for future analyses of biomarkers (neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin 
(NGAL), KIM -1, osteopontin (OPN), cystatin C (CysC), uromodulin (UMOD), epithelial growth factor (EGF) and 
urine β2 -Microglobulin (β2MG).   There are increasing data in older children as to the validity  of such markers for 
diagnosis of AKI, but very little data in preterm neonates.   Additionally, prior to including these markers as part 
of the neonatal AKI definition, more knowledge is needed on other clinical factors which may affect urinary 
concentrati ons of these biomarkers independent of renal function (e.g. inflammation, NEC or other neonatal 
specific conditions).   Advantages to eventually including novel renal injury biomarkers in a future definition of 
neonatal AKI are that they would ideally repre sent actual renal tubular injury versus the solely functional markers 
of AKI currently used.  
 
Urine will be collected by placing cotton balls in the infant’s diaper with a diaper change.  (If needed, a bag can 
be used to collect urine instead of cotton bal ls.)  At the next diaper change, these cotton balls will be placed in 
an empty 10 mL syringe and the plunger will be used to squeeze the urine out into collection tubes.  The collection 
tubes will be labeled with the infant’s study ID number, and date. The  urine will then be frozen and sent in batches 
to the University of Washington for further processing and analysis.  
 
Brain Imaging in Premature Infants.  Please see Appendix 6. 
The review titled: “Practice parameter: neuroimaging of the neonate: report of the Quality Standards 
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the Practice Committee of the Child Neurology 
Society” published in 2002 gave recommendations for the timing and grading of ultrasound finings.139 Cranial 
ultrasounds are recommended at day 7 -10 and at 36 -0/7 to 36 -6/7 weeks PMA or prior to discharge  if this occurs 
earlier.   Our study guidelines are modified from these recommendations in that an additional research crani al 
ultrasound will be done on day 1 , prior to (or within 6 hours of) the first study drug administration.  While our 
guidelines request a late cranial ultrasound or MRI be done at 36 weeks PMA, we will accept a CUS done after 
30 days of age.   
 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging.   Please see Appendix 2 for pulse sequences.  
MRI’s will be obtained on 110 subjects from each study arm at 36 weeks PMA (220 total). All scans will be done 
on a 3T  Siemens  or 3T Philips  scanner using an optimized protocol determined by th e Imaging committee. These 
scanners are available at the University of Florida  in Gainesville, Florida Hospital for Children in Orlando, 
Methodist Children’s Hospital in San Antonio, University of Minnesota in Minneapolis , Wake F orest School of 
Medicine in Winston -Salem, Johns Hopkins  in Baltimore , University of Washington in Seattle and Maria Fareri 
Children’s Hospital in Valhalla .  (Please see Imaging SOP.)  
 Figure 4.  
 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 30 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Automated Developing Tissue Segmentation:  Analyses will be based on automated processing steps 
developed specifically for analysis of early developing brain anatomy, as part of separate on -going R01 projects 
on fetal and  premature neonatal brain image analysis, directed by Colin Studholme , PhD  (R01 NS 061957 and 
R01 NS 055064). Validated automated techniques will segment gray matter, myelinated, and un -myelinated 
white matter using 3D T1W MRI data. These make use of age -specific spatial statistical priors synthesized from 
a computational spatio -temporal atlas140, 141 that models age -related variations in tissue volume, tissue 
probability, and MRI contrast for an automated expectation maximization base d labeling scheme, illustrated in 
Figure 5.  
 
Following tissue segmentation, anatomical regions will be automatically labeled (Figure 6) using fine scale 
unbiased spatial normalization to form an unbiased minimum deformation group average anatomy.  
 
Spatial Normalization for population based analyses . Accurate spatial normalization of developing anatomies 
allows population -based mapping of structural differences in subjects. For structural image analysis we will us e 
template -free, symmetric, group wise , spatial normalization of anatomies to form an unbiased average anatomy 
from all scans being studied. This will make use of accurate, automated developing brain tissue segmentation 
techniques to align only boundaries present in each subject's anatomy and exclude focal pathological variations 
in tissue contrast such as blood clots that may be present in some anatomies and potentially induce incorrect 
mappings between brain structures.  
 
Evaluation of Global and Regional Tissue Growth (GRTG) summary measures . We will first use the 
automated tissue segmentations to evaluate summary measures for global and regional growth rates in each 
subject for conventional statistical analyses. Gray matter, myelinated white matter and un myelinated white matter 
will be estimated by integrating tissue label probabilities over the whole brain and within a set of pre -defined Figure 5. Preliminary results using a specialized template driven expectation maximization (EM) scheme 
(left) to label T1W MRI data of a premature neonate (right) with developed and developing tissues (cyan -
myelinated white matter boundary, blue -unmyelinated white matter boundary, red -CSF boundary  
 
Figur e 6: Left: Example delineation of the preterm cerebellum to create a set of 10 
reference MRI scans with delineated anatomy. Right: 3D Rendering illustrating initial 
gyral marking protocols and techniques applied to a pair of MRI studies of a single infant 
acquired at 32 and 38 wks PMA.  
 
 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 31 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 brain regions. Each MRI will be automatically labeled with an optimized patch -based brain labeling technique142 
based on a subset of manually delineated MRI scans that are aligned to form a statistical model of the labeling. 
The labeling approach combines multi -atlas based methods with patch -based techniques t o optimally assign 
region labels to each new individual MRI scan. The resulting label maps combined with tissue segmentations 
provide summary measures that can be analyzed using linear modeling described in more detail by the DCC.  
 
Evaluation of patterns o f tissue growth using Tensor -Based Morphometry (TBM) of Structural MRI.  We 
will use TBM to look for spatially localized biomarkers of abnormal brain tissue growth across the population 
using techniques developed and validated in fetal brain imaging.44 The local volume changes induced by the 
mapping from the group average to each individual brain will be used to characterize the developing brain 
anatomies. These will be evaluated from the Jaco bian determinant of the deformation at each voxel.143 We will 
apply general linear modeling to analyze these maps to account for age and other covariates together with main 
outcome measures on a voxel -by-voxel level, generating regre ssion coefficients and associated t -statistics at 
every voxel in the average anatomies by spatial parametric mapping.144 Correction for multiple comparisons will 
be achieved using an efficient parallel implementation of non -parametric permutation testing.145 This analysis 
permits a spatial hypothesis free exploration of how local tissue growth rates are related to outcome and 
treatment variables across the study populati on.  
 
Evaluation of Cortical Folding using Surface Curvature Mapping (SCM) . We will use the automated 
segmentations of cortical tissue boundaries to evaluate the local and global state of neonatal brain folding to 
look for perturbations in cortical develop ment, using techniques our group has previously used in both fetuses 
and premature neonates.146, 147 Each cortical surface will be tessellated into a locally topologically -correct 
triangular mesh148 and a set of normalized curvature measures will be evaluated at each point on the surface to 
provide direct quantitative measures of cortical evolution. Each subject’s surface folding map will be transformed 
into the unbiased population average anatomy using the deformations described above for TBM analysis. These 
are mapped onto a common tessellated average surface146 to allow statistical p arametric mapping using a vertex -
by-vertex general linear model. As with TBM, this generates a map of regression coefficients and t -statistics 
(here on a surface of vertex locations), which is corrected using an efficient parallel implementation of non -
parametric permutation testing,145 again permitting a spatial, hypothesis -free exploration of how local and global 
cortical foldin g is related to outcome and treatment variables acros s the study population. Figure 6  shows an 
example of changes in surface folding over time in the developing fetus.  
 
MRI Analysis.  All MRI images will be sent to UW CCC for analysis, where they will be will be converted to 
DICOM format and stored on the DICOM server.   Todd Richards , MD  will write customized software to prepare 
data for analysis at the UW CCC site such as reformatting, resorting, and extraction of diffusion b -values  b-
vectors for tensor calculations. He has already written b -values, b -vector extraction code for the Philips Acheiva 
scanners but will need to customize code for the Siemens scanners. Standardized phantoms ( The Phantom 
Laboratory, Incorporated ) will be used at each site to est ablish data  integrity for quality control of MR data.  
 
Qualitative image analysis  will be performed by the clinical neuroradiologist at each participating site so the 
information is available to the subject’s care team. For study purposes, each MRI will be  evaluated by Drs. 
Dennis Shaw and Manjiri Dighe,  who will be blinded to the treatment group, and all clinical data. Qualitative 
evaluation will be done using the recently published MR Imaging Assessment Tool created by the Inder group 
to define brain abno rmalities in very preterm infants at term corrected age.149 This scoring system defines 
abnormalities of white matter, gray matter, and includes measures of hemorrhage, and brain  loss. The table 
below is excerpted from this manuscript.  
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 32 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
 
Quantitative analysis.  We will use a range of highly sensitive automated techniques to quantitatively assess 
brain development at 36 weeks PMA using MRI analysis tools developed as part of on-going projects in the 
biomedical image computing group at UW ( http://depts.washington.edu/bicg ) led by Dr. Studholme. We will 
examine global and regional summary measures of tissue volume,150 cortical folding147 and microscopic water 
diffusion properties from each subject scan to examine whether the state of overall br ain growth at 36 weeks 
PMA has been modified by the administration of Epo. We will then explore the possible presence of focal 
differences in growth patterns that may be related to specific functional deficits. This will use group  wise spatial 
normalizatio n to examine the spatial pattern of tissue volume increase,44 and water diffusion, together with 
patterns of cortical surface folding.146 
 
DTI Analysis:  The met hodology detailed below is currently used by our research group at the University of 
Washington’s Diagnostic Imaging Sciences Center (DISC).  
 
Preprocessing . DTI quantification will be preceded by head motion and eddy current correction using affine 
regist ration to a reference volume151 with FDT (FMRIB’s Diffusion Toolbox; 
http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/ fsl/fdt/index.html). Using the field maps, B 0-field inhomogeneity induced geometric 
distortion in the eddy current -corrected  images will be corrected with PRELUDE (phase Region Expanding 
Labeller  for Unwrapping Discrete Estimates)152 and F UGUE  (FMRIB's Utility for Geometrically Unwarping EPIs;  
http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/fsl/fugue/ ).  FSL software DTIFIT  will be used to fit the 
diffusion tensor model at each voxel in  order to calculate DTI Eigen vectors, Eigen values, fractional anisotropy, 
axial diffusivity, radial diffusivity, and mean diffusivity ( http://www.fmrib.ox .ac.uk/fsl/fdt/fdt_dtifit.html ). 
 
Development of 36 Week Infant Head Model for MRI. We will use software (MINC) 
developed at the Montreal Neurological Institute 
(http:/ /www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/ServicesSoftware/MINC ) in order to co -register and 
combine 50 MRI structural brain images of normal infants at 36 weeks in order to make 
a head model to be used in DTI and VBM group comparisons Dr. Richards has 
experience using this software at I -LABS in collaboration with Dr. Patricia Kuhl where 
he used MINC to make a head model for 6 month old infant brain using 43 brains.  
 
Evaluation of white matter integrity using DTI.  Group differences in fractional 
anisotropy (FA), axial diffusi vity, radial diffusivity, and mean diffusivity (similar to ADC) 
will be determined using TBSS (Tract -Based Spatial Statistics).153 TBSS was 
Figure 7. TBSS  
 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 33 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 developed to conduct voxel wise  analysis of multi -subject diffusion data utilizing improved non -linear registration 
techniques. An example of a 6 month old child studied at the University of Washington  is shown in Figure 7. 
Data processing will be conducted according to the standard method detailed in the TBSS instruction manual 
(http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/tbss/ index.html ). We plan to use Randomise, a permutation method, to test for 
between -group differences in these DTI measures. Correction for multiple comparisons will be done using whole 
brain cluster -based thresholding method:  voxel height, p < 0.01; cluster  extent, p < 0.05. Our group is well 
published in this area of diffusion imaging, DTI and DTI analysis.154-157 Statistical comparison for TBSS will be 
performed using FSL -software called Randomise ( http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/randomise/index.html ). This 
program will be used to perform a non -parametric voxel by voxel ANOVA (and correlations with clinical score) 
with multiple comparison correction using the Threshold -Free Clus ter Enhancement option. Randomise is a 
permutation program enabling modeling and inference using standard General Linear Model design matrix setup 
using cluster -based tests. For more detail on permutation testing in neuroimaging see Nichols and Holmes.145 
The multiple comparison correction was performed based on cluster statistical characteristics such as extent of 
cluster size. D r. Richards has written software to create the design matrix that will be used for both the ANOVA 
and clinical score correlations in software Randomise.  
 
As part of the overall QA effort, we will examine various measures of study implementation across site s. In 
particular, recruitment, retention, data completeness, and measurement precision will be tabulated and 
compared across sites and will be included in our web -based reports. QA efforts and site visits will be focused 
on any sites that show evidence of problems.  
 
Inflammatory Mediators . To test whether Epo treatment decreases serial measures of circulating inflammatory 
mediators and biomarkers of brain injury.  
 
Circulating Proteins :  
We will use Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) technology to measure the following inflammatory markers and growth 
factors: BDNF, Interferon -gamma (IFN -γ),82 Interleukin (IL) -1 β,158 IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor -α (TNF -
α), transforming growth factor ( TGF)-β, matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP )-2 and MMP -9,159 macrophage 
inflammatory protein -1α (MIP-1α), MIP -1β136, monocyte chemotactic protein -1 (MCP -1)136  and tissue inhibitor of 
metalloproteinase ( TIMP )-1.159 
 
Markers of neurotoxici ty and brain injury will include: S100B, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), neuron 
specific enolase (NSE), Activin A, and Ubiquitin C -terminal hydrolase -L1 (UCH -L1).160-162  
 
A number of circulating proteins have been evaluated as potential biomarkers of brain injury. Promising 
biomarkers include the GFAP, Ubiquitin C -terminal hydrolase -L1 (UCH -L1), myelin basic protein (MBP), S100B, 
Activin A, and neuron -specific enolase (NSE), although the sensitivity, specificity and timing of elevation after 
injury in preterm infants have yet to be determined. All of these proteins, with varying levels of specificity, are 
elevated after brain injury in studies of  adult or neonates. Due to the immaturity of myelination, MBP is unlikely 
to be useful in preterm infants.  
 
GFAP is a specific marker of differentiated astrocytes and increased circulating concentrations are detectable 
within hours and peak at up to four d ays after an ischemic stroke.160-163 Astrocyte foot processes make up the 
sub-endothelial component of the blood -brain barrier (BBB), so elevations of GFAP can also reflect loss of BBB 
integrity. UCHL1 expression is highly specific to neurons and t o cells of the neuroendocrine system. Elevations 
have been demonstrated in term infants with HIE. S100B belongs to a family of calcium handling proteins and is 
localized predominately in glial cells in brain. It is thought to function in neurite extension,  inhibition of PKC -
mediated phosphorylation, axonal proliferation, and inhibition of microtubule assembly. NSE is a glycolytic 
enzyme localized primarily to neurons. However NSE is also expressed in platelets and erythrocytes, so 
elevations may not be spec ific to brain injury. GFAP has not been studied in the context of preterm brain injury, 
but a direct comparison of GFAP, S100B, and NSE showed that GFAP was a superior biomarker of brain injury 
in the setting of traumatic brain injury.164  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 34 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
Activin  A is a member of the transforming growth factor -β superfamily and is expressed by neurons. It is a trophic 
factor that regulates differentiation and proliferation of neurons.165  In a cohort of 53 infants, Florio , et al., showed 
that high concentrations of Activin A (>  0.8 mcg/L) in blood samples drawn during their first hour of life was highly 
correlated with ICH in preterm infants <  32weeks gestation (100% sensitivity and 93% specificity, with positive 
predictive value of 79%).166, 167 Activin A is also increased in term newborns with mo derate or severe asphyxia 
suggesting that activin is released after neuronal injury.168 
 
Population Epo Pharmacokinetic Analysis.  We will measure timed Epo concentrations to monitor for 
accumulation and safety, and to confirm Epo dosing. Plasma  Epo concentrations will be measured in duplicate 
using Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) technology  at the UW Laboratory Core . Batched samples will be run every 
12-18 months. A population pharmacokinetic analysis will be performed using sparse plasma  Epo c oncentration 
data. NONMEM software (Icon Development Solutions, Ellicott City, MD) will be used to determine 
compartmental population pharmacokinetic parameters (i.e., clearance and volume). The base structural model 
will be implemented as established in t he population pharmacokinetic model developed from the intensive 
pharmacokinetic data of our pilot study.35 The random -effect model will be updated using the concentration data 
from this study. A covariate analysis will also be performed in a standard step -wise forward addition followed by 
backward elimination method to determine the influence of clinical fact ors (e.g. gestational age, birth weight, 
serum creatinine, concomitant medications) on pharmacokinetic parameters. Based on the final population 
model, post -hoc Bayesian individual pharmacokinetic parameters will then be estimated for each participant. 
Pharmacodynamic relationships will be determined between Epo pharmacokinetics and the clinical and 
biochemical markers measured during the investigation.  
 
Blood (0.5  mL/sample, 2. 5 mL total) will be obtained through an indwelling umbilical arterial or venous catheter 
when possible. Samples will be spun for 10 min at 1000 g; plasma  and cellular components will be frozen in 
separate labeled tubes at -70°C  to -80°C. Samples will be labeled with a code provided by the DCC to maintain 
blinding. All samples will be sent to Dr. Juul’s lab at the University of Washington. Each site will be sent premade 
packages containing the instructions, data sheets, sample labels, blood collection tubes and mailing labels with 
which to process the blood samples  (See Laboratory SOP) .  
 
Neurodevelopmental Follow -Up: High-risk follow -up for ELGANs is part of standard care at all sites. Routine 
visits generally occur at 4 months, 8 months, 12 months, 18 months and two years corrected age . The timing of 
visits may vary depending on the child’s need for intervention  and site -specific protocols . If subjects are not 
scheduled at any one of these time points for routine high risk follow -up, parents/guardians will be contacted by 
telephone at 4, 8, 12, 18 , 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, and 60  months co rrected age. The 30  minute phone contact will 
include an update of the subject’s medical problems, medications, use of services such as physical therapy . The 
timing of these call can be found in  Table 5  and Appendix 3 , “Follow -up manual,”  for further detai ls.   
 
The primary outcome will be neurodevelopment at 22-26 months corrected age . All personnel involved in the 
neurode velopmental assessme nts will be blind to study treatment. Assessment at 22-26 months corrected age 
will include:  
 
 Bayley III Scales of Infant and Toddler Development  
 Standardized neurological examination based on ELGAN Neurological Exam Study protocol (Appendix 
3) 
 The Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS)  
 Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers ( M-CHAT -R) (Appendix 3) 
 
Bayley Scales of Infant Development (BSID) is the standard test used to evaluate early neurodevelopmental 
outcomes of preterm infants.13, 19, 169, 170 The second edition Bayley Scales, used from 1969 to 2005, was 
mode stly predictive of cognitive function at school age with MDI < 70 showing a positive predictive value of 0.19 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 35 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 – 0.8 for identification of children with an IQ < 70 at school age.171-175 The cognitive portion of the Bayley test 
was revised in 2005176, 177 (Bayley III Scales of Infant Development): the Mental Development index (MDI) 
reported in the Bayley II was a composite  of co gnitive, expressive and receptive language; in the revised Bayley 
III, individual scores for cognitive, expressive and receptive language are reported in addition to an assessment 
of social -emotional, and adaptive behavior. As experience has accumulated, i t has become apparent that 
children score higher on the Bayley III compared to the Bayley II.1, 177-183 Thus a cognitive score of 85 on the 
Bayley III likely corresponds to a Bayley II score of 70. Given that children assessed with the Bayley III are just 
now reaching school age, the value of the third edition of the Bayley Scales for prediction of cognitive impairment 
at school age and beyond is still under evaluation.177 In order to ensure that the outcomes of this study are 
clinically important, we have identified two important stepped outcomes: the primary outcome is very stringent, 
and uses a cut off of 2 standard deviations below the mean for cognitive or motor scales (<  70). The secondary 
outcome uses a cut off of one standar d deviation below the mean for these criteria (<  85), which will still have a 
significant impact on the child, family, and healthcare system.  
 
Inter -Rater Reliability Training:  
Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, 3rd edition . Individuals  performing  the BSID -III assessments  
for this study  will be required  to be certified after attending  a formal Training  & Orientati on Workshop  6 months  
before  testing  as organiz ed by Drs.  Michael O’Shea and Jean Lowe (run in tandem  with a neurological  trainin g 
session).  The certification process is comprised of two parts. First, each candidate Infant Assessor will review 
the test publisher’s “Enhanced Administration DVD,” which will be employed in this RCT as the “gold standard” 
for administration and scoring of the Bayley III. Second , the candidate Infant Assessor will administer the Bayley 
to healthy full -term infants who are 24  month s old. Video -recordings will be made of these administrations. The 
candidate Assessor will score each of his/her pilot administ rations. A copy of the candidate’s test protocol will 
be sent to the Study Psychologist (Jean Lowe, PhD) at the coordinating center, along with a copy of the video 
recording. The Study Psychologist will use these materials to assess the candidate’s ability  to (a) engage the 
infant in the Bayley activities, (b) administer and score each Bayley item, and (c) compile all summary scores. 
Infant Assessors will be required to meet the calibration standard for certification:  88% score concordance on 
items correctly administered. The Study Psychologist will provide prompt item -specific feedback, so that the 
candidate can make any needed modifications. Once Infant Assessors have begun to see enrolled patients, we 
will ask each A ssessor to record one Bayley administration after the first 10 patients, or after the first 6 months, 
and then semi -annually. These video -recordings will also be reviewed by the Study Psychologist to guard against 
“calibration drift” over time. Training for Bayley assessment staff will include a semi -annual ass essment to ens ure 
continued reliable and valid assess ment data. For non-English  speaking infants, we will use an interpreter who 
interprets each of the Assessor’s  requests to the child.  
 
Neurological  exam . To standardize the quality of data regarding neurological exams, examiners will attend a 
one-day workshop at 4 convenient hub locations in the U.S., view a training video, and then classify neurological 
findings illustrated on an assessment video.184 Inter-observer variability assessments will be done to determine 
agreement with gold standard responses. Annotated feedback will be given to examiners regarding items that 
had a less than  85% correct rate, and, based on experience in the ELGAN study, we expect agreement rate to 
rise to over 90%.43, 184 To minimize expectation bias, examiners will be blinded to the child’s medical history and 
brain -imaging studies. Findings from the neurological exam will serve as the basis for an algorithm that classifies 
infants into one of four groups: no CP, diparetic CP, hemiparetic CP, and quadriparetic CP.185 These 
categorizations correlate highly with long -term neurodevelopmental outcomes. We will use the neurologic exam 
forms created for the NINDS -funded ELGAN study (Appendix 3). In addition, CP severity will be determined 
using the Gross Mot or Function Classification System (GMFCS) developed by Palisano.3, 4, 186, 187 A GMFCS 
score of 2 or greater will be considered severe CP, given that these children will not be able to walk independently 
at age 2.  
 
 
b) Standardized Diagnosis of Cerebral Palsy and Quantification of Motor Delay  
The presence and sub -type of CP will be determined using the broadly accepted and standardized ELGAN 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 36 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Neurological Exam scoring system and CD based video teaching system.184, 185 This software and training 
program developed by the PENUT collaborator Dr. Karl Kuban provides a distributable method of neurologic 
testing of subjects in a formalized, systemized method th at is highly reproducible.184 CP severity will be 
determined using the Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS).4, 186, 187 
 
Rationale for d iagnosing sub -types of CP:  
Although all forms of CP will be tabulated as part of the primary outcome, relationships between CP sub -types 
and cognitive development vary by the brain region affected and so we will classify CP into three sub -categories:  
- Spastic Quadriparesis: has a higher association with structural injury and quadriparetic children are 9 -times 
more likely than diparetic children to be severely impaired and 5 -times more likely than diparetic to be 
microcephalic. They are also twice as likel y to have MDI < 70 and a high rate of positive M-CHAT -R scores vs. 
diparetic and children without CP.  
 
- Spastic Hemiparesis: represent an intermediate level of injury where 53% of this form of CP have Bayley < 70 
vs. 75% for quadriparesis and only 34% for  diparesis; consistent with a more common association with unilateral 
injury and focal lesions like middle cerebral artery stroke, that spare fibers closest to the ventricle in control of 
lower extremities.  
 
- Spastic Diparesis: Diparesis is more commonly associated with symmetrical white matter injury close to the 
ventricle presumable due to injury of leg fibers of the pyramidal system that are closest to ventricles.  
 
Gross Motor Function Classification System: The Gross Motor Function Classification Syst em (GMFCS) 
system developed by Palisano, et al. focuses on children's functional achievements rather than on their 
limitations. It places emphasis on the child’s routine performance (not necessarily their best capacity) in the 
home or community setting.  
 
The GMFCS system uses descriptions defining 5 levels of function that represent a broad ordinal scale where 
the distance between levels is not considered equal. Distinctions between levels are based on the need for 
assistive technology including mobility d evices (such as walkers and wheeled mobility), and to a much lesser 
extent the quality of movements. Levels between 3 and 5 (the highest possible score) indicate progressively 
more serious limitations of gross motor function and that child is severely hand icapped.3 Table 6 shows the 
classification relevant to our study population.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 37 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Table 6. Summary of the Gross Motor Classification System for Cerebral Palsy.  Adapted from Palisano et 
al., 1997.  
 
 
 
The 2 -year assessment will provide a window into early language development and early gross - and fine -motor 
development. We plan to submit further grants for long -term follow -up at 5 years of age, which correlates b etter 
with ultimate function.188 
 
Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers ( M-CHAT -R). Parent questionnaire  (Appendix 3) will be administered 
to the mother/caretaker at the 2 year corrected age follow -up visit. This instrument is validated for s creening 
toddlers between 16 and 30 months of age, to assess risk for autism spectrum disorders (ASD).  
 
“The primary goal of the M-CHAT -R was to maximize sensitivity, meaning to detect as many cases of ASD as 
possible. Therefore, there is a high false pos itive rate, meaning that not all children who score at risk for ASD 
will be diagnosed with ASD. To address this, we have developed a structured follow -up interview for use in 
conjunction with the M-CHAT -R; it is available at www.firstsigns.org .” Users should be aware that even with the 
follow -up questions, a significant number of the children who fail the M-CHAT -R will not be diagnosed with an 
ASD; however, these children are at risk for other developmental disorder s or delays, and therefore, evaluation 
is warranted for any child who fails the screening.  
 
The M-CHAT -R can be scored in less than two minutes. We will use the scoring template available at 
www.firstsigns.org . Children who fail more than 3 items total or 2 critical items (particularly if these scores remain 
elevated after the follow -up interview) will be referred for diagnostic evaluation by a specialist trained to evaluate 
ASD in very young children.  
 
As the fiel d of Neonatology has matured, more nuanced follow -up of NICU graduates has become available. It 
is now clear that preterm babies have a higher risk than do term infants for psychological and behavioral 
problems, with autism spectrum disorders and attention  deficit problems identified specifically.189-193  We will 
therefore screen all subjects with the M-CHAT -R parental questionnaire at the 2 year corrected age follow -up 
visit.194 We a nticipate positive screening will be higher in this ELGAN population than in term infants,43 and if, as 
indicated in several MRI studies,46, 193, 195-201 MRI imaging of brain structures correlates to psychological and 
behavioral function, we anticipate that Epo -treated neonates will have better preserved brain structure, and 
therefore, functi on. 
 
 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 38 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 6.3.3 Subject Retention.  Additional contact to increase the likelihood of follow -up participation will include 
sending birthday cards and appointment reminders. Follow -up rates of > 90% have been achieved in most of 
our study sites, using these metho ds. An offset for parents' travel/work loss expenses ($100) will be provided at 
the completion of the face -to-face follow -up visit at 2 years corrected age.  An additional $100 per visit is included 
in the budget to provide for unusually high travel expense s when needed. We estimate this will be needed for 
15% of subjects.  
 
6.3.4  Intervention Discontinuation Evaluations  
If a subject is removed from study treatment for any reason (parent decision, Attending physician choice, or 
because of SAE such as a symptomatic clot requiring anticoagulation), the reason for discontinuation will be 
recorded. Since this is an intention -to-treat study design, any subjects who discontinue intervention will continue 
to be followed and evaluated on study. Like all study su bjects, these families will have a discharge questionnaire 
filled out, and will be contacted by phone at 4, 8, 12 and 18 months. They will be sent birthday cards for the ir 
baby. A small monetary incentive will be given to each family at the completion of t he 2 year follow -up visit. For 
those individuals that must travel over 2.5 hours for the follow -up visit, overnight accommodations may be 
offered.   
 
6.3.5  On Study/Off -Intervention Evaluations  
The MRI should be done between 36 -0/7 and 36 -6/7 weeks of PMA. This will be done in a subset of 220 patients 
at study sites  that have a 3T Siem ens or 3T Philips  magnet available.   
 
6.3.6  Final On -Study Evaluations  
Study drug treatment will end on the Mond ay, Wednesday or Friday closest to  32-6/7 weeks PMA, and each 
subject will be followed for 2 years, until their neurodevelopmental assessment at 22-26 months corrected  age. 
 
At the 2 year corrected age follow -up visits, documentation of the standardized ne urologic exam, and results of 
the Bayley III exam will be recorded.  
 
DOCUMENTATION AND RECORD RETENTION  
Documentation.  Each site must provide the UW CCC lead PENUT s tudy coordinator   with the following 
documents prior to study initiation. A copy of these d ocuments must be maintained in the site investigator’s study 
files.  
 
IRB approved informed consent form  - All IRB approvals and correspondence (including approved revisions, 
protocol, advertisements, etc.) - Copies of all correspondence pertaining to the study (excluding any budgetary 
matters) - Copies of all serious adverse events submitted to the IRB - Copy of all safety reports.  
 
The UW DCC co -supports an installation of REDCap, software specifically designed for electronic data capture 
that we have use d successfully in other multi -site studies. REDCap features include differentiated user roles and 
privileges, password and user authentication security, electronic signatures, SSL encryption, and comprehensive 
auditing to record and monitor access and data  changes ( http://www.project -redcap.org/software.php ). REDCap 
will serve as the architectural backbone for all data captured prospectively, with all data linked by study subject 
ID. 
 
Record Retention.  The clinical site is responsible for maintaining all records (i.e., case report forms, original 
data, screening logs, signed informed consent forms, correspondence, etc.) until notified, in writing, by the UW 
CCC, that these records are no longe r needed. The Investigator must notify  the UW CCC lead study coordinator  
if the site or records are relocated, if the investigator leaves the institution, etc. , and a new address for the records 
must be provided.  
 
6.3.7  Off-Study Requirements  
When the sub ject has completed the 2 year corrected age follow -up visit, there are no further requirements for 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 39 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 study participation. Participation in any further follow -up will require new consent.  If consent is given, phone 
follow -up will continue at 6 month intervals  up to a maximum age of 5 years. At that point, we hope to enroll 
willing participants in a follow -up study that will follow the children up to 8 years of age.  
 
6.4   Special Instructions and Definitions of Evaluations  
Screen admissions to antepartum and N ICU: Screening for eligible subjects will be done daily. For antepartum 
admissions, this will involve determining whether any admissions within the past 24 hours are likely to deliver 
imminently, and if so, whether they are within the gestational age crite ria for the study. If both these criteria are 
satisfied, the Attending Perinatologist will be asked whether this patient might be an appropriate study candidate, 
and if so, whether it is permissible to approach the mother to discuss the study.  
 
For neonat al admissions to the NICU, screening will involve determining the infant’s time of birth and gestational 
age. If they qualify for the study, the Attending Neonatologist will be asked whether they meet inclusion (but not 
exclusion) criteria. If the baby mee ts criteria, the Attending will be asked whether it is permissible to approach 
the family to discuss the study. Once it is confirmed that the family is willing to hear about the study, they will be 
approached for informed consent.  
 
A screening log will be completed for all screened patients.  
 
6.4.1  Informed Consent  
Antenatal consent will be obtained when feasible . Prenatally, the study investigator will obtain permission from 
the Maternal Fetal Medicine Attending to approach the mother to discuss the study . Postnatally, permission to 
approach the family will be obtained from the Attending Neonatologist. The Attending physician will seek parental 
agreement for an investigator to meet and discuss the study. If the parents are interested, the study investigato r 
will discuss the study with family and seek consent in person. The consenting legal guardian will receive a copy 
of the consent form to review, and once signed, will be given a copy to keep. Ideally, if the Attending physician 
is also a study investigato r, an alternate study investigator , or their designee , should obtain consent, so as to 
avoid the appearance of coercion. If this is not required by the site IRB, an investigator who is also the Attending 
physician  may obtain consent. Investigators will only approach family after infant’s attending heath care provider 
gives permission and family indicates that they are interested in further information about the study. No alteration 
in care will otherwise occur. The attending neonatologist and family can withdraw child from study at any time. If 
permissible by the site IRB, phone consent may be obtained, but must be reaffirmed with the family when they 
are present. Investigator should retain original signed document.  Consent will be obtained by the Investigator in 
a room which ensures the privacy of the family, and which is free of potential coercive influences. Consent for 
participation must be obtained before the baby is 24 hours old. 
 
If a family has limited or no E nglish speaking abilities, a certified interpreter will be provided. They will review the 
consent form with the family, and interpret the verbal explanation of the study during the discussion between the 
Investigator and the family members. If individual s ites have a large population of non -English speakers, consent 
forms will be translated into the appropriate languages. If an interpreter is not available in a timely manner, the 
family will not be approached.  
 
The parents of the research participants will be given opportunity to review the study both verbally and in writing. 
The will be given opportunity to ask questions of the investigator prior to giving consent.  
 
If there are changes in the protocol or safety information that require consent forms to be updated, they will be 
sent through the IRB process for approval. When entering a patient into the PENUT Portal electronic database, 
documentation of a signed consent form as well as a signed HIPAA form  is required prior to randomization .  
 
A model informed  consent form is included as Appendix 1.   
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 40 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
6.4.2  Documentation of Gestational Age  will be done according to the following hierarchy, and the method by 
which gestational age was determined will be logged on the enrollment form:  
1. Gestational age by in vi tro fertilization if available.  
2. Gestational age by first trimester assessment (0 -14-0/7 weeks)  
3. Gestational age by second trimester assessment (up to 28 -0/7 weeks)  
4. Last menstrual period (LMP)  
5. Newborn maturational assessment  
 
Documentation of intracranial  hemorrhage.  Screening Cranial  Ultrasounds will be obtained as per the 
guidelines . Only the first ultrasound is done for study purposes. The subsequent two ultrasounds (or MRI at 36 
weeks) will be done as part of routine clinical care. The Imaging  Guidelines delineate how pathology will be 
documented and graded.  
 
Documentation of clinical findings during the initial hospitalization will be done in REDCap after chart extraction  
after the first 6 doses of study drug have been administered, and within  one month of discharge . 
 
Documentation of neurodevelopmental follow -up will be at the time of the 2 year corrected age follow -up visit. A 
standardized neurologic exam and Bayley III exam will be done. The M-CHAT -R questionnaire will also be 
administered at this time.  
 
6.4.3 Maternal demographics  and history  will be obtained and documented on the demographics and maternal 
history forms after consent is obtained for participation in the study.  
 
6.4.4  Treatment history . Not applicable since subjects are newborns  
 
6.4.5  Concomitant treatments  while the subject is in the NICU will be documented.  
 
6.4.6  Study Intervention Modifications . Study drug  and/or iron supplementation  will be held or stopped for 
the followi ng criteria:  
 Polycythemia:  Central hematocrit (Hct) > 65%: Study drug  should be held until Hct is < 55%. 
 Severe sepsis : Blood c ulture -proven bacterial or fungal sepsis requiring blood pressure support or new 
respiratory support. Supplemental parenteral iron should be held until blood culture is negative for 72 hours.  
Rationale:  Iron has been reported to be permissive for selected gram -negative  bacteria and might worsen 
the patient's condition during sepsis. There is no known relationship between Epo and sepsis , so study 
drug does not need to be held.  
 Unexplained recurrent seizure s (unrelated to ICH, PVL or other known pathology): Study drug  should be 
held until seizures are well controlled by medication. Restarting study drug will be determined by the Med ical 
Monitor, DSMB, and CCC.  
 Major venous or arterial thrombosis (clot).  
 Study drug  should be held for any thrombosis that is treated with anticoagulation, and this should be reported 
to the CCC  PI as an SAE.  
 Study drug  should be held for any symptomatic  thrombosis involving a major vessel (e.g. symptoms such 
as superior vena cava syndrome)  
 Sustained hypertension  requiring medical intervention: Study drug  should be discontinued if blood 
pressure requires treatment.   When blood pressure returns to normal r ange (systolic blood pressure < 100 
mmHg ), study drug can be resumed. This is true even if patient is still being treated, but blood pressure is 
being controlled.    
 If the subject requires prolonged antihypertensive therapy (> 1 month) and/or will be disch arged on 
medication this is considered an SAE. Medications used to treat hypertension will be recorded.   Any work 
up done to investigate causes of hypertension will be recorded.   
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 41 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
6.4.7  Clinical Assessments.  
Clinical safety parameters  
1) Complete physical exam  will be done on study entry, after the fir st 6 doses of study drug (day 12 -15) and at 
discharge. Growth parameters (head circumference, height and weight) will be obtained at these times. The 
presence of microcephaly (OFC  < 10th percentile) o r relative microcephaly (discrepancy of > 50 percentile 
between weight, length and head circumference) will be recorded.  
 
2) Vital signs and blood pressure . All ELGANs are monitored continuously for heart rate and arterial saturation 
(pulse  oximetry), with  either continuous or intermittent blood pressure readings as part of routine care in the 
NICU. The high and low blood pressure will be recorded for the first 14 days of the study, and then  BP 
measurements will be recorded at 6 set time points through disc harge.   
 
3) Hematologic data . Complete blood count (CBC) including hematocrit, white blood cell count, absolute 
neutrophil count, platelet counts and blood smear are obtained routinely in extremely preterm neonates as part 
of their care. This is done to e valuate for infection, and to evaluate  the need for transfusion  (ELGANs receive an 
average of 4 transfusions during their first month of life) . Results of these tests will be recorded weekly, as 
available , through 36 -6/7 weeks PMA  or hospital discharge . The number and volume of blood transfusions, 
donor exposures, and phlebotomized blood volume will be recorded for the entire hospital stay. Ferritin or 
ZnPP/H  will be followed to monitor iron status. While important for all preterm newborns, this is strongly  
recommended for infants receiving parenteral iron. Iron supplementation will be modified based on these results 
(See  Appendix 7 I ron Guidelines) . 
 
4) Renal  function.  Daily weights, and fluid intake and output will be recorded as available  in the chart. BUN and 
creatinine  will be recorded as available  in the chart. If renal ultrasounds are done for clinical indications, the 
results from these studies will be recorded. Ten urine samples will be collected non -invasively at timed intervals 
from the time of e nrollment until discharge.  
 
5) Liver function . Conjugated b ilirubin will be recorded weekly as available , through 36 -6/7 weeks PMA. These 
data are checked routinely on all infants requiring parenteral nutrition support, and as part of routine assessment 
of nutritional status.   
 
6) Respiratory data . Respiratory complications of prematurity will be documented, including respiratory distress 
syndrome, pulmonary hemorrhage, pneumothorax, pneumonia, duration of mechanical ventilation (> 1 day, > 1 
week), and oxygen use at 28 days and BPD at 36 weeks PMA.  
 
7) Complications of extreme prematurity  defined as follows will be recorded:  
 Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). BPD will be defined at 36 ± 1 week s corrected gestational age. Infants 
requiring nasal cannula o xygen, CPAP/high flow nasal cannula or mechanical ventilation will be considered 
mild, moderate or severe BPD, respectively.   
 
 Necrotizing Enterocolitis (NEC). Bell's staging criteria will be used to define NEC. All surgeries for NEC, 
and for strictures or  bowel obstructions occurring as sequelae of NEC, will be recorded.  NEC stage II or III 
is considered an SAE.  
 
 Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP). All infants will be followed using the screening recommendations 
published in 2006.202 The international classification of ROP will be used.203 Severe ROP requiring 
intervention is considered an SAE  
 
 Intracranial Hemorrhage (ICH) , white matter injury (WMI) or hydrocephalus (HC). A cranial  ultrasoun d will 
be done prior to the first study drug dose as part of the study. Brain imaging will also be done as part of 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 42 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 routine care at 7 -10 days and 36 weeks PMA  (30 days of age or later  is accept able). The presence, location 
and extent of any intracranial ble eding, hydrocephalus or periventricular echolucencies/densities will be 
documented.  Grade III and IV bleeds will be considered an SAE.  
 
 Clinical seizures. If clinical seizures are suspected, an EEG will be done to confirm the diagnosis  at the 
Attending phy sician’s discretion . All such results will be recorded.   
 
 Sustained hypertension  requiring medical intervention:  Study drug  should be discontinued if blood 
pressure requires treatment.   When blood pressure returns to normal range (systolic blood pressure < 
100 mmHg ), study drug can be resumed. This is true even if patient is still being treated, but blood  
pressure is being controlled.  
 
 If the  subject requires prolonged antihypertensive therapy (> 1 month) and/or will be discharged on 
medication this is considered an SAE. Medications used to treat hypertension will be recorded.  Any work 
up done to investigate causes of hypertension will be rec orded.   
 
 Patent ductus arteriosus that is treated with either medical or surgical intervention. The indications for 
treatment will be recorded (ECHO parameters  and/or clinical symptoms). Age at treatment will be recorded.  
 
 Sepsis, confirmed by positive blood culture, or presumed (clinical symptoms present and antibiotic 
treatment instituted for 7 -10 days despite negative cultures).  Culture proven sepsis associated with shock 
or significant respiratory deterioration is an indication to hold parenteral iro n (not study drug).  
 
 Renal (acute or chronic renal failure) and hepatic complications (cholestasis, hepatitis).  
 
 Thyroid function (TSH and free T4) will be collected as available.  
 
 Mortality. The timing and circumstances of any deaths in this study populat ion will be recorded and 
reviewed by the DSMB.  
 
Data on medication administration, including use of steroids, methylxanthines , antibiotics , diuretics, 
vaso pressors, antihypertensive agents,  sedatives,  anticoagulants, anticonvulsants,  thyroid treatment, and 
indomethacin /ibuprofen  will be collected.  
 
8) Blood samples . Blood (0.5 mL/sample) will be obtained through an indwelling umbilical arterial or venous 
catheter when possible. If no access is available, all efforts will be made to combine the blood draw wi th clinically 
indicated phlebotomy times. The timing of blood draws is shown in Figure 3.  An additional (optional ) blood 
sample will be drawn at the 2 year follow -up visit.  
 
The CCC will provide sample collection packs to each site. These will contain green  top tubes for blood collection, 
a microfuge tube for plasma  collection, and labels for subject identification and date. Samples will be spun, and 
plasma  and cell pellet  frozen at -70°C  to -80°C. Batched samples from each site will be sent to Dr. Juul ’s lab at 
the University of Washington  via FedEx .  
 
Biomarkers.  Plasma  from these samples will be used to investigate the effect of Epo on inflammatory mediators 
and growth factors, as well as Epo pharmacokinetics.  
 
Sample storage.  Samples will be spun on site to separate plasma  from cells. Plasma  and cells will be stored in 
separate, labeled containers at -70ºC to -80°C. They will be sent to the UW in batched quantities, after every 4-
5 subjects. The stored cells for each subject will be kept for later study of problems related to prematurity that 
are beyond the scope of this study.  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 43 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
Urine samples  will be banked  at the University of Washington  for future analyses of biomarkers, (neutrophil 
gelatinase associated lipocalin (NGAL), osteopontin (OPN), cystatin C (CysC), uromodulin (UMOD), epithelial 
growth factor (EGF) and urine β2 -Microglobulin (β2MG)).    
9) MRI will be done at selected sites at 36 -0/7 to 36 -6/7 weeks PM A using a predefined protocol. If an MRI is 
needed for clinical indications during this time frame, and if the appropriate protocol is utilized, it may be used 
for the purposes of the study  
 
10) Neurodevelopmental assessment  will be completed on each subje ct at 22-26 months corrected  age: 
 
 Bayley III Scales of Infant Development: Composite Language and Composite Motor Scale in 5 domains - 
cognitive language (receptive, expressive), motor (fine and gross), social -emotional, and adaptive.176  
 
 Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers  (M-CHAT -R) (Appendix 3) 
 
 Standardized neurological examination  (Appendix 3) 
 
 The Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS)  
 
6.4.8 Epo pharmacokinetics . Epo con centrations will be obtained at four time points as outlined in Figure 3 , 
section 5.1 . Population Pharmacokinetic Analysis will be done, and Epo concentrations will also be used to 
document study adherence for subjects assigned to the Epo (and control) arms.  Plasma  for inflammatory 
mediators and biomarkers of brain injury will be obtained at the same blood draw at baseline and study  days 7 
and 1 4. 
 
7.0 MANAGEMENT of ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
All complications will be treated in the site NICUs.  
 
8.0 CRITERIA FOR INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION  
 
The attending neonatologist or parent may withdraw the infan t study subject at any time for any reason.  The 
reason for such withdrawal will be recorded.  The study interventions will be discontinued in any infant subject 
who suffers a SAE due to Epo administration.  The research coordinator and study investigator will evaluate all 
subjects on an ongoing basis for evidence of Epo SAE occurrence.  
  
Criteria for Temporarily Withholding/Stopping Study Drug  and/or Supplemental Iron .  
1. Polycythemia:  Central hematocrit (Hct) > 6 5%: Study drug  should be held until Hct is < 55%. 
2. Severe sepsis : Blood c ulture -proven bacterial or fungal sepsis requiring blood pressure support or 
significant new respiratory support. Supplemental iron  should be held until blood culture is negative for  72 
hours.  Rationale:  Iron has been reported to  be permissive for selected gram -negative bacteria and might 
worsen the patient's condition during sepsis. There is no known relationship between Epo and sepsi s, 
so study drug does not need to be held.  
3. Unexplained recurrent seizure s (unrelated to ICH, PVL or other known pathology): Study drug  should be 
held until seizures are well controlled by medication. Restarting study drug will be determined by the Medical 
Monitor, DSMB, and CCC.  
4. Major venous or arterial thrombosis (clot).  
Study drug  should be held for a ny thrombosis that is treated with a course of anticoagulation . 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 44 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Study drug  should be held for a ny symptomatic  thrombosis involving a major vessel (e.g. symptoms such 
as superior vena cava syndrome) . 
5.  Sustained hypertension  requiring  medical intervention : Study drug  should be discontinued if blood 
pressure requires treatment.  When blood pressure returns to normal range (systolic blood pressure < 100 
mmHg ), study drug can be resumed. This is true even if patient is still being treated , but blood pressure is 
being controlled.   
 
All necessary medical interventions will be available in the event of serious adverse events stemming from a 
subjects involvement in research. All serious adverse events will be monitored closely until resolutio n, and they 
will be recorded and reported to the local IRB  (as required)  as well as the CCC PI (Dr. Juul) who will then notify 
the Medical Monitor as well as the DSMB  and NINDS (via Peter Gilbert) . In the event that a subject is withdrawn 
from the study fo r any reason, all efforts will be made to encourage parents to allow their child to continue to 
participate in follow -up visits.  
 
 
9.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
9.1   General Design Issues  
Hypothesis:  Epo treatment from 24 hours to 32 -6/7 weeks postmenstrual age (PMA) of Extremely Low 
Gestational Age Neonates  (ELGANs) will safely decrease the combined outcome of death or neurologic 
impairment from 40% to 30% measured at two years of age.  
 
Design :  We will enroll 940/2 = 470 subjects in each of two treatment groups:  Epo -treated (from 24 hours of age 
to 32 -6/7 weeks PMA) vs. placebo control.  
 
Randomization  sequences will be created centrally by the DCC. We will use block randomization within site 
using variable blocks of size 4, 6, 8 and 10 subjects. Using block randomization ensures that equal numbers of 
subjects are randomized to the intervention and control arm and that the two groups are balanced at period 
enrollment intervals. For multiple births (t wins, triplets) all infants will be randomized to the same treatment group 
(e.g. effective randomization of the mother).  
 
Randomization will be stratified on site, gestational age category (24 -25 weeks, 26 -27 weeks), and on the 
number of babies inborn for  a given pregnancy (one, two, three or more).  Rand omization sequences will be 
provided to the research pharmacy at each site through a study binder.  The binder will contain the complete set 
of study IDs and associated randomized assignments and will be ut ilized as a look -up table over the course of 
the study and for each patient’s protocol administration of the study drug. Patient study IDs will utilize the 
following format: <3 digit site code> -XXX-YY, where XXX is the mother ID and YY is the baby ID withi n mother 
(01, 02, 03… etc.). Study IDs within the binder will be listed by site and mother ID.  Singletons, twins and 
triplets are stratified by gestational age as shown in Table 7 .  For example, twin infants from mother 201 at 
site UOW will have study IDs  of UOW -201-01 and UOW -201-02. Using Table 7 .1 to look up the mother ID UOW -
201, these two infants will be assigned to receive Epo over the course of the study protocol.  
 
Table 7. Randomization and stratification  
 24-0/7 to 25 -6/7 26-0/7 to 27 -6/7 
Singletons  100-YY 400-YY 
Twins  200-YY 500-YY 
Triplets  300-YY 600-YY 
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 45 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Table 7 .1. Example study drug look -up table in Pharmacy study binder.  
Singleton, 24 -25 weeks gestation  Twins, 24 -25 weeks gestation  Triplets, 24 -25 weeks gestation  
ID Baby  Treatment  ID Baby  Treatment  ID Baby  Treatment  
UOW -101 -01 Epo UOW -201 -01 Epo UOW -301 -01 Placebo  
UOW -102 -01 Placebo   -02   -02  
UOW -103 -01 Epo     -03  
UOW -104 -01 Placebo  UOW -202 -01 Placebo  UOW -302 -01 Epo 
UOW -105 -01 Placebo   -02   -02  
UOW -106 -01 Epo     -03  
         
         
Singleton, 26 -27 weeks gestation  Twins, 26 -27 weeks gestation  Triplets, 26 -27 weeks gestation  
ID Baby  Treatment  ID Baby  Treatment  ID Baby  Treatment  
UOW -401 -01 Epo UOW -501 -01 Epo UOW -601 -01 Placebo  
UOW -402 -01 Placebo   -02   -02  
UOW -403 -01 Epo     -03  
UOW -404 -01 Placebo  UOW -502 -01 Placebo  UOW -602 -01 Epo 
UOW -405 -01 Placebo   -02   -02  
UOW -406 -01 Epo     -03  
         
 
A modified intent -to-treat ( mITT) approach204 will be used, with all randomized infants who receive the first dose 
of study treatment to be included in the analysis. All pre -specified hypotheses will be tested using a two -sided 
type I error of 0.05 with no formal adjustment for multiple comparisons unless otherwise specified (such as with 
safety outcomes). Secondary analyses that focus on separate hypotheses will not require correction for multiple 
comparisons, but those analyses that use multivariate measures such as multiple br ain image parameters would 
be corrected for multiple comparisons using standard methods.  
 
Given that we anticipate enrollment of multiple births we require that all analyses properly account for the within -
sibship correlation of outcomes. We will use Gener alized Estimating Equations (GEE), which is a versatile 
regression approach for the analysis of discrete and continuous outcomes.205 Use of “robust” standard errors will 
provide valid statistical inference and fully account for the clusteri ng of data.  
 
9.2  Outcomes  
Primary outcome variable : The primary outcome is the composite outcome of death or neurodevelopmental 
impairment at 22-26 months  corrected age . Neurodevelopmental impairment (NDI) is defined as the presence 
of any one of the following: CP, Bayley III cognitive or motor scale < 70. There is a known inflation of scores from 
the Bayley II to III1, 178, 179 and we will therefore also consider a threshold of <  85 for secondary analysis. Subjects 
will be stratified by gestational age (24 -0/7 to 25 -6/7 and 26 -0/7 to 27 -6/7), number of babies in the pregnancy,  
and by study site. Table 8 shows how CP will be c ategorized based on features present on standardized 
neurologic exam.  
 
  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 46 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
Table 8. Motor outcome - 4 level classification  
GMFCS  
 0 0.5 1 2 3 4 5 
No CP  None  None  Mild  Moderate  Severe  Severe  Severe  
HP or DP  Mild  Mild  Moderate  Moderate  Severe  Severe  Severe  
QP Moderate*  Moderate*  Severe*  Severe  Severe  Severe  Severe  
* It is unlikely that a child with quadriparetic CP will have a GMFCS of 0 -1. However, this scenario is 
possible in cases of bilateral hemiparesis in which arms are more affected than legs. In such cases, the 
bilateral nature of the deficit, and the significant neurologic abnormalities that are noted on a 
standardized neurologic examination, warrant a designation of moderate/severe neurodevelopmental 
impairment.  
QP: quadriplegic; HP: he miplegic; DP: diplegic  
 
 
Primary Analysis:  The primary analysis will be a test of equality of the rate of the primary outcome (death or 
NDI) across the two randomized investigational groups. Specifically, we will use a GEE Wald test based on 
logistic regression, with stratification by recruitment center , multiples in gestation  and gestational age. We will 
perform intent to treat analysis and expect minimal non -compliance due to the nature of the intervention in 
relation to in -patient care. For the primary endpoint we expect uniform and complete asc ertainment of death but 
may not evaluate all subjects for developmental impairment. We plan to perform a primary analysis based on 
complete cases and will exclude those subjects for whom vital status is known (alive) but NDI cannot be 
assessed. Sensitivity  analysis will use multiple imputation to evaluate the potential impact of any missing data. 
Secondary analysis will be for quantitative measures of brain volume, and for these endpoints an unadjusted t -
test provides inference regarding the mean response a cross the treatment groups. We will adjust all secondary 
outcome analyses for recruitment site using regression methods.  
 
Power and Sample Size for Primary Outcome:   In order to determine the necessary sample size for efficacy 
evaluation , we need to formul ate assumptions for the primary outcome rate in the treated and untreated groups.  
 
The primary outcome measure is the rate of death or severe neurodevelopmental impairment (NDI). Using data 
from two sources , we can compute the expected rates of death or ND I for the neonates that we will enroll. The 
Vermont Oxford Network 2008 Follow -up Report206 evaluated the disability status of infants born in 2008 only, 
and the combined 2004 -2008 cohorts. Follow -up status was determined at age 18 -24 months and information 
regarding death and NDI is provided for subgroups of children based on their gestational a ge. Therefore, we can 
use these data to forecast expected trial results for our eligible subjects (24 -27 weeks gestational age).  
 
The VON reports on severe NDI and specifically states that components of severe disability include: cerebral 
palsy, or a Bayl ey score less than 70 or too severely delayed for Bayley testing.206  
 
In addition, data from Ga rgus et al. (2009)19  provides follow -up information at 18 -22 months for approximately 
3,800 neonates born between 24 and 27 weeks gestational age, based on babies born between 1998 and 2001.  
  
We have combined the VON and Gargus (2009) data in order to determine the ant icipated characteristics of our 
proposed trial. While the VON data is contemporary, it has relatively low follow -up for two -year outcomes 
(approximately 50%) and therefore may be biased toward more easily followed or more favorable subjects. Table 
9 displa ys our best estimates of gestational age specific  and overall rates of death and NDI.  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 47 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Our assumed 
death rates of 
32, 19, 13 and 9 
percent are 
exactly those 
presented in the 
VON 2008 report, 
and are lower than 
the rates reported 
in Gargus (2009) 
where among 
neonates born 
between 1998 and 
2001 , GA-specific 
death rates of 
45, 25,  18, and 
15 percent were observed. Using our combined data assumptions , we expect an overall death rate of 
approximately 18%, which is approximately the rate observed in VON (17%), and is lower than the 26% death 
rate observed for Gargus (2009).  
 
In addit ion, Gargus (2009) report GA -specific rates of NDI as 21, 25, 23, and 19 percent. The VON 2008 report 
estimates NDI rates as 22, 21, 17, and 16 percent respectively. We have combined VON and Gargus (2009) 
data and further assumed that NDI rates are decreas ing with increasing gestational age to obtain our NDI 
estimates. Using these data we expect an overall NDI rate of 22%, which equals the overall rate observed in the 
VON 2008 report and in Gargus (2009).  
 
In order to estimate the overall rate observed amon g treated neonates , we have assumed that there will be no 
effect of treatment on death, but that Epo will lead to a decrease in the rate of NDI. If we assume a multiplicative 
reduction in the NDI rate of 0.45 then we expect a treated NDI rate of 12 percent  and an overall rate of death+NDI 
of 30.4% as compared to the control rate of 40.4%. Therefore, in order to obtain a target sample size we assume:  
an overall control rate of 40%, and an overall treated rate of 30% corresponding to an overall treatment rat e ratio 
of 0.75.  
 
Using the control and treated rates of 40% and 30% respectively leads to a sample size of 376 evaluated subjects 
per arm or a total evaluated sample size of 752 subjects.  
 
Efficacy Trial Statistical Analysis Plan – Secondary Outcomes  
Secondary Aims and Outcomes:  
 To compare safety measures between infants receiving Epo and placebo to determine whether there are 
risks associated with Epo administration.  
 To compare moderate impairment (< 85 on Bayley III cognitive or motor score, or CP).  
 To compare neuroimaging outcomes across the two treatment groups.  
 To assess whether treatment effects vary by gender.  
 To evaluate whether individual biomarkers measured through 36 weeks are predictive of 2 -year outcomes, 
and whether a derived multivariat e combination of markers has predictive performance greater than 
individual marker performance.  
 
Analysis for Secondary Aims and Outcomes:  
 
Safety:  The primary safety outcomes are the serious adverse events and adverse events listed in the CRFs . 
Analysis  will compare the proportion of subjects with an AE across the two treatment groups and will use a 2 -Table 9. Combined Vermont Oxford Network (VON) and Gargus (2009) data showing death 
rates and severe neurodevelopmental impairment (NDI) rates for different gestationa l ages 
(GA).  
 
Gestational 
age 
(weeks)  Fraction of 
enrolled   
Death   
NDI  
Total  
(Death+NDI)  Expected  
Treated  
(Death + NDI*0.45)  
24 0.25 32 25.0 54.4 44.8 
25 0.25 19 24.2 40.1 32.3 
26 0.25 13 21.2 30.4 24.7 
27 0.25 9 18.1 24.5 19.0 
 
Overall    
18.2  
22.1  
40.4  
30.4 
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 48 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 sample test of proportions. Inference for the (5) individual SAE outcomes will use a Bonferroni correction for 
multiple comparisons.  
  
Power:  The expected prevalence of SAEs range from less than 1% for polycythemia, to 18% for death. In order 
to characterize power we show the effect sizes for which we have 80% power based on having n=376 subjects 
evaluated in each group:  
 
Table 10.  
Baseline (control) rate  Alternative rate for 80% power  
Using alpha=0.05   
Using alpha=0.01  
5% 11% (RR = 2.2)  13% (RR = 2.6)  
10% 18% (RR = 1.8)  19% (RR = 1.9)  
15% 24% (RR = 1.6  25% (RR = 1.7)  
20% 30% (RR = 1.5)  31% (RR = 1.5)  
      
Secondary Efficacy Outcome : Our key secondary long-term outcome is the rate of death or NDI using severe or 
moderate impairment defined by a Bayley less than 85. In order to estimate power for the secondary outcome 
we assume the same overall rates for death and severe NDI as above, and then assume a 2 0% rate for moderate 
impairment. Similar to the primary outcome , we assume that the death rate is unchanged by Epo and that the 
rate of severe NDI is reduced from 22% to 12%. We also assume that the moderate NDI group would have an 
effect similar to the se vere group where the 20% rate would be reduced by a factor of 0.45 to  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11% but that among the 10% of severe subjects impacted by Epo , half of these would only move from severe to 
moderate impairment. Therefore we assume:  
 
Power:  Using these assumptions and the target evaluated of n=752 leads to greater than 95% power to detect 
a difference on the secondar y outcome . 
 
Imaging Outcomes:   The neuroimaging outcomes are: Myelinated white matter volume; Total gray matter 
volume; and White matter integrity (TBSS FA corpus callosum). We will conduct a single MANOVA test using 
the multivariate outcome and comparing treated and control subjects. The mean and standard deviation will also 
be calculated (by treatment group) for each individual measure. Note that MR measures will be obtained on a 
subset of infants (110 per treatment group).  
 
Given the a priori  hypothesis that treatment effect may differ according to gender we will conduct a single 
subgroup analysis that assesses treatment effects separately for males and for females. Subgroup specific 
treatment effects will be computed and inference will be based on a sing le Gender -by-Treatment test for 
interaction using logistic regression.  
 
Power : Multiple MRI variables will be collected and analyzed in this study. To provide a basic sample size for a 
treatment effect we selected one common basic measure of structural inj ury that has been identified in the 
literature for the premature neonates that we hypothesize will be preserved: The size of the cerebellum tissue 
when compared to the whole head volume. We used a comparable set of T1 weighted brain scans of 22 Control  Treated  
Death     18%  18%   
Severe NDI    22%  12%   
Moderate NDI   20%  16% = 11% remain mod + 5% from severe  
 
Total     60%  46% 
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 49 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 premature b abies aged between 34 and 36 PMA, with a representative range of brain injuries present on MRI 
and applied the proposed segmentation methods to the data. We estimated the ratio of the cerebellum to whole 
brain size as our marker across this group and used the mean and variance of these measures on which to base 
our power calculation for a treatment effect. Assuming age matched groups in the treated and untreated groups, 
from this data we estimate that 110 subjects will be required to see a 5% increase in th e cerebellum size. The 
recognition of cerebellar atrophy in extremely preterm infants has only recently come to light with the increased 
use of MRI.193, 207-212 Cerebellar atrophy has been linked to cognitive as well as motor deficits.209, 213, 214 In 
summary, we will focus on four primary measures that are established to be predictive of 2 -year 
neurodevelopmental status and therefore can be used t o establish support for the hypothesis of long -term benefit 
of Epo treatment. The neuroimaging biomarkers are: 1) myelinated white matter volume; 2) total gray matter 
volume; 3) cerebellar volume and 4) white matter integrity assessed by TBSS (using FA cor pus callosum).  
 
Biomarker Analysis:   We will consider two main classes of potential predictors of 2 -year status:  neuroimaging 
measures and inflammatory markers. Interest is in the prognostic potential of individual and/or combined 
biomarker measurements.  Given that the primary outcome is a binary measure (NDI) , we will evaluate the 
predictive potential of individual quantitative measures using ROC curves showing the full potential of sensitivity 
and specificity across marker cut points. We will compute RO C curves for the (4) primary neuroimaging 
measures, and separately for individual inflammatory markers. Only 220 subjects will have data on the 
inflammatory markers, and these will be the same subjects identified for MR measures. We will derive two 
multiva riate predictive models:  using the inflammatory markers; and using the MR measures. We will use AIC 
and 10 -fold cross -validation to develop and validate predictive models. A final multivariate model will combine 
markers from both MR and inflammatory measu res, and 10 -fold cross -validation will permit inference in the 
incremental value of adding markers in combination by comparing ROC curves and associated area under the 
ROC curve (AUC).  
 
9.3   Meeting Recruitment Targets  
We have chosen sites for this trial that can be expected to enroll a minimum of 24 infants/year in the study.  We 
plan to recruit at 18 sites, several of which have participated in the NO CLD and TOLSURF studies. Based on 
our experience to date with these studies, we anticipate that the participating sites will meet their enrollment 
targets and that subject accrual will follow the project ed timeline. We have provided very conservative estimates 
of enrollment, recognizing that some sites will do better, and some worse than predicted. Accordingly, we will 
assess site enrollment every 6 months after initiation of the study. Should enrollment at an individual site fall 
below 6 in a 6 month period, the UW CCC PI and Executive  Committee will give warning and evaluate whether 
it is appropriate to drop the site from the trial. If no patients are entered during a 6 month period the Executive 
Committ ee will recommend that the site be dropped and a new site recruited. If a single site appears to be 
enrolling more than 20% of the total infants enrolled in the trial we will temporarily limit enrollment at that site.  
 
In order to obtain the target number of evaluated subjects we will recruit from  18 centers . Our current centers 
are listed below i n Table 11, wit h numbers estimated based on the previous 2 years of admissions. If these 18 
sites are insufficient to maintain an average of 204 subjects enrolled per 6 month period, additional sites will be 
added. This will be monitored closely.  
 
Table 11. Subject Availability  at Each Enrolling Site      
Site # admitted  
< 27-6/7 
wks # 
eligible  # 
survive  % 
enrolled  % 
followed  # Total    
(2.5 years)  
Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital , Boston  47 41 40 0.5 93 47 
Children's Hospital of the U niv of Illinois  57 50 42 0.5 90 47 
Children's Hospital of Minnesota, St Paul  55 41 39 0.5 85 41 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 50 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Children's Hospital of Minnesota, M inneapolis  99 80 70 0.5 96 84 
University of Minnesota Children's Hospital  52 48 46 0.5 100 46 
Maria Fareri Children's Hospital, New York  110 88 72 0.5 90 81 
Methodist Children's Hospital , San Antonio  64 56 51 0.5 80 51 
Prentice Women's Hospital , Chicago  87 83 70 0.5 93 81 
University of Florida, Gainesville  100 85 68 0.5 85 72 
Florida Hospital for Children , Orlando  75 57 56 0.5 80 56 
University of Louisville , Kentucky  94 86 71 0.5 90 80 
Univ of New Mexico Children's Hospital  50 25 22 0.5 100 28 
University of Arkansas , Little Rock  120 100 80 0.5 90 90 
University of Utah , Salt Lake City  68 54 49 0.5 90 55 
University of Washington , Seattle  87 69 58 0.5 85 62 
Wake Forest School of Medicine , Winston -Salem  120 100 89 0.5 92 102 
Johns Hopkins Medical Center , Baltimore  87 80 70 0.5 90 63** 
South  Miami Hospital , Miami  47 42 40 0.5 90 36***  
Hopkins joined study in Feb 2015; South Miami joined study in June 2015  
**Over 1.8 years; *** Over 1.5 years  
 
In both the phase I/II Epo trial of extremely low birth weight infants and the NEAT trial (Epo neuroprotection of 
term infants with hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy), consent was obtained in over 90% of approached parents. 
This extremely high consent rate reflects the concern parents have about their children’s neurodevelopment, 
and their willingness  to participate in research that might result in improved outcome.  
 
Site performance will be tracked with both enrollment and follow -up tables. Examples are shown below.  
 
EXAMPLE ENROLLMENT AND FOLLOW -UP TABLES  
 
Shell Table 1 . Open Report: Cumulative and Current Report Period Study Recruitment.  
 Current Report Period  Cumulative  
Site Screened  Eligible  Enrolled  Screened  Eligible  Enrolled  
Site-Name -1       
…       
Site-Name -18       
Total        
 
Shell Table 2 . Open Report: Follow -up rates by site, n / N (%).  
Site 4 
month  8 
month  12 
month  18 
month  24 
month  30 
month  36 
month  42 
month  48 
month  54 
month  60 
month  
Site-Name -1            
…            
Site-Name -
18            
Total             
 
9.4   Data Monitoring  
Per NIH Guidelines (1998), this Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) defines the oversight and monitoring 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 51 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 activities that will ensure and maintain both the safety of participants and the scientific integrity and validity of 
the trial data. The plan also describes the procedures for adverse event reporting and detailed guidelines for 
recommendations related to trial continuation.  
 
PENUT is a multi -center randomized placebo -controlled phase III trial to determine whether recombinant human 
erythropoietin (Ep o) will safely improve the long -term neurodevelopmental outcome of preterm infants  24-0/7 to 
27-6/7 weeks of gestation. The PENUT study will randomize n=940 subjects to receive either Epo or placebo.  
 
The DSMB will monitor the rates of these comorbidities at 6 month  intervals, comparing the rates in treated and 
control infants. Expected rates will be based on the published literature. For example, in the Network trial, 93% 
had RDS, 46% PDA, 36% had any ICH with 16% severe, 11% NEC, 36% late -onset sepsis, and 12% ROP. In 
the ELGAN study, 21% died by 2 years of age, 24% of all children had an ICH, 12% had moderate/severe 
ventriculomegaly, and 24% had an ultrasound lesions (echodense or lucent).134 
 
Safety Analysis:  For each SAE we will tabulate the event rate by t reatment group, and then compare rates 
using Fisher’s exact test. The DCC will prepare monthly summaries of reported SAEs for review by the Medical 
Monitor, the CCC PI and NINDS.  
 
9.4.1   Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
Review of the PENUT trial’s s tudy performance and safety outcomes will be conducted by the Data and Safety 
Monitoring Board (DSMB) as required by the NIH for multi -site clinical investigations. The DSMB consist s of 5 
members with a designated chair  (Ronnie Guillet) , and safety officer  (Jack Widness) .  Committee membership 
include s expertise in both biostatistics and bioethics, and should have clinical expertise appropriate for the 
intervention and target population. The DSMB is expected to meet two times (every 6 months) per year to re view 
study performance and safety outcomes in Open and Closed Reports, and to review study enrollment reports 
quarterly. Ad hoc sessions may be scheduled as required should a serious adverse event need to be reviewed 
by the group.  
  
Aggregate safety and ef ficacy data and study performance monitoring data will be presented during the open 
sessions of DSMB meetings. Blinded  safety and efficacy data will be presented by treatment arm during the 
closed sessions. Review by the DSMB provides assurances that the t rial can continue without jeopardizing 
patient safety. The DSMB is also responsible for protecting the confidentiality of the trial data and for monitoring 
the quality of both the data and study implementation procedures.   
 
The DCC will work closely with the CCC in developing and implementing a comprehensive system for safety 
monitoring. Safety monitoring includes the systematic review of safety data for trends that may impact patient 
safety. The processing, reviewing, and reporting of adverse events  (AEs)  and serious adverse events (SAE s) 
are also part of this process. The infants in this study are hospitalized at study entry, and the duration of their 
hospitalization is highly variable and not predictable at birth. It ranges from as short as three months to more 
than a year.  
 
Data and Saf ety Monitoring Schedule :  Our target enrollment is n=940 which is expected to accrue during the 
first 2.5 years of the trial. Therefore, we will enroll approximately 200 subjects every 6 months. Our planned 
DSMB safety analyses will occur every 6 months af ter trial initiation.  
 
9.4.2 Monitoring Guidelines   
Based on findings following review of study data by the DSMB, the Board may recommend: continuation of the 
trial, termination of the trial, or modifications to the protocol (e.g. adding new measurements for safety monitoring, 
discontinuing high risk subjects, extending the trial in time, increasing the trial sample). Decision guidelines in 
the PENUT trial are based on group differences in adverse event rates as explained below, and on whether SAE 
rates ex ceed pre -determined thresholds.  
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 52 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 9.4.2. 1 Performance Monitoring  
Performance monitoring  will be an ongoing activity performed by the study principal investigator and statistician, 
and status reports will be reviewed by the DSMB during their regular meetin gs. Procedural reviews to address 
protocol compliance with respect to subject recruitment and eligibility, retention and follow -up, randomization 
and blinding  and quality of data will be conducted and monthly reports generated. Any protocol violation that 
affects patient safety will be reported to the DSMB immediately.  
 
Performance data will be reviewed in aggregate and by site. It is expected that:  
 The response rate for determination of the primary outcome (e.g. 24 month Bayley) will be no less than 
80%; 
 
 Missing interviews will be no greater than 15% at the 4, 8, 12 and 24 month follow -ups; 
 
 The overall enrollment rate will not drop below the expected rate ( 34 subjects per month for 24 months) 
by more than 25%.  
 
Data will be entered into a central  trial management system utilizing a REDCap database hosted at the DCC.  
Data will be entered into fields with automated validation and logical check built in.  Data will be double entered 
on the outcome measures of Bayley III and CP assessment by standardi zed neurologic exam.  Compliance will 
be assessed based on the weekly conference calls and data submitted to the DCC on a weekly basis.  If it is 
determined by the study PI that either 1) study protocol is not being followed, or 2) that reporting is inadeq uate 
at any site, further action will be taken to address these issues.  These actions may include additional in -person 
site visits if appropriate or additional educational/problem -solving sessions by phone or in person regarding the 
study protocol.  
 
9.4.2.2 Safety Monitoring:  
The research coordinator at each site will monitor each subject daily for the presence of any complications  until 
discharge . Serious adverse events will be brought to the attention of the CCC PI  (Dr. Juul) who will report them 
to the Medical Monitor  (Jack Widness) , DSMB  and NINDS (via Peter Gilbert) .  Sites will notify their local IRBs of 
SAEs per site institution al requirements . An independent Medical Monitor will review all cases of serious adverse 
events. A potential risk that is unique to preterm infants is the risk of ROP.121 In the published studies of preterm 
neonates receiving potentially neuroprotective doses of Epo, no difference has been noted between treatment 
and control groups .33, 35, 114, 115 
 
As part of the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) we will perform continuous and interim analysis of 
accruing safety data. We have defined potentially treatment (Epo) related serious adverse events (SAEs) that 
will be monitored thro ughout the course of the study. Specifically, for SAEs , we will compare absolute rates to 
expected rates based on published data for similar newborns, and will seek careful DSMB review and guidance 
when observed rates exceed pre -specified thresholds. In ad dition, at planned interim analysis we will formally 
compare the event rates across the two treatment groups using appropriate small sample methods such as 
Fisher’s exact test.  
 
9.4.2.3   Data and Safety Monitoring Schedule.  
See section 9.4.3.1 , Table 1 4. 
 
9.4.2.4   Treatment Efficacy Monitoring  
Treatment efficacy will be monitored by the DSMB , but recognizing that 24 month efficacy outcomes will not be 
obtained until after enrollment is complete (or nearly complete).  Therefore, although formal interim ana lyses will 
be conducted using group -sequential boundaries there may not be compelling reasons to terminate the trial on 
the basis of accruing efficacy data. Efficacy measures will be provided in a blinded fashion to the DSMB with 
treatment groups labeled “ A” and “B” as well as a z -score assessment of the evidence for the difference between 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 53 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 treatment arms at 24 months.  An O’Brien -Fleming interim stopping boundary will be provided to the DSMB to 
help assess the magnitude of the z -score.   
 
9.4.3   Scheduled R eporting  
One month prior to each DSMB review, the Data Coordinating Center (DCC) will summarize monthly 
administrative reports that describe study progress including subject accrual by site, demographics, and the 
sites’ adherence to inclusion/exclusion cri teria and other protocol requirements, including retention rates at each 
follow -up point. These reports are prepared monthly and reviewed internally by the study research team for 
ongoing quality control and are also presented to the DSMB and NIH as reques ted. The DCC will also produce 
safety reports that list adverse events, serious adverse events, deaths, and disease or treatment specific events 
by site and in aggregate to the DSMB . 
 
With each review the DSMB will approve the study and protocol as is, rec ommend protocol changes in the 
interest of patient safety or stop the study based on overwhelming evidence of treatment benefit or safety 
concerns.  The DSMB will provide the recommendation in written minutes provided to the NIH.  If the NIH concurs 
with t hese recommendations, they will be forwarded to the principal investigator.  The recommendations will 
include any suggested changes in the proposed timing of future DSMB reviews.  The review may result in an 
amendment to the protocol, which must be approved by the IRB, the NIH and the sponsor.  
 
The DSMB report will begin with a brief narrative section that describes the status of the study, progress or 
findings to -date, issues, and  the procedures that produced the report (e.g., data obtained by a specific date). 
The report will provide a study description along with a current organization chart, current timetable and study 
schedule as well as a list of study clinical and administrat ive centers. Data will be presented that describe the 
administrative status of the study including recruitment and forms handling. Study data reports describe 
demographic and baseline clinical characteristics and provide a safety assessment. Tables will be  provided by 
site as well as for the whole study population. AE/SAE rates for each group will be presented.  
 
Following each DSMB meeting, the NINDS will send the study’s principal investigator a letter confirming that the 
DSMB met, reviewed all accumulated study data, and made a recommendation that the study continue as 
planned (or, possibly, to modify the protoc ol).  The principal investigator will forward a copy of this letter to each 
of the clinical investigators who, in turn, are responsible for forwarding it to their local IRB.  
 
9.4.3.1   Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
We divide potential serious adverse eve nts (SAEs) by the severity:   Below we detail the defined SAEs with 
associated expected event rates and thresholds that would trigger DSMB review. Most of the SAEs would occur 
during the Epo treatment period  or during hospitalization and therefore would be immediately recorded.  
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 54 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adverse Event (AE) :  In addition to the monitoring of SAEs , we will also measure and compare rates of adverse 
events across the two treatment arms. Given the high -risk study population a number of adverse events are 
expected, and the key monitoring function will be to assess whether evidence is accruing that sugge sts a 
differential adverse event rate associated with treatment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Estimates here are based on three primary sources:  Stoll et al. (2010); O’Shea et al. (2009) ELGAN study; and 
The Vermont Oxford Network (VON) 2008 Follow -up Report (2011).5, 43, 206  
 
Table 1 4. Cumulative number of subjects evaluated for safety events and for the long -term efficacy 
outcome.  Table 12. Serious Adverse Events    
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  Potentially Epo related  Expected Rate*  Threshold  
Hypertension  20% 25% 
Polycythemia (hematocrit > 6 5%) Rare <  1% 2% 
Major venous or arterial thrombosis (clot) not associated 
with a central line  Rare <  5% 10% 
Other unexpected life threatening event  Rare < 5%  10% 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  Prematurity related  Expected Rate*  Threshold  
Pulmonary Hemorrhage (Severe)  7% 15% 
NEC (Stage 2b or 3)  12% 25% 
Sepsis (severe)  33% 50% 
Intracranial hemorrhage (grade III or IV)  16% 25% 
Retinopathy of Prematurity (Severe)  7% 14% 
Other Serious Adverse Event: Expected or unexpected    
Death  Approx. 18%  30% 
Cardiac arrest  Rare < 1%  2% 
Other life threatening event  Rare < 1% 2% 
Table 13. Adverse Events   
Adverse Event (AE)  Expected Rate  
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)  93% 
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)  46% 
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia  (BPD)  42% 
Central line-related thrombosis (clot)  40% 
Intracranial  hemorrhage ( ICH) 36%total  
16% (grade III & IV)  
Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC)  11% 
Periventricular leukomalacia (PVL)  4% 
Hydrocephalus  2% 
Clinical Seizures  6%-13% 
ROP (stages 1 -2) 59% 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 55 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Month  6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60 
Safety (3 month)  125 375 625 875 940      
Efficacy  (24 month)  0 0 0 0 125 375 625 875 940  
 
Safety evaluation will be based on all available follow -up but we expect the majority of SAEs and AEs to occur 
during hospitalization and therefore within the first three months study follow -up. SAE’s and AE’s will be 
considered by gestational age category, given that complication rates of infants 24 and 25 weeks of gestation 
are expected to be higher than those at 26 and 27 weeks of gestation.  
 
SAEs and Threshold for Action : For each SAE listed in 
Table 9 we have established expected rates of SAEs for 
the target stu dy population, and thresholds for each 
treatment arm at which careful evaluation would be 
required by DSMB review. The DSMB would be asked to 
review all information associated with the line listing for 
the SAEs and then make a decision as to whether the 
study should be modified, continued or stopped. In Figure 
8 we show the operating characteristics for an SAE that 
has an expected (normal) rate of 5%, and a threshold of 
10% for review. If the true SAE rate is 1.5 times the 
threshold (e.g. 15%) then with 100  or more subjects there 
is a greater than 80% probability (power) that the 
observed rate of greater than the threshold would occur 
and trigger DSMB review. However, if the true SAE rate 
was only 1.25 times greater than the threshold then 150 
or more subjec ts would be needed to have 80% power. 
Although a total of 5  SAEs are monitored for their 
absolute rate , we will not use any multiple comparison 
correction for continuous monitoring of safety leading to DSMB review. However, formal interim analysis 
comparin g safety across the two study groups will account for both multiple comparisons due to multiple 
individual safety outcomes, and for multiple interim analyses.  
 
SAE analysis uses a doubling of rates to trigger consideration of DSMB action irrespective of st atistical 
significance at interim analysis, yet formal monitoring will be conducted every 6 months to evaluate the strength 
of statistical evidence for a difference across groups. Therefore, our proposed interim analyses will evaluate the 
accruing data usi ng both formal statistical comparison in addition to consideration of absolute rates and is thus 
more conservative than use of only one criterion. Finally, we plan to conduct interim analys es that will also report 
on the specific SAEs and AEs listed in Tables 10 and 11, and will provide p -values comparing treatment groups 
for these safety outcomes in addition to the SAE outcomes. A medical safety officer not involved in the study will 
review all SAEs, an d the DSMB (appointed by NINDS) will decide when they want to review each type of SAE 
or AE. We recommend that each case of ROP be reviewed as an SAE in real time.  
9.5 Formal Interim Analysis  
Our primary objective for interim analysis is to allow careful and continuing analysis of safety outcomes. 
Specifically, we propose to conduct formal statistical analysis and inference for each SAE and AE at three interim 
and one final analysis time. We will continue to analyze all AE events that have occurred during follow -up, but 
focus interim analysis on those events that occur within the first three months of follow -up since this is the time 
period in which the major treatment related events would be expected. We will conduct formal safety evaluation 
at 6, 12, 18, and 36 months following the start of enrollment. As shown above in Table 11 , we expect to have 3 -
month data available on 125 subjects at the first safety analysis . We plan to monitor death and will control the 
overall significance level using O’Brien -Flemi ng boundaries (net alpha=0.05 significance, accounting for three Figure 8: Probability (power) of exceeding established 
thresholds for safety outcomes . Here we consider an 
expected event rate of 5% with a threshold of 10% used to  
trigger DSMB action . 
 
0 50 100 150 200 250 3000.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
N (number evaluated)probability (power)rate = 1.50 x threshold
rate = 1.25 x threshold
rate = 1.10 x threshold
rate = n ull value (5%)
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 56 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 interim and one final analysis).215 For the other 4 SAEs, we will again use sequential monitoring boundaries to 
control the outcome -specific family -wise error rate (using a Bonferroni corrected alpha of 0.05/5 = 0.01).  
 
We have 10 AE outcomes and will display both a standard O’Brien -Fleming sequential monitoring guideline 
based on alpha=0.05, and a Bonferroni corrected sequential guideline using a significance of 0.05/9 = 0.0056 to 
correct for multiple outcomes.  
 
The CCC PI will be responsible for notifying the Medical Monitor of any safety events, and the Medical Monitor 
will notify the DSMB if indicated. All events will be reported to the DSMB in semi -annual reports.  
10.0   DATA COLLECTION, SITE MONITORING, AND ADVERSE EVENT 
REPORTING  
10.1   Records to Be Kept  
All patient data will be identified by a Study Identification Number (SID). The link between the SID and the patient 
name/medical record number will be maintained in a locked file available only to the site investigator. This link 
will b e destroyed after study completion, data analysis and publication of results.  Retained medical record 
information will include maternal education, SES, other factors known to affect cognitive development (e.g. drug. 
alcohol exposure), date of birth, birth  weight, medical treatments, complications, length of hospitalization, 
outcome measures including neurodevelopmental examination results , Bayley III test results, and neuroimages. 
All retained data will be coded with a SID so no direct link will be availab le to others besides the site investigator.  
 
Data Storage and Security  
Access to research data collected by the PENUT project will be restricted to study team members at each site 
and UW DCC personnel. The clinical recruitment sites will maintain a secure electronic database (e.g. Access, 
MySQL, REDCap, etc.) that links the SID generated by the PENUT Portal to study subject contact information. 
The clinical recruitment sites are responsible for scheduling patient follow -up visits, phone calls, and collectio n 
of survey data. The database will be stored on a secure electronic server with user name and passwords log in 
for individual users and will be backed up nightly.  
 
The REDCap servers are virtual machines (VMs) located on UW DCC hardware in a secure server  room. This 
server room meets the technical requirements for HIPAA compliance and hosts other servers containing PHI.  
 
Storage for all study data is backed by 2 dedicated Network Appliance FAS2050 storage appliances. The filer 
provides highly fault tolera nt storage using large RAID volumes, on -line hot -spare drives, and built -in, proprietary 
'snapshot' file system technology that automatically creates hourly, daily, and weekly on -line backups of modified 
files. Each filer provides approximately 2.6 terabyt es (2.6TB) of usable storage space.  
 
The VM Operating System will be kept fully patched and firewalled in accordance with UW Medicine Information 
Security Policy SEC05.04, which can be found online at http://security.uwmedicine.org/policies.     
 
The UW DCC maintains a Linux -based infrastructure server that uses and manages a central department 
storage server.  A Silicon Mechanics SM -1272A rack -mount server installed in the UW DCC server room rack 
and an HP dc5750 desktop PC are installed as so -called “lo gical firewalls”, such that that all PCs and operate 
on a private logical network.  
 
10.2   Role of Data Management  
10.2.1  Each clinical site will be responsible for data collection on enrolled subjects and data entry into the 
REDCap system. Once the study  is complete as described in 10.1, each clinical site will be responsible for 
destruction of link s and any retained clinical information.  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 57 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
   
10.2.2  It will be the responsibility of the Data Coordinating Center (DCC) to maintain confidentiality of all the 
submitted data by appropriate data encryption methods and password protection entry to database.  Please refer 
to the DCC Manual of Procedures for more detailed information on data handling.  
 
10.3   Quality Assurance  
Each clinical site will need local IRB a pproval of the study protocol prior to enrollment. Each clinical site will be 
visited by Dr. Sandra Juul and the UW CCC lead study coordinator  or her designee , prior to initiation of subject 
enrollment.  This visit will focus on protocol review, data colle ction and entry and maintenance of quality control.  
In addition, the UW CCC lead study c oordinator or her designee will visit each clinical site on a regular basis, at 
least once a year to assure protocol compliance and quality data entry.  These visits will include review of all 
pertinent records, maintenance of study and pharmacy regulatory documents, and review/reso lve any data 
accuracy concerns.  Each site will be required to make all study documents and pertinent records available for 
inspection by the research coordinator or other monitoring authorities.  
 
Data Quality Assurance.  We will monitor the accuracy of da ta entry by the sites both internally and externally. 
We will review study data on arrival for completeness. We will then subject each submitted data set to a set of 
preliminary checks to search for values that are out -of-range or otherwise inappropriate.  
 
External monitoring will consist of regular monitoring visits to every site while actively enrolling. Initial monitoring 
visits will take place prior to subject enrollment, and then every six to 12 months. Using the Patient Monitoring 
Report ( example below), a subset of all data points in the CRFs will be compared with the medical record  for 
25% of enrolled subjects . Any outstanding data queries will be resolved with the research coordinator at the time 
of the visit. After each study site visit a report w ill be prepared and copies sent to the Study File, the study PI (S. 
Juul), the site PI, and the site coordinator.  
 
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 58 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
 
 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 59 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
 
 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 60 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
  
 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 61 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 10.4   Serious Adverse E vent Reporting  
Since reporting rules vary by institution, by IRB, and by government agency (NIH), the fo llowing statements are 
a conservative guide to reporting serious adverse events for this trial and may be further refined with DSMB 
guidance.  
 
When an SAE occurs, the PI of the CCC (S. Juul) will be notified by the site within 24 -72 hours per protocol  (see 
Figure 9) . She , or her designee, is responsible for reporting the SAE to the Medical Monitor (Jack Widness ), the 
DSMB  and NINDS  (via Peter Gilbert) .  The immediate reports will be followed promptly by detailed, written 
reports  within 3 -7 days per pro tocol .  SAE reporting will also follow the requirements of the local IRB and the 
FDA.   SAEs and/or laboratory abnormalities identified in the protocol as critical to participant safety must be 
reported. All SAEs experienced by participants during the study  time frame specified in the protocol (from the 
time of study drug administration to discharge) are to be reported .  A death, found at any time point, including 
follow -up, should be reported.  The DCC will provide monthly summaries of all SAEs to the CCC P I, DCC PI, 
Medical Monitor, and Peter Gilbert (NINDS). The Medical Monitor is responsible for notifying the FDA when 
indicated.   
Figure 9 shows the flow diagram of how adverse events will be reported.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unexpected adverse events which are serious, but not life threatening, and have a causal relation to the 
research, (unexpected in this context means not mentioned in the informed consent) must be reported to the PI 
of the CCC (S. Juul)  within 72 hours per protocol (see Figure 9).  She, or her designee, is responsible for notifying 
the Medical Monitor, DSMB and NI NDS  within 7 days .  The local IRB should be notified as per local regulations Figure 9. SAE Flow Diagram  
 
 

  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 62 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 by the Site. The DSMB may call an emergency meeti ng, if necessary.  
 
11.0   HUMAN SUBJECTS  
11.1   Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review and Informed Consent  
This protocol and the informed consent  document and any subsequent modifications will be reviewed and 
approved by the IRB or ethics committee respo nsible for oversight of the study.  A signed consent form will be 
obtained from the subject’s parent, legal guardian, or person with power of attorney.  The consent form will 
describe the purpose of the study, the procedures to be followed, and the risks a nd benefits of participation.  A 
copy of the consent form will be given to the subject, parent, or legal guardian, and this fact will be documented 
in the subject’s record. A model informed consent form is included in Appendix 1.  
 
11.2   Subject Confidenti ality 
The UW DCC will support an https secured web page ( https://www.penut -trial.org ) that provides a centralized 
location for information about the Preterm Epo Neuropro tection (PENUT) Trial for patients, providers, 
investigators, and institutional agencies. The web page will also contain a link to the PENUT Portal 
https://www.penut -trial.org/portal  where all research personnel will log in with indiv idual user names and 
passwords to securely perform study data management activities.  
 
The PENUT Portal controls the assignment of sequentially generated Study Identification Numbers (SID) for all 
patients screened under the PENUT project. All patient conta ct information will be linked to the SID within 
databases hosted at the clinical recruitment sites and in a REDCap database at the DCC that stored separately 
from all other study or clinical data.   
 
All laboratory specimens, evaluation forms, reports, vid eo recordings, and other records that leave the site will 
be identified only by the SID to maintain subject confidentiality.  All records will be kept in a locked file cabinet at 
each site.  All computer entry and networking programs will be done using SID s only.  Clinical information will 
not be released without written permission of the subject, except as necessary for monitoring by IRB, the FDA, 
the NINDS, the OHRP, the sponsor, or the sponsor’s designee.  
 
Upon conclusion of the study, subjects’  families or legally authorized representative  may be notified of their 
child’s study arm assignment. This information will be generated by the DCC, and given to sites to distribute in 
a confidential way appropriate to the ir IRB’s  guidelines .  
 
Certain aspects of the subject's medi cal history and demographics will be collected for this study. Loss of privacy 
may lead to problems with insurability or social stigmatization. However, all data will be collected by study 
personnel with due attention to patien t privacy. A  Certificate of Confidentiality from the United States Department 
of Health and Human Services  (DHHS)  will be obtained by the CCC PI for all sites, to protect the subjects' 
confidential information.  With this Certificate, study investigators  cannot be forced (for example by court order or 
subpoena) to disclose information that may identify subject, subject’s parent, legal guardian, or person with 
power of attorney  any federal, state, local, civil, legislative, administrative, or other proceeding s. The researchers 
will use the Certificate to resist any demands for information that would identify any specific individual , except to 
prevent serious harm to anyone . 
 
11.3    Study Modification/Discontinuation  
The study may be modified or discontinued a t any time by the DSMB, IRB, the NINDS, the sponsor, the OHRP, 
the FDA, or other government agencies as part of their duties to ensure that research subjects are protected.  
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 63 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 12.0   PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS  
A Publications and Presentations Policy document has been developed to describe  processes for defining study 
publications  and presentations , for assigning authors in accord with JAMA criteria, and for reviewing publications 
prior to submission .  (Please see Appendix 4). A proposal for a manuscri pt will be initiated by submitting a 
structured summary proposal that includes an analysis plan. All proposal s will be reviewed by the Publication s 
and Presentation s and Executive Committee s. Similarly, all abstracts, presentations, and publications must also 
be approved by the Publication s and Presentation s and Executive Committee s, and it will be the responsibility 
of the DCC to ensure that the process is transparent and timely.  An Excel spreadsheet or the study website will 
include a searchable list of all analysis proposals and will track their status toward publication.  
 
We expect that Epo treatment will improve NDI -free survival compared to that seen in the ELGAN and NICHD 
trials. We expect that this benefit will translate into shorter and less compli cated hospital stays and better 
neurodevelopmental outcomes. This outcome of the trial would represent an important advance in the care of 
ELGANs that could change the standard of care for high -risk infants. If Epo treatment has no demonstrable 
benefit, or  if adverse effects are observed, this information will also be useful in the field because Epo is currently 
used anecdotally in many NICUs, without trial -based evidence, for some severely ill infants. The results of the 
PENUT trial will be of particular i nterest to pediatricians trained in neonatal -perinatal medicine. This group of 
practitioners is largely centered in academic or medical centers and they attend several meetings each year 
where new information about treatment can be presented. The PENUT tri al results will be presented at regional 
Pediatric Research Society meetings such as the Western and Eastern Society for Pediatric Research, and at 
national and international meetings including the Pediatric Academic Societies combined meetings, the 
Europe an Society for Pediatric Research meeting, the American Academy of Pediatrics meetings, and at other 
venues such as “Hot Topics in Neonatology”.  
 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 64 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 13.0  REFERENCES  
 
1. Moore T, Johnson S, Haider S, Hennessy E, Marlow N. The Bayley -III cognitive and language scales: how do scores 
relate to the Bayley II? Arch Dis Child. 2011;96(Suppl 1):A1 –A100. doi: 10.1136/adc.2011.212563.85.  
2. Rouse DJ, Hirtz DG, Thom E, Varner MW, Spong CY, Mercer BM, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of magnesi um 
sulfate for the prevention of cerebral palsy. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(9):895 -905. Epub 2008/08/30. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa0801187. PubMed PMID: 18753646; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2803083.  
3. Palisano R, Rosenbaum P, Walter S, Russell D, Wood E, Galuppi B. De velopment and reliability of a system to classify 
gross motor function in children with cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1997;39(4):214 -23. Epub 1997/04/01. 
PubMed PMID: 9183258.  
4. Palisano RJ, Rosenbaum P, Bartlett D, Livingston MH. Content validity  of the expanded and revised Gross Motor 
Function Classification System. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2008;50(10):744 -50. Epub 2008/10/07. doi: 10.1111/j.1469 -
8749.2008.03089.x. PubMed PMID: 18834387.  
5. Stoll BJ, Hansen NI, Bell EF, Shankaran S, Laptook AR, Wals h MC, et al. Neonatal outcomes of extremely preterm 
infants from the NICHD Neonatal Research Network. Pediatrics. 2010;126(3):443 -56. Epub 2010/08/25. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2009 -2959. PubMed PMID: 20732945; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2982806.  
6. La Pine TR, Jack son JC, Bennett FC. Outcome of infants weighing less than 800 grams at birth: 15 years' experience. 
Pediatrics. 1995;96(3 Pt 1):479 -83. PubMed PMID: 7544456.  
7. Vohr BR, Wright LL, Dusick AM, Perritt R, Poole WK, Tyson JE, et al. Center differences and out comes of extremely 
low birth weight infants. Pediatrics. 2004;113(4):781 -9. PubMed PMID: 15060228.  
8. Hack M, Fanaroff AA. Outcomes of children of extremely low birthweight and gestational age in the 1990s. Semin 
Neonatol. 2000;5(2):89 -106. PubMed PMID: 10 859704.  
9. Wilson -Costello D, Friedman H, Minich N, Fanaroff AA, Hack M. Improved survival rates with increased 
neurodevelopmental disability for extremely low birth weight infants in the 1990s. Pediatrics. 2005;115(4):997 -
1003. PubMed PMID: 15805376.  
10. Tyson JE, Parikh NA, Langer J, Green C, Higgins RD. Intensive care for extreme prematurity --moving beyond 
gestational age. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(16):1672 -81. PubMed PMID: 18420500.  
11. Eichenwald EC, Stark AR. Management and outcomes of very low birth weight. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(16):1700 -
11. PubMed PMID: 18420502.  
12. Hoekstra RE, Ferrara TB, Couser RJ, Payne NR, Connett JE. Survival and long -term neurodevelopmental outcome of 
extremely premature infants born at 23 -26 weeks' gestational age at a tert iary center. Pediatrics. 2004;113(1 Pt 
1):e1 -6. Epub 2004/01/02. PubMed PMID: 14702487.  
13. Hintz SR, Kendrick DE, Stoll BJ, Vohr BR, Fanaroff AA, Donovan EF, et al. Neurodevelopmental and growth outcomes 
of extremely low birth weight infants after necroti zing enterocolitis. Pediatrics. 2005;115(3):696 -703. Epub 
2005/03/03. doi: 10.1542/peds.2004 -0569. PubMed PMID: 15741374.  
14. Wood NS, Marlow N, Costeloe K, Gibson AT, Wilkinson AR. Neurologic and developmental disability after extremely 
preterm birth. EPI Cure Study Group. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(6):378 -84. PubMed PMID: 10933736.  
15. Wood NS, Costeloe K, Gibson AT, Hennessy EM, Marlow N, Wilkinson AR. The EPICure study: growth and associated 
problems in children born at 25 weeks of gestational age or less. A rch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2003;88(6):F492 -
500. PubMed PMID: 14602697.  
16. Wood NS, Costeloe K, Gibson AT, Hennessy EM, Marlow N, Wilkinson AR. The EPICure study: associations and 
antecedents of neurological and developmental disability at 30 months of age following extremely preterm birth. 
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2005;90(2):F134 -40. PubMed PMID: 15724037.  
17. Beauchamp MH, Thompson DK, Howard K, Doyle LW, Egan GF, Inder TE, et al. Preterm infant hippocampal volumes 
correlate with later work ing memory deficits. Brain. 2008;131(Pt 11):2986 -94. PubMed PMID: 18799516.  
18. Edgin JO, Inder TE, Anderson PJ, Hood KM, Clark CA, Woodward LJ. Executive functioning in preschool children 
born very preterm: relationship with early white matter pathology. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2008;14(1):90 -101.  
PubMed PMID: 18078535.  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 65 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 19. Gargus RA, Vohr BR, Tyson JE, High P, Higgins RD, Wrage LA, et al. Unimpaired outcomes for extremely low birth 
weight infants at 18 to 22 months. Pediatrics. 2009;124(1):112 -21. PubMed C entral PMCID: PMC2856069.  
20. Marlow N, Hennessy EM, Bracewell MA, Wolke D. Motor and executive function at 6 years of age after extremely 
preterm birth. Pediatrics. 2007;120(4):793 -804. PubMed PMID: 17908767.  
21. Johnson S, Hollis C, Kochhar P, Hennessy E , Wolke D, Marlow N. Autism spectrum disorders in extremely preterm 
children. J Pediatr. 2010;156(4):525 -31. PubMed PMID: 20056232.  
22. Buchmayer S, Johansson S, Johansson A, Hultman CM, Sparen P, Cnattingius S. Can association between preterm 
birth and au tism be explained by maternal or neonatal morbidity? Pediatrics. 2009;124(5):e817 -25. PubMed PMID: 
19841112.  
23. Kuban KC, O'Shea TM, Allred EN, Tager -Flusberg H, Goldstein DJ, Leviton A. Positive screening on the Modified 
Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT) in extremely low gestational age newborns. J Pediatr. 2009;154(4):535 -
40 e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2008.10.011. PubMed PMID: 19185317; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2693887.  
24. Scott MN, Taylor HG, Fristad MA, Klein N, Espy KA, Minich N, et al. Beha vior Disorders in Extremely 
Preterm/Extremely Low Birth Weight Children in Kindergarten. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2012. Epub 2012/01/17. doi: 
10.1097/DBP.0b013e3182475287. PubMed PMID: 22245934.  
25. Petrou S, Henderson J, Bracewell M, Hockley C, Wolke D, Marlo w N. Pushing the boundaries of viability: the 
economic impact of extreme preterm birth. Early Hum Dev. 2006;82(2):77 -84. PubMed PMID: 16466865.  
26. Rushing S, Ment LR. Preterm birth: a cost benefit analysis. Seminars in Perinatology. 2004;28(6):444 -50. Epu b 
2005/02/08. PubMed PMID: 15693401.  
27. van der Kooij MA, Groenendaal F, Kavelaars A, Heijnen CJ, van Bel F. Neuroprotective properties and mechanisms 
of erythropoietin in in vitro and in vivo experimental models for hypoxia/ischemia. Brain Res Rev. 2008; 59(1):22 -
33. PubMed PMID: 18514916.  
28. Gonzalez FF, Abel R, Almli CR, Mu D, Wendland M, Ferriero DM. Erythropoietin sustains cognitive function and 
brain volume after neonatal stroke. Dev Neurosci. 2009;31(5):403 -11. PubMed PMID: 19672069.  
29. Kellert BA,  McPherson RJ, Juul SE. A comparison of high -dose recombinant erythropoietin treatment regimens in 
brain -injured neonatal rats. Pediatr Res. 2007;61(4):451 -5. doi: 10.1203/pdr.0b013e3180332cec. PubMed PMID: 
17515870.  
30. Rees S, Hale N, De Matteo R, Cardam one L, Tolcos M, Loeliger M, et al. Erythropoietin is neuroprotective in a 
preterm ovine model of endotoxin -induced brain injury. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2010;69(3):306 -19. Epub 
2010/02/10. doi: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181d27138. PubMed PMID: 20142760.  
31. Loeliger MM, Mackintosh A, De Matteo R, Harding R, Rees SM. Erythropoietin protects the developing retina in an 
ovine model of endotoxin -induced retinal injury. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011;52(5):2656 -61. Epub 2011/01/20. 
doi: 10.1167/iovs.10 -6455. PubMed  PMID: 21245409.  
32. Juul SE, McPherson RJ, Farrell FX, Jolliffe L, Ness DJ, Gleason CA. Erytropoietin concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid 
of nonhuman primates and fetal sheep following high -dose recombinant erythropoietin. Biol Neonate. 
2004;85(2):138 -44. PubMed PMID: 14639039.  
33. Fauchere JC, Dame C, Vonthein R, Koller B, Arri S, Wolf M, et al. An approach to using recombinant erythropoietin 
for neuroprotection in very preterm infants. Pediatrics. 2008;122(2):375 -82. PubMed PMID: 18676556.  
34. Weber A,  Dzietko M, Berns M, Felderhoff -Mueser U, Heinemann U, Maier RF, et al. Neuronal damage after 
moderate hypoxia and erythropoietin. Neurobiol Dis. 2005;20(2):594 -600. PubMed PMID: 15935685.  
35. Juul SE, McPherson RJ, Bauer LA, Ledbetter KJ, Gleason CA, Mayo ck DE. A phase I/II trial of high -dose erythropoietin 
in extremely low birth weight infants: pharmacokinetics and safety. Pediatrics. 2008;122(2):383 -91. PubMed PMID: 
18676557.  
36. Widness JA, Veng -Pedersen P, Peters C, Pereira LM, Schmidt RL, Lowe LS. Ery thropoietin pharmacokinetics in 
premature infants: developmental, nonlinearity, and treatment effects. J Appl Physiol. 1996;80(1):140 -8. 
37. Statler PA, McPherson RJ, Bauer LA, Kellert BA, Juul SE. Pharmacokinetics of high -dose recombinant erythropoietin 
in plasma and brain of neonatal rats. Pediatr Res. 2007;61(6):671 -5. doi: 10.1203/pdr.0b013e31805341dc. PubMed 
PMID: 17426655.  
38. Mwansa -Kambafwile J, Cousens S, Hansen T, Lawn JE. Antenatal steroids in preterm labour for the prevention of 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 66 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 neonatal deaths  due to complications of preterm birth. Int J Epidemiol. 2010;39 Suppl 1:i122 -33. Epub 2010/04/02. 
doi: 10.1093/ije/dyq029. PubMed PMID: 20348115; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2845868.  
39. Gluckman PD, Wyatt JS, Azzopardi D, Ballard R, Edwards AD, Ferriero DM,  et al. Selective head cooling with mild 
systemic hypothermia after neonatal encephalopathy: multicentre randomised trial. Lancet. 2005;365(9460):663 -
70. PubMed PMID: 15721471.  
40. Shankaran S, Laptook AR, Ehrenkranz RA, Tyson JE, McDonald SA, Donovan EF, et al. Whole -body hypothermia for 
neonates with hypoxic -ischemic encephalopathy. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(15):1574 -84. PubMed PMID: 16221780.  
41. Azzopardi DV, Strohm B, Edwards AD, Dyet L, Halliday HL, Juszczak E, et al. Moderate hypothermia to treat perina tal 
asphyxial encephalopathy. N Engl J Med. 2009;361(14):1349 -58. PubMed PMID: 19797281.  
42. Field DJ, Dorling JS, Manktelow BN, Draper ES. Survival of extremely premature babies in a geographically defined 
population: prospective cohort study of 1994 -9 co mpared with 2000 -5. Bmj. 2008;336(7655):1221 -3. Epub 
2008/05/13. doi: 10.1136/bmj.39555.670718.BE. PubMed PMID: 18469017; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2405852.  
43. O'Shea TM, Allred EN, Dammann O, Hirtz D, Kuban KC, Paneth N, et al. The ELGAN study of the brai n and related 
disorders in extremely low gestational age newborns. Early Hum Dev. 2009;85(11):719 -25. Epub 2009/09/22. doi: 
10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2009.08.060. PubMed PMID: 19765918; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2801579.  
44. Rajagopalan V, Scott JA, Habas PA, Co rbett -Detig JM, Kim K, Rousseau F, et al. Local tissue growth patterns 
underlying normal fetal human brain gyrification quantified in utero. J Neurosci. 2011;31(8):2878 -87. 
45. Lodygensky GA, Vasung L, Sizonenko SV, Huppi PS. Neuroimaging of cortical devel opment and brain connectivity 
in human newborns and animal models. J Anat. 2010;217(4):418 -28. Epub 2010/10/29. doi: 10.1111/j.1469 -
7580.2010.01280.x. PubMed PMID: 20979587.  
46. Huppi PS. Growth and development of the brain and impact on cognitive outcomes . Nestle Nutr Workshop Ser 
Pediatr Program. 2010;65:137 -49; discussion 49 -51. PubMed PMID: 20139679.  
47. Back SA, Luo NL, Borenstein NS, Levine JM, Volpe JJ, Kinney HC. Late oligodendrocyte progenitors coincide with the 
developmental window of vulnerabilit y for human perinatal white matter injury. J Neurosci. 2001;21(4):1302 -12. 
PubMed PMID: 11160401.  
48. Back SA, Rivkees SA. Emerging concepts in periventricular white matter injury. Semin Perinatol. 2004;28(6):405 -14. 
PubMed PMID: 15693397.  
49. Volpe JJ. Br ain injury in the premature infant: overview of clinical aspects, neuropathology, and pathogenesis. 
Semin Pediatr Neurol. 1998;5(3):135 -51. PubMed PMID: 9777673.  
50. Volpe JJ. Neurobiology of periventricular leukomalacia in the premature infant. Pediatr Re s. 2001;50(5):553 -62. 
PubMed PMID: 11641446.  
51. Volpe JJ. Perinatal brain injury: From pathogenesis to neuroprotection. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev. 
2001;7(1):56 -64. PubMed PMID: 11241883.  
52. Volpe JJ. Brain injury in premature infants: a complex ama lgam of destructive and developmental disturbances. 
Lancet Neurol. 2009;8(1):110 -24. Epub 2008/12/17. PubMed PMID: 19081519; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2707149.  
53. Volpe JJ. The encephalopathy of prematurity --brain injury and impaired brain development inex tricably 
intertwined. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2009;16(4):167 -78. Epub 2009/12/01. PubMed PMID: 19945651; PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC2799246.  
54. Back SA, Han BH, Luo NL, Chricton CA, Xanthoudakis S, Tam J, et al. Selective vulnerability of late oligodendrocyte  
progenitors to hypoxia -ischemia. J Neurosci. 2002;22(2):455 -63. PubMed PMID: 11784790.  
55. Back SA, Luo NL, Mallinson RA, O'Malley JP, Wallen LD, Frei B, et al. Selective vulnerability of preterm white matter 
to oxidative damage defined by F2 -isoprostanes . Ann Neurol. 2005;58(1):108 -20. PubMed PMID: 15984031.  
56. Back SA, Riddle A, McClure MM. Maturation -dependent vulnerability of perinatal white matter in premature birth. 
Stroke. 2007;38(2 Suppl):724 -30. PubMed PMID: 17261726.  
57. Volpe JJ. Neurology of t he Newborn. 4th ed: W.B. Saunders; 2001. 912 p.  
58. Zacharias R, Schmidt M, Kny J, Sifringer M, Bercker S, Bittigau P, et al. Dose -dependent effects of erythropoietin in 
propofol anesthetized neonatal rats. Brain Res. 2010;1343:14 -9. PubMed PMID: 20452333.  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 67 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 59. Kumral A, Gonenc S, Acikgoz O, Sonmez A, Genc K, Yilmaz O, et al. Erythropoietin increases glutathione peroxidase 
enzyme activity and decreases lipid peroxidation levels in hypoxic -ischemic brain injury in neonatal rats. Biol 
Neonate. 2005;87(1):15 -8. PubMed PMID: 15334031.  
60. Gonzalez FF, McQuillen P, Mu D, Chang Y, Wendland M, Vexler Z, et al. Erythropoietin enhances long -term 
neuroprotection and neurogenesis in neonatal stroke. Dev Neurosci. 2007;29:321 -30. 
61. Demers EJ, McPherson RJ, Juul SE. Ery thropoietin protects dopaminergic neurons and improves neurobehavioral 
outcomes in juvenile rats after neonatal hypoxia -ischemia. Pediatr Res. 2005;58(2):297 -301. PubMed PMID: 
16055937.  
62. McPherson RJ, Demers EJ, Juul SE. Safety of high -dose recombinant erythropoietin in a neonatal rat model. 
Neonatology. 2007;91(1):36 -43. PubMed PMID: 17344650.  
63. Iwai M, Stetler RA, Xing J, Hu X, Gao Y, Zhang W, et al. Enhanced oligodendrogenesis and recovery of neurological 
function by erythropoietin after neonatal hy poxic/ischemic brain injury. Stroke. 2010;41(5):1032 -7. Epub 
2010/04/03. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.570325. PubMed PMID: 20360553; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2919308.  
64. Reitmeir R, Kilic E, Kilic U, Bacigaluppi M, ElAli A, Salani G, et al. Post -acute deliv ery of erythropoietin induces stroke 
recovery by promoting perilesional tissue remodelling and contralesional pyramidal tract plasticity. Brain. 
2011;134(Pt 1):84 -99. Epub 2010/12/28. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq344. PubMed PMID: 21186263.  
65. Leviton A, Fichorova R, Yamamoto Y, Allred EN, Dammann O, Hecht J, et al. Inflammation -related proteins in the 
blood of extremely low gestational age newborns. The contribution of inflammation to the appearance of 
developmental regulation. Cytokine. 2011;53(1):66 -73. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2010.09.003. PubMed PMID: 
20934883; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2987520.  
66. Martin CR, Dammann O, Allred EN, Patel S, O'Shea TM, Kuban KC, et al. Neurodevelopment of extremely preterm 
infants who had necrotizing enterocolitis with or without late bacteremia. J Pediatr. 2010;157(5):751 -6 e1. Epub 
2010/07/06. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.05.042. PubMed PMID: 20598317; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2952050.  
67. Ivacko JA, Sun R, Silverstein FS. Hypoxic -ischemic brain injury induces an acute micro glial reaction in perinatal rats. 
Pediatr Res. 1996;39(1):39 -47. PubMed PMID: 8825384.  
68. Foster -Barber A, Dickens B, Ferriero DM. Human perinatal asphyxia: correlation of neonatal cytokines with MRI 
and outcome. Dev Neurosci. 2001;23(3):213 -8. PubMed PMI D: 11598323.  
69. Bartha AI, Foster -Barber A, Miller SP, Vigneron DB, Glidden DV, Barkovich AJ, et al. Neonatal encephalopathy: 
association of cytokines with MR spectroscopy and outcome. Pediatr Res. 2004;56(6):960 -6. PubMed PMID: 
15496611.  
70. Juul S, Feld erhoff -Mueser U. Epo and other hematopoietic factors. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2007;12(4):250 -8. 
Epub 2007/02/27. PubMed PMID: 17321813; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2018740.  
71. Gorio A, Gokmen N, Erbayraktar S, Yilmaz O, Madaschi L, Cichetti C, et al. Recom binant human erythropoietin 
counteracts secondary injury and markedly enhances neurological recovery from experimental spinal cord trauma. 
PNAS. 2002;99(14):9450 -5. Epub 2002/06/26. doi: 10.1073/pnas.142287899. PubMed PMID: 12082184; PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC123161.  
72. Villa P, Bigini P, Mennini T, Agnello D, Laragione T, Cagnotto A, et al. Erythropoietin selectively attenuates cytokine 
production and inflammation in cerebral ischemia by targeting neuronal apoptosis. J Exp Med. 2003;198(6):971 -5. 
Epub 2003 /09/17. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2194205.  
73. Sun Y, Calvert JW, Zhang JH. Neonatal hypoxia/ischemia is associated with decreased inflammatory mediators after 
erythropoietin administration. Stroke. 2005;36(8):1672 -8. PubMed PMID: 16040592.  
74. Siren AL, Fr atelli M, Brines M, Goemans C, Casagrande S, Lewczuk P, et al. Erythropoietin prevents neuronal 
apoptosis after cerebral ischemia and metabolic stress. PNAS. 2001;98(7):4044 -9. PubMed PMID: 11259643.  
75. Bian XX, Yuan XS, Qi CP. Effect of recombinant human  erythropoietin on serum S100B protein and interleukin -6 
levels after traumatic brain injury in the rat. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 2010;50(5):361 -6. Epub 2010/05/28. PubMed 
PMID: 20505289.  
76. Juul SE, Beyer RP, Bammler TK, McPherson RJ, Wilkerson J, Farin FM. Microarray analysis of high -dose recombinant 
erythropoietin treatment of unilateral brain injury in neonatal mouse hippocampus. Pediatr Res. 2009;65(5):485 -
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 68 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 92. Epub 2009/02/05. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e31819d90c8. PubMed PMID: 19190543.  
77. Yatsiv I, Gri goriadis N, Simeonidou C, Stahel PF, Schmidt OI, Alexandrovitch AG, et al. Erythropoietin is 
neuroprotective, improves functional recovery, and reduces neuronal apoptosis and inflammation in a rodent 
model of experimental closed head injury. FASEB J. 2005; 19(12):1701 -3. PubMed PMID: 16099948.  
78. Vitellaro -Zuccarello L, Mazzetti S, Madaschi L, Bosisio P, Fontana E, Gorio A, et al. Chronic erythropoietin -mediated 
effects on the expression of astrocyte markers in a rat model of contusive spinal cord injury. N euroscience. 
2008;151(2):452 -66. PubMed PMID: 18065151.  
79. Li L, Jiang Q, Ding G, Zhang L, Zhang ZG, Li Q, et al. MRI identification of white matter reorganization enhanced by 
erythropoietin treatment in a rat model of focal ischemia. Stroke. 2009;40(3):9 36-41. Epub 2009/01/20. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.527713. PubMed PMID: 19150870; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2730918.  
80. Zhang L, Chopp M, Zhang RL, Wang L, Zhang J, Wang Y, et al. Erythropoietin amplifies stroke -induced 
oligodendrogenesis in the rat. PLoS ONE. 2010;5(6):e11016. Epub 2010/06/17. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0011016. PubMed PMID: 20552017; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2884017.  
81. Yamada M, Burke C, Colditz P, Johnson DW, Gobe GC. Erythropoietin protects against apoptosis and increases 
expression of  non-neuronal cell markers in the hypoxia -injured developing brain. J Pathol. 2011. Epub 2011/03/16. 
doi: 10.1002/path.2862. PubMed PMID: 21404277.  
82. Savino C, Pedotti R, Baggi F, Ubiali F, Gallo B, Nava S, et al. Delayed administration of erythropoietin  and its non -
erythropoietic derivatives ameliorates chronic murine autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J Neuroimmunol. 
2006;172(1 -2):27 -37. Epub 2005/12/13. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2005.10.016. PubMed PMID: 16337691.  
83. Vitellaro -Zuccarello L, Mazzetti S, Madas chi L, Bosisio P, Gorio A, De Biasi S. Erythropoietin -mediated preservation 
of the white matter in rat spinal cord injury. Neuroscience. 2007;144(3):865 -77. Epub 2006/12/05. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.10.023. PubMed PMID: 17141961.  
84. Ha-Vinh Leucht er R, Gui L, Hagmann C, Lodygensky GA, Sizonenko S, Martin E, et al. Neuroprotective effects of 
early Epo in preterm infants: an MRI study. Pediatric Research. 2011;70:28. doi: 10.1038/pr.2011.253.  
85. Sugawa M, Sakurai Y, Ishikawa -Ieda Y, Suzuki H, Asou H . Effects of erythropoietin on glial cell development; 
oligodendrocyte maturation and astrocyte proliferation. Neurosci Res. 2002;44(4):391 -403. Epub 2002/11/26. 
PubMed PMID: 12445627.  
86. Genc K, Genc S, Baskin H, Semin I. Erythropoietin decreases cytotox icity and nitric oxide formation induced by 
inflammatory stimuli in rat oligodendrocytes. Physiol Res. 2006;55(1):33 -8. Epub 2005/04/29. PubMed PMID: 
15857166.  
87. Mizuno K, Hida H, Masuda T, Nishino H, Togari H. Pretreatment with low doses of erythropoiet in ameliorates brain 
damage in periventricular leukomalacia by targeting late oligodendrocyte progenitors: a rat model. Neonatology. 
2008;94(4):255 -66. Epub 2008/09/12. doi: 10.1159/000151644. PubMed PMID: 18784421.  
88. Oppenheim RW. Cell death during deve lopment of the nervous system. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1991;14:453 -501. 
PubMed PMID: 2031577.  
89. McDonald JW, Behrens MI, Chung C, Bhattacharyya T, Choi DW. Susceptibility to apoptosis is enhanced in immature 
cortical neurons. Brain Res. 1997;759(2):228 -32. Pu bMed PMID: 9221941.  
90. Digicaylioglu M, Lipton SA. Erythropoietin -mediated neuroprotection involves cross -talk between Jak2 and NF -
kappaB signalling cascades. Nature. 2001;412(6847):641 -7. PubMed PMID: 11493922.  
91. Xiong T, Qu Y, Mu D, Ferriero D. Erythr opoietin for neonatal brain injury: opportunity and challenge. Int J Dev 
Neurosci. 2011. Epub 2011/02/01PMID: 21277366. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2010.12.007. PubMed PMID: 
21277366.  
92. Dzietko M, Felderhoff -Mueser U, Sifringer M, Krutz B, Bittigau P, Thor F , et al. Erythropoietin protects the 
developing brain against N -methyl -D-aspartate receptor antagonist neurotoxicity. Neurobiol Dis. 2004;15(2):177 -
87. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2003.10.006. PubMed PMID: 15006687.  
93. Wang L, Zhang Z, Wang Y, Zhang R, Chopp M. Treatment of stroke with erythropoietin enhances neurogenesis and 
angiogenesis and improves neurological function in rats. Stroke. 2004;35(7):1732 -7. PubMed PMID: 15178821.  
94. Iwai M, Cao G, Yin W, Stetler RA, Liu J, Chen J. Erythropoietin promotes neuron al replacement through 
revascularization and neurogenesis after neonatal hypoxia/ischemia in rats. Stroke 2007;38:2795 -803.  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 69 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 95. Shingo T, Sorokan ST, Shimazaki T, Weiss S. Erythropoietin regulates the in vitro and in vivo production of neuronal 
progenitors  by mammalian forebrain neural stem cells. J Neurosci. 2001;21(24):9733 -43. PubMed PMID: 11739582.  
96. Osredkar D, Sall JW, Bickler PE, Ferriero DM. Erythropoietin promotes hippocampal neurogenesis in in vitro models 
of neonatal stroke. Neurobiol Dis. 2010 ;38(2):259 -65. Epub 2010/02/02. PubMed PMID: 20117210; PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC2854222.  
97. Ransome MI, Turnley AM. Systemically delivered Erythropoietin transiently enhances adult hippocampal 
neurogenesis. J Neurochem. 2007;102(6):1953 -65. PubMed PMID: 1 7555554.  
98. Bocker -Meffert S, Rosenstiel P, Rohl C, Warneke N, Held -Feindt J, Sievers J, et al. Erythropoietin and VEGF promote 
neural outgrowth from retinal explants in postnatal rats. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2002;43(6):2021 -6. PubMed 
PMID: 12037014.  
99. Yang Z, Covey MV, Bitel CL, Ni L, Jonakait GM, Levison SW. Sustained neocortical neurogenesis after neonatal 
hypoxic/ischemic injury. Ann Neurol. 2007;61(3):199 -208. Epub 2007/02/09. doi: 10.1002/ana.21068. PubMed 
PMID: 17286251.  
100.  Wang L, Chopp M, Gregg SR, Zhang RL, Teng H, Jiang A, et al. Neural progenitor cells treated with EPO induce 
angiogenesis through the production of VEGF. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2008;28(7):1361 -8. PubMed PMID: 
18414495.  
101.  Marzocchi B, Perrone S, Paffetti P, Magi B, Bi ni L, Tani C, et al. Nonprotein -bound iron and plasma protein oxidative 
stress at birth. Pediatr Res. 2005;58(6):1295 -9. PubMed PMID: 16306211.  
102.  Buonocore G, Perrone S, Longini M, Paffetti P, Vezzosi P, Gatti MG, et al. Non protein bound iron as early predictive 
marker of neonatal brain damage. Brain. 2003;126(Pt 5):1224 -30. PubMed PMID: 12690060.  
103.  Collard KJ. Is there a causal relationship between the receipt of blood transfusions and the development of chronic 
lung disease of prematurity? Med Hypo theses. 2006;66(2):355 -64. PubMed PMID: 16236459.  
104.  Ozment CP, Turi JL. Iron overload following red blood cell transfusion and its impact on disease severity. Biochim 
Biophys Acta. 2009;1790(7):694 -701. Epub 2008/11/11.PubMed PMID: 18992790.  
105.  Juul S E, Zerzan JC, Strandjord TP, Woodrum DE. Zinc protoporphyrin/heme as an indicator of iron status in NICU 
patients. J Pediatr. 2003;142(3):273 -8. doi: 10.1067/mpd.2003.101. PubMed PMID: 12640375.  
106.  Wallach I, Zhang J, Hartmann A, van Landeghem FK, Ivanov a A, Klar M, et al. Erythropoietin -receptor gene 
regulation in neuronal cells. Pediatr Res. 2009;65(6):619 -24. Epub 2009/02/17. doi: 
10.1203/PDR.0b013e31819ea3b8. PubMed PMID: 19218878.  
107.  Nagai A, Nakagawa E, Choi HB, Hatori K, Kobayashi S, Kim SU. Eryt hropoietin and erythropoietin receptors in human 
CNS neurons, astrocytes, microglia, and oligodendrocytes grown in culture. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 
2001;60(4):386 -92. Epub 2001/04/18. PubMed PMID: 11305874.  
108.  Chong ZZ, Kang JQ, Maiese K. Erythropoieti n fosters both intrinsic and extrinsic neuronal protection through 
modulation of microglia, Akt1, Bad, and caspase -mediated pathways. Br J Pharmacol. 2003;138(6):1107 -18. 
PubMed PMID: 12684267.  
109.  Kumral A, Tugyan K, Gonenc S, Genc K, Genc S, Sonmez U, e t al. Protective effects of erythropoietin against ethanol -
induced apoptotic neurodegenaration and oxidative stress in the developing C57BL/6 mouse brain. Brain Res Dev 
Brain Res. 2005;160(2):146 -56. PubMed PMID: 16236368.  
110.  Chattopadhyay A, Choudhury T D, Bandyopadhyay D, Datta AG. Protective effect of erythropoietin on the oxidative 
damage of erythrocyte membrane by hydroxyl radical. Biochem Pharmacol. 2000;59(4):419 -25. PubMed PMID: 
10644050.  
111.  Zhu C, Kang W, Xu F, Cheng X, Zhang Z, Jia L, et al. Er ythropoietin improved neurologic outcomes in newborns with 
hypoxic -ischemic encephalopathy. Pediatrics. 2009;124(2):e218 -26. Epub 2009/08/05. doi: peds.2008 -3553 [pii]  
10.1542/peds.2008 -3553. PubMed PMID: 19651565.  
112.  Elmahdy H, El -Mashad AR, El -Bahrawy H, El -Gohary T, El -Barbary A, Aly H. Human recombinant erythropoietin in 
asphyxia neonatorum: pilot trial. Pediatrics. 2010;125(5):e1135 -42. PubMed PMID: 20385632.  
113.  Brown MS, Eichorst D, Lala -Black B, Gonzalez R. Higher cumulative doses of erythropoietin and developmental 
outcomes in preterm infants. Pediatrics. 2009;124(4):e681 -7. Epub 2009/09/30. doi: peds.2008 -2701 [pii]  
PubMed PMID: 19786428.  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 70 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 114.  Neubauer AP, Voss W, Wachtendorf M, Jungmann T. Erythropoietin improves neurodevelopmental outcome of 
extremely preterm infants. Ann Neurol. 2010;67(5):657 -66. Epub 2010/05/04. doi: 10.1002/ana.21977. PubMed 
PMID: 20437563.  
115.  Bierer R, Peceny MC, Hartenberger CH, Ohls RK. Erythropoietin concentrations and neurodevelopmental outcome 
in preterm  infants. Pediatrics. 2006;118(3):e635 -40. PubMed PMID: 16908620.  
116.  Smeets G, George A. Instantaneous laser Doppler velocimeter using a fast wavelength tracking Michelson 
interferometer. The Review of scientific instruments. 1978;49(11):1589. doi: 10.10 63/1.1135316. PubMed PMID: 
18699009.  
117.  McAdams RM, McPherson RJ, Mayock DE, Juul SE. Neurodevelopmental Outcomes For Extremely Low Birth Weight 
Infants Given Neonatal High -Dose Erythropoietin. J Perinatol. 2012;In Press.  
118.  Juul S. Erythropoietin in a nemia of prematurity. J Matern Fetal Neona. 2012;25(Suppl 5):80 -4. Epub 2012/10/03. 
doi: 10.3109/14767058.2012.716987. PubMed PMID: 23025776.  
119.  Mathur AM, Neil JJ, McKinstry RC, Inder TE. Transport, monitoring, and successful brain MR imaging in unsedated 
neonates. Pediatr Radiol. 2008;38(3):260 -4. PubMed PMID: 18175110.  
120.  Ohls RK. The use of erythropoietin in neonates. Clin Perinatol. 2000;27(3):681 -96. PubMed PMID: 10986635.  
121.  Ohlsson A, Aher SM. Early erythropoietin for preventing red blo od cell transfusion in preterm and/or low birth 
weight infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;3:CD004863. PubMed PMID: 16856062.  
122.  Ohlsson A, Aher SM. Early erythropoietin for preventing red blood cell transfusion in preterm and/or low birth 
weight i nfants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;4:CD004863. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004863.pub4. PubMed 
PMID: 24771408.  
123.  Doege C, Pritsch M, Fruhwald MC, Bauer J. An association between infantile haemangiomas and erythropoietin 
treatment in preterm infants. A rch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2012;97(1):F45 -9. Epub 2011/05/07. doi: 
10.1136/adc.2010.187344. PubMed PMID: 21546402.  
124.  Fauchere JC, Koller BM, Tschopp A, Dame C, Ruegger C, Bucher HU, et al. Safety of Early High -Dose Recombinant 
Erythropoietin for N europrotection in Very Preterm Infants. J Pediatr. 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2015.02.052. 
PubMed PMID: 25863661.  
125.  Leuchter RH, Gui L, Poncet A, Hagmann C, Lodygensky GA, Martin E, et al. Association between early administration 
of high -dose erythropoi etin in preterm infants and brain MRI abnormality at term -equivalent age. JAMA. 
2014;312(8):817 -24. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.9645. PubMed PMID: 25157725.  
126.  O'Gorman RL, Bucher HU, Held U, Koller BM, Huppi PS, Hagmann CF, et al. Tract -based spatial statist ics to assess 
the neuroprotective effect of early erythropoietin on white matter development in preterm infants. Brain. 2014. 
doi: 10.1093/brain/awu363. PubMed PMID: 25534356.  
127.  Aher SM, Ohlsson A. Late erythropoietin for preventing red blood cell trans fusion in preterm and/or low birth 
weight infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;4:CD004868. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004868.pub4. PubMed 
PMID: 24760628.  
128.  Aher SM, Ohlsson A. Early versus late erythropoietin for preventing red blood cell transfusion in preterm and/or 
low birth weight infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;10:CD004865. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD004865.pub3. PubMed PMID: 23076909.  
129.  Xu XJ, Huang HY, Chen HL. Erythropoietin and retinopathy of prematurity: a meta -analysis. Eur J Pedia tr. 2014. doi: 
10.1007/s00431 -014-2332 -4. PubMed PMID: 24849614.  
130.  Wu YW, Bauer LA, Ballard RA, Ferriero DM, Glidden DV, Mayock DE, et al. Erythropoietin for neuroprotection in 
neonatal encephalopathy: safety and pharmacokinetics. Pediatrics. 2012;130(4 ):683 -91. Epub 2012/09/26. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2012 -0498. PubMed PMID: 23008465; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3457622.  
131.  Ohls RK, Ehrenkranz RA, Wright LL, Lemons JA, Korones SB, Stoll BJ, et al. Effects of early erythropoietin therapy on 
the transfusion requ irements of preterm infants below 1250 grams birth weight: a multicenter, randomized, 
controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2001;108(4):934 -42. PubMed PMID: 11581447.  
132.  AAP. Screening examination of premature infants for retinopathy of prematurity. Pediatrics. 2006;117(2):572 -6. 
Epub 2006/02/03. doi: 10.1542/peds.2005 -2749. PubMed PMID: 16452383.  
133.  Dammann O, Naples M, Bednarek F, Shah B, Kuban KC, O'Shea TM, et al. SNAP -II and SNAPPE -II and the risk of 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 71 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 structural and functional brain disorders in extremely l ow gestational age newborns: the ELGAN study. 
Neonatology. 2010;97(2):71 -82. Epub 2009/08/13. doi: 10.1159/000232588. PubMed PMID: 19672122; PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC2790760.  
134.  Leviton A, Allred EN, Kuban KC, Hecht JL, Onderdonk AB, O'Shea T M, et al. M icrobiologic and histologic 
characteristics of the extremely preterm infant's placenta predict white matter damage and later cerebral palsy. 
the ELGAN study. Pediatric Research. 2010;67(1):95 -101. Epub 2009/09/12. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181bf5fab. 
PubMed PMID: 19745780; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2794973.  
135.  Leviton A, Dammann O, Engelke S, Allred E, Kuban KC, O'Shea TM, et al. The clustering of disorders in infants born 
before the 28th week of gestation. Acta Paediatrica. 2010;99(12):1795 -800. PubMed PMID : 20712837.  
136.  O'Shea TM, Allred EN, Kuban KC, Dammann O, Paneth N, Fichorova R, et al. Elevated concentrations of 
inflammation -related proteins in postnatal blood predict severe developmental delay at 2 years of age in extremely 
preterm infants. The Jou rnal of Pediatrics. 2012;160(3):395 -401 e4. Epub 2011/10/18. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.08.069. PubMed PMID: 22000304; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3279610.  
137.  Franz AR, Mihatsch WA, Sander S, Kron M, Pohlandt F. Prospective randomized trial of early versus l ate enteral iron 
supplementation in infants with a birth weight of less than 1301 grams. Pediatrics. 2000;106(4):700 -6. PubMed 
PMID: 11015511.  
138.  Howie SRC. Blood sample volumes in child health research: review of safe limits. Bulletin of the World Healt h 
Organization. 2011;89(1):46 -53. 
139.  Ment LR, Bada HS, Barnes P, Grant PE, Hirtz D, Papile LA, et al. Practice parameter: neuroimaging of the neonate: 
report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the Practice Comm ittee 
of the Child Neurology Society. Neurology. 2002;58(12):1726 -38. Epub 2002/06/27. PubMed PMID: 12084869.  
140.  Habas PA, Kim K, Corbett -Detig JM, Rousseau F, Glenn OA, Barkovich AJ, et al. A spatiotemporal atlas of MR 
intensity, tissue probability and shape of the fetal brain with application to segmentation. Neuroimage. 
2010;53(2):460 -70. Epub 2010/07/06. PubMed PMID: 20600970; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2930902.  
141.  Habas PA, Kim K, Rousseau F, Glenn OA, Barkovich AJ, Studholme C. Atlas -based segmentat ion of the germinal 
matrix from in utero clinical MRI of the fetal brain. Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv. 2008;11(Pt 1):351 -8. 
Epub 2008/11/05. PubMed PMID: 18979766; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3343876.  
142.  Rousseau F, Habas PA, Studholme C. A superv ised patch -based approach for human brain labeling. IEEE Trans Med 
Imaging. 2011;In Press.  
143.  Davatzikos C, Vaillant M, Resnick SM, Prince JL, Letovsky S, Bryan RN. A computerized approach for morphological 
analysis of the corpus callosum. J Comput Assis t Tomogr. 1996;20(1):88 -97. Epub 1996/01/01. PubMed PMID: 
8576488.  
144.  Friston K, Holmes A, Worsley K, Poline J, Frith C, Frackowiak RSJ. Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging: 
A general linear approach. Human Brain Mapping. 1995;2:189 -210.  
145. Nichols TE, Holmes AP. Nonparametric permutation tests for functional neuroimaging: a primer with examples. 
Human Brain Mapping. 2002;15(1):1 -25. Epub 2001/12/18. PubMed PMID: 11747097.  
146.  Habas PA, Scott JA, Roosta A, Rajagopalan V, Kim K, Rousseau F , et al. Early folding patterns and asymmetries of 
the normal human brain detected from in utero MRI. Cereb Cortex. 2011;In Press.  
147.  Rodriguez -Carranza CE, Mukherjee P, Vigneron D, Barkovich J, Studholme C. A framework for in vivo quantification 
of regional brain folding in premature neonates. Neuroimage. 2008;41(2):462 -78. Epub 2008/04/11. doi: S1053 -
8119(08)00031 -1 [pii]  10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.01.008. PubMed PMID: 18400518; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2741002.  
148.  Lopes A, Brodlie K. Improving the  robustness and accuracy of the marching cubes algorithm for isosurfacing. . IEEE 
Trans Vis Comput Graph. 2003;9:16 -29. 
149.  Kidokoro H, Neil JJ, Inder TE. New MR Imaging Assessment Tool to Define Brain Abnormalities in Very Preterm 
Infants at Term. AJNR A m J Neuroradiol. 2013. Epub 2013/04/27. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A3521. PubMed PMID: 
23620070.  
150.  Habas PA, Corbett -Detig JM, Kim K, Rousseau F, Glenn OA, Barkovich AJ, et al., editors. Global and regional patterns 
of tissue volume growth in the normal fetal br ain from in utero MRI. 16th Annual Meeting of the Organization for 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 72 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 Human Brain Mapping; 2010; Barcelona, Spain.  
151.  Jenkinson M, Smith S. A global optimisation method for robust affine registration of brain images. Med Image Anal. 
2001;5(2):143 -56. Epub 2 001/08/23. doi: S1361841501000366 [pii]. PubMed PMID: 11516708.  
152.  Jenkinson M. Fast, automated, N -dimensional phase -unwrapping algorithm. Magn Reson Med. 2003;49(1):193 -7. 
Epub 2003/01/02. doi: 10.1002/mrm.10354. PubMed PMID: 12509838.  
153.  Smith SM, Je nkinson M, Johansen -Berg H, Rueckert D, Nichols TE, Mackay CE, et al. Tract -based spatial statistics: 
voxelwise analysis of multi -subject diffusion data. Neuroimage. 2006;31(4):1487 -505. Epub 2006/04/21. doi: 
S1053 -8119(06)00138 -8 [pii]  10.1016/j.neuroimag e.2006.02.024. PubMed PMID: 16624579.  
154.  Richards T, Stevenson J, Crouch J, Johnson LC, Maravilla K, Stock P, et al. Tract -Based Spatial Statistics of Diffusion 
Tensor Imaging in Adults with Dyslexia. American Journal of Neuroradiology. 2008;29:1134 -9. 
155. Weaver KE, Richards TL, Liang O, Laurino MY, Samii A, Aylward EH. Longitudinal diffusion tensor imaging in 
Huntington's Disease. Exp Neurol. 2009;216(2):525 -9. Epub 2009/03/26. PubMed PMID: 19320010.  
156.  Heide AC, Richards TL, Alvord EC, Jr., Peterson  J, Rose LM. Diffusion imaging of experimental allergic 
encephalomyelitis. Magn Reson Med. 1993;29(4):478 -84. PubMed PMID: 8464364.  
157.  Richards TL, Alvord EC, Jr., He Y, Petersen K, Peterson J, Cosgrove S, et al. Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis 
in non -human primates: diffusion imaging of acute and chronic brain lesions. Mult Scler. 1995;1(2):109 -17. PubMed 
PMID: 9345461.  
158.  Chen G, Shi JX, Hang CH, Xie W, Liu J, Liu X. Inhibitory effect on cerebral inflammatory agents that accompany 
traumatic br ain injury in a rat model: a potential neuroprotective mechanism of recombinant human 
erythropoietin (rhEPO). Neurosci Lett. 2007;425(3):177 -82. PubMed PMID: 17825990.  
159.  Bednarek N, Svedin P, Garnotel R, Favrais G, Loron G, Schwendiman l, et al. Increas ed MMP -9 and TIMP -1 in mouse 
neonatal brain and plasma and in human neonatal plasma after hypoxia –ischemia: a potential marker of neonatal 
encephalopathy. Pediatr Res. 2012;71:63 -70. 
160.  Douglas -Escobar M, Yang C, Bennett J, Shuster J, Theriaque D, Leibov ici A, et al. A pilot study of novel biomarkers 
in neonates with hypoxic -ischemic encephalopathy. Pediatric Research. 2010;68(6):531 -6. Epub 2010/08/26. doi: 
10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181f85a03. PubMed PMID: 20736881.  
161.  Ehrenreich H, Kastner A, Weissenborn K, Streeter J, Sperling S, Wang KK, et al. Circulating damage marker profiles 
support a neuroprotective effect of erythropoietin in ischemic stroke patients. Mol Med. 2011. Epub 2011/09/14. 
doi: 10.2119/molmed.2011.00259. PubMed PMID: 21912808.  
162.  Ennen CS,  Huisman TA, Savage WJ, Northington FJ, Jennings JM, Everett AD, et al. Glial fibrillary acidic protein as a 
biomarker for neonatal hypoxic -ischemic encephalopathy treated with whole -body cooling. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2011;205(3):251 e1 -7. Epub 2011/07/26.  doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2011.06.025. PubMed PMID: 21784396.  
163.  Bembea MM, Savage W, Strouse JJ, Schwartz JM, Graham E, Thompson CB, et al. Glial fibrillary acidic protein as a 
brain injury biomarker in children undergoing extracorporeal membrane oxygenation . Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2011;12(5):572 -9. Epub 2010/11/09. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181fe3ec7. PubMed PMID: 21057367.  
164.  Honda M, Tsuruta R, Kaneko T, Kasaoka S, Yagi T, Todani M, et al. Serum glial fibrillary acidic protein is a highly 
specific biomarke r for traumatic brain injury in humans compared with S -100B and neuron -specific enolase. J 
Trauma. 2010;69(1):104 -9. Epub 2010/01/23. doi: 10.1097/TA.0b013e3181bbd485. PubMed PMID: 20093985.  
165.  Florio P, Luisi S, Moataza B, Torricelli M, Iman I, Hala M, et al. High urinary concentrations of activin A in asphyxiated 
full-term newborns with moderate or severe hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy. Clin Chem. 2007;53(3):520 -2. 
PubMed PMID: 17259240.  
166.  Florio P, Perrone S, Luisi S, Vezzosi P, Longini M, Marzocch i B, et al. Increased plasma concentrations of activin a 
predict intraventricular hemorrhage in preterm newborns. Clin Chem. 2006;52(8):1516 -21. Epub 2006/06/03. doi: 
10.1373/clinchem.2005.065979. PubMed PMID: 16740650.  
167.  Florio P, Reis FM, Severi FM, L uisi S, Imperatore A, Palumbo MA, et al. Umbilical cord serum activin A levels are 
increased in pre -eclampsia with impaired blood flow in the uteroplacental and fetal circulation. Placenta. 
2006;27(4 -5):432 -7. Epub 2005/07/30. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2005. 04.008. PubMed PMID: 16051348.  
168.  Florio P, Luisi S, Bruschettini M, Grutzfeld D, Dobrzanska A, Bruschettini P, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid activin a 
measurement in asphyxiated full -term newborns predicts hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy. Clin Chem. 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 73 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 2004;5 0(12):2386 -9. Epub 2004/11/26. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2004.035774. PubMed PMID: 15563489.  
169.  Laptook AR, O'Shea TM, Shankaran S, Bhaskar B. Adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes among extremely low 
birth weight infants with a normal head ultrasound: prevale nce and antecedents. Pediatrics. 2005;115(3):673 -80. 
PubMed PMID: 15741371.  
170.  Hintz SR, Kendrick DE, Vohr BR, Poole WK, Higgins RD. Changes in neurodevelopmental outcomes at 18 to 22 
months' corrected age among infants of less than 25 weeks' gestational  age born in 1993 -1999. Pediatrics. 
2005;115(6):1645 -51. Epub 2005/06/03. doi: 10.1542/peds.2004 -2215. PubMed PMID: 15930228.  
171.  Hack M, Taylor HG, Drotar D, Schluchter M, Cartar L, Wilson -Costello D, et al. Poor predictive validity of the Bayley 
Scales of Infant Development for cognitive function of extremely low birth weight children at school age. Pediatrics. 
2005;116(2):333 -41. PubMed PMID: 16061586.  
172.  Roberts G, Anderson PJ, Doyle LW. The stability of the diagnosis of developmental disability betw een ages 2 and 8 
in a geographic cohort of very preterm children born in 1997. Arch Dis Child. 2010;95(10):786 -90. Epub 2009/10/16. 
doi: 10.1136/adc.2009.160283. PubMed PMID: 19828882.  
173.  Schmidt B, Anderson PJ, Doyle LW, Dewey D, Grunau RE, Asztalos EV,  et al. Survival without disability to age 5 years 
after neonatal caffeine therapy for apnea of prematurity. JAMA. 2012;307(3):275 -82. Epub 2012/01/19. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2011.2024. PubMed PMID: 22253394.  
174.  Potharst ES, Houtzager BA, van Sonderen L, Tamm inga P, Kok JH, Last BF, et al. Prediction of cognitive abilities at 
the age of 5 years using developmental follow -up assessments at the age of 2 and 3 years in very preterm children. 
Dev Med Child Neurol. 2012;54(3):240 -6. Epub 2011/12/23. doi: 10.1111/j. 1469 -8749.2011.04181.x. PubMed 
PMID: 22188215.  
175.  Munck P, Niemi P, Lapinleimu H, Lehtonen L, Haataja L. Stability of cognitive outcome from 2 to 5 years of age in 
very low birth weight children. Pediatrics. 2012;129(3):503 -8. Epub 2012/03/01. doi: 10.1542/peds.2011 -1566. 
PubMed PMID: 22371467.  
176.  Bayley N. Bayley scales of infant and toddler development, third edition. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Assessment, 
Inc; 2006.  
177.  Vohr BR, Stephens BE, Higgins RD, Bann CM, Hintz SR, Das A, et al. Are Outco mes of Extremely Preterm Infants 
Improving? Impact of Bayley Assessment on Outcomes. The Journal of Pediatrics. 2012. Epub 2012/03/17. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2012.01.057. PubMed PMID: 22421261.  
178.  Msall ME. Measuring outcomes after extreme prematurity with  the Bayley -III Scales of infant and toddler 
development: a cautionary tale from Australia. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2010;164(4):391 -3. PubMed PMID: 
20368495.  
179.  Anderson PJ, De Luca CR, Hutchinson E, Roberts G, Doyle LW. Underestimation of developmenta l delay by the new 
Bayley -III Scale. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2010;164(4):352 -6. Epub 2010/04/07. doi: 
10.1001/archpediatrics.2010.20. PubMed PMID: 20368488.  
180.  Robertson CM, Hendson L, Biggs WS, Acton BV. Application of the Flynn effect for the Bayley III Scales. Arch Pediatr 
Adolesc Med. 2010;164(11):1072 -3; author reply 3. Epub 2010/11/03. doi: 10.1001/archpediatrics.2010.199. 
PubMed PMID: 21041604.  
181.  Msall ME. Overestimating neuroprotection in congenital heart disease: problems with Bayley III out comes. 
Pediatrics. 2011;128(4):e993 -4. Epub 2011/09/29. doi: 10.1542/peds.2011 -2166. PubMed PMID: 21949147.  
182.  Lowe JR, Erickson SJ, Schrader R, Duncan AF. Comparison of the Bayley II Mental Developmental Index and the 
Bayley III Cognitive Scale: are we measuring the same thing? Acta Paediatrica. 2012;101(2):e55 -8. Epub 
2011/11/08. doi: 10.1111/j.1651 -2227.2011.02517.x. PubMed PMID: 22054168.  
183.  Silveira RC, Filipouski GR, Goldstein DJ, O’Shea TM, Procianoy RS. Agreement between Bayley Scales Second and  
Third Edition Assessments of Very Low Birth Weight Infants. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine. 2012;In 
Press.  
184.  Kuban KC, O'Shea M, Allred E, Leviton A, Gilmore H, DuPlessis A, et al. Video and CD -ROM as a training tool for 
performing neuro logic examinations of 1 -year -old children in a multicenter epidemiologic study. J Child Neurol. 
2005;20(10):829 -31. Epub 2006/01/19. PubMed PMID: 16417880.  
185.  Kuban KC, Allred EN, O'Shea M, Paneth N, Pagano M, Leviton A. An algorithm for identifying and classifying cerebral 
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 74 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 palsy in young children. The Journal of Pediatrics. 2008;153(4):466 -72. Epub 2008/06/07. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2008.04.013. PubMed PMID: 18534210; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2581842.  
186.  Palisano RJ, Cameron D, Rosenbaum PL, Walter SD, Russell D. Stability of the gross motor function classification 
system. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2006;48(6):424 -8. Epub 2006/05/17. doi: 10.1017/S0012162206000934. PubMed 
PMID: 16700931.  
187.  Rosenbaum PL, Palisano RJ, Bartlett DJ, Galuppi BE, Russell DJ. Dev elopment of the Gross Motor Function 
Classification System for cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2008;50(4):249 -53. Epub 2008/03/06. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469 -8749.2008.02045.x. PubMed PMID: 18318732.  
188.  Johnson S, Wolke D, Hennessy E, Marlow N. Educationa l outcomes in extremely preterm children: 
neuropsychological correlates and predictors of attainment. Dev Neuropsychol. 2011;36(1):74 -95. Epub 
2011/01/22. doi: 10.1080/87565641.2011.540541. PubMed PMID: 21253992.  
189.  Johnson S, Marlow N. Preterm Birth and  Childhood Psychiatric Disorders. Pediatric Research. 2011. Epub 
2011/02/04. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e318212faa0. PubMed PMID: 21289534.  
190.  Mulder H, Pitchford NJ, Marlow N. Inattentive behaviour is associated with poor working memory and slow 
processing s peed in very pre -term children in middle childhood. Br J Educ Psychol. 2011;81(1):147 -60. Epub 
2011/03/12. doi: 10.1348/000709910X505527. PubMed PMID: 21391967.  
191.  Lind A, Korkman M, Lehtonen L, Lapinleimu H, Parkkola R, Matomaki J, et al. Cognitive and neuropsychological 
outcomes at 5 years of age in preterm children born in the 2000s. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2011;53(3):256 -62. Epub 
2010/12/21. doi: 10.1111/j.1469 -8749.2010.03828.x. PubMed PMID: 21166668.  
192.  Raz S, Debastos AK, Newman JB, Batton D. Extre me prematurity and neuropsychological outcome in the preschool 
years. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2010;16(1):169 -79. PubMed PMID: 19900351.  
193.  Limperopoulos C. Autism spectrum disorders in survivors of extreme prematurity. Clin Perinatol. 2009;36(4):791 -
805,  vi. PubMed PMID: 19944836.  
194.  Kuban KC, Allred EN, O'Shea TM, Paneth N, Westra S, Miller C, et al. Developmental correlates of head 
circumference at birth and two years in a cohort of extremely low gestational age newborns. The Journal of 
Pediatrics. 20 09;155(3):344 -9 e1 -3. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2803763.  
195.  Kontis D, Catani M, Cuddy M, Walshe M, Nosarti C, Jones D, et al. Diffusion tensor MRI of the corpus callosum and 
cognitive function in adults born preterm. Neuroreport. 2009;20(4):424 -8. Epub 20 09/02/17. doi: 
10.1097/WNR.0b013e328325a8f9. PubMed PMID: 19218872.  
196.  Gaddlin PO, Finnstrom O, Samuelsson S, Wadsby M, Wang C, Leijon I. Academic achievement, behavioural 
outcomes and MRI findings at 15 years of age in very low birthweight children. Act a Paediatrica. 2008;97(10):1426 -
32. Epub 2008/07/16. doi: 10.1111/j.1651 -2227.2008.00925.x. PubMed PMID: 18624991.  
197.  Nagy Z, Ashburner J, Andersson J, Jbabdi S, Draganski B, Skare S, et al. Structural correlates of preterm birth in the 
adolescent brain.  Pediatrics. 2009;124(5):e964 -72. PubMed PMID: 19858152.  
198.  Mathur AM, Neil JJ, Inder TE. Understanding brain injury and neurodevelopmental disabilities in the preterm infant: 
the evolving role of advanced magnetic resonance imaging. Semin Perinatol. 201 0;34(1):57 -66. PubMed PMID: 
20109973.  
199.  Wustenberg T, Begemann M, Bartels C, Gefeller O, Stawicki S, Hinze -Selch D, et al. Recombinant human 
erythropoietin delays loss of gray matter in chronic schizophrenia. Mol Psychiatry. 2010. PubMed PMID: 20479759.  
200.  Northam GB, Liegeois F, Chong WK, Wyatt JS, Baldeweg T. Total brain white matter is a major determinant of IQ in 
adolescents born preterm. Ann Neurol. 2011;69(4):702 -11. Epub 2011/03/11. doi: 10.1002/ana.22263. PubMed 
PMID: 21391229.  
201.  Woodward LJ , Clark CA, Pritchard VE, Anderson PJ, Inder TE. Neonatal white matter abnormalities predict global 
executive function impairment in children born very preterm. Dev Neuropsychol. 2011;36(1):22 -41. Epub 
2011/01/22. doi: 10.1080/87565641.2011.540530. PubMed PMID: 21253989.  
202.  Screening examination of premature infants for retinopathy of prematurity. Pediatrics. 2006;117(2):572 -6. 
PubMed PMID: 16452383.  
203.  The International Classification of Retinopathy of Prematurity revisited. Arch Ophthalmol. 2005;123(7):991 -9. 
PubMed PMID: 16009843.  
  Preterm Epo Neuropro tection Trial (PENUT  Trial)  
 
Page 75 of 75 PENUT Protocol  V6.1 October 14, 2019  
 204.  Fisher LD, Dixon DO, Herson J, Frankowski RK, Hearron MS, Peace KE. Intention to treat in clinical trials. In: Peace 
KE, editor. Statistical Issues in Drug Research and Development. New York: Marcel Dekker; 19 91. p. 331 -50. 
205.  Diggle PJ, Heagerty PJ, Liang KY, Zeger SL. Analysis of Longitudinal Data. Second Edition ed: Oxford University Press; 
2002.  
206.  Vermont Oxford Network ELBW Follow -up Report Birth Year 2008 All Centers [Internet]Sept 2011.  
207.  Volpe J J. Cerebellum of the premature infant: rapidly developing, vulnerable, clinically important. J Child Neurol. 
2009;24(9):1085 -104. PubMed PMID: 19745085; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2799249.  
208.  Limperopoulos C, Chilingaryan G, Guizard N, Robertson RL, du Ple ssis AJ. Cerebellar injury in the premature infant 
is associated with impaired growth of specific cerebral regions. Pediatr Res. 2010. Epub 2010/04/15. doi: 
10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181e1d032. PubMed PMID: 20389260.  
209.  Limperopoulos C, Bassan H, Gauvreau K, Ro bertson RL, Jr., Sullivan NR, Benson CB, et al. Does cerebellar injury in 
premature infants contribute to the high prevalence of long -term cognitive, learning, and behavioral disability in 
survivors? Pediatrics. 2007;120(3):584 -93. PubMed PMID: 17766532.  
210. Limperopoulos C, Soul JS, Gauvreau K, Huppi PS, Warfield SK, Bassan H, et al. Late gestation cerebellar growth is 
rapid and impeded by premature birth. Pediatrics. 2005;115(3):688 -95. PubMed PMID: 15741373.  
211.  Messerschmidt A, Pataraia A, Helmer H, K asprian G, Sauer A, Brugger PC, et al. Fetal MRI for prediction of neonatal 
mortality following preterm premature rupture of the fetal membranes. Pediatr Radiol. 2011;41(11):1416 -20. Epub 
2011/09/13. doi: 10.1007/s00247 -011-2199 -8. PubMed PMID: 21909717.  
212. Messerschmidt A, Fuiko R, Prayer D, Brugger PC, Boltshauser E, Zoder G, et al. Disrupted cerebellar development 
in preterm infants is associated with impaired neurodevelopmental outcome. Eur J Pediatr. 2008;167(10):1141 -7. 
Epub 2008/01/04. doi: 10.1007 /s00431 -007-0647 -0. PubMed PMID: 18172680.  
213.  Limperopoulos C, Robertson RL, Sullivan NR, Bassan H, du Plessis AJ. Cerebellar injury in term infants: clinical 
characteristics, magnetic resonance imaging findings, and outcome. Pediatr Neurol. 2009;41(1):1 -8. doi: 
10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2009.02.007. PubMed PMID: 19520266.  
214.  Tam EW, Rosenbluth G, Rogers EE, Ferriero DM, Glidden D, Goldstein RB, et al. Cerebellar hemorrhage on magnetic 
resonance imaging in preterm newborns associated with abnormal neurolo gic outcome. J Pediatr. 
2011;158(2):245 -50. Epub 2010/09/14. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.07.049. PubMed PMID: 20833401; PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC3010295.  
215.  O'Brien PC, Fleming TR. A multiple testing procedure for clinical trials. Biometrics. 1979;35(3):54 9-56. Epub 
1979/09/01. PubMed PMID: 497341.  
 
 
 