Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
 
Phase 2 Trial of Tremelimumab in Patients with Metastatic Uroth elial Cancer Previously 
Treated with PD-1/PD-L1 Blockade 
  
Sponsor Investigator 
Matthew D. Galsky, MD 
Icahn School of Medic ine at Mount Sinai 
Tisch Cancer Institute 
 
Co-Principal Investigator 
Neeraj Agarwal, MD 
University of Utah School of Medicine 
 
Statistician 
Menggang Yu, PhD 
 
Trial Management Provided by  
Hoosier Cancer Res earch Network, Inc. 
500 N. Meridian, Suite 100 
Indianapolis, IN 46204 
  
Trial Supported by  
AstraZeneca 
ESR-17-12779 
  
Investigational New Drug (IND) # 138594 
  
 
 
Initial Protocol Version Date:  02JUL2018  
Protocol Amendment Version Date:  28MAR2019    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 Confidential Page 2 of 69 PROTOCOL SIGNATURE PAGE 
 
Phase 2 Trial of Tremelimumab in Patients with Metastatic Uroth elial Cancer Previously 
Treated with PD-1/PD-L1 Blockade  
 
VERSION DATE: 28MAR2019 
I confirm I have read this pr otocol, I understand it, and I wil l work according to this protocol and 
to the ethical principles stated in the latest version of the D eclaration of Helsink i, the applicable 
guidelines for good clinical practi ces, whichever provides the greater protection of the 
individual. I will accept the mon itor’s overseeing of the study . I will promptly submit the 
protocol to applicable institutional review board(s).  
 
  ____________________________________ ________________________ 
 S i g n a t u r e  o f  S i t e  I n v e s t i g a t o r        D a t e    ____________________________________  Site Investigator Name (printed)   ____________________________________ 
 Site Investigator Title 
  ____________________________________  Name of Facility   ____________________________________  Location of Facility (City and State)    
 PLEASE COMPLETE AND EM AIL A COPY TO HCRN 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 Confidential Page 3 of 69 SYNOPSIS  
TITLE Phase 2 Trial of Tremelimumab in P atients with Metastatic Uroth elial 
Cancer Previousl y Treated with PD-1/PD-L1 Blockade 
SHORT TITLE Phase 2 Trial of Tremelimumab i n previously treated urothelial cancer 
PHASE  2 
OBJECTIVES Primary Objective: 
Estimate the objective response rate (according to RECIST 1.1) with 
tremelimumab in subjects with met astatic urothelial cancer prev iously 
treated with PD-1/PD-L1 blockade  Secondary Objectives: 
 Describe the safety of treatment 
 Describe the disease control ra te (objective response + stable 
disease)  
 Describe the duration of response  
 Describe the progression-free survival  
 Describe the overall survival 
 
Correlative/Exploratory Objectives: 
 Explore the relations hip between PD-L1 expression and response 
to treatment 
 Explore the relations hip between gene expres sion signatures and  
response to treatment 
 Explore the relations hip between genomic alterations including 
mutational load and response to treatment 
 Explore the impact of treatme nt on the peripheral blood immune 
cells and other circulating biomarkers 
 Explore the relations hip between the microbiome and adverse 
events and outcomes with treatment 
 
STUDY DESIGN This is a phase II trial designe d to estimate the activity of s ingle agent 
tremelimumab in subjects with met astatic urothelial cancer with  disease 
progression despite prior treatm ent with PD-1/PD-L1 blockade. T he 
primary endpoint is objective re sponse rate and the study will employ a 
Simon’s 2-stage design. 
 
KEY ELIGIBILITY 
CRITERIA; See Section 3 for ALL eligibility criteria 1. Histologically or cytologicall y documented urothelial cancer. L ocally 
advanced (T4b, any N; or any T, N 2− 3) or metastatic disease (M 1, 
Stage IV) (also termed TCC or UCC  of the urinary tract; includi ng 
renal pelvis, ureters, ur inary bladder, and urethra)  Subjects with 
mixed histologies are eligible p rovided that the predominant 
component is urothelial cancer.  Locally advanced bladder cancer 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 Confidential Page 4 of 69 must be inoperable on the basis  of involvement of pelvic sidewa ll or 
adjacent viscera (clinical Sta ge T4b) or bulky nodal metastasis  
(N2−N3). 
 
2. Representative formalin-fixed pa raffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor 
specimens in paraffin blocks (bloc ks preferred) or at least 15 
unstained slides. If archival ti ssue is not available and the s ubject is 
undergoing a standard of care bi opsy, tissue from the biopsy is  
required to be submitted for correlative analyses. Subjects wit hout 
adequate baseline tumor tissue may be considered for enrollment  on a 
case by case basis after discus sion with the sponsor-investigat or.  
	
3. Measurable disease according to RECIST 1.1 within 28 days prior  to 
registration. At least 1 lesion, not  previously irradiated, tha t can be 
accurately measured at baseline as ≥10 mm in the longest diamet er 
(except lymph nodes, which must  have short axis ≥15 mm) with 
computed tomography (CT) (preferred) or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) scans, preferabl y with IV contrast, and that is s uitable 
for accurate repeated measurements as per RECIST 1.1 guidelines ; 
lesions in a previously irradiate d field can be used as a measu rable 
disease provided that there ha s been demonstrated progression i n the 
lesion 
	
4. A subject with prior brain metast asis may be considered if they  have 
completed their treatment for br ain metastasis at least 4 weeks  prior 
to study registration, have been o ff of corticosteroids for ≥ 2  weeks, 
and are asymptomatic 
 
5. Subjects must have progressed despit e prior treatment with anti -PD-
1/PD-L1 antibody therapy. Subject s must not have progressed wit hin 
2 months of starting prior ant i-PD-1/PD-L1 antibody therapy. 
Subjects must have received at l east 1 line of prior systemic t herapy. 
Subjects must not have experience d a toxicity that led to perma nent 
discontinuation of prior immunothe rapy. All AEs while receiving  
prior immunotherapy must have c ompletely resolved or resolved t o 
baseline prior to screening for  this study with the exception o f 
endocrine related AEs that are stable on replacement therapy (e .g., 
steroids, thyroid hormone) whic h may be considered eligible but  must 
be discussed with the s ponsor-investigator. 
 
6. Prior cancer treatment must be c ompleted at least 28 days or 5 half-
lives (whichever is shorter) pr ior to first dose of study drug.  Subjects 
must have recovered from all reve rsible acute toxic effects of the 
regimen (other than alopeci a) to ≤ Grade 1 or baseline. 
 
7. Adequate or gan function per screenin g labs
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 Confidential Page 5 of 69 8. Cannot have QT interval correcte d for heart rate  using Frideric ia’s 
formula (QTcF) ≥470 ms calculate d. Any clinically significant 
abnormalities detected require tri plicate ECG results and a mea n 
QTcF< 470 ms calculated from 3 ECG s obtained over a brief perio d 
(eg, 30 minutes) 
 
STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 A Simon’s 2-stage design will  be applied. The null hypothesis t hat the 
true response rate is 2% will be tested against a one-sided alt ernative. In 
the first stage, 18 subjects will be accrued. If there are 0 re sponses in these 
18 subjects, enrollment will be stopped. Otherwise, 10 addition al subjects 
will be accrued for a total of  28. The null hypothesis will be rejected if 3 
or more responses (complete/p artial) are observed in 28 subject s and 
further investigation will be w arranted. This design yields a t ype I error 
rate of 0.02 and power of 80% when the  true response rate is 15 % or 
lar
ger. 
TOTAL  NUMBER OF SUBJECTS N = Approximately 28  
ESTIMATED 
ENROLLMENT PERIOD Estimated 12 months 
ESTIMATED STUDY 
DURATION  Estimated 24 months 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 Confidential Page 6 of 69 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Schema ........................................................ ............................................................... ........ 7	
1.	Background and Rationale ...................................... ............................................... 8 	
2.	Study Objectives and Endpoints................................. .......................................... 12 	
3.	Eligibility Criteria .......................................... ........................................................ 13 	
4.	Subject Registration........................................... .................................................... 19 	
5.	Treatment Plan................................................. ...................................................... 19 	
6.	Toxicities and Dose Delays/Dose Modifications ................. ................................. 23 	
7.	Study Calendar & Evaluations .................................. ........................................... 26 	
8.	Biospecimen Studies and Procedures ............................ ....................................... 30 	
9.	Criteria for Disease Evaluation ............................... ............................................. 32 	
10.	Drug Information .............................................. ..................................................... 36 	
11	Adverse Events ................................................ ....................................................... 37 	
12	Statistical Methods ........................................... ...................................................... 43 	
13	Trial Management .............................................. ................................................... 45 	
14.	Data Handling and Record Keeping .............................. ...................................... 46 	
15	Ethics ........................................................ ...............................................................  47	
16	References .................................................... ........................................................... 48 	
Appendix 1 .................................................... ............................................................... .... 50	
 
    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-297 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 7 of 69 SCHEMA 
 
 
 
 
		 

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 Confidential Page 8 of 69 1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
 1.1 Disease Background 
Each year in the United Stat es, over 60,000 patients succumb to  metastatic urothelial cancer. 
Standard first-line treatment for metastatic urothelial cancer includes platinum-based 
chemotherapy, regimens characterized by a relatively high respo nse proportion but for the 
majority of patients, insufficien t response durations. Given th at a large subset of patients with 
metastatic urothelial cancer treated with first-line platinum b ased chemotherapy regimens are 
candidates for further treatment, several novel therapeutic app roaches have been explored over 
the last several decades. However, until 2016, there had been n o treatments approved in this 
setting by the United States Food a nd Drug Administration. The development of immune 
checkpoint blockade has recently changed the landscape of treat ment for metastatic urothelial 
cancer.       1.2 Immune checkpoint blockade in advanced urothelial cancer 
 1.2.1 PD-1/PD-L1 blockade in advanced urothelial cancer Several phase 1-3 trials have  now established the activity and safety of PD-1/PD-L1 blockade in 
patients with metastatic urothelial cancer (Table 1). Collectiv ely, these trials demonstrate durable 
responses are achieved in approxi mately 15-25% of patients with  metastatic urothelial cancer 
with grade 3-4 adverse events o ccurring in approximately 5-15% of patients. Based on these 
findings, as of 5/2017, five PD-1/P D-L1 inhibitors had been app roved by the United States Food 
and Drug Administration for the t reatment of patients with meta static urothe lial cancer and has 
been integrated into standard therapy.   
Table 1. Major trials exploring P D-1/PD-L1 blockade in patients  with metastatic urothelial 
cancer  
Reference Drug Antibody Target Setting Phase N Response 
Rate 
Balar, 
Lancet, 20161 Atezolizumab Humanized 
IgG1 PDL-1 First line 
cis-
ineligiblePhase II 119 24% 
Balar, ESMO, 
20162 Pembrolizumab Human IgG4 PD-1 First line 
cis-
ineligiblePhase II 100 24% 
Rosenberg, Lancet, 
20163 Atezolizumab Humanized 
IgG1 PDL-1 Post 
platinum Phase II 310 16% 
Sharma, Lancet 
Oncology, 20164 Nivolumab Human 
IgG4 PD-1 Post 
platinum Phase II 270 20% 
Bellmunt, NEJM, 
20175 Pembrolizumab Human IgG4 PD-1 Post 
platinum Phase II 270 21% 
Plimack, Lancet 
Oncology, 20176 Pembrolizumab Human IgG4 PD-1 Post 
platinum Phase I 
basket 29 28% 
Massard, JCO, 
20167 Durvalumab Human 
IgG1 PDL-1 Post 
platinum Phase I 
basket 42 31% 
Apolo, JCO, 20178 Avelumab Human IgG1 PD-L1 Post 
platinum Phase I 
basket 44 16% 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 Confidential Page 9 of 69 1.2.2 CTLA-4 blockade in ad vanced urothelial cancer 
Though extensive studies have r apidly establis hed proof of conc ept for immune checkpoint 
blockade with PD-1/PD-L1 blocka de in advanced urothelial cancer  leading to integration into 
standard treatment, CTLA-4 blocka de has been understudied in th is disease. Blocking the 
interaction between CTLA-4 e xpressed on T lymphocytes, and B7 f amily molecules expressed 
on antigen-presenting cells, has  been shown to augment T cell a ctivation, prolif eration, and anti-
tumor immunity. In a syngeneic m urine bladder cancer model, CTL A-4 blockade induced tumor 
regression, improved survival, and increased levels of tumor-re active T cells.9   
 A “window of opportunity” study ex plored the pharmacodynamic ef fects of the CTLA-4 
antibody, ipilimumab, administere d prior to radical cystectomy in 12 patients with localized 
invasive urothelial c ancer of the bladder.
10 This study demonstrated infil tration of T cells in the 
post-ipilimumab cystectomy speci mens. A phase II trial has expl ored gemcitabine, cisplatin, plus 
ipilimumab in patients with m etastatic urothelial cancer.11 This study demonstrated 
pharmacodynamics effects and unusual response kinetics suggesti ve of benefit with the addition 
of CTLA-4 blockade.  Preliminary results of the fir st study to explore single-agent CTLA-4 blockade in patients with 
metastatic urothelial cancer wer e reported at the Society for I mmunotherapy of Cancer 2017 
meeting. Sharma et al reported the results of a phase 2 multice nter study exploring 
tremelimumab monotherapy in patients with advanced solid tumors , including patients with 
advanced urothelial cancer ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).
12 Among 32 patients with met astatic urothelial 
cancer enrolled, the confirmed object ive response rate was 18.8 % (95% CI 7.2-36.4) with 2 
complete responses and 4 partial responses; the median duration  of response was not estimable 
and all patients with confirmed C R or PR had disease control at  12 months.  
 
1.2.3 CLTA-4 blockade may be non-cross resistant with single ag ent PD-1/PD-L1 
blockade in advanced urothelial cancer Given non-overlapping mechanis ms of action, and potential syner gy, emerging data suggest that 
single agent CTLA-4 blockade ma y be active in patients with dis ease progression d espite prior 
single-agent PD-1/PD-L1 blockade . Such findings are critical as  only 15-25% of patients with 
metastatic urothelia l cancer respond to singl e-agent PD-1/PD-L1  blockade and the development 
of additional regimens with the  potential to induce durable res ponses in this disease is urgently 
needed.   Preliminary results of a phase 2 study of ipilimumab added to n ivolumab, in patients with 
metastatic urothelia l cancer progressing desp ite single-agent n ivolumab, were presented at the 
2017 ASCO Genitourinary Cancer Symposium.
13 Ten patients who were refractory to nivolumab 
monotherapy were treated with t he combination of ipilimumab (1 mg/kg) and nivolumab (3 
mg/kg). Among these 10 patients, 1 p atient achieved a partial r esponse and three additional 
patients achieved stable disease.   Taken together, the findings outli ned above support the need to  further dissect t he potential role 
of CTLA-4 blockade alone in patien ts with metastatic urothelial  cancer progressing despite prior 
treatment with a PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitor.    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 10 of 69 1.3 Tremelimumab 
Tremelimumab, a CTLA-4 mAb of th e immunoglobulin G 2 kappa isot ype, is an 
immunomodulatory therapy that is being developed by AstraZeneca  for use in the treatment of 
cancer. CTLA-4 is a critical regul atory signal for T-cell expan sion and activation following an 
immune response, and it serves as a natural braki ng mechanism t hat maintains T-cell 
homeostasis. During T-cell activ ation, T-cells upregulate CTLA- 4, which binds to B7 ligands on 
APCs, sending an inhibitory signa l that limits T -cell activatio n. Tremelimumab blocks the 
inhibitory signal re sulting from CTLA- 4 binding to B7, leading to indirect prolongation and 
enhancement of T-cell activati on and expansion. Thus, the mecha nism of action of 
tremelimumab is indirect and i s applied through enhancing T-cel l-mediated immune response. 
 An extensive program of non-clinic al and clinical studies has b een conducted for tremelimumab 
both as monotherapy and combina tion therapy with conventional a nticancer agents to support 
various cancer indications usi ng different dose schedules. To d ate tremelimumab has been given 
to more than 1500 patients as pa rt of ongoing studies either as  monotherapy or in combination 
with other anticancer agents. D etails on the saf ety profile of tremelimumab monotherapy are 
summarized in Section. Refer to t he current tremelimumab Invest igator’s Brochure for a 
complete summary of non-clinic al and clinical information inclu ding safety, efficacy and 
pharmacokinetics. Refer to the tre melimumab Investigator’s Broc hure for a complete summary 
of non-clinical and clin ical information. 
 1.4 Rationale 
A prospective trial to assess the activity of tremelimumab in p atients with metastatic urothelial 
cancer progressive despite prior PD -1/PD-L1 blockade is support ed by the following lines of 
evidence: 
 
1. Immune checkpoint blockade has changed the landscape of treatme nt for metastatic 
urothelial cancer, a d isease without prior t reatment advances i n decades. 
2. Single-agent PD-1/PD-L1 blocka de results in durable responses i n ~15-20% of patients with 
metastatic urothelial cancer.  
3. Single-agent tremelimumab has shown similar response proportion s to PD-1/PD-L1 blockade 
in metastatic urothelial ca ncer in a small phase 2 study. 
4. The mechanism of action of CTL A-4 blockade and PD-1/PD-L1 block ade are non-
overlapping and at least additi ve activity has been observed wi th combination therapy across 
several malignancies.  
5. Treatment of patients with metasta tic urothelial cancer progres sing despite prior PD-1/PD-L1 
blockade is a major unmet need.  
1.5 Rationale for dose/schedule 
An extensive program of non-clinic al and clinical studies has b een conducted for tremelimumab 
both as monotherapy and combina tion therapy with conventional a nticancer agents to support 
various cancer indications usi ng different dose schedules. A to tal of 34 sponsored clinical studies 
have been conducted as part of the  tremelimumab clinical develo pment program. Of these, 13 
studies have completed and 21 are ongoing. Eight tremelimumab m onotherapy studies have been 
completed and 3 are ongoing. As of t he data cutoff date of 24 J anuary 2016, 962 patients 
received tremelimumab in com pleted monotherapy studies and 380 patients in the Phase IIb 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 11 of 69 monotherapy study (D4880C00003;  DETERMINE). Study D4881C00024 i s an ongoing rollover 
study, which provides continued a ccess to treatment to 37 patie nts treated in prior completed 
studies. In the third ongoi ng monotherapy study (D4884C00001), 44 patients have been treated 
as of the data cutoff date. I n addition, approximately 80 patie nts have been treated with 
tremelimumab in monotherapy arms of combination studies. Five s tudies of tremelimumab in 
combination with other anticancer a gents have been completed an d 18 are ongoing. In total, 
approximately 250 patients with a v ariety of tumor types have r eceived tremelimumab in 
combination with other anticancer  agents in these studies. 
 In patients, tremelimumab exhi bits linear (dose-proportional) P K following IV infusion. The 
estimate of clearance (CL), volum e of distribution at steady st ate (Vss), and terminal-phase half-
life is 0.132 mL/h/kg, 81.2 mL/kg and 22.1 days, respectively. These values are consistent with 
those of natural IgG2.  Across the clinical development  program for tremelimumab, a pat tern of efficacy has emerged 
that is similar to that of the  related anti-CTLA-4 antibody, ip ilimumab. In patients who respond, 
the responses are generally dur able, lasting several months eve n in patients with aggressive 
tumors such as refractory metas tatic melanoma. Some patients ma y have what is perceived to be 
progression of their disease i n advance of deve loping disease s tabilization or a tumor response.  
 The target trough concentration of t remelimumab is estimated to  be approximately 30 μg/mL, 
based on enhanced interleukin (IL )-2 release (in vitro) and ant itumor activity (in vivo) in 
preclinical studies. PK simulati ons indicate that, following a dose of 10 mg/kg q4w for 6 months, 
approximately 90% of patients are expected to be above this tar get level of 30 μg/mL during the 
induction phase. Tremelimuma b at a dose of 10 mg/kg q4w for 6 m onths followed by 10 mg/kg 
every 90 days is expected to yield P K exposures similar to thos e of the related anti-CTLA-4 
mAb ipilimumab, given at a dose of 10 mg/kg every 3 weeks (q3w)  for 4 cycles (12 weeks) 
followed by 10 mg/kg every 3 months  (beginning on Week 24), the  dosing regimen that was 
tested in the pivotal first-line melanoma trial.  Retrospective analyses of the Phase I and II tremelimumab melan oma studies show an 
improvement in OS for patients w ho were able to achieve a highe r tremelimumab exposure, as 
measured by the area under the plasma drug concentration-time c urve (AUC). The median OS 
was significantly longer in t he high-AUC group (15.3 months; N= 164) versus the low- AUC 
group (6.0 months; N=163) (based on the median value of AUC [10 3570 μ.h /mL]). This 
difference in OS corresponds t o a hazard ratio (HR) of 0.41 (p< 0.001), and the estimated survival 
rates in these 2 groups were 59% v ersus 29%, respectively, at 1  year. Additionally, a 
retrospective exposure and sur vival analysis of 293 patients tr eated with tremelimumab in a 
Phase III study in patients with m elanoma showed better OS in p atients with higher exposure. 
The median OS was 18.4 months  for the high-AUC group (≥123665 μ g.h /mL) compared to 9.0 
months for the low-AUC gr oup (<123665 μ.h/mL) (HR 0.5; p<0.001) . Tremelimumab 
monotherapy at a dose of 750 mg q4 w for 7 doses (cycles) follow ed by 750 mg q12w for 2 
additional doses (cycles) is equivalent to 10 mg/kg tremelimuma b monotherapy with the same 
dosing schedule. Therefore, the c urrent study will utilize the following dosing regimen: 
Tremelimumab 750 mg once every 4 weeks for up to 7 doses.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 12 of 69 2. STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 
 2.1 Objectives 
 2.1.1 Primary Objective 
Estimate the objective response rate (RECIST 1.1) with tremelim umab in subjects with 
metastatic urothelial cancer prev iously treated with PD-1/PD-L1  blockade 
 2.1.2 Secondary Objectives 
 Describe the safety of the study treatment 
 Describe the disease control ra te (objective response + stable disease)  
 Describe the duration of response  
 Describe the progression-free survival  
 Describe the overall survival  
 2.1.3 Correlative/Exploratory Objectives 
 Explore the relations hip between PD-L1 expression and response to treatment 
 Explore the relations hip between gene expres sion signatures and  response to treatment 
 Explore the relations hip between genomic alterations including mutational load and 
response to treatment 
 Explore the impact of treatme nt on the peripheral blood immune cells and other 
circulating biomarkers 
 Explore the relations hip between the microbiome and adverse eve nts and outcomes with 
treatment 
 2.2 Endpoints 
 2.2.1 Primary Endpoint 
Objective Response rate a s determined by RECIST 1.1 
 2.2.2 Secondary Endpoints 
 Safety will be determined according to the NCI Common Terminolo gy Criteria for 
Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) v4.03 
 The disease control rate is the rate of objective response and stable disease as determined 
by RECIST 1.1 
 Duration of response will be the time from the first documentat ion of response to the time 
of progression  
 Progression-free survival which i s defined as the time from tre atment initiation to death 
or progression, depending on which occurs first 
 Overall survival is defined as the time from treatment initiati on to death  
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 13 of 69 3. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
 3.1 Inclusion Criteria 
 1. Written informed consent and HIP AA authorization for release  of personal health 
information prior to registration. NOTE:   HIPAA authorization may be included in the 
informed consent or obtained separately. 
 2. Age ≥ 18 years at the time of consent.  3. ECOG Performance Status of  0 or 1 within 14 days prior to re gistration. 
 4. Histologically or cytological ly documented urothelial cancer . Locally advanced (T4b, any N; 
or any T, N 2−3) or metastatic dis ease (M1, Stage IV) (also ter med TCC or UCC of the 
urinary tract; including renal pe lvis, ureters, urinary bladder , and urethra)  Subjects with 
mixed histologies are eligible pr ovided that the predominant co mponent is urothelial cancer. 
Locally advanced bladder cancer must be inoperable on the basis  of involvement of pelvic 
sidewall or adjacent viscera (c linical Stage T4b) or bulky noda l metastasis (N2−N3). 
 5. Representative formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor  specimens in paraffin blocks 
(blocks preferred) or at least  15 unstained slides. If archival  tissue is not available and the 
subject is undergoing a standar d of care biopsy, tissue from th e biopsy is required to be 
submitted for correlative analyses. Subjects without adequate b aseline tumor tissue may be 
considered for enrollment on a case by case basis after discuss ion with the sponsor-
investigator.  
 6. Measurable disease according to RECIST 1.1 within 28 days prior  to registration. At least 1 
lesion, not previously irradiate d, that can be accurately measu red at baseline as ≥10 mm in 
the longest diameter (except ly mph nodes, which must have short  axis ≥15 mm) with 
computed tomography (CT) (preferred) or magnetic resonance imag ing (MRI) scans, 
preferably with IV contrast, and that is suitable for accurate repeated measurements as per 
RECIST 1.1 guidelines; l esions in a previously irradiated field  can be used as a measurable 
disease provided that there ha s been demonstrated progression i n the lesion. 
 7. A subject with prior brain metast asis may be considered if they  have completed their 
treatment for brain metastasis at least 4 weeks prior to study registration, have been off of 
corticosteroids for ≥ 2 weeks, and are asymptomatic  
8. Subjects must have progressed despit e prior treatment with anti -PD-1/PD-L1 antibody 
therapy. In addition, subjects must meet the following criteria : 
 Subjects must not have progresse d within 2 months of starting p rior anti-PD-1/PD-L1 
antibody therapy.  
 Subjects must have received at l east 1 line of prior systemic t herapy.  
 Must not have experienced a toxic ity that led to permanent disc
ontinuation of prior 
immunotherapy.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 14 of 69  All AEs while receiving prior im munotherapy must have completel y resolved or 
resolved to baseline prior t o screening for this study with the  exception of endocrine 
related AEs that are stable on r eplacement therapy (e.g., stero ids, thyroid hormone) 
which may be considered eligible but must be discussed with the  sponsor-investigator. 
 Must not have experienced a ≥ Gra de 3 immune related AE or an i mmune related 
neurologic (neuro-muscular) or  ocular AE of any grade while rec eiving prior 
immunotherapy. NOTE : Subjects with endocrine AE of ≤ Grade 2 are permitted to 
enroll if they are stably maintained on appropriate replacement  therapy and are 
asymptomatic. Must not have r equired the use of additional immu nosuppression other 
than corticosteroids for the management of an AE, not have expe rienced recurrence of 
an AE if re-challenged, and not cu rrently require maintenance d oses of > 10 mg 
prednisone or equivalent per day. 
 Patients with Gr 3 AST/ALT elev ation < 8 fold that resolved wit h steroids without 
additional immunosuppression can be included (Patients who expe rienced Hy’s law on 
PD-1/L1 therapy will be excluded) 
 9. Prior cancer treatment must be c ompleted at least 28 days or 5 half-lives (whichever is 
shorter) prior to first dose  of study drug. Subjects must have recovered from all reversible 
acute toxic effects of the regim en (other than alopecia) to ≤ G rade 1 or baseline. 
 10. Demonstrate adequate organ func tion as defined in the table bel ow. All screening labs to be 
obtained within 14 days pri or to registration.  
 
System Laboratory Value 
Hematological  
Absolute Neutrophil Count (ANC) ≥ 1500/m m3 
Hemoglobin (Hgb) ≥ 9 g/dL  
Renal  
Calculated creatinine clearance1or creatinine ≥ 30 cc/min or creatinine ≤ 1.5  
Hepatic  
Bilirubin ≤ 1.5 × upper limit of normal (ULN) 
This will not apply to 
subjects with confirmed Gilbert’s syndrome 
(persistent or recurrent hyperbilirubinemia [predominantly unconjugated bilirubin] in the absence of evidence of hemolysis or hepatic pathology), who may be considered for enrollment after 
discussion with the Sponsor Investigato
r 
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)  ≤ 2.5 × ULN (≤ 5 x ULN for subjects with 
hepatic metastases  
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)  ≤ 2.5 × ULN (≤ 5 x ULN for subjects with 
hepatic metastases  
1 Cockcroft-Gault formula  will be used to calculate creatin ine clearance or 24 urine coll ection for 
creatinine can be utilized 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 15 of 69 11. Evidence of postmenopausal statu s or negative urinary or serum pregnancy test for female 
premenopausal subjects. Women w ill be considered postmenopausal  if they have been 
amenorrheic for 12 months without  an alternative medical cause.  The following age-specific 
requirements apply: 
 Women < 50 years of age would be c onsidered postmenopausal if t hey have been 
amenorrheic for 12 months or m ore following cessation of exogen ous 
hormonal treatments and if they ha ve luteinizing  hormone and fo llicle-stimulating 
hormone levels in the postmenopaus al range for the institution or underwent surgical 
sterilization (bilat eral oophorectomy, bilateral salpingectomy,  or hysterectomy). 
 Women ≥ 50 years of age would be c onsidered postmenopausal if t hey have been 
amenorrheic for 12 months or m ore following cessation of all ex ogenous hormonal 
treatments, had radiation-indu ced oophorectomy with last menses  >1 year ago, had 
chemotherapy-induced menopause w ith >1 year interval since last  menses, or 
underwent surgical sterilizati on (bilateral oophorectomy, bilat eral salpingectomy, or 
hysterectomy)  
12. Females of childbearing potential  who are sexually active with a non-sterilized male partner 
must be willing to abstain from  heterosexual activity or to use  1 highly of effective method of 
contraception from the time of informed consent until 90 days a fter the last dose of 
tremelimumab. Non-sterilized male  partners of a female patient must use male condom plus 
spermicide throughout this period. See Table 2 for acceptable c ontraceptive methods.  
 13. Non-sterilized males who are sex ually active with a female part ner of childb earing potential 
must use a male condom plus spermicide from screening through 9 0 days after receipt of the 
final dose of tremelimumab. Fema le partners (of childbearing po tential) of male subjects 
must also use a highly effectiv e method of contraception throug hout this period. 
 
14. Must have life expectancy of ≥ 12 weeks. 
 3.2 Exclusion Criteria 
 1. Pregnant or breastfeeding ( NOTE:  breast milk cannot be stored f or future use while the 
mother is being treated on study).  
2. Known additional malignancy that is active and/or progressive r equiring treatment. Patients 
with incidental histologic findi ngs of prostate cancer (tumor/n ode/metastasis stage of T1a or 
T1b or prostate-specific antig en <10) who have not received hor
monal treatment may be 
included, pending a discussion with  the sponsor-investigator 
 
3. Treatment with any investigati onal drug within 28 days prior to  registration.  
 
4. Prior treatment with an anti-C TLA-4 antibody, including tremeli mumab 
 
5. Any unresolved toxicity National Ca ncer Institute (NCI) CTCAE V ersion 4.03 Grade ≥ 2 
from previous anticancer thera py with the exception of alopecia , vitiligo, and laboratory 
values defined in the inclusion criteria. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 16 of 69  Subjects with Grade ≥ 2 neuropa thy will be evaluated on a case- by-case basis after 
consultation with the Sponsor Investigator 
 Subjects with irreversible toxic ity not reasonably expected to be exacerbated by 
treatment with tremelimumab ( e.g., hearing loss) may be include d after consultation 
with the sponsor-investigator 
 
6. Any concurrent chemotherapy, inv estigational product, biologic,  or hormonal therapy for 
cancer treatment. Concurrent use  of hormonal therapy for non-ca ncer related conditions (e.g., 
hormone replacement therapy) is acceptable. Note: Local treatme nt of isolated lesions, 
excluding target lesions, for palliative intent is acceptable ( e.g., local surger y or radiotherapy) 
 
7. Radiation therapy w ithin 14 days of first  dose of study drug 
 
8. Major surgical proce dure within 28 days prio r to first dose of study treatment 
 
9. History of allogeneic organ trans plantation that requires use o f immunosuppressive agents 
 
10. Active or prior documented autoi mmune of inflammatory disorders  (including but not 
limited to inflammatory bowel dise ase [eg, colitis or Crohn’s d isease], diverticulitis [with the 
exception of diverticulosis], sys temic lupus erythematosus, Sar coidosis syndrome 
[granulomatosis with polyangiitis ], Graves’ disease, rheumatoid  arthritis, hypophysitis, 
uveitis, etc). The following are e xceptions to this criterion: 
 Subjects with vitiligo 
 Subjects with hypothyroidism (e .g., following Hashimoto syndrom e) stable on 
hormone replacement 
 Any chronic skin condition that doe s not require systemic thera py 
 Subjects without active disease in the last 5 years may be cons idered for enrollment 
after discussion with the  sponsor-investigator 
 Subjects with celiac disease c ontrolled by diet alone may be co nsidered for 
enrollment after discussion w ith the sponsor-investigator 
 
11. QT interval correcte d for heart rate using F ridericia’s formula  (QTcF) ≥470 ms calculated. 
Any clinically significant abnorma lities detected require tripl icate ECG results and a mean 
QTcF <470 ms calculated from 3 ECG s obtained over a brief perio d (eg, 30 minutes) 
 
12. Past medical history of Interst itial Lung Disease (ILD), drug-i nduced ILD, radiation 
pneumonitis which required steroid treatment, or any evidence o f clinically active interstitial 
lung disease.  
13. History of active primary immunodeficiency 
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 17 of 69 14. Active infection, including tuberc ulosis (clinical evaluation t hat includes clinical history, 
physical examination and radiograp hic findings, and tuberculosi s testing in line with local 
practice), hepatitis B, hepatitis  C, or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV, positive HIV 1 or 
2 antibodies). Active hepatitis B  virus (HBV) infection is defi ned by a positive HBV surface 
antigen (HBsAg) result. Subjects with a past or resolved HBV in fection (defined as the 
presence of hepatitis B core IgG antibody and the absence of HB sAg, deoxyribonucleic acid 
[DNA] negative) are eligible. Subj ects positive for hepatitis C  virus (HCV) antibody are 
eligible only if polym erase chain reaction is negative for HCV ribonucleic acid (RNA). 
 15. Current or prior use of immunos uppressive medication within 14 days before the first dose of 
tremelimumab. The following are e xceptions to this criterion: 
 Intranasal, inhaled, top ical steroids, or lo cal steroid injecti ons (eg, intra-articular 
injection) 
 Systemic corticosteroids at phys iologic doses no t to exceed 10 mg/day of prednisone 
or its equivalent 
 Steroids as premedication for hype rsensitivity reactions (eg, C T scan premedication) 
 
16. Receipt of live attenuated vacci ne within 30 days prior to the first dose of study treatment. 
NOTE:  Subjects, if enrolled, should not  receive live vaccine during the study and up to 30 
days after the last dos e of tremelimumab. 
 
17. Known allergy or hypersensitivity t o tremelimumab or any invest igation product excipient, 
or to other humanized mAbs  
18. Weight  35 kg 
 
3.3 Re-Treatment with Tremelimumab Criteria  Inclusion Criteria  1. ECOG Performance Status of 0 or  1 within 14 days prior to re-tr eatment. 
 
2. Demonstrate adequate organ func tion as defined below. All labs to be obtained within 14 
days prior to re-treatment.  
 Absolute Neutrophil Count (ANC): ≥ 1500/mm
3 
 Hemoglobin (Hgb): ≥ 9 g/dL 
 CrCl or creatinine: ≥ 30 cc/ min or creatinine ≤ 1.5 
 AST and ALT: ≤ 2.5 × ULN (≤ 5 x ULN  for subjects with hepatic m etastases 
1Cockcroft-Gault formula  will be used to calculate creatin ine clearance or 24 urine coll ection for creatinine 
can be utilized 
 
3. Evidence of postmenopausal statu s or negative urinary or serum pregnancy test for female 
premenopausal subjects prior to re-treatment.   
4. Females of childbearing potential  who are sexually active with a non-sterilized male partner 
must be willing to abstain from  heterosexual activity or to use  1 highly of effective method of 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 18 of 69 contraception from the time of informed consent until 90 days a fter the last dose of 
tremelimumab. Non-sterilized male  partners of a female patient must use male condom plus 
spermicide throughout this period.  
 5. Non-sterilized males who are sex ually active with a female part ner of childbe aring potential 
must use a male condom plus spermicide from screening through 9 0 days after receipt of the 
final dose of tremelimumab. Fema le partners (of childbearing po tential) of male subjects 
must also use a highly effectiv e method of contraception throug hout this period. 
 
6. Must have life expectancy of ≥ 12 weeks. 
 Exclusion Criteria  1. No significant, unacceptable, or  irreversible toxicities tha t indicate re-treatment will not 
benefit the subject 
 2. Active autoimmune or inflammator y disorders (including but not limited to inflammatory 
bowel disease [eg, colitis or Cr ohn’s disease], diverticulitis [with the exception of 
diverticulosis], systemic lupus e rythematosus, Sarcoidosis synd rome [granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis], Graves’ disease , rheumatoid arthritis, hypophysi tis, uveitis, etc). The following 
are exceptions to this criterion: 
 Subjects with vitiligo 
 Subjects with hypothyroidism (e .g., following Hashimoto syndrom e) stable on 
hormone replacement 
 Any chronic skin condition that doe s not require systemic thera py 
 Subjects without active disease in the last 5 years may be cons idered for enrollment 
after discussion with the  sponsor-investigator 
 Subjects with celiac disease c ontrolled by diet alone may be co nsidered for 
enrollment after discussion w ith the sponsor-investigator 
 
3. QT interval correcte d for heart rate using F ridericia’s formula  (QTcF) ≥470 ms calculated. 
Any clinically significant abnorma lities detected require tripl icate ECG results and a mean 
QTcF <470 ms calculated from 3 ECG s obtained over a brief perio d (eg, 30 minutes) 
 4. Active infection 
 5. Current or prior use of immunos uppressive medication within 14 days before re-treatment 
with tremelimumab. The following a re exceptions to this criteri on: 
 Intranasal, inhaled, top ical steroids, or lo cal steroid injecti
ons (eg, intra-articular 
injection) 
 Systemic corticosteroids at phys iologic doses no t to exceed 10 mg/day of prednisone 
or its equivalent 
 Steroids as premedication for hype rsensitivity reactions (eg, C T scan premedication) 
 
6. Weight  35 kg 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 19 of 69 7. Has not received an intervening sy stemic anticancer therapy aft er initial treatment 
discontinuation 
 4. SUBJECT REGISTRATION 
All subjects must be registered through HCRN’s electronic data capture (EDC) system. A subject 
is considered registered when an “On Study” date is entered int o the EDC system. Subjects must 
be registered prior to starti ng protocol therapy. Subjects must  begin therapy within  7 business 
days  of registration.  
 5. TREATMENT PLAN 
This is a phase 2 study exploring single-agent tremelimumab in subjects with metastatic 
urothelial cancer progressive des pite prior PD-1/PD-L1 blockade  therapy. The study utilizes a 
Simon 2-stage design. Patients who do not receive drug or who d o not complete 1 cycle of 
therapy for non-treatment related causes (e.g., traffic acciden ts, trauma etc.) will be replaced. 
 
 
 
5.1 Study Drug Administration 
There are no pre-medicati on or hydration requirements  
Drug Dose1 Route Schedule Cycle Length2 Number of 
cycles 
Tremelimumab 750 mg Intravenously (IV) 
over 1 hour Day 1 
Cycle 1-7 28 days (± 3 days) Up to 7 
cycles 
1 Fixed dosing will be utilized. However, if a patient’s weight falls to 35kg or less, they should be 
discontinued from study treatment. 
2 A window of ± 5 minutes ma y be used for infusion of tremelimumab.
 
5.1.1 Monitoring During Study Drug Infusions 
First Infusion:  On the first infusion day, subjects will be monitored, and vit al signs 
collected/recorded in eCRF prior t o, during and after infusion as presented in the bulleted list 
below. BP and pulse will be col lected from subjects before, dur ing, and after each infusion at the 
following times (based on a 60-minute infusion): 
 Prior to the beginning of the infusion (measured once from appr oximately 30 minutes 
before beginning of the infusion) 
 Approximately 30 minutes during the infusion (halfway through i nfusion)  
 At the end of the infusion (approximately 60 minutes ±5 minutes ) 
 
If the infusion takes longer than 60 minutes, then BP and pulse  measurements should follow the 
principles as described above or be taken more frequently if cl inically indicated. A 1-hour 

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 20 of 69 observation period is recommende d after the first infusion of t remelimumab.  
 
Subsequent infusions:  BP, pulse and other vital signs  should be measured, collected/ recorded in 
eCRF prior to the start of the  infusion. Subjects should be car efully monitored, and BP and other 
vital signs should be measured during and post infusion as per institution standard and as 
clinically indicated. Any clinical ly significant changes in vit al signs should be entered onto an 
unscheduled vital signs eCRF page.  5.1.2 Treatment Beyond RECIST 1.1 Progression If there is evidence of RECIS T 1.1 defined disease progression within the initial 7 cycles of 
tremelimumab, subjects may con tinue protocol therapy provided t hat none of the following 
apply: 
 Absence of signs and symptoms indicating disease progression 
 No decline in ECOG performance status 
 Absence of rapid progression of disease 
 Absence of progressive tumor at critical anatomical sites (e.g. , cord compression) 
requiring urgent alternative  medical intervention 
 5.1.3 Re-treatment of Subjects Progres sing within 1 Year of Completin g Initial 
Tremelimumab 
Patients that complete the initial 7 cycles of tremelimumab the n have evidence of disease 
progression per RECIST 1.1 (wit h or without confirmation) durin g the 1-year follow-up period 
may be eligible for re-treatment with up to 7 additional cycles  of tremelimumab. Such patients 
are required to meet the eligibility criteria outlined in Secti on 3.3. Testing done during 
progression may be used for screen ing prior to re-treatment. Su bjects should follow the same 
schedule of events/procedures f or the initial Cycles 1-7 of tre melimumab.  
 5.2 Concomitant Medications, Treatments, and Restrictions 
 5.2.1 Allowed Concomitant Medications/Treatments 
Medication other than that descri bed below that is considered n ecessary for the patient’s safety 
and well-being may be given at th e discretion of the site inves tigator and recorded in the eCRF. 
 
 
Rescue/supportive medication/class of drug Usage 
Concomitant medications or treatments (eg, 
acetaminophen or diphenhydramine) deemed 
necessary to provide adequate prophylactic or 
supportive care, except for those medications identified as “prohibited,” as listed above To be administered as prescribed by the site 
investigator 
Basic Supportive Care (BSC) including antibiotics, nutritional support, correction of metabolic disorders, optimal symptom control, and pain management [including palliative radiotherapy to non-target lesions, etc]) Should be used, when necessary, for all subjects 
Inactivated viruses, such as those in the influenza 
vaccine Permitted 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 21 of 69 5.2.2 Prohibited Concomitant Medications/Treatments 
Restricted and prohibited concomita nt medications are described  in the tables.  
 
Prohibited medication/class of drug Usage 
Any investigational anticancer therapy other than 
those under investigation in this study Should not be given concomitantly while the 
patient is on study treatment 
mAbs against CTLA-4, PD-1, or PD-L1 other 
than those under investigation in this study Should not be given concomitantly while the 
patient is on study treatment 
Any concurrent chemotherapy, radiotherapy, immunotherapy, or biologic or hormonal therapy 
for cancer treatment Should not be given during the study. (Concurrent 
use of hormones for non-cancer-related conditions 
[eg, insulin for diabetes and hormone replacement therapy] is acceptable. Lo cal treatment of isolated 
lesions, excluding target lesions, for palliative intent is acceptable [eg, by local surgery or 
radiotherapy]) 
Immunosuppressive medications including, but not limited to, systemic corticosteroids at doses 
exceeding 10 mg/day of pre dnisone or equivalent, 
methotrexate, azathioprine, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha blockers Should not be given during the study. Short-term 
use of immunosuppressive medications, including 
corticosteroids for the acute management of non-
IP emergencies (eg, COPD, asthma) or IP-related emergent AEs, is permitted. In addition, immunosuppressive medication for palliative 
treatment for oncologic emergencies or prior to 
imaging procedures in subjects with contrast allergies is acceptable. Use of inhaled, topical, and intranasal corticosteroids is permitted for all treatment arms. 
Live attenuated vaccines Should not  be given through 30 days af ter the last 
dose of IP 
Sunitinib Should not be given to subjects within 3 months 
of a dose of tremelimumab, as acute renal failure has been reported with combination therapy of 
tremelimumab and sunitinib 
Drugs with laxative properties Should be used with caution thro ugh 90 days after 
the last dose of tremelimumab during the study. In case of strong medical need, should be used with 
caution. 
Herbal and natural remedies Should be avoided during the study.  
AE adverse event; CTLA-4 cytotoxi c T lymphocyte-associated anti gen 4; IP investigational product; PD-1 
programmed cell death 1; PD-L1 p rogrammed cell death ligand 1 
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 22 of 69 5.3 Contraception 
 5.3.1 Female patient of child-bearing potential Females of childbearing potenti al are defined as those who are not surgically sterile (ie, bilateral 
tubal ligation, bilate ral oophorectomy, or complete hysterectom y) or post-menopausal. Females 
of childbearing potential who are  sexually active with a non-st erilized male partner must use at 
least 1 highly  effective method of contraception (Table 2) from the time of s creening and must 
agree to continue using such precautions for 90 days after the last dose of tremelimumab. Non-
sterilized male partners of a female patient must use male cond om plus spermicide throughout 
this period. Cessation of birth cont rol after this  point should  be discussed with a responsible 
physician. Not engaging in sexual activity for the total durati on of the drug treatment and the 
drug washout period is an acceptable practice; however, periodi c abstinence, the rhythm method, 
and the withdrawal method are not acceptable methods of birth c ontrol.  
 Female subjects should also re frain from breastfeeding througho ut this period. 
Women will be considered post-me nopausal if they have been amen orrheic for 12 months 
without an alternative medical cause. The following age-specifi c requirements apply:  
 Women < 50 years of age would be c onsidered post-menopausal if they have been 
amenorrheic for 12 months or m ore following cessation of exogen ous hormonal 
treatments and if they have luteinizing hormone and follicle-st imulating hormone levels 
in the post-menopausal range for  the institution or underwent s urgical sterilization 
(bilateral oophorectomy or hysterectomy).  
 Women ≥ 50 years of age would be c onsidered post-menopausal if they have been 
amenorrheic for 12 months or m ore following cessation of all ex ogenous hormonal 
treatments, had radiation-induced menopause with last menses >1  year ago, had 
chemotherapy-induced menopause with last menses >1 year ago, or  underwent surgical 
sterilization (bilat eral oophorectomy, bilateral salpingectomy or hysterectomy). 
 5.3.2 Male subjects with a female partner of childbearing poten tial 
Non-sterilized males who are sex ually active with a female part ner of childbe aring potential 
must use a male condom plus spermicide from screening through 9 0 days after receipt of the 
final dose of tremelimumab. Not engaging in sexual activity is an acceptable practice; however, 
occasional abstinence, the rhythm method, and the withdrawal me thod are not acceptable 
methods of contraception. Male subj ects should refrain from spe rm donation throughout this 
period.  Female partners (of childbeari ng potential) of male subjects mu st also use a highly effective 
method of contraception throughout  this period (Table 2).  High ly effective methods of 
contraception, defined as one tha t results in a low failure rat e (ie, less than 1% per year) when 
used consistently and correctly a re described in Table 2. Note that some contraception methods 
are not considered highly effec tive (eg. male or female condom with or without spermicide; 
female cap, diaphragm, or sponge w ith or without spermicide; no n-copper containing 
intrauterine device; progestoge n-only oral hormonal contracepti ve pills where inhibition of 
ovulation is not the primary mode  of action [excluding Cerazett e/desogestrel which is considered 
highly effective]; and triphasic combined oral contraceptive pi lls). 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 23 of 69 Table 2: Highly effective method s of contraception (<1% failure  rate) 
Barrier/Intrauterine methods Hormonal Methods 
 Copper T intrauterine device 
 Levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine 
system (eg, Mirena®)a 
  Etonogestrel implants: eg, Implanon or 
Norplan 
 Intravaginal device: eg, ethinylestradiol 
and etonogestrel 
 Medroxyprogesterone injection: eg, 
Depo-Provera  
 Normal and low dose combined oral 
contraceptive pill 
 Norelgestromin/ethinylestradiol 
transdermal system 
 Cerazette (desogestrel) 
a This is also consider ed a hormonal method 
 5.4 Blood donation Subjects should not donate blood whi le participating in this st udy, or for at least 90 days 
following the last infusion of tremelimumab.  6. TOXICITIES AND DOSE DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS 
The NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4.03 will be used to 
grade adverse events.   Subjects enrolled in t his study will be evalua ted clinically an d with standard laboratory tests 
before and at regular intervals  during their par ticipation in t his study as specified in Study 
Calendar & Evaluations.  Subjects will be evaluated for a dverse events (all grades), ser ious adverse events, and adverse 
events requiring study drug int erruption or discontinuation as specified in Study Calendar & 
Evaluations.    6.1 Infusion Reactions 
In the event of a ≤ Grade 2 inf usion-related reaction, the infu sion rate of study drug may be 
decreased by 50% or interrupted unt il resolution of the event a nd re-initiated at 50% of the initial 
rate until completion of the infus ion. For subjects with a ≤ Gr ade 2 infusion-related reaction, 
subsequent infusions may be adm inistered at 50% of the initial rate. Acetaminophen and/or an 
antihistamine (eg, diphenhydramin e) or equivalent medications p er institutional standard may be 
administered at the discretion of  the site investigator. If the  infusion-related reaction is ≥ Grade 3 
or higher in severity, study dr ug will be discontinued. For man agement of subjects who 
experience an infusion reaction, p lease refer to the toxicity a nd management guidelines in 
Appendix 1.   As with any antibody, allergic r eactions to dose administration  are possible. Appropriate drugs 
and medical equipment to treat acute anaphylacti c reactions mus t be immediately available, and 
study personnel must be trained t o recognize and treat anaphyla xis. The study site must have 
immediate access to emergency res uscitation teams and equipment  in addition to the ability to 
admit subjects to an intensiv e care unit if necessary. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 24 of 69 6.2 Dose Delays/Dose Modifications 
The following general guidance should be followed for managemen t of tremelimumab-related 
toxicities. 
 Treat each of the toxicities w ith maximum supportive care (incl uding holding the 
agent suspected of causing t he toxicity if required). 
 If the symptoms promptly resolve with supportive care, consider ation should be 
given to continuing study drug along  with appropriate continuin g supportive 
care. 
 If medically appropriate, dose modifications are permitted (App endix 1) 
 All dose modifications should be do cumented with clear reasonin g and documentation of 
the approach taken. 
 Guidelines for the management  of immune-mediate d reactions, inf usion-related reactions, and 
non-immune-mediated reactions a re provided in Appendix 1, Dosin g Modification and Toxicity 
Management Guidelines. In additi on, there are certain circumsta nces in which tremelimumab 
should be permanently discontin ued (see Section 6.4 and Appendi x 1). 
 Following the first dose of st udy drug, subsequent administrati on tremelimumab can be modified 
based on toxicities observed as  described in Appendix 1, the Do sing Modification and Toxicity 
Management Guidelines. These  guidelines apply to adverse events  considered by the reporting 
site investigator to be causally  related to tremelimumab. In ca se of doubt, the site investigator 
should consult with the sponsor-investigator.  6.3 Liver Function Test Abnormalities 
If a patient shows an AST or ALT ≥ 3 x ULN together with total bilirubin ≥ 2 x ULN, refer to 
Appendix 1 for further instructi ons. These cases should be repo rted as SAEs if, after evaluation, 
they meet the criteria for a Hy ’s law case or if any of the ind ividual liver test parameters fulfill 
any of the SAE criteria.   6.4 Protocol Therapy Discontinuation 
In addition to discontinuation from therapy related to toxiciti es as outlined in Appendix 1, a 
subject will also be disconti nued from protocol therapy and fol lowed per protocol under the 
following circumstances outlined below.  The reason for discont inuation of protoc ol therapy will 
be documented on the electronic case report form (eCRF)   
 Confirmed disease progression pe r RECIST 1.1 prior to Cycle 7 
 Completion of scheduled treatment 
 Site investigator determines a  change of therapy would be in th e best interest of the 
subject 
 Subject requests to discontinue  protocol therapy, whether due t o unacceptable toxicity or 
for other reasons 
o In a subject decides to prematur ely discontinue protocol therap y (“refuses 
treatment”), the subject should be asked if he or she may still  be contacted for further 
scheduled study assessments. The ou tcome of that discussion sho uld be documented 
in both the medical rec ords and in the eCRF. 
 Female subject becomes pregnant.  
 If subject weight falls to 35kg or less. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 25 of 69  Grade  3 infusion reaction. 
 Study therapy is interrupted for ≥ 120 days.  
 
Subjects who are permanently discontinued from receiving invest igational product will be 
followed for safety per Secti on 7, including the collection of any protocol-specified blood 
specimens, unless consent is with drawn or the subject is lost t o follow-up or enrolled in another 
clinical study. All subjects will be followed for survival. Sub jects who decline to return to the 
site for evaluations will be  offered follow-up by phone every 3  months as an alternative. 
 6.5 Protocol Discontinuation  
If a subject decides to discontinue from the protocol (and not just from protocol therapy) all 
efforts should be made to complete and report study assessments  as thoroughly as possible. A 
complete final evaluation at th e time of the subject’s protocol  withdrawal should be made with 
an explanation of why the subject is withdrawing from the proto col. If the reason for removal of 
a subject from the study is an adverse event, it will be record ed on the eCRF. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 26 of 69 7. STUDY CALENDAR & EVALUATIONS 
 
Study Evaluations 
Cycle = 28 days Screening Cycles 1-7  
(± 3 days)16 Cycles 1-3  
(± 3 days)16 Safety Follow 
Up Visit14 Follow up15 
Progression 
of Disease Screening for 
Re-
Treatment17 -28 days Day 1 Day 15 ~30 days post 
last dose  
(+7 da ys)Every 3 
months  
(± 14 da ys)
REQUIRED  ASSESSMENTS  
Informed Consen t X  
Medical Histor y1 X 
Physical Exa m X X X X X
Vital si gns and ECOG Performance Status2XX9 XX X
ECG3 X X
AEs & concomitant medications X X X X X X
LABORATORY ASSESSMENTS  
Complete Blood Cell Count with diff (CBC) X X X X X
Comprehensive Metabolic Profile (CMP) X X X X X
Amylase and Lipase X X  X
GGT and Ma gnesium level X  X
PT/INR and aPTT X  X
Thyroid Function (TSH, T4, free T3)4 XX4  X
Pregnanc y test (serum or urine) (WOCBP)5 X X
Hepatitis B and C and HIV6 X 
Urinal ysis7  X  X
DISEASE ASSESSMENT  
CT of ches t8 XX8 X8 Every 3 
months  
(± 7 days) X
CT or MRI of abdomen and pelvis8 XX8 X8 X
Bone scan in sub jects with bone metastases8XX8 X8 X
TREATMENT EXPOSURE  
Tremelimumab9 X9(750 m g) 
SPECIMEN C OLLECTION   
Archival Tumor Tissue or Fresh Biops y10 X10  
Tumor tissue obtained for clinical purposes11 X11 X11 X11 X11 X11 X11
Blood samples12 X12X12 X12 X12
Stool sample for microbiome13 X13  
FOLLOW-UP   
Survival Status, Subsequent Therap y  X
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 27 of 69 CBC with differential and platelet to include: Hgb, Hct, WBC, A NC, absolute lymphocyte count, p latelets. CMP to include sodium , potassium, 
chloride, creatinine, blood urea nitrogen; liver function tests  (LFTs) to include AST, ALT, total bilirubin, alkaline phosphat ase  
 
Key to Footnotes  
1: Medical History includes: smoking history questionnaire and a question regarding how the pa tient heard about the study. Pri or anti-cancer 
treatment should be documented in cluding medications (chemother apy, checkpoint inhibitors, etc) radiation or surgery. Antibiot ic use for 6 
months prior to stool collecti on will be documented. Diagnosis and staging to include pathology report and Tumor Node Metastas is (TNM) 
staging. Prior genomic or molecu lar testing results are require d if available. 
 
2: Vital signs to include: blood pressure, pulse, temperature, res piration rate, weight, height (screening only) and ECOG perform ance status.  
Please see Section 5 for guidelines regarding vital signs durin g study drug infusion. 
 3: Resting 12-lead ECGs will be recorded at screening and as cl inically indicated throughout the study. ECGs should be obtaine d after the patient 
has been in a supine position for 5 minutes and recorded while the patient remains in that position. In case of clinically sig nificant ECG 
abnormalities, including a QTcF value >470 ms, 2 additional 12- lead ECGs should be obtained over a brief period (eg, 30 minute s) to confirm. 
 
4: Thyroid Function (TSH, T4 and T3) will be done prior to trea tment C1D1 then C3D1, C5D1, and C7 D1 or more often if clinicall y indicated per 
site investigator discretion. For T4 and T3, free versus total is at the discretion of the site investigator. 
 5: For women of childbearing potential (WOCBP): urine or serum βhCG if clinically appropriate. If a urine test is done and it is positive or cannot 
be confirmed as negative, a serum  pregnancy test will be requir ed.   
 6: Active infection, including tu berculosis (clinical evaluatio n that includes clinical history, physical examination and radi ographic findings, and 
tuberculosis testing in line with  local practice), hepatitis B,  hepatitis C, or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV, positive HI V 1 or 2 antibodies). 
Active hepatitis B virus (HBV) i nfection is defined by a positi ve HBV surface antigen (HBsAg)  result. Subjects with a past or resolved HBV 
infection (defined as the presen ce of hepatitis B core IgG anti body and the absence of HBsAg, deo xyribonucleic acid [DNA] nega tive) are eligible. 
Subjects positive for hepatitis C v irus (HCV) antibody are elig ible only if polymerase chain r eaction is negative for HCV ribo nucleic acid (RNA). 
 7: Urinalysis for bilirubin, bl ood, glucose, ketones, pH, prote in, specific gravity to be perfo rmed at screening and as clinic ally indicated throughout 
the study per site inves tigator’s discretion. 
 
8: Radiology imaging to include: CT of the chest, CT or MRI of the abdomen/pelvis and bone scan  (in subjects with bone metasta sis). Scans 
should be performed at screening then every 2 months (± 7 days)  during Cycles 1-7 (e.g., after C 2, C4, etc.) and then every 3 months (± 7 days) 
until the time of progression. Imaging for the D30 safety visit  may be omitted if already performed within 2 past months. 
 9: Tremelimumab will be given approximately every month for up to 7 cycles in the absence of disease progression or prohibitiv e toxicity. Refer 
to Section 5 for information regarding monitoring of subjects d uring infusion. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 28 of 69 10: Representative formalin-fixe d paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumo r specimens in paraffin blocks ( blocks preferred) or at least 1 5 unstained slides 
will be identified prior to subj ect registration and shipped pr ior to C1D1. If archival tissue is not available and the subjec t is undergoing a standard 
of care biopsy, tissue from the biopsy is required to be submit ted for correlative analyses. Subjects without adequate baselin e tumor tissue may be 
considered for enrollment on a case by case basis after discuss ion with the sponsor-investigator. See Correlative Laboratory M anual (CLM) for 
additional details.  11: Surplus tissue remaining after routine standard of care pro cedures (e.g., metastatic biopsies) during and after treatment will be collected during 
this study. Subjects may have tumor tissue obtained during the course of the study or at the time of disease progression for c linical purposes (e.g., 
confirmation of disease progression, management of complication  of disease progression, etc.). Subj ects will have the option o f whether samples 
obtained during standard of care procedures may be used for res earch purposes.
 Samples for correlative analysis  are required if a standard of care 
biopsy is performed at screening for the first 7 cycles of trea tment.  See CLM for additional details. 
 12: Blood samples for research w ill be drawn pre-treatment C1D1  (may be done during screening if subject is found eligible), C 2D1, C3D1, C6D1 
and at time of progression. See Table 3 and CLM for additional information. Blood samples for research will be collected for s ubjects receiving re-
treatment after progression. If samples are collected at progre ssion after the initial 7 cycles of tremelimumab, samples at sc reening prior to re-
treatment C1D1 do not need to be repeated. Samples will also be  done prior to treatment C2D1, C3D1, C6D1 and at progression af ter re-treatment. 
 13. Stool for microbiome analysis will be collected prior to tr eatment prior to C1D1 of initial treatment. Subjects will be pr ovided a kit with 
detailed instructions regarding collection of the sample prior to the timepoint. Samples will not be collected during re-treat ment. Please see the 
CLM for additional details.  
14: The safety follow-up visit should only occur when subjects stop study treatment for whateve r reasons (toxicity, progressio n, or at discretion of 
site investigator) and should b e performed ~30 days (+7 days) a fter the last dose of treatment. Subjects who have an ongoing G rade ≥ 2 or serious 
AE (SAE) at this visit will con tinue to be followed until the A E resolves to ≤ Grade 1 or baselin e, deemed clinically insignif icant, and/or until a 
new anti-cancer treatment starts, whichever is earlier. 
 15: Subjects completing study treatment without evidence of dis ease progression will be followed every 3 months for progressio n. Subjects with 
disease progression within 1 year o f completing initial treatme nt with tremelimumab may be eligible for re-treatment with trem elimumab. After 
progression for subjects who are not candidates for tremelimuma b retreatment or who initiate other anticancer therapies, patie nts will be followed 
for survival which may be accomp lished via clinic visit, phone call, or other avenues as appropriate. Subjects who decline to return to the site for 
evaluations will be offered follo w-up by phone every 3 months a s an alternative. 
 16: Results for LFTs, electrolytes and creatinine MUST BE REVIEWED  by the treating physician or s ite investigator within 3 days p rior to 
administration of study drug. For Day 15 Cycles 1-3, subjects w ill be contacted via phone call or other avenues as appropriate  on Day 15 (± 3 
days) for AE assessment. If issues are identified during commun ication with the subject, appropr iate assessment will be perfor med based on 
discretion of research staff. This may include a clinic visit, lab work or additional communication. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 29 of 69 17: Patients that complete the initial 7 cycles of tremelimumab the n have evidence of disease progression per RECIST 1.1 (with or without 
confirmation) during the 1-year follow-up period may be eligibl e for re-treatment with up to 7 additional cycles of tremelimum ab. Such patients 
are required to meet the eligibility criteria outlined in Secti on 3.3. Testing done during progression may be used for screeni ng prior to re-treatment. 
Subjects should follow the same schedule of events/procedures f or the initial Cycles 1-7 of tremelimumab. Baseline tumor asses sment will be 
within 28 days of starting retreatment.  Subjects should follow the same schedule of events/procedures f or the initial cycles 1-7 of tremelimumab. 
Re-treatment should start within 28 days of documented progress ion.  
  
 
    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 30 of 69 Table 3:  Schedule for correlative blood sample collections 
 
Timepoint Correlative blood samples 
Pre-Treatment Cycle 1 Day 1 5 purple top tubes (50 ml total) 
2 ACD tubes (17 ml total) 1 PAX
gene tube (8.5 ml total)
Pre-Treatment Cycle 2 Day 1 2 purple top tube (20 ml total) 
2 ACD tubes (17 ml total) 1 PAX
gene tube (8.5 ml total)
Pre-Treatment Cycle 3 Day 1 2 purple top tubes (20 ml total) 
5 ACD tubes (42.5 ml total) 1 PAX
gene tube (8.5 ml total)
Pre-Treatment Cycle 6 Day 1 2 purple top tubes (20 ml total) 
5 ACD tubes (42.5 ml total) 1 PAX
gene tube (8.5 ml total)
Time of progression  5 purple top tubes (50 ml total) 
2 ACD tubes (17 ml total) 
1 PAX gene tube (8.5 ml total)
 
 
8. BIOSPECIMEN STUDIES AND PROCEDURES  
Tumor tissue, peripheral blood, a nd possibly normal urothelium will be used for biospecimen-
based research in this study. Fu ll details of specimen collecti on and processing can be found in 
the CLM.  Correlative studies may include g enomic sequencing of tumor tis sue and/or peripheral blood and 
immune monitoring studies includi ng T cell receptor sequencing and flow cytometry and/or mass 
cytometry on tissue and/or periph eral blood, antigen-specific T  cell assays, HLA typing, and 
gene expression.   8.1 Tissue 
Analysis of tumor tissue will include assessment for changes in  the composition of immune cells, 
tumor cells, and tumor microenvironment. Immune cell compositio n and changes in the tumor 
microenvironment will be analyzed by platforms including but no t limited to 
immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry, and mass cytometry. Tumor  cells will be analyzed by 
immunohistochemistry, DNA, and R NA sequencing. Normal tissue or  blood will be used for the 
germline genome. An effort will be made to identify tumor antig ens for each subject using 
strategies including, but not limited to, collating the “antige nome” using immunohistochemistry 
data as well as identifying muta tion-derived tumor antigens thr ough genome sequencing and 
computational biology approaches t o predict epitope: MHC bindin g affinity. Subject HLA typing 
will be done by sequence specific oligonucleotide probing and s equence specific priming of 
genomic DNA using standard procedures. T-cell responses will be  detected using standard 
ELISPOT and intracellular cytokine assays or other emerging tec hnologies. Tumor tissue will 
also be utilized for PD-L1 expr ession as determined by immunohi stochemistry.    
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 31 of 69 8.1.1 Archival Tissue 
Representative formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor sp ecimens in paraffin blocks 
(blocks preferred) or at least 15 unstained slides will be iden tified prior to subj ect registration 
and shipped after registration but  prior to C1D1. Representativ e formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded (FFPE) tumor specimens in paraffin blocks (blocks pref erred) or at least 15 unstained 
slides. If archival tissue is not available and the subject is undergoing a standard of care biopsy, 
tissue from the biopsy is required to be submitted for correlat ive analyses. Subjects without 
adequate baseline tumor tissue may be considered for enrollment  on a case by case basis after 
discussion with the sponsor-inv estigator. Specimens will be uti lized for cellula r and molecular 
analyses including but not lim ited to DNA sequencing, RNA seque ncing, and tissue 
imaging/multiplex staining.  8.1.2 Tissue collected during routine clinical procedures Surplus tissue remaining after r outine standard of care procedu res (e.g., metastatic biopsies) will 
be collected during this study. S ubjects may have tumor tissue obtained during the course of the 
study or at the time of disease  progression for clinical purpos es (e.g., confirmation of disease 
progression, management of com plication of disease progression,  etc.). Specimens obtained in 
these settings may be accessed by t he research team to facilita te an understanding of the 
pharmacodynamic effects of treatme nt at the level of the tumor and microenvironment including 
mechanisms of treatment resista nce.  Subjects will have the opt ion of whether samples obtained 
during standard of care procedur es may be used for research pur poses. 
 8.2 Blood Samples For blood samples, the volume  of blood and type of tube to be u sed for each collection is 
specified in Table 3 and CLM.  C ollection of whole blood sample s is mandatory for participation 
in this study. Blood samples for r esearch will also be collecte d for subjects receiving re-
treatment after progression.  8.2.1 Blood for Immune cell subsets The quantity and composition of imm une cells in the peripheral blood will be analyzed by flow 
cytometry or mass cytometry. Antigen specific T cell responses will be detected as described 
above.    8.2.2 Peripheral blood for DNA and RNA Plasma will be stored for futur e ctDNA isolation and quantitati ve expression using sequence 
specific primers and/or for exo me sequencing. DNA from whole bl ood may be used to germline 
sequencing to facilitate analysi s of somatic tumor DNA sequenci ng. Whole blood will be stored 
for gene expression profiling from RNA.   8.3 Stool for microbiome analysis Prior to treatment, patients will provide a stool sample from a  single bowel movement for 
microbiome analysis as per the CLM. Stool samples will be analy zed to assess microbiome 
diversity and composition. Explorat ory analyses correlating cli nical outcomes and 
diversity/composition as well as ass essment of metabolomics and  metagenomic whole genome 
sequencing may be performed. Stool samples will not be collecte d during re-treatment with 
tremelimumab. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 32 of 69 8.4 Storage of Biospecimens 
Excess biospecimens not completel y utilized in these experiment s will be stored indefinitely at 
HCRN for future use in researc h focused on GU malignant disease s that are yet to be 
determined.  All specimens collect ed will maintain the assigned  sequence ID number of the 
corresponding patient.  Deidentifie d samples may be shared with  other research institutions.  We 
believe that allowing for storage  and usage of the remaining sa mples for future research is 
ethically justified and a prefe rred option to discarding these materials given the potential impact 
on improving clinical outcomes for  subjects with bladder cancer .  Subjects will be given the 
option to store excess specimens  during the informed consent pr ocess. 
 8.5 Confidentiality of Biospecimens Samples that are collected w ill be identified by a subject’s se quence ID assigned at the time of 
registration to the trial. Any ma terial issued to collaborating  researchers will be anonymized and 
only identified by the subject’s sequence ID.  9. CRITERIA FOR DISEASE EVALUATION 
See section 5.1.3 and 5.1.4 for crite ria for continuing treatme nt past RECIST 1.1 disease 
progression.  9.1 RECIST 1.1 
 
9.1.1 Measurable disease  The presence of at least one measurable lesion. If the measurab le disease is res tricted to a 
solitary lesion, its neoplastic  nature should be confirmed by c ytology/histology.  
 
9.1.1.1 Measurable lesions 
Measurable lesions are defined as those that can be accurately measured in at least one 
dimension (longest diameter to be  recorded) as >20 mm by chest x-ray, as >10 mm with CT 
scan, or >10 mm with calipers by c linical exam.  All tumor meas urements must be recorded in 
millimeters (or decimal fractions of centimeters). 
 
9.1.1.2  Non- Measurable lesions 
All other lesions (or sites of di sease), including small lesion s (longest diameter <10 mm or 
pathological lymph nodes with ≥  10 to <15 mm short axis), are c onsidered non-measurable 
disease.  Bone lesions, leptomeningeal disease, ascites, pleura l/pericardial effusions, 
lymphangitis cutis/pulmonitis, inflammatory breast disease, and  abdominal masses (not followed 
by CT or MRI), are considered as non-measurable.  NOTE:   Cystic lesions that meet the c riteria for radiographically de fined simple cysts should not 
be considered as malignant lesi ons (neither measurable nor non- measurable) since they are, by 
definition, simple cysts.  ‘Cystic lesions’ thought to repre sent cystic metastases can be considered as measurable lesions, 
if they meet the definition of m easurability described above. H owever, if non-cystic lesions are 
present in the same subject, the se are preferred for selection as target lesions. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 33 of 69 9.1.1.3 Malignant lymph nodes  
To be considered pathologically e nlarged and measurable, a lymp h node must be >15 mm in 
short axis when assessed by CT s can (CT scan slice thickness re commended to be no greater 
than 5 mm).  At baseline and i n follow-up, only the short axis will be measured and followed. 
 9.1.1.4 Baseline documentation of “T arget” and “Non-Target” les ions 
 
Target lesions  
All measurable lesions up to a m aximum of 2 lesions per organ a nd 5 lesions in total, 
representative of all involve d organs, should be identified as target lesions  and recorded and 
measured at baseline.  Target lesions should be selected on the  basis of their size (lesions with 
the longest diameter), be represe ntative of all involved organs , but in addition should be those 
that lend themselves to reproduc ible repeated measurements.  It  may be the case that, on 
occasion, the largest lesion does not lend itself to reproducib le measurement in which 
circumstance the next largest les ion which can be measured repr oducibly should be selected.  A 
sum of the diameters (longest  for non-nodal le sions, short axis  for nodal lesions) for all target 
lesions will be calculated and re ported as the baseline sum dia meters.  If lymph nodes are to be 
included in the sum, then only the s hort axis is added into the  sum.  The baseline sum diameters 
will be used as reference to fur ther characterize any objective  tumor regression in the measurable 
dimension of the disease.  Non-target lesions   
All other lesions (or sites of di sease) including any measurabl e lesions over and above the 5 
target lesions should be identified as non-target lesions and should also be reco rded at baseline.  
Measurements of these lesions a re not required, but the presenc e, absence, or in rare cases 
unequivocal progression of eac h should be noted throughout foll ow-up. 
 9.2 Response Criteria 
 
Evaluation of target lesions 
Complete Response (CR) Disappear ance of all target lesions.  An y pathological 
lymph nodes (whether target or non-target) must have reduction in short axis to <10 mm.
Partial Response (PR) At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the  diameters of 
target lesions, taking as r eference the baseline sum 
diameters
Progressive Disease (PD) At leas t a 20% increase in the sum of the diameters of 
target lesions, taking as r eference the smallest sum on 
study (this includes the base line sum if that is the 
smallest on study).  In addition to the relative increase of 20%, the sum must also demonstrate an absolute increase of at least 5 mm.  (Note:  t he appearance of one or more 
new lesions is also considered pro
gressions). 
Stable Disease (SD) Neither su fficient shrink age to qualify for  PR nor 
sufficient increase to qualify f or PD, taking as reference 
the smallest sum diameters while on stud y. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 34 of 69 Evaluation of non-target lesions 
Complete Response (CR) Disappear ance of all non-target lesions and 
normalization of tumor marker level.  All lymph nodes must be non-pathological in size (<10 mm short axis)  NOTE:   If tumor markers are initially above the 
upper normal limit, they must normalize for a subject to be considered in complete clinical response.
Non-CR/ Non-PD Persistence of one  or more non-target lesion(s) 
and/or maintenance of tum or marker level above 
the normal limits
Progressive Disease (PD) Appearance of one or more new lesions and/or 
unequivocal progression of  existing non-target 
lesions.  Unequivocal progression should not normally trump target lesi on status.  It must be 
representative of overall di sease status change, not 
a sin
gle lesion increase.
*Although a clear progression of “ non target” lesions only is e xceptional, in such 
circumstances, the opinion of t he site physician should prevail . 
 
9.3 Evaluation of best overall response The best overall response is the b est response recorded from th e start of the treatment until 
disease progression/recurrence (t aking as reference for PD the smallest measurements recorded 
since the treatment started). I n general, the subject's best re sponse assignment will depend on the 
achievement of both measurement and confirmation criteria.  
Tar
get Lesions Non-Tar get lesio n New Lesion Overall response
CR C R N o C R 
CR Non-CR/ Non-PD No P R 
 Not evaluate d No P R 
PR Non-CR/ Non-PD/ not 
evaluate d No PR 
SD Non-CR/ Non-PD/ not 
evaluate d No SD 
PD An y Yes or No PD 
Any PD* Yes or No PD 
Any A n y Y e s P D  
*In exceptional circumstances, une quivocal progression in non-t arget lesions may be accepted as 
disease progression. 
 
Subjects with a global deteriora tion of health status requiring  discontinuation of treatment 
without objective evidence of dis ease progression at that time should be classified as having  
“symptomatic deterioration”.  Every effort should be made to do cument the objective 
progression even after discon tinuation of treatment. In some ci rcumstances it may be difficult to 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 35 of 69 distinguish residual disease fr om normal tissue.  When the eval uation of complete response 
depends on this determination, it is recommended that the resid ual lesion be investigated (fine 
needle aspirate/biopsy) to confir m the complete response status . 
 9.4 Definitions for Response Evaluation – RECIST 1.1 
 
9.4.1 First documentation of response The time between initiation of t herapy and first documentation of PR or CR. 
 9.4.2 Confirmation of Response To be assigned a status of compl ete or partial response, change s in tumor measurements must be 
confirmed by repeat assessments  performed no less than four wee ks after the criteria for response 
are first met.  9.4.3 Duration of Response Duration of overall response—the period measured from the time that measurement criteria are 
met for complete or partial res ponse (whichever status is recor ded first) until the date that 
recurrent or progressive diseas e is objectively documented, tak ing as reference the smallest 
measurements recorded since treatment started.  9.4.4 Duration of Overall Complete Response The period measured from the time that measurement criteria are  met for complete response until 
the first date that recurrent di sease is objectively documented . 
 9.4.5 Objective response rate 
The objective response rate is the proportion of all subjects w ith confirmed PR or CR according 
to RECIST, from the start of t reatment until disease progressio n/recurrence (taking as reference 
for progressive disease the smallest measurements recorded sinc e the start of treatment). 
 9.4.6 Progression Free Survival A measurement from the start of  the treatment  until the criteri a for disease progression is met or 
death occurs, taking as reference the smallest measurements rec orded since the tr eatment started.   
 Progression free survival will be  measured from the date of ini tial treatment to the earliest date of 
disease progression, resection of  measurable tumor or death for  subjects who fail; and to the date 
of last contact for subjects w ho remain at risk for failure. 
    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 36 of 69 10. DRUG INFORMATION 
 10.1 Tremelimumab 
Tremelimumab is an anti-CTLA- 4 antibody being explored as a sin gle-agent, and in combination 
with durvalumab, for the treatmen t of several malignancies.  
 10.1.1  Supplier/How Supplied 
Tremelimumab will be supplied by AstraZeneca. Tremelimumab is f ormulated at 20 mg/mL in 
20 mM histidine/histidine-HCl , 22 mM trehalose dihydrate, 0.02%  (w/v) polysorbate 80, and 
0.27 mM disodium edetate dihydra te, pH 5.5. The investigational  product is supplied as a sterile 
liquid solution containing either  400 mg (nominal) tremelimumab  per vial or 25 mg (nominal) 
per vial. The nominal fill volum e for the 400 mg presentation i s 20.0 mL and the nominal fill 
volume for the 25 mg presentation is 1.25 mL. Investigational p roduct vials are stored at 2°C to 
8°C (36°F to 46°F) and must not be frozen. Drug product should be kept in secondary container 
until use to prevent excessive light exposure.  10.1.2  Preparation  
Total time from needle puncture of the tremelimumab vial to the  start of administration should not 
exceed:  
 24 hours at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F) 
 4 hours at room temperature 
 Tremelimumab will be administered using an IV bag containing 0. 9% (w/v) saline or 5% (w/v) 
dextrose, with a final tremelimu mab concentration ranging from 0.10 to 10 mg/mL, and 
delivered through an IV admini stration set with a 0.2- or 0.22- μm in-line filter. The IV bag size 
should be selected such that the fi nal concentration is within 0.10 to 10 mg/mL. Mix the bag by 
gently inverting to ensure homoge neity of the dose in the bag.  
 Standard infusion time is 1 hour. H owever, if there are interru ptions during infusion, the total 
allowed time should not exceed 8 hours at room temperature. Do not co-administer other drugs 
through the same infusion line.  In the event that either prepar ation time or infusion time exce eds the time limits a new dose must 
be prepared from new vials. Tre melimumab does not contain prese rvatives, and any unused 
portion must be discarded.   10.1.3  Dispensing 
Tremelimumab must be dispensed o nly from official study sites a nd to eligible subjects under the 
supervision of the site inves tigator. Tremelimumab should be st ored in a secure area according to 
local regulations. It is the res ponsibility of the site investi gator to ensure that study drug is only 
dispensed to subjects.   
 
10.1.4  Adverse Events 
Risks with tremelimumab monot herapy include, but are not limite d to, GI effects (colitis, 
diarrhea, enterocolitis and int estinal perforation), endocrine disorders (hypo and 
hyperthyroidism, hypophysitis and adr enal insufficiency), skin effects (rash, and pruritus), 
elevations in lipase and amylase  and clinical manifestations of  pancreatitis, other gastrointestinal 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 37 of 69 events e.g. ulcerative colitis, dehydration, nausea and vomitin g; hepatic events including 
hepatitis, and liver enzyme elevations; pneumonitis and ILD; ne rvous system events including 
encephalitis, peripheral motor a nd sensory neuropathies, Guilla in-Barre and proximal muscle 
weakness; cytopenias including th rombocytopenia, anemia and neu tropenia; infusion-related 
reactions, anaphylaxis, and allergic reactions; renal events in cluding renal failure, acute kidney 
injury, nephritis, nephrotic syndr ome, autoimmune nephritis and  electrolyte abnormalities such 
as hypokalemia; autoimmune diseases  including autoimmune arthri tis, Sjogren's syndrome and 
giant cell temporal arteritis;  hyperglycemia and diabetes melli tus; and pyrexia. For information 
on all identified and potential ri sks with tremelimumab please always refer to the  current version 
of the tremelimumab IB. Using pool ed data from monotherapy clin ical studies AEs (all grades) 
reported very commonly (≥ 10% of pa tients) were diarrhea, nause a, fatigue, pruritus, decreased 
appetite, rash, vomiting, dyspnea, constipation, cough, pyrexia , abdominal pain, decreased 
weight, headache, asthenia, a nd anemia. Approximately 16% of pa tients experien ced an AE that 
resulted in permanent discontin uation of tremelimumab and appro ximately 45% of patients 
experienced an SAE.  11 ADVERSE EVENTS 
The descriptions and grading s cales found in the NCI CTCAE v4.0 3 will be utilized for AE 
assessment. A copy of the CTCAE  v4.03 can be downloaded from th e CTEP website at 
http://ctep.cancer.gov. All forms for AE/SAE recording and repo rting can be found in the Study 
Procedure Manual or in the EDC s ystem (Documents and Informatio n Tab). 
 11.1 Definitions 
 11.1.1  Adverse Event (AE) 
An AE is any untoward medical occu rrence whether or not conside red related to the study drug 
that appears to change in inte nsity during the course of the st udy. The following are examples of 
AEs:  
 Unintended or unfavorab le sign or symptom 
 A disease temporally associate d with participa tion in the proto col 
 An intercurrent illnes s or injury that impairs the well-being o f the subject 
 Abnormal laboratory values or diag nostic test results constitut e AEs only if they induce clinical 
signs or symptoms or require tre atment or further diagnostic te sts   
 Hospitalization for elective surg ery or routine clinical proced ures that are not the result of an AE 
(e.g., surgical insertion of cen tral line) should not be record ed as an AE.  
 Disease progression should not be  recorded as an AE, unless it is attributable to the study 
regimen by the site investigator.    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 38 of 69 11.1.2  Serious Adverse Event (SAE) 
A SAE is an adverse event that: 
 Results in death. NOTE:  Death due to disease progression should not be reported as a 
SAE, unless it is attributable  by the site investigator to the study drug(s) 
 Is life-threatening (defined as an event in which the subject w as at risk of death at the 
time of the event; it does not r efer to an event which hypothet ically might have caused 
death if it were more severe) 
 Requires inpatient hospitaliza tion for >24 hours or prolongatio n of existing 
hospitalization. NOTE:  Hospitalization for anticipate d or protocol specified procedur es 
such as administration of chemot herapy, central line insertion,  metastasis interventional 
therapy, resection of primary tum or, or elective surgery, will not be considered serious 
adverse events. 
 Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
 Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect 
 Is an important medical event ( defined as a medical event(s) th at may not be immediately 
life-threatening or r esult in death or ho spitalization but, bas ed upon appropriate medical 
and scientific judgment, may jeopa rdize the subject or may requ ire intervention (e.g., 
medical, surgical) to prevent one  of the other serious outcomes  listed in the definition 
above). Examples of such event s include, but are not limited to , intensive treatment in an 
emergency room or at home for  allergic bronchospasm; blood dysc rasias or convulsions 
not resulting in hospitalizatio n; or the development of drug de pendency or drug abuse.  
 
11.1.3  Adverse Events of Special Interest  
An adverse event of special int erest (AESI) is one of scientifi c and medical interest specific to 
understanding of the study drug(s)  and may require close monito ring and rapid communication 
by the site investigator to the  sponsor-investigator. An AESI m ay be serious or non-serious. The 
rapid reporting of AESIs allows ongo ing surveillance of these e vents in order to characterize and 
understand them in association w ith the use of the study drug(s ). If any AESI occurs in the 
course of the study, then the site  investigators or other site personnel should report to Hoosier 
Cancer Research Network (HCRN) within 1 business day  of becoming aware of the event. 
HCRN will report to AstraZeneca within 1 business day  of becoming aware of the event. AESIs 
for tremelimumab include, but a re not limited to, events with a  potential inflammatory or 
immune-mediated mechanism and that may require more frequent mo nitoring and/or 
interventions such as steroids , immunosuppressant s, and/or horm one replacement therapy. These 
AESIs are being closely monitore d in clinical studies with trem elimumab therapy.  
 An imAE is defined as an AE th at is associated with drug exposu re and is consistent with an 
immune-mediated mechanism of ac tion and where there is no clear  alternate etiolo gy. Serologic, 
immunologic, and histologic (biops y) data, as appropriate, shou ld be used to support an imAE 
diagnosis. Appropriate efforts s hould be made to rule out neopl astic, infectious, metabolic, toxin, 
or other etiologic causes of th e imAE. In the event of imAE or suspected imAE, the sponsor-
investigator may request relevan t clinical infor mation (includi ng images) for those subjects who 
demonstrate the event and may r equest the independent review by  external experts based on the 
acquired clinical information.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 39 of 69 If the site investigator has a ny questions with regards to an A E being an imAE, the site 
investigator should immediately c ontact the sponsor-investigato r. 
AESIs observed with tremelimu mab include the following: 
 Diarrhea/Colitis and intestinal perforation 
 Pneumonitis/Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD) 
 Hepatitis/transaminase increases  
 Neuropathy / neuromuscular toxi city (e.g. Guillain-Barré, and m yasthenia gravis) 
 Endocrinopathy (ie, events of hypophys itis, adrenal insufficien cy, and hyperthyroidism 
and hypothyroidism, Type I diabetes) 
 Rash/Dermatitis 
 Nephritis/Blood creatinine increases 
 Pancreatitis/ serum lipas e and amylase increases 
 Myocarditis 
 Myositis/Polymyositis 
 Other inflammatory responses tha t are rare / less frequent with  a potential immune-
mediated aetiology include, but a re not limited to, pericarditi s, sarcoidosis, uveitis and 
other events involving the eye , skin, haematological and rheuma tological events. 
 In addition, infusion-related r eactions and hypersensitivity/an aphylactic reactions with a different 
underlying pharmacological etiology are also considered AESIs. Further information on these 
risks (e.g. presenting symptoms)  can be found in the current ve rsion of the tremelimumab 
Investigator’s Brochure. More sp ecific guidelines for their eva luation and treatment are 
described in detail in the Do sing Modification and Toxicity Man agement Guidelines (please see 
Appendix 1). These guidelines have  been prepared by the Funder to assist the investigators in the 
exercise of his/her clinical judgm ent in treating these types o f toxicities. These guidelines apply 
to AEs considered causally rel ated to the study drug/study regi men by the reporting investigator) 
 
11.1.4  Unexpected Adverse Event 
For this study, an AE is consider ed unexpected when it varies i n nature, intensity or frequency 
from information provided in the c urrent IB, pres cribing inform ation or when it is not included in 
the informed consent document as a potential risk. Unexpected a lso refers to AEs that are 
mentioned in the IB as occurri ng with a class of drugs or are a nticipated from the 
pharmacological properties of t he drug, but are not specificall y mentioned as occurring with the 
particular drug under investigation.    11.1.5  Relatedness 
AEs will be categorized according to the likelihood that they a re related to the study drug(s). 
Specifically, they will be categorized using the following term s:  
 
Unrelated Adverse Event is not related  to the study drug(s)  
Unlikely Adverse Event is doubtfully related  to the study drug(s)  
Possible Adverse Event may be related  to the study drug(s)  
Probable Adverse Event is  likely related  to the study drug(s)  
Definite Adverse Event is clearly related  to the study drug(s)  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 40 of 69 11.2 Reporting 
 11.2.1  Adverse Events  
AEs will be recorded from time of signed informed consent until  30 days after 
discontinuation of study drug(s) or until a new anti-cancer tre atment starts, whichever 
occurs first.  
 AEs will be recorded regardless  of whether or not they are cons idered related to the study 
drug(s).   
 All AEs will be recorded in the s ubject’s medical record and on  the appropriate study 
specific eCRF form within the EDC system. 
 AEs considered related to st udy drug(s) will be followed until resolution to        
 ≤ Grade 1 or baseline, deemed clin ically insignificant, and/or  until a new anti-cancer 
treatment starts, whichever occurs first. 
 Asymptomatic laboratory abnorma lities that do not require treat ment will not be collected 
as adverse events.  
11.2.2  Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) 
 11.2.2.1 Site Requirements for Reporting SAEs to HCRN 
 SAEs will be reported from time of signed informed consent unti l 90 days after 
discontinuation of study drug(s) or until a new anti-cancer tre atment starts, whichever 
occurs first.  
 SAEs will be reported on the SAE Submission Form within  1 business day  of discovery 
of the event.   
 SAEs include events related a nd unrelated to the study drug(s).   
 All SAEs will be recorded in the s ubject’s medical record and o n the appropriate study 
specific eCRF form within the EDC system.   
 All SAEs regardless of relat ion to study drug will be followed until resolution to ≤ Grade 
1 or baseline and/or deemed clini cally insignificant and/or unt il a new anti-cancer 
treatment starts, whichever occurs first. 
 The site will submit the completed SAE Submission Form to HCRN within  1 business day of 
discovery of the event . The form may be submitted to HCRN electronically to 
safety@hoosiercancer.org . The site investigator is res ponsible for informing the IRB an d/or other 
local regulatory bodies as per local requirements.   
 
The original copy of the SAE Submission Form and the email corr espondence must be kept 
within the study file  at the study site. 
 Once the SAE has resolved (s ee resolution guidelines listed abo ve), sites must submit a follow-
up SAE Submission Form within a r easonable timeframe to HCRN el ectronically to 
safety@hoosiercancer.org .   
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 41 of 69 11.2.2.2 HCRN Requirements for Reporting SAEs to AstraZeneca  
HCRN will report all SAEs to Ast raZeneca as stipulated by compa ny within  1 business day  of 
receipt of the SAE Submission For m from a site. Follow-up infor mation will be provided to 
AstraZeneca as it is received fro m site. Send SAE report and ac companying cover page by way 
of email to AstraZeneca’s design ated mailbox:  AEMailboxClinica lTrialTCS@astrazeneca.com 
11.3 Sponsor-Investigator Responsibilities  
HCRN will send a SAE summary to the sponsor-investigator within 1 business day  of receipt of 
SAE Submission Form from a site .  The sponsor-investigator will  promptly review the SAE 
summary and assess for expectedness and relatedness.    11.4 HCRN Responsibilities to FDA HCRN will manage the Investigational New Drug Application (IND)  associated with this 
protocol on behalf of the sponsor-investigator. HCRN will cross -reference this submission to the 
AstraZeneca’s parent IND at the time of submission. Additionall y, HCRN will submit a copy of 
these documents to AstraZeneca at  the time of submission to FDA . 
 For protocols conducted under an IND, HCRN will be responsible for all communication with 
the FDA in accordance with 21CFR312 including but not limited t o the 7 and 15 Day Reports, as 
well as an Annual Progress Report. Additionally, HCRN will subm it a copy of these reports to 
AstraZeneca at the tim e of submission to FDA. 
 11.5 IND Safety Reports Unrelated to this Trial AstraZeneca will provide to HCRN  IND safety reports from extern al studies that involve the 
study drug(s) per their guidelin es.  HCRN will forward safety r eports to the sponsor-investigator 
who will review these reports and de termine if revisions are ne eded to the protocol or consent. 
HCRN will forward these reports to participating sites within 1 business day  of receiving the 
sponsor-investigator’s review .  Based on the sponsor-investigat or’s review, applicable changes 
will be made to the protocol and informed consent document (if required).  All IND safety 
reports will also be made availa ble to sites via the EDC system .    
 Upon receipt from HCRN, site inves tigators (or designees) are r esponsible for submitting these 
safety reports to their respec tive IRBs, as per their IRB polic ies. 
 11.6 Other events requiring reporting  11.6.1 Overdose Use of tremelimumab in doses in ex cess of that specified in the  protocol is considered to be an 
overdose. There is currently no spe cific treatment in the event  of overdose of tremelimumab, and 
possible symptoms of overdose are not established. An overdose with associated AEs will be 
recorded as the AE diagnosis or s ymptoms in the relevant eCRF. 
 If an overdose of a study drug(s) o ccurs in the course of the s tudy, then the site investigator or 
other site personne l will inform HCRN within 1 business day of becoming aware of the event. 
HCRN will report the event to AstraZeneca within 1 business day  of becoming aware of the 
event.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 42 of 69 11.6.2  Pregnancy 
All pregnancies and outcomes of  pregnancy should be reported to  AstraZeneca except for: 
 Pregnancy discovered before the s tudy subject has received any study drugs. 
 Pregnancy of a female partner of  male subject, providing there is no restriction of male 
subject fathering a child. 
 
11.6.3 Maternal exposure If a patient becomes pregnant dur ing the course of the study, t he study drug(s) should be 
discontinued immediately. Pregnanc y itself is not regarded as a n AE unless there is a suspicion 
that the study drug(s) may have i nterfered with the effectivene ss of a contraceptive medication. 
Congenital abnormalities or birth defects and spontaneous misca rriages should be reported and 
handled as SAEs. Elective aborti ons without complications shoul d not be handled as AEs.
 The 
outcome of all pregnancies (sponta neous miscarriage, elective t ermination, ectopic pregnancy, 
normal birth, or congenital abnormality) should be followed up and documented even if the 
patient was discontinued from the study.   If any pregnancy occurs in the cou rse of the study, then the si te investigator or other site 
personnel will inform HCRN within 1 business day  of becoming aware of the event. HCRN will 
report the event to AstraZeneca within 1 business day  of becoming aware of the event.  
 11.6.4 Paternal exposure  Male subjects should refrain f rom fathering a child or donating  sperm during the study and for 
90 days after the last dose of t remelimumab.  Pregnancy of the patient’s partner is not considered 
to be an AE. However, the outcome of all pregnancies (spontaneo us miscarriage, elective 
termination, ectopic pregnanc y, normal birth, or congenital abn ormality) occurring from the date 
of the first dose until 90 days a fter the last dose of tremelim umab therapy should, if possible, be 
followed up and documented.   11.6.5  Reporting of deaths to AstraZeneca 
All deaths that occur during the  study, or within the protocol- defined 90-day post-last dose of 
tremelimumab safety follow-up peri od must be reported to AstraZ eneca as follows: 
 Death that is clearly the res ult of disease progression should be documented but should 
not be reported as an SAE. 
 Where death is not due (or not c learly due) to progression of t he disease under study, the 
AE causing the death mus t be reported to HCRN within 24 hours  and HCRN will report 
to AstraZeneca as a SAE within  24 hours . The report should  contain a comment 
regarding the co-involvement  of progression of disease, if appr opriate, and should assign 
main and contributory causes of death.  
 Deaths with an unknown cause should always be reported as a SAE .  
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 43 of 69 12 STATISTICAL METHODS 
 12.1 Study Design 
This is a phase II trial designe d to estimate the activity of s ingle agent tremelimumab in subjects 
with metastatic uroth elial cancer with dis ease progression desp ite prior treatment with PD-1/PD-
L1 blockade. There is currentl y no standard treatment for such subjects. Therefore, given the 
durability of responses observed w ith immune checkpoint blockad e, even a relatively low 
response proportion could be clin ically meaningful. A Simon’s 2 -stage design will be applied.    
 12.2 Endpoints 
 12.2.1  Definition of Primary Endpoint 
The primary endpoint is to determ ine the response rate by RECIS T 1.1 
 12.2.2  Definition of Secondary Endpoints 
 Safety will be determined according to the NCI Common Terminolo gy Criteria for 
Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) v4.03 
 Duration of response will be the time from the first documentat ion of response to the time 
of progression as per RECIST 1.1 or death  
 Progression-free survival which i s defined as the time from tre atment initiation to death 
or progression, depending on which occurs first 
 Overall survival is defined as the time from treatment initiati on to death  
 12.3 Sample Size and Accrual 
A Simon’s 2-stage design
14 will be applied. Patients who do not receive drug or who do no t 
complete 1 cycle of therapy for non- treatment related causes (e g, traffic accidents, trauma etc) 
will be replaced.   The null hypothesis that the true response rate is 2% will be t ested against a one-sided 
alternative. In the first sta ge, 18 subjects will be accrued. I f there are 0 responses in these 18 
subjects, enrollment will be stopped. Otherwise, 10 additional subjects will be accrued for a total 
of 28. The null hypothesis will be rejected if 3 or more respon ses are observed in 28 subjects. 
This design yields a type I  error rate of 0.02 and power of 80%  when the true response rate is 
15% or larger.  12.4 Assessment of Safety 
The safety population will be de fined as any patients that rece ive at least one dose of 
tremelimumab and will be used in the assessment of toxicity. Sa fety will be determined 
according to the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Ev ents (NCI CTCAE) v4.03. 
All subjects will be evaluable f or adverse event evaluation fro m the time of their first dose of 
study treatment.   
 
12.5 Assessment of Efficacy 
All subjects who have received at least one cycle of therapy an d have had their disease re-
evaluated will be considered eva luable for response (exceptions  will be those who exhibit 
objective disease progressi on prior to the end of Cycle 1 who w ill also be considered evaluable). 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 44 of 69 Patients who do not receive drug o r who do not complete 1 cycle  of therapy for non-treatment 
related causes will be replaced.  12.6 Data Analysis Plans 
 12.6.1  Analysis Plans for Primary Objective 
All subjects with measurable dis ease who have received at least  one cycle of treatment and have 
their disease re-evaluated will  be evaluable for assessment of objective response. The objective 
response rates as determined by RECIST 1.1 and their associated  95% confidence i ntervals will 
be constructed based on the exact binomial test.  
 12.6.2  Analysis Plans for Secondary Objectives 
Any subject who receives at least  one dose of treatment on this  protocol is evaluable for toxicity. 
Toxicity rates will be summarized using frequency tables. Disea se control rates will be analyzed 
based on the exact binomial test. Duration of response will be the time from the first 
documentation of response to the time of progression or death w ill be summarized using 
frequency tables. Progression fr ee survival and overall surviva l curves will be based on the 
Kaplan-Meier method.   12.6.3  Analysis Plans for Exploratory Objectives 
To explore the relationship betw een PD-L1 expression and respon se to treatment, Fisher's exact 
test will be used. To explore th e relationship between molecula r subtype of bladder cancer and 
response to treatment, frequency tables will be constructed and  Fisher's exact test will be used. 
 
To explore the relationship betw een genomic alterations, includ ing mutational load, and changes 
in circulating immune biomarkers  and response to treatment both  Fisher's exact test and T-test 
will be used. Exploratory analys es correlating clinical outcome s and adverse events with stool 
microbiome diversity/composition a s well as assessment of metab olomics and metagenomic 
whole genome sequencing may also be performed.   12.7 Interim Analysis/Crite ria for Stopping Study 
Though there has been limited experience with single agent CTLA -4 blockade in metastatic 
urothelial cancer, prior studies  exploring combination PD-1/PD- L1 plus CTLA-4 blockade in 
metastatic urothelial cancer have reported a treatment-related Grade ≥ 3 adverse event rate of 
approximately 30%.
15 A stopping rule for excessive toxicity will be employed after 6, 12, 18, 
and 24 subjects finish at least one  cycle of treatment. This sa fety stopping rule will be performed 
with respect to all treatment-r elated Grade ≥ 3 adverse events.  Two-sided 95% exact binomial 
confidence intervals (CIs) of t hese treatment-related Grade ≥ 3  adverse event rates will be 
constructed. If their lower  bounds exceed 33%, the study drug w ill be considered unacceptably 
toxic for this patient population and enrollment will be halted . This corresponds to ≥ 5 out of 6 
patients with grade ≥ 3 adverse events, ≥ 8 out of 12 patients with grade ≥ 3 adverse events, ≥ 10 
out of 18 patients with grade ≥  3 adverse events , and ≥ 13 out  of 24 subjects with grade ≥ 3 
adverse events.  There is a possibility of stopping at the 1
st stage if no patients respond t o treatment. In addition, 
the study accrual may be suspende d in the case when none of the  first 17 patients respond and 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 45 of 69 the decision to move onto the 2nd stage hinges on the response of the 18th patient. Otherwise, 
during these safety analyses , enrollment will continue. 
 13 TRIAL MANAGEMENT 
 13.1 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) 
The study will be conducted with guidance from the Tisch Cancer  Institute Cancer Center’s 
DSMP.   HCRN oversight activities include: 
 Review and process all adverse ev ents requiring expedited repor ting as defined in the 
protocol 
 Provide trial accrual progress, safety information, and data su mmary reports to the 
sponsor-investigator  
 Submit data summary reports at least every 6 months to the DSMC  for review according 
to the Tisch Cancer Institu te Cancer Center’s DSMP 
 13.2 Tisch Cancer Institute Cancer Center Data Safety Monitorin g Committee 
HCRN will provide the followin g for the DSMC to review: 
 Adverse event summary report 
 Audit results, if applicable 
 Data related to stopping/decisi on rules described in study desi gn 
 Study accrual patterns  
 Protocol deviations 
 The DSMC will review study data at least every 6 months. Docume ntation of DSMC reviews 
will be provided to sponsor-inve stigator and HCRN.  Issues of i mmediate concern by the DSMC 
will brought to the attention of t he sponsor-investigator and o ther regulatory bodies as 
appropriate.  The sponsor-investigator will work with HCRN to a ddress the DSMC’s concerns.   
 13.3 Data Quality Oversight Activities Remote validation of EDC system data will be completed on a con tinual basis thro ughout the life 
cycle of the study. Automated edit check listings will be used to generate queries in the EDC 
system and transmitted to the site to address in a timely fashi on. Corrections will be made by the 
study site personnel.   Participating sites may also be subject to quality assurance au dits by AstraZeneca-MedImmune 
or its designee as w ell as inspection by a ppropriate regulatory  agencies. 
 13.3.1 Onsite Monitoring Monitoring visits to the trial sites may be made periodically d uring the trial to e nsure key aspects 
of the protocol are followed. S elected source documents will be  reviewed for verification of 
agreement with data entered int o the EDC system.  It is importa nt for the site investigator and 
their relevant personnel to be available for a sufficient amoun t of time during the monitoring 
visits or audit, if applicable. T he site investigator and insti tution guarantee access to source 
documents by HCRN or its designee. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 46 of 69 13.4 Compliance with Trial Registrat ion and Results Posting Requirem ents 
Under the terms of the Food and D rug Administration Modernizati on Act (FDAMA) and the 
Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA), the sponso r-investigator of the trial 
is solely responsible for determi ning whether th e trial and its  results are subject to the 
requirements for submission to t he Clinical Trials Data Bank, http://www.clinicaltrials.gov . All 
results of primary and secondar y objectives must be posted to C T.gov within a year of 
completion.  The sponsor-investigator has delegated responsibil ity to HCRN for registering the 
trial and posting the results  on clinicaltria ls.gov. Informatio n posted will allow subjects to 
identify potentially app ropriate trials for their disease condi tions and pursue pa rticipation by 
calling a central contact number  for further information on app ropriate trial l ocations and study 
site contact information.    14. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING 
 14.1 Data Management 
HCRN will serve as the Clinical R esearch Organization for this trial. Data will be collected 
through a web based clinical resea rch platform, a system compli ant with Good Clinic al Practices 
and Federal Rules and Regulati ons.  HCRN personnel will coordin ate and manage data for 
quality control assurance and integrity. Select data will be co llected and entered into the EDC 
system 
 by study site personnel from par ticipating institutions.   
 14.2 Case Report Forms and Submission 
Generally, clinical data will be e lectronically captured in the  EDC system
 and correlative results 
will be captured in the EDC system or other secure database(s) . If procedures on the study 
calendar are performed for standa rd of care, at minimum, that d ata will be captured in the source 
document. Select standard of care data will also be captured in  the EDC system, according to 
study-specific objectives.   The completed dataset is the sol e property of the sponsor-inves tigator’s institution and should 
not be exported to third parties, e xcept for authorized represe ntatives of appropriate 
Health/Regulatory Authorities, w ithout permission from the spon sor-investigator and HCRN. 
 14.3 Record Retention 
To enable evaluations and/or aud its from Health Authorities/HCR N, the site investigator agrees 
to keep records, including the i dentity of all subjects (suffic ient information to link records; e.g., 
hospital records), all original s igned informed consent forms, copies of all source documents, and 
detailed records of drug disposi tion. All source documents are to remain in the subject’s file and 
retained by the site investigator  in compliance with the site c ontract with HCRN.  No records 
will be destroyed until HCRN confi rms destruction is permitted.  
 14.4 Confidentiality 
There is a slight risk of loss  of confidentiali ty of subject in formation. All records identifying the 
subjects will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted  by the applicable laws and/or 
regulations, will not b e made publicly available. Information c ollected will be maintained on 
secure, password protected electro nic systems. Paper files that  contain personal information will 
be kept in locked and secure lo cations only accessible to the s tudy site personnel. Subjects will 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 47 of 69 be informed in writing that some  organizations including the sp onsor-investigator and his/her 
research associates, HCRN, Ast raZeneca, IRB, or government agen cies, like the FDA, may 
inspect their medical records t o verify the information collect ed, and that all personal 
information made available for inspection will be handled in st rictest confidence and in 
accordance with local data protection laws.  If the results of the  study are published, t he subject’s identi ty will remain confidential. 
 15 ETHICS 
 15.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approval 
The final study protocol and the  final version of the informed consent form must be approved in 
writing by an IRB. The site investigator must submit written ap proval by the IRB to HCRN 
before he or she can enroll subjects into the study.   
 The site investigator is respons ible for informing the IRB of a ny amendment to the protocol in 
accordance with local requirements. In addition, the IRB must a pprove all advertising used to 
recruit subjects for the study. T he protocol must be re-approve d by the IRB, as local regulations 
require.   Progress reports and notificati ons of serious and unexpected ad verse events will be provided to 
the IRB according to local re gulations and guidelines. 
 15.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study 
The study will be performed in acco rdance with ethical principl es originating from the 
Declaration of Helsi nki.  Conduct of the study will be in compl iance with ICH Good Clinical 
Practice, and with all applicab le federal (including 21 CFR par ts 56 & 50), state, or local laws. 
 15.3 Informed Consent Process 
The site investigator will ensure the subject is given full and  adequate oral and written 
information about the nature, pur pose, possible risks and benef its of the study. Subjects must 
also be notified they are free t o discontinue from the study at  any time. The subject should be 
given the opportunity to ask quest ions and allowed time to cons ider the information provided. 
 The subject’s signed and dated i nformed consent must be obtaine d before conducting any 
procedure specifically for the s tudy. The site investigator mus t store the original, signed 
informed consent form. A copy of the signed informed consent fo rm must be given to the 
subject.     
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 48 of 69 16 REFERENCES 
 1.  Balar A V, Galsky MD, Rosenberg JE, et al. Atezolizumab as first-line treatment in 
cisplatin-ineligible pa tients with locall y advanced and metasta tic urothelial carcinoma: a 
single-arm, multicentre, phase 2 trial. Lancet . 2017;389(10064):67-76. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32455-2. 
2.  Balar A, Bellmunt J, O’Donnell PH, et al. Pembrolizumab (pe mbro) as first-line therapy 
for advanced/unresectable or m etastatic urothelial cancer: Prel iminary results from the 
phase 2 KEYNOTE-052 study. Ann Oncol . 2016;27(suppl_6). 
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw435.25. 
3.  Rosenberg JE, Hoffman-Censits J, Powles T, et al. Atezolizu mab in patients with locally 
advanced and metastatic urothe lial carcinoma who have progresse d following treatment 
with platinum-based chemotherapy: a single-arm, multicentre, ph ase 2 trial. Lancet 
(London, England) . March 2016. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00561-4. 
4.  Sharma P, Retz M, Siefker-Rad tke A, et al. Nivolumab in met astatic urothelial carcinoma 
after platinum therapy (CheckMate 275): a multicentre, single-a rm, phase 2 trial. Lancet 
Oncol . January 2017. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30065-7. 
5.  Bellmunt J, de Wit R, Vaughn DJ, et al. Pembrolizumab as Se cond-Line Therapy for 
Advanced Urothelial Carcinoma. N Engl J Med . February 2017:NEJMoa1613683. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1613683. 
6.  Plimack ER, Bellmunt J, Gupta S, et al. Safet y and activity  of pembrolizumab in patients 
with locally advanced or metas tatic urothelia l cancer (KEYNOTE- 012): a non-
randomised, open-label, phase 1b study. Lancet Oncol . 2017;18(2):212-220. 
doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30007-4. 
7.  Massard C, Gordon MS, Sharma S, et al. Safety and Efficacy of Durvalumab 
(MEDI4736), an Anti-Programmed Ce ll Death Ligand-1 Immune Check point Inhibitor, in 
Patients With Advanced Urothelial Bladder Cancer. J Clin Oncol . June 2016. 
doi:10.1200/JCO.2016.67.9761. 
8.  Apolo AB, Infante JR, Balmanoukian A, et al. Avelumab, an A nti-Programmed Death-
Ligand 1 Antibody, In Patients With R efractory Metastatic Uroth elial Carcinoma: Results 
From a Multicenter, Phase Ib Study. J Clin Oncol . April 2017:JCO2016716795. 
doi:10.1200/JCO.2016.71.6795. 
9.  Mangsbo SM, Sandin LC, Anger K,  et al. Enhanced tumor eradi cation by combining 
CTLA-4 or PD-1 blockade with CpG therapy. J Immunother . 2010;33(3):225-235. 
doi:10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181c01fcb00002371-201004000-00001 [pii].  
10.  Carthon BC, Wolchok JD, Yuan J, et al. Preoperative CTLA-4  blockade: tolerability and 
immune monitoring in the setting of  a presurgical clinical tria l. Clin Cancer Res . 
2010;16(10):2861-2871. doi:1078-0432.CCR-10-0569 [pii]10.1158/1 078-0432.CCR-10-
0569. 
11.  Galsky MD, Hahn NM, Albany C, e t al. Phase II trial of gem citabine + cisplatin + 
ipilimumab in patients with m etastatic urothelial cancer. ASCO Meet Abstr . 
2016;34(2_suppl):357. http://meeting. ascopubs.org/cgi/content/a bstract/34/2_suppl/357. 
12.  Sharma P, Callahan MK, Calvo E, et al. Efficacy and safety  of nivolumab plus ipilimumab 
in previously treated metasta tic urothelial cancer. In: SITC . ; 2016. 
13.  Antonia S, Goldberg SB, Balmanoukian A, et al. Safety and antitumour activity of 
durvalumab plus tremelimumab in non-small cell lung cancer: a m ulticentre, phase 1b 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294 
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 49 of 69 study. Lancet Oncol . 2016;17(3):299-308. doi:10. 1016/S1470-2045(15)00544-6. 
14.  Callahan MK, Kania BE, Iyer G, et al. Evaluation of the cl inical activity of ipilimumab 
(IPI) plus nivolumab (NIVO) in pati ents (pts) with NIVO-refract ory metastatic urothelial 
cancer (UC). J Clin Oncol . 2017;35(6_suppl):384-384. 
doi:10.1200/JCO.2017.35.6_suppl.384. 
15.  Ascierto PA, Del Vecchio M , Robert C, et al. Ipilimumab 10  mg/kg versus ipilimumab 3 
mg/kg in patients with unresectabl e or metastatic melanoma: a r andomised, double-blind, 
multicentre, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol . March 2017. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30231-
0. 
16.  Seymour L, Bogaerts J, Perrone  A, et al. iRECIST: guidelin es for response criteria for use 
in trials testing immunotherapeutics. Lancet Oncol . 2017;18(3):e143-e152. 
doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30074-8. 
17.  Simon R. Optimal two-stage  designs for phase II clinical t rials. Control Clin Trials . 
1989;10(1):1-10. doi:0197-2456(89)90015-9 [pii]. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 50 of 69 APPENDIX 1 
Dosing Modification and Toxic ity Management Guidelines for Immu ne-Mediated, Infusion -Related, and  
Non-Immune –Mediated Reactions   
General Considerations 
Dose Modifications Toxicity Management 
Drug administration m odifications of study drug/study regimen 
will be made to manage potential immune-related AEs based on 
severity of treatment-emergent toxicities graded per NCI CTCAE 
v4.03. 
In addition to the criteria for permanent discontinuation of st udy 
drug/study regimen based on CTC g rade/severity (table below), 
permanently discontinue study  drug/study regimen for the 
following conditions: 
 Inability to reduce corticoste roid to a dose of ≤10 mg of 
prednisone per day (or equivalent) within 12 weeks  after last 
dose of study drug/study regimen 
 Recurrence of a previously expe rienced Grade 3 treatment-
related AE following resumption of dosing 
Grade 1  No dose modification 
Grade 2  Hold study drug/study regi men dose until Grade 2 
resolution to Grade ≤1. 
If toxicity worsens, then tr eat as Grade 3 or Grade 4. 
Study drug/study regimen can be resumed once eve nt stabilizes t o 
Grade ≤1 after comple tion of steroid taper. 
Patients with endocrinopathies who may require prolonged or 
continued steroid replacement can be retreated with study 
drug/study regimen on th e following conditions: 
1. The event stabilizes and is controlled. 
2. The patient is clinically stable as per Investigator or treatin g 
physician’s clinical judgement. 
3. Doses of prednisone are at ≤10 mg/day or equivalent. It is recommended that management of immune-mediated adverse ev ents (imAEs) follows the 
guidelines presented in this table: 
− It is possible that events with an inflammatory or immune media ted mechanism could occur 
in nearly all organs, s ome of them not noted specifically in th ese guidelines. 
− Whether specific immune -mediated events (and/or laboratory indi cators of such events) are 
noted in these guidelines or not, patients should be thoroughly  evaluated to rule out any 
alternative etiology (e.g., disease progression, concomitant me dications, and in fections) to a 
possible immune-mediated event. In the absence of a clear alter native etiology, all such 
events should be manag ed as if they were i mmune related. Genera l recommendations 
follow. 
− Symptomatic and topical therapy s hould be considered for low-gr ade (Grade 1 or 2, unless 
otherwise specified) events.  
− For persistent (>3 to 5 days) lo w-grade (Grade 2) or severe (Gr ade ≥3) events, promptly 
start prednisone 1 to 2 mg/ kg/day PO or IV equivalent. 
− Some events with high likelihood for morbidity and/or mortality  – e.g., myo-carditis, or 
other similar events even if the y are not currently noted in th e guidelines – should progress 
rapidly to high dose IV corticos teroids (methylprednisolone at 2 to 4 mg/kg/day) even if the 
event is Grade 2, and if clinical  suspicion is high and/or ther e has been clinical 
confirmation. Consider, as necessary, discussing with the study  physician, and promptly 
pursue specialist consultation. 
− If symptoms recur or worsen during corticosteroid tapering (28 days of taper), increase the 
corticosteroid dose (prednisone d ose [e.g., up to 2 to 4 mg/kg/ day PO or IV equivalent]) 
until stabilization or improvement of symptoms, then resume cor ticosteroid tapering at a 
slower rate (>28 days of taper). 
− More potent immunosuppressives su ch as TNF inhibitors (e.g., in fliximab) (also refer to the 
individual sections of the imAE s for specific type of immunosup pressive) should be 
considered for events not respon ding to systemic steroids. Prog ression to use of more potent 
immunosuppressives should proceed m ore rapidly in events with h igh likelihood for 
morbidity and/or mortality – e.g ., myocarditis, o r other simila r events even if they are not 
currently noted in the guidelines – when these events are not r esponding to systemic 
steroids. 
− With long-term steroid and other immunosuppressive use, conside r need for Pneumocystis 
jirovecii pneumonia (PJP, formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii  pneumonia) 
prophylaxis, gastrointestinal pro tection, and gluc ose monitorin g. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 51 of 69 Dosing Modification and Toxic ity Management Guidelines for Immu ne-Mediated, Infusion -Related, and  
Non-Immune –Mediated Reactions   
General Considerations 
Dose Modifications Toxicity Management 
Grade 3  Depending on the indiv idual toxicity, study 
drug/study regimen ma y be permanently 
discontinued. Please refe r to guidelines below. 
Grade 4  Permanently discontinue study drug/study regimen. 
Note: For Grade ≥3 asymptomatic amylase or lipase levels, hold 
study drug/study regimen, and  if complete work up shows no 
evidence of pancreatitis, study drug/study regimen may be 
continued or resumed. 
Note: Study drug/study regimen should be permanently 
discontinued in Grade 3 events with high likelihood for morbidi ty 
and/or mortality – e.g., myocardi tis, or other similar events e ven if 
they are not currently noted i n the guidelines. Similarly, cons ider 
whether study drug/study regi men should be permanently 
discontinued in Grade 2 events with high likelihood for morbidi ty 
and/or mortality – e.g., myocardi tis, or other similar events e ven if 
they are not currently noted in the guidelines – when they do n ot 
rapidly improve to Grade <1 upon treatment with systemic steroi ds 
and following full taper 
Note: There are some exceptions  to permanent discontinuation of  
study drug for Grade 4 events (i.e., hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, Type 1 diabetes mellitus).  
 − Discontinuation of study drug/st udy regimen is not mandated for  Grade 3/Grade 4 
inflammatory reactions attributed  to local tumor response (e.g. , inflammatory reaction at 
sites of metasta tic disease and lymph nodes). Continuation of s tudy drug/study regimen in 
this situation should be  based upon a benefit-risk analysis for  that patient. 
AE Adverse event; CTC Common Toxi city Criteria; CTCAE Common Te rminology Criteria for Adverse E vents; imAE imm une-mediated adv erse event; IV intravenous; NCI 
National Cancer Institute; PO By mouth. 
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 52 of 69 Specific Immune-Mediated Reactions 
Adverse Events Severity Grade of the 
Event (NCI CTCAE 
version 4.03) Dose Modifications Toxicity Management 
Pneumonitis/Interstitial 
Lung Disease (ILD) Any Grade General Guid ance For Any Grade: 
− Monitor patients for signs and symptoms of pneumonitis or 
ILD (new onset or worsening sh ortness of breath or cough). 
Patients should be evaluated w ith imaging and pulmonary 
function tests, including other diagnostic procedures as 
described below. 
− Initial work-up may include clinical evaluation, monitoring of 
oxygenation via pulse oxime try (resting and exertion), 
laboratory work-up, and high- resolution CT scan. 
Grade 1 
(asymptomatic, clinical 
or diagnostic 
observations only; intervention not 
indicated) No dose modifications  required. However, 
consider holding study drug/study 
regimen dose as clinic ally appropriate and 
during diagnostic work-up for other etiologies. For Grade 1 (radiogra phic changes only): 
− Monitor and closely follow up in 2 to 4 days for clinical 
symptoms, pulse oximetry (re sting and exertion), and 
laboratory work-up and then  as clinically indicated. 
− Consider Pulmonary and Inf ectious disease consult. 
Grade 2 
(symptomatic; medical 
intervention indicated; limiting instrumental 
ADL) Hold study drug/study regimen dose until 
Grade 2 resolution to Grade ≤1. 
 If toxicity worsens, then treat as 
Grade 3 or Grade 4. 
 If toxicity improves to Grade ≤1, 
then the decision to reinitiate study 
drug/study regimen will be based 
upon treating physician’s clinical judgment and after completion of 
steroid taper. For Grade 2 (mild to mo derate new symptoms): 
− Monitor symptoms daily and  consider hospitalization. 
− Promptly start systemic ster oids (e.g., prednisone 1 to 
2 mg/kg/day PO or IV equivalent). 
− Reimage as clinically indicated. 
− If no improvement within 3 to 5 days, additional workup 
should be considered and pr ompt treatment with IV 
methylprednisolone 2 t o 4 mg/kg/day started 
− If still no improvement with in 3 to 5 days despite IV 
methylprednisolone at 2 to 4  mg/kg/day, promptly start 
immunosuppressive therapy s uch as TNF inhibitors 
(e.g., infliximab at 5 mg/kg ev ery 2 weeks). Caution: It is 
important to rule out sepsis and refer to infliximab label for 
general guidance before using infliximab. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, or  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 53 of 69 anti-PJP treatment (refer to c urrent NCCN guidelines for 
treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation])a 
− Consider pulmonary and inf ectious disease consult. 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with study physician. 
Grade 3 or 4 
(Grade 3: severe 
symptoms; limiting self-care ADL; oxygen 
indicated) 
 (Grade 4: life-
threatening respiratory 
compromise; urgent intervention indicated 
[e.g., tracheostomy or 
intubation]) Permanently discontinue study drug/study 
regimen. For Grade 3 or 4 (severe or new symptoms, new/worsening hypoxia , 
life-threatening): 
− Promptly initiate empiric IV methylprednisolone 1 to 
4 mg/kg/day or equivalent. 
− Obtain Pulmonary and Infectious  disease consult; consider, as 
necessary, discussing w ith study physician. 
− Hospitalize the patient. 
− Supportive care (e.g., oxygen). 
− If no improvement within 3 to 5 days, additional workup 
should be considered and prom pt treatment with additional 
immunosuppressive therapy s uch as TNF inhibitors 
(e.g., infliximab at 5 mg/kg ev ery 2 weeks’ dose) started. 
Caution: rule out sepsis and ref er to infliximab label for gene ral 
guidance before using infliximab. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophyl actic antibiotics, antifungals, 
and, in particular, anti-PJP treatment (refer to current NCCN 
guidelines for treatment of cance r-related infections [Category  
2B recommendation]).
a 
Diarrhea/Colitis Any Grade General Guidance For Any Grade: 
− Monitor for symptoms that may be related to 
diarrhea/enterocolitis (abdominal pain, cramping, or changes in  
bowel habits such as increased  frequency over baseline or 
blood in stool) or related to bow el perforation (such as sepsis , 
peritoneal signs, and ileus). 
− Patients should be thoroughly e valuated to rule out any 
alternative etiology (e.g., disease progression, other 
medications, or infections), inc luding testing for clostridium 
difficile toxin, etc. 
− Steroids should be considered  in the absence of clear 
alternative etiology, even for low-grade events, in order to 
prevent potential progressi on to higher grade event. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 54 of 69   − Use analgesics carefully; they can mask symptoms of 
perforation and peritonitis. 
Grade 1 
(Diarrhea: stool 
frequency of <4 over 
baseline per day) (Colitis: asymptomatic; 
clinical or diagnostic 
observations only) No dose modifications. For Grade 1: 
− Monitor closely for worsening symptoms. 
− Consider symptomatic treat ment, including hydration, 
electrolyte replacement, dietary changes (e.g., American 
Dietetic Association colitis diet), and loperamide. Use 
probiotics as per treating phys ician’s clinical judgment. 
Grade 2 
(Diarrhea: stool 
frequency of 4 to 6 over 
baseline per day) 
(Colitis: abdominal pain; mucus or blood in 
stool) Hold study drug/study regimen 
until resolution to Grade ≤1 
 If toxicity worsens, then treat as 
Grade 3 or Grade 4. 
 If toxicity improves to Grade ≤1, 
then study drug/study regimen can 
be resumed after  completion of 
steroid taper. For Grade 2: 
− Consider symptomatic treat ment, including hydration, 
electrolyte replacement, dietary changes (e.g., American 
Dietetic Association colitis d iet), and lope ramide and/or 
budesonide. 
− Promptly start prednisone 1  to 2 mg/kg/day PO or IV 
equivalent. 
− If event is not respons ive within 3 to 5 days or worsens despit e 
prednisone at 1 to 2 m g/kg/day PO or IV equivalent, GI consult 
should be obtained for consider ation of further workup, such as  
imaging and/or colonoscopy, to  confirm colitis and rule out 
perforation, and prompt treatmen t with IV methylprednisolone 
2 to 4 mg/kg/day started. 
− If still no improvement within 3 t o 5 days despite 2 to 4 mg/kg  
IV methylprednisolone, promptl y start immunos uppressives 
such as infliximab at 5 mg/kg once every 2 weeks
a. Caution:  it 
is important to rule out bowel perforation and refer to 
infliximab label for general gui dance before using infliximab. 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with study physician if no 
resolution to Grade ≤1 in 3 to 4 days. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, an d 
anti-PJP treatment (refer to c urrent NCCN guidelines for 
treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation]).a 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 55 of 69  Grade 3 or 4 
(Grade 3 diarrhea: stool 
frequency of ≥7 over baseline per day; 
Grade 4 diarrhea: life 
threatening consequences) (Grade 3 colitis: severe 
abdominal pain, change in 
bowel habits, medi-cal intervention indi-cated, 
peritoneal signs; 
Grade 4 colitis: life-threatening consequences, 
urgent intervention indicated) 
 Grade 3 
Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen for Grade 3 if toxicity does not improve to Grade 
≤1 within 14 days; study 
drug/study regimen can be resumed after completion of steroid taper.  
 
Grade 4 
Permanently discontinue  
study drug/study regimen.  For Grade 3 or 4: 
− Promptly initiate empiric IV methylprednisolone 2 to 
4 mg/kg/day or equivalent. 
− Monitor stool frequency and vol ume and maintain hydration. 
− Urgent GI consult and imag ing and/or colonoscopy as 
appropriate. 
− If still no improvement w ithin 3 to 5 days of IV 
methylprednisolone 2 to 4 mg/ kg/day or equivalent, promptly 
start further immunosuppressives (e.g., infliximab at 5 mg/kg 
once every 2 weeks). Caution : Ensure GI consult to rule out 
bowel perforation and refer to infliximab label for general 
guidance before using infliximab. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, an d 
anti-PJP treatment (refer to c urrent NCCN guidelines for 
treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation]).
a 
Hepatitis  
(elevated LFTs) 
Infliximab should not be 
used for management of immune-related hepatitis. Any Grade General Guid ance For Any Grade: 
− Monitor and evaluate liver func tion test: AST, ALT, ALP, and 
TB. 
− Evaluate for alternative etiologies (e.g., viral hepatitis, dis ease 
progression, concomita nt medications). 
Grade 1 
(AST or ALT >ULN and 
≤3.0×ULN and/or TB > ULN 
and ≤1.5×ULN)  No dose modifications. 
 If it worsens, then treat as 
Grade 2 event. For Grade 1: 
− Continue LFT monitoring per protocol. 
Grade 2 
(AST or  
ALT >3.0×ULN and ≤5.0×ULN and/or  
TB >1.5×ULN and 
≤3.0×ULN)  Hold study drug/study regimen 
dose until Grade 2 resolution 
to Grade ≤1. 
 If toxicity worsens, then treat 
as Grade 3 or Grade 4. 
 If toxicity improves to Grade 
≤1 or baseline, resume study For Grade 2: 
− Regular and frequent checking of L FTs (e.g., every 1 to 2 days)  
until elevations of these are improving or resolved. 
− If no resolution to Grade ≤1 in  1 to 2 days, consider, as 
necessary, discussing w ith study physician. 
− If event is persistent (>3 to 5 days) or worsens, promptly star t 
prednisone 1 to 2 mg/kg/da y PO or IV equivalent. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 56 of 69 drug/study regimen after 
completion of steroid taper. − If still no improvement within  3 to 5 days despite 1 to 
2 mg/kg/day of prednisone PO or IV equivalent, consider 
additional work up and start prompt treatment with IV 
methylprednisolone 2 to 4 mg/kg/day. 
− If still no improvement within  3 to 5 days despite 2 to 
4 mg/kg/day of IV methylpre dnisolone, promptly start 
immunosuppressives (i.e.,  mycophenolate mofetil).a Discuss 
with study physician if mycophenolate mofetil is not available.  
Infliximab should NOT be used.  
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, an d 
anti-PJP treatment (refer to c urrent NCCN guidelines for 
treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation]).a 
Grade 3 or 4 
(Grade 3: AST or  
ALT >5.0×ULN and 
≤20.0×ULN and/or  
TB >3.0×ULN and ≤10.0×ULN) 
 
(Grade 4: AST or  
ALT >20×ULN and/or  
TB >10×ULN) For Grade 3: 
For elevations in transaminases 
≤8 × ULN, or elevations in 
bilirubin ≤5 × ULN: 
 Hold study drug/study regimen 
dose until resolution to Grade 
≤1 or baseline 
 Resume study drug/study 
regimen if elevations 
downgrade to Grade ≤1 or 
baseline within 14 days and 
after completion of steroid 
taper. 
 Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen if the 
elevations do not downgrade 
to Grade ≤1 or baseline within 
14 days 
For elevations in transaminases 
>8 × ULN or eleva tions in bilirubin 
>5 × ULN, discontinue study drug/study regimen. 
Permanently discontinue study 
dru
g/stud y regimen for an y case For Grade 3 or 4: 
− Promptly initiate empiric IV methylprednisolone at 1 to 
4 mg/kg/day or equivalent. 
− If still no improvement within  3 to 5 days despite 1 to 
4 mg/kg/day methylprednisolone  IV or equivalent, promptly 
start treatment with immunos uppressive therapy (i.e., 
mycophenolate mofetil). Discuss with study physician if 
mycophenolate is not available. Infliximab should NOT be 
used.  
− Perform hepatology consult, a bdominal workup, and imaging 
as appropriate. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, an d 
anti-PJP treatment (refer to c urrent NCCN guidelines for 
treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation]).a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 57 of 69 meeting Hy’s law  criteria (AST 
and/or ALT >3 × ULN + bilirubin >2 × ULN without initial findings 
of cholestasis (i.e., elevated 
alkaline P04) and in the absence of any alternative cause.
b 
 
For Grade 4: Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Nephritis or renal 
dysfunction 
(elevated serum 
creatinine) Any Grade General Guid ance For Any Grade: 
− Consult with nephrologist. 
− Monitor for signs and symptoms t hat may be related to changes 
in renal function (e.g., routine urinalysis, elevated serum BUN  
and creatinine, decreased creatinine clearance, electrolyte 
imbalance, decrease in urine  output, or proteinuria). 
− Patients should be thoroughly e valuated to rule out any 
alternative etiology (e.g., disease progression or infections).  
− Steroids should be considered  in the absence of clear 
alternative etiology even for low-grade events (Grade 2), in 
order to prevent poten tial progression to higher grade event. 
 
 
Grade 1 
(Serum creatinine > 1 to 1.5 × 
baseline; > ULN to 1.5 × 
ULN) No dose modifications. For Grade 1: 
− Monitor serum creatinine weekly and any accompanying 
symptoms. 
 If creatinine returns to baseline, resume its regular 
monitoring per study protocol. 
 If creatinine worsens, depending on the severity, treat 
as Grade 2, 3, or 4. 
− Consider symptomatic treat ment, including hydration, 
electrolyte replacement, and diuretics. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 58 of 69 Grade 2 
(serum creatinin e >1.5 to 3.0 × 
baseline; >1.5 to 3.0 × ULN)  Hold study drug/study regimen 
until resolution to Grade ≤1 or baseline.  
 If toxicity worsens, then treat 
as Grade 3 or 4. 
 If toxicity improves to Grade 
≤1 or baseline,  then resume 
study drug/study regimen after 
completion of steroid taper. For Grade 2: 
− Consider symptomatic treat ment, including hydration, 
electrolyte replacement, and diuretics. 
− Carefully monitor serum creatinine every 2 to 3 days and as 
clinically warranted. 
− Consult nephrologist and consider  renal biopsy if clinically 
indicated. 
− If event is persistent (>3 to 5 days) or worsens, promptly star t 
prednisone 1 to 2 mg/kg/da y PO or IV equivalent. 
− If event is not respons ive within 3 to 5 days or worsens despit e 
prednisone at 1 to 2  mg/kg/day PO or IV e quivalent, additional 
workup should be considered and prompt treatment with IV 
methylprednisolone at 2 to 4 mg/kg/day started. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, an d 
anti-PJP treatment (refer to c urrent NCCN guidelines for 
treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation]).
a 
− When event returns to baselin e, resume study drug/study 
regimen and routine serum cr eatinine monitoring per study 
protocol. 
Grade 3 or 4 
(Grade 3: serum creatinine 
>3.0 × baseline; >3.0 to 
6.0 × ULN; 
 
Grade 4: serum creatinine >6.0 
× ULN)  Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen. For Grade 3 or 4: 
− Carefully monitor serum creatinine on daily basis. 
− Consult nephrologist and consider  renal biopsy if clinically 
indicated. 
− Promptly start prednisone 1  to 2 mg/kg/day PO or IV 
equivalent. 
− If event is not respons ive within 3 to 5 days or worsens despit e 
prednisone at 1 to 2  mg/kg/day PO or IV e quivalent, additional 
workup should be considered and prompt treatment with IV 
methylprednisolone 2 to 4 mg/kg/day started. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, an d 
anti-PJP treatment (refer to c urrent NCCN guidelines for 
treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation]).a 
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 59 of 69 Rash 
(excluding bullous skin 
formations) Any Grade 
(refer to NCI CTCAE v 4.03 
for definition of severity/grade 
depending on type of skin 
rash) General Guidance For Any Grade: 
− Monitor for signs and sympto ms of dermatitis (rash and 
pruritus). 
− IF THERE IS ANY BULLOUS FORMATION, THE STUDY 
PHYSICIAN SHOULD BE CONTACTED AND STUDY 
DRUG DISCONTINUED.  
Grade 1 No dose modifications. For Grade 1: 
− Consider symptomatic treatment , including oral antipruritics 
(e.g., diphenhydramine or hydroxyzine) and topical therapy 
(e.g., urea cream). 
Grade 2 For persistent (>1 to 2 weeks) 
Grade 2 events, hold scheduled 
study drug/study regimen until 
resolution to Grade ≤1 or baseline. 
 If toxicity worsens, then treat 
as Grade 3. 
 If toxicity improves to Grade 
≤1 or baseline,  then resume 
drug/study regimen after 
completion of steroid taper. For Grade 2: 
− Obtain dermatology consult. 
− Consider symptomatic treatment , including oral antipruritics 
(e.g., diphenhydramine or hydroxyzine) and topical therapy 
(e.g., urea cream). 
− Consider moderate-stre ngth topical steroid. 
− If no improvement of rash/skin lesions occurs w ithin 3 to 
5 days or is worsening despite s ymptomatic treatment and/or 
use of moderate strength topica l steroid, consider, as necessar y, 
discussing with study physician  and promptly start systemic 
steroids such as prednisone 1  to 2 mg/kg/day PO or IV 
equivalent. 
− Consider skin biopsy if the event  is persistent for >1 to 2 wee ks 
or recurs. 
 
 
Grade 3 or 4 For Grade 3: 
Hold study drug/study regimen 
until resolution to Grade ≤1 or 
baseline. 
If temporarily holding the study 
drug/study regimen does not 
provide improvement of the Grade 3 skin rash to Grade ≤1 or baseline 
within 30 days, then permanently For Grade 3 or 4: 
− Consult dermatology. 
− Promptly initiate empiric IV methylprednisolone 1 to 
4 mg/kg/day or equivalent. 
− Consider hospitalization. 
− Monitor extent of rash [Rule of Nines]. 
− Consider skin biopsy (preferabl y more than 1) a s clinically 
feasible. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, an d 
anti-PJP treatment 
(refer to current NCCN guidelines for 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 60 of 69 discontinue study drug/study 
regimen. 
 
For Grade 4: 
Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen. 
 treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation]).a 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with study physician. 
Endocrinopathy 
(e.g., hyperthyroidism, 
hypothyroidism, Type 1 diabetes mellitus, 
hypophysitis, 
hypopituitarism, and adrenal insufficiency; 
exocrine event of 
amylase/lipase increased also included in this 
section) 
 Any Grade 
(depending on the type of 
endocrinopathy, refer to NCI CTCAE v4.03 for defining the 
CTC grade/severity) General Guidance For Any Grade: 
− Consider consulting an endocrinologist for endocrine events. 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with study physician. 
− Monitor patients for signs and symptoms of endocrinopathies. 
Non-specific symptoms include headache, fatigue, behavior 
changes, changed me ntal status, vertig o, abdominal pain, 
unusual bowel habits, pol ydipsia, polyuria,  hypotension, and 
weakness. 
− Patients should be thoroughly e valuated to rule out any 
alternative etiology (e.g., di sease progression including brain  
metastases, or infections). 
− Depending on the suspected e ndocrinopathy, monitor and 
evaluate thyroid function tests: TSH, free T3 and free T4 and other relevant endocrine and rel ated labs (e.g. , blood glucose 
and ketone lev els, HgA1c). 
− For modest asymptomatic elevations in serum amylase and 
lipase, corticosteroid treatment  is not indicate d as long as th ere 
are no other signs or symptoms of pancreatic inflammation. 
− If a patient experiences an AE that is thought to be possibly o f 
autoimmune nature (e.g., thyro iditis, pancreatitis, hypophysiti s, 
or diabetes insipidus), the investigator should send a blood 
sample for appropriate auto immune antibody testing. 
 
Grade 1 No dose modifications. For Grade 1 (including those with asymptomatic TSH elevation): 
− Monitor patient with appropria te endocrine function tests. 
− For suspected hypophysitis/h ypopituitarism, consider 
consultation of an endocrinologi st to guide assessment of early -
morning ACTH, cortisol, TSH  and free T4; also consider 
gonadotropins, sex horm ones, and prolactin l evels, as well as 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 61 of 69 cosyntropin stimulation test ( though it may not be useful in 
diagnosing early secondary adrenal insufficiency). 
− If TSH < 0.5 × LLN, or TSH >2 ×  ULN, or consistently out of 
range in 2 subsequent measurem ents, include free T4 at 
subsequent cycles as clinica lly indicated and consider 
consultation of an endocrinologist. 
Grade 2 For Grade 2 endocrinopathy other 
than hypothyroidism and Type 1 
diabetes mellitus, hold study 
drug/study regimen dose until patient is clinically stable. 
 If toxicity worsens, then treat 
as Grade 3 or Grade 4. 
Study drug/study regimen can be 
resumed once event stabilizes and 
after completion of steroid taper. 
Patients with endocrinopathies who 
may require prolonged or 
continued steroid replacement (e.g., adrenal insufficiency) can be 
retreated with study drug/study 
regimen on the following conditions: 
1. The event stabilizes and is 
controlled. 
2. The patient is clinically stable 
as per investigator or treating 
physician’s clinical 
judgement. 
3. Doses of prednisone are 
≤10 mg/day or equivalent. For Grade 2 (including those with symptomatic endocrinopathy): 
− Consult endocrinologist to gui de evaluation of endocrine 
function and, as indicated by s uspected endocrinopathy and as 
clinically indicated, consider pituitary scan. 
− For all patients with  abnormal endocrine work up, except those 
with isolated hypothyroidism or  Type 1 DM, and as guided by 
an  endocrinologist, consider shor t-term corticosteroids (e.g.,  1 
to 2 mg/kg/day methylpredniso lone or IV equivalent) and 
prompt initiation of treat ment with relevant hormone 
replacement (e.g., hydro cortisone, sex hormones). 
− Isolated hypothyroidism may be treated with replacement 
therapy, without study drug/stud y regimen interruption, and 
without corticosteroids. 
− Isolated Type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) may be treated with 
appropriate diabetic therapy, w ithout study drug/study regimen 
interruption, and without corticosteroids. 
− Once patients on steroids are  improving, gradually taper  
immunosuppressive steroids (as appropriate and with guidance 
of endocrinologist) over ≥28 days  and consider prophylactic 
antibiotics, antifungals, and anti- PJP treatment (refer to curr ent 
NCCN guidelines for treatment of cancer-related infections 
[Category 2B recommendation]).
a 
− For patients with normal e ndocrine workup (laboratory 
assessment or MRI scans), repeat laboratory assessments/MRI 
as clinically indicated. 
Grade 3 or 4 For Grade 3 or 4 endocrinopathy 
other than hypothyroidism and 
Type 1 diabetes mellitus, hold For Grade 3 or 4: 
− Consult endocrinologist to gui de evaluation of endocrine 
function and, as indicated by s uspected endocrinopathy and as 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 62 of 69   study drug/study regimen dose 
until endocrinopathy symptom(s) are controlled.  
Study drug/study regimen can be 
resumed once event stabilizes and after completion of steroid taper. 
Patients with endocrinopathies who 
may require prolonged or continued steroid replacement 
(e.g., adrenal insufficiency) can be 
retreated with study drug/study regimen on the following 
conditions: 
1. The event stabilizes and is 
controlled. 
2. The patient is clinically stable 
as per investigator or treating 
physician’s clinical 
judgement. 
3. Doses of prednisone are 
≤10 mg/day or equivalent. clinically indicated, consider pituitary scan. Hospitalization 
recommended. 
− For all patients with  abnormal endocrine work up, except those 
with isolated hypothyroidism or  Type 1 DM, and as guided by 
an  endocrinologist, promp tly initiate empiric IV 
methylprednisolone 1 to 2 mg/kg/ day or equivalen t, as well as 
relevant hormone replacement (e.g., hydrocortisone, sex 
hormones). 
− For adrenal crisis, severe dehydr ation, hypotension, or shock, 
immediately initiate IV corticosteroids with mineralocorticoid 
activity. 
− Isolated hypothyroidism may be treated with replacement 
therapy, without study drug/stud y regimen interruption, and 
without corticosteroids. 
− Isolated Type 1 diabetes mellitus may be treated with 
appropriate diabetic therapy, w ithout study drug/study regimen 
interruption, and without corticosteroids. 
− Once patients on steroids are  improving, gradually taper 
immunosuppressive steroids (as appropriate and with guidance 
of endocrinologist) over ≥28 days  and consider prophylactic 
antibiotics, antifungals, and anti- PJP treatment (refer to curr ent 
NCCN guidelines for treatment of cancer-related infections 
[Category 2B recommendation]).
a 
 
Neurotoxicity 
(to include but not be 
limited to limbic encephalitis and 
autonomic neuropathy, 
excluding Myasthenia Gravis and Guillain-
Barre) Any Grade 
(depending on the type of 
neurotoxicity, refer to NCI CTCAE v4.03 for defining the 
CTC grade/severity) General Guidance For Any Grade: 
− Patients should be evaluated to rule out any alternative etiolo gy 
(e.g., disease progression, infec tions, metabolic  syndromes, or  
medications). 
− Monitor patient for general symptoms (headache, nausea, 
vertigo, behavior change, or weakness). 
− Consider appropriate diagnostic testing (e .g., electromyogram 
and nerve conduction investigations). 
− Perform symptomatic treatment w ith neurological consult as 
appropriate. 
−  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 63 of 69    Grade 1  No dose modifications. For Grade 1: 
− See “Any Grade” re commendations above. 
Grade 2  For acute motor neuropathies or 
neurotoxicity, hold study drug/study regimen dose until 
resolution to Grade ≤1. 
For sensory 
neuropathy/neuropathic pain, 
consider holding study drug/study 
regimen dose until resolution to Grade ≤1. 
If toxicity worsens, then treat 
as Grade 3 or 4. 
Study drug/study regimen can be 
resumed once event improves to 
Grade ≤1 and after completion of steroid taper. For Grade 2: 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with the study physician. 
− Obtain neurology consult. 
− Sensory neuropathy/neuropathi c pain may be managed by 
appropriate med ications (e.g., gabapentin or duloxetine). 
− Promptly start systemic steroi ds prednisone 1 to 2 mg/kg/day 
PO or IV equivalent. 
− If no improvement within 3 to 5 da ys despite 1 to 2 mg/kg/day 
prednisone PO or IV equivale nt, consider additional workup 
and promptly treat w ith additional immunos uppressive therapy 
(e.g., IV IG). 
Grade 3 or 4  For Grade 3: 
Hold study drug/study regimen 
dose until resolution to Grade ≤1. 
Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen if Grade 3 
imAE does not resolve to Grade ≤1 
within 30 days. 
 
For Grade 4: 
Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen. For Grade 3 or 4: 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with study physician. 
− Obtain neurology consult. 
− Consider hospitalization. 
− Promptly initiate empiric IV methylprednisolone 1 to 
2 mg/kg/day or equivalent. 
− If no improvement within 3  to 5 days despite IV 
corticosteroids, consider additi onal workup and promptly treat 
with additional immunosuppres sants (e.g., IV IG). 
− Once stable, gradually taper steroids over ≥28 days. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 64 of 69 Peripheral neuromotor 
syndromes 
(such as Guillain-Barre 
and myasthenia gravis) Any Grade General Guid ance For Any Grade: 
− The prompt diagnosis of i mmune-mediated peripheral 
neuromotor syndromes is importa nt, since certain patients may 
unpredictably experien ce acute decompensati ons that can result 
in substantial morbidity or in th e worst case, death. Special c are 
should be taken for certain senti nel symptoms that may predict 
a more severe outcome, such as  prominent dysphagia, rapidly 
progressive weakness, and signs o f respiratory insufficiency or  
autonomic instability. 
− Patients should be evaluated to rule out any alternative etiolo gy 
(e.g., disease progression, infec tions, metabolic  syndromes or 
medications). It should be noted  that the diagnos is of immune-
mediated peripheral neuromotor s yndromes can be particularly 
challenging in patients with underlying cancer, due to the 
multiple potential confounding effects of cancer (and its 
treatments) throughout the neuraxi s. Given the importance of 
prompt and accurate diagnosis, it is essential to have a low 
threshold to obtain a neurological consult. 
− Neurophysiologic dia gnostic testing (e .g., electromyogram and 
nerve conduction invest igations, and “repe titive stimulation” i f 
myasthenia is suspected) are ro utinely indicated upon suspicion  
of such conditions and may be b est facilitated by means of a 
neurology consultation. 
− It is important to consider that the use of steroids as the pri mary 
treatment of Guillain-Barre is not typically considered 
effective. Patients requiring t reatment should be started with IV 
IG and followed by plasmapheresi s if not responsive to IV IG. 
 
Grade 1 No dose modifications. For Grade 1: 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with the study physician. 
− Care should be taken to monitor pa tients for sentinel symptoms 
of a potential decompensa tion as described above. 
− Obtain a neurology consult. 
Grade 2 Hold study drug/study regimen 
dose until resolution to Grade ≤1. 
Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen if it does not resolve to Grade ≤1 within 30 days For Grade 2: 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with the study physician. 
− Care should be taken to monitor pa tients for sentinel symptoms 
of a potential decompensa tion as described above. 
− Obtain a neurology consult 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 65 of 69 or if there are signs of respiratory 
insufficiency or autonomic instability. − Sensory neuropathy/neuropathi c pain may be managed by 
appropriate med ications (e.g., gabapentin or duloxetine). 
MYASTHENIA GRAVIS: 
o Steroids may be successfully  used to treat myasthenia 
gravis. It is importa nt to consider that steroid therapy 
(especially with high doses) may result in transient 
worsening of myasthenia and should typically be 
administered in a monitore d setting under supervision 
of a consulting neurologist. 
o Patients unable to tolerate steroids may be candidates 
for treatment with plasmapheresis or IV IG. Such 
decisions are best made i n consultation with a 
neurologist, taking into account the unique needs of 
each patient. 
o If myasthenia gravis-like neurotoxicity is present, 
consider starting AChE inhibitor therapy in addition 
to steroids. Such therapy, if successful, can also serve 
to reinforce the diagnosis. 
GUILLAIN-BARRE: 
o It is important to c onsider here that the use of steroids 
as the primary treatment of Guillain-Barre is not 
typically considered effective. 
o Patients requiring treatment  should be started with IV 
IG and followed by plasma pheresis if not responsive 
to IV IG. 
 
Grade 3 or 4 For Grade 3: 
Hold study drug/study regimen 
dose until resolution to Grade ≤1. 
Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen if Grade 3 imAE does not resolve to Grade ≤1 
within 30 days or if there are signs 
of respiratory insufficiency or autonomic instability. 
 For Grade 3 or 4 (severe o r life-threatening events): 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with study physician. 
− Recommend hospitalization. 
− Monitor symptoms and obtai n neurological consult. 
MYASTHENIA GRAVIS: 
o Steroids may be successfully  used to treat myasthenia 
gravis. They should typica lly be administered in a 
monitored setting under su pervision of a consulting 
neurologist. 
o Patients unable to tolerate steroids may be candidates 
for treatment with plasmapheresis or IV IG. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 66 of 69 For Grade 4: 
Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen. o If myasthenia gravis-like neurotoxicity present, 
consider starting AChE inhibitor therapy in addition 
to steroids. Such therapy, if successful, can also serve 
to reinforce the diagnosis. 
GUILLAIN-BARRE: 
o It is important to c onsider here that the use of steroids 
as the primary treatment of Guillain-Barre is not 
typically considered effective. 
o Patients requiring treatment  should be started with IV 
IG and followed by plasma pheresis if not responsive 
to IV IG. 
 
Myocarditis  Any Grade General Guidance 
Discontinue drug permanently if 
biopsy-proven immune-mediated 
myocarditis. For Any Grade: 
− The prompt diagnosis of immune-mediated myocarditis is 
important, particularly in patients with baseline 
cardiopulmonary disease and reduced cardiac function.  
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with the study physician. 
− Monitor patients for signs and symptoms of myocarditis (new 
onset or worsening chest pain, arrhythmia, shortness of breath,  
peripheral edema). As some sym ptoms can overlap with lung 
toxicities, simultaneously evaluat e for and rule out pulmonary 
toxicity as well as other causes (e.g., pulmonary embolism, 
congestive heart failure, maligna nt pericardial effusion). A 
Cardiology consultation should be  obtained early, with prompt 
assessment of whether and when to complete a cardiac biopsy, 
including any other diagnostic procedures. 
− Initial work-up should include  clinical evaluation, BNP, 
cardiac enzymes, ECG, echocar diogram (ECHO), monitoring 
of oxygenation via pulse oximetr y (resting and exertion), and 
additional laboratory work-up as indicated. Spiral CT or 
cardiac MRI can complement ECHO to assess wall motion 
abnormalities when needed. 
− Patients should be thoroughly e valuated to rule out any 
alternative etiology (e.g., disease progression, other 
medications, or infections) 
 Grade 1 No dose modifications required 
unless clinical sus picion is high, in 
which case hold study drug/study 
regimen dose durin g diagnostic For Grade 1 (no definitive findings): 
- Monitor and closely follow up in 2 to 4 days for clinical 
symptoms, BNP, cardiac enzymes , ECG, ECHO, pulse oximetry 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 67 of 69 (asymptomatic with laboratory 
(e.g., BNP) or cardiac imaging abnormalities)  work-up for other etiologies.
 If 
study drug/study regimen is held, resume after complete resolution to 
Grade 0.  (resting and exertion), and laboratory work-up as clinically 
indicated.  
- Consider using steroids if clinical suspicion is high.  
 Grade 2, 3 or 4 
(Grade 2: Symptoms with 
mild to moderate activity or 
exertion) 
 
 (Grade 3: Severe with 
symptoms at rest or with 
minimal activity or exertion; 
intervention indicated) 
 
(Grade 4: Life-threatening 
consequences; urgent 
intervention indicated (e.g., 
continuous IV therapy or 
mechanical hemodynamic support)) 
 - If Grade 2 -- Hold study 
drug/study regimen dose until 
resolution to Grade 0. If toxicity rapidly improves to Grade 0, 
then the decision to reinitiate 
study drug/study regimen will be based upon treating 
physician’s c linical judgment 
and after completion of steroid taper. If toxicity does not 
rapidly improve, permanently. 
discontinue study drug/study regimen. 
If Grade 3-4, permanently 
discontinue study drug/study 
regimen.  For Grade 2-4: 
− Monitor symptoms daily, hospitalize. 
− Promptly start IV methylpredni solone 2 to 4 mg/kg/day or 
equivalent after Cardiology consultation has determined 
whether and when to complete d iagnostic procedures including 
a cardiac biopsy. 
− Supportive care (e.g., oxygen). 
− If no improvement within 3  to 5 days despite IV 
methylprednisolone at 2 to 4  mg/kg/day, promptly start 
immunosuppressive therapy s uch as TNF inhibitors 
(e.g., infliximab at 5 mg/kg ev ery 2 weeks). Caution: It is 
important to rule out sepsis and refer to infliximab label for 
general guidance before using infliximab. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, or  
anti-PJP treatment (refer to c urrent NCCN guidelines for 
treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation]).
a 
Myositis/Polymyositis 
(“Poly/myositis”) Any Grade General Guid ance For Any Grade: 
− Monitor patients for signs and symptoms of poly/myositis. 
Typically, muscle weakness/pain occurs in proximal muscles including upper arms, thighs, s houlders, hips, neck and back, 
but rarely affects the extremiti es including hands and fingers;  
also difficulty breathing and/or trouble swallowing can occur 
and progress rapidly. Increased  general feelings of tiredness 
and fatigue may occur, and there can be new-onset falling, 
difficulty getting up from a fa ll, and trouble c limbing stairs,  
standing up from a seated position, a nd/or reaching up. 
− If poly/myositis is suspected, a Neurology consultation should 
be obtained early, with pro mpt guidance on diagnostic 
procedures. Myocarditis may co- occur with poly/myositis; 
refer to guidance under Myocarditis. Given breathing 
com
plications, refer to guidance under Pneumonitis/ILD. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 68 of 69 Given possibility o f an existent (but previously unknown) 
autoimmune disorder, consider  Rheumatology consultation. 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with the study physician. 
− Initial work-up should include c linical evaluation, creatine 
kinase, aldolase, LDH, BUN/creatinine, erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein level, urine myoglobin , 
and additional laboratory work-up as indicated, including a 
number of possible rheumatol ogical/antibody tests (i.e., 
consider whether a rheumatolog ist consultation is indicated and  
could guide need for rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, 
anti-smooth muscle, antisynthetas e [such as anti-Jo-1], and/or 
signal-recognition particle an tibodies). Confirmatory testing 
may include electromyography , nerve conduction studies, MRI 
of the muscles, a nd/or a muscle biopsy. Consider Barium 
swallow for evaluation of  dysphagia or dysphonia. 
Patients should be thoroughly evalu ated to rule out any alterna tive 
etiology (e.g., disease progressi on, other medications, or infe ctions).  
 Grade 1 
(mild pain)  - No dose modifications. For Grade 1: 
− Monitor and closely follow up in 2 to 4 days for clinical 
symptoms and initiate evaluation as clinically indicated. 
− Consider Neurology consult. 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with the study physician. 
 Grade 2 
(moderate pain associated with 
weakness; pain limiting 
instrumental activities of daily 
living [ADLs]) Hold study drug/study regimen 
dose until resolution to Grade ≤1. 
- Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen if it does not 
resolve to Grade ≤1 within 30 days or if there are signs of 
respiratory insufficiency. For Grade 2: 
− Monitor symptoms daily and  consider hospitalization. 
− Obtain Neurology consult, and initiate evaluation. 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with the study physician. 
− If clinical course is rapidly progressive  (particularly if 
difficulty breathing and/or tr ouble swallowing), promptly start  
IV methylprednisolone 2 to 4 mg/kg/day systemic steroids 
along with receiving input fro m Neurology consultant  
− If clinical course is not rapidly progressive, start systemic 
steroids (e.g., prednisone 1  to 2 mg/kg/day PO or IV 
equivalent); if no improvement  within 3 to 5 days, continue 
additional work up and start treatment with IV 
methylprednisolone 2 to 4 mg/kg/day 
− If after start of IV methylpre dnisolone at 2 to 4 mg/kg/day 
there is no improvement within 3  to 5 days, consider start of 
immunosuppressive therapy s uch as TNF inhibitors 
(e.g., infliximab at 5 mg/kg ev ery 2 weeks). Caution: It is 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU17-294  
Version Date: 28MAR2019 C onfidential Page 69 of 69 aASCO Educational Book 2015 “Manag ing Immune Checkpoint Blocking  Antibody Side Effects” b y Michael Postow MD. 
bFDA Liver Guidance Document 2009 Guidance for Industry: Drug In duced Liver Injury – Premarketing Clinical Evaluation. 
AChE Acetylcholine esterase; ADL  Activities of daily living; AE  Adverse event; ALP Alkaline p hosphatase test; ALT Alanine amin otransferase; AS T Aspartate aminotransferase; 
BUN Blood urea nitrogen; CT Comput ed tomography; CTCAE Common T erminology Criteria for Adverse Events; ILD Interstitial lung d isease; imAE immune-mediated 
adverse event; IG Immunoglobulin; IV  Intravenous; GI Gastrointe stinal; LFT Liver function tests;  LLN Lower limit of normal; MR I  Magnetic resonance imaging; NCI  
National Cancer Institute; NCCN  National Comprehensive Cancer Network; PJP Pneumocystis jirovecii  pneumonia (formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii  pneumonia); 
PO  By mouth; T3  Triiodothyronin e; T4 Thyroxine; TB Total bili rubin; TNF Tumor necrosis factor; TSH Thyroid-stimulating hormo ne; ULN Upper li mit of normal. 
 
 important to rule out sepsis and refer to infliximab label for 
general guidance before using infliximab. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, or  
anti-PJP treatment (refer to c urrent NCCN guidelines for 
treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation]).a 
 Grade 3 or 4 
(pain associated with severe 
weakness; limiting self-care 
ADLs) For Grade 3: 
Hold study drug/study regimen 
dose until resolution to Grade ≤1. 
Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen if Grade 3 
imAE does not resolve to Grade ≤1 within 30 days or if there are signs 
of respiratory insufficiency. 
 For Grade 4: 
- Permanently discontinue study 
drug/study regimen. For Grade 3 or 4 (severe o r life-threatening events): 
− Monitor symptoms closely; recommend hospitalization. 
− Obtain Neurology consult, and complete full evaluation. 
− Consider, as necessary, discussing with the study physician. 
− Promptly start IV methylpre dnisolone 2 to 4 mg/kg/day 
systemic steroids along with r eceiving input from Neurology 
consultant. 
− If after start of IV methylpre dnisolone at 2 to 4 mg/kg/day 
there is no improvement within 3  to 5 days, consider start of 
immunosuppressive therapy s uch as TNF inhibitors 
(e.g., infliximab at 5 mg/kg ev ery 2 weeks). Caution: It is 
important to rule out sepsis and refer to infliximab label for 
general guidance before using infliximab. 
− Consider whether patient may require IV IG, plasmapheresis. 
− Once the patient is improving,  gradually taper steroids over 
≥28 days and consider prophylac tic antibiotics, antifungals, or  
anti-PJP treatment (refer to c urrent NCCN guidelines for 
treatment of cance r-related infecti ons [Category 2B 
recommendation]).a 