Version 5/16/2019 
  
Title:  In Vivo  Effects of Fibrinogen Concentrate (FC) versus Cryoprecipitate on the 
Neonatal Fibrin Network Structure after Cardiopulmonary Bypass (CPB)  
 
Protocol version date:  May 16, 2019  
 
NCT number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
  
Version 5/16/2019 
 SPA YIG Protocol  
 
Title:  In Vivo  Effects of Fibrinogen Concentrate (FC) versus Cryoprecipitate on the 
Neonatal Fibrin Network Structure after Cardiopulmonary Bypass (CPB)  
 
Principal Investigator: Laura A Downey, MD  
Co-PI: Nina  Guzzetta, MD  
 
Abstract  
 
Like most organ systems in the newborn, the hematologic system is not fully developed 
at birth. Studies have shown both quantitative and qualitative deficiencies in many pro - 
and anticoagulation proteins (1). Neonates with congenital heart disease (CHD) often 
require cardiac surgery and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) within a few days of birth.  Their immature coagulation system, effects of CPB, and the complexity of the surgical 
repair contribute to the potential for a substantial coagulopathy following CPB.  
Transfusion of red blood cells (RBCs), platelets, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), and cryoprecipitate is often needed to restore post -CPB hemostasis. However, excessive 
bleeding and perioperative transfusions are independent predictor s for morbidity and 
mortality (2 -4). Therefore, developing strategies to reduce bleeding and transfusion 
requirements in neonates after CPB is an urgent need.  
 The most common hemostatic derangement after CPB is an acute acquired 
hypofibrinogenemia, which compromises fibrin clot generation and platelet 
aggregation, resulting in increased bleeding and need for allogenic blood product 
transfusions.  Currently, management of this acquired hypofibrinogenemia is replaced 
with a blood product, cryoprecipitate. Ho wever, f ibrinogen concentrate, RiaSTAP (CSL 
Bering), is a commercially available product that is being used off -label in cardiac and 
pediatric surgery to reduce bleeding and transfusions.  Riastap, made from human 
plasma, contains purified fibrinogen as a pasteurized, lyophilized powder  that has 
several advantages over cryoprecipitate: 1) small  volume ; 2) accurate dosing ; 3) shorter 
preparation time since no blood typing or thawing are required; 4) lower risk of infectious transmission; 5) l ower risk of allergic and immunologic reactions  (5). In 
addition, recent studies have demonstrated that fibrinogen in neonates exists in a 
neonatal form that is distinct from the adult form of fibrinogen.  Of particular concern, 
clots formed from a mixture  of adult and neonatal fibrinogen, simulating transfusion, 
took twice as long to degrade as clots containing pure neonatal fibrinogen.  These 
results raise concerns about the ability of the immature neonatal fibrinolytic system to 
degrade mixed clots and t herefore a potential increased risk of adverse thrombotic 
events after the administration of adult fibrinogen.  However, a study specifically 
targeting neonates undergoing open -heart surgery with CPB has not been done to 
determine the efficacy of fibrinoge n concentrate  in this population.  
 
Version 5/16/2019 
 In this study, we plan to complete a randomized, control trial in neonates undergoing 
cardiac surgery to characterize the in vivo  effect of transfusion with either 
cryoprecipitate or fibrinogen concentrate on clot kineti cs and degradation. Our 
secondary goal is to correlate individual clot properties to patient outcomes, specifically the degree of postoperative bleeding, transfusion requirements and signs or symptoms of a postoperative thrombosis.  
 
Introduction and Backg round  
 
In patients undergoing open -heart surgery (OHS), transfusion of allogenic blood 
products is independently associated with increa sed morbidity and mortality (6,7 ). In 
response to this, research in adult cardiac anesthesia has focused on blood product  
usage and developing algorithms to limit blood product exposure. Due to the smaller 
population, considerable variability in patient characteristics, and wide range of procedures performed in pediatric cardiac patients, the literature regarding blood conse rvation strategies for pediatric cardiac patients is limited. In children undergoing 
OHS, there are no published algorithms even though product exposure, particularly in neonates, is significant . The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) has 
determined pediatric transfusion medicine (PTM) to be a high priority for clinical and translational research, specifically targeting transfusion strategies that could reduce 
short and long -term morbidity and mortality (8 ).  
 
Congenital heart defects are t he most common type of birth defect, affecting 
approximately 1% of births in the US (9 ).  Up to 20% of these patients require cardiac 
surgery wit hin the first 30 days of life (9 ).  Neonates are extremely susceptible to the 
coagulopathic effects of CPB due to an immature coagulation system, massive 
hemodilution from large circuit primes, and extensive suture lines that accompany 
complex  congenital cardiac repairs (10 -11). While all neonates requiring CPB experience 
bleeding, up to 25% may suffer excessive bl eeding r equiring massive transfusions (10 ). 
Increasing transfusions of allogenic blood products during pediatric cardiac surgery are 
associated with increased mortality, prolonged mechanical ventilation, prolonged 
hospital stays, increased risk of infectio ns, kidney injury, and negative immunologic 
responses ( 3-4-7). Given the safety concerns and the effects on the immune system 
associated with blood product administration, the search for alternative options to treat 
coagulopathy remains an important challe nge.  Unfortunately, there exists a paucity of 
adequately studied pharmacologic options to reduce post -CPB bleeding in neonates. 
Therefore, the aim of this study is to evaluate an effective, yet safe, pharmacologic alternative to blood transfusions for man aging post- operative bleeding in neonates after 
CPB.  
 
Like most organ systems in the newborn, the hematologic system is not fully 
developed at birth, but the parallel maturation of the coagulation and fibrinolytic systems maintains the hemostatic balance between thrombosis and bleeding. Several 
Version 5/16/2019 
 studies have demonstrated that neonates have quantitative and qualitative deficiencies 
in many pro - and  anticoagulation proteins (1, 15 -17). Specifically, there is a “fetal 
fibrinogen” that is qualitatively dysfunctional and exists in a fetal form until approximately one year of age (15 ). In fact, several ex vivo  studies have demonstrated 
improved fibrin network structure in neonatal pediatric cardiac patients (1) with the addition of adult fibr inogen.  However, Brown et al (1 ) demonstrated that adult 
fibrinogen does not integrate seamlessly with neonatal fibrinogen and may increase clot degradation times, thus increasing the risk of post- operative thrombosis.  
 In addition to an immature hema tologic system, fibrinogen, the final component 
of the clotting pathway, is one of the earliest coagulation proteins to become depleted during major bleeding and surgery with CPB.  Studies have reported worse outcomes in patients with lower fibrinogen levels in multiple clinical settings including trauma, cardiac , and pediatric surgeries (18 -22).  As a result, an increasing body of literature has 
demonstrated that targeting higher fibrinogen levels reduced blood loss and transfusions in pediatric patients unde rgoing craniofacial and scoliosis surgery (19 ).  
The available options for fibrinogen replacement are cryoprecipitate and FC. In the 
United States, cryoprecipitate has been the traditional source of fibrinogen. 
Cryoprecipitate contains a high concentration  of fibrinogen, around 15 g/L (23 ), and the 
procoagulant factors vWF, FXIII, and FVIII ( 23)).  Cryoprecipitate is prepared as single 
units, which are pooled prior to administration with a typical dose being approximately 
2-3 units for a neonate.  The risk of viral transmission is similar to that of FFP, the 
fibrinogen concentration is variable, and bl ood group matching is needed (23 ). The time 
to thaw cryoprecipitate is often 45 -90 minutes. Cryoprecipitate was withdrawn from 
most European countries years ago due to safety concerns, but remains available in the USA. In contrast, FC contains purified fibrinogen without other coagulation factors.  
Viral inactivation during the manufacturing process minimizes th e risk of viral 
transmission (5 ). The concentration  of fibrinogen is standardized, and the 
administration volume is low (5 ).  In addition, the time to availability is short as it does 
not require cross -matching or thawing. FC has been effective and well tolerated in 
various clinical settings. As a result, FC is being used off- label for the treatment of 
bleeding in pediatric patients. Administration of FC to pediatric patients has proven 
successful in decreasing major blood loss in the setting of scoliosis and craniosynostosis 
surgery (19 ).  Galas et al. (20) demonstrated that FC was an effective substitute for 
cryoprecipitate in a post -bypass transfusion algorithm in older pediatric cardiac 
patients (ages: 1 month -5 years). However, to date, no study has examined the use of FC 
in neonates after cardiac surge ry with CPB or how FC interfaces with the neonatal clot 
structure, kinetics, and degradation.  
 This  study represents a shift in the design of hemostatic therapy for neonatal 
coagulopathy. While many institutions continue to treat post- CPB bleeding in neon ates 
with the  transfusion of blood products consisting primarily of platelets and 
cryoprecipitate , Europe and an increasing number of pediatric institutions are replacing 
Version 5/16/2019 
 cryoprecipitate with fibrinogen concentrate . Given the safety risks and immunologic 
effects associated with blood transfusions, the search for effective alternatives to blood 
products for managing post- bypass coagulopathy is essential. To date, the studies on 
neonatal clot structure and kinetics are based on ex vivo  addition of adult fibrinogen.  
Therefore, this is the first in vivo  study to directly compare the effect of cryoprecipitate 
or FC on the neonatal fibrin network after CPB surgery. Our first hypothesis is that clots formed from FC will display similar structural characteristics as those formed with 
cryoprecipitate.  However, because FC lacks FXIII, an important factor for forming a stable fibrin network but also causing greater resistance to degradation (14 ), we also 
hypothesize that clots f ormed from FC will be degraded faster by the neonatal 
fibrinolytic system, thus reducing the thrombotic risk associated with transfusion of adult blood products.  This work is significant because it is the first in vivo study to 
specifically 1) compare in v ivo transfusion of cryoprecipitate to FC on neonatal clot 
structure, strength, and kinetics, 2) assess the degradation rates of two types of adult 
fibrinogen by the neonatal system, and 3) correlate clot structure and degradation with 
clinical outcomes.   
 
Significance:  
 
Overall Aim:  Determine the effects of post -CBP fibrinogen transfusion on the 
neonatal fibrin network to develop effective and safe strategies for managing 
coagulopathies in neonates. This proposal compares the in vivo  effect of post -CPB 
administration of FC, a blood pr oduct alternative, to cryoprecipitate on neonatal clot 
properties. Our previous studies using cryoprecipitate suggest that adult fibrinogen 
does not seamlessly integrate with neonatal fibrinogen and may result in prolonged clot 
degradation, thus increasing  the risk of thrombotic events. It is unclear if this is a direct 
result of the adult fibrinogen molecule or the other clot stabilizing factors in cryoprecipitate. This is the first in vivo  study to 1) compare transfusion of 
cryoprecipitate to FC on neonatal clot structure, 2) assess the degradation rates between the two types of fibrinogen replacement, and 3) correlate clot structure and kinetics with clinical outcomes.  
 
Central Hypothesis:  We hypothesize that FC clots will have similar structural 
charact eristics to clots formed from transfused cryoprecipitate, but that FC clots will be 
degraded faster by the neonatal fibrinolytic system.  
 
Specific Aims:  
Aim 1A : Characterize coagulation factors and properties of clot structure, 
strength, and polymerization  kinetics in neonates undergoing CPB surgery after the 
transfusion of either FC or cryoprecipitate.  
Hypothesis 1A : Clots formed after administration of FC will have similar strength 
and polymerization kinetics as clots formed with cryoprecipitate.  
 
Version 5/16/2019 
 Aim 1B : Compare clot degradation rates in neonates undergoing CPB surgery 
prior to transfusion of adult fibrinogen, immediately after the administration of FC or 
cryoprecipitate, upon arrival to the ICU, and at 24hours post -operatively.   
Hypothesis 1B : Clots formed after the administration of FC will have faster 
degradation times at 24hours than those formed with cryoprecipitate.  
  
Aim 2:  To complement aims 1A and 1B, we will examine the correlation of clot 
structure and kinetics to clinical outcomes with specific attention to: 1) transfusion requirements within 24 hours of surgery; 2) 24 -hour chest tube output; 3) evidence of 
adverse thrombotic events.  
 Hypothesis 2: Patients who have faster clot degradation times will have decreased 
risk of post- operative  thrombotic events, but no difference in transfusion requirements 
or chest tube output.  
 
Summary:  The proposed work represents an innovative and radical shift in managing 
neonatal coagulopathy. Neonatal CPB patients receive multiple blood products, consisting primarily of platelets and fibrinogen (cryoprecipitate) to reestablish 
hemostasis after CPB.  These procedures are often complicated by excessive bleeding 
and repeated transfusions, which are associated with increased mortality and morbidity. Blood pr oducts are prepared from adult blood, and our recent studies have 
demonstrated that components of the adult coagulation system, namely fibrinogen , do 
not integrate seamlessly with the neonatal coagulation system.  Therefore, developing alternative strategi es to reduce blood transfusions and achieve hemostasis are critical. 
This study proposes to evaluate how two fibrinogen replacement therapies – FC and cryoprecipitate – interface with neonatal fibrin network properties.  We will enroll 36 
neonates undergoi ng elective cardiac surgery and randomize them to receive either 
cryoprecipitate or FC as part of the post- CPB transfusion protocol. We will collect blood 
at 4 time points 1) baseline; 2) post -transfusion of platelets and either cryoprecipitate or 
FC; 3) upon arrival to the ICU; 4 ) 24 hours after surgery.  The samples will be used to 
measure coagulation factors, analyze the fibrin network structure by confocal and 
scanning electron microscopy, strength parameters by rheology and atomic force microscopy (AFM), polymerization by absorbency and thrombin clotting times, and 
degradation kinetics by a customs fluidics device.   
 
Experimental Design and Methods:  
 
In this proposal, we aim to compare the effects of post- bypass transfusion of 
cryoprecipitate to fibrinogen concentrate (FC) on neonatal clot structure, clot kinetics, and clot degradation times. We will further characterize the levels of important 
procoagulants (thrombin, FXIII, vWF, fibrinogen) throughout the perioperative process to allow for a direct comparison between the current standard of care, cryoprecipitate, 
and an alternative source of fibrinogen, FC. Additionally, studies have demonstrated 
increased risk of thrombosis associated wit h more blood transfusions (24 -25) or elevated 
Version 5/16/2019 
 levels of vWF (25 ) in neonates and infants after CPB. As demonstrated by our group, ex 
vivo mixtures of purified neonatal fibrinogen and purified adult fibrinogen (derived 
from cryoprecipitate) alter clot structure and have prolonged degradation times, 
increasing the potential for post- transfusion thrombosis. However, these studies were 
carried out using clots formed in vitro  from the addition of purified neonatal and adult  
fibrinogen, which do not fully mimic the structure of clots formed in vivo . Therefore, we 
plan to carry out a prospective, randomized control trial to examine the in vivo  effects of 
cryoprecipitate versus fibrinogen concentrate as an alternative treatment for post- CPB 
coagulopathy in neonates undergoing cardiac surgery ( Figure 6 ).   
 
Study Design: This study is a prospective, randomized control trial designed to evaluate 
fibrinogen concentrate as an alternative therapy to cryoprecipitate in treating post- CPB 
coagulopathy in neonates undergoing cardiac surgery.  After informed consent is obtained, we  will randomize infants undergoing cardiac surgery to receive 
cryoprecipitate (standard of care) or fibrinogen concentrate (FC) (study arm) as part of a post -bypass transfusion algorithm. For patients enrolled in the study, we will follow 
our standard anes thetic management, cardiopulmonary bypass protocol, and 
transfusion thresholds in the operating room and ICU.  Patient demographics, relevant 
clinical data, standard laboratory data, and adverse events will be collected for each 
subject. In addition to our  standard of care labs, whole blood samples will be collected 
from each study patient to analyze various properties of the neonatal fibrin network, 
including structure, strength, and polymerization and degradation kinetics, after the transfusion of either cryoprecipitate or FC.  These studies will allow us to directly compare clotting dynamics in the presence of the current standard of care for treating 
surgically induced coagulopathy, adult cryoprecipitate, and the potential alternative 
therapy FC.   
 
Stud y Population:  As discussed above, neonates have unique aspects of their coagulation 
cascade that warrant specific biological consideration. This study will be a single -center 
prospective, randomized control trial.  After informed and written parental conse nt, a 
total of 36 neonates (age less than 30 days) undergoing elective cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass will be enrolled at Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta. The following criteria will be used to determine patient eligibility:  
      
Inclusion C riteria:  
 1. Full term neonates (36- 42 weeks gestational age)  
             2. Infants <  30 days of age  at time of surgery  
             3. APGAR score of 6 or greater at 5 minutes after delivery  
      4. Neonates undergoing elective cardiac surgery requir ing CPB at Children’s 
Healthcare of Atlanta  
      5. Parents willing to participate and able to understand and sign the provided informed consent  
 
Version 5/16/2019 
 Exclusion Criteria:  
     1. Preterm neonates (less than 36 weeks gestation)  
     2. Patients undergoing an em ergent procedure or surgery not requiring CPB  
     3. Patients with personal or family history of a coagulation defect or 
coagulopathy  
     4. Parents unwilling to participate or unable to understand and sign the provided 
informed consent  
 
Recruitment and Enrollment  After a patient is deemed eligible for the study, informed 
and written consent will be obtained from the parents or legal guardian. Only those 
patients who meet the entry criteria will be approached for study participation.  Ther e 
will be no costs for the participants.  At any time, parents and legal guardians will have 
the option of withdrawing their child from the study.  
 
Randomization  As they present to Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, patients will be 
enrolled consecutively and randomized to receive either FC or cryoprecipitate as part of 
a standardized transfusion algorithm.  Once on CPB, patients will be randomized using 
block randomization with variable blocks . Patients will be randomly assigned (1:1) to 
receive either cry oprecipitate (control group) or fibrinogen concentrate (FC) (study 
group) as part of our post- bypass transfusion algorithm. Ideally, all practitioners would 
be blinded to the study. However, the dose of fibrinogen concentrate is diluted in normal saline an d may be up to approximately 50mls.  The use of a placebo would 
require the administration of up to 50mls of normal saline, 20% of a blood volume in a 
3kg neonate. The hemodiluational effects of placebo would potentially confound the 
results comparing the two groups. Therefore, the anesthesiologist, who will be administrating either cryoprecipitate or FC, will be aware of the group allocation.  
Parents, surgeons, and critical care physicians will be blinded to the group allocation.  
 
Rationale for Standardiz ed Anesthetic, Cardiopulmonary Bypass and Anticoagulation 
Management  In order to minimize confounding factors, we will follow our standard 
anesthetic management, cardiopulmonary bypass protocol, and anticoagulation 
strategy.  
 
Anesthesia Management and Car diopulmonary Bypass Management  
Anesthesia, CPB, and surgery will be performed by the same teams of anesthesiologists, 
perfusionists, and surgeons.  Anesthesia techniques will follow institutional protocol, which include a balanced anesthesia technique and necessary invasive monitoring, 
including arterial and central pressure monitoring.  
 
Cardiopulmonary Bypass management  
Nonpulsatile CPB is performed using a nonheparin -coated system, a Terumo FX -05 
hollow -fiber membrane oxygenator (Terumo Cardiovascular Sy stems, Ann Arbor, MI), 
and Livanova SMArt -coated neonatal circuit (LIVANOVA USA (Sorin Group USA), 
Version 5/16/2019 
 Arvada, CO, USA).  All circuits contain a 250- 300 ml priming volume, which include 
50ml 25% albumin (Grifols), Plasmalyte, 0.5mg/kg mannitol, calcium gluconate, and 
8.4% sodium bicarbonate to normalize the pH. Packed RBCs (pRBCs) are added to the 
circuit as needed to achieve and maintain a hematocrit of 30% throughout the duration of CPB.  In accordance with institutional policy, patients having cardiac surger y receive 
pRBCs that are less than 14 days old. 50ml fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is added to CPB 
prime and another 50 ml FFP is added upon re -warming. Conventional or zero- balance 
ultrafiltration is performed throughout the bypass period at both institutions .  For all 
patients,  pH-stat blood gas management i s used during bypass.  
 
Anticoagulation  
Anticoagulation is established with 500units/kg of porcine heparin with 1000 units of 
heparin added to the CPB prime. Kaolin -activated ACT values greater than 480 se conds 
are confirmed prior to the initiation of CPB (i- STAT®1 Analyzer; Abbot Point of Care 
Inc, Abbott Park, IL, USA). Additional heparin is administered as necessary during CPB 
to maintain an ACT >480 seconds.  After completion of surgery, patients are re warmed 
to 36
oC and weaned from CPB. Protamine (5mg/kg) is used to neutralize heparin upon 
completion of CPB and confirmed with ACT. Additional protamine is administered if ACT levels are above baseline values. All neonates (patients <30 days of age) will receive anti -fibrinolytic therapy.  Tranexamic acid was used: 100mg/kg bolus dose pre -
bypass, 100mg/kg bypass dose, and an infusion at 10mg/kg/hr that was terminated at transport to the ICU.  
 
Transfusion Algorithm : In order to minimize confounding factors, a transfusion 
algorithm and transfusion thresholds will be followed in the operating room and ICU for all patients enrolled in the study.  RBCs will be transfused for hematocrit <32% for 
acyanotic neonates, while cyanotic neonates are transfused RBCs for a  goal Hct 35 -40%.  
RBC transfusion is not permitted for hematocrit values higher than 45%.   
 
After enrollment in our study, patients will be randomized to receive either 
cryoprecipitate or fibrinogen concentrate as part of our transfusion protocol.  Our 
standard transfusion algorithm for neonates includes a quarter to half a unit of platelets and two units of cryoprecipitate, which historically resulted in a median post -operative 
fibrinogen level of 345mg/dL (258 -469) (unpublished data).  Using recent studies as 
well as our historical data, we chose a post -transfusion target fibrinogen level of 
300mg/dL.  After separation from bypass, patients will receive platelets and either cryoprecipitate or FC. For patients randomized to the FC arm, we will calculate the dose of fibrinogen concentrate to achieve a level of 300mg/dL after drug administration 
using the following equation f rom Riastap ® Package insert (5 ):  
 
 
 
 
Version 5/16/2019 
  
 
Dose = (Target Level -Measured Level)  
                             1.7 x weight(kg)  
 
  
In order to account for the hemodilutional  effects of the bypass prime on fibrinogen 
levels, the “measured level” will be the fibrinogen level measured after 10min on CPB. 
If a patient in either arm continues to have post- bypass bleeding, the anesthesiologist 
will use point of care testing and the  transfusion thresholds outlines in the transfusion 
algorithm to determine appropriate products for transfusion.   
 
Sample Procurement and Processing – At Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, whole blood 
samples will be collected from 36 neonates scheduled for elective cardiac surgery 
requiring CPB. We will collect these samples at four  time points: 1) after induction of 
anesthesia prior to CPB; 2) after t ermination of CPB and transfusion of platelets and 
either cryoprecipitate or fibrinogen concentrate; 3) upon arrival to the ICU 4 ) 24 hours 
post -operatively in the ICU.  These samples will be centrifuged to yield platelet poor 
plasma (PPP) and stored at - 80oC. These samples will be utilized for the clot analysis 
experiments described in detail below.  Samples will be transported according to appropriate regulations to the laboratory of Dr. Brown at North Carolina State University for analysis.  All samples w ill be obtained from an arterial line that is 
required for the planned surgical procedure.  
 
Analysis of coagulation factors  – For each sample, we will measure coagulation factor 
levels (thrombin, FXIII, vWF, and fibrinogen) using ELISA to elucidate the con tribution 
of these factors present in cryoprecipitate to clot kinetics when compared to FC. Each 
sample will be analyzed in triplicate to ensure that reproducible and statistically 
significant data are obtained.  
 
Analysis of clot characteristics -  Clots formed from pre -CPB PPP, post -CPB PPP after 
transfusion of cryoprecipitate or FC, and 24 hours post- operative PPP will be analyzed 
to compare the effects of FC and cryoprecipitate on clot properties. Using previously 
described methods, strength parameters wi ll be assessed by rheology and atomic force 
microscopy (AFM) and polymerization will be determined by thrombin -initiated 
turbidity/absorbency curves (13).  These studies will allow us to directly compare 
differences between fiber alignment (3 -D branching s tructure), strength, and 
polymerization differences after the transfusion of FC or cryoprecipitate in neonates after CPB surgery.  
 
Analysis of fibrin fiber alignment  – We will quantify clot fiber alignment using an 
application of an algorithm based on a fa st Fourier transform (FFT) that our group has 
Version 5/16/2019 
 previously employed (25). Briefly, each confocal image is padded with redundant data; 
a Gaussian decay (SD=0.25) and tow -dimensional Hann window function are applied to 
minimize edge effects; and the images are transformed into the frequency domain using a two -dimensional fast Fourier transform. The predominant fiber angle is defined as the 
angle with the maximum relative intensity, and the alignment index (AI) is defined the fraction of fibers aligned within + 20
0 of the preferred fiber alignment (PFA) normalized 
to a random dis tribution of oriented fibers (1). The higher the AI, the greater alignment 
of the fibers.  Our previous work demonstrated that clots formed from purified neonatal fibrinogen were found to display a significantly higher degree of alignment (i.e. less 3 -D structure) compared to those comprised of adult fibrinogen. Although we 
have not completed in vitro  studies to analyze the effect of FC on neonatal clot 
formation, we expect that it will be similar to fibrin alignment in clots formed from 
purified adult fibrinogen derived from cryoprecipitate.  In support of our hypothesis, 
we expect that both FC and cr yoprecipitate will have lower AI than baseline neonatal 
only clots, but there will likely be no difference between clots formed with FC or 
cryoprecipitate. Any difference in AI between the two groups will shed light on how 
pro-coagulant factors present in cryoprecipitate may affect in vivo  clot formation in 
neonates after surgery with CPB (13)  
 
Analysis of clot degradation kinetics  – To evaluate clot degradation kinetics, we will utilize 
a previously described custom fluidics -based microscopy approach (1 ).  Our previous 
data have demonstrated that clots from mixed neonatal and adult fibrinogen degrade slower than neonatal fibrinogen only clots.  Given that cryoprecipitate contains both vWF, (essential to the proper functioning of neonatal platelets) and FXII I (important for 
stabilizing clot strength), it may be that transfusion of adult- derived cryoprecipitate 
generates a clot that is not as easily degraded by the neonatal fibrinolytic system when compared to FC, which contains fibrinogen only.  FC may have f aster degradation times 
when compared with cryoprecipitate, thus potentially reducing post -transfusion 
thrombotic risk in neonates af ter cardiac surgery with CPB (1 ).   
 
Aim 1A (Clot structure, strength, polymerization kinetics between 
cryoprecipitate and FC)  Thirty -six neonates undergoing non -emergent cardiac surgery 
will be enrolled in this study and randomized to receive either cryoprecipitate or FC as part of post- bypass transfusion algorithm.  Blood samples will be collected at four  times 
points: 1) af ter the induction of anesthesia 2) after transfusion of cryoprecipitate or FC; 
3) upon arrival to the ICU; 4) 24 hours after surgery.  After samples are collected and processed, they will be transported to Dr. Ashley Brown’s lab at NCSU/UNC -CH.  Dr. 
Brown will use ELISA to measure the coagulation factors (thrombin, FXIII, von 
Willebrand Factor, and fibrinogen) at each time point.  Using the previously described 
methods,  strength parameters will be assessed by rheology and atomic force 
microscopy (AFM); polymerization will be determined by thrombin -initiated 
turbidity/absorbency curves; fiber alignment using the described fast Fourier transform. Our goal is to characteriz e how these two sources of adult fibrinogen affect 
Version 5/16/2019 
 properties of the neonatal fibrin network including the structure, strength, 
polymerization kinetics between these two groups.  
 
Aim 1B (Clot degradation kinetics) In addition to the above studies, the blood 
samples from the same 36 neonates will then be used to perform degradation kinetic 
studies as described previously.  This will be the first study detailing the longitudinal 
differences in degradation kinetics of neonates undergoing cardiac surgery.  After characterizing the coagulation factor levels between patients who receive cryoprecipitate versus FC, we hope to better understand the role of vWF and FXIII in 
neonatal clot formation and degradation rates and how this may contribute to the risk 
of throm botic events.  
    
Aim 2 (Correlation of clot properties to clinical outcomes):  Clinical outcome 
variables will be collected for each patient and correlated to clot properties with specific attention to: 1) transfusions within the first 24 hours of surgery, 2) 24- hour chest tube 
output, 3) clinical signs and symptoms of postoperative thrombosis.  Our multi -site 
prospective, randomized control trial demonstrated that FC can reduce allogenic blood transfusion in neonates and infants undergoing elective cardiac  surgery with CPB when 
compared to cryoprecipitate. Our proposed laboratory studies use platelet poor plasma to enable us to focus on the contribution of supplemental fibrinogen to neonatal clot 
kinetics.  However, since platelets, particularly the increas ed dependence on vWF in 
neonates, also play an important role in post- bypass hemostasis, we plan to correlate 
clinical characteristics and outcomes with our findings regarding clot kinetics. Clinical 
outcome variables will be collected for each patient and correlated to clot properties 
with specific attention to 1) transfusion requirements intraoperatively; 2) transfusion 
requirements within the first 24 hours of surgery; 3) post- operative bleeding recorded 
by 24 hour chest tube output; 4) clinical signs an d symptoms indicative of postoperative 
thrombosis; 5) mechanical ventilation time; 6) length of ICU and hospital stay 7) adverse events within seven days of surgery.  While our study is not powered to for this 
outcome, we hope that these data will provide some insight in to the clinical differences 
between different sources of adult fibrinogen.  
 
 
Samples Size/Statistical Analysis  
 
Data collected will include demographic data, CBP data, transfusion data, laboratory 
data and clinical outcomes listed above. As we demonstrated in prior work, neonatal 
clots prior to transfusion displayed a significantly higher degree of alignment when 
compared to those composed of adult only or mixed neonatal and adult fibrinogen. 
Based on our previous data, to detect a difference in degradation times  between clots 
formed with neonatal fibrinogen and clots formed with adult fibrinogen with 80%  
power, we will enroll at total of 36 patients, with 18 in patients in each arm. All 
quantitative data will be analyzed using a paired t -test or Wilcoxon rank- sum test to 
Version 5/16/2019 
 determine differences between  the two groups. Correlation will be determined by either 
Pearson co rrelation or Spearman rank  correlation. Significance will be defined by a p-
value less than or equal to 0.05.  
 
 
Adverse Events Reporting  
 Monitoring of  Adverse  Events  (AE) and  Serious  Adverse  Events  (SAE ) is an 
important  aspect  of clinical trials .  After  enrollment , the  research  team  will collect  the 
adverse  events  from the  medical record . SAEs  will be  reported  to the IRB within  the 
guidelines  set by the IRB.  Any serious AE will be immediately reviewed by the PI and 
a senior cardiac anesthesiologist  not involved in the study.  Quarterly, study  subjects 
will be  reviewed  on a case -by-case basis by  our Quality Improvement Officer and an 
experienced  cardiac  anesthesiologist not involved  in the study  for review  of potential  
adverse  events  and  whether  or not the event  was related  to the  study .  
Drug  reactions  including  fever , chills , headache , allergic  reactions , or thrombosis  
are potential  risks to this  study .  The most common adverse reactions observed in 
clinical studies (frequ ency >1%) with the study drug, f ibrinogen concentrate, were fever 
and headache. The most serious adverse reactions observed are thrombotic episodes (pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction, deep vein thrombosis) and anaphylactic reactions. These reactions are simi lar to those of blood transfusions and specifically, 
cryoprecipitate. The risks are  also comparable  to cryoprecipitate . Fibrinogen  concentrate  
has been  used  in Europe  and  as part  of transfusion  algorithms  around  the United  States , 
including  our institution  with  no increased  serious adverse events  reported .  In our 
preliminary study, we received an IND exemption for the use of fibrinogen concentrate.  
Thirty patients under one year of age received fibr inogen concentrate instead of 
cryoprecipitate to treat postoperative bleeding. There was no significant difference in 
the rate of adverse events, including postoperative thrombosis, between the fibrinogen concentrate versus the cryoprecipitate group. Based  on this data  and  the need  to 
minimize  transfu sions in the neonatal  population  undergoing  cardiac  surgery  with  
CPB , we are seeking an  IND  exemption  for use of this medication  in a randomized, 
control  trial .  
Patient  confidentiality  is at risk  since  protected  healthy  information  is included 
in the study  data . This  risk will be  minimized  by only  recording  information  absolutely  
necessary  to fulfill  the study ’s objectives. Information  directly  identifying  patients  will 
be excluded.  Once  the samples  are collected , a unique  study  number  will be  assigned  to 
each  sample . This  unique  number  will be used  to identify  the patient  in the research  
database . The  database , along  with  the code  linking  the study  patient  to an  assigned  
number , will be kept  in a locked  office .  
 
Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
Version 5/16/2019 
  
A potential risk of this study is related to drug reactions including fever, chills, 
headache, allergic reactions, or thrombosis.  This medication has been used extensively 
in Europe and as part of transfusion algorithms around the United States.  Based on this data and the need to minimized transfusions in the infant population undergoing cardiac surge ry with CPB, we have received  an IND exemption for use of this 
medication in this randomized, control trial.  
 The study subjects will be re viewed  on a case -by-case basis at our  institution and 
quarterly by the DSMB. The DSMB will consist of a cardiologist, an anesthesiologist, a 
hematologist, and a statistician not involved in the study. Serious adverse events, 
including thrombosis, stroke, s epsis, and death, will be reported to the DSMB within 24 
hours of the study team becoming aware of the event. The DSMB will review all safety data, including frequency and severity of AEs.  
 
A second risk of this study is patient confidentiality since prot ected health information 
is included in the study data. This risk will be minimized by only recording information 
absolutely necessary to fulfill the study’s objectives. Information directly identifying 
patients will be excluded (names, addresses, telephon e numbers, social security 
numbers, email addresses, and account numbers). A unique study number will identify the study subjects. The study information will be collected and stored in a password-
protected database. Consents, along with the code linking a subject’s identity to an 
assigned number, will be locked in the office of the principal investigator or designee.  
 The study team will conduct a self -monitoring tool quarterly to ensure data integrity.  
  
1. Brown AC, Hannan RH, Timmons LH, Fernandez JD, Barker, TH, Guzzetta, NA. 
Fibrin Network Changes in Neonates after Cardiopulmonary Bypass. 
Anesthesiology 2016; 124:1021- 31.  
2. Guzzetta NA, Allen NN, Wilson EC, Foster GS, Ehrlich AC, and Miller BE. 
Excessive Postoperative Bleeding and Outcomes in Neonates Undergoing 
Cardiopulmonary Bypass. Anesth & Anal. February 2015: 120 (2): 405- 410. 
3. Kipps AK, Wypij D, Thiagarajan RR, Bacha EA, and Newburger  JW. Blood 
transfusion is associated with prolonged duration of mechanical ventilation in 
infants undergoing reparative cardiac surgery. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2011 Vol. 12, 
No. 1: 52- 56.  
4. Salvin JW, Scheurer MA, Laussen PC, Wypij D, Polito A, Bacha EA, Pig ula FA,  
McGowan FX, Costello JM and Thiagarajan RR. Blood Transfusion After Pediatric 
Cardiac Surgery Is Associated With Prolonged Hospital Stay. Ann Thorac Surg 
2011;91:204 –11. 
5. CSL Behring . Fibrinogen  Concentrate  (Human ) RiaSTAPM. US Package  Insert  
Janua ry 2009. 
Version 5/16/2019 
 6. Murphy GJ, Reeves BC, Rogers CA, Rizvi SI, Culliford L, Angelini GD. Increased 
mortality, postoperative morbidity, and cost after red blood cell transfusion in 
patients having cardiac surgery. Circulation 2007; 116: 2544- 52. 
7. Iyengar A, Scipione CN, Sheth P, Ohye RG, Riegger L, Bove EL, Devaney EJ and 
Hirsch -Romano JC. Association of Complications With Blood Transfusions in 
Pediatric Cardiac Surgery Patients. Ann Thorac Surg 2013; 96:910–6.  
8. Josephson CD, Mondoro TH, Ambruso DR, Sanchez R, Sloan SR, Luban NLC and 
Widness JA.  One Size Will Never Fit All: Clinical and Translational Research Gaps 
in Pediatric Transfusion Medicine. Pediatr Res. 2014 Nov;76(5):425- 31.  
9. Benjamin , E. Blaha , M., Chiuve  S., et al. Heart  Disease  and  Stroke  Statistics  – 2017 
Update : A report  from  the American  Heart  Association . Circulation  2017 March  07; 
135(10):e 146-e603.doi:10.1161 
10. Williams , G. D., Bratton , S. L. & Ramamoorthy, C . Factors  associated  with  blood  
loss and  blood  product  transfusions: a multivariate  analysis  in children  after  open -
heart  surgery . Anesth  Analg  1999; 89:57- 64. 
11. Kern  FH, Morana  NJ, Sears  JJ, et  al. Coagulation  defects  in neonates  during  
cardiopulmonary  bypass . Ann  Thorac  Surg  1992; 54:541–6. 
12. Levy  JH, Szlam  F, Tanaka KA , Sniecienski  RM: Fibrinogen  and  hemostasis: A  
primary  hemostatic  target for  the management  of acquired  bleeding . Anesth  Analg  
2012; 114:261–74. 
13. Tao GZ, Liu  B, Zhang  R, et al. Impaired Activity  of Blood Coagulant  Factor  XIII in  
Patients  with  Necrotizing  Enterocolitis . Scientific  Reports 2015; 5:13119 
14. Hakimi , CS, Carling  MS, Hansson  EC, et al The  effect  of ex vivo  factor  XIII 
supplementation  on clot formation  in blood  samples  from cardiac  and  scoliosis 
patients . Clinical and  Applied Thrombosis  and Hemostasis. 2017: 1- 7. 
15. Andrew  M, Paes B , Milner  R, et al. Development  of the human  coagulation  system  
in the healthy  premature  infant . Blood  1988; 72:1651–7 
16. Guzzetta , N. A. & Miller , B. E. Principles  of hemostasis in  children : models  and  
maturation . Pediatric   Anesthesia  2011; 21:3- 9. 
17. Miller  BE, Tosone  SR, Guzzetta  NA, et al. Fibrinogen  in children  undergoing  
cardiac  surgery : Is it effective? Anesth  Analg  2004; 99:1341–6 
18. McQuilten  ZK, Bailey  M, Cameron  PA, et al. Fibrinogen  concentration  and  use of 
fibrinogen  supplementation  with  cryoprecipitate  in patients  with  critical  bleeding  
receiving  massive  transfusion : a bi-national  cohort study . Br J Haematol  2017 Oct ; 
179(10):131- 141. 
19. Haas  T, Speilmann  N, Restin  T, et al. Higher  fibrinogen  concentrations  for 
reduction  of transfusion  requirements  during  major  paediatric  surgery : A 
prospective  randomized controlled  trial . BJA  2015; 115 (2): 234- 43. 
20. Galas  FR, de Almeida  JP, Fukushima  JT, et  al. Hemostatic  effects  of fibrinogen  
concentrate  compared  with  cryoprecipitate  in children  after  cardiac  surgery : A 
randomized pilot  trial . The  JTCS   2014; 148(4):1647- 1655. 
Version 5/16/2019 
 21. Gielen , C., Dekkers , O., Stijnen , et al. The  effects  of pre- and  postoperative  
fibrinogen  levels  on blood  loss after  cardiac  surgery : a systematic  review  and  meta -
analysis . Interactive  Cardiovascular  and Thoracic  Surgery . 2014;18:292–298. 
22. Faraoni , D. et al. Plasma  fibrinogen  concentration  is correlated  with  postoperative  
blood  loss in  children   undergoing  cardiac  surgery . European  Journal  of 
Anaesthesiology  2014; 31 , 317- 326. 
23. Kasper  CK. Judith  Graham  Pool  and  the discovery  of cryoprecipitate . Haemophilia  
2012;18: 833–5 
24. Manlhiot  C, Menjak  IB, Branda˜o  LR, et al. Risk , clinical features , and  outcomes  of 
thrombosis  associated  with  pediatric  cardiac  surgery . Circulation  2011;124:1511- 9. 
25. Faroni , D, Emani , S, Halpin  E, et al. Relationship between  transfusions  of blood  
products  and  incidence  of thrombotic  complications  in neonates  and  infants  
undergoing  cardiac  surgery . Journal  of Cardiothoracic  and Vascular  Anesthesia  2017; 
31:1943- 1948.  
26. Hunt  R, Hoffman  CM , Emani  S, et al. Elevated preoperative  von Willebrand factor  
is associated  with  perioperative  thrombosis  in infants  and  neonates  with  congenital  
heart  disease . Journal  of Thrombosis  and Haemostasis  2017;15: 2306- 2316.  
 
 
 
 