Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan 
Using Retrospective and Real -Time Physical Activity 
Tracking to P redict Risk o f Sunburn i n Outdoor 
Exercisers o n Strava 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
06/22/2020
Using Retrospective and Real-Time Physical Activity Tracking to Predict 
Risk of Sunburn in Outdoor Exercisers on Strava  
1R21CA241637 -01A1  
Recreational UV exposure is associated with every form of skin cancer and individuals who engage in more 
physical activity have a higher prevalence of sunburn, a proximal biomarker of melanoma risk, perhaps 
explaining why melanoma is the only cancer with w hich physical activity is positively correlated. Mobile 
technology for tracking physical activity has become increasingly prevalent and Strava, an activity tracking app 
and social networking site for athletes, is one of the most popular of these technologi es. This research will test 
the feasibility of delivering location -based, ecologically -valid sun safety advice to Strava users at times when 
they are predicted to be engaged in outdoor physical activity, by utilizing Strava’s public open -source 
Application s Programming Interface.  
2. SPECIFIC AIMS
Skin cancer is  the most common cancer in the United States. In 2019, o ver 5.4 million cases of keratinocyte
cancers (basal and squamous cell) and 96,480 cases of melanoma will diagnosed and melanoma will cause 
7,230  deaths.3 Skin cancer t reatment is a  financial  burden on the nation’s health system.3 Thus, the U.S. 
Surgeon General has designated s kin cancer prevention as a major national priority.4 Skin cancer is 
preventable because excessive exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UV), the primary risk factor, is easily 
modifiable . But, many Americans do not apply sunscreen, wear UV-protective clothing  or wide -brimmed hats, 
or stay in shade  and approximately one -third of American  adult s experience damaging sunburns  annually .5 
     Recreational UV exposure is associated with skin cancer.6 Individuals who engage in more physical activity 
have a higher prevalence of sunburn,5,7-10 a proximal biomarker of melanoma risk , and m elanoma is positively 
associated with physical activity.11 For some athletes, forgetting to apply s unscreen12,13 or not liking its feel 
while engaged in physical activity can be barr iers to sun protection.12,14 An expert  meeting hosted by the 
National Cancer Institut e (NCI)  identified sun safety during physical activity as a priority research area15 and 
the Surgeon General prioritized  strategies for coordinating messages on sun safety and physical activity in his 
Call to Action to Prevent Skin Cancer .16 
     Online and mobile technologies for tracking physical activity ha ve exploded over the past decade. Many 
Americans  wear activity trackers or GPS -enabled devices (e.g., Fitbit and Garmin) and upload their physical 
activity  data  to websites /mobile apps. Strava , an activity tracking app and social networking site for athletes of 
all abilities, is one of the most popular . Millions shar e their own activities  and follow and comment on physical 
activity by other users in their network. This R21 research  responds to PAR -19-309 “Stimulating Innovations 
in Behavioral Intervention Research for Cancer Prevention and Control”  with the goal of increas ing skin 
cancer prevention among a high -risk population , adult s who engage in outdoor physical activity  by 
establis hing feasibility  of interfacing sun protection  advice  with the Strava  website /mobile app . Specifically, 
we will show that we can creat e an algorithm that a) predicts when individuals are likely to be engaged in 
physical activity outdoors and b) deliver s sun safety advice tailored to time, location, and personal risk (e.g., 
skin sun sensitivity) . We need  to establish feasibility  before conducting a future randomized trial evaluating the 
efficacy of this unique intervention . The Strava  Sun (SS) program will obtain user data and deliver 
ecologically -valid sun safety advice by utilizing Strava ’s open -source Applications Programming Interface 
(API) and location -based advice algorithms developed earlier f or a sun safety mobile app, sunZapp , funded by 
the NCI.17 Sun safety messages provided through SS will also be derived from sun safety messages from our Go 
Sun Smart ( GSS ) program for individuals engaged in outdoor recreation.18 Both the algorithms from sunZapp  
and the GSS  messages improved sun safety practices of adults in general and while on vacation in randomized 
trials (see Boxes 1 and 2 ) and provide the scientific premise  for developing SS. Based on the Extended 
Parallel Pr ocessing Model19 of persuasive communication, D iffusion of Innovation Theory20 (DIT), and Social 
Cognitive Theory (SCT),21 we hypothesize  that SS will increase sun protection by elevating perceived risk, 
self-efficacy, and response efficacy and promoting prevention skills acquisition.21 The specific aims  are to: 
1.Gather formative data from focus groups of outdoor exercisers, both Strava  users and non -users, on
interest in receiving personalized, location -based sun protection advice and willingness to use sun
protection advice sent through the Strava  mobile app before and during physical activity.
2.Develop a machine learning algorithm t o predict future time of day and duration of outdoor physical
activity from activities logged on Strava  through its API from users who consent to data access.
3.Modify the algorithms in sunZapp  and social media messages from GSS  to create a prototype of the SS
intervention that delivers location -based, tailored sun safety advice to Strava  users through Strava
comments, which can be accessed through the Strava  website and mobile app, and emails.
4.Test with Strava  users the acceptability of the SS prototype and sun safety messages, ways of interacting
with it, and barriers/willingness to allowing access.  
The R21 research  is significant and innovative . A sun protection interface for the Strava  platform will 
allow us to identify a large population of Americans at high risk for skin cancer who routinely engage in 
physical activity, often outdoors with high -risk sun exposure, and reach them with sun safety advice they 
may not seek on their own to motivate them to practice sun safety during outdoor activities. Dissemination of 
evidence -based sun safety messages through th is widely -used “social network for athletes” is innovative . It 
will help to meet the goals set by both NCI and the U.S. Surgeon General  to preven t skin cancer among 
physically -active Americans to reverse the one cancer currently increased by physical activity . 
The project will be led by Principal Investigators, Dr. David Buller and Ms. Julia Berteletti at Klein Buendel, 
Inc. (KB). Co-Investigators  at Colorado State U., Dr. Kimberly Henry  (project statistician ) and Dr. Chuck  
Anderson (machine learning  exper t) will create the predictive algorithms, assisted by a  machine learning  
graduate student . Dr. Sherry Pagoto , project consultant , at U . of Connecticut will provide expertise on physical 
activity promotion and interventions delivered via social media . Mr. Scott Camichael, recent software engineer 
at Strava , will also serve as a project consultant  and advise on delivering the sun protection  intervention 
through Strava . Media developers at KB will produce the AP I database and program.  
3A. SIGNIFICANCE  
3A.1.  The Skin Cancer Problem   
The research is significant because it will develop a new mHealth strategy to reduce skin cancer . In 201 9, 5.4 
million cases of keratinocyte cancers (basal and squamous cell)4 and 96,480 cases of melanoma  will occur . 
Melanoma h as doubled over the last 3 decades22 and will cause  7,230  deaths  this year23 (nearly as many deaths 
as due to  drunk driving24). Exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation (UV) is a primary cause ,25-34 both l ifetime UV 
exposure25-28,35 and i ntermittent, severe  exposure  (i.e., sunburn) .15-21 The U.S. Surgeon General issued a Call to 
Action to Prevent Skin C ancer ,16 citing its high prevalence4 and annual cost ($4.8 bil.  for non-melanoma skin 
cancer ; $3.3 bil.  for melanoma36). Its recurrence,37-39 and treatment disfigurement40-43 also prioritizes  
prevention. Primary prevention of skin cancer relies on reducing UV exposure  by limit ing time in the sun when 
UV is high (e.g., at midday ; at lower latitudes ; near summer solstice) and using  shade, protective clothing, and 
sunscreen . But, people inconsistently take precautions,16 so efforts are needed to promote sun protection.44-46 
3A.2. Correlation between Physical Activity and Skin Cancer  
The research is significant because it seeks to improve sun protection among individuals engaged in physical 
activity, a beneficial health behavior that is also related to unprotected  sun exposure  and risk for skin  cancer . 
Meeting guidelines for physical activity provides numerous positive health effects ;47-51 however, melanoma has 
a positive risk association with physical activity.11 Physical activity is associated with sunburn,7,8,52 -54 skin cancer 
risk behaviors,9 melanoma in both genders ,11,55  and keratinocyte  skin cancers,  chiefly  in men.56,57 It was 
estimated that sunburn is twice as likely to occur in  physically -active  than inactive  people52,53 and is linked to 
aerobic activit y (e.g., running and cycling ).5,53 Cardiorespiratory fitness is related to an increased risk of 
melanoma55 especially  in high -UV locations , suggesting sun exposure plays a role.11 In one study , persons who 
were more physically active were less concerned about sun exposu re.58 Together, the evidence impl ies that t he 
behavioral phenotype of exercise rs leads to increased UV exposure , elevating risk for  developing  skin cancer . 
Promoting sun safety to exercisers must not discourage p hysical activity . It should be ecologically -valid by 
consider ing the person’s age, environment, activity type, and other sociocultural factors .17,59 For example, w e 
should promote sun protection as a personal comfort and safety issue ; bundle  it with factors  like injuries  
(sunburn is an injury) , heat stress , and hydration ; note sun safety  does not interfere with and may improve 
performance ; and promote  water proof sunscreen and hats to avoid sweat leeching sunscreen into eyes.   
3A.3. Strava  as a Platform for Skin Cancer Prevention  
Adding to significance are plans to use Strava , a popular  social networking and activity -tracking site for 
athletes  of all abilities , to reach high -risk individuals engaged in outdoor physical activity with sun protection 
advice tailored to time, location,  season, and personal risk . Strava  is a free -to-use networking  website with 
mobile app s (Android and iOS) , currently used by 42 million athletes , with approximately 1 million new users 
every month.60 Most  activities are tracked u sing Strava ’s GPS features,  through a GPS -enabled watch (e.g., 
Garmin ; Apple Watch) or Strava  app. Analytics data provided by Mr. Carmichael,  project consultan t, show 
that 32% of Strava  users identify as runners, 32% as cyclists, and 22% as multisport  (i.e., triathlon).  Per US 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 9% of American adults are runners and 3% , cyclists.61 Running, cycling, and  
triathlon  (including swimming ) require large amounts of time in the s un, often exceeding sunburn  doses of UV 
(i.e., >1 minimal erythemal dose  [MED] ). Currently, ~90% of activities recorded are performed outdoors ( ~15 
million per week62), using real-time GPS . Uploading an activity to Strava  can be done nearly automatically , 
by simply choos ing activity (e.g., running, cycling ), start ing a GPS -watch or Strava  app, clicking ‘done’ when 
finish ed. The activity syncs to Strava  servers using a small amount of cellular  data. Users  can add more 
detail to the activity, such as title, description, and photos.  Strava  is also  an online community  for athletes . 
Using  a feed similar to Facebook , activities of  followers  are highlighted and us ers can give “kudos” and/ or leave 
comments on activities. This social nature encourages members to use Strava  regularly  and not just for 
personal tracking . Strava  users are accustomed to receiving comments63; in one study, 80% of Strava  users 
received  social feedback on their activities.64  Receiving social support in an online fitness community 
increased  levels of use.64 In 2017, Strava  users left 110 million commen ts and gave 2.3 billion kudos .65   
The Strava  open -source Applications Programmin g Interface (API) is a publicly -available interface that is 
open  to registered Strava  user s (at labs. Strava .com/developers ) and allows developers access  to Strava  data.66 
A Strava  API application only has access to a user’s personal data if the user authorize s it. The API is an 
extremely promising  and innovative  tool for physical activity and sun protection.  In this R21 project , we will 
determine if we can use the API to  a) download retrospective  activities  and create  an algorithm that predicts 
when users will be outdoors and b) deliver s un protection advice tailored on  time, location, season, and 
personal risk  to users through the ir Strava  feed , access able  any time on any device . Per Mr. Carmichael, the 
Strava  API is constantly evolving  and we are confident we can access the data  needed  through the API.    
There is no comprehensive theory that explains how mobile intervention s improve  health behavior.67-69 As 
in our  past  projects ,70-76 Strava  Sun (SS) will follow principles of the Extended Parallel Processing Model19 of 
persuasive communi cation, Diffusion of In novation  Theory20 (DIT), and Social Cognitive Theory  (SCT) :19,21 a) 
communicating real -time (e.g., high UV hours, 10 AM to 4 PM), location -based advice to create perceived 
threat to motivate prevention; b) teaching/ promoting  simple ecologically -valid sun safety  skills with how -to 
knowledge to elevate self -efficacy (e.g., when to apply and reapply sunscreen); and c) showing why these 
practices prevent skin cancer (i.e., principles knowledge) to increase response efficacy. SS messages will 
remind users to take prec autions when exercising outdoors and convert intentions into action.  
3B. I NNOVATION  
3B.1. Innovation of the Proposed Research  
The major innovation is a program that u ses an open source API to  predict outdoor phys ical activity bouts and 
provides  location -based sun safety advice through the Strava  tracking and social networking site and app.  
•Strava  Sun (SS) will u tilize a popular platform to deliver evidence -based, temporally -based, location -based,
ecologically -valid sun safety messages to individuals before they participate in outdoor exercise .
•We will u se machine learning techniques to develop an algorithm using Strava  activities  to predict high -
risk behavior, (i.e., outdoor physical activity when UV levels are high and sun safety is advised ).
•SS will contribute to the mHealth and integrative data a nalysis  research on utilizing publicly -available APIs
and large co nsumer databases to predict high -risk behavior and access social media platforms to reach at -
risk populations with technology -based tailored interventions.
This R21 project is high -risk, high -reward research. We are unsure that user s will engage with and benefit from 
a location -based, real -time sun safety intervention delivered by the Strava  service, but our sunZapp  mobile 
app and GSS  outdoor recreation program  suggest they will (see Boxes 2 and 3). Over 80%  of Americans own a 
smartphone and most  use social media and mobile  apps.77-79 Findings from  this R21 nee d to conf irm the 
potential of SS before investing in a randomized trial. With the growing number online activity track ers (e.g., 
Strava , Fitbit, MyFitnessPal ), it is difficult to compete for users’ attention with a new stand -alone app for skin 
cancer prevention. SS will have high impact by using a popular  established  activity tracking platform to predict 
high -risk behavior and deliver evidence -based, tailored advice to a large population of outdoor exerci sers. 
Box 1: Preliminary Studies: Surveys and Focus Groups with Physically -Active Adults 
Our team has collected  formative data relevant to the proposal.  Dr. Pagoto surveyed 278 adults who  engaged 
in moderate -intensity physical activity . Physically -active participants had more sun exposure, higher 
perceived skin c ancer risk, but similar sun protection  as inactive adults. There were 4 types of active 
participants: 1) low perceived risk, no tanning interest, and high frequency of exercise in peak UV (17%); 2) 
low perceived risk, no tanning interest, and avoid exercise during peak UV (36%); 3) high perceived risk, no 
tanning interest, and avoid exercise during peak UV (18%); 4) high perceived risk, high  tanning  interest, and 
exercise during peak UV (29%). A second online survey assessed members of a large workout group (n=60; 
91% non -Hispanic, 86% White, 67% female) in Denver in 2018. 94% exercised outdoors for ≥30 minutes at 
least 3 times per week (51% 5 times/week). 53% did so between 8:00am and 7:00pm and 16% , 10:00am and 
4:00pm when UV is highest. 93% used a device to track physical activity, with a GPS -enabled watch most 
common (48%). 82% uploaded their activities on a tracking site (61% used Strava ). Of Strava  users , 78% 
regularly or always uploaded their activity; 43% uploaded 2 -4 times per week , and 41% ≥5 times per week; 
51% checked Strava  notifications regularly. 73% were somewhat (51%) or very (22%) willing to get sun safety 
messages on Strava ; 89% were somewhat (54%) or very (35%) willing to download an app that connects 
with Strava  and uses their data to provide sun safety advice. Respondents, on average, received 2.6 sunburns 
in the past year (range: 0 -20), with 2.5 of these sunburns oc curring while exercising outdoors (range: 0 -15). 
 We piloted our focus group protocol with Strava  (n=5)  and non -Strava  (n=5) outdoor exercisers  (90% 
non-Hispanic White; 70% female; mean age=32) . Strava users exercised outdoors 4 -10 times per week. 
They upload ed all of their activity to St rava, check ed Strava daily for notifications, and were members of 
4-6 clubs. They believed Strava  protects their data. Most wore hats while exercising outdoors, but other
sun protection was uncommon. All were  interested in getting  sun safety advice through Strava, especially 
UV Index, high -UV warning s similar to poor air quality notices, and cumulative sun exposure based on 
time spent exercising. They said  the proposed SS messages would make them consider sun p rotection 
before exercising outdoors. Non -Strava users exercis ed outdoors 4 -7 times per week. All appl ied sunscreen 
to their face but did not reapply it . Some wore hats  but not UV-protective clothing or sunglasses . They did 
not us e Strava  because they did not want another social network and were not competitive  (only 1 avoided  
it for privacy ), but they would be interested  in sun protection information from  their weather app.  
Discomfort with  sun protection was a barrier for both groups. Str ava users also cited inconvenience and 
“laziness” and non -Strava users, not wanting to carry items and social norms  as barriers . In focus groups 
conducted by Dr. Pagoto  with adults (n=15; 52% female) who met physical activity guidelines ( moderate -
intensity activity >150 minutes per week) , most common reasons for not using sunscreen (cited by 88%) 
were forgetting, inconvenience, discomfort, and belief they do not need it. Most common barriers to 
protective clothing were discomfort (e.g., to o hot), cost, and desire to get a tan while exercising. 
Scientific Premise:  This research verified that many outdoor exercisers are a high -risk population, 
regularly receiving dangerous doses of UV with inadequate sun protection. It also confirmed that a ctivity 
tracking is popular and Strava users regularly  and frequently log activities, check notifications, and  are 
interested in receiving sun safety messages through  Strava using SS. Our intervention messages will be 
tailored to address content needs and barriers to sun safety cited by these outdoor exercisers.  
3C. A PPROACH  
3C.1. Project Overview and Timeline  
In the two-year R21 research (see timeline in Section 2.7 . Form E ), we will conduct rigorous formative 
research and pilot -testing  of the Strava Sun  (SS) intervention . We will create study protocols in Month 1.  
Outdoor exercisers  (Strava  users and non -users ) will give input on initial concepts for SS in focus groups 
during Months 2 -5. An algorithm that predicts time of day and day of week exercising out doors  during high UV 
will be built using  retrospective  Strava  user data in Months 6 -8. In Months 9 -15, a prototype of the SS database  
will be creat ed and messages and delivery methods tested for usability /acceptability.  In Months 16 -21, 
feasibility of SS will be tested  in a pilot field trial  with Strava  users . While the many aims are to establish 
methodologic feasibility, analysis of the pilot field trial in Months 22 -24 will test the hypothesis  that SS will 
improve sun protection. To achieve the ambitious timeline, we will use protocols and methods developed in 
prior research (see Box 2  and 3). All procedures will be approved by the Western Institutional Review Board .  
3C.2. Target Population: Outdoor Exercisers on Strava  
Target population will be users of the Strava  social network. Inclusion criteria include a) being 18 or older, b) 
U.S.  resident , c) engaging in regular physical activity outdoors (at least 156 times in past year [3 times per 
week] ), and d) consenting. All participants except non -Strava  users in focus groups will: e) b e tenured  Strava  
member s (for 1+ full calendar year) , f) upload at least 13 activites  to Strava  in past month  (i.e., 3 per week) , 
and g) giv e permission for us to access their activity  data . Strava  has 42 million members  world wide , providing  
a very large user population. All recruiting, besides for focus groups,  will occur  by invitations through Strava  
(e.g., posting in clubs ). Interested user s will click a link to a study registration website . We cannot screen 
users based on inclusion criteria  on Strava directly, so  interested  trial  participants will complete a screener 
on the study website to determine eligibility. We expect participants to  regularly participate in outdoor 
exercise, thus being a high -risk group, and to actively use Strava.   
3C.3. Formative Focus Groups (Specific Ai m 1) 
Four focus groups  will be conducted with adult s who engage in outdoor physical 
activity and use Strava , or not , in Colorado in Months 4 -5 (compensation=$50). 
Using Facebook and investigators’ networks,  we will recruit a variety of 
exercisers, including those who use Strava  for recreation only and for competitive 
training. Though not mutually exclusive,  we will attempt to segment groups by 
these uses. Strava  users (n=2 focus groups; n=16 total; 8 male, 8 f emale) will 
discuss a) Strava  use, b) exercise behaviors, c) concerns about privacy, d) 
willingness to receive sun safety advice while exercising  and e) use of  sun 
protection while exercising . To explore interest in sun safety advice by those who 
track phy sical activity through other means , non -Strava  users (n=2 focus groups; 
n=16 total; 8 male, 8 female ; matched to Strava users in focus groups on race, 
gender, and activity type ) will discuss exercise behavior, privacy concerns, and 
why they do not use Strava . Both groups will discuss  time of day/day of week and 
season they exercise outdoors , activity type , sun safety intentions, tanning 
desirability, barriers to sun safety while  physically active, SS concept, preferred  
sun safety  content /delivery methods, barriers to us ing SS, utility/ acceptability  of 
sun safety  advice through Strava , potential competitive advantages of sun safety, 
willingness to use the advice while exercising, and privacy concerns.  We will not 
segment focus groups by age, but  will examine age for differences in tailoring preference s. Transcripts will be 
coded and analyzed using ATLAS.ti.® For this resu bmission, we pilot -tested the focus  group protocol ( Box 1 ). 
3C.4 . Development of Algorithm s (Specific Aim 2)  
Dr. Anderson, Dr. Henry, and a computer science graduate student  will develop a model that can predict  
impending outdoor physical activity by Strava  users  during high UV  based on their uploaded activity records 
and relevant ambient factors (e.g., weather) and prescribe  timely sun safety advice . We will use data -driven 
machine learning analytic s to develop an algorithm that forecasts the next outdoor physical activity bout, 
assuming past behaviors a nd situational contexts predict  future behavior.  
3C.4.1. Collect Retrospective Activity Data. Data from 1,000  tenured adult  Strava  users in the 4 U.S. 
Census  regions will be obtained . Eligibility criteria includes: 1+ full calendar year of activities; at least 156 
activities [3 per week] in past year; 18 and older ; U.S.  resident . Users will consent for their data to be 
accessed and a full calendar year of all Strava  data will be procured, including following variables , which are 

all available through the Strava  API80: distance, moving time, pace, elapsed time, start time, end time, date, 
type of activity (e.g., run ; ride; swim ), and gear used . These data will be paired with calendar data (i.e., day of 
week, season, holidays) and weather data  from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration databases  
(i.e., temperature ; precipitation ; humidity ; UV level ; wind) to create a multivariate time series of data for each 
user . This data will be subjected to  machine learning analytics to develop an algorithm that forecast s the 
likelihood that the user will engage in outdoor activity in near future (duration of reliable prediction will be 
modeled) , including the nature of exer cise bout (e.g., length of time ; UV level ). We will recruit users by posting 
in clubs , a popular Strava  feature  (e.g., Strava  Club  has over 662,8 00 members81). We will post in various 
clubs until 1,000 eligible members  are enrolled . Participants  will receive  an authentication screen (see Figure 
1)that identifies data we will access and how it will be used . We will raffle off 10 $50 gift cards as an incentive .
3C.4.2. Use Machine Learning (AI) to Predict Outdoor Activity.  Deep learning analytics, a branch
of machine learning that mimics structures of the human brain , are innovative techniques that give more 
flexibility and are typically more accurate  than autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models .82,83 
To predict future outdoor activity, w e will use a typ e of artificial neural network, Recurrent Neural Network 
(RNN) , well-suited to temporal prediction ,84 along with a Long Short -Term  Memory (LSTM)  approach .85 LSTM 
neural network can learn  long -term patterns and dependencies and provid e stability to prediction algorithm by 
evaluating when it is advantageous t o remember or forget previous state , mak ing assessing  typically intractable 
problems with very complex data possible. LSTM has been applied to several temporal processing problems in 
public health, including influenza,86 colorectal cancer,87 and fall  prevention .88 We will build a machine learning 
model using Keras  and TensorFlow in R. First, we will split time -series data into a training set and  a validation 
set of users, in  an 80/20 split. We will train a LSTM neural network on the training set. Once trained, we will 
layer on auxiliary calendar and weather data to try to reduce the model’s error and maximize  predictive power. 
We will compare models using several fit indices: Mean Absolute Percentage Error, Root Mean Squared Error, 
and Root Mean Sq uared Percentage Error, and plot predicted scores across each model w ith observed scores to 
determine closest match. We will apply  the model with best fit and most accurate predicti on to time -series in 
validation set to assess  how well it predicts new data.  
3C.4.3.  Integrate Predicted Outdoor Activity  with Sun Protection Advice . Algorithms from our 
sunZapp  mobile app71 (see Box 2 ) will be employ ed to tailor  sun safety  advice to predicted outdoor physical 
activity and personal risk  of Strava  users. Machine learning model will predict users’ risk of UV-exposure 
(i.e., timing and duration of outdoor exercise). Users’ personal risk (i.e., skin type : hair and eye color and 
skin tanability89) will be collected in SS user profile when first accepted by Strava  users. We will use  5-day 
Planner  in sunZapp  to combine predicted  time and duration of outdoor activity  bout , forecast UV Index, and 
personal risk to  calculate Strava  users’ time to sunburn and provide  tailored  sun safety advice , based on  the 
World Health Organization’s  (WHO)  Global UV Index guidelines .90  To be modified based on results from 
focus groups,  we plan to deliver the  advice in the evening and morning before the predicted outdoor physical 
activity bout  (and during extended bouts) through Strava  comments and emails (see 3C.5.). Because Strava  
users get notified by email and in the app, they  likely will see the message before their next outdoor activity.   
Box 2: Prior Research on Sun Safety Advice Algorithms  
Under a contract from NCI  (HHSN261200900025C),  Dr. Buller and KB programmers created algorithms to 
deliver real -time tailored sun safety  advice over a mobile app , sunZapp .71 Algorit hms first converted hourly 
UV Index forecast for each 0.5 ° latitude -longitude grid worldwide published daily by National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration to UV radiation level. Using skin sun sensitivity input by the user, it calculate d 
time to recei ve 1 MED of UV (i.e., sunburning dose) to tailor advice on timing of precautions. Algorithms also 
adjust ed UV dose for sunscreen application/reapplication based on sun protection factor ( SPF) and for use 
of shade. Sun protection advice follow ed WHO’s UV Index guidelines .90 Amount of sunscreen was adjus ted 
for percen t of skin uncovered by clothing. In two trials with national adult samples,59,91 sunZapp ’s advice 
improved  users’  sun safety. In the first trial (n=604 adults from nationwide survey panel), participants 
assigned to the mobile app improved self -efficacy for sun protection (p=0.022), increased shade use (+7%, 
p=0.034), and decreased reliance on sunscreen ( -6%, p=0.048). Those who used the mobile app minimiz ed 
time in the sun (+15%, p=010).59 In the second tri al (n=202 adults recruited online), sunZapp  increased 
wide -brimmed hat use  (+6%, p=0.045). Compared to non -users, y oung adults who used sunZ app wore wide -
brimmed hats (+16% 20 year olds, +9% 25 year olds , p=0.03), women employed all sun protection practices 
(+4%, p=0.04); and more educated individuals spent less time  outdoors at midday ( -17 hours, p=0.03).91 An 
algorithm also deliver s predicted UV levels and sun protection advice for up to 5 days from  the present time 
(i.e., 5-day Planner) . This routine that will be expanded to provide advice to Strava  users , tailored to time, 
location, season, and personal risk, before the next time they are likely to exercise outdoors.  
3C.5 . Development and Production of Prototype Strava  Sun  (SS) Intervention  (Specific Aim 3)   
The prototype SS intervention will be delivered through Strava . There are 2 components: 1) a machine learning 
algorithm that predict s future outdoor activity based on Strava  users’ retrospective data (see 3C.4 ) and 2)  a 
database that deliver s tailored, evidence -based sun safety emails /comments through the Strava  interface 
based on predicted outside physical activity , forecast UV, and personal skin cancer risk . SS development will 
follow KB’s standard iterative production.  We will develop goals  and behavioral 
objectives  and outline of messages based on focus group results, theoretical 
models (see 3A.3 ), GSS  social media messages (see Box 3 ), and sunZapp ’s 
advice algorithms  (see Box 2 ). KB media developers will produce a database 
with  the Strava  API and algorithm predict ing future outdoor physical activity 
(see 3C.4 ) to power the SS interface and schedule sun safety messages (when 
and to whom ). The SS database will determine time of day, date, location (from 
Wi-Fi, cellular network, or GPS ), and forecast UV,  and use sunZapp  algorithm  
and outdoor physical activity algorithm to provide emails /activity comments 
over Strava  platform advising  precaution when UV Index is forecast to be ≥3 
during predicted  outdoor activity time (i.e., risk is moderate, high, or extreme  
based on Global UV Index standards90). Messages  will be sent at various times, 
based on outdoor activity algorithm (see 3C.4.2 ); tentatively, we plan to  
deliver  advice  on the evening before outdoor activity bout  to promote planning 
for sun safety (e.g., forecast UV Index for time outdoors; pack ing suns creen and select ing hats, sungla sses, and 
protective clothing), just before predicted time of exercising, and during extended exercise (e.g., reapply 
sunscreen ; use shade ). We will ask focus group s about timing preferences  (see 3C.3 ). Strava  users are 
accustomed to receiving emails /comments and most check them regularly (see Box 1 ). SS messages will be 
available through any device. Users will not need to interact with a separate app/interface. A specifications 
document with technical requirements,  database  plans, flow charts, and content outline will be developed.   
3C.5. 1. Utilizing the Strava  API. With  publicly -available tools from  Strava ,66 KB programmers will 
create the SS database. We will identify the user data (i.e., log dates and ti me and duration  for outdoor physical 
activity ) need ed to access and create authentication. Before collecting any data, users will view  an 
authentication screen  (see Figure 1) presenting  the data access terms and conditions (abiding by Strava ’s 
developer rules ) and information on the study . By accepting the authentication  screen, participants give 
consent for us to access their Strava  activity data , which  KB developers will see through the Strava  API. Data 
privacy is extremely important given recent cases in the news  and European Union’s General Data Protection 
Regulation.92 We wil l only access Strava  data for users who actively  give permission . If a user has accepted, 
but is ineligible, their Strava  data will not be used . We will cease data access at the end of the study . Access to 
the Strava  API will be informed  by Mr. Carmichael, recent Strava  software engineer and project consultant  
(see Letter of Support) , who has confirmed the feasibility of the above approach.  
3.C.5. 2. Strava  Comments and E mails . Using Strava  API, messages will be delivered in emails /
activity comments  through the SS profile  (e.g., “Nice job! Be sure to apply sunscreen and wear a hat for your 
run tomorrow afternoon. The UV will be high in Denver between 1:00 and 4:00pm.” ). On all activities, there is 
a comment box (see Figure 2). Depending on the user’s settings, Strava  sends emails to user s when  a 
comment is made on their activity (see Figure 3), activat ing a red notification 
symbol on their Strava  dashboard, alerting them to the new comment.  Users will 
also receive notifications in the Strava  mobile app  on their phone  (e.g., red icon 
alert s; banner notifications ; push notifications) , depending on personal set tings . 
Users can reply to the comment and tag  the commenter ( i.e., SS). Additionally , 
emails will be sent through the Strava  API ahead  of predicted outdoor activity to 
provide  more advice  than can be left on a comment (e.g., links to CDC resources or 
news articles on sun safety) . Strava  does not record if a n email/ commen t was read 
or not , so we will assess user s’ SS message recall in posttest surveys.   
3C.5. 3. Usability Testing of Strava  Sun . SS will be tested for  usability with 
30 Strava  users , randomly selected from those  who consented to data  access  for the  
algorithm  (3C.4.1 ) after being  invit ed through the Strava  API (3 reminders over 4 
weeks ; compensation=$40) . The first 30 to respond will be enrolled and receive the 
informed consent form, before starting a condensed 4-week SS intervention. Next , 
they  will complete a phone interview , assess ing message recal l, message delivery/  
timing (e.g., if message received before next physical activity bout) , accuracy of 
outdoor activity predictions , and usability of and problems with SS comments/  
emails.  They  will be asked about sun protection practices during physical activity.  
Investigators will review results and programmers will fix problems  in SS. 
Box 3: Preliminary Studies: Sun Safety for Vacation ers and Outdoor Recreation  
Dr. Buller led a series of stud ies promoting sun safety in outdoor recreation with the Go Sun Smart  (GSS ) 
intervention. In two randomized trials with the North American ski industry (R01CA81028; R01CA104876 ; 
D. Buller, PI ), GSS  increased sun safety practices by ski resort guests,93,94 i.e., goggles/sunglasses, head

covering, sunscreen reapplication, and overall sun protection (all p<0.001).  In a third trial a t warm -weather 
destination resorts in North America (R01CA152411 ; P. Andersen, PI, D. Buller, Co -I), exposure to GSS  
improved observed sun safety at waterside recreation ;18 self-reported  use of any sun protection (i.e., shade, 
clothing, or sunscreen) improved in the intervention group.95 GSS  contained a library of social media 
messages for Facebook and Twitte r feeds which will be used as a basis for the SS email and comments. 
3C.6. Pilot Field Tria l (Specific Aim 4)  
The feasibility of the SS intervention with adults Strava  users (n=22 6) who consent to provide activity data will 
be tested in a  pilot field test using a randomized pretest -posttest  controlled  design. Participants will be 
recruited through post s in Strava  clubs . They will click  on a link to learn more about the study  and complete a 
screener (eligibility: 18 or older; reside  in the United States; read /write in English; upload  outdoor activity to 
Strava  ≥3 times per week ) and then be provided with a) consent  form , b) authentication protocol to permit  
access to their Strava  data , and c) pretest  survey . Once  our target  sample is recruited  (n=226 Strava  users),  we 
will disconnect the authentication . Based on our pilot data  (Box 1 ), we anticipate that 41% will be  high users 
(upload 5+ days per week) and 43%, medium users (upload 2 -4 days per week). Participants  will be 
randomized to either SS or untreated control group in a 3.5:1  ratio. Power analysis was estimated using 
treatment effect sizes from our sunZapp  trials ( Box 2 ). For this small -scale pilot test, we powered  on the quasi -
experimental pretest -posttest comparison within the SS group, using a paired samples t -test. Assuming  an 
effect size of 0.23  in sun protection pre to post  and a correlation between the pre/post scores of 0.5, , we will 
need 1 81 participants with complete pre -post data to detect an effect of this size with power of 0.80  in a 2-
tailed p=0.05 test, which we factored up to 226 to account for 20% attrition.  A small  control group  (n=50)  will 
be included to see if a no -treatment control condition is acceptable to  users and estimate follow -up rates for 
planning a randomized trial.  It is not designed to  test for statistical differences  with  the treatment group . 
Randomization should assure that the control group is similar on age, gender, and activity level .  
     Eight months are allotted for the field trial. Participants will be enrolled  on a rolling basis  and particip ate in 
SS for 4 months  in the intervention condition . After pretesting , participants  will receive sun protection 
messages  from SS through emails /comments  based on algorithm  results from t heir profile and  activity data 
(see 3C.4 ). All p articipants  will complete posttest survey  4 months after randomization . They will receive links 
to both surveys via email and text and complete them  using KB’s QuestionPro software . Survey s will contain  
measures of self -efficacy, response -efficacy, sun protection practices,  sunburn  (defined as skin red and/or 
painful from exposure to the sun  in the past four months) ,96 and barriers to sun p rotection from the sunZapp  
and GSS  trials (see Boxes 1 and 2), recall of SS messages (i.e., times they read the notifications ; preferred type 
of message), and acceptability of receiv ing SS messages in future. We will assess physical activity behaviors at 
both pre - and posttest, using the validated International Physical Activity Question naire (IPAQ)97,98 long fo rm 
and current activity data uploaded by participants to Strava . Intervention p articipants will be compensated  
$65 total  ($30 pretest , $35 posttest ) and control group participants $45 total ($20 pretest, $25 posttest).   
3C.7. Data Managemen t and Analysis    
Focus groups will be recorded, transcribed, and analyzed using Atlas -ti© software by assigning codes that 
categori ze views, themes, and opinions, rely on constant comparative analysis99 and a phenomenological 
approach.100,101  In the pilot field trial,  the primary outcome is change in sun protection pre to post, analyzed 
with a paired t -test; changes in perceived risk , response - and self -efficacy, and sunburn  will be compared pre 
to post , similarly . Message recall (i.e. receipt of the messages) , users’ reaction s, barriers, and willingness to 
use SS, will be summarized as proportions/means  and compar ed on demographics  (including if  treatment 
differ s as a function of biological sex), using  chi-square  tests , t-tests, and correlations at p=0.05  (2-tailed) . 
We will likewise test if SS messages  (message recall) reduced physical activity  (IPAQ) . Recruitment rates and 
duration , and follow -up rates , will be described to plan a  future randomized trial on SS. Data will be de -
identified and stored in KB’s secure servers. Dr. Henry will oversee data analysis . SAS will be used for analyses.  
Eligibility Criteria  
Focus Group Inclusion Criteria:  
•18 years of age or older
•Able to speak  and read English
•Consent to participate
•Being a regular user of Strava  (Strava  users group only)
•Can attend focus group in Color ado
Focus Group Exclusion Criteria:  
•Having a c ognitive or visual impairment that would interfere with participating
•Being unwilling to be audio/video recorded
•Having another family member participating in the research
Retrospective Activity Data Partcipants Inclusion Criteria:  
•18 years of age or older
•Able to speak  and read English
•Consent to participate
•Being a tenured Strava  user (member for at least one year with at least 156 activities  uploaded )
•United States resident
•Able to provide authentication for data collection
Retrospective Activity Data Partcipants Exclusion  Criteria:  
•Having a c ognitive or visual impairment that would interfere with participating
Usability Testing Inclusion Criteria:  
•18 years of age or older
•Able to speak  and read English
•Consent to participate
•Being a tenured Strava  user (member for at least one year with at least 156 activities  uploaded )
•United States resident
•Able to provide authentication for data collection
Usability Testing Exlusion Criteria:  
•Having a c ognitive or visual impairment that would interfere with participating
•Having another family member participating in the research
Pilot Field Tester Inclusion Criteria  
•18 years of age or older
•Able to speak  and read English
•Consent to participate
•Being a regular user of Strava  (at least 3 uploads per week )
•United States resident
Pilot Field Tester Exclusion  Criteria  
•Having a c ognitive or visual impairment that would interfere with participating
•Having another family member participating in the research
•Having participated in the focus group and usability testing
Age Limits  
18-no maximum
Inclusion of Women and Minorities . We anticipate that 50% of the participants will be women.  No 
exclusions for this project will be based on gender.  
For the focus  groups , to be held in Denver, CO, we will attempt to recruit racial/ethnic minority 
participants at similar rates to their representation in Denver. According to the U.S. Census, 1.4% of th e 
population is American Indian or Alaskan Native; 3.4% Asian; 0.1% Hawaiian or Pacific Islander; 10.2% 
African American; 31.8% Hispanic (any race); 4.1% two or more races; and 49% White.80 
For the  data acquisition,  usability testing and the pilot field test, we will attempt to recruit racial/ethnic 
minority participants at similar rates to their representation in the United States. Potential participants will not 
be excluded based on race or ethnicity. According to the U.S. Census, 1.6% of th e population is American 
Indian or Alaskan Native; 3% Asian; 0.2% Hawaiian or Pacific Islander; 4.3% African American; 21% Hispanic 
(any race); 2.5% two or more races; and 67.4% White.  The Targeted Enrollment Table represents a composite 
of these numbers.  
During the recruitment process, Dr. Buller and Ms. Berteletti will screen for participants using protocols 
approved by the Western Institutional Review Board (WIRB), based on gender, race, and ethnicity. If we find 
that we are over -recruiting a particular  gender or racial or ethnic group  considering our accrual targets , we will 
place them on a waiting list until we have recruited an adequate number of targeted participants.  
Inclusion Across the Lifespan. Children under 18 will be ineligible for participati on.  C hildren under 
18 will not be enrolled in the proposed project because this program  is aimed at adults  and it is not possible to 
identify parents through the Strava  interface to obtain parental consent . Adults of any age, who use Strava  to 
track their physical activity will be enrolled (non -Strava  adult users will also be enrolled in the focus group 
discussions). Age will be self -reported by the participants.  
Recruitment and Retention Plan  
Recruitment Procedures.  Focus group participan ts will be recruited on a voluntary basis through 
Facebook and the investigators’ networks in Colorado.  
We will recruit 1, 000 Strava  users to provide authentication and consent to collect their retrospective (one 
year of data) activity data through the Strava API. These users will be recruited by posting invitations in clubs 
on Strava . The  SS database will connect to Strava  through its public Applications Programming Interface 
(API). This connection allows us to receive data of participants ’ physical activity from the Strava  app when 
they accept our Terms and Conditions and give permission to access their data. Participants will be  provided 
with an online consent form. They will not participate in the intervention or be contacted for follow -up surveys. 
Usability testing participants will be randomly selected from those  who consented to data  access  for 
creation of the  outdoor  activity  algorithm . They will be re -contacted through the Strava  API by email and 
comments (with 3 reminders over 4 weeks) and invited to participate  in the usability testing. The first 30 to 
respond to the emails will be enrolled and receive the informed  consent form before starting a condensed four -
week intervention period. They will be called for a follow -up phone interview after the four -week period.  
Pilot field test participants will be recruit ed through posting s in Strava  clubs and inviting participants to 
click a link to the study website to learn more about the study , where they can complete a brief screener before 
being  provided with an informed consent form, and  prompted with the authentication protocol to provide 
acces s to their Strava  data , complete a profile with user characteristics, and complete the pretest survey .
Retention and Adherence.  Participant retention and compliance with study procedures are paramount 
concerns. To address these factors, we have devised and  implemented a retention and compliance plan. This 
plan addresses: 1) how  participants are successfully retained throughout the course of the two -year study and 
2) how participants are educated about the requirements of the program. Participants may exhibi t issues that
pose threats to their successful completion of the study, even though they are eligible to participate. These
issues are often referred to as “red flags” in the clinical trials literature. Red flags can be circumstances,
personal traits, or p hysical or psychological limitations that could pose potential threats to a candidates’
successful retention in a long -term study. Participants may disclose these issues with the study staff publicly or
privately, or study staff may suspect these issues af ter an interaction with a participant. Study staff  will be
trained on identifying red flags and other barriers to successful participation to help facilitate honest
conversations with participants regarding their interest and motivation for being in the study.
To achieve the goal of high participant rete ntion after inclusion into the program, we will use supplemental 
materials, personal contact, telephone reminders, motivational interviewing techniques, incentives including  
compensation for assessment completion, and problem solving to overcoming barriers . Participants will be 
compensated to incentivize and improve study retention. Participants will be compensated as follows: $50 for 
participation in the focus group  (higher to account for travel to KB office for focus group) ; $40 for participation 
in the u sability testing; and $75 ($35 at baseline and $40 at follow -up) for participation in the pilot field test . 
Participants who provide access to their retrospective Strava  activity data for development of the outdoor 
physical activity algorithm will be enter ed into a drawing for $50 gift cards (they will not complete any surveys 
or participate in the intervention). The participants randomized to the no -treatment control condition in the 
pilot field trial will receive $45 ($20 at pretest; $25 at posttest) for completing the surveys.  
2.7. Study Timeline  
Protection of Human Subjects  
RISKS TO HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics, and Design.  The subject population for this study 
is adults who engage in routine physical activity and log their activities on Strava , an activity tracking and 
social network site with accompanying mobile app. Both males and females will be included and participants 
will be of various ethnic and racial backgrounds. Potential participants will not be excluded based on ethnic 
group or race. Participants will be asked to complete consent and demographic forms.  The demographics of 
the expected participants a re detailed in the Targeted Enrollment Table. Human subjects will include:  
1. Focus Group Participants (n=32) : Adult Strava  users and nonusers will provide feedback regarding
concept of Strava  Sun (SS), preferred content of sun safety advice and delivery meth ods, their outdoor
activities and time of day/day of week they typically exercise outdoors, variation in outdoor exercise by
season, confidence and barriers to using  SS advice, utility/effectiveness of advice for sun protection
through Strava  community, wi llingness to use the advice while exercising, and concerns around
privacy . Current Strava  users (n=2 focus groups; n=16 total; 8 male, 8 female) will be convened in
Denver for a discussion on a) Strava  use, b) exercise behaviors, c) concerns about privacy,  d)
willingness to receive recommendations on preventing sunburn while exercisin g, and e) use of sun
protection while exercising .  A group of outdoor exercisers who do not use Strava  will also be convened
(n=2 focus groups; n=16 total; 8 male, 8 female ; matched to Strava  users in focus groups on race,
gender, and activity type ). Inclusion criteria are 1) being 18 years of age or older, 2) speaking and
reading English, 3) consenting to  participate, and 4) being a regular user of Strava  (Strava  users group
only).  Exclusion criteria includes 1) having a c ognitive or visual impairment that would interfere with
participating, 2) being unwilling to be audio/video recorded, and 3) having anot her family member
participating in the research. Focus group transcripts will be coded and analyzed using ATLAS.ti®
software. Participants will be compensated $50 for their time.
2. Strava  Users in the USA to Provide Activity Data (n=1,000):  These participants will not answer survey
questions or actively participate in the program. They will provide authentication to collect their
retrospective (one year of data) activity data through the Strava  API. We will not collect their current
activity data. The data being collected and what it will be used for will be detailed in the authentication.
These users will be recruited by posting in clubs on Strava , until 1,000 eligible users have agreed t o
provide their data. Eligibility requirements include: 1) having at least 156 activities  uploaded  in one
year of Strava  use; 2) providing authentication. They will be entered to win one of 10 $50 gift cards for
allowing access to their data.
3. Usability Te st Participants (n=30):  Usability testing of the intervention will be conducted with 30
Strava  users who previously consented to provide their data for analysis and creation of the algorithm
(see above). These participants will have already provided consen t for data access, but will be re -
contacted by email through the Strava  API to ask if they are interested in participating in the usability
testing. The first 30 Strava  users to respond to the emails will be enrolled and will receive informed
consent befor e starting a condensed intervention period. Identifying the 30 participants in the  SS
database, we will send out the created messages by email and comments for four  weeks. At the
completion of the four -week period, participants will complete a phone interv iew with project staff to
assess recall of messages, message delivery and timing  (e.g., if message received before next physical
activity bout) , accuracy of outdoor activity  predictions , and usability of and problems with SS
comments/emails . They will be asked about sun protection practices during physical activity.
Eligibility requirements include: tenured Strava  user (member for at least one year with 156 activities);

18 or older; Unit ed States resident; can read/write in English; and provides authentication for data 
collection. Participants will be compensated $40 for their time.  
4. Pilot Field Te sters (n= 226): Strava  users (n=176) will test the prototype  SS interface while interacting
with the Strava  platform and community in the United States. They will be recruited through posting
an invitation in Strava  clubs. The invitation will link them to the study website where they will receive
more information and b e screened and consented. Participants will provide feedback on the design,
appeal, and functionality of the  SS message delivery and complete measures of self-efficacy, response -
efficacy, sun protection practices, sunburn  (defined as skin red and/or painfu l from exposure to the
sun in the past four months) , and barriers to sun protection, recall of  SS messages (i.e., how many
times a day they read the notifications, how much they liked receiving them, preferred type of
message), and acceptability and willin gness to use  SS interface through Strava  in the future.
Additionally, a small control group  (n=50)  will be included to determine if a no -treatment control
condition is acceptable to Strava  users and estimate follow -up rates for planning a randomized trial.
The control group sample is not designed to test for statistical differences in comparison to the
treatment group.  Randomization should assure that the control group is similar in age, gender, and
activity level.  Inclusion criteria are 1) being 18 years of age or older, 2) writing and reading English, 3)
being a regular user of Strava  (at least 3 uplo ads per week ), 4) living in the United States, and 5)
consenting to participate. Exclusion criteria includes 1) having a cognitive or visual impairment that
would interfere with participating, 2) having another family member participating in the research, or 3)
being unwilling to give consent. They will also be excluded if they participated in a focus group or
usability testing. Participants will be compensated $ 65 ($30 at baseline and $ 35 at follow -up) for their
time.  Control group participants will be compensated $45 ($20 pretest, $25 posttest) for completing
the surveys.
Study Procedures, Materials, and Potential Risks. 
Study Procedures : The two -year R21 research will use scientifically -rigorous formative researc h and 
pilot -testing. Investigators will create study protocols in Month 1. Outdoor exercisers, including Strava  users 
and non -users, will give input on initial concepts for Strava  Sun (SS) in focus groups during Months 2 -5. An 
algorithm that predicts time of day and day of week spent exercising outdoors will developed using anonymous 
Strava  user data in Months 6 -8. A prototype of the  SS database will be developed in Months 9 -14 and the 
messages and delivery methods will be tested for usability and acceptability with Strava  users. In Month 15, 
investigators and expert consultant will give input on the formative research results, validity of the time outside 
algorithm, usability of SS, and th e pilot -test plans. In Months 16 -21, the feasibility of  SS will be tested in a pilot 
field trial with Strava  users. Data analysis on the pilot field trial will be performed in Months 22 -24. All 
procedures will be approved by the Western Institutional Revie w Board (WIRB), KB’s IRB  (IRB costs are paid 
from KB’s indirect costs) . 
The collaborating site  is Colorado State University (FWA No. 00000647 ). 
Study  Materials: Data from focus groups , usability testing,  and pilot field test will be collected in the 
form of handwritten notes, video and audio tapes, computer files, transcriptions, online surveys, and web 
server records. We will collect retrospective (one year of data) activity data through the Strava  API to develop 
the algorithm predicting outdoor physical activity . Data will be obtained specifically for research purposes and 
will be kept confidential with access limited to the Multiple Principal Investigators  (MPIs) , Co-Investigator, 
specific project sta ff, and consultant s. Data will be obtained specifically for research purposes and will be kept 
confidential with access limited to the MPIs  and specific project staff. All data will be kept in locked files.  
Potential Risks:  Potential risks to adult Strav a users and non -users are minimal, mainly social or 
psychological. Participants may be hesitant or uncomfortable responding to questions about outdoor physical 
activity and actions to protect their skin from the sun. They also may not feel comfortable resp onding to 
questions about their opinions on appeal, ease of understanding, navigation, and functionality of the prototype  
SS and barriers and willingness to use it. Responses will not be shared with anyone except project staff.  All 
participants will be al lowed to withdraw at any time if they are uncomfortable with the discussions or survey 
questions. Responses to the questions will be coded to protect confidentiality, and participants may choose to 
not answer questions.  WIRB requires that the option not to  answer be provided to all participants on all 
questions.  
ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS 
Informed Consent and Assent. Human Subjects oversight will be conducted by the Western 
Institutional Review Board (WIRB; DHHS IRB Reg. No. IRB0000053; FWA No. 00003715) , KB’s IRB . All 
consenting procedures will be IRB -approved.  The WIRB will review and approve subject materials (including 
recruitment advertisements, letters, consent forms, survey instruments) and data management procedures 
prior to study implementation.  
Focus group p articipants will be presented with IRB -approved consent forms that will describe the purpose 
of the project, risks and benefits, and selection criteria. Participants will be given an opportunity to ask 
questions a nd have them answered. For focus groups, consent will occur in -person and will be administered by 
investigators. For the usability test  and for participants providing retrospective data , a link to an online 
informed consent document will be provided to participants. Participants will have the option to print the 
consent form. For the pilot field test, online consent will occur prior to the pretest survey  and randomization . 
Again, there will be an option for participants to print the consent l anguage.  
Participation will be voluntary, with the right to stop participating at any time. No clinical data will be 
captured. Responses to survey questions and the discussions would not reasonably place the participants at 
risk of criminal or civil liabi lity or be damaging to the participants' financial standing, employability, or 
reputation. All data coding, data entry, analysis and reporting activities will be conducted by KB and CSU. 
Participants will be informed that they have a right to withdraw from  the study at any time. No additional data 
will be collected from participants who decide to withdraw; however, the information collected prior to 
withdrawal will remain in the study.  
Protection Against Risk. To minimize potential psychological risk, the  focus group facilitator (Ms. 
Berteletti) will establish ground rules for discussion that includes an open, non -evaluative exchange of 
comments and ideas. All surveys and data collection forms will be approved by WIRB and employed under the 
supervision of senior project staff. Participants will be told that they do not have to answer any questions which 
make them uncomfortable and can terminate their participation at any time they wish.   
Notes, surveys, audiotapes, and data will be accessible only by rese arch personnel.  Responses to survey 
questions would not reasonably place the subjects at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the 
subjects' financial standing, employability, or reputation.  No clinical data will be captured.  The data col lected 
on this project will be obtained with the "use of educational tests, survey questions, [and] interview 
procedures."  
Data will be de -identified before being submitted for analysis. All notes and printed data collection forms 
and questionnaires will be stored in locked cabinets at KB offices; all electronic data files will be stored on KB’s 
secure network servers behind computer firewalls, with routine backup. All identifiers will be stored in secure 
files and behind computer firewalls and results wil l be shared in aggregate form only. All human subjects 
participating in this project will be 18 years and older.   
 To minimize the risk to participant data privacy and protection through the internet, KB programmers will 
monitor and maintain all programs  and databases and use an established protocol for participant cyber safety 
and security. KB is HIPAA complaint and maintains vigorous tec hnical safeguards which are built into KB’s IT 
system to protect information and to control access to it .  All partici pant information will be protected using 
128-bit SSL encryption. All Internet information must travel through KB’s CISCO ASA 5505 firewall using ASA
software version 9.0(2) encrypted 3DES -AES. Traffic then moves to KB’s web server. This server is a Dell
Power Edge T -310 with 32 GB of RAM, 1.5 TB available disk space on a RAID 5 redundant drive system using
Windows Hyper -V Operating System. The virtual web server uses Windows 2008 IIS Web server software.
User click stream data is collected using Webtrends a nd is saved to our SQL server. Enrollment data is
transferred to our SQL server (Windows Server 2008) which uses MS SQL server 2008 R2 database software.
This machine is also a Dell Power Edge T -310 with 32 GB of RAM, 1.5 TB available disk space on a RAID 5
redundant drive system using Windows Hyper -V OS and has no access to the Internet. When a participant is
directed to take a survey, their computer is linked to a third server in our system which is also a Dell Power
Edge T -310 with 32 GB of RAM, 1.5 TB a vailable disk space on a RAID 5 redundant drive system using
Windows Hyper -V OS. This server runs Question Pro Survey software. Data from each survey is collected and
saved to the SQL server mentioned above. All network traffic is sent from the CISCO firew all to a Syslog server
using Manage Engine Firewall Analyzer 7 software. Login and network activity is required and monitored by
Windows servers to an event viewer. Servers are kept in a locked room on site. All files are secured locally using
MS NTFS. All  traffic between servers and PCs on the LAN are digitally signed communications. Each local
machine has a built -in operating system firewall. Data from the Question Pro surveys are exported for data
analysis by local machines which are also behind KB’s fir ewall. Access to this exported data by outside sources
is done using File Transfer Protocol (FTP) protected by Secure Socket Layer (SSL). SQL databases are
protected by the built -in security of MS Active Directory. Data is backed up using a Quantum SuperLo ader 3
tape library using LT04 tapes that contain 800 GB/1.6 TB of info (depending on compression used). The device
holds 16 tapes. The backup software used by KB is Symantec Back -up Exec. 2012. Daily backups are
incremental and tapes are recycled weekly. Weekly backups are done every Friday and are recycled every 6
weeks. Monthly backups are done on the last Friday of each month and are full backups of all data. These
monthly tapes are stored in a secure offsite facility and are never recycled.
With regar ds to app security on personal devices, Apple (e.g., iOS programmed apps) completes a full 
security review of any app installed on a phone including beta/testing apps through their App Transport 
Security (ATS).   KB App programming will include all key developer -related features to ensure ATS security. 
Google Play (Android programming) does not conduct a similar security check; however, KB has extensive 
experience with developing and marketing both iOS and Androi d programmed apps using an established 
protocol ( SSL/TLS: Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Security Layer ) and has never experienced a data breach. 
All usability testers will be informed that information being sent to and from their device will remain encryp ted 
and password protected, and at any time they are allowed to opt -out of the program.   
POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH TO PARTICIPANTS AND OTHERS  
Potential benefits for all participants will be the knowledge that they have helped in develop ment of an 
innovative mobile delivery system for preventing the development of skin cancer. Participants also may 
increase their knowledge of effective sun protection practices. A sun protection interface for the Strava  
platform will provide individuals wh o engage in regular physical activity advice to help them plan for and 
practice sun safety during outdoor activities.  
A description of this study will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This 
website will not include information that can identify the participant. At most, the website will include a 
summary of the results. This website can be searched at any time.  
IMPORTANCE OF THE KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED   
Skin cancer is the most preventable cancer because excessive exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UV), the 
primary risk factor, is easily modifiable. Unfortunately, skin cancer rates continue to rise and m any Americans 
experience sunburns. Physical activity is associated with increased prevalence of sunburn and melanoma. The 
proposed research is important because it will develop new mHealth strategies to reduce the epidemic of skin 
cancer in the United States. In addition, the app will provide Americans who engage in physical activity, a 
healthy lifes tyle behavior, real -time advice on sun safety, when and where they need it.  
TRAINING IN THE ETHICAL CONDUCT OF RESEARCH WITH HUMAN SUBJECTS  
The MPIs , Co-Investigators, and study personnel have completed the required training in the Ethical 
Conduct of Rese arch with Human Subjects. Necessary documentation will be provided to NIH prior to funds 
being awarded.  
DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
A data safety and monitoring plan will be implemented for this R21 project, following well -established 
procedures at KB. We will not set up an independent Data Safety and Monitoring Board because this study is 
low risk; does not include use of therapeutics ; and physical risks are not anticipated. However, the progress of 
the formative research will be monitored monthly by the MPIs, Co-Investigator s, and study staff who will meet 
weekly to discuss the activities in the project, participant recruitment, and d ata collection. Any critical events 
will be reviewed by the investigators to ensure that project methods have not been intrusive or disruptive. 
Annual reports on data safety and monitoring are submitted to WIRB. Compliance with data collection 
protocols wi ll be monitored throughout data collection by the investigators. The investigators are responsible 
for reporting all adverse events to the IRB. Only Grade 1 events are expected on this trial. Thus, adverse events 
will be reported annually, as required by D HHS. This report will be reviewed by WIRB. Any action taken by the 
IRB or project investigators resulting in a temporary or permanent suspension of the trial will be 
communicated immediately by the  contact  PI to the NIH program officer.  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Focus groups will be recorded, transcribed, and analyzed using Atlas -ti© software by assigning 
codes that categorize views, themes, and opinions, rely on constant comparative analysis  and a 
phenomenological approach.  In the pilot field trial, primary outcome is change in sun protection 
pre to post, analyzed with a paired t -test; changes in perceived risk , response - and self -efficacy, 
and sunburn will be compared pre to post , similarly. Message recall (i.e. receipt of the 
messages), users’ reactions, barriers, and willingness to use SS, will be summarized as 
proportions/means and c ompared on demographics, using chi -square tests, t -tests, and 
correlations at p=0.05 (2 -tailed).  Power analy sis was estimated using treatment effect sizes from 
our sunZapp  trials . For this small -scale pilot test, we powered on the quasi -experimental 
pretest -posttest comparison within the SS group, using a paired samples t -test. Assuming an 
effect size of 0.23 in sun protection pre to post  and a correlation between the pre/post scores of 
0.5, we will need 181 participants with complete pre -post data to detect an effect of this size with 
power of 0.80  in a 2-tailed p=0.05 test, which we factored up to 226 to account for 20% 
attrition.  Recruitment rates and duration, and follow -up rates, will be described for planning a 
future randomized trial on SS effectiveness. We will test if sun safety messages ( SS message 
recall) reduced physical activity  (IPAQ),  using correlations.  The control group sample is not 
designed to test for statistical differences in comparison to the treatment group. D ata will be de -
identified and stored in KB’s secure servers. Dr. Henry will oversee data management and 
analysis . SAS will be used for analyses.  
 