Omegaven for PNALD  
         IRB # 12010063  
 
Page 1 of 4                                                   4/25/12 
 Treatment Use of Omegaven for treatment with Parenteral Nutrition Associated Liver 
Disease  
 
Principal Investigator:  
Joel Lim , MD, principal investigator, CMH , Gastroenterology, 234 -3017, jdlim@cmh.edu  
 
Co-Investigators:  
Tracy Sandritter , PharmD, sub -investigator, CMH, Pediatric Pharmacology and Medical 
Toxicology , 234-9301 , tlsandritter@cmh.edu  
 
Kim Radford , RN, MSN, CPNP -AC, sub -investigator, CMH, Gastroenterology, 983 -
6748, kradford@cmh.edu  
 
William San Pablo , MD, sub -investigator, CMH, Gastro enterology, 983 -6658, 
wsanpablo@cmh.edu  
 
Walter Andrews , MD, sub -investigator, CMH, Transplant Surgery, 234 -3633, 
wandrews@cmh.edu  
 
Rich Hendrickson , MD, sub -investigator, CMH , Transplant Surgery, 983 -6335, 
rjhendrickson@cmh.edu  
 
Beth Lyman , RN, CNSN, sub -investigator, CMH, Gastroenterology, 855 -1766, 
blyman@cmh.edu  
 
Research Personnel:  
Corey Schurman , MA, coordinator, CMH, Gastroenterology, 802 -1167, 
crschurman@cmh.edu  
 
Shawna Ricks , RN, MSN, CCRC, coordinator, CMH, Gastroenterology, 234 -3197, 
sricks@cmh.edu  
 
Study Site(s): Children’s Mercy Hospital  
 
Protocol Version:  1.0 Protocol Date:  1/30/12  
1. STUDY OBJECTIVES /HYPOTHESIS  
Primary Objective  
 
To evaluate whether  established parenteral nutrition  associated liver disease (PNALD) can be 
reversed or its progression halted by using a parenteral  fat emulsion prepared from fish oil 
(omega -3 fatty acid emulsion, Omegaven®) as measured by normalization or decrease of serum 
levels of hepatic enzymes . 
Secondary Objective  
Omegaven for PNALD  
         IRB # 12010063  
 
Page 2 of 4                                                   4/25/12 
  
To assess the safety profile of the intravenous omega -3 fatty acid emulsion (Omegaven®).  
2. BACKGROUND  
 
Patients suffering from short bowel syndrome require life -saving parenteral nutrition 
(PN).  One of the major complications of this essential therapy is PNALD, especially in infants 
and children.  This liver injury affects the majority of infants and children on long term PN and 
may progress to liver failure, liver transplantation  or ultimately death. A number of causes of 
PNALD have been proposed, including the use of intravenous fat emulsions.  
PN provides intravenous nutritional supplementation for patients unable to absorb 
adequate enteral nutrients secondary to insufficient intestinal length or decreased functionality.   
PN contains the macronutrient building blocks of the human diet in their most elemental forms 
(amino acids and dextrose) and is commonly administered with a lipid emulsion to avoid essential 
fatty acid deficiency and to provide a calorically dense source of non -protein calories.  In 
addition, PN contains the essential micronutr ients (electrolytes, trace elements, and vitamins) to 
provide an optimal nutritional regimen.  Before the development of PN, patients with insufficient 
gastrointestinal absorptive function commonly died of starvation and subsequent complications of 
malnutr ition.  Today many patients (30,000) patients are permanently dependent on PN for 
survival.  However, PN continues to be associated with hepatic injury that occurs at an 
unpredictable rate and includes both biochemical (elevated serum aminotransferases and  alkaline 
phosphatase) and histological alterations such as steatosis, steatohepatitis, lipidosis, cholestatis, 
fibrosis, and cirrhosis.    
Parenteral lipid emulsions in the United States are soy -based products which are rich in 
omega -6 fatty acids. These emulsions have been implicated in predisposing patients to PNALD 
because of their phytosterol content, which is thought to have a deleterious effect on hepatic 
biliary secretion and cause accumulation of lipids in the liver.  On the other hand, animal stud ies 
have shown that intravenous fat emulsions prepared from fish oil, which are high in omega -3 
fatty acids, do not impair bile flow and may actually diminish fat accumulation in hepatocytes.  
Fish oil based emulsions (ie, Omegaven) are available in Europe .  Due to regulatory and 
manufacturing limitations, these products are not available to patients in the US unless their 
physician petitions the Food and Drug Administration for permission to import them on a 
compassionate use basis.  
Children’s Hospital, Bo ston has published data regarding the use of Omegaven in 
patients with PNALD.  
 It has been their experience, that through the use of Omegaven instead of conventional 
lipid emulsions, that the biochemical tests of liver function improved significantly.  
Ther e has been no documented case of heavy metal contamination with the use of 
Omegaven.  There is no discussion in the literature of there being any worry or risk of this 
happening.   
3. DESIGN  
 
This is a compassionate use protocol for patients with PNALD who ha ve failed traditional 
treatment to receive Omegaven through an IND.  
TARGET POPLUATION SPECIFICS  
We will be enrolling up to 10 patients 0 - less than 18 years of age who have Parenteral Nutrition 
Associated Liver Disease.   These patients will have been on tra ditional TPN for on average 2 -4 
Omegaven for PNALD  
         IRB # 12010063  
 
Page 3 of 4                                                   4/25/12 
 weeks and will remain on TPN using Omegaven until they no longer need TPN or are sent for 
short bowel or liver transplant.  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. The patient will be PN dependent and unable to meet nutritional needs solely by en teral 
nutrition.  
2. Patient will be <18 years of age.  
3. Direct bilirubin > 2.0mg/dl  
4. The patient must have failed standard therapies to prevent progression his/her liver 
disease.  
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Other causes of chronic liver disease (Hepatitis C, Cystic fibro sis, biliary atresia, and alpha 1 
anti-trypsin deficiency).  
2. Patients who are allergic to eggs/shellfish  
3. Patients who have severe hemorrhagic disorders.  
5. DATA COLLECTION  
Data Collection Procedures  
Patients  will be identified by Dr. Lim and the Intestinal Rehabilitation/Transplant Team.  
 
All potential patients  will be either inpatient admitted under  the GI or Surgery Service, or GI or 
Surgery Services will be consulted. Dr. Lim  or one of the sub -investigator s will be notified by the 
services (if he is not the attending) that a subject has clinically progressed towards needing the 
investigational drug.  Dr. Lim will ultimately decide  if a subject meets criteria for enrollment.  
 
When Dr. Lim feels a patient will  benefit from Omegaven, he or one of the sub -investigators will 
discuss the protocol with the family and answer all questions.  Permission/assent will be obtained 
by the PI, sub -investigators or coordinator.  
Records to be kept  
All data collection will be p art of the patient’s medical record and there is no plan to record any 
additional data.  A patient record will be kept with lab results and other information directly 
related to a subject’s response to Omegaven.  This record will be identified with a uniqu e study 
numbe r and a master linking list will  be maintained that links the subject’s medical record 
number to their study number.  
 Secure Storage of Data  
The patient record will consist of an excel spread sheet that will be located in the GI section 
folder  on the CMH network.  The linking list will be kept in a separate folder in the GI section 
folder.  Only the PI and coordinators will have access to these folders.  
STUDY DURATION/STUDY TIMELINE  
 
This protocol will be kept open indefinitely for the benefit of patients who have PNALD 
and need access to Omegaven through this IND.  
Omegaven for PNALD  
         IRB # 12010063  
 
Page 4 of 4                                                   4/25/12 
 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
As this is a compassionate use protocol, there are no real statistical considerations.  All 
subjects who could benefit from Omegaven will be included.   
Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review and Informed Consent  
This protocol, and any subsequent modifications , will be reviewed and approved by the  
Pediatric  IRB at  The Children’s Mercy Hospital & Clinics . 
Permission/assent will be obtained after Dr. Lim has decided that a patient would benefit 
from Omegaven therapy and all other standard therapies h ave been exhausted.  
Permission/assent will be obtained in person and as the subjects will all be inpatients, will 
most likely be obtained in the NICU or PICU.   Without this treatment, the next step for 
these patients is short bowel or liver transplant.  
Subject Confidentiality  
 
All data collection will be part of the patient’s medical record and there is no plan to 
record any additional data.  A research record will be kept with lab results and other 
information directly related to a subject’s response to O megaven.  This research record 
will be identified with a unique study numbe r and a master linking list will  be maintained 
that links the subject’s medical record number to their study number.  
All research records will be kept on an excel spreadsheet in a p rotected folder which only 
the PI and coordinators will have access to.  There are no patient identifiers recorded in 
the research recor d. All computer entry and networking programs will be done using 
study identification only.  All data will be entered in to a computer that is password 
protected.  All data will be maintained for a minimum of three years after completion of 
the protocol.  
 
Study Modification/Discontinuation  
The protocol  may be modified or discontinued at any time by the IRB, the OHRP, the 
FDA or other Government agencies as part of their duties to ensure that patients  are 
protected.  
PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS  
 
There are no plans to publish findings , however, t here is always the chance that 
something may be found during the course of treatment that would be of scientific merit 
and would be of benefit to add to the literature on Omegaven.  
 
 
 