Page 1 of 9 
 Living Well Together Randomized Controlled Trial –  General Protocol  
Updated January 1, 2019  
1. Community Partnership  
This R CT is the result of well -established community -based partnership in a medium -sized city 
(population 600,000) that had over three years working together prior to applying for the RCT’s funding, 
with multiple involved agencies collaborating on other projects for even more years. The partnership 
included representatives from a university, a community health center, a religious organization 
providing supplies to food pantries, a non -profit focused on financial security for families , university 
extension services , and physical activity programing for youth and adults. Prior to the R CT, this group 
designed, obtained funding for, and implemented the pilot on which this R CT is based. A steering 
committee, called the Living Well Together Partnership, comprised of representatives from all partner 
organizations , meets quarterly and corresponds by phone and email throughout the duration of the 
RCT.  
2. RCT 
This RCT involves  two arms, Education Only group (control) and the Health Coach group 
(intervention). Participants in the  Education Only group re ceive  educational materials on health family 
diet and activity (We Can booklets) and  quarterly new sletters . In addition,  they receive resource 
screen ings at baseline and 6 -months , follow -up phone call s using the Community Resource S pecialist’s 
screening questionnaire , and referrals to appropriate basic -needs resources.  
Those in the Health Coach group  received guidance from an assigned Health  Coach , in which up to 5 
in-person visits and 4 phone visits were completed within a 12 -month period. MI  was used during these 
sessions to help set goals based on the family’s health needs and priorities. The Health Coach group 
participants received the same res ource screening and newsletters  as the Education Only group, but 
they also received additional resourc es to help their family's needs based on their goals made with the 
Health Coach.  
Primary outcomes based o n the 12 -month intervention are separated by Inde x Adult and Index  
Child. For the Index Adult the primary outcome s are  changes  from baseline to 12 -months in 1) BMI 
(kg/m2), 2) the average minutes of moderate to vigorous activity , and 3) average h ours of sedentary 
time per day . For the Index  Child the pri mary outcomes are change from baseline to 12 -month s on 
sedentary time and minutes of moderate to vigoro us activity per day  and score on the Family Nutrition 
and Physical Activity tool (FNPA). In comparison to the Education Only group, we hypothesize d that at 6, 
12, and 18 months, families participating in the Health Coach group will demonstrate 1) a reduction in 
BMI for Index  Adults, 2) an increase in minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity and a decrease 
in sedentary time for both Index Adults an d Index  Children as measured by an accelerometer, and 3) a 
reduction in the number of obesity risk behaviors and an increase in the number of obesity prevention 
behaviors among Index  Children as measured by the FNPA scale.  
 
3. Participants  
3.1. Inclusion and exclu sion criteria 
Index  Adult and Index  Child dyads were enrolled in the RCT if they met the following inclusion 
criteria: 1) Index  Adult was 18 years or older; 2) Index  Adult was not pregnant at  the time of enrollment; 
3) Index  Adult was a pare nt or guardian of a child who was  between the ages of 6 and 12 years old; 4) 
Page 2 of 9 
 Index  Child was living with parent/guardian at least 5 out of the 7 days on average (80% of the time); 5) 
Index  Adult must have lived within  the county or the Ind ex Child must attend the local public schools  6) 
Index  Adult must have  had a BMI of 30 or above (clinically obese); 7) Index Adult must  have  been able to 
converse in English or Spanish; 8) Index Adult and Index Child could not have been on specific 
medicat ions that are associated with weight gain or loss or have certain medical conditions that would 
make it difficult for them to participate (exceptions were made for certain medications if participants ’ 
weight had been stable on that medication of more than 3 months) ; and 9) Index Adult must not have  
had significant physical limitations to exercise (must be able to at least walk the equivalent of one city 
block with an assistive device).  
Other individuals in the family were involved with the intervention, su ch as the Primary Food 
Preparers  (PFPs) and other children in the household ages 2 to 18 (Non -Index Children) . These 
individuals  were not subject to any inclusion/exclusion criteria; however, it was preferred they have the 
ability to converse in English or Spanish. There was no inclusion or exclusion criteria for household 
income. Individuals who previously participated in the pilo t study and individuals from the same 
household were not eligible to participate. Families t hat did not meet these criteria  were not enrolled 
but encouraged to contact research staff if their eligibility conditions changed.    
4. Recruitment/randomization sch eme, phone screening  
Recruitment for the RCT occurred for 28 months  on a rolling basis.  To accommodate the varied 
background of participants, intervention materials were  provided in English and Spanish  (our target 
population ). Though eligibility criteria d id not include income recruitment sites were cho sen to primarily 
target low- income families.  
The two primary, and most successful, recruitment sites for enrolled participants were 
unemployment  seminars  and food pantries , both brick -and-mortar and mobile l ocations . At these 
seminars  a clip board was circulated through the audience and interested persons could leave their 
name and contact information in order to complete a screening via phone at a later time. Research staff 
were  also available after the seminars to answer any questions. At food pantry sites, intervention staff 
recruited in -person for four days a month, with a rotating schedule between the four largest pan tries  
within the pantry network . Interested individuals were asked to fill out and return a “Consent to 
Contact” form to intervention staff at the recruitment tables. A scale was provided in a private area for 
interested individuals to weigh themselves to see about preliminary eligibility  if their weight was 
unknown.  
Similar recruitment strategies were completed at community or school events  which catered to 
large numbers of low -income families . Monday Mail Folders, or similar systems, within elementary 
schools allowed flyers to be distributed to children within the district , who attend schools with high 
number s of free and reduced lunch recipients . At the  non-profit center focused on financial security for 
families , the Community Resource Specialist was housed and provided on -site recruit  of participants 
seeking the c enter’s assistance. All  organizations at the c enter had intervention brochures and referred 
clients to the Community Resource Specialist , which may have  contributed  to some of the participants 
actively seeki ng participation in  the study . Promotional materials were available in the waiting areas at  
other community partner locations. Healthcare providers (e.g., physicians, physician assistants, nurses 
or outreach workers) were used to reach eligible adult patients  at the communit y health center.   They 
provided these adults with intervention information and obtained contact information for interested 
families so that intervention staff could provide more information. Posters and brochures in the clinic  
encourage d adults with children to contact the intervention for information. This did not prove to be a 
Page 3 of 9 
 primary recruitment strategy, which was attributed to lack of communication between clinicians and 
intervention staff and priorities within the clinic for patient  care  over research .  
Individuals that were recruited or who filled out a “Consent to Contact” form were contacted by 
research study staff to complete a phone eligibility screening. The phone screener went through the list 
of eligibility questions with the  potential participant, and individuals were excluded if not meeting study 
criteria. Individuals who met study criteria provided contact and demographic information on an intake 
form, and the Index Child for the fam ily was chosen via a computer randomizati on program from all 
eligible 6 to 12 -year -old children within the household, if there were multiple children within this  age 
range. The family was scheduled to meet with a Data Collector at their home or a participant -chosen 
community location (i.e. a private conference room at the library or at the community health center ). 
  
5. Data collection visits  
Data Collectors  reviewed informed consent documents and obtained written consent of the Index 
Adult  for themsel f and their child  and written assent of the Index Child at the time of the baseline 
interview. There were two Index Child assent forms used based upon the age of the child (ages 6 -9 and 
ages 10 -12) to align with standard reading comprehension levels. When the family includ ed a Primary 
Food Preparer different than the Index Adult another written consent was obtained. All Non -Index 
Children (children ages 2 to 18 that resided within the household) were listed on another consent form 
in which the Index Adult could consent to them having limited participation in the study.  
Data is collected on primary and secondary outcome measures at  baseline, 6 -month, 12 -months, 
and 18 -months. Data collection include s the Index  Adult, the Primary Food Preparer (if different than 
the Index  Adult), and the Index  Child plus limited data on other Non -Index  Children. Data Collectors 
collect  height, weight , waist circumference, blood pressure measures, and questionnaire data on the 
Index  Adults and the Primary Food Preparer. The Index  Adults also answer questionnaires regarding the 
Index  Child. Height and weight measures are  collected for the Index  Child, and the same measures are  
taken for the Non -Index  Children if they wished to participate. At baseline and 12 -month visits, the 
Index  Adult and the Index  Child are fitted with accelerometers to measure physical activity. 7 to 10 days  
later the Data Collector  calls  the Index  Adult to complete a one- week recall for themselves regarding 
physical activity, and the Index  Child also completes  a one -week recall if they a re between the ages of 
10-12. The accelerometers are  then returned for data processing via mail o r picked up in -person by the 
Data Collector. If there is  not a minimum of 5 days of wear -time to analyze, the Index  Adult and/or the 
Index  Child may be asked to wear the accelerometers for additional days to make up for the lost days.  
6. Community Resource Mobilization, Randomization  
Prior to randomization into intervention or control arms, the Community Resource Specialist met 
with enrolled families in -person or by phone and systematically screened them for basic needs 
(appendix - screener documenta tion form) and referred families to community resources to meet 
identified needs. These needs would otherwise present barriers to overall health. The Community 
Resource Specialist also assisted the Health Coaches in mobilizing resources for families. This study staff 
member  was a community college employee who perform ed a similar function for the college and the 
resource center for w orking families. Health coaches follow ed-up with families to gauge resource 
utilization and encourage appropriate use, and als o connect ed them  to specific resources linked to their 
goal attainment. Direct contact from the Community Resource Specialist was  utilized for  families to 
facilitate this attainment. Types of resources include d education, diet, exercise, and financial and other 
support.  
Page 4 of 9 
 Families were stratified (by recruitment site and self- identified race/ethnicity of the Index Adult) and 
randomized to the Health Coach group or the Education Only group in a 1:1 ratio by the Community 
Resource Specialist. A computer algorit hm was used to randomize the families, and the Community 
Resource Specialist then discussed the results with the family and schedule the next step. Thus, D ata 
Collect ors were blinded to group assignment.  
 
7. Study Conditions  
7.1. Intervention (Health Coach group)  
Participants  in the intervention group were assigned  a Health Coach by the Community Resource 
Specialist based on preferred language (English or Spanish) and Health Coach workload . The initial 
Health Coach visit was scheduled by the Community Resource Specialist for continuity of visits, allowing 
active engag ement to continue throughout all portions of the study. The Health Coach guided families 
through a process to choose realistic meaningful goals for change  using motivational interviewing and  
utilizing SMART framework  for making goals . First, the coach and the family explore d current behaviors, 
values, ambivalence toward change, and perceptions of family members ’ ability to change. Then, they 
discuss ed improvements the family want ed to make in diet, physical activity  or other related items (such 
as sleep) , motivations for change, and goals. Each family member w as given  a chance to suggest goals, 
and the Health Coach helped them set realistic goals. The family chose one or two goals and specific 
actions to achieve those goals. Family members were  asked to gauge how important the stated goals 
were  and how achievable the actions seem. If family members perceive d the goals or actions to be 
unimportant or unachievable, the goals may have been revised until the majority agree d or the parents 
made  a final decision. F amily members sign ed an action plan listing the goal and steps to achieve it. For 
families who had  difficulty identifying goals, the Health Coach assist ed them in developing a menu of 
options to consider  or their goal could be to continue the discussion wi th family about current 
behaviors, values and thoughts regarding change.  As the family achieve d the  initial goals, the Health 
Coach encouraged them to set additional goals, including both diet and physical activity. Families were 
encouraged to share their goals with health care providers, family, and friends to gain support. The 
Health Coach and the family discuss ed resources needed to achieve these goals (e.g. equipment, 
information), and this information guided resource referrals.  
Families were scheduled to meet with their Health Coach in their home or a participant -chosen 
community location  to reduce barriers  to participation. They met  at baseline, 1 ½, 3, 6, 9 , and 12 months 
for Health Coach sessions to help set lifestyle  goals. Home visits allowed for m ore involvement from all 
family members within the household, as encouraged by the Health Coach. The Health Coach follow ed 
up by phone at 2 weeks , 4 ½, 7 ½ and 10 ½ months and as needed over the 12 -month intervention. 
These follow- ups allowed discussion  of successes or difficulties, problem -solving, help with resource 
needs, and provided motivational support . Families were encouraged to engage as many family 
members as possible on the follow -up phone calls by utilizing the speakerphone option on their devic es. 
All Health Coach visits were based on MI. MI is a behavioral counseling approach designed to help 
people identify motivations for change, establish goals relevant to their values and motivations, and 
increase self- efficacy for achieving those goals. MI  addresses the challenge  of keeping families engaged 
by focusing on the family’s specific challenges and environment. MI, which is based on social- cognitive 
theory (self -efficacy), self- determination theory and the empowerment paradigm, uses four techniques 
to support change: 1) expression of empathy, 2) development of a discrepancy (enhance participant 
Page 5 of 9 
 awareness of inconsistencies between behavior and values), 3) rolling with resistance (acknowledging 
ambivalence as part of the change process), and 4) supporting client self- effic acy (expression of the 
possibility of participant change and reinforcement of participant’s ability to choose). Health Coaches 
were trained on MI -based communication skills specific to goal setting and actions related to  increasing  
fruit and vegetable cons umption, reducing sugar -sweetened beverage consumption, increasing sleep, 
reducing stress, and reducing screen time  for promoting healthy weights in adults and children. To 
maintain fidelity, all Health Coach sessions were taped unless the Index Adult expl icitly stated they did 
not wish for the sessions to be taped. From the taped sessions, 20% of  sessions were scored  using the 
OnePass coding system . For further validity, 20% of those initially scored by the OnePass coding system 
were scored again by a seco nd reviewer.  
Following initial goal setting through MI , the Health Coach , with assistance from the Community 
Resource Specialist , linked participants to community resources to meet needs that would otherwise 
present barriers to goal attainment. We utilized  our Community Partners to break these barriers. Two 
examples of this were the fresh food boxes and gym memberships provided to the Health Coach group. 
If families chose “Eating More Fruits and Vegetables” as their goal or expressed interest in needing more 
healthy food for their families, we provided fresh and canned fruits and vegetables during the first 6 
months (2 servings/person/day) of the intervention. These food boxes were provided  through a local 
food pantry network  and their volunteers . Informatio n regarding sustainable sources of healthy foods 
through the pantry network and its affiliates was also distributed to participants. Families that chose 
“Physical Activity” are  linked to goal- appropriate resources, such as the low or no cost programs offer ed 
by Parks and Recreation or a 4 -month free membership to partner  YMCA ’s for all members of the 
household. Health Coaches followed -up with families to gauge resource utilization and encourage 
appropriate use of these services.  In addition to the specified  resources, the Health Coach group also 
received identical newsletters as the Education Only group.  
7.1. Control (Education Only group)  
Participants in the Education Only group received the “We Can” family nutrition and activity 
booklets and quarterly 4 -page ne wsletters containing children’s games,  physical activity ideas,  healthy 
recipes, and information on community events. Each newsletter also included a raffle in which 
participants could fill out an  updated contact slip with their information and return to t he study staff for 
a chance to win a gift card to a local retail store. The newsletters were distributed in both English and 
Spanish based on the family’s language preference. The Education Only group also received an initial 
resource screen and follow -up phone call using the Community Resource Specialist’s screening 
questionnaire (APPENDIX #) and referrals to appropriate basic -needs resources.  This was repeated at 6 
months.  These resources were not related to physical activity and nutrition unless specific ally requested 
by the Index  Adult , with the exception of food pantries , SNAP and WIC  for those who indicated food 
insecurity .  
8. Measures  
Body measurements and questionnaires were administered  by Data Collectors at baseline, 6 -month, 
12-month, and 18 -month visits to address primary outcomes. B lood pressure measurements are taken 
at least 30 minutes after arrival. Measurements were taken in a rotating order, separating them with 
another sort of measurement (i.e. taking weight measurement #1, then height measurement #1, then 
weight measurement #2, etc.) to limit repeated mistakes. A mistake is more likely to be caught if 
Page 6 of 9 
 measurements are separated by measurement of something else. Our general poli cy was that results 
were not be said out loud or given to the participants unless they specifically ask for them. If a 
participant asked for a result, it was be provided to them in values or units that are understandable (i.e., 
converting kilograms to poun ds). Accelerometer data was collected only at baseline and 12 -months to 
account for seasonality, and this data was not relayed back to the participants.  
8.1. Body measurements  
For BMI -related outcomes, height and weight were measured via standardized protocols . All 
measurements were  taken twice.  A third measurement was taken if the first two values differ ed by 
more than 1.0 cm for height and 0.3 kg for weight . Height was taken on a Shorrboard stadiometer. All 
hair accessories were removed, and hair was taken o ut from buns/braids/corn rolls/etc. (or compressed 
if not possible and noted). Participants stood in bare feet or socks with their heels of both feet together. 
The position of the heels, the buttocks, shoulder blades, and the back of the head contacted  the vertical 
backboard (Figure?). Depending on the overall body conformation of the individual, all points may not  
have  touch ed.  In such a case, the participant’s trunk was vertical above the hip , and the arms and 
shoulders were  relaxed. Their head was  posit ioned in the Frankfurt horizontal plane.  The head is in the 
Frankfurt horizontal plane when the line from the ear canal to the lower border of the orbit of the eye is 
parallel to the floor and perpendicular to the vertical backboard. The participant was asked to take a 
deep breath and hold it, and then the headboard firmly on top of the head with sufficient pressure to 
compress the hair. The measurement was recorded to the last completed 0.1 cm.  
Weight was measured using a calibrated digital scale set on a level surface. Research staff made sure  
that the scale wa s level by adjusting the feet as needed to ensure that the bubble is centered in the 
circle.  The display was  held by the D ata Collector or set on a flat surface in a way that results were  not 
displayed to participants or other people in the room. It was checked  to be sure the scale wa s properly 
zeroed before proceeding. Weight was measured while the participant was wearing normal street 
clothes and ha d removed any heavy clothing and accessories and shoes. After making sure the 
participant was centered on the scale, standing still, with both feet fully on the scale, the participant’s 
weight was recorded to the last completed 0.1  kg. 
As indicators of health, waist circumference and blood pressure were also taken on the Index  Adult 
and Primary Food Preparer. Similar to height and weight measurements, waist circumference was taken 
twice, and a third measurement was obtained if the two prior measurements differed by 0.1  cm. Waist 
circumference was measured using a Gulick tape measure so it would ensure the same amount of 
tension is placed on the tape measure each time a measurement is taken. Data Collectors began by 
locating the iliac cres t on one side of the participant’s hip and drew a horizontal line just above the 
uppermost border of the right ilium with a water -soluble  marker and then crossed the line to indicate 
the midaxillary line of the body.  These markings were repeated on the ot her side of the participant’s 
body.  The participant was to be standing with a relaxed, natural posture with feet close together and 
shoulders slightly rounded. The Data Collector, standing on the participant’s side, placed the measuring 
tape around the tr unk in a horizontal plane at the level marked on the right side of the trunk. The tape 
contacted the skin of the participant around the entire waist but did not compress the skin, and the 
participant’s waist circumference to the last completed 0.1 cm was recorded.  
Blood pressure is the only measurement that need ed to be taken once, unless a concerning result 
was obtained during this measurement.  Blood pressure was measured with either an Omron Automatic 
Page 7 of 9 
 Blood Pressure Monitor (if the participant has an arm  circumference between 9 and 17 inches) or a Life 
Source Extra Large Arm Automatic Blood Pressure Monitor (if the participant has an arm circumference 
between 16.5 and 23.5 inches). Before taking the blood pressure measurement, the Data Collector 
waited 30  minutes after arriving to observe no eating, smoking, or exercise took place prior to the 
reading. The participant was asked to sit quietly for 15 minutes prior to the measurement. The 
participant removed clothing from the left arm, and the Data Collector placed the correctly sized arm 
cuff on the participant. The research staff locate the brachial artery on the inside of the upper arm, 1 
inch above the elbow, using their  index and middle fingers , and then placed  the left arm through the 
cuff loop  with the bottom of the cuff at the appropriate height above the crease of the elbow for the 
monitor .  The participant was sitting in a chair with both feet flat on the floor, and resting their relaxed 
left arm on a table, with their palm upwards. Any concerning values were checked against the Blood 
Pressure Alert Card, and the Data Collector proceeded as instructed for the given values. If additional 
measurement was needed, they waited 5 -10 minutes before obtaining the next measurement.  
8.2. Accelerometer measurements  
Accelerometers, ActiGraph GT9X Link, were placed on the non -dominant wrist of the Index  Adult 
and Index  Child during baseline and 12 -month data collection visits.  The participants were instructed to 
wear the accelerometers continuously for one week. The accelerometer s are waterproof and thus did 
not need to be removed for any reason. After the participants wore the monitors for 7 days, they both 
(if the Index  Child is between the ages of 10 and 12 years) completed a questionnaire (Global Physical 
Activity Q uestionnaire for the Index  Adult and the Physical Activity Questionnaire for Children for the 
Index  Child) via interview with the Data Collector over the phone.  These questionnaires assessed level 
of physical activity during the same time the monitor is w orn, so that the accelerometer data can be 
compared to the self -reported data.  
8.3. Questionnaire measurements  
Index  Adul ts are assessed on dietary intake and physical activity via questionnaires. For dietary 
intake,  validated food -frequency questions  are administered  to monitor intake of fruits, vegetables, and 
fats (NHIS 2000 ), sweetened drinks (NHIS 2005), and fast food (EAT study). Physical activity 
questionnaires  include the Global Physical Activity Questionnaire  (GPAQ), which provide  contextual data 
to complement accelerometer data and provide information as to where activity is taking place (i.e., 
domains). The GPAQ will be calibrated with the accelerometer to improve data accuracy  in a one -week 
post -data collec tion phone visit.  Other data is collected, including demographic information, income and 
food insecurity information, medication usage and dose changes, health history information, substance 
use, depression screen,  and related questions.  
Index Child ren are  assessed on dietary intake, physical activity, and screen time. These 
questionnaires are given to the Index Adults, and they answer the questions as proxy for the children. 
The Family Nutrition and Physical Activity tool (FNPA)  is used, which is a  child e nvironmental measure 
developed in partnership with the American Dietetic Association to characterize behaviors related to 
childhood obesity . Validation shows a 1 -point change is associated with a 0 .1 change in BMI z- score, and 
the score correlates with cardiovascular risk indices. It measures changes emphasized by our 
intervention including decreasing sweetened beverages, sweet snacks, fast food and TV, and increasing 
family meals, family physical activity, and fruits and vegetables. The scale allows us to compare families 
who choose different goals and resources.  Additional validated parent questionnaire s were used to 
Page 8 of 9 
 assess child screen time , NCI quantitative FV screener  and other dietary measures  including sugar -
sweetened beverages . 
The Primary Food P repa rer (PFP)  of the household (who may be the Index Adult or a different 
household member) completes a validated survey on the availability of fru its and vegetables in the 
house and  a questionnaire on how often the family eats together inside and outside the home or brings 
in take -out food . If the PFP is not the Index Adult they complete  the same dietary measures as the Index 
Adult . Other exploratory measures  include collecting BMI on the non -Index Adult PFP and other children 
residing within the household.   
9. Data Analysis Plan  
The trial design includes three factors: 1)  two treatment groups (control, intervention), 2) four time 
points (0, 6, 12, and 18), and 3) two age groups (adult, child).  Each variable will be summarized by 
descriptive statistic s, including mean, standard deviation and quartile at each time point (separately by 
treatment and age groups). Index  Adults and I ndex Children will be analyzed separately.  Outcomes have 
repeated measures at multiple time -points. The primary analysis compa res the change in primary 
outcomes from baseline to 12 months between the treatment groups to gauge the efficacy of the 
intervention. The secondary analysis compares both the 6 - and 18 -month average change from baseline 
between the two treatment groups to assess short -term effect and longer -term sustainability. The 
analysis will be based on intention -to-treat and use two-sided t -test for the primary outcomes with 
multiple imputation to account for missing values. Multiple imputation models will incorporate 6 -month 
values when available.  L inear mixed models for repeated measures  will be used for other analysis using 
multiple time points.     
9.1. Power  
Power calculations were based on data from the pilot intervention and information culled from 
related trials. See Table    
Table 6. Power 
calculation  Standard 
deviations  Difference  80% 
powera Assuming 30% 
dropout  Source  
Adults BMI change  Intervention 2.29b 
Control 2.28  1 kg/m2 65 per 
group  92 per group  Wadden (2011)136  
Adult Accelerometer  Intervention 101.9c  
Control  77.7  35-minutes  82 per 
group  117 per group  Napolitano 
(2010)137  
Children Accelerometer  59.4 for bothd 30-minute   50 per 
group  71 per group  Robertson 
(2011)138  
FNPA  5.1 for bothe 2 points  81 per 
group  116 per group  Ihmels (2009)119  
a Using a two -sided 0.05 -level two -sample t -test 
b Pilot data at 6 months showed a SD 1.98 –  We used Wadden’s numbers to be conservative  
c The intervention group had baseline and 12-month SD’s of 44.2 and 59.6, while the control group had SD of 42.5 
and 44.6.  No information was available on the SD of the baseline-to -12-month change.  Taking the most 
conservative approach, we computed the largest possible pre-post SD and found the largest possible baseline- 12 
month SD’s (101.9 intervention, 77.7 control)  
d Table 1 reported baseline-to -9 months Cl’s. From these, we computed a 0-9 month SD of 59.4 to use for the 0-12 
month change  
e For those with income <$25,000. Our pilot showed a simi lar number of SD 5.4 for change at 6 months  
Based on these  power calculations, a target of 260 families was to be recruited to account for 
dropout prior to randomization, following randomization, and throughout all timepoints of the 
intervention.  
Page 9 of 9 
  