Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 1 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established 
Novel Coronavirus Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
 
NCT NUMBER: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 COORDINATING CENTER : Emory University   
 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
        Edmund K. Waller, MD, PhD  
Emory University  
1365 Clifton Road, B5119 
Atlanta, GA 30322  
404-727-4995  
ewaller@emory.edu   
CO-INVESTIGATORS:  
Aneesh K. Mehta, MD       Marshall Lyon III, MD  
Emory University Hospital    Emory University Hospital 
1365 Clifton Road,      1365 Clifton Road,  
Atlanta, GA 30322      Atlanta, GA 30322  
aneesh.mehta@emory.edu     gmlyon@emory.edu   
 
Gregory P. Bisson, MD MSCE     Aseala Abousaud, PharmD, BCOP   
Associate Professor of Medicine,    Emory University  
University of Pennsylvania     1365 Clifton Road,  
Philadelphia, PA      Atlanta, GA 30322  
bisson@pennmedicine.upenn.edu   Aseala.abousaud@emoryhealthcare.org  
 
Ronnie Funk, MD      Cynthia R. Giver, PhD  
Departm ent of Medicine,     Emory University  
Emory University      1365 Clifton Road, B3223  
1365 Clifton Road,      Atlanta, GA 30322  
Atlanta, GA 30322       cgiver@emory.edu  
Ronnie.Funk@emory.edu  
 
Daniel Kalman PhD      John D Roback MD, PhD  
Whitehead Bldg.  148      Department of Pathology  
Department of  Pathology     Mailstop: 1930- 001-1AP 
Emory University      Emory University Hospital 
Atlanta, GA 30322      Atlanta, GA 30322  

Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 2 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
dkalman@emory.edu      jroback@emory.edu  
              
Mark Caridi -Scheible, MD     Sanjay Chandrasekaran, MD  
Department of Anesthesiology     PGY- 7, Fellow, Hematology/Oncology  
Mailstop:  1600- 002-1AB     Post -Doctoral Research Fellow  
Emory University      Winship Cancer Institute  
1365 Clifton Road,      Emory University  
Atlanta, GA 30322      schandrasekaran@emory.edu  
mark.caridi-scheible@emory.edu  
 
STATISTICIAN:       CLINICAL NURSE S PECIALIST:  
 Yuan Liu, PhD        Roberta Kaplow, APRN -CCNS, Ph.D., AOCNS, CCRN  
Research Assistant Professor     Clinical Nurse Specialist, Critical Care    
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics   Emory University Hospital  
Emory University      1364 Clifton Rd. Atlanta GA 30322   
1518 Clifton Rd. Atlanta GA 30322     roberta.kaplow@emoryhealthcare.org  
Yliu31@emory.edu       
 
 
EXTERNAL (NON -EMORY) COLLABORATORS :                                                                     
 University of Pennsylvania (
Gregory P. Bisson, MD MSCE)  
 MULTISITE CONTACT: Winship Multisite coordinator  
 VERSION:   (Version 0.1; 05/01/2020) 
 FUNDING SOURCE: Verastem  
 
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT (IP) : [Duvelisib ; Supplier: Verastem Oncology ] 
 IND # :  150467
 
 
 
REVISION HISTORY  
 
Revision #  Version Date  Summary of Changes  
V2 26-MAY -2020  Responded to comments from FDA   
V3 08-JUN-2020  Responded to comments from FDA Study May Proceed 
Correspondence  
V3.1 19-DEC-2020  Logistical changes , sample collection updates,  and small 
corrections  
V3.2  25-APRIL -2021  Logistical changes and small corrections  
V3.3  30-JUNE -2021  Added section on study -specific AE/SAE reporting  
 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 3 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
Table of Contents  
 
1. Study Summary           5 
1.1 Synopsis           5 
1.2        Schema            8 
1.2 Schedule of Assessments         9 
2. Objectives (and Endpoints)          10 
3. Background           11 
3.1   Study Rationale          11 
3.2   SARS -CoV- 2 and COVID -19         11 
3.3   Inflammation as part of lung pathology in COVID -19     12 
3.4   Phosphoinositide 3 -Kinase (PI3K)         12 
3.5  Pre -Clinical Pharmacology of Duvelisib and T Cell activation and expansion   13 
3.6   PI3K Inhibitors in Clinical Settings         13 
4. Study Intervention/Investigational Agent        13 
4.1 Description (Duvelisib)          13 
4.2 Drug/Device Handling          14 
5. Study Procedures           15 
5.1 Study Design           15 
5.2 Dosing and Administration          16 
5.3 Dose Modification           16 
5.4 Concomitant medication         16 
5.5 Study Procedures           17 
5.6 Description of Data Collection         18 
6. Data and Specimen Banking          20 
7. Sharing of Results with Participants         20 
8. Study Timelines           20 
8.1 Duration of therapy and follow up         20 
8.
2 Study termination          21 
9. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria          22 
 9.1 Inclusion Criteria           22 
 9.2 Exclusion Criteria           22 
10. Local Number of Participants          23 
11. Recruitment Methods           23 
12. Withdrawal of Participants          24 
13. Risks to Participants           25 
14. Potential Benefits to Participants         26 
15. Data Management and Confidentiality         26 
15.1 Statistical consideration         26 
15.2 Data/specimens:          28 
16. Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Participants     29 
16.1 Safety Analyses           29 
16.2 Adverse Event and Serious Adverse Event Reporting      30 
16.3 The  Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC)      34 
17. Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Participants     35 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 4 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
18. Economic Burden to Participants         36 
19. Consent Process           36 
20. Setting             38 
21. Resources Available          38 
22. Multi -Site Research when Emory is the Lead Site       38 
23. References            41 
APPENDIX A:   Clinical diagnosis of severe acute respiratory infection      43  
APPENDIX B: POTENT INHIBITORS AND INDUCERS OF CYP3A4 (FDA referenc e 2014)    43 
APPENDIX C: CYP450 Substrates (FDA reference 2019)        44 
APPENDIX D: CYP3A Substrates (FDA reference 2019)        44 
APPENDIX E: Immunomodulator and Immunosuppressant                                                                                  44  
APPENDIX F : Drug Accountability          45 
APPENDIX G : Procedure protocol for analysis of T cells        46 
APPENDIX H : Table to guide the IDMC during review        47 
 
  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 5 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
1. Study Summary  
 
1.1 Synops is 
This randomized placebo -controlled phase 2 study will evaluate whether a two -week exposure to duvelisib , a 
gamma/delta PI3K inhibitor, reduces inflammation in the lungs in patients with severe SARS- CoV-2 infection and 
COVID -19 who do not require mechanical  ventilation at study initiation. The primary objective of the study is to 
determine the efficacy of duvelisib  treatment in preventing death or the need for mechanical ventilation among 
patients with WHO -defined severe COVID -19. Key secondary endpoints wil l be reductions in oxygen 
requirements of patients and improvements in their performance status, safety and tolerability of duvelisib  in 
the setting of COVID -19, biomarkers of inflammation, and generation of IgG antibody responses to SARS -Cov-2 
spike protein.  The study will determine if a two -week exposure to duvelisib  beginning soon after presentation 
with severe COVID -19 warrants further evaluation in a larger clinical study.  
Title:  Duvelisib  Ameliorates Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Co ronavirus 
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Study 
Description:  This randomized placebo -controlled phase 2 clinical study will evaluate whether a two -
week exposure to duvelisib  in subjects with  severe  COVID -19 is safe and well tolerated, 
and whether exposure to the maximally effective dose of duvelisib  will safely and favorably 
change inflammatory bio -markers and reduce the incidence of the composite end -point of 
mechanical ventilation or death following the diagnosis of severe COVID -19. We 
hypothesize that short term exposure to duvelisib  in patients with severe COVID -19 will 
decrease the incidence of mechanical ventilation and death compared with placebo -
treated control subjects. We also hypothesize that duvelisib  will decrease inflammation 
and improve time to resolution of symptoms.   
Objectives:  
 Primary Objective :   
1) To compare the incidence of the composite end -point of mechanical ventilation or 
death  within 2 9 days of randomization  in subjects with severe COVID -19 given 
placebo or oral duvelisib  
 
Secondary Objectives  are to compare the duvelisib  cohort to the placebo cohort with 
respect to:   
2) Days to recovery as assessed by ACTT endpoints  as the  time to recovery (Day 1 
through Day 2 9) to satisfy one of the following eight  categories from the  NIAID  
ordinal scale .  The scale is as follows: 1) Death; 2) Hospitalized, on invasive 
mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO); 3) 
Hospitalized, on non -invasive ventil ation or high flow oxygen devices; 4) 
Hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen; 5) Hospitalized, not requiring 
supplemental oxygen - requiring ongoing medical care (COVID -19 related or 
otherwise); 6) Hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen - no longer requires 
ongoing medical care; 7) Not hospitalized, limitation on activities and/or requiring home oxygen; 8) Not hospitalized, no limitations on activitie s.  
3) Duration of hospitalization  
4) Death within 29 days of randomization  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 6 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
5) ICU transfer within 29 days of randomization  
6) Incidence of grade III -V adverse events or SAEs (as defined by NCI CTCAE version 
5.0)  
7) Documented secondary bacterial or viral infection within 29 days of randomization .  
8) Mean frequencies of Th1 and Th17 T cells in blood mononuclear c ells at 1, 2 and 4 
weeks  
9) Mean levels of inflammatory serum biomarkers at 1, 2 and 4 weeks  
10) Gene expression profiles of T cells at 1, 2 and 4 weeks  
11) Median titers  of Ig G antibodies to SARS -CoV-2 at 4 weeks  
Endpoints:  Primary Endpoint :   
1. Composite endpoint of either mechanical ventilation or death within 29 days  
of randomization  
 
Secondary Endpoints:  
2. Days to recovery as assessed by ACTT endpoints  as the  time to recovery (Day 
1 through Day 29) to satisfy one of the following eight  categories from the  
NIAID  ordinal scale .  The scale is as follows: 1) Death; 2) Hospitalized, on 
invasive mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO); 3) Hospitalized, on non-
invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen 
devices; 4) Hospitalize d, requiring supplemental oxygen; 5) Hospitalized, not 
requiring supplemental oxygen - requiring ongoing medical care (COVID -19 
related or otherwise); 6) Hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen - no longer requires ongoing medical care; 7) Not hospitalized, limitation on activities and/or requiring home oxygen; 8) Not hospitalized, no limitations on activitie s.  
3. Duration of hospitalization  
4. Duration of hospitalization  
5. Death within 29 days of randomization  
6. ICU transfer within 29 days of randomization  
7. ECOG performance status at day 15 and 29  of randomization  
8. Incidence of grade III -V adverse events or SAEs (as defined by CTCAE version 
5)  
9. Documented secondary bacterial or viral infection within 29  days of 
randomization .  
10. Mean frequencies of Th1 and Th17 T cells in blood mononuclear cells at 1, 2 and 4 weeks  
11. Mean levels of inflammatory serum biomarkers at 1, 2 and 4 weeks  
12. Gene expression profiles of T cells at 1, 2 and 4 weeks  
13. Median titers of Ig G antibodies to SARS -CoV-2 at 4 weeks  
Study 
Population:  80 adults aged 18 years or older will be enrolled with severe, confirmed COVID -19 
Phase: Phase 2 randomized, placebo -controlled study  
Description of Sites/Facilities Enrolling Participants:  This study will begin at Emory University and will seek to open at one or more secondary site institutions.  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 7 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
  Description of 
Study 
Intervention: Duvelisib  is an oral PI3K inhibitor that is given at a dose of 25 mg BID  
Study Duration: We estimate that the duration of the study will be approximately 12 months.  Participant 
duration will be approximately 1 month from the time of enrollment  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 8 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
1.2  Schema  
 
 
 
           
 
          
Placebo      N= 40 
Duvelisib    N= 40 
Screening  (Informed consent, Eligibility)  
Randomization  
Drug Administration  
Study Assessments   (Refer to Schedule of Activities)  
Post COVID -19 Assessments (Refer to Schedule of Activities)  
Study Assessments  (Refer to Schedule of Activities)  
Day -2 to Day 0 
Day 0 
Day 1  
Day 8  
Day 15  
Day 29  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 9 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
1.2 Schedule of Assessments  
Following screening, informed consent, and confirmation that a patient with severe COVID -19 meets all eligibility 
criteria, subjects will be randomized 1:1 to receive duvelisib 25 mg, po BID or a placebo pill, po BID. 
Randomization between duvelisib  25 mg po BID and placebo BID will be stratified by study site. The 
investigational pharmacy will supply coded study drug based upon the results of central randomization.  
Procedures and Tests  
Study Tests  DURING HOSPITALIZATION# Days  
-2 to 0@ Day 1@ Day 8  
(± 2) Day 15  
(± 2) Day 29  
(± 3) Day  
50-60 
Randomization to duvelisib or placebo arm  X      
Study Drug Administration  
  Oral drug BID Days 1 -14   
SARS- CoV-2 RT-PCR X      
Immunophenotyping of immune cells in 
blood   X X X X  
Whole blood for RNA gene expression ##  X X X X  
Mononuclear cells for mass cytometry  ##  X X X X  
Plasma cytokines and chemokines  ##  X X X X  
Anti-SARS Cov -2 IgG   X   X  
TSH X    X  
Hepatitis Serologies  if known history of  
treated Hepatitis B or C  X      
 
 Standard of Care Tests*   
 Days  
-2 to 0  Day 1  Day 8  
(± 2) Day 15  
(± 2) Day 29  
(± 3) Day 
50-60 
Physical Exam  X Performed daily during hospitalization  
ECOG Performance Status  X Performed daily during hospitalization  
Vital Signs  X Performed daily during hospitalization  
 Clinical Labs:  Record data in eCRF (REDCap) during hospitalization as shown below   
   CBC with differential  X Abstract data as available    
   CMP  X Abstract data as available    
Ferritin  Abstract data as available   
   CRP, Troponin  Abstract data as available   
   Coagulation Tests ** Abstract data as available   
Non-contrast Chest CT  or Chest X -Ray X Abstract data as available   
Serum or Urine Pregnancy Test *** X      
Assessment of Survival Status       X 
# study procedures which are performed as part of the research protocol and covered by the study budget  
## Additional research blood samples will be obtained prior to  discharge  from hospital   
@ Some overlap of procedures and tests performed for screening and Day 1  is expected.  
* Standard of care procedures which are routinely performed on COVI D-19 patients and the results of which will be 
recorded as part of study conduct 
** PT/INR, PTT, Fibrinogen, D -Dimer, Heparin/Enoxaparin Anti Xa  
*** Pregnancy test for WOCBP may be obtained after hospital admission but prior to study enrollment   
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 10 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
2. Objectives  (and Endpoints)  
 
OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  
Primary   
 
To compare the incidence of mechanical ventilation 
or death i n subjects with severe COVID -19 given 
placebo or oral duvelisib .  
The primary end -point is a composite endpoint of 
mechanical ventilation or death within 4 weeks of 
randomization . 
Secondary   
 
Secondary Objectives are to compare the duvelisib  
cohort to the placebo cohort with respect to:  
   
1) Days to recovery as assessed by ACTT endpoints  
as the time to recovery (Day 1 through Day 29) to satisfy a score of >5 from the following eight 
categories from the NIAID ordinal scale.  The 
scale is as follows: 1 . Death; 2.  Hospitalized, on 
invasive mechanical ventilation or 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO); 3. Hospitalized, on non -
invasive ventilation or 
high flow oxygen devices; 4 . Hospitalized, 
requiring supplemental oxygen; 5 . Hospitalized, 
not requiring supplemental oxygen - requiring 
ongoing medical care (COVID -19 related or 
otherwise); 6 . Hospitalized, not requiring 
supplemental oxygen - no longer requires 
ongoing medical care; 7 . Not hospitalized, 
limitation on activities and/or requiring home 
oxygen; 8 . Not hospitalized, no limitations on 
activities.  
2) Duration of hospitalization  
3) Death within 29 days of randomization  
4) ICU transfer within 29 days of randomization  
5) ECOG performance status at day 15 and 29 of 
randomization  
6) Incidence of grade III -V adverse events or SAEs 
(as defined by CTCAE version 5)  
7) Documented secondary bacterial or viral 
infection within 29 days of randomization.  
8) Mean frequencies of Th1 and Th17 T cells in 
blood mononuclear cells at 1, 2 and 4 weeks  
9) Mean levels of inflammatory serum biomarkers at 1, 2 and 4 weeks  
10) Gene expression profiles of T cells at 1, 2 and 4 
weeks   
1) Days to recovery as assessed by ACTT endpoints 
as the  time to recovery (Day 1 through Day 29) 
to satisfy one of the following eight  categories 
from the  NIAID  ordinal scale  (see to the left).   
2) Comparing days of hospitalization between 
groups  
3) Comparing incidence of death within 29  days of 
randomization  in each group  
4) Comparing the proportion of subjects in each 
group requiring ICU transfer within 29 days of 
randomization  
5) Comparing median ECOG performance status in 
each group at day 15 and 29 after  randomization  
6) Comparing the incidence of grade III -V adverse 
events or SAEs (as defined by CTCAE version 5)  
7) Comparing the incidence of documented 
secondary bacterial or viral infection within 29  
days of randomization  in each group.  
8) Comparing the mean frequencies of Th1 and 
Th17 T cells in blood mononuclear cells at 1, 2 
and 4 weeks in each group  
9) Comparing mean levels of inflammatory serum 
biomarkers at 1, 2 and 4 weeks in each group  
10) Description of gene expression profiles of T cells 
at 1, 2 and 4 weeks in each group  
11) Comparing median titers of IgG antibodies to 
SARS- CoV-2 at 4 weeks in each group.  
12) Overall survival is defined as days from 
randomization to death and censored at last follow up .  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 11 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  
11) Median titers of Ig G antibodies to SARS -CoV-2 at 
4 weeks  
12) Survi val at day 50-60 after randomization  
 
 
3. Background  
 
3.1 Study R ationale  
COVID -19 patients have a poor  prognosis, especially in the setting of  co- morbidities, the presence of 
inflammatory serum markers, and declining oxygenation levels, with reported frequency of ICU transfer up to 
50% and deat h of 25% (1, 2). Serum inflammatory markers in patients with severe COVID -19 including those that 
require ICU care and respiratory support with mechanical ventilation are reported to be higher than in patients 
with less severe disease (1) , and COVID -19 patients develop a pattern of interstitial pulmonary infiltrates (3, 4)  
that are similar to those seen among patients that develop auto -immune pneumonitis in the setting of treatment 
with monoclonal antibodies that block immune check -point signaling (5) . Taken together, these clinical and 
laboratory observations have led to the hypothesis that COVID -19 leads to hyper -immune activation, al so termed 
“cytokine storm” (6).  Immunomodulatory clinical interventions that are currently being evaluated included 
antibodies that block IL6 signaling ( 22 trials ),  IL1 signaling ( 5 trials ), and tyrosine kinase inhibitors to Bruton’s 
tyrosine kinase  (BTK) (7), Janus2 Kinase (JAK) ( 2 trials ). The common theme in these studies is the hypothesis  
that intra- cellular signaling pathways of immune cells are hyper-activated, that immune hyperactivation 
contributes to alveolar damage and impairments in gas exchange, and that  clinical interventions to block intra-
cellular tyrosine kinase -mediated signa ling pathways activated during COVID -19 will prevent or reverse the 
alveolar damage and hypoxemia that characterizes this disease. Recently, clinical data from CLL patients treated with duvelisib , a dual PI3K gamma/delta inhibitor, indicate lower levels of serum inflammatory markers  during 
PI3Ki exposure (8) .  Addition of PI3K inhibitors, including duvelisib , during ex vivo  expansion of T cells stimulated 
with anti CD3/CD28 beads indicates PI3K -inhibition appears to block differentiation of T cells from naïve/central 
memory to effector phenotypes, increases frequencies of CD8+ T cells,  and improves in vivo persistence and anti -
tumor activity when PI3Ki -expanded T cells are reinfused in vivo (9) . Paradoxically, continuous exposure to 
duvelisib  over a period of months has been associated with both opportunistic infections (10, 11)  as well as auto -
immune toxicities (12, 13) , supporting the idea that duvelisib  is an immunomodulatory drug, and indicating that 
short -term exposure to PI3Ki may have different immunological consequences than long- term exposure.    
 
This study will examine if a 2 -week exposure to duvelisib  in patien ts with severe COVID -19, will favorably change 
their immune profile, decreasing alveolar inflammation and damage, and decrease the incidence of patients who require mechanical ventilation or who die.  
 
3.2  SARS- CoV-2 and COVID -19  
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus -2 (SARS -Cov-2) is a novel emerging pathogen that results in an 
illness called Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19). COVID -19 is an acute flu -like illness characterized by fever, 
dry cough and shortness of breath. In approximately 80 -85%  of individuals these symptoms will be mild to 
moderate, whereas in certain patient subgroups, such as the elderly and those with chronic cardiovascular disease, the illness may be severe, resulting in hypoxic respiratory failure and death (1, 14) . Prior to the 
development and after resolution of symptomatic disease, patients shed virus in mucosal surfaces, which facilitates spread of the disease. SARS- Cov-2 has a basic reproductive number of >2, meaning that the disease 
has the potential to expand at exponential rates. The outbreak started initially as 4 cases of severe pneumonia in Wuhan, China, but on March 11th, 2020, with over 118,000 cases spread across over 110 countries, the World 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 12 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
Heal th Organization (WHO) declared Covid -19 a pandemic. As of April 19, 2020, according to the Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, there were over 690,000 confirmed cases and 35,000 deaths in the US due to 
this disease (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2 019-ncov/casesupdates/cases -in-us.html), and experts predict 
that the number of individuals needing hospitalization and respiratory support may outpace existing capacity. 
Agents under investigation for treatment of COVID -19 include , but are not limited to , remdesivir, a nucleotide 
analogue, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, IL -6 blockers and lopinavir/ritonavir, as reviewed (15). 
 
3.3  Inflammation as part of lung pathology in COVID -19  
Following initial infection of the nasal pharyngeal epithelium, SARS -Cov-2 infection can spread to the lungs where 
it causes viral  pneumonia, producing symptoms of dyspnea secondary to hypoxemia (2, 14) , with radiographs 
showing interstitial infiltrates in the lung periphery (3, 4), collectively creating a novel disease entity termed 
COVID -19. Severe pneumonia can progress to Adult Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) requiring intubation 
and mechanical ventilation (1, 2).The development of severe pneumonia and respiratory failure leading to ARDS has been associated with elevated levels of serum cytokines (1, 6) , suggesting that SARS- CoV-2 pulmonary 
infection in these patients has led to a “cytokine storm”, and that administration of drugs that inhibit cytokine release or block cytokine signaling may be of clinical benefit in patients with COVID -19.  A recent report from 
Wuhan described 548 hospitalized patients with COVID -19, half of whom had severe disease (defined by  the 
2019 American Thoracic Society Guidelines (16) ) of which one third required mechanical ventilation and one third 
died (1). Age, male gender, elevated leukocyte counts, LDH, troponin and glucose levels  were associated with an 
increased risk of death among COVID -19 patients with severe disease in a multi -variable model, and treatment 
with steroids, a  non-specific immunosuppressive, were associated with an increased risk of death. Serum 
cytokine levels for IL -2R, IL -6, IL-10, and TNF -α were significantly higher in COVID -19 patients with severe disease 
than nonsevere patients (1) . These data and other reports of similar findings indicate that 1) patients with severe 
disease at a higher risk of death can be identified by simple clinical and laboratory assessments, 2) that disease 
severity is associated with a heightened inflammatory state, and 3) interventional studies to reduce inflammation 
in patients with high- risk disease could be of benefit to patients. A sep arate  analysis of Wuhan patients with 
severe COVID -19 indicated that patients with severe disease had decreased numbers of total T cells, CD8+T cells 
and CD4+T cells, and that lower T cell numbers were negatively correlated with patient survival (17). Of note, 
lower T cell numbers in patients were also associated with higher IL -6, IL -10 and TNF -α cytokine levels, and 
COVID -19 patients treated in the ICU had higher levels of expression of the coinhibitory markers PD -1, LAG -3 and 
TIM-3 (17), suggesti ng that inflammation may cause quantitative and qualitative suppression of  T cell function
. 
 
3.4  Phosphoinositide 3- Kinase (PI3K)  
 
PI3K proteins are divided into three classes of which only Class IA PI3K molecules have been implicated in human cancers, prompting development of isoform -selective inhibitors to Class IA PI3K (18) . Analysis of evolutionary 
conservation across known class I PI3K signaling cascades reveals the greatest conservation in signaling along the insulin/IGF -1/AKT pathway, suggesting PI3K primarily evolved to regulate cellular proliferation and metabolic 
chan ges in response to glucose (18) . 
 PI3Ks are involved in the generation of lipid second messengers and contain eight catalytic subunits of PI3K, with the P110 gamma and the  P110 delta subunits being expressed at much higher levels in immune cells (19, 20) . 
The PI3K p110 subunits work by phosphorylating phosphatidylinositol 4,5 bisphosphate (PIP2) into phosphatidylinositol 3, 4,5 triphosphate (PIP3), which enables anchorage and association of cytosolic proteins near the lipid bilayer, enabling complex signal transduction cascades to occur (18) .   In the case of T cells, 
metabolism of glucose is closely linked to the replicative capacity of the cells, with T cells capable of oxidative phosphorylation exhibiting enhanced replicative capacity whereas T cells that  rely upon glycolysis exhibit reduced 
replicative potential, as reviewed (21).
 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 13 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
PIP3 then goes on to function as a second messenger that initiates multiple signaling cascades, including the phosphorylation of AKT, a serine/threonine protein kina se, leading to downstream survival and differentiation 
signals for example through mechanistic target of rapamycin 1 (mTOR) also a serine/threonine kinase (22). Upon 
T cell activation, there is an increase in uptake of amino acids and glucose leading to activation of mTOR1 and this activation is required to maintain the T cell effector functions (23 –26). Activation of mTOR1 also promotes 
induction of aerobic glycolysis, as well as assistance in maintaining it, which leads to increased differentiation and effector functions, which are shown to be less efficacious in terms of adoptive T cell therapies (26) . By 
inhibiting mTOR through inhibition of PI3K. PI3K inhibitors promote formation of a pool of T -cells with a memory 
phenotype by inhibiting aerobic glycolysis and preventing terminal differentiation (26) .  Given that Daio et al. 
showed that CD8 and CD4 T -cells in COVID -19 patients increase expression of PD -1 and TIM -3 as their  clinical 
symptoms worsen (17), we propose that duvelisib  may mitigate T -cell exhaustion to promote more effective anti -
viral responses to COVID -19, thus preventing COVID -19 infection progression.  
 
3.5 Pre-Clinical Pharmacology of duvelisib  and T c ell activation and expansion  
Duvelisib  is a highly potent, PI3K d elta and gamma inhibitor with a whole blood IC 50 of 0.36nM for inhibition of 
the delta subunit and whole blood IC 50 of 19.6nM for inhibition of the gamma subunit (11) .  We have seen that 
human T cells from healthy volunteers  and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients show a doubling in net 
expansion at concentrations of duvelisib  from to 40nM to 0.4 µ M over a 9 -14 day culture period ( (9) and 
unpublished data).  Of note, high dimensional profiling of T cells showed less effector T cells and a shift in the 
metabolic profile of T cells from dependency on glucose to glutamine and lower levels of expression of co -
inhibitory markers PD -1, TIM -3 and LAG -3 (unpublished). Furthermore, models of the human CLL cell line OSU -
CLL engrafted to NOG mice show that duvelisib -cultured chimeric antigen receptor  (CAR) T-cells exhibit enhanced 
in vivo proliferation, greater CD8:CD4 CAR ratios, and enhanced efficacy (unpublished data). Taken together, this 
data indicates that a short -term exposure of T cells to duvelisib  is not globally immunosuppressive but instead 
pres erves qualitative measures of T cell function while reducing effector T cell differentiation and preserving 
naïve and memory subsets.  
 
3.6 PI3K inhibitors in clinical settings  
 
PI3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitors are FDA -approved for treatment of relapsed follicular lymphoma (FL) and CLL/small 
lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL). Orally bioavailable drugs are typically dosed once or twice a day with the goal of 
inhibiting signaling through the PI3K -AKT pathway causing reduction in the growth of malignant lymphoma cells 
and induction of apoptosis. PI3K inhibitors are generally well tolerated and can be given for weeks to months as 
continuous therapy without significant hematological toxicity. One common feature of treatment with PI3K inhibitors is the development of late autoimmune disease, typically after more than 1 month of drug exposure, including colitis, pneumonitis and rash, that appears to be a consequence of blocking differentiation and down -
regulation  of regulatory T cells (12, 27) .  
 
4. Study Intervention/Investigational Agent  
 
4.1 Description  (duvelisib ) 
Duvelisib  is an oral PI3K inhibitor.  FDA approved duvelisib  (Copiktra, IPI -145) on September 24, 2018. Duvelisib  
is approved for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory CLL/SLL after at least two prior 
therapies, and relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma (FL) after at least two prior systemic therapies. Refer 
to the approved labeling for more details on specific indications and for detailed information on duvelisib . 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 14 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
4.2 Drug h andling  
4.2.1 Acquisition and Accountability  
 
Duvelisib  and unmatched placebo capsule (same size and shape but slightly different shade of blue/green) will 
be provided by Verastem and will be packaged and labeled by Verastem.  The study drug provided for this study 
will be used only as directed in the study protocol. The IDS (Investigational  Drug Service) personnel at each site 
will account for all study drugs. Drug accountability should be performed until the patient stops study treatment completely. Study site personnel will account for all study drugs received at the site.  Study drug supplies must be 
kept in an appropriate, secure locked area and stored in accordance with the conditions specified on the labels. 
The Investigator, pharmacist, or designee must maintain an accurate record of dispensing the study drug/s in a 
Drug Accountabi lity Log.  
 
The Drug Accountability Log  may record specifics to study drug dispensation such as:  
• Records of product delivery, inventory, temperature monitoring, destruction, and return.  
• Dosages prepared, time prepared, doses dispensed.  
• Doses destroy ed.  
• The Drug Accountability Log will be reviewed by the monitor during site visits and at the completion of the study.  
 
The study drug supply will be disposed of as per Winship’s Investigational Pharmacy (IDS) SOP.  Duvelisib /study 
drug capsule should be  taken at approximately the same times on each day.  Duvelisib /study drug capsule should 
be taken with 8 oz of water if possible.  Compliance will be assessed by the investigator and/or study personnel and information provided by the Hospital electronic me dical record will be captured in the Drug Accountability 
Form . Dose changes and interruptions of study drug must be specifically documented in the patient source 
documents and eCRF.  The time of each dose should be reported in the Hospital electronic medical record . 
Patients will not be allowed to make up missed doses and a missed dose should also be recorded in the Hospital electronic medical record. Damaged medication will be replace d. 
4.2.2. Formulation, Appearance, Packaging and Labeling 
 Duvelisib  comes in two strengths: 15mg and 25mg capsules . A placebo capsule matched in size  and shape  with 
similar color to the 25 mg duvelisib capsule will be provided by Verastem.  Twenty -eight (2 8) 25mg duvelisib  
tablets or placebo capsule will be dispensed to the in- patient unit for  each enrolled patient. 15mg duvelisib 
tablets are also available if needed for dose reduction. All duvelisib and placebo capsules will be over-encapsulated at the Emo ry Investigational Pharmacy so that they appear identical, to avoid unblinding due to 
differences in duvelisib and placebo capsule color.  
4.2.3. Product Storage and Stability  
 
Duvelisib /placebo will be stored at the Emory Investigational Pharmacy. Duvelisib /study drugs will be stored at 
room temperature between 20 -25 degrees Celsius.  
 
4.2.4. Study Drug Administration:  
 
Duvelisib/placebo  is an oral medication that will be taken twice a day. The intent of the study design is to conduct 
a placebo -contr olled double -blinded/double -masked  administration of duvelisib or placebo in hospitalized 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 15 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
patients with severe COVID -19. All efforts will be undertaken to maintain ignorance among clinical and study 
staff as to allocation of each individual patient to acti ve drug versus placebo . Subjects, the clinical team 
(physicians, nurses, advanced practice providers (nurse practitioner/physician assistant ), clinical pharmacists) 
will not be informed as to whether an individual subject is receiving active drug or placebo.   
4.2.5 Interruption/Disruption of Treatment:  
 
Duvelisib/placebo  is a BID medication.  Medication doses that are missed or not absorbed (i.e., vomiting) will not 
be made up with additional dosing.  
Duvelisib  can be stopped if any of the following are observed:  
• Grade 3 or 4 hematologic toxicity (19) as defined by the NCI  CTCAE  v5.0. 
• Grade 3 or 4 non -hematological toxicity  
 Study drug ( duvelisib  or placebo) will be stopped at the time of hospital discharge if that occurs prior to day 15.  
 Grades 1 -2 AEs as defined by the  NCI CTCAE,  version 5.0  will not result in any dose modifications and will be 
treated with supportive care. If study drug is stopped due to an AE, it will not be resumed.  
 
5. Study Procedures  
 
5.1  Study Design  
This is a prospective  placebo -controlled, double -blinded/double -masked phase 2 clinical trial study of treating 
patients with severe COVID -19 disease who do not require mechanical ventilation at randomization  with the 
FDA- approved dose of duvelisib  for a maximum of 14 days . 
 
Rationale for study design  
 Duvelisib  is proposed as an immunomodulatory drug that can reduce the generation of inflammatory cytokines 
in patients with severe COVID -19 while preserving quantitative and qualitative T cell function. A two -week 
exposure to duvelisib has been chosen beca use clinical deterioration of patients with severe COVOD -19 typically 
occurs within this time frame, and we have demonstrated enhanced T cell expansion and decreased expression of markers associated with T cell exhaustion and senescence in T cells co -cultu red with duvelisib  for 14 days in 
both healthy controls, CLL and DLBCL patients.  While longer exposure to duvelisib  might be considered, it is 
appropriate for an initial study to limit the duration of exposure to reduce the risk of secondary opportunistic infections associated with long -term exposure and to potentially preserve B cell function and humoral responses 
to SARS- CoV-2. 
 
Justification for Duvelisib  Dose  
 
In the phase I study with duvelisib  in hematological malignancies, the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was 75 mg 
BID.  However, peak inhibition of the p -AKT pathway was not dose dependent among the doses tested and was 
maximally inhibited at 25mg BID, and this is the FDA approved dose (8) . We will initiate treatment of critically ill 
patients with COVID -19 at an initial dose of 25 mg duvelisib  BID, and dose -deescalate to 15 mg BID if patients 
receive concomitant drug that is a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor.   
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 16 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
5.2 Dosing and Administration  
 
Regimen Description  
Agent  Premedication/ Precautions  Dose  Route  Schedule  Treatment 
Course  
Duvelisib /
placebo  Take with 8 oz of water food  25 mg 
capsule  PO BID 14 days  
 
5.3 Dose Modification  
The investigator will decide whether any AE that occurs is related to study  drugs and determine whether dose 
modification or discontinuation of duvelisib /placebo  is required.  Treatment of critically ill patients with COVID -
19 will be started at an initial dose of 25 mg duvelisib/placebo  BID, and dose -deescalate to 15 mg BID if patients 
receive concomitant drug that is a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor.  
 
5.4 Concomitant medication  
Acceptable Concomitant Medications  
 
Patients with severe COVID -19 are ill and will require treatment with standard -of-care drugs or procedures to 
treat existing signs and symptoms of their disease and to prevent the development of a dditional disease 
manifestations.  All c oncomitant medication (including prescribed, over the counter, herbal or vitamin 
supplements) used by the patient prior to 7 days to enrollment are permitted  to be continued under the 
supervision and discretion of th e treating physician . The use of FDA -approved drugs in an “off -label” situation to 
treat or prevent signs or symptoms of C OVID-19 are permitted if they are given  under the direction of the treating 
physician as local standard -of-care.  Any drug with known anti -viral activit y that has been accepted by the  
FDA/CDC/NIH/WHO in published clinical guidance documents as having activity  against SARS- CoV-2, or an anti -
viral drug that has been approved by a regulatory agency for use as an anti- viral against SARS -CoV-2  is permitted  
as standard -of-care or as part of a formal clinical study . Co-enrollment in randomized or non -randomized clinical 
studies of drugs with potential anti -viral activity against SARS -CoV-2 are permitted. For example, the FD A has 
authorized the unapproved product remdesivir for treatment of suspected or confirmed COVID -19 in adults and 
children hospitalized with severe disease.  As new drugs are developed and introduced into the treatment 
paradigm for patients with COVID -19, t he toxicity profile of these drugs will be compared with t he toxicity profile  
of duvelisib  by the study pharmacist . Treatment with  an agent (investigational or standard of care)  with a toxicity 
profile that overlaps significantly with that of duvelisib will be an exclusion criteri on for subject enrollment.  Co-
enrollment on a clinical stud y testing another immune -modulatory drug ( i.e., tociluzumab , baracitinib ) is not 
permitted. Determination of whether the mechanism of action of drugs being tested in COVID -19 patients have 
an immune -modulatory effect as their primary proposed mechanism of action will be made monthly by the study 
pharmacist  based upon a review of data available in  www.clinicatrials.gov, and an updated list of non-permitted 
immune -modulatory drugs will be provided to the research staff for the purposes of subject screening.  All 
medications should be reported to the investigators and recorded in the concomitant medications page.  
It is anticipated that participants may be treated with antibacterial agents, either for concomitant infection, or bacterial superinfection , anti -coagulants, and passive antibody treatment (immune plasma or purified antibodies 
reactive to SARS -CoV-2 epitopes).  The final decision for antibiotics (need, drug[s] and dose) and other 
medications will be made by the treating physician (except as noted below under Prohibited Medications).
 
Concomitant use of medications that  are sensitive CYP 450 substrates (Appendix C) are  prohibit ed, unless 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 17 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
absolutely necessary.  If concomitant use of a medication which is a CYP 450 substrates  is required, then adverse 
events (AEs) should be monitored  every 2 days.  
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) and CMV p rophylaxis .  
Since duvelisib or placebo exposure is only 14 days, the risk of developing PJP of CMV viremia in this study is low, 
and specific antimicrobial prophylaxis with Bactrim (PJP) and valganciclovir  ( CMV) for a 14 period would be  of 
limited clinical benefit given the short time of exp osure to duvelisib, and  prophylaxis with Bactrim and/or 
valganciclovir could lead to a higher incidence of blood cytopenia which might trigger stopping the study drug. 
Given the short term exposure to duvelisib, no PJP or CMV prophylaxis is mandated by the protocol , although 
treating physician may prescribe such medications if deemed  to be in the interests  of the subject.   
Prohibited Medications and Food  
 Concomitant medi cations will be tracked daily during duvelisib administration. Patients on strong inhibitors of 
CYP3A (Appendix B) will receive a reduced dose of duvelisib  of 15 mg PO  BID (or matched placebo). Initiation of 
medications known to be strong inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A should be avoided unless deemed to be 
necessary by the PI.  In this instance, patients should be carefully monitored and the duvelisib  dose reduced to 
15 mg PO  BID if the patient was started on a CYP3A inhibitor. Please see Appendix B for known potent inhibitors 
and inducers of CYP3A.  Other anti -neoplastic drugs, radiotherapy and other investigational drugs other than 
anti-viral and  other  non-immunomodul atory drugs to treat signs and symptoms of COVID -19, as described above, 
are prohibited during the study period.  Concomitant use of an immunomodulator  or immunosuppressant 
(Appe ndix E) such as IL -6 inhibitors, TNF inhibitors, anti -IL-1 agents, and JAK inhi bitors  while on study or  within 5 
half- lives or 30 days (whichever is longer) prior to randomization is prohibited.  
 
5.5 Study Procedures  
Before randomization , throughout the study, and following study drug discontinuation, various clinical and 
diagnostic laboratory evaluations are outlined.  The purpose of obtaining these detailed measurements is to 
ensure adequate safety and tolerability assessments .  Clinical evaluations and laboratory studies may be 
repeated more frequently if clinically indicated.  The Schedules of Assessments during the screening and treatment period is provided following the Protocol Synopsis . Please see Section C, Schedule of Activities,  Table 
1, for the schedule for screening phase and treatment phase procedures. Screening assessments will be completed within two days of initiation of duvelisib /placebo .  
 
Screening Phase:  
All screening evaluations must be conducted and reviewed by the p rimary investigator to confirm that 
patients meet the eligibility criteria.  The following procedures will be performed during the screening visit:  
 
• Informed Consent  
• Medical History, Physical Exam, Assessment of Performance Status   
• Nasopharyngeal swabs for SARS -CoV-2 RT-PCR test, with Ct values for positive tests. Note: saliva SARS-
CoV-2 PCR test will be added once available.  
• Electrocardiogram (EKG)  (if ordered by the primary care team)  
• Labs: Complete Blood Count (includes hemoglobin , platelets, and white blood cell count with 
differential), Comprehensive metabolic panel (includes sodium, potassium, chloride, creatinine, AST, ALT total bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase), Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) , and Covid -19 IgG. Other 
labs typically (but not always) ordered by the primary care team at the time of screening include: ferritin, 
D-dimer, CRP, Coagulation Testing (PT/INR, PTT)  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 18 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
• Non -contrast Chest CT and/or Chest X -ray 
• Pregnancy Test (for pre -menopausal women)  
• Hepatitis C antibod y and Hepatitis B antibodies and  viral antigen  testing  (if known history of treated 
Hepatitis B or C).  
  
Treatment Phase: 
Procedures to be conducted during the treatment phase of the study are presented in the Schedule of 
Activities (Section C).  
  
• Randomization to duvelisib  or placebo arm  
• Study drug administration (BID Days 1 -14) 
• Brief medical history  
• Symptom -directed physical exam  
• ECOG Performance Status  
• Vitals signs, weight, requirement for supplemental oxygen  
• Review of prior/concomitant medications  
• EKG as ordered by attending physician  
• Labs: Complete Blood Count (includes hemoglobin, platelets, and  white blood cell count with 
differential), Comprehensive metabolic panel (includes sodium, potassium, chloride, creatinine, AST, ALT, total bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase), ferritin, D -dimer, CRP, troponin  (abstract from SOC labs 
daily or as available ), Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH, Day 29 ) 
• Immune phenotyping of leukocytes (days 1, 8, 15, and 29) 
• Whole blood for RNA  – gene expression analyses (days 1, 8, 15, and 29 ) 
• Mononuclear cells for mass cytometry (CyTOF ) (days 1, 8, 15, and 29 ) 
• Plasma for cytokine/chemokine analyses (days 1, 8, 15, and 29 ) 
• Serum for antibodies to SARS- CoV-2 (screening and 29) 
 
Follow -up Phase:  
 
• Survival status on day 50 - 60 
 
5.6 Description of Data Collection  
Definition of Study Assessments 
 
All patients will be closely monitored for safety and tolerability throughout the study.  Patients will continue dosing until they experience intolerable AE’s , discharge from hospital, patient withdrawal or termination of 
the study.  Subjects may be discontinued from study treatment in the following situations: 1) subject has decided to withdrawal from the study, 2) Intolerable adverse events, 3)  mechanical ventilation (e.g. 
intubation, high -flow 0
2 Bi-PAP or AIRVO)  or death , 4) pregnancy, or 5) severe noncompliance. The schedule 
of activities is listed in section C.  
Medical History  
 
Medical history and demographics will be collected at screening.  Medical history will include other significant co-morbidities, previous surgeries, history of hypertension, chronic obstructive lung disease, asthma, 
diabetes, cancer, previous chemotherapy and outcomes, prior immunosuppressive drug therapy including 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 19 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
steroids, use of tobacco, alcohol and recreational drugs and any known toxin exposure. D emographics data 
will include age, sex and self- identified race/ethnicity.  
Performance Status  
 
The ECOG performance status will be assessed at screening and on days 1  [baseline, prior to study drug] , 8, 
15, and 29. 
Physical Exam  
 
Physical exam will includ e focused examination of body systems, including assessment of ECOG performance 
status , weight, heart, lungs, abdomen, skin and nervous system.  A targeted physical exam will be performed 
on screening and on days 1  [baseline, prior to study drug] , 8, 15, a nd 29. 
Clinical Assessments  
Vital signs will be recorded daily including maximal and minimal blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, 
oxygen saturation. Daily weights will be recorded. The maximum level of supplemental oxygen delivered in 
each 24-hour period will be recorded. Results from imaging studies of the lung ordered as part of the 
standard -of-care management of COVID -19 patients will be extracted from the electronic medical record and 
entered into case report forms. Positive results from  microbiological tests of blood, sputum, and bronchial 
lavage ordered as part of the standard- of-care management of COVID -19 patients will be extracted from the 
electronic medical record and entered into case report forms.  
Clinical Laboratory Data  
 
Blood s amples for chemistry, hematology, viral serologies, leukocyte immunophenotyping and pregnancy 
(for pre -menopausal patients) will be analyzed at Emory or secondary site  clinical laboratories. The chemistry 
panel will include sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, glucose, BUN, AST, ALT, total bilirubin, total 
protein, ferritin, D -dimer, CRP will be tested at screening and on days  1, 8, 15, and 29. TSH will be tested at 
screening and at day 29 . Hematology panel includes complete blood count, including white blood cell count 
with differential (neutrophils, lymphocytes, eosinophils, basophils), red blood cell count, hemoglobin, hematocrit and platelet count will be tested at screening and days 1, 8, 15, and 29 . Hepatitis v iral serologies 
will be tested at screening if a patient has a prior history of treated hepatitis B or C, and include:  
• Hepatitis B Panel (HBsAg, HBsAb, HBcAb and HBV DNA PCR)  
• Hepatitis C Panel (HCV Ab and HCV PCR)  
Correlative Laboratory Data  
 
• SARS- CoV-2 RT-PCR test from nasopharyngeal swabs will be ordered  at screening [baseline, prior to study 
drug] . Results are returned as positive or negative, with Ct values for positive tests. Note: saliva SARS -
CoV-2 PCR test will be added once available.  
• Leukocyte immunophenotyping ( via flow cytometry/fluorescence -activated cell sorting) will be done at 
days 1, 8, 15, and 29.  This will determine the amount of B/T/NK cells and more specifically, the 
phenotypes and frequencies of these immune cell populations pre and post duvelisib  exposure (Th1 and 
Th17 T cells).  
• Mononuclear cells collected at days 1, 8, 15, and 29  will be stored for CyTOF analyses for more in -depth 
immune -phenotyping in follow -up studies.  
• Blood cells collected at days 1, 8, 15, and 29  will also be collected  in RNA stabilization tubes for 
immunological gene expression analyses.  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 20 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
• Mean levels of inflammatory serum biomarkers will be measured by ELISA at day 1 [baseline, prior to 
study drug], during and following  2 weeks of study drug exposure in each cohort, us ing samples at days 
1, 8, 15, and 29 
• Median titers of neutralizing antibodies to SARS -CoV-2 will be determined at days 1  and 29.  
 
6. Data and Specimen Banking   
Specimens   will be obtained and used for medical research by the investigators of this study. Data and specimens 
from this study may be useful for other research being done by investigators at Emory or elsewhere. To help 
further science, Investigators may provide de -iden tified data and/or specimens to other researchers. Any 
information that could identify participants will not be included. If data or specimens are labeled with study ID, 
we will not allow other investigators to link that ID to identifiable information.  
Sam ples and data collected under this protocol may be used to study COVID -19. Access to stored samples will be 
limited to IRB -approved investigators. Samples  and data will be stored using codes assigned by the investigators 
or their designees. Data will be ke pt in password -protected computers. Only  investigators will have access to the 
samples and data.  
All stored samples will be maintained in the laboratory to which it was sent initially for analysis. Study participants 
who request destruction of samples will  be notified of compliance with such request and all supporting details 
will be maintained for tracking.  
The results of some study tests and procedures will be used only for research purposes and will not be placed in subject’s medical record.   
 
7. Sharing of Results with Participants  
In general, study staff will not provide any individual results to subjects (ex. outcome trial results or results from subject’s samples studies). If something of urgent medical importance to the participating subjects will be found, 
the PI (or co -Is) will inform the subject, although we expect that this will be a very rare occurrence. Samples and 
data will only be used for research. 
 
8. Study Timelines  
 
8.1 Duration of therapy  and follow up  
In the absence of treatment delays due to adverse event(s), subjects  will be treated for 14 days  with 
duvelisib /placebo . A subject  will be considered to have completed the study if he or she has completed all phases 
of the study including the last visit or the last scheduled procedure shown in the schedule of activities. Subjects who have signed consent, are deemed eligible and are randomized to receive study drug ( duvelisib/placebo ) will 
be considered evaluable for efficacy endpoints  on an intent -to-treat basis .  Subj ects who receive at least one 
dose of study drug (duvelisib/placebo) will be evaluable for toxicity.  The end of the stu dy is defined as completion 
of the last visit or procedure in SOA (Day 29 ) and an assessment of survival status on day 50 - 60. In the event of 
a subject ’s withdrawal, the Investigator will make every effort to complete the End of Treatment procedures 
specified in the Schedule of Events. Subjects who withdraw from the study will be encouraged to permit follow -
up for clinical end -points, including death, mechanical ventilation (e.g. intubation , high -flow 0
2 Bi-PAP or AIRVO) , 
hospital discharge , and need for supplemental oxygenation.  Subjects will be assessed daily while hospitalized. If 
the subjects are discharged from the hospital, they will have phone follow -up calls  with a study team member at 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 21 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
day 15  (window d13 – 25), and at day 29 (window d27 - 39) for clinical outcomes data. Arrangements will be 
made for an outpatient phelebotomy appointment after day 29  (day 30 - day 60 if possible , but up to day 100 ) 
to obtain safety laboratory tests and blood  samples for secondary research . Patients will receive $ 100 
compensation for the  in-person follow -up phlebotomy visit. However, travel distance, infection control or other 
restrictions may limit the ability of the subject to return to the clinic. In such  case s, only clinical data will be 
obtained via the d27 - 39 call. 
 
Patients  removed from study  for unacceptable adverse event(s) will be followed until resolution or stabilization 
of the adverse event and for key clinical end -points including death, mechanical ventilation (e.g. intubation, high -
flow 0 2 Bi-PAP or AIRVO) , hospital discharge, and need for supplemental oxygenation.  Survival status of each 
subject will be assessed by reference to documentation in EMR of non -protocol specified in -person or tele -
medicine visits that occurred on or following day 50 - 60, contacting the patient by phone or text, contacting 
know associate of the patient, or through a search of vital records.  
 
8.2 Study termination  
 
This study may be suspended or terminated if there is sufficient reasonable cause.  The Sponsor/ Investigator will  
notify the co-investigators and Verastem  if he/she  decide s to discontinue the study.  If the study is prematurely 
closed, the clinical investigators will notify the study participants, and t he Sponsor/Investigator will notify the 
IRB/IEC , and the FDA.  Reasons for suspension and termination of the study include:  
 
• Determination of unexpected or unacceptable risk to patients  
• Demonstration of efficacy that would warrant stopping  
• Determination of futility  
• Insufficient compliance to protocol requirements  
• Determination that the primary endpoint has been met  
 
The study may resume once concerns about safety and compliance have been addressed and are satisfactory 
with sponsor and IRB/IEC.  
 
9. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
9.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 
1. Hospitalized in participating facility.  
2. Documentation of pneumonia with radiographic evidence of infiltrates by imaging (e.g., chest x -ray or CT 
scan).  
3. Laboratory -confirmed SARS -CoV-2 infection as determined by PCR or other authorized or approved assay in 
any specimen collected within 72 hours prior to enrollmen t. Note – An exception must be requested to the 
Sponsor if ≥72 hours since positive test.  
4. Symptoms suggestive of severe systemic illness with COVID -19, such as respiratory rate > 30 breaths per 
minute, heart rate >125 beats per minute, oxygen saturation  (O2 sat) in the blood  of <93% on room air at 
sea level or PaO 2/FiO 2< 300 ( see Appendix A).  
5. 18 years of age or older  
6. Patients with hematological parameters at screening consistent with < grade 2 NCI CTCAE v5.0 toxicity:  
hemoglobin >8 g/dL, platelet count >50 ,000 K/mcl, an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) > 1,000/mm3 , and  an 
absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) >500/mm3 . 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 22 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
7. Patients with  laboratory measurements of liver function at screening consistent with < grade 2 NCI CTCAE 
v5.0 toxicity:  alanine aminotransferase (ALT) < 5X ULN; aspartate aminotransferase (AST) < 5X ULN; and 
bilirubin < 3X ULN.  
8. The effects of duvelisib  on the developing human fetus are unknown.  For this reason, women of child -
bearing potential (WOCBP) must have a negative serum or urine pr 5egnancy test prior to starting therapy. 
WOCBP and men  must agree to use adequate contraception (hormonal or barrier method of birth control; 
abstinence) from enrollment into this study until at least 60 days after the first dose of duvelisib . A woman 
of childbearing po tential (WOCBP) is a sexually mature woman who: 1) has not undergone a hysterectomy 
or bilateral oophorectomy; or 2) has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 consecutive months 
(i.e., has had menses at any time in the preceding 24 consecutive months. Should a woman become pregnant or suspect she is pregnant while she or her partner is participating in this study, she should inform her treating physician immediately.  Men treated or enrolled on this protocol must also agree to use adequate contr aception prior to the study, for the duration of study participation, and 2 months after completion of 
duvelisib  administration. WOCBP must have a negative pregnancy test after admission to the hospital, prior 
to the first dose of study drug.  
The patient must be willing to comply with fertility requirements  as below:  
• Total abstinence (when this is in line with the usual practice and lifestyle of the patient) will be accept ed. Periodic abstinence ( i.e., calendar, ovulation, post -ovulation methods) and withdrawals are 
not acceptable forms of contraception. All other patients must comply with the measures described below.  
• If a female participant is of reproductive potential, the participant (and her partner) must agree to use of  one of the following combinations of birth control during the study and for 2 months  after 
the last dose of study drug (or tubal ligation as a single method):  
1) Use of a double -barrier method of contraception: condoms (male or female) and a diaphragm 
or cervical cap with spermicide;  
2) Use of an IUD and a barrier method: condoms (male or female, with or without spermicide) or 
a diaphragm or cervical cap with spermicide;  
3) Tubal ligation.  
• Women who are post- menopausal, defined as age greater than 45 and no menses for at least 24 
consecutive months , or who have had a hysterectomy, are considered not of reproductive potential.    
• Males must agree to using contraception during the study and for  2 months  after the last dose of 
study drug or have undergone a male sterilization procedure (at least 6 months prior to screening.  
• Use of oral (estrogen and progesterone), injected or implanted hormonal methods of contraception, or placement of an intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS) or other forms of contraception that comparable efficacy (failure rate <1%). In case of oral contraception, the woman should be stable on the same pill for a minimum of 3 months prior to enrollment on the stu dy. 
5. Patients must agree not to donate blood, sperm/ova or any other organs while taking protocol therapy and for at least 2 weeks after stopping treatment.  
6. Willingness and ability of the patient to comply with scheduled visits, drug administration plan, protocol specified laboratory tests, other study procedures and study restrictions  
7. Evidence of personally signed informed consent indicating that the subject is aware of the life -threatening 
nature of the disease and has been informed on the procedures to b e followed, the experimental nature of 
the therapy, alternative, potential risks and discomforts, potential benefits and other pertinent aspects of study participation.  
 
 
9.2 Exclusion  criteria  
 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 23 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
1. Patients requiring mechanical ventilation ( e.g. intubation , high -flow 0 2 Bi-PAP or AIRVO ) at the time 
randomization . 
2. Patients receiving any investigational drugs  other  than drugs or therapies to treat COVID -19, with the 
exception of investigational immune- modulatory drugs as per section 5.4 .  
3. Pregnant women are excluded from this study because d uvelisib  is agent with the potential for teratogenic 
or abortifacient effects.  Because there is an unknown but potential risk for adverse events in nursing infants 
secondary to treatment of the mother with duvelisib , breastfeeding should be discontinued before starting 
study drug and breastfeeding should not be resumed until at least 1 month after last dose of study drug.  
4. Clinical suspicion that the etiology of acute illness (acute decompensation) is primarily due to a condition other than COVID -19
 
5. Known contraindication to duvelisib  
6. Patients with hepatic cirrhosis  as defined by s ymptomatic liver dysfunction; liver fibrosis by biopsy;  ALT > 5X 
ULN, AST> 5X ULN , or b ilirubin > 3XULN.  
7. Patients with autoimmune diseases or patients on chronic  immunosuppressive medications  at the time of 
hospital admission  or screening.  
8. Active Hepatitis B or C infection, as determined by FDA -approved serology testing.  
 
10. Number of Participants  
 We will be recruiting a total of 80  participants at Emory Healthcare  and potential secondary sites, combined .  We 
are expecting to have to consent 100 number of participants to reach our recruitment goal of 80 .  Patients will 
be registered after signing of the informed consent document and meeting all entry requirements.  
 
11.  Recruitment Methods  
Investigators, nurses, and/or data managers review lists of patients who have COVID -19 and will determine if 
there are patients who might be eligible for a clinical trial. The nurse/data manager reviews accessible medical records to screen further for eligibility.  Subjects will be identified by their treating physicians. Clinical care team  
at Winship will inform potential subjects about the known benefits and potential risks of a clinical trial as well as other available treatment options.  Some of the subjects recruited for this protocol will be patients being treated 
at Emory and under the  care of one or more of the study investigators.  
 
No incentives are provided to patients for trial participation . 
Study personnel will notify Winship Central Subject Registration (WCSR) by email at winshipcsr@emory.edu
, 
once subject has been consented for a trial. Email notification must be done within 24 hours after consent has 
been obtained and it will include scanned copies of:  
 
• Signed patient consent form  
• HIPAA authorization form  
•        Emory Research Management System (ERMS;  https://erms.emory.edu ) Enrollment Fax Cover  
 The WCSR will enter the subject into the OnCore Research Management System, which is the system of record for Winship Cancer Institute Clinical Trials.  
 Participating Site (s)  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 24 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
A site - specific Central Subject Registration (CSR) form will be provided to Participating Site.  
After each subject signs consent, the Central Subject Registration form is to be completed and sent to Winship 
within 2 4 hours of consent. This form, along with the valid, signed informed consent form/HIPAA authorization 
form, is to be faxed or emailed to Winship’s Central Subject Registrar per instructions on the form. Once a subject 
is registered, each participating site  will be notified via e -mail.  
 
Enrolling a subject requires careful screening and determination of eligibility.  
Eligible patients will be enrolled on study centrally at Winship Cancer Institute by the Study Coordinator.   
When all required test results are available, complete the eligibility checklist and provide the checklist and the supporting documentation to the  IRB approved investigator for review and sign- off. Once the investigator (sub-
investigator, Co -Investigator) has signed the eligibility checklist, randomization and enrollment may proceed. 
Oncore and ERMS must be updated to reflect eligibility and on trea tment status.  
Following enrollment, patients should begin protocol treatment within  3 days. Issues that would cause treatment 
delays should be discussed with the Principal Investigator.   
 
Screen failures:  
After the screening evaluations have been completed, the investigator or designee is to review the inclusion/exclusion criteria and determine the participant’s eligibility for the study.  
Only the reason(s) for ineligibility will be collected on screen failures. Participants who are found to be ineligible will be told the reason(s) for ineligibility.  
Individuals who do not meet the criteria for participation in this study (screen failure) because of an abnormal laboratory finding may be rescreened once  
 
Participating site  
The Eligibility checklist is to be printed from OnCore  and verified by 2 people, of which one must be a clinical 
investigator or co -investigator. The completed and signed eligibility checklist along with all redacted supporting 
source documentation must be submitted to the Winship Multi -site Coordinator (MSC)  or designee (fax 404 -778-
0417) within 14 days after pre -registration but no later than 2 business days before the scheduled treatment 
visit. Eligibility will be confirmed by the site investigator or co -investigator and the MSC or designee within 1 
busines s day of receipt of all eligibility documentation and confirmation will be sent to the participating site along 
with cohort assignment, if subject meets criteria. The Participating Site will enter all subject enrollment  data in 
OnCore following eligibility  confirmation, including subject ‘on treatment date’. If a consented subject does not 
meet eligibility criteria (screen failure), the MSC will update the enrollment status in OnCore. The Participating Site is responsible for entering data for all procedures subject completed prior to eligibility determination.  
 Randomization between duvelisib  25 mg po BID and placebo BID will be stratified by study site. The 
investigational pharmacy will supply coded study drug based upon the results of central randomizatio n. 
  
12. Withdrawal of Participants  
 
All study patients have the right to withdraw from the study at any time.  The reasons for withdrawal must be documented in the case report form.  Final study evaluations will be done at the time of withdrawal. The following are examples of early withdrawal from the study:  
• Patient withdrawal of consent at any time  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 25 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
• Any medical condition that the primary investigator believes may jeopardize the patient’s health or 
safety if they continue in the study  
• Pregnancy  
• Initiation of mechanical ventilation ( e.g. intubation, high -flow O 2 Bi-PAP or AIRVO ) 
• Termination of the study by the Sponsor/Investigator, IDMC , the IRB, or the FDA 
  
 
13. Risks to Participants  
Safety of duvelisib :  
 Immune related toxicities are the most common non -hematological adverse event (AE) with duvelisib . Elevated 
AST/ALT and diarrhea are the most common non -hematological AEs. The rates of diarrhea ranged from 42 -51% 
in clinical trials with a median onset of 2 .2-4 months ( 28, 8). The median time of onset for AST/ALT elevation was 
1.2 months and occurred in 39% of patients in one phase I clinical trial ( 28). Other non -hematological AE’s that 
have been reported include : 
 1) risk of infection  (reported in 61 -69% o f patients with upper respiratory tract infections and pneumonia being 
the most common infections (8, 29 ).)
 There have also been reports of Pneumocystis jirovecci with the use of 
duvelisib .  
2) risk of pneumonitis,  
3) risk of intestinal infection and colitis,  
4) risk of severe skin reactions  (maculopapular rash)   
5) Neutropenia (the most common hematological AE, occurring in 29% -39% of patients in clinical trials)  
6) pyrexia  
 
Other Risks:  
 
Risk of Phlebotomy - The primary risks of phlebotomy include local discomfort, occasional bleeding or bruising 
of the skin at the site of needle puncture, and rarely hematoma, infection, or fainting. At the time of enrollment 
and during study visits, each participant will be asked about part icipation in other research studies to ensure 
that blood draws do not exceed the following amounts for all research protocols combined: 10.5 mL/kg or 550 mL, whichever is smaller, over any 8 -week period for adults, and no more than 5 mL/kg may in a single day (no 
more than 9.5 mL/kg may be drawn over any 8 -week period) for persons under the age of 18.  
 Risk of Nasopharyngeal Swab- The primary risk of a nasal swab is local discomfort. Rarely, there can be local 
bleeding from the nasal mucosa, which is controlled with local measures such as pressure or packing with 
gauze.  
 Risk of Oropharyngeal Swab-  The primary risk of an oropharyngeal swab is local discomfort. This swab can 
stimulate the gag reflex, and very rarely vomiting.  
 Risk of Endotracheal Aspir ate- The primary risk of endotracheal aspirate is cough, and rarely can cause a small 
amount of bleeding.  
 
Data security - Subjects will be asked to provide personal health information (PHI). All attempts will be made to 
keep this PHI confidential within the limits of the law. However, there is a chance that unauthorized persons will 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 26 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
see the subjects’ PHI. All records will be kept in a locked file cabinet or maintained in a locked room at the 
participating sites. Electronic files will be password protected behind an academic institutional firewall. Only people who are involved in the conduct, oversight, monitoring, or auditing of this study will be allowed access to the PHI that is collected. Any publications from this study will not use information that will identify subjects. 
Organizations that may inspect and/or copy research records maintained at the participating sites for quality assurance and data analysis include groups such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
 
14. Potential Benefits to Participants  
 There is no guarantee of benefit to subjects who enroll in this protocol.  
 
15. Data Management and Confidentiality  
 
15.1 Statistical considerations  
The proportion of patients that did not require mechanical ventilation or die within 29 days of randomization  
will be recorded as a preliminary assessment of the efficacy of duvelisib  in this setting.  
 
Definition of subjects  e valuable for efficacy response  
 Subjects who completed screen ing and enrollment procedure and who are randomized to receive  
duvelisib /placebo  will be evaluable for efficacy endpoints  on an intent -to-treat basis .  
 
Definition of NIAID scale    
 The clinical response to study drug is  defined as the first day on which the subject satisfies the criteria of a score 
of 5 or greater in the following categories from the NIAID ordinal scale . The NIAID ordinal scale is an assessment 
of the clinical status at the first assessment on  a given study day. The scale is as follows: 1) Death; 2) Hospitalized, 
on invasive mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO); 3) Hospitalized, on no n-
invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen devices; 4) Hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen; 5) Hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen - requiring ongoing medical care (COVID -19 related or otherwise); 6) 
Hospitalized, not requiring suppleme ntal oxygen - no longer requires ongoing medical care; 7) Not hospitalized, 
limitation on activities and/or requiring home oxygen; 8) Not hospitalized, no limitations on activitie s. 
 
Definition of the primary efficacy endpoint  
 The proportion of patients who do not require mechanical ventilation ( e.g. intubation, high -flow 0
2 Bi-PAP or 
AIRVO ) and who survive to 4 weeks  after randomization  will be used as the primary measure of efficacy.  
 
Study design  
This is a randomized placebo -controlled double blind/double masked phase 2 study to explore the efficacy of 
exposure to a PI3K inhibitor in patients with severe COVID- 19.   Subjects who are randomized to receive  d uvelisib  
or placebo will be evaluable for the primary and secon dary efficacy analys es.   All subjects with any exposure to 
duvelisib  will be evaluable for toxicity (please see section 13.3 on grading of toxicities). A total of 80 subjects will 
be planned for analysis of the primary and secondary endpoints.  We estimat e that five subjects will be enrolled 
every month. One interim analysis is planned upon 50% (n= 40) of subjects enrolled, which allows us the 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 27 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
opportunity to stop the trial early due to futility or safety concerns.  The only groups that will  have access to 
unblinded interim data: (a) an independent data monitoring committee (IDMC); and (b) an  independent 
statistical team whose role will be to generate the reports to be reviewed by the IDMC.  The responsibility of any 
data -informed recommendations regarding cont inuing/stopping the study or modifying the study 
design/protocol be restricted to the IDMC.  
 
Power Calculation  
The reported incidence of death or mechanical intubation for patients with severe COVID -19 is approximately 
40% (1). Local experience with COVID -19 patients at the Emory hospitals is consistent with this estimate, as 29% 
of all SARS- CoV-2 positive patients (n=800) are admitted to the ICU with COVID -19, and that 22% of all admitted 
patients are intubated, and 37% of  intubated patients die in hospital. A favorable and clinically significant result 
from treatment with duvelisib  in high -risk COVID -19 patients would be to reduce the composite incidence of 
death/mechanical ventilation from 40% to 15%. A sample size of 40 subjects for each treatment group will have 
>80% power to detect a 25% absolute reduction in the proportion of subjects who experience death or 
mechanical ventilation, comparing a predicted proportion of 40% death or intubation in the control arm to 15% 
death or intubation in the experimental arm receiving duvelisib  treatment. The calculation is based on 10% type 
1 error rate and two-sided Mantel -Haenszel test with one planned interim analysis when approximately 50% of 
sample enrolled (N= 20/treatment).  For  
 
Analysis of Primary Endpoints  
Analysis of the primary end -point will be based upon an intent -to-treat analysis of all subjects who are 
randomized to receive  duvelisib/placebo . The primary endpoint  is the proportion of patients who will require 
mechanical ventilation or experiencing death within 4-week s (29 days)  after randomization, which will be 
estimated with the corresponding 95% Clopper -Pearson confidence interval for the two arms separately. F isher’s 
Exact test will be used to test the difference between the two arms.  In addition, a logistic regression will be used 
to estimate the odd ratio between the two arms controlling for the baseline covariattes for an improved precision of the estimation  (30).  
 
Analysis of Secondary Endpoints  
Evaluable subject s will be all subjects who were randomized to receive duvelisib  or placebo. The definition of 
secondary endpoints are  listed in section 2. The descriptive  statistics will mainly be applied to all secondary 
endpoints by treatment arms separately , such as frequency and percentage for categorical endpoints and mean, 
median, and standard deviation for numerical endpoints. They will be compared between treatment arms by Fisher’s Exact test for categorical endpoints and Wilcoxon Rank -Sum test for numerical endpoints. For biomarkers 
measured repeated over time, generalized estimating equation (GEE) model will be used to test the difference in change pattern over time by two treatment grou ps using a nonlinear model. P -value will be adjusted for 
multiple comparison if necessary. Time to recovery  is as the days from randomization to reach the desired NIAID 
ordinal scale >=5, a log -rank test will be used to compare the difference between the two arms. Survival rate at 
day 50 - 60 will be estimated by Kaplan -Meier method with log -rank test.  
 
Interim Analysis for futility  
The responsibility of any data -informed recommendations regarding continuing/stopping the study or modifying 
the study design/protocol be restricted  to the  independent data monitoring committee  (IDMC ), which is a part 
of the Winship data safety monitoring committee (DSMC). Upon 20 enrolled for each arm, an interim analysis 
will be carried out  by two -sided Mantel -Haenszel t est. O’Brien -Fleming boundary  for futility is 2.373 on the Z 
score (equivalently: 0. 991 on the fixed sample p- value scale). The trial may be terminated due to futility, or 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 28 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
following review by the IDMC  of clinical and labor atory immune -monitoring data. Otherwise, the trial will 
continue enrolling patients until all 80  patients enrolled.  
 
Stopping Rule for Safety  
At the interim analysis (20 patients/arm), the incidence of death or mechanical ventilation, grade ¾ elevations in 
liver transaminases, or neutropenia will be estimated.  We assume that the underline rate is 40%, 10%, or 24% 
for the three incidences in placebo group respectively , and if the rate in duvelisib  group is >=15% higher than 
that in the placebo group in either of the three incidences, the trial may be stopped due to the safety concern. It also translates to stop the study if 3 or more excess events  in duvelisib  group are observed in either of the three 
incidences.  Operating Characteristics, the probability of trail stopping due to >=3 excess events based one 
simulation study, is listed in the below table.  
 
AEs Underline event 
rate in Placebo 
arm Underline event rate in Duvelisib arm  
5% 10%  20%  30%  40%  50%  60%  
death or mechanical 
ventilation  40%  0% 0.02%  0.7%  4.8%  16.6%  37.4%  62.7%  
grade ¾ elevations in 
liver transaminases  10%  0.79%  5.7%  32.8%  65.8%  87.9%  97.2%  99.7%  
neutropenia  24%  0.07%  0.6%  7.3%  26.1%  52.7%  77.3%  92.6%  
 In addition to the  study stopping rules based an interim analysis, the Independent Data Monitoring Committee 
(IDMC) will review, on a monthly basis, the  number of Grade 3 and/or Grade 4 adverse events  in each arm , 
including neutropenia and elevated transaminases, and consider stopping or suspending accrual to the study if the frequencies of Grade 3 or Grade 4 adverse events are significantly higher among subjects in the duvelisib arm 
compared with subjects in the control arm.    
Analysis of Safety Data  
The primary safety endpoints include death or mechanical ventilation, grade  ¾ elvation in liver transminases, and 
neutropenia  within 4 weeks . The cumulative incidence rate  of each safety endpoint will be calculated with 95% 
confidence interval  by randomized arms, and compared by Fisher’s exact test.  
 
Handing of Missing Data  
For the safety endpoints  and secondary endpoints , missing data will not be imputed, summaries and analyses 
will be based on the observed cases. For the primary efficacy analysis, every effort will be made from the informed consent form design to clinical foll ow up to reduce the missing data. Patients withdraw consent before 
the primary endpoint can be measured will be replaced.   
Demographics and Baseline Characteristics  
Summary statistics and frequencies for the following characteristics will be described by randomized arms:  
ECOG , Race , Ethnicity , Age, Sex, Body mass index (BMI) , Medical history of hypertension, diabetes, asthma, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , History of and treatment for cancer, History of coronary artery disease 
(prior M I, CABG, coronary artery stent, or medical management) , History of prior pulmonary infections (TB, 
pneumonia, influenza) , Allergies  
 
Subgroup analyses  
None  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 29 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
15.2 Data/specimens:  
Source Documents  
 
Source data is all information, original records of clinical findings, observations, or other activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  Examples include medical records (hospital records, 
office charts), laboratory results, imaging scans and reports, EKGs, patient diaries, videos, photographs, 
pharmacy dispensing, and other records, investigator or patient completed questionnaires involved in the clinical trial.  
 
Case Report Forms  
 The case report form (C RF) will be the primary data collection instrument for the study.  All data requested on 
the CRF will be recorded and all entries will be recorded into an electronic data capture system by authorized personnel.   The principal investigator is responsible for assuring that the data entered into the CRF are complete, accurate and that entries are updated in a timely fashion.  Data will be entered in the clinical research data 
management system – REDCap - per Winship SOP 4.2 Data Completion Metrics.  REDCap  will be used to record 
all study related information and data  for all registered subjects, including their assigned patient ID. All data 
submitted must be accompanied by supporting source documents, where applicable and as outlined in the 
protocol -specific m onitoring plan.  Data completion will be reviewed monthly. In situations where there are 
significant delays of data completion, the Associate Director of Clinical Research or the Director of Clinical Trials may temporarily suspend enrollment. All data must  be entered in the timeframe required at each site, but no 
later than 30 days following registration and each visit completion. All queries are to be resolved within 4 weeks of issue. The coordinating center multi-site coordinator will provide REDCap  train ing and request access to the 
appropriate staff at the participating site.  
 
Procedures to Ensure Capturing Data for the Primary End- point  
 All patients who maintain consent to be followed for additional outcome information will remain in the study through the end of the double -blind period collection of safety and efficacy assessments. Subjects discharged 
from the hospital prior to the last protocol- specified assessment on day 29 will be followed as out -patients with 
in-person or telehealth visits. Survival status at day 50 - 60 will be captured in all subjects who have not 
withdrawn consent for follow -up by contacting the patient via a telehealth visit or other approaches (e.g., 
telephone calls, texts, and emails to the patient and  close contacts).  In the absence of direct or indirect contact 
with the subject, a vital records search will be performed to assess survival status  of each subject . 
  
Data Retention  
 All study documents will be retained for at least two years after the last approval of a marketing application in their country and until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications in their country.  
 
Transmission of Data:  
 Blood samples for T -cell phenotyping from secondary sites will be cryopreserved and shipped to Emory University 
in real- time.  Patient samples will be cryopreserved by using Crystor Media (please see Appendix F ). Emory 
University will cover the cost of shipment of blood samples. All patient samples for T -cell phe notyping will be 
analyzed at Emory University to ensure uniform analysis.  Clinical data (ORR and rates of CRS, neurotoxicity, ICU 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 30 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
transfers) will be captured with chart review at Emory University and secondary sites .  Data will be uploaded into 
RedCap .  There will be monthly meetings (tele- conference) with each site’s PI to review the study, enrollment 
and reporting of data.  
 
Publication Plan  
 
The results of the study should be available within 12 months of completion of the study.  The end of the study is the time point at which the last data items are to be reported or after the outcome data are sufficiently mature 
for analysis.  A full report of the outcomes will be made public no later than three years after the end of the 
study.  
 
16.  Provisions to Monitor  the Data to Ensure the Safety of Participants  
 
16.1 Safety Analyses  
Adverse event data will be described and graded per the NCI CTCAE v 5.0 guidelines. For AE that are not listed in 
the NCI CTCAE v 5.0 guidelines , grade 3 AEs are defined as events that interrupt usual activities of daily living, or 
significantly affects clinical status, or may require intensive therapeutic intervention. Severe events are usually 
incapacitating.  For each adverse event, information to be collected includes event descriptio n, time of onset, 
clinician assessment of severity, relationship to study product (assessed only by those with the training and authority to make a diagnosis), and time of resolution/stabilization of the event. Regardless of relationship, all AEs will be recorded with start dates occurring any time after patient receives any duvelisib /placebo . At each 
study visit, the investigator will inquire about the occurrence of AE/SAEs since the last visit. Events will be followed for outcome information until resolut ion or stabilization.  
 Any medical condition that is present at the time that the participant is screened will be considered as baseline and not reported as an AE. However, if the study participant’s condition deteriorates at any time during the study, it will be recorded as an AE. Changes in the severity of an AE will be documented to allow an assessment of the duration of the event at each level of severity to be performed. AEs characterized as intermittent require documentation of onset and duration of e ach episode.  
 The maximum grade for each type of toxicity will be recorded for each patient, and frequency tables will be 
reviewed to determine toxicity patterns. Adverse events will be summarized and described within each cohort. 
They will initially be reviewed regardless of attribution, but also whether they are possibly, probably, or definitely related to treatment. In addition, we will review all adverse event data that are graded as 3, 4, or 5 and classified as either “unrelated” or “unlikely to be related” to study treatment in the event of an actual relationship developing. The incidence of severe adverse events or toxicities will be described. We will assess the proportion of patients who experience grade 3 or higher non -hematologic toxicity. To assess tolerability, we will also capture 
the proportion of patients who go off treatment due to adverse events.  
 
16.2 Adverse Event and Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
Definition of Adverse Events (AE)  
 
The ICH defines an adverse event as any unfavorable and unintended sign, including laboratory findings, symptoms or diseases temporally associated with the use of an investigational product. Adverse event severity will be graded per the using the CTCAE version 5 for toxicity and adverse event reporting.   
 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 31 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
Any adverse events, either observed by the investigator or reported by the patient, should be documented, 
including the intensity and duration of the AE, what steps were taken in regard to duvelisib  and the outcome.  
 The principal investigator must review any laboratory abnormality for clinical significance.  If the abnormality is 
deemed to be clinically significant, then the adverse event will be reported along with the actions taken in regard 
to duvelisi b and the outcome of the event. All AE’s will began recording at the beginning of enrollment until 
withdrawal and/or completion of the clinical trial.  
 
Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  
 
An adverse event (AE) or suspected adverse reaction is cons idered "serious" if, in the view of either the 
investigator or sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes:  
• Death  
• Life-threatening adverse event  
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life 
functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
• Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require hospitalization may 
be considered serious when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the participant and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. (Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchos pasm requiring intensive 
treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse).  
 
Study -Specific AE/SAE Reporting  
 
• Due to the wide arr ay of symptoms experienced by patients hospitalized with COVID -19, it is not 
feasible or informative to record and assess all possible symptoms and lab test results for AE/SAE grading in this study. Hence  AE/SAE grading and reporting will be limited to  lab tests that might reflect 
effects of study drug exposure including bilirubin, ALT, ALK PHOS, AST, leukopenia, lymphopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Symptomatic AE/SAE grading and reporting will focus on the following: diarrhea, bradycardia, symptoms requiring ICU admission and mechanical ventilation, symptoms requiring repeat hospitalization, or death. Non -clinically relevant AEs (Grade 1) will not be included on 
AE logs or AE reporting documents.  
 
Classification of an Adverse Event  
 
Severity of Event  
For both AE’s and SAE’s  the investigator must assess the severity of the event.  The severity of the event will be 
graded based off the patient’s symptoms using the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE 
Version 5 .0): 
https://ctep.cancer.gov/protocoldevelopment/electronic_applications/docs/CTCAE_v5_Quick_Reference_5x7.
pdf.  
The terms “severe” and “serious” are not synonymous. Severity refers to the intensity of an AE (as in mild, moderate, or severe pain); the event itself may be of relatively minor medical significance (such as severe headache). “Serious” is a regulatory definition and is based on patient or event outcome or action criteria usually associated with events that pose a threat to a patient’s life or vital functions. Seriousness (not severity) serves as the guide for defining regulatory reporting obligations  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 32 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
Relationship to Study Intervention  
All adverse events (AEs) must have their relationship to study intervention assessed by the clinician who 
examines and evaluates the participant based on temporal relationship and his/her clinical judgment. The degree 
of certainty about causality will be graded using the categories below. In a clinical trial, the study product must 
always be suspect.  
 
Expectedness  
Principal Investigator will be responsible for determining whether an adverse event (AE) is expected or unexpected . 
An expected  adverse event is those that have previously identified resulting from administration of the study 
drug.  These include, but not limited to, AE’s that are listed in the AE list, stated on the informed consent document or listed on the investigator’s brochu re. 
An unexpected adverse event occurs when the nature or severity or frequency of the event is not consistent with 
the risk product’s information (i.e., investigator’s brochure, not listed on the informed consent document).  
 
Documenting Adverse Events  
From the time of treatment until 14 days following cessation of duvelisib/placebo  all adverse events, that begin 
or worsen after informed consent, must be recorded  by the investigator or designee at each examination on the 
Adverse Event case report forms (CRF)/worksheets  
 
The investigator will make every attempt to follow all subjects with non -serious adverse events for outcome.  
Conditions that were already present at the time of informed consent should be recorded in the Medical History 
page of the patient’s CRF/worksheet.  
 Adverse events will be assessed and graded according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0. Grade 1 to 5 will be used to characterize the severity of the Adverse Event. If CTCAE grading does not exist for an adverse event, the severity of mild, moderate, severe, and life- threatening, death related 
to the AE corresponding respectively to Grades 1 - 5, will be use d. Information about any deaths (related to an 
Adverse Event or not) will also be collected. The occurrence of adverse events should be sought by non -directive 
questioning of the patient (patient) during the screening process after signing informed consent  and at each visit 
during the study. Adverse events also may be detected when they are volunteered by the patient (patient) during the screening process or between visits, or through physical examination, laboratory test, or other assessments. As far as po ssible, each adverse event should be evaluated to determine:  
 
1. The severity grade (CTCAE Grade 1 -5)  
2. Its duration (Start and end dates)   
3. Its relationship to the study treatment (Reasonable possibility that AE is related: No, Yes) or Its relations hip to 
the study treatment (Reasonable possibility that AE is related: No, Yes)  
4. Action taken with respect to study or investigational treatment (none, dose adjusted, temporarily interrupted, permanently discontinued, unknown, not applicable)  
5. Whether medication or therapy was given (no concomitant medication/non -drug therapy, co ncomitant 
medication/non -drug therapy)  
6. Whether it is serious, where a serious adverse event (SAE) is defined as in Section 16.1 and which seriousness 
criteria have been met). 7. Outcome (not recovered/not resolved, recovered/resolved, recovering/resolv ing, recovered/resolved with 
sequelae, fatal, unknown)   
  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 33 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
If the event worsens the event should be reported a second time in the CRF noting the start date when the event 
worsens in toxicity. For grade 3 and 4 adverse events only, if improvement to a lower grade is determined a new 
entry for this event should be reported in the CRF noting the start date when the event improved from having been Grade 3 or Grade 4.   For phase I studies any AE that constitutes a DLT should be reported like a grade 3 
and 4 adv erse event.  All adverse events should be treated appropriately. If a concomitant medication or non -
drug therapy is given, this action should be recorded on the Adverse Event CRF.  
 
Once an adverse event is detected, it should be followed until its resoluti on or until it is judged to be permanent, 
and assessment should be made at each visit (or more frequently, if necessary) of any changes in severity, the suspected relationship to the study treatment, the interventions required to treat it, and the outcome.  
Laboratory abnormalities that constitute an Adverse event in their own right (are considered clinically significant, induce clinical signs or symptoms, require concomitant therapy or require changes in study treatment), should be recorded on the Adverse E vents CRF.  
 
Laboratory abnormalities, that do not meet the definition of an adverse event, should not be reported as adverse events.  
 
A Grade 3 or 4 event (severe) as per CTCAE does not automatically indicate a SAE unless it meets the definition of serious as defined below and/or as per investigator’s discretion. A dose -hold or medication for the lab 
abnormality may be required by the protocol in which case the lab abnormality would still, by definition, be an adverse event and must be reported as su ch.  Any serious adverse event, or follow up to a serious adverse event, 
including death due to any cause whether or not related to the study drug, must be submitted on an SAE form  
and assessed by PI in order to determine reporting criteria to regulatory authorities, IRB, DSMC, FDA.  
 
All serious adverse events collected during this time frame will also be reported to Verastem.  
 
All SAEs will be followed until satisfactory resolution or until the site investigator deems the event to be chronic or the adheren ce to be stable. The sponsor -Investigator will be responsible for notifying FDA of any unexpected 
fatal or life -threatening suspected adverse reaction as soon as possible but in no case later than 7 calendar days 
after the sponsor's initial receipt of the information.  
  
All subjects with serious adverse events must be followed up for outcome.  
 
Any additional information for the SAE including complications, progression of the initial SAE, and recurrent episodes must be reported as follow-up to the original episode within 24 hours  of the investigator receiving the 
follow -up information.  
An SAE oc curring at a different time interval or otherwise considered completely unrelated to a previously 
reported one should be reported separately as a new event.  
Any SAEs experienced after the reporting period described above should only be reported to FDA/IRB if the 
investigator suspects a causal relationship to the study treatment.    
 
Information about all SAEs is collected and recorded on the Serious Adverse Event Report Form ; all applicable 
sections of the form must be completed in order to provide a clinically thorough report. The investigator must 
assess and record the relationship of each SAE to each specific study treatment (if there is more than one study treatment), complete the SAE Report Form, and submit the completed form.   
Each reoccurrence, complication, or progression of the original event should be reported as a follow -up to that 
event regardless of when it occurs. The follow- up information should describe whether the event has resolved 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 34 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
or continues, if and how it was treated, whether the blind was broken or not, and whether the patient continued 
or withdrew from study participation.  
 
Reporting Requirements for IND holder  
 For Investigator -sponsored IND studies, reporting requirements for the FDA apply in accordance with the 
guidance set forth in 21 CFR, Part 312.32.  Events meeting the following criteria need to be submitted to the FDA as Expedited IND Safety Reports.  
 
7 Calendar -Day Telephone or Fax Report  
The S ponsor -Investigator is required to notify the FDA of a fatal or life -threatening adverse event that is 
unexpected and assessed by the investigator to be possibly related to the use of investigational agents .  An 
unexpected adverse event is one that is not already described in the most recent Guidance for Investigator section of the Investigator’s Brochure.  Such reports are to be telephoned or faxed to the FDA, within 7 calendar days of the first learning of the event.  
 
15 Calendar -Day Written Report  
The Sp onsor -Investigator is also required to notify the FDA and all participating investigators, in a written IND 
Safety Report, of any serious unexpected adverse event that is considered reasonably or possibly related to the use of investigational agent.  
 Writt en IND Safety Reports with analysis of similar events are to be submitted to the FDA, within 15 calendar 
days of first learning of the event.  The FDA prefers these reports on a MedWatch 3500 Form but alternative formats (e.g., summary letter) are acceptable.  
 SAE must be recorded on a MedWatch 3500 Form . SAE reports and any other relevant safety information are to be 
forwarded to the following  
  
MedWatch 3500 Reporting Guidelines:  
Note:  MedWatch 3500 forms and other information related to MedWatch reporting are available at http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/index.html
. 
 A copy of all 15 Day Reports and Annual Progress Reports is submitted as required by FDA. Investigators will cross reference this submission according to local regulations to the Investigational Compound Number (IND, CSA, etc.) 
at the time of submission.  
 An investigator who is a qualified physician will evaluate all adverse events according to the NCI Common Terminology for Adverse Events (CTCAE), version 5.0. Any adverse event which changes CTCAE grade over the course of a given episode will have each change of grade recorded on the adverse event case report forms/wo rksheets. All adverse events regardless of CTCAE grade must also be evaluated for seriousness.  
 
FDA Fax number of IND Safety Reports: 1 -(800) -FDA-1078.   
 
The IND sponsor will also make an assessment of whether the event constitutes an unanticipated problem posing risks to subjects or others (UP). This assessment will be provided to the Emory University IRB, which, in turn will make a final determination.  If the Emory IRB determines an event is a UP it will notify the appropriate regulatory 
agencies and institutional officials.  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 35 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
Participating subsites  
For participating subsites, adverse events collected are to be entered into OnCore no later than 14 calendar days 
after data collection. Subsites are not permitted to report directly to the coordinating center IRB or FDA. All 
external site SAEs are to be reported to the coordinating center multi- site regulatory specialist. The coordinating 
center multi -site regulatory specialist will facilitate submission of external site SAEs to the coordinating center 
IRB and FDA. All serious adverse events (SAEs) and other adverse events must be recorded on case report forms. In addition, all SAEs must be reported to the coordinating center principal investigator and coordinating center multi -site regulato ry specialist within 24 hours of knowledge of the event using the FDA MedWatch 3500A 
mandatory reporting form. Copies of de -identified source documentation pertaining to the SAE must be 
submitted to the coordinating center. If a patient is permanently with drawn from the study because of a SAE, 
this information must be included in the initial or follow -up form. All SAEs must be submitted to the local IRB per 
local IRB and institutional policy. Upon request of additional data or information that is deemed nec essary must 
be reported to the coordinating center as soon as possible but no later than 5 calendar days.  
 
16.3 The Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) /Independent Data Monitoring Committee 
(IDMC)  
The Independent Data monitoring Committee  (IDMC ) for this study is a part of the Winship Data Safety 
Monitoring Committee (DSMC). The DSMC functions independently within Winship Cancer Institute to conduct 
internal monitoring functions to ensure that research being conducted by Winship Cancer Institute Inv estigators 
produces high -quality scientific data in a manner consistent with good clinical practice (GCP) and appropriate 
regulations that govern clinical research. Depending on the risk level of the protocol, the DSMC review may occur every 6 months or an nually. For studies deemed High Risk, initial study monitoring will occur within 6 months 
from the date of the first subject accrued, with 2 of the first 5 subjects being reviewed. Subsequent monitoring will occur in routine intervals per the Winship Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP).  The  DSMC  will provide 
oversight for the conduct of this study  based upon access to unblinded study data  and will continuously monitor 
cumulative SAE provided by the PI on a monthly basis.  A planned analysis for futility will be submitted to the 
DSMC after accrual of 40 subjects. The  DSMC will meet in closed session with access to unblinded data  that will 
be provided by the study statistician.  
 The DSMC  will review pertinent aspects of the s tudy to assess subject safety, compliance with the protocol, data 
collection, and risk -benefit ratio. Specifically, the Winship Cancer Institute Internal Monitors assigned to the 
DSMC  may verify , using blinded data,  informed consent, eligibility, data entry, accuracy and availability of source 
documents, AEs/SAEs, and essential regulatory documents. Following the monitoring review, monitors will provide a preliminary report of monitoring findings to the PI and other pertinent individuals involved in the conduct of the study. The PI is required to address and respond to all the deficiencies noted in the preliminary 
report. Prior to the completion of the final summary report, monitors will discuss the preliminary report responses with the PI and other team mem bers (when appropriate). A final monitoring summary report will then 
be prepared by the monitor. Final DSMC review will include the final monitoring summary report with corresponding PI response, submitted CAPA (when applicable), PI Summary statement, and available aggregate toxicity and safety data.  The DSMC will render a recommendation and rating based on the overall trial conduct. The PI is responsible for ensuring that instances of egregious data insufficiencies are reported to the IRB. Continuing Revi ew submissions will include the DSMC recommendation letter. Should any revisions be made to 
the protocol -specific monitoring plan after initial DSMC approval, the PI will be responsible for notifying the 
DSMC of such changes. The Committee reserves the rig ht to conduct additional audits if necessary.  
Multisite Monitoring Plan  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 36 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 At the time of study initiation at a non -Emory site, the Emory Sponsor -Investigator, Winship regulatory specialist, 
and Winship MSC will perform a site initiation teleconference. During this teleconference, the Emory team will 
review the study, enrollment,  reporting, and regulatory compliance. Winship will have internal monitoring 
meetings. These meetings, which will include the participating site investigator, the clinical research coordinator 
and the regulatory affairs coordinator, will meet at least on a monthly basis to review and discuss study data to 
ensure subject safety. The research coordinators will maintain a spreadsheet which will be de -identified and will 
summarize all the patient data for subjects actively being treated on the trial as well as a roadmap detailing 
pending tests/treatments for each individual subject. The spreadsheet will be shared with the Emory PI via e-mail.  
 Winship’s MSC will perform an on -site or remote monitoring visit within the first three months of enrollment of 
the first subject. Quarterly monitoring visits will occur (once annually onsite and three times remotely) until subject follow -up is terminated. Monthly reviews of data in OnCore will be conducted to ensure compliance or 
identify discrepancies; specifically, to assess compliance with the protocol, verify informed consent forms, verify 
compliance with SAE reporting procedures, monitor the tracking of study drug (pharmacy visit, storage and 
accounting of study drug), retrieve regulatory documentation, and perform qu ality control by comparing data 
from the CRF to the source documents of the center.  
Study updates will occur at least once monthly between the PI at Emory and the research team at the participating site(s). The purpose of the meetings is to discuss the en rollment, regulatory updates, monitor 
toxicities, and evaluate the progress of the trial. Scheduled teleconferences may stop after all patients have completed assigned protocol therapy. The coordinating center (or designee) will communicate with participat ing 
sites via monthly email. The minutes from the teleconference will be maintained in the regulatory binder for the study. In addition, electronic copies will be sent via email to the principal investigators at each site . 
 
17.   Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Participants  
Participants will be assured of their voluntary participation in the study, their choice to answer or not answer any question, and the protocol for maintaining confidentiality.  
Participant  confidentiality  is strictly held in  trust by the participating investigators, their staff, and  the sponsor(s) 
and their agents. This confidentiality is  extended to cover  testing of  biological samples and  genetic  tests  in 
addition  to the clinical information relating to participants.  Therefore,  the study  protocol,  documentation,  data, 
and all other  information generated  will be  held  in strict  confidence. No  information  concerning the  study,  or 
the data  will be  released to  any unauthorized third party  without  prior written approval  of the sponsor. 
 The study  monitor,  other authorized representatives  of the  sponsor, representatives  of the IRB  or pharmaceutical 
company supplying study product  may inspect  all documents and records  required to be  maintained by the 
investigator, including but not limited to,  medical records (office,  clinic,  or hospital)  and pharmacy  records for 
the participants in this study. The  clinical study  site will permit access  to such  records.  
 The study  participant’s  contact information  will be  securely stored at  each clinical  site for internal use during the 
study. At  the end of the  study, all records  will continue to  be kept in  a secure  location for  as long a period as 
dictated by  local IRB and Institutional  regulations.  
 
Study participant research  data, which is  for purposes  of statistical analysis  and scientific reporting,  will be 
transmitted to  and stored. This  will not  include the  participant’s  contact  or identifying information. Rather, 
individual participants  and their research data will be identified by  a unique study identification number. The  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 37 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
study  data  entry  and study  management  systems  used by  clinical sites  and research staff will be  secured and 
password protected. At  the end of the  study, all study  databases  will be de -identified and  archived  
 
18.    Economic Burden to Participants  
The study supporter  will provide or pay for certain items and services the subject may receive in this study.  
Subjects will have to pay for the items or services for which the study supporter  does not pay. The sponsor will 
not pay for regular medical care. If subjects have insurance, Emory will submit claims to the insurance for items 
and services that the sponsor does not cover.  Emory will send in only those claims for items and services that it reasonably believes the insurance will pay and that the sponsor has not paid. The actual amount  that 
participants have to pay depends on whether or not they have health insurance and whether or not that insurance will pay for any research study costs. Generally, insurance companies will not pay for items and 
services that are required just for a research study. Some insurance companies will not pay for regular medical 
treatment or treatment for complications if in a study.  If subject do not have insurance, Emory will review that particular case as part of its program for low -income patient care.  Th e standard policies of that program will 
apply.  The program will figure out if subjects have to pay any costs for taking part in the study and what those costs will be . 
 
19.   Consent Process  
The initial informed consent discussion will occur in one of the Em ory Healthcare Hospitals  or the Emory Clinic.  
The consent discussion may take place in person, or by phone or video call. The informed consent is an ongoing, 
interactive process rather than a one -time information session. The consent form document is designed to begin 
the informed consent process, which provides the patient with ongoing explanations that will help them make educational decisions about whether to begin or continue participating in the trial. The research team knows that a written document alone may not ensure that the patient fully understands what participation means. Therefore, the research team will discuss with the patient the trial's purpose, procedures, risks and potential benefits, and their rights as a participant. The team will continue to update the patient on any new information 
that may affect their situation.  
 
Consent will be obtained prior to any research -driven procedures. The investigator will assess the patient’s 
capacity during his/her encounters with him or her. The investigator will give the person providing consent (the patient or a legally authorized re presentative) adequate opportunity to read the consent document before it is 
signed and dated.  It will be explained to prospective participants that the study involves research, the purpose 
of the research, the expected duration of participation, as well as the approximate number of participants to be enrolled. The study procedures, and identification of research procedures v. non -research will also be thoroughly 
discussed. It will be explained to participants that participation is voluntary and that the su bject may discontinue 
at any time.  
 Refusal to participate or withdraw will not involve a penalty or loss of benefits to which the participant is otherwise entitled. Refusal will in no way affect the participant's future are. The participant will also be told of 
the possible consequences of the decision to withdraw from the research, and procedures for orderly termination of participation.  
 Any significant new findings developed during the course of the research that may affect the participant's willingnes s to continue to participate will be provided. Also explained will be anticipated circumstances under 
which the subject's participation may be terminated by the investigator without the participant's consent.  
Prospective participants will be provided with a description of any reasonably foreseeable  risks or discomforts as 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 38 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
well as a description of any benefits to the participant or to others that might be reasons expected from the 
research. Alternative procedures or courses of treatment will also be thorough ly discussed.  Prospective 
participants will also be given detailed information describing the extent to which confidentiality of records identifying the participant will be maintained and what records may be examined by the research staff, IRBs, 
sponsor, their representatives, and possibly the FDA or OHRP.  
 
Also communicated to the participant will be an explanation that emergency medical care will be arranged for a study -related illness or injury, and an explanation of whether funds are set aside to pay fo r this care and/or 
compensation, and if so by whom (e.g., sponsor, subject, insurer). The participant is told the source of the study's funding.  All participants will be told of any additional costs that may result from participation in the research . 
 
Non -English -Speaking Participants    
A certified translator/interpreter will be present during the consenting process and this will be documented . All 
questions and concerns will be answered by one of the study  physician s with the aid of a certified 
translator/interpreter.  
An IRB -approved Short Form in that specific language will be used.  We will use what's available on Emory IRB 
website. For the languages that are not available, we will have the short form translated to  that language and 
submit the IRB for review and approval prior to use.  Process to Document Consent in Writing: Winship SOP 2.1:  
”Obtaining Informed consent for Interventional clinical trial” will be followed . 
Participants  who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)    
N/A 
Cognitively Impaired Adults    
A legally authorized representative may take part in the informed consent discussion and sign the consent form on behalf of the patient  
Adults Unable to Consent    
A legally authorized representative may take part in the informed consent discussion sign the consent form on behalf of the patient  
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (consent will not be obtained, required information will not be disclosed,  or the research involves deception)  
N/A 
 
20.    Setting  
The study will begin  at Emory University and will seek to open at one or more secondary site institutions . 
 
21.   Resources Available  
 
Emory University was founded in 1836 and is a national center for teaching, research, and service. Emory 
University has been named as one of the nation’s top 25 universities for more than a decade by the U.S. News and World Report. Emory University researc h partners include the Georgia Institute of Technology, the University 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 39 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
of Georgia, Morehouse School of Medicine, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Children's 
Healthcare of Atlanta, and the Georgia Clinical and Translational Science Alliance (GACTSA). Emory University researchers received $734 million from external funding agencies in fiscal year 2018, including approximately $441 million in funding from federal agencies, $359 million of this from the National Institutes of Health (NIH).  
 Winship Cancer Institute (Winship)  is Georgia's first and only National Cancer Institute (NCI) -designated 
Comprehensive Cancer Center (P30CA138292) and is dedicated to the integration of innovative clinical and basic science research with outstanding patie nt care for the prevention, treatment and control of cancer. First 
designated in 2009, Winship’s NCI designation was renewed in 2012 and 2016, achieving an “outstanding” rating. Winship earned the prestigious Comprehensive Cancer Center designation from th e NCI in 2016, after 
demonstrating that its outstanding programs are reducing the cancer burden on the state of Georgia through research conducted in its laboratories, its clinical trial program, and its population -based science. The 
institutional support for Winship was rated as ‘exceptional’ by the review panel.  
The Winship Clinic Building C  houses the primary offices and clinical space for cancer services including the 
medical oncology, hematology, and surgical oncology clinics, the radiation oncology program, and the Winship Ambulatory Infusion Center.  In summer 2017, Emory Healthcare completed the expansion of Emory University Hospital Tower  on Clifton Road. This nine -floor facility adds 144 inpatient beds to the hospital, of which more 
than 80% are dedicated to cancer care. The hospital expansion also accommodates cancer patient -specific 
intensive care units, an expanded BMT Unit with peri -transplant clinics to facilitate continuity of care, and a 24 -
hour cancer urgent care center, which serves as both a triage facility and short stay treatment center for patients with cancer -related medic al concerns.  
 
22.   Multi- Site Research when Emory is the Lead Site   
 All sites will have the current protocol document and each IRB will review each site’s consent form and all required approvals will be obtained at each site.  Any protocol modifications will be communicated to all sites with the appropriate regulatory agencies notified for their respective reviews and approvals.  All engaged participating sites will safeguard date, including secure transmission of data, as required by local information secur ity policies.  All local site investigators will conduct the study in accordance with applicable federal 
regulations and local laws.  All non -compliance with the study protocol or applicable requirements will be 
reported in accordance with local policy.   
 
Site initiation at subsites  
At the time of study initiation at a subsite, the coordinating center multi -site coordinator  (with additional staff 
as needed) will perform a site initiation teleconference. During this teleconference, the Emory team will revie w 
the study, enrollment, reporting, and regulatory compliance.   
Subsite data collection  
Subsite data must be submitted to the coordinating center multi- site coordinator as outlined in the protocol -
specific monitoring plan. The protocol- specific monitoring  plan will be provided by the coordinating center multi-
site coordinator to external participating prior to site activation. Access to the coordinating center OnCore database will be provided to external participating sites for direct electronic data entry . All data submitted must 
be accompanied by supporting source documents, where applicable and as outlined in the protocol -specific 
monitoring plan. All data must be entered in the timeframe required at each site, but no later than 14 days following registration and each visit completion. All queries are to be resolved within 4 weeks of issue. The coordinating center multi- site coordinator will provide OnCore training and request access to the appropriate 
staff at the participating site.  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 40 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
Monthly investigato r conference calls  
The subsite research coordinators will maintain a spreadsheet which will be de -identified and will summarize 
patient data for subjects actively being treated on the trial well as a roadmap detailing pending tests/treatments 
for each individual subject. The spreadsheet will be shared with the coordinating center PI / IND sponsor (or 
designee) via e -mail. Teleconferences will be conducted at least once monthly between the PI (or designee) at 
Emory and the research team at the participating site(s).   The purpose of the meetings is to discuss the enrollment, regulatory updates, monitor toxicities, and evaluate the progress of the trial. Scheduled teleconferences may stop after all patients have completed assigned protocol therapy. The coordinating center (or designee) will communicate with participating sites via monthly email.  
The minutes from the teleconference will be maintained in the regulatory binder for the study. In addition electronic copies will be sent via email to the research tea ms at subsite.   
 
Monitoring  
Clinical site monitoring is conducted to ensure that the rights and well-being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial follows the currently approved protocol/amendment(s), with GCP, and with applicable regulatory requirement(s).  
 
Subsite self -monitoring : The participating site will have internal monitoring meetings. These meetings which will 
include the participating site investigator (or designee), the clinical research coordinator and the regulatory affairs coordinator as applicable, will meet at least on a monthly basis to review and discuss study data to ensure subject safety. Chart reviews will be performed on selected cases by participating site staff to confirm that the data collection is accurate regarding study conduct, data collection, documentation and completion.  
 
Central monitoring : Study -specific monitoring plans are specified per site, with the only difference between s ites 
whether the site submits source data on paper or provides the coordinating center multi -site team remote access 
to that site’s local electronic medical record.  Centralized monitoring will occur minimally quarterly, no more frequently than monthly. Mo nitoring will be centralized, including data reporting and research sample 
acquisition. The coordinating center multi -site coordinator will perform on -site and/or remote monitoring visit 
within the first three months of enrollment of the first subject. Qua rterly monitoring visits will occur (on site up 
to once per year and at least three times remotely) until subject follow- up is terminated. Monthly reviews of 
data will be conducted to ensure compliance or identify discrepancies; specifically, t o assess com pliance with the 
protocol, verify informed consent forms, verify compliance with SAE reporting procedures, monitor the tracking 
of study drug (pharmacy visit, storage and accounting of study drug), retrieve regulatory documentation, and 
perform quality control by comparing data from the CRF to the  source documents of the center.  
 
Auditing 
For sites with an auditing mechanism in place that are able to share documentation of their auditing standards and processes followed, an agreement may be requested for the site to perform local auditing and provide formal audit reports to the coordinating center.  
  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 41 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
 
23.   References  
 
1. X. Li, S. Xu, M. Yu, K. Wang, Y. Tao, Y. Zhou, J. Shi, M. Zhou, B. Wu, Z. Yang, C. Zhang, J. Yue, Z. Zhang, H. Renz, 
X. Liu, J. Xie, M. Xie, J. Zhao, Risk factors for severity and mortality in adult COVID -19 inpatients in Wuhan., J. 
Allergy Clin. Immunol.  (2020), doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2020.04.006.  
2. D. Wang, B. Hu, C. Hu, F. Zhu, X. Liu, J. Zhang, B. Wang, H. Xiang, Z. Cheng, Y. Xiong, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Wang, Z. 
Peng, Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients with 2019 Novel Coronavirus -Infect ed Pneumonia in 
Wuhan, China, JAMA - J. Am. Med. Assoc. 323, 1061 –1069 (2020).  
3. H. Shi, X. Han, N. Jiang, Y. Cao, O. Alwalid, J. Gu, Y. Fan, C. Zheng, Radiological findings from 81 patients with 
COVID -19 pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study, La ncet Infect. Dis.  20, 425 –434 (2020).  
4. W. Zhao, Z. Zhong, X. Xie, Q. Yu, J. Liu, Relation Between Chest CT Findings and Clinical Conditions of 
Coronavirus Disease (COVID -19) Pneumonia: A Multicenter Study, Am. J. Roentgenol. , 1–6 (2020).  
5. M. Delaunay,  J. Cadranel, A. Lusque, N. Meyer, V. Gounaut, D. Moro -Sibilot, J. M. Michot, J. Raimbourg, N. 
Girard, F. Guisier, D. Planchard, A. C. Metivier, P. Tomasini, E. Dansin, M. Pérol, M. Campana, O. Gautschi, M. 
Früh, J. D. Fumet, C. Audigier -Valette, S. Couraud, S. Dalle, M. T. Leccia, M. Jaffro, S. Collot, G. Prévot, J. Milia, 
J. Mazieres, Immune -checkpoint inhibitors associated with interstitial lung disease in cancer patients, Eur. 
Respir. J.  50 (2017), doi:10.1183/13993003.00050 -2017.  
6. P. Mehta, D. F. McA uley, M. Brown, E. Sanchez, R. S. Tattersall, J. J. Manson, COVID -19: consider cytokine storm 
syndromes and immunosuppression, Lancet  395, 1033 –1034 (2020).  
7. S. P. Treon, J. Castillo, A. P. Skarbnik, J. D. Soumerai, I. M. Ghobrial, M. L. Guerrera, K. E. Meid, G. Yang, The 
BTK- inhibitor ibrutinib may protect against pulmonary injury in COVID -19 infected patients, Blood  (2020), 
doi:10.1182/blood.2020006288.  
8. I. W. Flinn, P. Hillmen, M. Montillo, Z. Nagy, Á. Illés, G. Etienne, J. Delgado, B. J. Kuss, C. S. Tam, Z. Gasztonyi, F. 
Offner, S. Lunin, F. Bosch, M. S. Davids, N. Lamanna, U. Jaeger, P. Ghia, F. Cymbalista, C. A. Portell, A. P. Skarbnik, A. F. Cashen , D. T. Weaver, V. M. Kelly, B. Turnbull, S. Stilgenbauer, The phase 3 DUO trial: Duvelisib  vs 
ofatumumab in relapsed and refractory CLL/SLL, Blood  132, 2446 –2455 (2018).  
9. C. T. Petersen, M. Hassan, A. B. Morris, J. Jeffery, K. Lee, N. Jagirdar, A. D. St aton, S. S. Raikar, H. T. Spencer, T. 
Sulchek, C. R. Flowers, E. K. Waller, Improving T -cell expansion and function for adoptive T -cell therapy using 
ex vivo treatment with PI3Kδ inhibitors and VIP antagonists, Blood Adv. 2, 210 –223 (2018).  
10. I. W. Flinn , C. B. Miller, K. M. Ardeshna, S. Tetreault, S. E. Assouline, J. Mayer, M. Merli, S. D. Lunin, A. R. 
Pettitt, Z. Nagy, O. Tournilhac, K. E. Abou -Nassar, M. Crump, E. D. Jacobsen, S. De Vos, V. M. Kelly, W. Shi, L. 
Steelman, N. D. Le, D. T. Weaver, S. Lustgarten, N. D. Wagner -Johnston, P. L. Zinzani, DYNAMO: A Phase II study 
of duvelisib  (IPI-145) in patients with refractory indolent non -hodgkin lymphoma, J. Clin. Oncol. 37, 912 –922 
(2019).  
11. D. G. Winkler, K. L. Faia, J. P. Dinitto, J. A. Ali, K. F. Whit e, E. E. Brophy, M. M. Pink, J. L. Proctor, J. Lussier, C. 
M. Martin, J. G. Hoyt, B. Tillotson, E. L. Murphy, A. R. Lim, B. D. Thomas, J. R. MacDougall, P. Ren, Y. Liu, L. S. Li, K. A. Jessen, C. C. Fritz, J. L. Dunbar, J. R. Porter, C. Rommel, V. J. Palom bella, P. S. Changelian, J. L. Kutok, PI3K -
δ and PI3K -γ inhibition by IPI- 145 abrogates immune responses and suppresses activity in autoimmune and 
inflammatory disease models, Chem. Biol.  20, 1364 –1374 (2013).  
12. B. L. Lampson, S. N. Kasar, T. R. Matos, E. A. Morgan, L. Rassenti, M. S. Davids, D. C. Fisher, A. S. Freedman, C. 
A. Jacobson, P. Armand, J. S. Abramson, J. E. Arnason, T. J. Kipps, J. Fein, S. Fernandes, J. Hanna, J. Ritz, H. T. Kim, J. R. Brown, Idelalisib given front -line for treatment of chro nic lymphocytic leukemia causes frequent 
immune -mediated hepatotoxicity, Blood  128, 195 –203 (2016).  
13. K. Patel, A. V. Danilov, J. M. Pagel, Duvelisib  for CLL/SLL and follicular non -Hodgkin lymphoma, Blood  134, 
1573– 1577 (2019).  
14. C. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Ren, J. Zhao, Y. Hu, L. Zhang, G. Fan, J. Xu, X. Gu, Z. Cheng, T. Yu, J. Xia, Y. Wei, W. 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 42 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
Wu, X. Xie, W. Yin, H. Li, M. Liu, Y. Xiao, H. Gao, L. Guo, J. Xie, G. Wang, R. Jiang, Z. Gao, Q. Jin, J. Wang, B. Cao, 
Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China, Lancet  395, 497 –506 (2020).  
15. J. M. Sanders, M. L. Monogue, T. Z. Jodlowski, J. B. Cutrell, Pharmacologic Treatments for Coronavirus Disease 
2019 (COVID- 19): A Review., Jama  2019  (2020), doi:10.1001/jama.2020.6 019.  
16. Clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) when COVID -19 disease is suspected. 
Interim guidance from the World Health Organization  13 March 2020  
17. B. Diao, C. Wang, Y. Tan, X. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Ning, L. Chen, M. Li, Y. Liu, G. Wang, Z. F. Zilin Yuan1, Y. Wu, Y. 
Chen, Reduction and Functional Exhaustion of T Cells in Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 ( COVID -19 ), 
medRxiv  2019 , 1–14 (2020).  
18. Lewis C. Cantley, The Phosphoinositide 3 -Kinase Pathway, Science (80 -. ). 296, 1655 –1658 (2002).  
19. K. Okkenhaug, Two birds with one stone: Dual p110δ and p110γ inhibition, Chem. Biol. 20, 1309 –1310 (2013).  
20. B. Vanhaesebroeck, J. Guillermet -Guibert, M. Graupera, B. Bilanges, The emerging mechanisms of isoform -
specific PI3K signalling, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.  11, 329 –341 (2010).  
21. G. J. W. Van Der Windt, D. O’Sullivan, B. Everts, S. C. C. Huang, M. D. Buck, J. D. Curtis, C. H. Chang, A. M. 
Smith, T . Ai, B. Faubert, R. G. Jones, E. J. Pearce, E. L. Pearce, CD8 memory T cells have a bioenergetic advantage 
that underlies their rapid recall ability, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 14336– 14341 (2013).  
22. D. A. Fruman, H. Chiu, B. D. Hopkins, S. Bag rodia, L. C. Cantley, R. T. Abraham, Leading Edge The PI3K Pathway 
in Human Disease, Cell 170, 605 –635 (2017).  
23. D. K. Finlay, E. Rosenzweig, L. V. Sinclair, F. C. Carmen, J. L. Hukelmann, J. Rolf, A. A. Panteleyev, K. Okkenhaug, 
D. A. Cantrell, PDK1 reg ulation of mTOR and hypoxia- inducible factor 1 integrate metabolism and migration of 
CD8+ T cells, J. Exp. Med.  209, 2441 –2453 (2012).  
24. J. Rolf, M. Zarrouk, D. K. Finlay, M. Foretz, B. Viollet, D. A. Cantrell, AMPKα1: A glucose sensor that controls 
CD8 T-cell memory, Eur. J. Immunol. 43, 889 –896 (2013).  
25. J. L. Hukelmann, K. E. Anderson, L. V Sinclair, K. M. Grzes, A. B. Murillo, P. T. Hawkins, L. R. Stephens, A. I. 
Lamond, The cytotoxic T cell proteome and its shaping by mammalian Target of Rapamycin,  Nat. Immunol.  17, 
104–112 (2016).  
26. R. J. Salmond, mTOR regulation of glycolytic metabolism in T cells, Front. Cell Dev. Biol.  6, 1–9 (2018).  
27. K. Patel, A. Danilov, J. M. Pagel, Duvelisib  for CLL/SLL and Follicular Non -Hodgkin Lymphoma, Blood  134, 
blood.2019001795 (2019).  
28. Flinn IW, O'Brien S, Kahl B, et al. Duvelisib, a novel oral dual inhibitor of PI3K -δ,γ, is clinically active in advanced 
hematologic malignancies,  Blood 131, 877 –887 (2018).  
29. Horwitz SM, Koch R, Porcu P, et al. Activity of the PI3K -δ,γ inhibitor duvelisib  in a phase 1 trial and preclinical 
models of T -cell lymphoma.  Blood , 131, 888 –898 (2018).  
30. Ge M, Durham LK, and Meyer DR. Covariate- adjusted difference in proportions from clinical trials using logistic 
regression and weighted risk differences. Drug Information Journal 2011;45:481- 493.  
 
 
  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 43 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
 
APPENDIX A  :   Clinical diagnosis  of severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) when 
COVID -19 disease is suspected - Interim guidance (16) 
 
 
 
Validated definition for severe diseas e (https://covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/overview/management -
ofcovid -19/) is based on  the following : 
  
Confirmed SARS -CoV-2 infection (by PCR test) with fever or suspected respiratory infection, plus one of 
the following:  
 
a. respiratory rate > 30 breaths/ min;  
b. severe respiratory distress; or  
c. SpO2 ≤ 93% on room air  at sea level or PaO 2/FiO 2< 300.  
 
 
APPENDIX B: POTENT INHIBITORS AND INDUCERS OF CYP3A4 (FDA reference 2014)  
   
Effect on CYP3A   Drug Class  Medications  
Moderate to Strong 
CYP3A Inhibitors  Antibiotics  chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, 
clarithromycin, erythromycin, telithromycin 
Antiemetic  aprepitant  
Antifungals  ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole, 
posaconazole, voriconazole 
Antiviral protease inhibitors  amprenavir, atazanavir, boceprevir, 
cobicistat, darunavir, elvitegravir, fosamprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir, 
nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, telaprevir, 
tenofovir, tipranavir  
Calcium -channel blockers  diltiazem, mibifradil, verapamil  
Foods/herbs  grapefruit, grapefruit juice, Seville oranges  
Serotonin antagonist  nefazodone  
Tyrosine kinase inhibitor  imatinib  
Vasopressin antagonist  conivaptan  
Moderate to Strong 
CYP3A Inducers  Antibiotics  nafcillin, rifampin  
Anticonvulsants  carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin  
Antiviral reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors  efavirenz, etravirine  
Endothelin receptor antagonist  bosentan  
Foods/herbs  St. John’s wort  
Wakefulness -promoting agent  modafinil  
 
 
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 44 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
APPENDIX C: CYP450 Substrates (FDA reference 2019)  
 
CYP enzyme  Sensitive substrates  Moderate ly sensitive 
substrates  
CYP1A2  alosetron, caffeine, duloxetine, melatonin, 
ramelteon, tasimelteon, tizanidine  clozapine, pirfenidone, 
ramosetron, theophylline  
CYP2B6  bupropion  efavirenz  
CYP2C8  repaglinide  montelukast, pioglitazone, 
rosiglitazone  
CYP2C9  celecoxib glimepiride, phenytoin, 
tolbutamide, warfarin  
CYP2C19  S-mephenytoin, omeprazole diazepam, lansoprazole, 
rabeprazole, voriconazole  
CYP2D6  atomoxetine, desipramine, dextromethorphan , 
eliglustat, nebivolol, nortriptyline, perphenazine, 
tolterodine, R -venlafaxine encainide, imipramine, 
metoprolol, propafenone, propranolol, tramadol, 
trimipramine, S -venlafaxine  
 
  
APPENDIX D: CYP3A  Substrates (FDA reference 2019)  
 
CYP enzyme  Sensitive substrates  Moderate ly sensitive 
substrates  
CYP3A  alfentanil, avanafil, buspirone, conivaptan, 
darifenacin, darunavir, ebastine, everolimus, 
ibrutinib, lomitapide, lovastatin, midazolam, 
naloxegol, nisoldipine, saquinavir, simvastatin, 
sirolimus, tacrolimus, tipranavir, triazolam, 
vardenafil  alprazolam, aprepitant, atorvastatin, colchicine, 
eliglustat, pimozide, rilpivirine, 
rivaroxaban, tadalafil  
 
  
APPENDIX E: Immunomodulator and Immunosuppressant  
 
Class Medication  
IL6 inhibitors  Tocilizumab, sarilumab, siltuximab 
TNF i nhibitors Adalimumab, certolizumab pegol, etanercept, golimumab, infliximab  
Anti-IL-1 agents  Anakinra, canakinumab, rilonacept  
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 45 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
JAK inhibitors  Baricitinib, fedratinib, ruxolitinib, tofacitinib, upadacitinib 
 
APPENDIX F: Drug Accountability Form  
 
         
 
 
 
 
            
     
 
 
  Study ID:  
[Drug ] Pill Record  
 Subject Initials:  ___          Subject ID: _____                    
   
Instructions :                   
Planned Daily Dose:  __mg        
  
Day Date  Time  # of Tablets taken  Comments  
1        
2        
3        
4        
5        
6        
7        
8        
9        
10     
11     
12     
13     
14     
15     
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 46 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
APPENDIX G: Procedure protocol for analysis of T cells 
 
Procedure Protocol for Analysis of T -Cells for Protocol  Duvelisib  Antagonizes  Manifestations of Pneumonia 
in Established Novel Coronavirus Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
 
 
Cryopreservation with CryoStor Media: 
1. Suspend cells to be cryopreserved using mechanical  or enzymatic dissociation.  
2. Centrifuge cells to obtain cell pellet.  
3. Remove supernatant.  
Note: Remove as much culture medium as possible to reduce dilution of the CryoStor medium.  
4. Isolation - Add cold (2 –8 °C) CryoStor medium to a cell concentratio n range of 0.5 –10x106 cells/ml  
for standard cell culture protocols. A higher cell concentration is possible with testing.  
Note: CryoStor media contain DMSO, no additives are necessary.  
5. Pre -freeze - Incubate cell suspension at 2 –8 °C for ~10 minutes.  
6. Nucleation – Lower sample temperature to –80 °C.  
a. Use a controlled rate freezer ( –1 °C /minute) or similar procedure for most mammalian cell  
systems. 
b. The freezer should be pre -cooled to 2 –8 °C.  
c. Ice nucleation within the sample (seeding)  should be initiated at approximately – 5 °C using  
a liquid nitrogen burst program setting on the controlled rate freezer or mechanical agitation  
(flick or tap) of the cryovial/sample container after 15 –20 minutes at – 80 °C.  
 Alternative Nucleation Procedur es – cells can be frozen using stepwise freezing procedures.  
Stepwise freezing procedures include:  
a. 2 hours at –20 °C followed by 2 hours at – 80 °C or  
b. 3–4 hours at – 80 °C in an isopropanol freezing container. The isopropanol container should be pre -cooled 
to 2–8 °C 
Ice nucleation - mechanical agitation (flick or tap) of the cryovial/sample container after 15 –20 minutes at –
80 °C.  
7. Storage – Store the samples at liquid nitrogen temperatures (below – 130 °C).  
Note: Sample storage at –80 °C is only recom mended.  
8. Thawing - Thaw samples quickly in a 37 °C water bath. Sample should be thawed with gentle swirling of the 
sample until all visible ice has melted. Thaw time for a 1 ml sample in a cryovial is ~3 minutes. Note: DO NOT 
allow sample to warm above c hilled temperatures (0 –10 °C). Cryovials should be cool to the touch when removed 
from the water bath. Passive thaw is not recommended.  
9. Dilute cell/CryoStor mixture immediately with appropriate culture medium. This can be performed in a single 
step. The dilution medium should be between 20 –37 °C. A dilution ratio of 1:10 (sample: medium) or greater is 
recommended.  
10. Plate cells appropriately.  
11. Culture the cells or use immediately.  
 
Shipment:  
Patient samples from secondary sites  will be shipped in r eal-time overnight on Monday -Wednesday so that 
samples will be received no later than Friday. Each sample will be shipped on adequate amounts of dry ice.  Emory University will cover the cost for shipment of the patient samples  
   
Protocol Title :  Duvelisib  Ameliorates  Manifestations of Pneumonia in Established Novel Coronavirus  
Infection (DAMPEN -CI) 
Page 47 of 47 Protocol Version: VERSION NUMBER 3. 3 30-JUNE -2021  
 
APPENDIX H: Table to guide  the IDMC  during  review of potential toxicity in the 
duvelisib arm at the time of the interim safety analysis  
 
Table 1: Approximate probability of observing excess instances of mechanical ventilation or 
death in the duvelisib treatment arm at the time of the interim analysis.  
 
 
 
