 
Integrated Cognitive Behavior Therapy to Improve Work Outcomes in Schizophrenia  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
May 14, 2017  
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 1 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  CMCVAMC SPECIFIC PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
Corporal Michael J. Crescenz Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center (CMCVAMC)  
Institutional Review Board (IRB)  
 
A. Protocol Title  
1. Integrated Cognitive Behavior Therapy to Improve Work Outcomes in Schizophrenia  
(Short Name: BEST Vet – Building Employment Skills through Therapy for Veterans)  
 
2. Date of Protocol Summary and Version #: Date 05/04 /2017 ; Version # 17 
 
B. Principal Investigator’s Full  Name and Degree:  Steven Sayers, Ph.D.  
 
C. Co-Investigator’s Full Name and Degree :  Paul Grant, Ph.D.  
 
D. Financial Sponsor  (Provide the name of the agency, organization, company or person providing 
funds for the research study.)  VA Rehabilitation R&D   
 
E. Grant (Provide the name of individual who holds the grant and the grant number, if applicable .) 
Steven L. Sayers, Ph.D ., grant number D1157 -R 
 
F. Protocol Number (Provide the financial sponsor’s protocol number, if applicable.)   D1157 -R   
 
G. Institution(s) responsible for the project:  
1. For single -site studies - CMCVAMC  is the only institution involved.  Yes   No  
2. For multi -center studies.  
2.1. CMCVAMC  is the Coordinating Center in which the PI is the lead investigator.  Yes   
No   N/A    
2.2. Provide the name of the Coordinating Center.  Yes   No   N/A  
2.3. List the name of the other sites involved.   Not Applicable.  
2.4. Provide the FWA numbers for each of the other sites involved.  Not Applicable.  
 
THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION MUST BE CMCVAMC -SPECIFIC, THAT IS, SPECIFIC TO WHAT 
WILL BE DONE WITH CMCVAMC -RECRUITED VETERANS . 
 
H. Background and Significance (Describe succinctly and clearly the past findings which justify the 
plan for this project.  A summary of the relevant literature in the area of interest and reports of 
previous studies should be included.) :   1Between two and three million American adults 
currently suffer from schizophrenia.2 The modal onset occurs in early adulthood, and ro ughly 
two-thirds of affected individuals experience a chronic or fluctuating course of illness.3 This 
latter group is amongst the most expensive receiving psychiatric services, with the overall 
direct treatment costs and indirect costs incurred due to unemployment and lost productivity 
approaching $63 bil lion in the United States .1 Although antipsychotic medications have been 
readily available for more than half a century, the impact of these agents on functional 
outcomes has been modest, even when medication regimes have been optimized.4 By 
contrast, psychiatric rehabilitation programs have been shown to improve psychosocial 
functioning.5 Vocational rehabilitation services, in particular supported employment (SE),  
have the best evidence base. As compared to those patients not participating in such 
services, patients successfully engaged in SE are more likely to be working competitive jobs, 
working full time, earning higher wages, and reporting a higher quality of l ife.6 Furthermore, 
steady employment has been shown to generate significant savings in the use of mental 
health services use compared to patients who are minimally employed.7 Given the impressive 
benefits of SE programs, it is disappointing that so few eligible patients agree to participate in 
them. Patients who do not engage in treatment achieve the poorest outcomes,8 have the 
lowest quality of life, and are at risk for symptom exacerbation, recurring hospitalization, 
persistent homelessness, violence toward others, and suicide.9 Indeed, “providing appealing 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 2 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  and effective treatment to those who could derive bene fit but who choose to avoid treatment 
remains an ongoing challenge”9 in schizophrenia.  
 
Our group has responded to this challenge by developing a new integrated Cognitive 
Behavior Therapy (iCBT) protocol designed for low functioning patients with schizophrenia 
who are not participating in psychiatric rehabilitation services such as SE. It is pragmatic, 
multimodal, recovery -oriented, and extends to some of the most challenging patients (e.g., 
those with the predominant negative symptoms and/or low insight). Our recent article in the 
Archives of General Psychiatry  demonstrates that this approach  is efficacious at improving 
functional outcomes and increasing motivation relative to standard treatment when delivered 
by PhD therapists in a university setting.10 The current proposal aims to compare usual care 
to iCBT to see if there are differences in their ability to improve work outcomes achieved by 
VA patients with schizophrenia enrolled in SE. Not being enrolled in SE or being enrolled but 
not active both produce little benefit. The goal of adding iCBT or usual care  is to increase the 
patients’ motivation to achieve  their own recovery goals and direct their own engagement in 
constructive activity such as utilization of SE .  
 
I. Purpose of the Project  (Clearly provide the purpose of this research project.) : The objective of the 
current proposal is to improve work outcome s and functional outcomes of veterans with 
functional disability who are not participating in psychiatric rehabilitation services that are 
available to them.  
 
J. Describe the Research Questions or Hypotheses  (that is, what questions are you trying to 
address by conducting the research. ): The objective of the current proposal is to evaluate 
whether iCBT vs. treatment as usual  can improve engagement and success in an existing SE 
program among the most functionally disabled patients with schizophrenia.   
 
K. Primary Outcome Variable(s)  (Define the primary outcome variable(s) used to support the study 
objectives (e.g. if the objective is to show that treatment A is superior to treatment B in the treatment 
of subjects with essential hypertension, the primary outcome var iable is blood pressure 
measurement.) : Our primary specific aim  is to determine whether iCBT will significantly 
improve work outcomes at post -treatment to a greater extent than usual care  in low 
functioning patients with schizophrenia who are enrolled in SE. The primary outcome 
measure s are several work -related indices of work participation across the 18 months of 
active study involvement, including the following: 1) instances of job attainment, 2) average 
days  worked per week while employed, 3) average number of hours worked  per week while 
employed , 3) total weeks worked  , and 4) a composite of these indices .  
 
L. Secondary Outcome Variable(s)  (Define the secondary outcome variables. Such measured 
variables should also include the timing of measurement.) : The second trial outcome measure s 
will include the Work behavior Inventory (WBI) and the Specific Levels of Functioning Scale  
(SLOF). A significant ITT difference on the WBI and the total SLOF score across 6 and 12 
months would support the hypothesis that ICB T is more efficacious than usual care at 
improving functioning by the end of treatment (Secondary Aim 1). Similarly, WBI score and 
the SLOF total score at 18 months is a secondary outcome, and the separate ITT effects on 
functioning at 18 months with the r espective month -treatment interaction in favor of iCBT 
would support the hypothesis that it promotes better functioning than usual care during the 6 
months after the completion of treatment (Secondary Aim 3).   
 
M. Study Design and Methods:  
1. Is this a clinical trial?        YES     NO  (Rando mized non -drug/non -medical devic e 
intervention)  
1.1. If yes, what type?  Check all that apply.   
  Phase I        Phase II            Phase III        Phase IV  
1.2. If yes, this study must be registered on Clinicaltrials.gov . 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 3 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  2. Design  
2.1. What research methods will be used in the project?  Check all that apply.  
 Surveys/Questionnaires   Interviews                        Audio Taping  
 Behavioral Observations   Chart Reviews                 Video Taping  
 Focus Groups   Randomization   Double -Blind  
 Control Group   Placebo   Withhold/Delay Treat ment  
 Specimen Collection   Deception   Telephone Survey  
 Other (Describe)    
2.2. Describe how randomization or other treatment assignment will be made.   
Randomization will occur on a 1:1 basis to one of the two study conditions (iCBT 
or usual care ) using a permuted block randomization with randomly varying 
block sizes of 2, 4 and 6 and stratification by gender (because females with 
schizophrenia have a better course and may respond better to traditional CBT). 
The study biostatistician  will generate randomization lists based on the above 
procedure. The encrypted randomization file will be located on a server (i.e.,  
\\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT  to Improve 
Work ) that is not accessible to the study personnel who make subject contact 
during the randomization  procedure. S/He  will access the file and provide the 
randomization token.  S/He  will not have subject  contact nor know which 
condition is being assigned. Further, s/he does not have a stake in the outcome 
of the study.  
2.3. For retrospective research studies, provide the “look -back” period.  (e.g., December 1, 
1999 through December 31, 2008.)  Not Applicable.  
 
3. Study Duration  
3.1. Provide the estimated length of time to enroll all subjects and complete the study.  To 
allow that not all identified patients will qualify and not all qualifying patients will 
elect to participate, we will conduct more baseline  screening s than required. We 
propose, accordingly, to consent to the baseline assessment 48 patients in the 
first year of the study (months 6 to 12), 96 patients in the second year (months 13 
to 24), and 48 patients in the third year (months 25 to 30), producing 24  
randomized patients in year 1, 48 in year 2, and 24 in year 3, for an estimated total 
of 96 randomized subjects  (48 per group). All 96 subjects  will be randomized by 
middle of the third year.  Data collection will be complete after the middle of the 
fourt h year.  
3.2. Explain the expected duration of subject participation including any follow -up. iCBT will 
be delivered as a group  therapy for 12 months of weekly or biweekly sessions 
(see below). Usual care (and iCBT) will entail continued access to all treatmen ts 
available to all Veterans receiving treatment at the CMC VAMC Mental Health 
Clinical without restriction. Blind, reliable independent assessors , who are part of 
the study team,  will reassess participants every 6 months after participants begin 
treatment  over a n 18-month participation period, producing mid -treatment (6 
month) end -of-treatment (12 month), and post -treatment (18 month) assessments.   
3.3. Specify the projected date of completion of the proposed study.  We plan to complete 
the study at the end of fiscal  year 2018 .  
 
4. Drug Information  (If not applicable state, “Not Applicable.”) Not Applicable.  
4.1. Specify if the drug or biological agent is:   
4.1.1.  FDA approved        
4.1.2.  Used for off -label purposes       
4.1.3.  Not yet FDA approved .       
4.2. Include the FDA Investigational New Drug (IND) number for all non -FDA approved and 
off-label drugs, biological agents or nutritional supplements.  If not applicable state, “Not 
Applicable.”        
4.3. Provide all relevant information about the  drug       
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 4 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  4.4. Explain any wash -out periods, rescue medications permitted and any type of 
medications not permitted while enrolled in the study.        
4.5. Describe blinding and un -blinding procedures.         
4.6. Include the dosage, route of administration, previous use, and the safety and efficacy 
information on any drug used for research purposes.       
4.7. Describe rationale for the dosage in this study.        
4.8. Justify why the risks are reasonable in relation to anticipated benefits and/or knowledge. 
      
4.9. Describe where drug preparation will be done.       
4.10.  All drugs for CMCVAMC  subjects must be dispensed through the VA investigational 
pharmacy.       
4.11.  Describe where the study treatment will be administered.       
4.12.  Describe plan for tracking a non -compliant treatment study subject.       
4.13.  Summarize any pre -clinical data.       
4.14.  Describe the process for the storage, security, dispensing and return of an 
investigational drug.       
 
5. Investigational Device  (If not applicable state, “Not Applicable.”)  Not Applicable.  
5.1. The Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) number must be submitted for all significant 
risk devices and if an IDE exists for a non -significant device.       
5.2. Significant R isk or Non -significant Risk - If a device is not approved by the FDA, specify 
whether or not the sponsor has determined this device to be a “significant risk” or “non -
significant risk” as defined by the FDA.       
5.3. Provide all relevant information about the device.       
5.4. Describe blinding and un -blinding procedures.        
5.5. Specify if device is:   
5.5.1.  FDA approved       
5.5.2.  Used for off -label purposes       
5.5.3.  Not yet FDA approved.       
5.6. Explain if the investigational device will be delivered and/or stored by the Principal 
Investigator or Pharmacy Services.        
5.7. Describe the process for the storage, security, dispe nsing and return of an 
investigational device.       
5.8. For research involving an investigational device, describe the SOP or plan for device 
control.       
5.9. Address how the device will be stored in such a way that only research staff associated 
with the protocol will have access to the device.       
5.10.  Describe measures that will be put into place to ensure that the device will only be used 
in participants of this research protocol.       
 
N. Does this project involve international research?    YES NO    
1. For further instructions refer to VHA Directive 2005 -050, Requirements for Conducting VA -
Approved International Research Involving Human Subjects, Human Biological Specimens, or 
Human Data  
2. VHA Handbook 1200.05  definition of international research - VA international research is any 
VA-approved research conducted at international sites (not within the United States (U.S.), its 
territories, or Commonwealths); any VA -approved research using either human biological 
specimens (identified, de -identified, or coded) or human data (identified, de -identified, or 
coded) originating from international sites; or any VA -approved research sending such 
specimens or data out of the U.S. (see par. 56). NOTE: For the purposes of th is Handbook, 
research conducted at U.S. military bases, ships, or embassies is not considered international 
research.  
 
O. Study Procedure  
1. Study Procedures  
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 5 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  1.1. Outline all study procedures  - (If necessary , include a table or flow chart, showing the 
schedule of the procedures and interactions.  Distinguish between interventions that are 
experimental and carried out for research purposes vs. those that are considered 
standard of care. Routine procedures that  are performed solely for research purposes 
should also be identified.)    
 
Consenting patients will be administered a baseline assessment battery 
(diagnostic, work outcomes, functional outcomes, symptom, neurocognitive, and 
attitude measures) to determine eligibility. Baseline assessment procedures will 
take approximately 4 -5 hou rs. (Please see section O.2.1 for full descriptions of 
the assessment battery.) Subjects will be notified of their eligibility status for the 
treatment component of the research by phone within 2 weeks of their baseline 
assessment.  
 
The research team will  seek permission to obtain the contact information of a 
secondary contact person, to assist in maintaining contact with the veteran over 
the course of the 18  active months of the study. Though participants will be 
encouraged to provide this information, th ey may refuse to do so and still remain 
in the study. The research team will not disclose any information to this 
secondary contact person.  
 
Eligible subjects  who give a second informed consent  will be randomly assigned 
to receive either iCBT or to usual care. All randomized participants will enter into 
supportive employment at the CMCVAMC . iCBT will be delivered as a group  
therapy for 12 months of weekly or biweekly sessions (see below). iCBT sessions 
will take approximately 1 hour. Blind, reliable indep endent assessors will 
reassess participants  every 6 months after  participants begin treatment groups 
over a n 18-month participation period, producing mid -treatment (6 month) end -of-
treatment (12 month), and post -treatment (18 month) assessments. Follow -up 
assessment procedures will take approximately 3 -4 hours. The Research 
Coordinator will conduct a 15 -minute Check -In at baseline to gather information 
about medications and services being received outside of this research study ; 
the Supported Employment Specialists or Independent Assessors will conduct 
the 15-minute Check -In every 3 months after participants begin treatment groups 
(i.e., at 3 -, 6-, 9-, 12-, 15-, and 18 -months) . The SE Specialists will also conduct the 
assessment  of employment variables at these Check -Ins using the Workforce 
Participation form using an informal interview assisted by the use of a calendar 
and review of holidays and other activity anchors, supplemented by the ongoing 
assessment they conduct as part of the SE activities.  
 
We are proposing a prospective randomized controlled trial with participants 
recruited from the CMCVAMC .  We will randomize 96 patients (48 patients per 
condition). Independent a ssessors will be blinded to participant treatment group 
allocation. Assessment sessions will occur at baseline, and at 6, 12, and 18 
months  after therapy groups begin ; brief check -ins will occur at each assessment 
session, and also at months 3, 9, and 15  after therapy groups begin .   
 
Subjects  in the iCBT  condition will receive weekly or twice weekly group sessions 
for 12 months. iCBT follows a treatment manual developed by Perivoliotis, Grant, 
& Beck. The manual details the approach (engagement, behavioral activation, 
cognitive remediation/restructuring, maintenance) and individualized treatment 
planning. It also describes strategies and techniques to deal with positive and 
negative symptoms, mood symptoms, and suicidality. Included in these 
strategies are mindfulness exercises, designed to assist the part icipant in 
identifying feelings and biological processes that accompany a stimulus (i.e., 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 6 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  food and/or drink).  It incorporates cognitive remediation strategies. iCBT 
sessions will be video recorded, for purposes of quality control and supervision.  
 
Subjects  in both conditions will participate in the existing SE program at 
CMCVAMC.  
 
All participants will continue to receive any services (medical, psychiatric, case 
management) they were already receiving.  
 
The primary outcome measure will be the work participation indices, including 1) 
instances of job attainment, 2) average days worked per week while employed, 3) 
average number of hours worked per week while employed, 3) total weeks 
worked, and 4) a composite of these indices  Secondary outcomes m easures will 
be total score of the Work Behavior Inventory (WBI) at the 6, 12, and 18 month 
follow up and the total score on the Specific Levels of Functioning scale (SLOF) 
measured at post -treatment 6 , 12, and 18 month follow -up. 
 
Treatment conditions  
Usual Care  - Usual care will entail continued access to all treatments available to 
all Veterans receiving treatment at the CMC VAMC Mental Health Clinical without 
restriction . 
 
iCBT  - Subjects in the iCBT condition will receive sessions of group therapy 
scheduled at least once every week for up to 12 months following randomization. 
iCBT will follow a treatment manual developed by Perivoliotis, Grant, & Beck74 
based upon conceptualizations developed in Schizophrenia: Cognitive Theo ry, 
Research, and Therapy.21 The manual details the modular approach (engagement, 
behavioral activation, maintenance) and individualized treatment planning. It also 
explains in detail strategies and techniques for negative symptoms, 
hallucinations, delusions, anxiety, depre ssion, and suicidality. It also gives 
guidelines for when and how to incorporate the UCLA social skills role -plays37 
and cognitive remediation strategies.75 The employment s pecialists will be 
masters level clinicians and will provide the iCBT.  iCBT sessions will be video 
recorded, for purposes of quality control and supervision.  
 
i. Cognitive remediation  - Cognitive remediation refers to programs that target 
specific cognitive d omains and aim to improve them, often through 
thousands of repetitions of the same task, an approach called “drill and 
practice.”38 There is sub stantial evidence that cognitive remediation 
significantly improves performance on cognitive batteries in people with 
schizophrenia39, and (perhaps by extension) improves measures of 
functioning. Several recent meta -analyses of cognitive remediation programs 
have found moderate ef fect sizes for improvement in cognitive functioning40, 
social cognitive functioning,41 and psychosocial functioning.40  Kurtz 
conducted a literature review of studies that reported neurocognitive data in 
the context of different psychosoc ial interventions. He concluded that global 
cognition, and attention, memory, and problem -solving domains, were 
associated with outcome variables in people with schizophrenia enrolled in 
vocational rehabilitation programs.42.  Five randomized control trials have 
been conducted integrating cognit ive remediation and vocational 
rehabilitation. McGurk et al. reviewed 4 of the 5 trials in a 2008 review article, 
and subsequently published the results of another trial. In her review, and in 
the 2009 trial, she concluded that the combination of cognitive  remediation 
and vocational rehabilitation improved both cognitive functioning and 
vocational rehabilitation outcomes.43, 44 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 7 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017   
The cognitive remediation program we will use, Brain HQ by Posit Science 
(https://portal.brainhq.com/?study=best_vet) , is a series of computer 
“games” developed by neuroscientists to target particular areas of cognition, 
for instance verbal and visuo -spatial memory, working memory, sustained 
attention, set -shifting, planning and problem solving, and others. The 
program is designed to provide practice on these cognitive areas in the form 
of interactive and engagi ng computer games. Brain HQ software is 
commercially available and targeted at a healthy adult population looking to 
improve cognitive skills that are already within the normal range of 
performance. It has also been developed for clinical populations with a 
unique training set for people with schizophrenia, and it has programs with 
more gradual increases in challenge level, less emphasis on timed tests, and 
a new interface for facilitators working with patients.  
 
The cognitive remediation module lasts 4 mo nths. During this module, 
participants will meet twice weekly for hour -long sessions. 40 minutes of 
those sessions will be devoted to computerized cognitive remediation using 
Brain HQ. The cognitive domains practiced by the subjects will be 
individually ta ilored to the areas of greatest cognitive weakness of each 
subject. During the cognitive reappraisal portion (see below), the challenges 
and gains of the subjects using Brain HQ will be discussed and the 
relationship of the skills mastered to employment si tuations will be 
discussed.  The employment specialists will perform the cognitive 
remediation.  Consistent with cognitive remediation programs already in place 
at CMCVAMC, t he Brain HQ patient kiosk is connected to the local network, 
and provides access to  the Internet ; patients will be monitored by the 
Supported Employment Specialist during computer use . The name, email 
address, and password requested when logging on this site will be that of the 
Supported Employment Specialist (SES), who will then enter a  subject code 
for each subject.   Thus no identifiable information about the subject is being 
entered for use of this computer program.  
 
ii. Cognitive reappraisal skills.  During the cognitive remediation and cognitive 
reappraisal module, participants will meet twice weekly. The cognitive 
reappraisal portion will occur 10 minutes prior and 10 minutes after cognitive 
remediation. The difficulties and gains encountered during cognitive 
remediation will be discussed. In particular, cognitive restructuring will be 
conducted around expectancies and attitudes that might block goal 
achievement. This will involve training patients to recognize negative 
automatic thoughts (“I can’t do  it,” “I do not have the energy), to identify 
thinking errors (e.g., emotion based reasoning such as “if it feels like I can’t 
do it, then I can’t do it”), and to generate alternative explanations to specific 
unhelpful or inaccurate thoughts and beliefs. A ll skills are taught in a fun and 
engaging manner.  
 
March 2016 Amendment  
This protocol was  initially submitt ed with a study objective to evaluate whether 
iCBT vs. Psychoeducation (PE)  can improve engagement and success in an 
existing SE program among the m ost functionally disabled patients with 
schizophrenia.  
 
We decided to change the control group from Psychoeducation (PE ) to usual 
care.   We made this change because  experts in randomized clinical trials ( RCT) 
design have recently argued that control condition that is “active” in an effort to 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 8 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  equalize the attention association with the experimental intervention can reduce 
the power of the design to detect that impact of the intervention.87 Thus, a control 
condition that is also active may lead to biasing the study aga inst detecting a 
difference compared  to the experimental group.  Psychoeducation is often used 
as a minimally active control condition in lieu of usual care. Unfortunately, 
psychoeducation has been demonstrated to reduce relapse, reduce and shorten 
hospital admissions, and improve medication compliance76. It is an active 
comparator to iCBT, given its significant improvements in areas related to 
functional outcome. Again, this may in fac t reduce the ability to detect a posi tive 
impact of iCBT.  
 
This study change was approved by the Sponsor (See Request for Administrative 
Modification of a Rehabilitation Research and Development Service (RR&D) 
Project form signed by Patricia Dorn, Director, RR&D)  
 
Plans for subjects already enrolled in the study :  Prior to t his change in the 
control arm, w e wer e in the initial stages of existing participants who have been 
randomized and remain active ( 3 iCBT group, 3 Psychoeducation group). Since 
the Psychoeducation  participants expect a group, will offer all these participants 
the iCBT group. Because those two participants who had been randomized to the 
Psychoeducation group would be offered the iCBT outside the original design, 
their data will be excluded from data  analysis . They will otherwise receive all  the 
benefits of the study.  
 
All existing consented and randomized participants will be re -consented 
describing the new design just specified, with a usual care arm  (that does not 
involve any group treatment) . Aga in, those participants who want to participate in 
a group  treatment  (or an additional group if they are in iCBT  arm), have the 
treatment resources of the Mental Health Clinic that they can access outside of 
their involvement in this study . 
 
Supported Employment (SE) . SE is the standard clinical intervention that is 
offered to Veterans with severe mental illness. Therefore, SE is not a research 
intervention. However, the supported employment specialists will be a part of the 
research team. Subjects rand omized to either treatment group (i.e., iCBT, usual 
care) will participate in SE. All participants will also continue receive psychiatric 
care. Case management will continue for subjects already receiving such 
services. The SE program will adhere to the IP S model adopted by the CMCVAMC  
in 2005 as part of a national initiative (see Background, above). The IPS model has 
been well described 18 and training occurs through a mentor -trainer model. 
Multiple studies have demonstrated the importance of high fidelity scores on SE 
program evaluation in terms of employment outcomes77. 
1.2. Explain if and how the follow -up of subjects will occur. The baseline assess ment is 
designed to: a) determine baseline levels of work functioning, psychosocial 
functioning, symptomatology, cognitive impairment, and dysfunctional belief 
endorsement, and b) determine whether participants are eligible for th e treatment 
phase of the s tudy.  
 
The research team will strive to form treatment groups as quickly as possible. 
However, it may take several weeks to accumulate enough eligible and willing 
participants to form a treatment group (i.e., 6 -8 participants). The intention of the 
follow -up asse ssments and check -ins is to measure the impact of treatment on 
the study measures. Therefore, the follow -ups and check -ins are tied to the 
beginning of the treatment groups.  
 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 9 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  All participants who are eligible and consent to randomization will participate in 
three additional assessment sessions. The mid -treatment and post -treatment 
assessments are designed to measure change from baseline that occurred 
during the treatment period and will consist of a re -administration of the baseline 
measures. The follow -up assessment occurs 6 months after the end of the 
treatment period (18 months after  treatment groups begin ). The Research 
Coordinator will conduct the 15 -minute check -in at baseline; the Supported 
Employment Specialists or Independent Assessors will conduct  the check -in 
every 3 months after treatment groups begin  (i.e., at 3 -, 6-, 9-, 12-, 15-, and 18 -
months).  
1.3. Describe where, how and who will be conducting study procedures.  The primary 
purpose of the follow -up assessments is to determine the durability of change 
post -treatment.  Table 1 depicts the study assessment timetable. Baseline s tudy 
assessments will be carried out by the study Research Coordinator , while follow -
up ass essments will be carried out by the Independent Assessors.  The Research 
Coordinator will conduct the 15 -minute check -in at baseline; the Supported 
Employment Specialists or Independent Assessors will conduct the check -in 
every 3 months after treatment grou ps begin (i.e., at 3 -, 6-, 9-, 12-, 15-, and 18 -
months).  
                  Table 1: Assessment measures and administration timeline  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4. If a survey study, specify the estimated amount of time that subjects will need to 
complete the questionnaires/tools.  The baseline assessment will take approximately 
4-5 hours. The follow -up assessments will take approximately 3 -4 hours. The 
check -ins will take approximately 15 minutes.  
1.5. If a blood draw, specify the amount of blood to be drawn in milliliters and in teaspoo nfuls 
or tablespoonfuls and specify how often and where the blood will be drawn. Not 
Applicable.  
 Measure  Baseline  3 Month  
(after 
groups 
begin)  6 Month  
(after 
groups 
begin; mid 
treatment)  9 Month  
(after 
groups 
begin)  12 Month 
(after 
groups 
begin; end 
of groups ) 15 Month  
(after 
groups 
begin; 
post 
groups ) 18 Month 
(after 
groups 
begin; 
post group  
follow up)  
SCID  X  -  -  - 
WHODAS  X  -  -  - 
Work 
Readiness  X       
Risk 
Assessment  X       
Data from 
WBI X  X  X  X 
SLOF  X  X  X  X 
BNSS  X  X  X  X 
SAPS  X  X  X  X 
DAS X  X  X  X 
ABS X  X  X  X 
BSES -SF X  X  X  X 
QOLI  X  X  X  X 
BCIS  X  X  X  X 
CNB  X  X  X  X 
B-CATS  X  X  X  X 
UPSA  X  X  X  X 
Check -in X X X X X X X 
Workforce 
Participation  X X X X X X X 
   Note.  “X” = measure administered  
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 10 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  2. Data Collection (Include all questionnaires and survey tools with the submission.)  
2.1. Provide  
2.1.1.  the mode of data collection, e.g. telephone, in -person, questionnaire, 
interviews: Interview tools include : The Structured Interview for DSM -IV-
TR Axis I Disorders, Clinical Trials Version (SCID); World Health 
Organization Disability Assessment Scale v. 2. 0 (WHODAS),Work 
Behavior Inventory (WBI),Specific Level of Functioning Scale (SLOF), 
Brief Negative Symptom  Scale  (BNSS), Scale for the Assessment of 
Positive Symptoms (SAPS) , the Check -In, and the Work Readiness 
Assessment  The 15 -minute check -in is a tool  developed by the research 
team to capture information about medications and services being 
received  outside of  the study , and will include measures of workforce 
participation . Training of assessors on the clinical interview will follow 
the UCLA model of initial training, competency (ICC ¬> .80 with a 
minimum of 10 cases), and prevention of rater drift (sessions every 6 
months).  
 
Questionnaires include:  Dysfunctional Attitude Scale (DAS),63 Asocial 
Beliefs Scale  (ABS),64 Beck Self -Esteem Scales – Short Form  (BSES -
SF),65 the Quality of Life Inventory (QOLI),66 and the Beck Cognitive 
Insight Scale (BCIS).67  
 
Cognitive and Functional Tests include: the Computerized 
Neurocognitive Battery (CNB), the Brief Cognitive Assessment Tool for 
Schizophrenia (B -CATS), and the USCD Performance -Based Skills 
Assessment – Brief (UPSA -B). 
 
Specific Levels of Functioning Scale (SLOF).56 The SLOF is a self -report 
behavioral rating scale used to assess mentally ill patients’ level of 
functioning in the community and in mental hospitals. The 30 -item scale 
emphasizes subjects’ everyday behaviors rather than emotional or 
mental capacity, and it focuses on subjects’ tangible strengths and skills 
rather than on subjects’ weaknesses. Subjects rate their typicality of 
certain behavior s and self -sufficiency regarding basic tasks on a 5 -point 
scale, in the areas of interpersonal relationships, social acceptability, 
activities, and work skills. A high total suggests a higher level of 
functioning in the subject, while a low total suggests relatively lower 
functioning. The SLOF is considered to be one of the best scales for 
measuring functional outcomes in terms of reliability, convergent 
validity, sensitivity, and practicality.60  
 
World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0  
(WHODAS).56 The WHODAS is an interviewer -administered assessment 
designed to determine the level of  functioning in subjects with 
schizophrenia. The WHODAS measures a number of areas, including 
cognition, mobility, self -care, sociability, life activities, work/school 
activities, and participation. Each item is measured on a 5 -point scale, 
with higher tot als indicating higher levels of dysfunction. Schennach -
Wolff et al.61 found the WHODAS to have predictive validity for early 
response, response, remission, and symptomatic outcome.  
 
Brief Negative Symptom  Scale  (BNSS).57  The BNSS is a 13-item 
interviewer -scored instrument for assessing the negative symptoms of 
schizophrenia. Each item is rated on a 7-point scale: “ Normal/No 
Impairment ” (0), “Questionab le/Very Slight Impairment ” (1), “Mild /Mild 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 11 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  Deficit ” (2), “Moderate /Moderate Deficit ” (3), “M oderately 
Severe/Moderately Severe Deficit ” (4), “Severe /Marked Deficit ” (5), 
“Extremely Severe/Severe Deficit” (6).  The items  are organized into six  
subscales:  Anhedonia (3 items), Distress (1 item), Asociality (2 items), 
Avolition (2 items), Blunted Affect (3 items), and Alogia (2 items) . The 
total score is the sum of the 13 items, with the total possible score 
ranging from 0 to 78.  Higher  scores are indicative of greater negative 
symptomatology.  
 
Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS).58  The SAPS is a 
34-item interviewer -scored instrument for assessing the positive 
symptoms of schizophrenia. Each item is scored on a 6 -point scale 
(“Absent” (0), “Questionable” (1), “Mild” (2), “Moderate” (3), “Marked” (4), 
“Severe” (5)). There  are four subscales: Hallucinations (6 items), 
Delusions (12 items), Bizarre Behavior (4 items), and Positive Formal 
Thought Disorder (8 items). In a manner similar to the SANS, each SAPS 
subscale is also assigned a global rating. Participants’ positive sy mptom 
levels will be indexed by the global SAPS score, which is the sum of the 
four subscale global ratings. The range of the SANS global score is 0 to 
20, with higher scores indicative of greater negative symptomatology. 
Additionally, the global score of the SAPS Psychotic factor is defined as 
the sum of the Hallucinations and Delusions subscale global scores, 
while the global score for the SAPS Disorganized factor is defined as the 
sum of the Bizarre Behavior and Positive Formal Thought Disorder global 
scores. Andreasen and colleagues  have shown that the SAPS can be 
reliably administered with people diagnosed with schizophrenia, and a 
recent consensus statement has proposed the SAPS as a standard 
measure of positive symptoms.62  
 
Check -In. The check -in is a  tool developed by the research team to 
capture information about medications and services being received 
outside of the research study. There are six main sections: (1) mood, (2) 
medications, (3) current treatment, (4) hospitalizations, (5) legal issues, 
and (6) demographics.  The Check -In will include measures of workforce 
participation (as described below).  
 
Workforce Participation.  This report form is also completed during the 
check -in and reflects the timing of job attainment,  average days worked 
per week while employed, average number of hours worked per week 
while employed, and total weeks worked, These indices reflect common 
and accepted variables that reflect the degree of success in obtaining 
competitive employment and at a competitive compensatio n rate.  
 
The Work Readiness Assessment.  The Work Readiness Assessment  was 
developed by David Loveland at the Human  Service Center in Peoria, IL, 
and is based on the Transtheoretical Model of Change and the principles 
of motivational interviewing 
(http://www.bhrm.org/guidelines/motiveint.pdf ). It is comprised of two 
scales: the Understanding of Benefits scale and the Work Motivation 
scale. Participants are asked to rate items on a 3 -point scale (i. e., 
“disagree,” “not sure,” “agree”) regarding their understanding of 
benefits, and a 4 -point scale (i.e., “disagree,” “somewhat agree,” “mostly 
agree,” “strongly agree”) regarding their motivation to work. Assessors 
will use this data to determine a parti cipant’s overall work readiness on 
the following scale: Pre -contemplation about working, Contemplation for 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 12 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  working, Determination/preparation for working, Active stage of job 
seeking, and Maintaining job seeking activities or working.  
 
Risk Assessment. The Risk Assessment is a tool developed by the study 
team to evaluate the potential risks (to the participant and study staff) in 
enrolling the participant into phase 2 of the research study. The risk 
assessment will be completed as part of the baseline/sc reening 
assessment, and then as clinically indicated throughout study 
participation (e.g., when a subject moves, after an inpatient 
hospitalization, etc.).  
 
Questionnaires.  Belief endorsement and quality of life, questionnaires 
include: Dysfunctional Attit ude Scale (DAS),63 Asocial Beliefs Scale 
(ABS)  ,64 Beck Self -Esteem Scales – Short Form (BSES -SF),65 the Quality 
of Life Inventory (QOLI),66 and the Beck Cognitive Insight Scale (BCIS).67  
 
Dysfunctional Attitude Scale  (DAS).63 The DAS consists of 40 statements 
rated on a 7 -point scale: “Ag ree Totally” (7), “Agree Very Much” (6), 
“Agree Somewhat” (5), “Neutral” (4), “Disagree Somewhat” (3), “Disagree 
Very Much” (2), and “Disagree Totally” (1). Participants are instructed to 
select the option that describes how they think most of the time. Sa mple 
items include: “If I do not do as well as other people, it means I am an 
inferior human being”; “If I fail at my work, then I am a failure as a 
person”; “If I fail partly, it is as bad as being a complete failure”; “If you 
cannot do something well, th ere is little point in doing it at all”; “Making 
mistakes is fine because I can learn from them (reverse keyed).” The DAS 
is composed of two subscales: Defeatist Performance Attitudes and 
Dysfunctional Need -for-Acceptance attitudes. The DAS can be reliably  
administered  and its utility in outpatient samples diagnosed with 
schizophrenia has been established.22 
 
Asocial Beliefs Scale  (ABS ).64 The ABS is composed of 15 items self -
reported as “True” or “False” (scored “1” or “0”) that tap attitudes and 
preferences related to spending time with other people. Sample items 
include:  “I prefer watching television to going out with other people,” 
“people sometimes think I am shy when I really just want to be left 
alone,” and “I could be happy living all alone in a cabin in the woods or 
mountains.” In both patient and control populations , the ABS has been 
shown to be internally consistent and have high test -retest reliability.68 
Grant and Beck have shown that these  items, which are a subscale of the 
larger Revised Social Anhedonia Scale (RSAS), predict current and future 
social functioning.31 
 
Beck Self -Esteem Scales – Short Form.65  Beck Self -Esteem Scales – 
Short Version.  65 The BSES -SF is a 12 -item questionnaire that assesses 
beliefs about the self and others’ impressions of the self. Domains 
queried include sup erior/inferior, likeable/unlikeable, strong/weak, 
secure/vulnerable, efficient/helpless, and powerful/powerless. Responses 
are made to each bipolar set of adjectives on a 10 -point scale (anchors 
are “very much”, “average”, and “ very much”). Modifications t o the 
original form include: (1) the measure was shortened to capture the 
essence of self -esteem, and (2) seven of the twelve adjectives have been 
modified to better suit this population based on clinical experience.  
 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 13 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  Quality of Life Inventory (QOLI).66  The QOLI consists of 32 self -reported 
items that tap subjective  functioning. Participants are presented with 
descriptions of 16 life domains: health, self -esteem, goals -and-values, 
money, work, play, learning, creativity, helping, love, friends, children, 
relatives, home, neighborhood, and community. For each domain, the 
subject makes an importance judgment on a 3 -point scale -- “Not 
Important” (0), “Important” (1), “Very Important” (2) -- and a satisfaction 
judgment on a 6 -point scale  -- “Very Dissatisfied” ( -3),  “Dissatisfied” ( -
2), “Somewhat Dissatisfied” ( -1), “S omewhat Satisfied” (1), “Satisfied” 
(2), “Very Satisfied” (3). QOLI scores for each domain are determined by 
multiplying the importance rating by the satisfaction rating. The total 
QOLI score is the sum of the 16 individual domain scores; higher scores 
reflect higher reported quality of life.  
 
Beck Cognitive Insight Scale (BCIS).67 The BCIS is a 15 -item measure of 
two components (factors) of cognitive insight —the capacity and 
willingness to observe one’s experiences and consider alternative 
explanations (self -reflectiveness) and the overconfidence in the validity 
of one’s beliefs (self -certainty). Sample items include, “There is often 
more than one possible explanation for why people act the way they do” 
and “My interpretations of  my experiences are definitely right.” In the 
original study with inpatients of varying diagnoses, the BCIS showed 
adequate convergent and discriminant validity and internal consistency 
(α = .60 -.68). The original psychometrics and factor structure have no w 
been replicated several times.69 Taken together, the research on the BCIS 
suggest that cognitive insight has important clinical significance for 
people with schizophrenia, that it may be a mediating variable in 
cognitive therapy for the disorder, and that it should therefore be 
assessed and addressed in clinical trials.69 
 
Collection of information  from the Work Behavior Inventory (WBI).55 The 
WBI is a 35 -item scale specifically designed to assess the work behaviors 
of individuals suffering from severe mental illness. The WBI is completed 
as a routine standard of care measure during Supported Employment 
procedures. As part of usual care, t he SE Specialists  observes  the 
patient  in his/ her work setting and also speak  to the subject’s supervisor  
(when the veteran allows this) .  As part of the research study, we will 
collect information from the  WBI at the time of the baseline and follow -up 
assessments. The mea sure will have a value of ‘0’ at points in which the 
participants are not working .  WBI data may be missing if research 
participants refuse to allow the SE specialist to observe at the worksite 
and/or speak to employers. Data from the WBI will be analyzed along with 
other research data whenever available. The WBI is broken down into 
specific areas, including social skills, cooperativeness, work habits, work 
quality, and personal presentation. Each item is scored on a 5 -point 
scale, with higher totals indica ting stronger work performance. The WBI 
has been found to have good validity and reliability55 and predicts 
vocational outcomes and productive activity after discharge from 
rehabilitation.  
 
Performance measures  
a) Cognitive  
The Computerized Neurocognitive Battery (CNB).  The CNB, developed by 
Ruben Gur and colleagues,  is widely used and validated.70 The vers ion we will 
use evaluates both accuracy and speed of performance in the following 5 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 14 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  domains: abstraction and mental flexibility (Penn Conditional Exclusion Test), 
attention and working memory (Letter -n-Back), spatial memory (Visual Object 
Learning Test [VO LT]), spatial processing (Computerized Judgment of Line 
Orientation), and sensorimotor dexterity (Computerized Finger -Tapping Task 
and Motor Praxis test). Participants will be given standard instructions and 
practice trials with feedback to assure comprehe nsion. Collected data are 
uploaded automatically to the VA MIRECC secure server using PGP encryption 
and reviewed for validity. Accuracy and response time for each trial are 
recorded and the domain scores for accuracy and speed are available in a 
relationa l database. The scoring code has been validated against manually 
scored tests. This procedure is fully automated.  
 
Brief Cognitive Assessment Tool for Schizophrenia (B -CATS).71: The B -CATS 
is a 10 -12 minute measure of global cognitive function designed for clinicians 
to administer and interpret. The B -CATS is composed of 3 neurocognitive 
tests, Trail Making Tes t (parts A and B) , animal fluency, and Digit Symbol.  
 
b) Functional capacity  
The UCSD Performance -Based Skills Assessment -Brief (UPSA).72 :The UPSA 
assesses functional capacity -- that is, the expected ability of subject s to 
function in a variety of real -world settings. This measure assesses skills in two 
areas: a) Communication (making phone calls, making emergency calls, 
rescheduling a medical appointment, and others), and b) Finance (e.g. 
counting change, writing check s, and paying bills). The brief UPSA (10 -15 min) 
has been shown to correlate at 0.91 with the scores on the full UPSA.73 
2.1.2.  the precise plan for how data is to be collected or acquired At the baseline 
assessment interview, a member of the research team (PI, Co -I, or 
research coordinator) will administer a comprehensive, face -to-face 
interview that allows for a reliable diagnosi s of schizophrenia and 
queries patient psychosocial functioning levels, symptomatology, 
substance use, and service usage.  At other assessments, the 
independent assessors  will perform semi -structured interviews, collect 
questionnaire data, and administer c ognitive and performance tests.  
2.1.3.  exact location where data will be collected, In a pre -arranged 2nd floor 
MIRECC interview room  (B228) . 
2.1.4.  exact location where data entry will take place. In the pre-arranged 2nd floor 
MIRECC interview room (B228) and the research coordinator’s  and 
independent assessors’ cubicles in the 2nd floor MIRECC (B228).  
2.1.5.  the “title” of individual(s) collecting the data and analyzing the data, e.g. 
principal investigator, research coordinato r. Principal Investigator, Co -
Investigators, Research Coordinator , Independent Assessors . 
2.2. Provide a time line for each aspect of the study.  Assessment sessions will occur at 
baseline, and at 6, 12, and 18 months  after treatment groups begin .  Check -ins 
will occur at baseline, and then every 3 months after treatment groups begin . 
 
Subject s in the iCBT condition will receive weekly or twice weekly group 
sessions for 12 months. It incorporates cognitive remediation strategies, and a 
specific compu terized cognitive remediation 4 -month block (see below). Subject s 
assigned to usual care will continue to receive usual care  for 12 months. Subject s 
in both conditions will participate in the existing SE program at CMCVAMC . All 
participants will continue to receive any services (medical, psychiatric, case 
management) they were already receiving. The primary outcome measure will be  
the indices of workforce participation (jobs attained, hours  per week , average 
days worked  while employed, weeks employed, tota l income for the reporting 
period ) . Secondary outcomes measures will be the total score on th e Work 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 15 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  Behavior Inventory (WBI) and the total score on the Specific Levels of 
Functioning inventory (SLOF) measured at 6 months, 12 months, and 18 month 
post -treatment follow -up. 
2.3. Chart/Records/Data Review (retrospective and/or prospective)  
2.3.1.  Provide the planned or approximate number of charts/records/data to be 
accessed  
2.3.1.1.  CMCVAMC  Phase I – 192; Phase II – 96  
2.3.1.2.  Other site       
2.3.2.  Does this protocol employ an Honest Broker?  YES  NO 
2.3.2.1.  If yes, provide name of individual.  
2.3.2.2.  If no, explain who will access the charts/records. Research 
coordinator, PI, Co -I. 
2.3.2.3.  Describe from what database charts/records/data will be accessed.  
CPRS  
 
3. Future Use of Data and Re -Contact , if applicable.   Not Applicable  
3.1. If any of the participant’s data are going to be retained after the study for future 
research, the following information must be provided to the participant:  
3.1.1.  Where will the data be stored?  
3.1.2.  Who will have access to the data?  
3.2. If the subject is going to be re -contacted in the future about participating in future 
research, this must be specified.  Describe the circumstances under which the 
participant would be re -contacted whether within the VA  or outside the VA. Not 
Applicable  
3.2.1.  If subjects will receive aggregate study results at the end of the study, the 
informed consent document must contain this information.  
 
4. Specimen Collection  
4.1. Give the source of all specimens and whether they were collected for research, 
treatment or diagnosis. Not Applicable.  
4.2. State where specimens will be stored, secured and when discarded.  Not Applicable.  
4.3. Explain how destruction of samples will be substantiated.  Not Applicable.  
 
P. Genetic Testing, if applicable  
1. Explain if t he study is looking for an association between a genetic marker and a specific 
disease or condition, but at this point it is not clear if the genetic marker has predictive value. 
Not Applicable.   
1.1. The uncertainty regarding the predictive value of the geneti c marker is such that studies 
in this category will not involve participant counseling.  
1.2. Describe if the study is based on the premise that a link between a genetic marker and 
a specific disease or condition is such that the marker is clinically useful in p redicting 
the development of that specific disease or condition.        
1.3. Will the subject be notified of the results and the provision for genetic counseling?  
 Yes    No   N/A 
1.3.1.  If yes, explain further.        
1.4. If biological specimens are used in this protocol, please respond to the following 
questions by checking the appropriate box:  
 YES NO N/A 
a. Does the project involve genetic testing?         
b. Will specimens be kept for future, unspecified use?     
c. Will samples be made anonymous to maintain confidentiality?  
(Instructions: Note:  If there is a link, it is not anonymous.  Codi ng 
is not anonymous.     
d. Will specimens be destroyed after the pro ject-specific use is 
completed?     
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 16 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  e. Will specimens be sold in the future?     
f. Will subjects be paid for their specimens now or in the future?     
g. Will subjects be informed of the results of the specimen 
testing?     
h. Are there any implications for family members based on 
specimen testing results? (If yes, they may be participants.)     
i. Will subjects be inform ed of results obtained from their DNA?     
1.5. Will specimens be de -identified?  YES        NO  N/A 
1.5.1.  If yes, please describe the procedures to be used.        
1.5.2.  Include at what point in the process the specimens will be de -identified.        
1.6. Describe what measures will be taken to m inimize the following risks from breaches of 
confidentiality and privacy resulting from participating in THIS aspect  of the research 
project:   
1.6.1.  physical       
1.6.2.  psychological       
1.6.3.  financial       
1.6.4.  social        
1.6.5.  legal harm       
 
Q. Banking of Collected Specimens  
1. Will collected specimens be banked ?  YES   NO   N/A 
1.1. IF BANKING SPECIMENS, IT MUST BE AT AN APPROVED VA REPOSITORY . (For 
additional information, refer to VHA Handbook 1200.12 , Use of Data and Data 
Repositories in VHA Research - March 9, 2009.)  
1.2. If yes, spec ify the location where specimens will be banked.        
1.3. Explain how destruction of banked samples will be substantiated.       
 
R. Subject Recruitment  (characteristics of the study population)  
1. Provide the planned or targeted enrollment at : 
1.1. CMCVAMC  -    Phase I:  192;  Phase II :  96  
1.2. Other sites -  0 
1.3. Not applicable; chart review or use of previously collected data -  
 
2. Screening and/or Eligibility Requirements  
2.1. Describe and provide justification for:  
2.1.1.  Inclusion criteria  
The study inclusion criteria are as follows:  
i. Diagnosis of DSM -IV schizophrenia or schizo affective disorder 
(SCID)  
ii. Severe/extreme functional disability [World Heath Organization 
Disability Assessment Scale (WHODAS) score > 50] 
iii. Clinical stability (as per primary mental health provider)  
iv. Receiving treatment at the Veterans Administration  
v. Minimal engagement in psychiatric rehabilitation services (just 
psychiatrist and therapist/case management in the last 6 
months)  
vi. Eligible and willing to be enrolled in Supporte d Employment  
program  
vii. Age 18 to 65  
viii. Proficient in English  
ix. Able to give informed consent  
2.1.2.  Exclusion criteria  
i. Neurologic disease or damage that would make the diagnosis of 
schizophrenia questionable  
ii. Current opioid or stimulant dependence (SCID).  
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 17 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017                         iii. Not appropriate due to safety concerns (based on risk  
 assessment)  
 
2.2. List all screening and/or eligibility requirements. The Study Research Coordinator will 
gather the appropriate records relevant to inclusion. The study team wi ll recruit 
research participants from the Compensated Work Therapy (CWT) program , the 
outpatient  psychiatric clinic , and the inpatient psychiatric unit  at the CMCVAMC . 
At the time of baseline assessment, subject s will be told that  the study staff will 
query the subject’s psychiatrist regarding symptoms, psychosocial functioning, 
and medications.  
2.3. Explain any special test or evaluations potential subjects  may have to undergo before 
they are actually determined to be eligible for the study. Based upon all  available 
information (records and the clinical interview), a best -estimate diagnosis will be 
determined on consensus basis by the PI a nd Co -Investigator (Dr. Grant). The PI 
will then determine if eligibility criteria are met.  
2.4. Not Applicable; subjects not  recruited; chart review.   
 
3. If applicable, indicate what populations will be targeted for recruitment as participants. 
Check all that apply.   
Males   
Females   
Inpatients   
Outpatients   
VA Employees   
Non-English Speaking**   
Veteran Family members***   
Non-Veterans***   
Other (Specify)   
Not Applicable, chart review   
3.1. **For non -English speaking subjects - If an investigator proposes to use a participant 
population that does not speak or read English, a copy of the translated document, as 
well as the English version, needs to be forwarded to the IRB for approval.  Translator 
certification is also required. Not Applicable.  
3.2. ***If non -veterans will be recruited for this study, explain why sufficient veterans are not 
available to participate in the project [ VHA Handbook 1200.5 , paragraph 16a]. Veteran’s 
spouses/partners, caregivers, etc. are considered non -veterans for the purposes of this 
study.   Not Applicable.     
3.3. ***Has approval to recruit non -veterans been received from the ACOS/R&D and 
Medical Center Director?   
3.3.1.   Not Applicable  
3.3.2.   Pending (Non -veteran forms should be used. IRB office will obtain 
approval from ACOS/R&D and Medical Center Director.)  
 
4. Does this project target a specific race or ethnic group as participants?  YES   NO    
If yes, check all that apply.  
 Race    Ethnicity   
American Indian or Alaskan Native    Hispanic or Latino   
Asian    Not Hispanic or Latino   
Black or African American    Other   
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific 
Islander      
Black, not of Hispanic origin      
White, not of Hispanic origin      
Other      
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 18 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  4.1. Provide justification why this/these group(s) was/were chosen.  
 
5. What is the age range of participants?  Check all that apply.  
Children ( Under 18) Requires Waiver from CRADO ( VHA 
Directive 2001 -028, Research Involving Children )  
Young Adults (18 -21)  
Adults (22 -65)  
Seniors (Over 65)   
Over 89   
Not Applicable, chart review   
 
6. Are there specific reasons why certain populations (i.e., age, gender or ethnic groups) 
are excluded as participants?   YES   NO    N/A 
6.1. If yes, specify reasons . Because of the supported employment (difficult to find 
compet itive employment after age 65) and cognitive remediation (possible 
confound of age -related declines in older populations) portions of the protocol, 
veterans over the age of 65 are excluded.  
 
7. Does the project require enrollment of the following classes of participants?  
 YES NO 
a. Employees    
b. Individuals with impaired decision making capability    
c. Pregnant women    
d. Economically and/or educationally disadvantaged persons    
e. Prisoners    
f. Illiterate, limited, or no English language proficiency    
g. Terminally ill patients    
7.1. If applicable, what is the justification for including any of the above classes of 
participants in the project?   Not Applicable.  
7.2. If the project requires enrolling any of the above classes of participants describe any 
project -specific measures or special considerations, steps, or safeguards to ensure that 
these individuals are adequately protected.   Not Applicable.  
 
8. Describe the exact plan how subjects will be identified and recruited for the study.   
8.1. Discuss methods, e.g., referrals from physician offices, clinics, programs, or through 
advertisements and brochures. Potential participants will be identified through the  
outpatient mental health clinic , the inpatient psychiatric unit,  and the 
Compensated Work Therapy (CWT) program at the CMCVAMC . Identification of 
potential research participants will be two -fold: (1) the research team will conduct 
a review of the caseloads of the treating psychiatrists in the CMCVAMC 
outpatient mental health clinic and the inpatient psychiatric unit via CPRS review  
under a Waiver of Individual Authorization for Disclosure of Protected Health 
Information. The research team will communicate securely (e.g., via CPRS, 
encrypted email, secure server) regarding patients who may be eligible for the 
research study, and conf er on the appropriateness of research participation; (2) 
treating psychiatrists in the outpatient mental health clinic and inpatient 
psychiatric unit will identify potentially eligible participants based on interest in 
SE and interest in learning about res earch. In either case,  treating psychiatrists at 
the outpatient mental health clinic will refer individuals with SMI as per 
CMCVAMC  standard protocol to the CWT program .  (This referral would be made 
regardless of eligibility in the research study.) Providers who refer  potentially 
appropriate Veterans will ask them if they would consider participating in the 
research study. The study team will remind the clinician that they should 
document this referral in the patient’s chart .  Those who agree will be approached 
by the research staff (t he PI , RC,  independent assessors, and/or the SE 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 19 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  specialists ) after they are referred to the CWT program  through a CPRS consult 
created specifically for study referrals (i.e., SE Research Consult – Vocational 
Rehab Outpt) . The consult note will remind providers that they can only refer 
patients who want to hear more about the study . The study team will recei ve an 
alert in the CPRS system once a study consult has been placed. The study team 
will regularly check for consults in the CPRS system. All consults will be received 
and resolved by the study team within 24 business hours, per CMCVAMC 
standard of care.  Providers and the research team may also collaborate to 
identify potentially eligible participants with whom the provider has not yet 
discussed SE or study participation to receive a “recruitment opt -in letter” 
describing study participation and requestin g that Veterans contact their treating 
providers and/or the study team to learn more about the study. Study referrals 
will follow guidelines outlined above and below if the Veteran reach es out to their 
provider and/or the research team to learn more about participation.  
 
If meeting in person, Research staff will provide the potential participant with 
information about the study (e.g., the research flyer , informational letter ) and be 
given the option to consider participation in research.  Research staff will also call 
potential subjects who have expressed interest in hearing more about the 
research study (See phone script).  Individuals who are interested in participating 
in the research  will be invited to participate in the baseline assess ment portion of 
the research study to determine eligibility for the treatment phase of the study.  
Potential participants may speak directly with a research team member or contact 
the research team via the telephone number listed on the recruitment material s 
(e.g., research flyer , informational letter ).  Potential subjects who we cannot reach 
by phone and who the research team are unable to meet with during visits to the 
VA, will be mailed an informational letter (See Recruitment  letter) . 
 
Amendment August 15, 2016: The research team has interacted with a number of 
Veterans who disagree with their psychiatric diagnosis , or feel uncomfortable 
labeling themselves as someone with a diagnosis of 
schizophrenia/schizoaffective disorder, however still very m uch meet study 
inclusion criteria and otherwise express desire to participate in the study. To be 
sensitive to this issue, we have modified our consent documents – Veterans will 
be given the option of disagreeing with their psychiatric diagnosis while agre eing 
to study participation during the informed consent process.  
 
Mental Health Providers will learn about this research study through direct 
contact with research staff (i.e., PI, RC, SES), research flyers/brochures, and also 
through the CMCVAMC Mental Health services informational materials (e.g., the 
MIRECC’s Research Opportunities – Mental Health Provider Informational Sheet - 
a document distributed to CMCVAMC  mental health providers, advertising 
CMCVAMC  research studies , the Resour ce Center desktop icon ). 
 
Research consult note is based on the current Supported Employment consult 
note and will include the following information . The consult is for Veterans who 
are interested in Supported Employment services, and who are also open to 
hearing about the research study. Veterans who decline participation in the 
research study components, but who are still interested in Supported 
Employment, will be referred to the CWT Supported Employment Program 
Manager for follow -up.:  
Current PC Provid er:    
Current PC Team:        
Current Pat. Status:    
Primary Eligibility:    
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 20 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  Patient Type:           
OEF/OIF:               
 
Service Connection/Rated Disabilities  
SC Percent:             
Rated Disabilities:     
 
Order Information  
To Service:            S E RESEARCH CONSULT - VOCATIONAL REHAB OUTPT  
From Service:           
Requesting Provider:    
Service is to be rendered on an OUTPATIENT basis  
Place:                 Consultant's choice  
Urgency:               Routine  
Earliest Appr. Date:    
Orderable Item:        SEE RESEARCH CONSULT - VOCATIONAL REHAB 
OUTPT  
Consult:               Consult Request  
Provisional Diagnosis: (Schizophrenia/Schizoaffective Disorder)  
Reason For Request:  
ERA:  
Service Connected:  
 
COMBAT SERVICE  - Yes/No  
_______________________________  
Service Connected Condition?  
 
Is the reason for this consult because of a Service Connected condition:  
(Yes/No)  
*************************************************************************  
All patients must have a diagnosis o f schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.  
(Schizophrenia or Schizoaffective Disorder)  
 
Reason for Request:  
(e.g., Patient is interested in finding employment. Patient is also interested in 
hearing about research study).  
   
Inter-facility Information  
This is not an inter -facility consult request.  
 
Status:                 
Last Action:            
8.2. If using a clinic, be specific about who will identify the potential subject and how that 
information will be transmitted to the research staff. The PI , RC,  independent 
assessors,  and/or the SE specialists will meet with all mental health clinicians in 
the outpatient clinic , the inpatient psychiatric unit,  and the CWT program to 
discuss the study with providers.  They will give them  recruitment  materials (e.g.,  
flyers ) to hand out to patients they feel might be interested in this study.  
8.3. If snowball method will be used, discuss the process and how the first individuals will be 
recruited. Providers can then give their patients a copy of the  IRB-approved flyer.  
8.4. Describe how information will be disseminated to subjects, e.g. handouts, brochures, 
flyers and advertisements (include all recruitment materials with this submission ). 
Providers can give their patients a copy of the  IRB-approved flyer.   
8.5. Non-Veteran p articipants will be given a copy of the Notice of Privacy Practices . 
 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 21 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  9. Informed Consent  
9.1. Informed Consent will not be sought.  
9.2. Written informed consent from participants.  
9.3. Written informed consent from participants’ legally authorized representative (LAR) as 
required by VA policy and/or applicable state laws.  
9.4. Request Waiver of Documentation of Inf ormed Consent  
9.5. List the title of the key personnel involved in the following activities:  
9.5.1.  Person Obtaining Consent  
9.5.1.1.  Provide the title(s) of individual(s) Principal Investigator, Co-
Investigator, Research Coordinator , Supported Employment 
Specialists, Independent Assessors  
9.5.1.2.  Type of training received to perform this process: All Staff: 
HIPAA, GCP, and Human Subjects Protection Training.  The 
research coordinator will attend the Resear ch Coordinator 
training class offered by the Research Compliance Officer 
prior to engaging in research activities.  
9.5.2.  Pre-Recruitment Screening (the use of medical records and other data 
bases to determine populations and individuals eligible for the study),  Not 
Applicable  
9.5.3.  Recruitment Process  (the process in which individuals are contacted and 
first introduced to the study and to the possibility of participating as subjects), 
Principal Investigator, Co -Investigator s, Research Coordinator , 
Supported Employment  Specialists, Independent Assessors  
9.5.4.  Informed Consent Process  (the process by which recruited subjects are 
fully informed about participating in the study and then formally give their 
voluntary consent for participating), Principal Investigator, Co -Investig ator, 
Research Coordinator , Supported Employment Specialists, Independent 
Assessors  
9.5.5.  Screening of Recruited Subjects  (those activities in the protocol in which a 
final determination of eligibility of prospective subjects is made during the 
early phases of t he study, using laboratory data, inclusion and exclusion 
criteria, and other person -specific information), Principal Investigator, Co -
Investigator, Research Coordinator  
9.5.6.  Include the breakdown of each individual’s responsibilities:  
9.5.6.1.  Principal Investigator, Oversee the entire study design, 
implementation, and data collection. He will also provide 
clinical and diagnostic guidance.  
9.5.6.2.  Co-Investigator, Dr. Grant will provide all the CBT trainings 
and monitor for fidelity and reliability. He will oversee 
training on structured interviews, questionnaires and 
oversee reliability. He will provide clinical and diagnostic 
guidance. Our TBD biostatistician will  analyze all the data. 
S/he will also maintain the randomization key.  
9.5.6.3.  Research Coordinator, The Research Coordinator (RC) will 
perform the baseline clinical interviews and assessments  to 
determine eligibility for the treatment portion of this study. 
She wi ll perform quality assurance checks on all research 
data;  therefore she will not be blinded to treatment condition. 
The RC will obtain informed consent for all assessment 
procedures and will write the Research Consent Note. She 
will scan the informed Conse nt Documents and HIPAA 
Authorization forms into CPRS.  She will call subjects to 
remind them of research assessment visits.   
9.5.6.4.  Additional research staff by title: Supported employment 
specialists/therapists (SES)  will assist in recruitment, may 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 22 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  obtain informed consent, conduct integrated cognitive 
behavioral therapy and cognitive remediation sessions, and 
log on to the Brain HQ site. They may call subjects to remind 
them of group sessions.  The SES will gather Check -In 
information at 3 -, 9-, and 15 -months. He or she will engage in 
all SE activities as usual (these activities are not part of the 
research study).  The SES will collect information from the 
WBI and data on employment (i.e., job ob tainment, number 
of hours worked per week, compensation per hour) in the 
course of SE activities, as standard of care measures.  
Independent Assessors  will perform the follow -up 
assessments for this study (at 6 -months, 12 -months, and 18 -
months)  and assist in conducting check -ins. They may 
obtain informed consent  and assist in recruitment activities . 
Independent Assessors will be blinded to treatment 
condition.  The Counseling Psychologist Supervisor  (Dr. 
Aaron Brinen)  will provide ongoing supervision to the SES 
regarding integrated cognitive behavior therapy. He will 
review videotaped therapy sessions. The SES Consultant  
(Richard Toscano)  will provide ongoing consultation 
services regarding Supported Employment activit ies. He will 
conduct SE fidelity measurements throughout the study, 
which will include contact with research participants. The 
DMU Administrators  (Christopher Petro and Ming Li)  will 
provide ongoing support related to the VA DMU server.  In 
this role they will have access to coded study data. This data 
will include visit date, which is the only identifying 
information stored on the DMU server.  The co-investigator  
(Virginia “Jennie” Keleher)  will provide hands -on 
supervision and guidance regarding Supported Employment 
activities. She will interact with research participants during 
evaluations of our Supported Employment Specialists .  
9.6. Will informed consent be obtained from potential subjects prior to determining eligibility?         
YES     NO     N/A 
9.6.1.  If no, provide just ification and a HIPAA Waiver of Individual Authorization for 
Disclosure of Protected Health Information.        
9.7. Define when a subject is enrolled into the study, e.g. after the subject signs the 
informed consent or after randomized to treatment. After all eligibility requirements 
have been verified and inf ormed consent and HIPAA authorization has been 
provided, the patient will be considered enrolled into the study.  
9.8. Describe:  
9.8.1.  The process when informed consent will be obtained and protecting patients’ 
privacy. After subjects are referred to the research study team , they will 
be scheduled for a baseline assessment, to determine eligibility  for the 
treatment phase of the research study. At this appointment, which will 
be conducted in a private room, informed consent will be obtained and 
documented by the re search coordinator. Consenting patients will be 
administered a baseline assessment battery (diagnostic, work 
outcomes, functional outcomes, symptom, neurocognitive, and attitude 
measures) to determine eligibility. Subjects will be told of their eligibility  
status for the treatment portion of the research study by phone within 2 
weeks of their baseline assessment. Eligible and willing subjects will be 
scheduled for a consenting appointment for the treatment portion of the 
study, which will be conducted and d ocumented by the research 
coordinator . Eligible subject s who give a second informed consent will 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 23 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  be randomly assigned to receive either iCBT or to receive  usual care . It 
may take several weeks to accumulate enough eligible and willing 
subjects to form a tr eatment group (i.e., 6 -8 participants); participants 
will be contacted by phone to inform them of the start of the treatment 
groups. Subjects will be invited to participate in follow -up assessment 
procedures, as documented in the informed consent documents, at 6 -
months, 12 -months, and 18 -months after treatment groups begin.  The 
research coordinator will review informed consent documents  at these 
follow -up assessment appointments.  A 15-minute check -in will occur at 
baseline by the Research Coordinator , then at 3-, 9-, and 15- months 
after treatment groups begin by the SES , and at 6-, 12-, and 18-months 
after treatment groups begin   by an Independent Assessor.  
9.8.2.  Any waiting period between informing the prospective participant and 
obtaining consent. Not Applicable.  
9.8.3.  Steps taken to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence.  
Consent will be sought only under circumstances that provide the 
prospective participant sufficient opportunity to consider whether or not 
to participate. The information that is given to the participant shall be in 
language understandable to the participant.  The informed consent does 
not include any exculp atory language through which the participant is 
made to waive or appear to waive any of the participant’s legal rights.  
The informed consent does not release or appear to release the 
investigator, the sponsor, the institution, or its agents from liability  for 
negligence.  
9.9. Provide the language  
9.9.1.  used by those obtaining consent English; we will use simple language at 
no higher than a 5th grade level to minimize misunderstandings with 
participants.  
9.9.2  understood  by the prospective participant or the legally authorized 
representative English, we will use simple language at no higher than a 
5th grade level to minimize  misunderstandings with participants.  
9.10.  Provide location where informed consent will be obtained. In the PI’s office or in a 
private office within the Mental Illness, Research, Education, and Clinical Center 
(MIRECC).  
 
10. Waiver or Alteration of Informed Consent Requirements/Waiver of Requirement to 
Obtain Documentation of Informed Consent  
10.1.  Are you request ing a waiver or alteration of informed consent? (Check all that apply)  
10.1.1.  No  
10.1.2.  Yes; provide justification.         
10.1.3.  Yes; for recruitment purposes only.    
10.2.  Are you requesting a waiver to obtain documentation of informed consent?  
10.2.1.  No  
10.2.2.  Yes; provide justification.  
 
S. Compensation (The amount of compensation may not constitute an undue inducement to participate in 
the research.)  
1. Summarize any financial compensation that will be offered to subjects. Subjects will receive 
$40.00 for each assessment visit completed.  
 
2. Provide the schedule for compensation. Subjects will receive compensation at each 
assessment, including the initial assessment, and at the 6, 12, and 18 month follow -up 
assessments. Subjects will not receive compensation for participation in the CBT, usual 
care, or SE treatment components of th e study , or for check -ins. 
2.1. Per study visit or session. See above, $40.00 per assessment completed  
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 24 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  2.2. Total amount for entire participation. $160 over the 2 year study.  
 
3. Explain how compensation will be provided via cash, voucher, gift card, etc.  The subjects  will 
receive a VA voucher that can be redeemed at the Cashier for cash.  
 
4. If financial compensation will be prorated, explain the process.  N/A 
 
5. Not Applicable -  
 
T. Withdrawal/Early Withdrawal  
1. Describe how and when a subject may withdrawal from the study.   Subjects may withdraw 
from the study at any time without consequences by contacting the PI  in writing . 
Subjects may also inform any research staff member of their desire to discontinue their 
participation in the research study at any time. Staff members will then inform Dr. 
Sayers . 
 
2. Provide procedures for the orderly termination of participation by the participant and if any 
consequences would result from early withdrawal from the study.  Subjects may withdraw 
from the study at any time without consequences. Subjects  who terminate fro m study 
treatment , but who are willing to remain active in the assessment portion of the 
research, will be followed  by phone  and encouraged to attend assessment visits  at 6-
months, 12 -months, and 18 -months after treatment groups begin , and check -ins at 3 -, 6-, 
9-, 12-, 15-, and 18 -months after treatment groups begin .  They will be referred back to 
their treatment team who will have been following them during their participation and 
kept informed of any study related matters.  
 
3. Explain if survival data is req uired.  If so, clarify how data will be obtained. Not Applicable.  
 
4. Not Applicable; subjects not recruited; chart review.   
 
U. Risk/Benefit Assessment  
1. Potential Study Risks  
1.1. Describe and assess all of the following risks that may be associated with the research:  
1.1.1.  Physical – Assessment procedures at baseline are expected to take 
approximately 4 -5 hours, while follow -up assessment sessions are 
expected to take approximately 3 -4 hours. Check -ins will take 
approximately 15 -minutes. Therapy sessions will take approximately 1 
hour . Subjects may become uncomfortable during periods of prolonged 
sitting, and will be encouraged to requests breaks whenever necessary. 
Research staff will frequently check -in with subjects to determine if a 
break is necessary, and will be encouraged to sup ply breaks if they feel 
this is in the best interest of the subject.  
1.1.2.  Psychological  - Subjects  may experience anxiety while completing the 
assessments or during iCBT sessions. They may feel uncomfortable 
answering questions, and may refuse any such questions. They may also 
feel tired or frustrated during the computerized training. They may be 
frustrated or stressed by the demands of looking for and maintaining 
employment in the SE setting. Subjects  may become frustrated or angry 
with each other in the group setting.   
1.1.3.  Social - NA 
1.1.4.  Economic -NA 
1.1.5.  Monetary - NA 
1.1.6.  Legal  - NA 
1.1.7.  Loss of confidentiality There  is a risk for breaches of confidentiality, 
especially in the setting of group treatment.  All efforts will be taken to 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 25 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  minimize this risk (i.e., secure storage of research documents, reviewing 
confidentiality in the therapy groups).   
1.1.8.  Assess the likelihood and seriousness of such risks. – The likelihood of 
physical and psychological risks occurring is high, however the 
seriousness of these risks is considered minimal. The likelihood of a loss 
of confidentiality is moderate (given the group therapy session); the 
seriousness of this risk is considered moderate.   
1.1.9.  Other – There may be other unforeseen risks. Subjects and the IRB will be 
notified in a timely manner if additional risks are discovered.  
1.2. Specify what steps will be taken to minimize these risks.  Subjects  will be counseled 
by their supported employment specialist/therapist if they are experiencing 
stress or agitation. They will be allowed to leave a group at any time if they feel it 
is necessary. As is part of the supported employment program, empl oyment 
specialists will advocate for subjects with the employer should the subject be 
experiencing extra stress. This will be routinely done as part of the supported 
employment paradigm and no t because the subject is involved in a research trial.  
If a subject becomes severely agitated, he or she will be brought to the 
emergency room for psychiatric evaluation by study staff and VA police.  
1.3. If methods of research create potential risks, describe other methods, if any, that were 
considered and why they will not be used.  Group interventions incur more risks 
than individual interventions, such as breaches of confidentiality and friction 
between group members. However, the benefits of a group approach to CBT  and 
cognitive remediation outweigh the risks. The ben efits relate to the additional 
learning subjects do in the group setting.  
1.4. If chart review, breach of confidentiality is always a concern.  Specify what steps will be 
taken to minimize these risks.  Not Applicable.  
 
2. Potential Study Benefits  
2.1. Assess the potential benefits to be gained by the individual subject, as well as benefits 
that may accrue to society in general as a result of the planned work.  Although 
antipsychotic medications have been readily available for more than half a 
century, t he impact of these agents on functional outcomes has been modest, 
even when medication regimes have been optimized. By contrast, psychiatric 
rehabilitation programs have been shown to improve psychosocial functioning. 
Vocational rehabilitation services, in  particular supported employment (SE), have 
the best evidence base. As compared to those patients not participating in such 
services, subject s successfully engaged in SE are more likely to be working 
competitive jobs, working full time, earning higher wage s, and reporting a higher 
quality of life. Furthermore, steady employment has been shown to generate 
significant savings in the use of mental health services use compared to subject s 
who are minimally employed.  
2.2. If the subject does not receive any direct be nefit, then it must be stated here and in the 
consent form.  Not Applicable.  
 
3. Alternate Procedures  
3.1 Describe the alternatives available to the subject outside the research context.  The 
alternative for subject s is not to participate in the study and to continue treatment 
as usual with their clinical team receiving medications, supported employment, 
and therapy as prescribed routinely.  
3.2 If none, state that the alternative is not to take part in this research  study at all.  Not 
Applicable.  
 
V. Data and Safety M onitoring Board (DSMB) or Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) ( All Phase III 
studies are required to have a DSMB.  However, the IRB has the right to require a DSMB with any 
study.)  
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 26 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  1. Will an independent DSMB or DMC oversee the project?  YES     NO N/A 
1.1. If yes, please provide contact information for the DSMB or DMC or Coordinating Center 
Representative and atta ch a copy of the charter.  
              Name:                                              Phone Number:        
             Title:                                                     E-mail:        
 
2. If a DSMB or DMC will not monitor this study, who will monitor this study? Check all that 
apply.  
   Principal Investigator  
   Sponsor  
   VA Cooperative Studies Program  
   Safety monitoring committee  
 
W. Data Monitoring (Monitoring plans describe how a monitor, independent of the study team, regularly 
inspects study records to ensure the study is adhering to the study protocol and applicable research 
regulations and CMCVAMC  requirements.  Monitoring plans do not necessaril y require the use of an 
independent Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB).  Such independent boards are usually 
reserved for high -risk phase I studies, or large, multi -center phase III trials.  Federally funded studies 
may require the use of an independe nt DSMB .)   
1. Describe the data monitoring plan  (All protocols must have a data monitoring plan appropriate 
for the potential risks and the complexity of the study.)  The PI and the rest of the study team 
will perform regular data monitoring to inspect study records to ensure the study is 
adhering to the study protocol and applicable research regulations and CMCVAMC  
requirements. This data monitoring will occur monthly and be overseen by the PI.  
 
2. Describe how protocol deviations, adverse events, serious adverse events, breaches of 
confidentiality, unanticipated adverse device effect (UADE), and unanticipated or 
unexpected problems will be reported to the CMCVAMC  IRB and sponsor  (Refer to the 
CMCVAMC  IRB Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) Manual for reporting guidelines.)    
Protocol deviations, serious adverse events, unanticipated or unexpected problems and 
breaches of confidentiality will be reported to the CMCV AMC  IRB via email using the 
appropriate CMCVAMC  forms in a timely manner (no more than 5 days) after learning of 
the event. Adverse events that are not considered serious will be reported to the IRB at 
the time of continuing review.     
2.1. Describe the management of information obtained that might be relevant to participant 
protections such as:  
2.1.1.  Unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others: We will update 
the informed consent form and make existing subject s aware of the new 
information thr ough a revised informed consent procedure.  
2.1.2.  Interim results: We will update the informed consent form and make 
existing subject s aware of the new information through a revised 
informed consent procedure.  
2.1.3.  Protocol modifications: We will update the informed c onsent form and 
make existing subject s aware of the new information through a revised 
informed consent procedure.  
 
3. If applicable, define the plan for subjects if research shows results such as:  
3.1. Unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others  – Subjects and the IRB 
will be informed in a timely manner (as above) should any unanticipated risks to 
subjects be identified .  
3.2. Interim results - The IRB will be notified of interim results at the time of continuing 
review.  
3.3. Protocol modifications  The IRB will be notified of requests for protocol modification 
prior to the institution of any modified procedures, either at the time of continuing 
review or in a stand -alone amendment request. Subjects will be notified in a 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 27 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  timely manner about any protocol modif ications that have a direct impact on 
research subjects (e.g., changes to consent form). If necessary, informed consent 
will be re -obtained .  
 
To ensure the safety of participants, review of all collected information in the form of 
surveys and interview da ta will be conducted by study staff.  If any current evidence of 
major depression, suicidal ideation, or homicidal ideation with no intent is present, this 
information will be discussed with the participant by a psychiatrist or doctoral level 
psychologist.  The information will be provided to their mental health care provider for 
follow -up.  In the case that a subject does not have a mental health care provider (e.g., 
they have left care against advice and/or after enrollment in the research study) they will  
be referred appropriately for treatment.  If indicated, assistance will be provided in 
making this contact. If suicidal ideation or homicidal ideation with intent is present or 
there are reports of abuse of a child or elder, the participant will be referr ed for 
evaluation in the nearest emergency room and the treating mental health care provider 
will be notified.  In emergent situations, emergency assistance will be sought from 
hospital security and/or by contacting 911 emergency services.  Subjects may be 
withdrawn from the study if they are considered a risk to themselves or others. Subjects 
may continue with the study if they are psychologically stable, even if they do not have a 
current treating psychiatrist. However, they will be encouraged to reestabli sh clinical 
care.  
 
4. Statistical Analysis  
4.1. Include statistical power calculations and the assumptions made in making these 
calculations.  
Power analysis  
For the primary outcome  variable (composite index of workforce participation) , 
and secondary outcome, Work  Behavior Inventory (WBI), we  used an uncorrected 
alpha level (Type 1 error rate) of 0.05 in designing our study. There are many 
different perspectives on adjusting for multiple comparisons in general, and 
randomized trials in particular. A number of resea rchers believe that with a 
primary outcome and all other outcomes treated as secondary (i.e., exploratory) 
there is no need for multiple comparisons.  
 
This study is powered to detect a clinically significant difference between iCBT 
and the usual care  condi tions. Meta -analysis of medical and behavioral outcomes 
indicates that a medium effect -size between conditions will have a significant 
impact on quality of life. In a previous study we observed an average effect of 
about d=0.55 SD. To allow for a somewhat smaller effect in this proposed study, 
we design our study to have 80% power to detect clinically significant effect of 
d=0.5 SD. In the pilot data, we found a within -subject correlation structure 
consistent with a stationary autoregressive process with co rrelation parameter 
0.4. We also assume a dropout rate of 20% for these power calculations. With 
these assumptions on effect size, covariance structure, and dropout rates, and 
with a two -sided alpha level of 0.05, the methods of Hedeker et al.86 estimate t hat 
a sample size of 48 subject s per group will provide 80% power for the test of our 
primary hypothesis.  
 
We believe that this is a conservative estimate, based on the larger effect size 
observed in our prior study, and the higher than expected dropout ra te used in 
the calculation, In addition, our analyses will use the baseline measure of 
Psychosocial Functioning as a covariate, which should reduce the standard 
errors in our test, and therefore increase the smallest detectable effect size.  
 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 28 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  4.2. Define plans for data and statistical analysis, including key elements of the statistical 
plan, stopping rules and endpoints.  
Planned Analyses  
 
(i) Overview  
Logistic, log -linear and linear random effects models (hierarchical regression 
models) will be imp lemented with random intercepts and slopes for longitudinal 
binary, count, and continuous outcomes, respectively. These models will contain 
separate main effects for change from baseline to each follow -up visit at 6, 12, 
and 18 months, main effect for the treatment, and interactions between the visit 
and treatment indicator variables. For each of the primary ( workforce 
participation indices ) and the secondary ( Work Behavior Inventory, Specific 
Levels of Function) outcomes, separate intent -to-treat ( ITT) tes ts and estimates 
(with 95% confidence intervals) of randomized group contrasts at 6, 12, and 18 
months will be obtained from the estimates of the respective time -treatment 
interactions.  
 
We will assess residuals in the longitudinal linear random effects m odel with 
normal QQ plots and estimation of the skewness and kurtosis coefficients. If 
these are coefficients exceed their classical cut -offs of 3 and the QQ plots 
confirm skewness and/or kurtosis, we will then perform a longitudinal analysis 
based on a ra ndom effects generalized linear model with a gamma error 
distribution (with SAS Proc GLIMMIX) that handles skewed and kurtotic 
distributions. We will fit such a model with identity link function (linear mean 
model), such that the resulting estimates and te sts are comparable to those of 
the normal error random effects model. We will compare the estimates and p -
values. If the two approaches agree with respect to significance at the specified 
alpha level, then we will use the results from the linear random eff ects model with 
normal error. If they disagree we will base results on the gamma error distribution 
model.  
 
Prior to each hierarchical analysis, baseline outcomes, pre -treatment assessment 
scores, and demographics (except gender which by definition is bala nced due to 
be a stratification factor in the randomization) will be compared between the two 
treatments at the two -sided alpha = .05 level. Any significant baseline variables 
will be included as covariates in the hierarchical regression models. We will al so 
perform as a sensitivity analysis based on an adjustment of the ITT models for 
post -randomization  confounding due to differences in medication patterns 
between the randomized groups. Such adjustments  will be based on a causal 
modeling approach that di stinguishes between direct effects of the iCBT 
intervention, on the one hand, and  differences in medication patterns, on the 
other, using randomization and its products with baseline covariates as the 
instrumental variables to control for unmeasured confo unding due to choice of 
medication.  
 
While the present study is designed to minimize lost observations, the proposed 
random effects or hierarchical regression approach is superior to last 
observation carried forward in minimizing bias and Type 1 error and inferentially 
equivalent to multiple imputation.79 To assess the sensitivity of treatment effect 
estimates to missing data, we will compare the results under the above 
hierarchical regression models with those based on shared parameter models 
that account for informative missingness that is dependent on unobserved 
outcomes through a latent variable.80 If the results between the two approaches 
are similar then we will present the proposed hierarchical regression models as 
robust to informative missing data; otherwise we will note that the results may be 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 29 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  sensitive to informative missing data and augment them with those based on the 
shared parameter model.  
 
(ii) Work outcome. The primary trial outcome measure , workforce participation 
(composite index)  at 6, 12 and 18 months analyzed in the manner described 
above. A significant ITT difference on the total WBI score across 6 and 12 months 
would support the hypothesis that iCBT is more efficacious than usual care  at 
improving work outcomes by the end of treatmen t (Primary Aim 1). Similarly, WBI 
score at 18 months is a secondary outcome, and a separate ITT effect on work 
outcomes at 18 months with the respective month -treatment interaction in favor 
of iCBT would support the hypothesis that it promotes better work outcomes 
than usual care  during the 6 months after the completion of treatment (Secondary 
Aim 2).   
 
(iii) Functional outcome. The second trial outcome measure s include the Work 
Behavior Inventory and the total score on the Specific Levels of Functioning 
Inventory (SLOF) at 12 months A significant ITT difference on the WBI and the 
total SLOF score across 6 , 12 months would support the hypothesis that ICBT is 
more efficacious than usual care  at improving fun ctioning by the end of treatment 
(Secondary Aim 1). Similarly, WBI and SLOF total score at 18 months is a 
secondary outcome, and the separate ITT effects on functioning at 18 months 
with the respective month -treatment interaction in favor of iCBT would sup port 
the hypothesis that it promotes better functioning than usual care  during the 6 
months after the completion of treatment (Secondary Aim 3).  
 
(iv) Neurocognitive  performance. Following previously established procedures, 
accuracy scores of the neurocognitive domain scores most closely related to 
functioning (attention, verbal memory, and executive function) will be averaged to 
form the variable, neurocognitive perf ormance (NP). The ITT analysis will be the 
same as for WBI.  (Exploratory Aim 1).  
 
(v) Negative symptoms. The sum of the 13 items  of the Brief  Negative Symptom  
Scale  (BNSS ) will serve as the index of negative symptoms. The ITT analysis will 
be the same as for work outcome s. (Exploratory Aim 2).   
 
(vi) Mediation and moderation. We will follow the MacArthur model of identifying 
mediating and moderating variables by adding two terms to the above 
hierarchical regression models: main effects of the putative medi ator on 
outcome, as well as interactive effects of the potential mediator by treatment 
condition (moderation) on outcome. With randomization and its products with 
baseline factors as instrumental variables, we also will test causally the effect of 
the inte rvention on outcome to see if there is full mediation (main effect of 
treatment is not significant) or partial mediation (main effect of treatment is still 
significant). Additionally, mediation analysis requires appropriate temporal 
ordering such that the mediator changes prior to the change in outcome that it 
putatively causes.83 Four classes of model will be tested: (a) whether change in 
symptoms (mediators = SAPS total and BNSS total ) mediates subsequent change 
in work outcomes or functional outcome (DVs  = Workforce participation 
composit ive, WBI total, SLOF total) [Exploratory Aim 3], (b) whether change in 
neurocognition (mediator = composite score) mediates subsequent change in 
work outcome or psychosocial functioning (DVs = Workforce participation 
composit ive, WBI total, SLOF total) [Exploratory Aim 4], (c) whether change in 
dysfunctional attitudes (mediators = defeatist beliefs, a social beliefs) mediates 
subsequent change in work outcomes and psychosocial functioning or 
symptoms (DVs = Workforce pa rticipation composit ive, WBI total, SLOF total) 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 30 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  [Exploratory Aim 5], (d) whether baseline prognostic variables predict treatment 
response  independent of treatment condition and whether prescriptive factors 
predict differential treatment response (prognosti c/moderator variables = illness 
duration, neurocognition, emotion recognition, cognitive insight, defeatist 
beliefs; DVs = Workforce participation composit ive, WBI total, SLOF total) 
[Exploratory Aim 6].  
 
X. Privacy and Confidentiality (Privacy refers to pers ons and to their interest in controlling the access 
of others to themselves .) (Confidentiality refers to protecting information from unauthorized disclosure 
or intelligible interception. ) (Investigator should contact the Privacy Officer for additional deta ils.) 
1. Indicate the type of data that will be received by the Principal Investigator.  Check all 
that apply.  
1.1.  De-identified – Without any identifiers that could link the data to a specific 
participant.  (Contact Privacy Officer for assistance.  If data is coded, it is not 
considered de -identified.)  
1.2.  Identified – Linked to a specific participant by identifiers sufficient to identify          
participants.  (See HIPAA  and Common Rule  Criteria for list of identifiers.)  
1.3.  Coded – Linked to a specific subject by a code rather than a direct identifier. If coded 
is checked, specify:  
1.3.1  Explain who will maintain the link or code. The code key will be maintained 
by the principal investigator and research coordinator on a mapped 
network drive on a secure VA server  (i.e., \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  
\Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT  to Improve Work ). 
1.3.2  Describe who will have access to the link or code. The study staff will have 
access to and maintain the code.  
1.3.3  Provide exact details for how the data is coded . Data will be coded by 
assigning subjects a study number based on consent order upon 
entrance into the study. The code will be kept separate from the rest of 
the data. In addition, when subjects who are in the CBT treatment arm are 
logged on to the Brain HQ server by their SES, they will be assigned a 
separate coded number, which will be maintained by the CMCVAMC  
study staff and not accessible by Posit Science at any time.  CNB d ata are 
uploaded automatically to the VA MIRECC secure server using PGP 
encryption and reviewed for validity (i.e., \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research 
Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT to Improve Work).  
 
2. Does the project require the use of existing Protected Health Information (PHI) from a 
database, medical records, or research records?  YES     NO    N/A 
2.1. If yes,  
2.1.1.  Specify the source of the existing PHI CPRS  
2.1.2.  Indicate the specific data elements/identifiers (e.g., name, address, phone 
numbers, etc.) on the below table.  
2.2. If the study uses an existing database/data warehouse,  
2.2.1.  Provide a description of the database/data warehouse.  Not Applicable  
2.2.2.  Make clear who is r esponsible for maintaining it. Not Applicable  
2.2.3.  Cite any relevant Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for the database/data 
warehouse.   Not Applicable  
2.2.4.  Provide a copy of the SOP.    
 
3. Will PHI be collected prior to obtaining informed consent?   YES     NO    N/A 
3.1. If yes, complete and provide a HIPAA Waiver of Individual Authorization for Disclosure 
of Protected Health Information with this submission.  
 
4. HIPAA Identifiers  - Indicate the PHI that will be  collected from project participants directly or 
indirectly.  
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 31 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  4.1.  Name   
4.2.  All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including street address, city, 
county, precinct, zip code,  and their equivalent geocodes, except for the initial three 
digits of a zip code if, according to the current publicly available data from the Bureau of 
the Census  
4.3.   All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual, and all 
ages over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) indicative of such age, except 
that such ages and  elements may be aggregated into a single category of age 90 or 
older.  
4.3.1.   Birth Date    Date of Death  
4.3.2.   Discharge date    Admission date  
4.3.3.   Appointment Dates   Other Dates (e.g. lab tests, x -rays, MRI, etc.)       
4.4.  Telephone numbers   
4.5.  Fax numbers  
4.6.  Electronic mail addresses   
4.7.  Social Security /Medical Record  Number  
4.8.  Health plan beneficiary numbers   
4.9.  Account Numbers  
4.10.   Certificate/license numbers  
4.11.   Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers  
4.12.   Device identifiers and serial numbers  
4.13.   Web universal resource locators (URLS)  
4.14.   Internet protocol (IP) address numbers  
4.15.  Biometric identifiers, including fingerprints, voiceprints, audio recordings  
4.16.  Full-face photographic images and any comparable images  
4.17.   Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code  
4.18.   Personal and Family History   
4.19.   History and Physical Examination   Progress Notes  
4.20.   Discharge Summary(ies)    Photographs, videotapes, other  images  
4.21.   X-Ray   HIV (testing or infectious disease) records  
4.22.   Diagnostic/Laboratory tests    Sickle cell anemia  
4.23.   Drug Abuse Information    Behavioral Health notes  
4.24.   Alcoholism or Alcohol Use    Operative Reports  
4.25.   Billing records    Medication List  
4.26.   Health Summary Reports    Anatomic Pathology Report  
4.27.  Other Records: Supported Employment records  
 
5. Will participants be contacted from existing PHI?   YES    NO    N/A 
5.1. If yes, clearly explain how participants will be contacted (NOTE: this would be the same 
information as listed under section R.8 identification and recruitment of subjects).  
Potential participants will be identified through the outpatient mental health 
clinic , the inpatient psychiatric unit,  and the Compensated Work Therapy (CWT) 
program at the CMCVAMC. Identification of potential research participants will be 
two-fold: (1) the research team will conduct a review of the caseloads of the 
treating psychiatrists in the CMCVAMC outpatient mental health clinic and 
inpatient psychiatric unit via CPRS review under a Waiver of Individual 
Authorization for Disclosure of Protected Health Information. The research team 
will communicate securely (e.g., via CPRS, encrypted email, secure server) 
regarding p atients who may be eligible for the research study, and confer on the 
appropriateness of research participation; (2) treating psychiatrists in the 
outpatient mental health clinic and inpatient psychiatric unit will identify 
potentially eligible participant s based on interest in SE and interest in learning 
about research. In either case, treating psychiatrists at the outpatient mental 
health clinic and inpatient psychiatric unit will refer individuals with SMI as per 
CMCVAMC standard protocol to the CWT prog ram.  (This referral would be made 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 32 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  regardless of eligibility in the research study.) Providers who refer potentially 
appropriate Veterans will ask them if they would consider participating in the 
research study. The study team will remind the clinician tha t they should 
document this referral in the patient’s chart .  Those who agree will be approached 
by the research staff (the PI, RC, independent assessors, and/or the SE 
specialists) after they are referred to the CWT program through a CPRS consult 
created specifically for study referrals (i.e., SE Research Consult – Vocational 
Rehab Outpt). The consult note will remind providers that they can only refer 
patients who want to hear more about the study. The study team will receive an 
alert in the CPRS system o nce a study consult has been placed. The study team 
will regularly check for consults in the CPRS system. All consults will be received 
and resolved by the study team within 24 business hours, per CMCVAMC 
standard of care.  Providers and the research team m ay also collaborate to 
identify potentially eligible participants with whom the provider has not yet 
discussed SE or study participation to receive a “recruitment opt -in letter” 
describing study participation and requesting that Veterans contact their trea ting 
providers and/or the study team to learn more about the study. Study referrals 
will follow guidelines outlined above and below should the Veteran reach out to 
their provider and/or the research team to learn more about participation.  
 
6. Provide the titl es of the exact individuals who will have access to the collected data.   The 
following members will have access to the data: The PI, the Research Coordinator, the 
Independent Assessors, the Supported Employment Specialists, the Co -investigator, the 
Counseling Psychotherapist Supervisor, the Supported Employment Consultant, the co-
investigator, the study biostatistician  and the DMU administrators . Our study consultant, 
Irene Hurford, MD, will not have access to any study data. Dr. Hurford will assist in the 
interpretation of the results of analyzed data.  
6.1. Explain why these individual will have access to this data.  This is because these are 
the study staff that will be involved in collecting and entering the PHI into the 
database , or supervi sing the collection of PHI . 
 
Y. Information Security (Contact the Information Security Officer for additional assistance regarding 
confidentiality (storage/security) of research data.)  
1. Provide the precise plan how data is to be collected or acquired (repeat the same information 
as listed under “Data Collection” section of this form. At the baseline assessment interview, 
a member of the research team (PI, Co -I, or research coordinator) wi ll administer a 
comprehensive, face -to-face interview that allows for a reliable diagnosis of 
schizophrenia and queries subject  psychosocial functioning levels, symptomatology, 
substance use, service usage , and check -in.  At other assessments, the independ ent 
assessor  will perform semi -structured interviews, collect questionnaire data, administer 
cognitive and performance tests , and  complete the check -in. The Supported 
Employment Specialists will complete the check -ins after treatment groups begin,  which 
are not tied to a n assessment (i.e., at 3 -months, 9 -months, and 15 -months ). They will 
collect data from the WBI at baseline, and at 6-months, 12 -months, and 18 -months after 
treatment groups begin (obtained in the course of standard SE care ). 
 
Some data (e.g., demographics, diagnosis , study enrollment and tracking ) will be stored 
on the centralized VA server and uploaded daily (i.e., \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research 
Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT  to Improve Work ). Research data from the 
questionnaires and some study scales (e.g., SAPS, BSES -SF) will be collected 
electronically via web interface, a password protected website  run within the CMCVAMC 
firewall and stored on the VHAPHIFOCMIRECC direct -entry data server. The server is 
maintained by CMCVAMC FITS.   Interview data and self -report data are entered directly 
onto computers at the research site, by research technicians an d study subjects 
respectively. The technician will be present with the subject through the entire 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 33 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  assessment, and will review each instrument  as it is completed.  CNB d ata are uploaded 
automatically to the VA MIRECC secure server using PGP encry ption and re viewed for 
validity (i.e.,  \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT  to Improve 
Work).  
 
Data from the cognitive remediation program will also be stored on the Posit Science 
server for quality assurance/quality improvement analysis of the program  by the Posit 
Science Company. All data sent to Posit Science will be coded and the code will not be 
available to them. The participants will be logged on to the Brain HQ server (by their SE 
specialist) using a coded numbe r, separate from their study ID number. The Posit 
Science/Brain HQ Company will have no access to the study ID number at any time and 
will not be able to de -code the data in any way. No identifying information will be 
included with the data stored on the P osit Science server  
(https://portal.brainhq.com/?study=best_vet) . Data will be saved on the VA server (i.e., 
\\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT  to Improve Work ). 
 
Media recordings of t he therapy sessions will be stored on the centralized VA server and 
uploaded daily (i.e., \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT  to 
Improve Work ). Recordings will include the subjects’ faces, bodies, and voices.  
 
December 2015 amendment  to change data storage  location : Due to a  system fail ure of 
the DMU at the VA , which wa s the main interface for entering research data for clinical 
studies for Behavioral health / MIRECC , an amendment to this ongoing protocol was 
made to change where data was stored (as detailed above and  in below sections that 
describe data storage) .  This is being done w ith the input from the ISO and PO , and 
under the current PENN -VA MOU on data storage  (even though  there is a separate PENN 
component to our study) . The need to use the DMU at Penn is critical because the use of  
is pen/paper has many problems related to privacy and errors and storage.  
 
Data from the 2 subjects enrolled, but not randomized, will not go to Penn. Data from the 
2 subjects randomized, but not active, will not go to Penn. We will re -consent all active 
subjects (n=6); data for these subjects will only be entered in to the Penn DMU server 
after re -consent/agreement from participants.   
 
We also note that t here was no data loss due to the VA DMU  failure . 
 
April 2016 Amendment to change data storage location from Penn’s Data Management 
Unit (DMU) back to VA DMU .  NOTE:  VA DMU server issues were fixed prior to 
finalization of UPenn DMU server for this study; no participant data was entered in the 
UPenn DMU server . 
 
2. Provide a listin g of the exact research data that will be stored, including but not limited to 
signed, original informed consent and HIPAA authorization forms, case report forms, etc.  
Informed Consent Forms, HIPAA authorizations, tests, recorded sessions, and 
questionnaires/surveys.  
 
3. Indicate how project’s research data (original and all copies) will be stored and provide 
corresponding security systems.   The participant’s research records containing any 
personal health information will never leave the VA ground s.  Hard copies of consents, 
HIPAA authorizations, tests, and surveys , and recorded sessions,  will be stored inside 
of a locked cabinet in the principal investigator’s locked office at the VA in the MIRECC 
of the CMCVAMC . Some e lectronic data, including overall study tracking files , will be 
maintained on the CMCVAMC  secure server  (i.e., \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research 
Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT  to Improve Work ). The data will be coded and the code 
will be maintained separate from the rest of the data, locked in a cabinet in the MIRECC.   
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 34 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  CNB d ata are uploaded automatically to the VA MIRECC secure server using PGP 
encry ption and reviewed for validity (i.e., vhaphiwebcnp 2.v04.med.va.gov/). Data from 
the cognitive remediation program will also be stored on the Posit  Science server for 
quality assurance/quality improvement analysis of  the program  by the Posit Science 
Company. All data sent to Posit Science will be coded and the code will not be available 
to them. The Posit Science/Brain HQ Company will have no access to the study ID 
number at any time and will not be able to de -code the data in an y way. No identifying 
information will be included with the data stored on the Posit Science 
server (https://portal.brainhq.com/?study=best_vet) . Data will be saved on the VA server 
(i.e., \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT to Improv e Work ). 
Research assessment  data (including questionnaire data, clinical assessment data  – 
including use of alcohol/substances , performance measures, supported employment 
tracking and fidelity ratings, and treatment group tracking data) will be housed on the 
VA DMU server ; data will be uploaded to the secure MIRECC server at least quarterly, 
for long -term storage (i.e., \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated 
CBT to Improve Work ).  NOTE:  VA DMU server issues were fixed prior to finalization of 
UPenn DMU server for this study; no participant data was entered in the UPenn DMU 
server . 
 
4. Provide exact location where research data (original and all copies) will be stored and secured.   
Physical research data will be stored in the MIRECC,  CMCVAMC . Some electronic data, 
including overall study tracking files, will be maintained on the CMCVAMC  secure 
server. CNB d ata are uploaded automatically to the VA MIRECC secure server using 
PGP encryption and reviewed for validity (i.e., \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research 
Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT to Improve Work). The data will be coded and the code 
will be maintained separate  from the rest of the data, locked in a cabinet in the MIRECC.  
Data from the cognitive remediation program will also be stored on the Posit Science 
server for quality assurance/quality improvement analysis of  the program  by the Posit 
Science Company. All data sent to Posit Science will be coded and the code will not be 
available to them. The Posit Science/Brain HQ Company will have no access to the study 
ID number at any time and will not be able to de -code the data in an y way. No identifying 
information will be included with the data stored on the Posit Science server  
(https://portal.brainhq.com/?study=best_vet) . Data will be saved on the VA server (i.e., 
\\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT to Impro ve Work ). 
Research assessment data (including questionnaire data, clinical assessment data  – 
including use of alcohol/substances , performance measures, supported employment 
tracking and fidelity ratings, and treatment group tracking data) will be housed on the 
VA DMU server ; data will be uploaded to the secure MIRECC server at least quarterly, for 
long -term storage (i.e., \\VHAPHIF PCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT 
to Improve Work ). 
 
5. Explain how data is to be transported or transmitted from one location to another.  Data from 
the cogn itive remediation program will  be stored on the Posit Science server for quality 
assurance/quality improvement analysis of the program  by the Posit Science Company. 
All data sent to Posit Science will be coded and the code will not be available to them. 
The Posit Science/Brain HQ Company will have no acce ss to the study ID number at any 
time and will not be able to de -code the data in any way. No identifying information will 
be included with the data stored on the Posit Science server  
(https://portal.brainhq.com/?study=best_vet) . Data will be saved on the VA server (i.e., 
\\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT to Improve Work ). 
Research assessment data (including questionnaire data, clinical assessment data  – 
including use of alcohol/substances , performance me asures, supported employment 
tracking and fidelity ratings, and treatment group tracking data) will be housed on the 
VA DMU server ; data will be uploaded to the secure MIRECC server at least quarterly, for 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 35 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  long -term storage (i.e., \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT 
to Improve Work ). 
5.1. Informed Consent discloses PHI transported or transmitted off -site.  YES  NO  
N/A 
5.2. HIPAA Authorization discloses entities to whom PHI will be transported or transmitted.  
YES  NO  N/A 
5.2.1.  List all entities or individuals outside CMCVAMC  to whom data is to be 
disclosed, and the justification for such disclosure and the authority :  
5.3. If yes, list the exact data that will be transmitted :  
5.4. If yes, explain how data will be protected during transmission outside of CMCVAMC :  
5.5. Off-site, provide exact location (If off -site, attach at least one of the following.)  
5.1.1.  Data Use/Transfer Agreement YES    NO    N/A 
5.1.2.  Off-Site Storage/Transfer of Research Data YES    NO    N/A 
5.1.3.  Memorandum of Understanding YES    NO    N/A 
5.1.4.  (Note: VA data disclosed to a non-VA investigator  at an academic affiliate for 
research purposes needs to be approved by the Under Secretary  of Health  or 
designee.)  
 
6. List who is to have access to the data and how they are to access it (anyone who has access 
to the data is responsible for its security).  The following members will have access to the 
data: The PI (Dr. Sayers ), the RC, the Co -investigator (Dr. Grant), the SES, the 
Independent Assessors, the Counseling Psychotherapist Supervisor (Dr. Brinen), the SE 
Consultant (Richard Toscano), the co-investigator (Virginia “Jennie” Keheler) and the 
study biostatistician ( TBD).  They can access the hard copies kept in the MIRECC , as 
well as the electronic copies on the secure server. Our study consultant, Irene Hurford, 
MD, will not have access to any st udy data.   
7. Describe who is to have access and be responsible for the security of the information (e.g., the 
Coordinating Center, the statistician, and PI who has ultimate responsibility).  The following 
members are responsible for the security of the data: The PI (Dr. Sayers ), the RC, the 
independent assessors, the supported employment specialists, the Co -investigator (Dr. 
Grant), the Counseling Psychotherapist Supervisor, the SE Consultant,  the co-
investigator, and the study biostatistician ( TBD). 
 
8. Provide mechanisms used to account for the information.  Only the above -named study staff 
will have access to the information.  
 
9. Give security measures that must be in place to protect individually identifiable information if 
collected or used. The participant’s research records containing any personal health 
information will never leave the VA grounds.  Hard copies of consents, HIPAA 
authorizations, tests, and surveys w ill be stored inside of a locked cabinet in the 
principal investigator’s locked office at the MIRECC , CMCVAMC . Some electronic data, 
including overall study tracking files, will be maintained on the CMCVAMC  secure 
server. Research assessment data (including questionnaire data, clinical assessment 
data – including use of alcohol/substances , performance measures, supported 
employment tracking and fidelity ratings, and treatment group tracking data) will be 
housed on  VA DMU server ; data will be uploa ded to the secure MIRECC server at least 
quarterly, for long -term storage (i.e., \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research Studies \Sayers -
Integrated CBT to Improve Work ).The data will be coded and the code will be maintained 
separate from the rest of the data, locked in a cabinet in the MIRECC . 
 
10. How and to whom a suspected or confirmed loss of VA information is to be reported.   
The Investigator will notify the Information  Security Officer, Privacy Officer, IRB, 
Associate Chief of Staff for Research and Research Compliance Officer within one hour 
of a suspected or confirmed loss of VA information.  
 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 36 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  11. Identify any circumstances that may warrant special safeguards to protect th e rights and 
welfare of subjects who are likely to be vulnerable including, but not limited to, those subjects 
who may be susceptible to coercion or undue influence, and describe appropriate actions to 
provide such safeguards.  Not Applicable  
 
12. Electronic P HI will be stored on the following:  
12.1.  CMCVAMC  desktop computer with password protection and/or encryption. YES  
NO  N/A 
12.1.1.  If yes, identify where the desktop is located.  
12.2.  CMCVAMC  secure server.  YES  NO  N/A 
12.2.1.  If yes, identify the CMCVAMC  server. \\VHAPHIFPCMIRECC  \Research 
Studies \Sayers -Integrated CBT  to Improve Work . 
12.2.2.  External drive that is password protected and/or encrypted.  YES  NO  
N/A 
12.2.2.1.  If yes, identify the external dri ve.       
12.3.  Off-Site server YES  NO  N/A ( If off-site, attach at least one of the following.)  
12.3.1.  Provide exact location and the name of the off-site server :  
12.3.2.  Data Use/Transfer Agreement YES  NO  N/A 
12.3.3.  Off-Site Storage/Transfer of Research Data YES NO N/A 
12.3.4.  Memorandum of Understanding YES    NO    N/A 
 
13. Explain how data is to be transported or transmitted from one location to another .   
 
14. Informed Consent discloses PHI transported or transmitted off -site.  YES  NO  N/A 
 
15. HIPAA Authorization discloses entities to whom  PHI will be transported or transmitted.  YES 
NO  N/A 
16. List all entities or individuals outside CMCVAMC  to whom data is to be disclosed, and the 
justification for such disclosure and the authority : Not applicable.  
 
17. Clarify what protection exists for a database.  PHI will be housed on secured CMCVAMC  
servers that reside behind the VA firewall.   
17.1.  Data is stored:  
17.1.1.  With identifiers - YES   NO 
17.1.2.  Coded - YES   NO 
17.1.3.  De-Identified -  YES   NO 
17.1.4.  Provide the exact  list of identifiers that will be stored. The list of identifiers 
that will be stored is as follows: Name; address ; telephone number ; 
date of birth ; social security/medical record number ; date of 
administration  
 
18. Describe th e pla n for protecting research data from improp er use or dis closure.  Research 
data will only be accessible to research staff .  
18.1.  The Investigator must notify the Information Security Officer, Privacy Officer, IRB, 
Associate Chief of Staff for Research and Research Compliance Officer within 
one hour of the improper use or disclosure.  
 
19. Is there a plan to apply for a Certificate of Confidentiality ?  YES    NO    N/A 
19.1.  If yes, provide a copy of the certificate with this application or to the IRB Office as soon 
as received.        
 
20. Record Retention :   
20.1.  The required records, including the investigator’s research records, must be retained 
until disposition instructions are approved by the National Archives and Records 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 37 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  Adminis tration and are published in VHA's Records Control Schedule (RCS 10 -1).  VHA 
Handbook 1200.05 §26.h   
20.2.  Until a schedule for local research records is published, ALL records including 
identifiers must be retained.” ORO/ORD Guidance on Informed Consent Form 
Modifications Addressing VA Record Retention Requirements (July 23, 2009)   
20.3.  If there are additional procedures for record retention, explain further.  N/A 
 
Z. Qualification of the Investigators  
1. Provide a description of the qualifications of each investigator/co -investigator  and their specific 
role in the study. Principal Investigator, Steven Sayers Ph.D.  Dr. Sayers is the Director of 
the Advanced Fellowship Program in Mental Illness Research and Treatment, and 
investigator and Co -Associate Direct or of Education for  VISN4.   
 
Co-Investigator s:  
 Dr. Grant developed the iCBT model. He has a long track record of research into 
CBT for psychosis with Dr. Aaron Beck. He will provide all the CBT trainings and 
monitor for fidelity and reliability. He will oversee training on structured 
interviews, questi onnaires and oversee reliability. He will provide clinical and 
diagnostic guidance.  
 Ms. Keheler is an expert in the field of Supported Employment. She will provide 
supervision and evaluations for our Supported Employment Specialists/Program.  
 
2. If applicabl e, the Principal Investigator must identify a qualified clinician to be responsible for all 
study related healthcare decisions. Not Applicable  
 
3. PI should submit a current, dated CV with each new initial review.  
 
  
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 38 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  References:  
 
1. Wu EQ, Birnbaum HG, Shi L, et al. The economic burden of schizophrenia in the United States in 
2002. J Clin Psychiatry. 2005;66(9):1122 -1129.  
2. Saha S, Chant D, Welham J, McGrath J. A systematic review of the prevalence of schizophrenia. 
PLoS Med. 2005;2( 5):413 -433. 
3. APA. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM -IV-TR, 4th ed., text revision) . 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2000.  
4. Swartz MS, Perkins DO, Stroup TS, et al. Effects of Antipsychotic Medications on Psych osocial 
Functioning in Patients With Chronic Schizophrenia: Findings From the NIMH CATIE Study. 
American Journal of Psychiatry. 2007;164(3):428 -436. 
5. Dixon LB, Dickerson F, Bellack AS, et al. The 2009 schizophrenia PORT psychosocial treatment 
recommendat ions and summary statements. Schizophr Bull. Jan 2010;36(1):48 -70. 
6. Cook JA, Leff HS, Blyler CR, et al. Results of a multisite randomized trial of supported 
employment interventions for individuals with severe mental illness. Arch Gen Psychiatry. May 
2005;62(5):505 -512. 
7. Bush PW, Drake RE, Xie H, McHugo GJ, Haslett WR. The long -term impact of employment on 
mental health service use and costs for persons with severe mental illness. Psychiatr Serv. Aug 
2009;60(8):1024 -1031.  
8. Kopelowicz A, Liberman RP, S ilverstein SM. Psychiatric Rehabilitation. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock 
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock's comprehensive Textbooks of psychiatry (9th ed).  Vol II 
2009:4329 -4370.  
9. Kreyenbuhl J, Nossel IR, Dixon LB. Disengagement from mental health treatment among 
individuals with schizophrenia and strategies for facilitating connections to care: a review of the 
literature. Schizophr Bull. 2009;35(4):696 -703. 
10. Grant PM, Huh GA, Pe rivoliotis D, Stolar NM, Beck AT. Randomized trial to evaluate the efficacy 
of cognitive therapy for low -functioning patients with schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. Feb 
2012;69(2):121 -127. 
11. Lehman AF. Vocational rehabilitation in schizophrenia. Schizo phr Bull. 1995;21(4):645 -656. 
12. Bond GR, Drake RE, Becker DR. An update on randomized controlled trials of evidence -based 
supported employment. Psychiatr Rehabil J. Spring 2008;31(4):280 -290. 
13. Drake RE, Becker DR, Clark RE, Mueser KT. Research on the individual placement and support 
model of supported employment. Psychiatr Q. Winter 1999;70(4):289 -301. 
14. Bush PW, Drake RE, Xie H, McHugo GJ, Haslett WR. The long -term impact of employment on 
mental health service use and costs for persons with severe mental illness. Psychiatr Serv. Aug 
2009;60(8):1024 -1031.  
15. Dixon LB, Dickerson F, Bellack AS, et al. The 2009 schizophrenia PORT psychosocial treatment 
recommendations and summary statements. Schizophr Bull. Jan;36(1):48 -70. 
16. Lysaker PH, Bond G, Davis LW, Bryson GJ, Bell MD. Enhanced cognitive -behavioral therapy for 
vocational rehabilitation in schizophrenia: Effects on hope and work. J Rehabil Res Dev. Sep-Oct 
2005;42(5):673 -682. 
17. Vauth R, C orrigan PW, Clauss M, et al. Cognitive strategies versus self -management skills as 
adjunct to vocational rehabilitation. Schizophr Bull. Jan 2005;31(1):55 -66. 
18. Bond GR. Supported employment: evidence for an evidence -based practice. Psychiatr Rehabil J. 
Spring 2004;27(4):345 -359. 
19. Resnick SG, Rosenheck R. Dissemination of supported employment in Department of Veterans 
Affairs. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2007;44(6):867 -877. 
20. McGurk SR, Mueser KT, Harvey PD, LaPuglia R, Marder J. Cognitive and symptom predict ors of 
work outcomes for clients with schizophrenia in supported employment. Psychiatr Serv. Aug 
2003;54(8):1129 -1135.  
21. Beck AT, Rector NA, Stolar NM, Grant PM. Schizophrenia: Cognitive Theory, Research and 
Therapy . NY: Guilford Press; 2009.  
22. Grant P M, Beck AT. Defeatist beliefs as a mediator of cognitive impairment, negative symptoms, 
and functioning in schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. Jul 2009;35(4):798 -806. 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 39 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  23. Horan WP, Rassovsky Y, Kern RS, Lee J, Wynn JK, Green MF. Further support for the role of 
dysfunctional attitudes in models of real -world functioning in schizophrenia. Journal of Psychiatric 
Research. 2010;44(8):499 -505. 
24. Quinlan T, Granholm E. Defeatist performance attitudes mediate relationships between 
neurocognition and negative symptoms  and functioning in schizophrenia. Paper presented at: 
Society for Research in Psychopathology; Sept. 2009; Minneapolis.  
25. Gallegos Y, Link P, Fish S, Granholm E. Defeatist performance beliefs and diminished motivation 
in schizophrenia. International Con gress on Schizophrenia Research . San Diego, ; April, 2009.  
26. Beck AT, Grant PM, Huh GA, Perivoliotis D, Chang NA. Dysfunctional attitudes and expectancies 
in deficit syndrome schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2011.  
27. Carpenter WT, Jr., Heinrichs DW, Wagma n AMI. Deficit and nondeficit forms of schizophrenia: 
The concept. Am J Psychiatry. 1988;145(5):578 -583. 
28. Perivoliotis D, Grant PM, Beck AT. The impact of success in low -functioning schizophrenia: an 
analogue study. International Conference on Schizophrenia Research . Colorado Springs, CO; 
April 02, 2011.  
29. Kern RS, Green MF, Mitchell S, Kopelowicz A, Mintz J, Liberman RP. Extensions of errorless 
learning for social problem -solving deficits in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. Mar 
2005;162(3):513 -519. 
30. Silverstein SM, Spaulding WD, Menditto AA, et al. Attention shaping: a reward -based learning 
method to enhance skills training outcomes in schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. Jan 2009;35(1):222 -
232. 
31. Grant PM, Beck AT. Asocial beliefs as predictors  of asocial behavior in schizophrenia. Psychiatry 
Res. 2010;177(1 -2):65 -70. 
32. Granholm E, Ben -Zeev D, Link PC. Social disinterest attitudes and group cognitive -behavioral 
social skills training for functional disability in schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2009;35(874 -883).  
33. Grant PM, Beck AT. Evaluation sensitivity as a moderator of communication disorder in 
schizophrenia. Psychol Med. Jul 2009;39(7):1211 -1219.  
34. Norman RMG, Malla AK, Cortese L, et al. Symptoms and cognition as predictors of community 
functioning: A prospective analysis. Am J Psychiatry. 1999;156:400 -405. 
35. Spaulding W, Nolting J. Psychotherapy for schizophrenia in the year 2030: prognosis and 
prognostication. Schizophr Bull. Oct 2006;32 Suppl 1:S94 -105. 
36. Ayllon T, Azrin N. The measurement and reinforcement of behavior in psychotics. J Exp Anal 
Behav. 1965;50:357 -383. 
37. Liberman RP, Wallace CJ. Social and independent living skills. Basic conversations skills module.  
Camarillo, CA: Author; 1990.  
38. Hurfor d IM, Kalkstein S, Hurford MO. Cognitive Rehabilitation in Schizophrenia: Strategies to 
Improve Cognition. Psychiatric Times. 2011;28(3):43 -46. 
39. Kurtz MM, Moberg PJ, Gur RC, Gur RE. Results from randomized, controlled trials of the effects 
of cognitive remediation on neurocognitive deficits in patients with schizophrenia. Psychol Med. 
Apr 2004;34(3):569 -570. 
40. McGurk SR, Twamley EW, Sitzer DI, McHugo GJ, Mueser KT. A meta -analysis of cognitive 
remediation in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. Dec 2007;164 (12):1791 -1802.  
41. Grynszpan O, Perbal S, Pelissolo A, et al. Efficacy and specificity of computer -assisted cognitive 
remediation in schizophrenia: a meta -analytical study. Psychol Med. Jan;41(1):163 -173. 
42. Kurtz MM. Neurocognition as a predictor of res ponse to evidence -based psychosocial 
interventions in schizophrenia: what is the state of the evidence? Clin Psychol Rev. 
Jun;31(4):663 -672. 
43. McGurk SR, Mueser KT, Feldman K, Wolfe R, Pascaris A. Cognitive training for supported 
employment: 2 -3 year outcomes of a randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry. Mar 
2007;164(3):437 -441. 
44. McGurk SR, Mueser KT, Pascaris A. Cognitive training and su pported employment for persons 
with severe mental illness: one -year results from a randomized controlled trial. Schizophr Bull. 
Oct 2005;31(4):898 -909. 
45. Warman D, Grant P, Sullivan K, Caroff S, Beck AT. Individual and group cognitive behavioral 
therapy for schizophrenia: a pilot investigation. Journal of Psychiatric Practice. 2005;11:27 -34. 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 40 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  46. Peer JE, Spaulding WD. Heterogeneity in recovery of psychosocial functioning during psychiatric 
rehabilitation: an exploratory study using latent growth mixture m odeling. Schizophr Res. 
2007;93(1 -3):186 -193. 
47. Mueser KT, Bond GR, Drake RE, Resnick SG. Models of community care for severe mental 
illness: a review of research on case management. Schizophr Bull. 1998;24(1):37 -74. 
48. Wykes T, Huddy V, Cellard C, McGu rk SR, Czobor P. A meta -analysis of cognitive remediation 
for schizophrenia: methodology and effect sizes. Am J Psychiatry. May 2011;168(5):472 -485. 
49. Heinssen RK. The cognitive exoskeleton: environmental interventions in cogntive rehabilitation. 
In: Cor rigan PW, Yudofsky SC, eds. Cognitive rehabilitation for neuropsychiatric disorders . 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press; 1996.  
50. Kingdon DG, Turkington D. Cognitive -behavioral therapy of schizophrenia . New York: Guilford; 
1994.  
51. Wykes T, Steel  C, Everitt B, Tarrier N. Cognitive behavior therapy for schizophrenia: effect sizes, 
clinical models, and methodological rigor. Schizophr Bull. May 2008;34(3):523 -537. 
52. Eaton WW, Chen C. Epidemiology. In: Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, Perkins DO, eds. Textb ook of 
Schizophrenia . Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.; 2006:17 -37. 
53. Brabban A, Tai S, Turkington D. Predictors of outcome in brief cognitive behavioral therapy for 
schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2009;35(5):859 -864. 
54. World Health  Organization Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0) 2010.  
55. Bryson G, Bell MD, Lysaker P, Zito W. The Work Behavior Inventory: A scale for the assessment 
of work behavior for people with severe mental illness. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal. 
1997;20(4):47 -55. 
56. Schneider LC, Struenging EL. SLOF: a behavioral rating scale for assessing the mentally ill. Soc 
Work Res Abstr. 1983;19:9 -21. 
57. Kirkpatrick B, Strauss GP, et. al. The brief negative symptom scale: psychometric properties. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin.  2011;37:300 -305.  
58. Andreasen NC. The Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS) . Iowa City, IA: 
University of Iowa; 1983.  
59. Ventura J, Green MF, Shaner A, Liberman RP. Training and quality assurance with the brief 
psychiatric rating scale: "the drift busters.". International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric 
Research. 1993;3:221 -244. 
60. Leifker FR, Bowie CR, Harvey PD. Determinants of everyday outcomes in schizophrenia: the 
influences of cognitive impairment, function al capacity, and symptoms. Schizophr Res. 
2009;115:82 -87. 
61. Schennach -Wolff R, Jäger M, Seemüller F, et al. Social disability and symptomatic outcome in 
schizophrenia -where are the unmet needs of schizophrenia patients? International Journal of 
Psychosocial Rehabilitation. 2010;15(2):23 -40. 
62. Andreasen NC, Carpenter WT, Kane JM, Lasser RA, Marder SR, Weinberger DR. Remission in 
schizophrenia: proposed criteria and rationale for consensus. Am J Psychiatry. 2005;162(3):44 1-
449. 
63. Weissman A, Beck AT. Development and validation of the Dysfunctional Attitude Scale. Paper 
presented at: Annual Meeting of the Association for Advancement of Behavior Therapy. , 
November, 1978; Chicago.  
64. Eckblad M, Chapman LJ, Chapman JP, Mis hlove M. Revised social anhedonia scale . Madison: 
University of Wisconsin; 1982.  
65. Beck AT, Brown GK, Steer RA, Kuyken W, Grisham J. Psychometric properties of the Beck Self -
Esteem Scales. Behav Res Ther. 2001; 39:115–124. 66. Frisch MB. Manual and treatment 
guide for the Quality of Life Inventory . Minneapolis, MN: National Computer Systems, Inc; 1994.  
67. Beck AT, Baruch E, Balter JM, Steer RA, Warman DM. A new instrument for measuring insight: 
the Beck Cognitive Insight Scale. Schizophr Res. 2004;6 8:319 -329. 
68. Blanchard JJ, Mueser KT, Bellack AS. Anhedonia, positive and negative affect, and social 
functioning in schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 1998;24:413 -424. 
69. Riggs SE, Grant PM, Perivoliotis D, Beck AT. Assessment of cognitive insight: a quali tative 
review. Schizophr Bull. Mar 2012;38(2):338 -350. 
HRPP Acknowledged:  03/2015                                                                                   Page 41 of 41 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
 APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB 1 on 05/14/2017  70. Gur RC, Richard J, Hughett P, et al. A cognitive neuroscience -based computerized battery for 
effeicient measurement of individual differences: standardization and initial construct validation. J 
Neurosci Methods. 2010;187:254 -262. 
71. Hurford IM, Marder SR, Keefe RS, Reise SP, Bilder RM. A brief cognitive assessment tool for 
schizophrenia: construction of a tool for clinicians. Schizophr Bull. May;37(3):538 -545. 
72. Patterson TL, Goldman S, McKibbin  CL, Hughs T, Jeste DV. UCSD performance -based skills 
assessment: Development of a new measure of everyday functioning for severely mentally ill 
adults. Schizophr Bull. 2001;27(2):235 -245. 
73. Mausbach BT, Harvey PD, Goldman SR, Jeste DV, Patterson TL. Dev elopment of a brief scale of 
everyday functioning in persons with serious mental illness. Schizophr Bull. Nov 2007;33(6):1364 -
1372.  
74. Perivoliotis D, Grant PM, Beck AT. Cognitive behavior therapy for schizophrenia: a 
comprehensive treatment manual . New Y ork: Guilford; in press.  
75. Wykes T, Reeder C. Cognitive remediation therapy for schizophrenia . New York: Routledge; 
2005.  
76. Xia J, Merinder LB, Belgamwar MR. Psychoeducation for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2011(6):CD002831.  
77. Becker DR, Smith J, Tanzman B, Drake RE, Tremblay T. Fidelity of supported employment 
programs and employment outcomes. Psychiatr Serv. Jun 2001;52(6):834 -836. 
78. Small D, Ten Have T, Cheng J. Random effects logistic models for analyzing efficacy of a 
longitudinal randomized treatment with non -adherence. Stat Med. 2006;25:1981 -2007.  
79. Schafer JL, Graham JW. Missing data: our view of the state of the art. Psychol Methods. 
2002;7(2):147 -177. 
80. Ten Have TR, Pulkstenis E, Kunselman A, Landis JR. Mixed effe cts logistic regression models for 
longitudinal binary response data with informative dropout. Biometrics. 1998;54:367 -383. 
81. Green MF, Kern RS, Braff DL, Mintz J. Neurocognitive deficits and functional outcome in 
schizophrenia: Are we measuring the “rig ht stuff”? Schizophr Bull. 2000;26(1):119 -136. 
82. Kraemer HC, Wilson GT, Fairburn CG, Agras WS. Mediators and moderators of treatment effects 
in randomized clinical trials. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2002;59(10):877 -883. 
83. Gelfand LA, Mensinger JL, Tenhave T.  Mediation analysis: a retrospective snapshot of practice 
and more recent directions. J Gen Psychol. Apr 2009;136(2):153 -176. 
84. Rothman K. No adjustments are needed for multiple comparisons. Epidemiology. 1990;1:43 -46. 
85. Norman GR, Sloan JA, Wyrwich KW. Interpretation of changes in health -related quality of life: the 
remarkable universality of half a standard deviation. Med Care. 2003;41(5):582 -592. 
86. Hedeker D, Gibbons RD. Application of random -effects pattern -mixture m odels for missing data in 
longitudinal studies. Psychol Methods. 1997;1(2):64 -78. 
87. Freedland KE1, Mohr DC, Davidson KW, Schwartz JE Usual and unusual care: existing practice 
control groups in randomized controlled trials of behavioral interventions. Psy chosom Med. 2011 
May;73(4):323 -35. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e318218e1fb . 