Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
1 
 1) Cover Sheet : 
 
Title: Precise Coil Positioning in Navigated Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (nTMS) Fe asibility in 
Depression Patients Trial  
 
Short Title : Confident Tr ial 
 
Protocol Number : MGS-2018 -SS 
 
Date : November26 , 2018  
 
Sponsor :   Magstim, Inc. 98 55 W. 78th St, Suite 12; 844 -624-7846  
 
Study Principal Investigator : Lothar Krinke PhD, Magstim, Inc. 844 -624-7846   
Research Site  key individual : Nicole Krummel, Georgia Behavioral Health Profes sionals, TMS 
Operations Leader, 678-426-2930  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
2 
  
 
2) Purpose and Background:  
Objective:  The objective of this study is to evaluate the feasibility of adding a navigational system to traditional 
repetitive Transcranial Magnetic  Stimulation ( rTMS , referred to in this application as nTMS) as a way to 
establish and maintain precise coil positioning (contact, rotation , and tilt ) and consistent brain  region targeting  
throughout a  nTMS  treatment sessio n and in subsequent nTMS sessions .  Success will be evaluated  via data 
analysis of information  captured during nTMS, which will evaluate coordinates, contact, rotation, and tilt 
parameters  of the stimulation pu lses delivered .  The study will be conducted with patients who have been 
select ed as traditional rTMS candidates and have met the criteria fo r rTMS , which includes , but is not limited to 
the following:  Adults with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) who have failed to achieve satisfactory 
improvement from prior antidepressant medication  in the current episode.  For the purposes of this study, nTMS 
is referring to the use of a navigation device in combination with delivery of traditional rTMS.   
 
Aim 1:  Determine the percentage of successful  nTMS  treatment  sessions .  A successful nTM S treatment session 
is defined as the following :  80% of the TMS pulse trains are delivered while the coil is within acceptance 
criteria  measured by tracking the following para meters :  coil deviations from digitally saved target location,  
which includes contact (mm), rotation (°), and tilt (°) parameters.   The acceptance criteria are met with coil 
position at the time of pulse deliver y as follows: coil rotation within ±15° of ta rget; coil til t within ±15° of 
target; in -plane deviation with in ±5mm of target; contact deviation within ± 2mm of target . 
Aim 2 : Determine Patient Health Question naire (PH Q-9) change measured weekly from baseline t o after 30 
sessions of nTMS, collect Patient comfort data , measure Oper ator confiden ce and collect coil position data for 
nTMS sessions to determin  future product improvements and clinical studies.    
 
The goal of this proposal is to establish nTMS as a means of precise administration of transcranial magnetic 
stimulation.   Ul timately, data from this study will be used to desi gn larger, compara tive studies to establish 
super ior efficacy profiles in the treatment of MDD.  
 
Background:  rTMS is a n FDA -approved, non -invasive brain stimulation treatment for MDD that uses an 
electromag net coil to deliver rapid magnetic pulses to a tar geted area of the p refrontal cortex.  The magneti c 
pulses induce a weak electrical current in the brain, stimulating neuronal activity.  In the treatment of MDD , the 
electromagnetic coil is placed over the p atient’s head to stimulate the DLPFC region of th e brain.  While this  
stimulation location has bee n used for some time now, recent studies have shown that the focal magnetic fields 
produced by rTMS are affected by how the device coil is positioned during t reatment3,9.  Therefore, it  is 
becoming clear that  positioning and maintaining the coil at the opt imal rotation and angle in relation to the 
patient’s scalp, and consistently treating the exact same place within th e DLPFC region may be crucial for 
optimal rTMS ef ficacy.     
 
Existin g Literature : rTMS is u sed to successfully treat individuals with MDD.  However, discrepancies exist in 
the effect sizes and variable outcomes between subjects.   
 
Coil Location:  Individu al anatomical variability and inter-expert variab ility have been argu ed to be the two 
main s ources of error during rTMS therapy6. Both  of these hurdles can be overcome with the addition of a 
neuronavigation system to rTMS. In fact,  the use of neuronavigation has been reported to decrease t he 
variabi lity of the results reported from rTMS therapy o n depressed patients5.  Further , variability in localizing 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
3 
 the DLPFC is significantly lower when the rTMS is conduc ted with a neuronavigational method11,9.  A direct 
comparison study of MRI -guided and fMRI -guided navigated rTMS compared to traditional rTMS  revealed a 
significantly larger effect size in the population who went thro ugh neuronavigation 12.  These d ata support the 
addition of neuronaviagation to the standard rTMS treatment regimen.  
 
Coil Orientation:  Coil orientation is an important factor to take into account in order to increase the respo nse 
rate to  rTMS treatment8. Both  brain gyrification15 conductivity anisotropy (which leads to certain current flow 
directions ) (Opitz et al., 2011)  play a role in the electric al field’s dependence on coil or ientation8. Therefore, 
even when the coi l is pre cisely locat ed on the defined treatment location , the optimum coil orientation to elicit a 
motor -evoked potential (MEP) can be different ; this was exquisitely described by the work of Balslev and 
colleagues ( 2007) who assessed the effect of eight d ifferent  coil orient ations o n MEPs1. Even minor changes in 
coil placement can affect the motor -evoked potentials13; therefore, the coil positioning needs to be con tinuously 
checked for high accuracy by adjusting the coil position  or orientation during the rTMS ses sion as needed14.  
 
Of particular relevance  is the perpendicularity of the e -field to the cortex is essential for the effectiveness of t he 
rTMS treatment10.  There is an extensive body of research on how to o ptimize the effect of rTMS by 
maximizing the str ength of the e-field as the coil is applied perpendicular to the treatment target and how 
accurate coil orienta tion can improve the treatment results3,9. For example, targeting the DLPFC for MDD  
treatment has  often shown optimal results with 45 degrees coi l orientation relative to parasa gittal plane 2. On a 
similar note, Opitz and colle agues emphasize the nee d for individualized target definition for rTMS, and argue 
that the sensitivity of coil orientation is  dependent on the TMS site, that is, the more po sterior the target, the 
more susceptiv e it will be to the changes in coil orientatio n.  
 
Significance:   Taken together , these data validate that  different variables such as location and orientation of the 
coil need to be carefully considered to optimize  the treatment for each individual patien t. We argue that this 
level of mm accuracy and  reproducibility can h ardly be achieved without neuronavigation.  The proposed work 
will confirm feasibility of use of nTMS to achieve precise and targeted stimulation outc omes. Such precise 
neuronavigation holds the future potential to  optimize treatment outcomes for patients,  resulting in improved 
effect -sizes, reproducibility, and consistency within and between patients.  Su ch opportunity to improve 
consistency advances t he field of rTMS by defining stimulati on parameters and ensuring those parameters ar e 
met on a patient -by-patient basis, optimizing individualized treatment.   
 
Justification for study involving humans: Humans  are the best model for this investigation as rT MS is already 
used in patient populati ons and the addition of navigational ability t o this treatment would  represent a 
refinement to the treatment.  Therefore, it is optimal to test the navigational device wi thin the context of its 
therapeutic setting; thi s requires use of human subjects.  
 
Magstim Tran scranial Magnetic Stimulators were fi rst approved for clinic al use in 20 08. The current Magstim 
device was FDA cleared in August 2018.  
 
 
3) Subjects:  
Number of subjects:  50 subjects are expected to be recruit ed to achieve successful completion of a total of 25 
subjects.  
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
4 
 Gender of Subjects : Men and women will be r ecruited in accordance with their demographic representation 
within Georgia for the treatment of MDD.   No one will be excluded based on gender.  Preg nant women will be 
excluded due to the lack of knowledge about the potential effects  of the treatment on a fetus. 
Age of Subjects:  All subjects will be between 18 -80 years of age.  Minors are excluded from th is study as 
minors have unique brain development  patterns and activity and as such, a s eparate, minor -specific study would 
be conduc ted to evaluate this po pulation.  
Racial and Ethnic Origin:  Recruitment is expected to be in alignment with the demographic d istributions of 
race and ethnic origin in Georgi a (the clinic site s).  No one will be ex cluded from the study based on race or 
ethni c origin.   
Inclusion  Criteria :  Diagnosis of m edication -resistant MDD ; Age 18 years or older ; Normal findings in the 
medica l history, physical , and neurological examinatio n 
Exclusion  Criteria :   History of seizu re disorder ; History of neuroleptic medicati ons/prior use of neurol eptics ;, 
Presence of implanted medical pump, metal plate , or metal object in skull or eye ; Pregnant women  
Vulnerable Subjects : Vulnerable subjects are not included in this study.  
Contraception : As the study is only over the  course of five treatme nt sessions, it is unlikely that an individual 
will become pregnant and have knowledge that they have  become pregnant.  If an individual becomes pregnant 
and notifies study staff, they will  be removed from the study.   
 
4) Methods and  Procedures:  
Design : This study is a feasibility trial. Each participant will receive 30 sessio ns of 10Hz  (4 seconds per cycle ) 
rTMS over th e left DLPFC. At the prescribing psychiatrist ’s discre tion, patient s may receive 20Hz (2 seconds 
per cycle ).  Bo th treatment protocols  have the sam e numbe r of pu lses delivered per session. The rTMS 
interventions will be guided by a ne uronavigation system (StimGuide TMS Navigation System, Magstim, Ltd. 
Carmarthenshire, UK) for navigation to the treatment location an d to ensure consistent placement  and 
orientation  of the coil dur ing and between each session.  For th e purpose of this prot ocol, these sessions are 
referred to  as nTMS.  Coil position dat a will be capture d for session s 6 through 30 to determine the primary 
outcome , which is Percenta ge of successful treatment sessions .  
 
The prim ary outcome measure  will be  the percentage of successful  nTMS  treatment  sessions  pooled from 
sessions 6 through 30 for  each study subject .  A successful nTMS treatment session is defined as:  80% of the 
TMS pulse trains are delivered while the coil is within acceptance criteria  meas ured by tracking the f ollowing 
parameters :  coil deviation s from digitally saved target location, which includes contact (mm), rotation (°), and 
tilt (°) pa rameters.   The acceptance criteria are met with coil position at the tim e of pulse delivery  as follo ws: 
coil rotation with in ±15° of t arget; coil tilt within ±15° of target; in -plane deviation within ±5mm of target; 
contact  deviation within ± 2mm of target . 
 
 
The secondary outcome measures  are: 
• Patient Healt h Question naire (PH Q-9) change fro m baseline (prior to the first day of trea tment but  not 
on the first day of trea tment) to after 30 sessions of nTMS . 
• Patient  comfort measured on a scale from 1 to 5; with 1 being uncomfortable and 5 being extremely  
comfortable  at the completion of the last nTMS session.  
• Operator confidence on a scale of 1 to 5; 1 being not co nfident a t all in u sing S timGuide to consistently 
find the treatment site and deliver therapy  to 5 being very confident in using StimGuide to c onsistently 
find the treatment site and deliver therapy  at the end of the study. 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
5 
 • Coil position for every pulse train for e ach patient ’s nTMS session 6 through 30.  
 
Procedure : The participant will be placed comfortably in  the treatment chai r in the field of view of technology 
for optical tracking, which tracks items with reflective spher es. A head reference, w hich is a l ightweight 3 -inch 
plastic piece w ith 4 reflective spheres, will be placed on the right side of the parti cipant’s forehead v ia either a 
headband or adhesive electrodes. Anatomical registration of the participant’s scalp lan dmarks will be conducte d 
by gently  placing the tip of a pointer too l, which is a lightweight plastic piece with 4 reflective spheres, onto  the 
participant’s nasion, left ear, and right ear.  
 
Motor threshold (MT), the lowest stimulation intensity to elicit a muscular response, will be determined using a 
light hand-held MT coil.  The position of the coil will be adjusted to find the motor hotspot.  EMG electrod es 
will be placed on the right APB (AbductorPollicis B revis ).  The  MT coil will be moved in a 1 cm grid -like 
fashion while  deliver ing p ulses.  A TMS -induce d motor evo ked potential (MEP) will have an amplitude greater 
than 50  uV.  The largest recorded amplitu de pulse > 50 uV will be s elected as the MT , and registered as a target  
in StimGuide.  The power intensity will be lowered  until the lowest intensity elicits 5 out of 10 consec utive 
pulses that elicit a  MEP of  at least 50  uV.  
  
The MT and location of the  motor hotspot will be saved in the StimGuide TMS navi gation syste m with the 
corresponding  power int ensity .  If using the Beam F3 method,  a mark will be placed at th e F3 location, and the  
coil will be placed at 45 degrees tan gential to the head.  The  treatment site will be registered in StimGuide.  If 
using the 5.5 cm (anterior to MT hotspot) method, StimGuide will guide the  operator to the location, and the  
coil will  be placed at 45 degrees tangential to the head.  The  treatment site will be registered in  StimGuide   
 
For the subsequent sessions, nTMS treatment will be delivered using the saved information. The StimGuide  
TMS navigation system will inform the opera tor of an y deviation  in rotation and angle of the treatment coil, or 
displacement of the t reatmen t coil while it is being plac ed onto the treatment site and during the entire  session.  
Such real -time feedback wil l ensure  accurate placement of the coil f rom session  to session while simultaneously 
ensuring optimized coil angling within treat ment sessions; together, such  dynamic navigation will enable 
nimble, individualized treatment that increases the likelihood of success for nTMS.  
 
Experiment versus Sta ndard of Ca re: All of the stimulation treatment received as part of this protocol is par t of 
the standard of care rec ommended for these participants.  Only patients whose physicians have referred them to 
have rTMS w ill participate.  Therefore, all study vi sits relate d to this project are also part of the standard care 
the patient would normal ly receive.  The only portion  of the care the participant will receive that is unique to the 
experimental portion of this proto col is combining the navigational compone nt/device w ith the standard rTMS 
component for five of their rTMS treatment sessions.  I f a patient does not wish to participate in this study, they 
still will receive rTMS as recommended by their physician.   
 
Freq uency and Duration of Procedure: The init ial appoint ment will last approximately  60 minutes ; each 
subsequent appointment  will last approximately 45 minutes.   The initial appointment will take longer due to the 
additional effort to establish and save the n avigational target to be used in subseque nt appointm ents All 
experimental  procedures are conducted at the same clinic  at which patients would receive their standard rTMS 
treatment; therefore , there is no change  in locatio n for participants whether they participate in the study or 
simply receive th eir standard care.   The patie nts will complete a PHQ -9 prior to receiving the first nTMS 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
6 
 session as baseline (prior to the first d ay of trea tment but not on the first day of treatment)  and weekly until after 
the last nTMS session has been completed .  
 
Timeline : Patient s will be recruited to participate in the study for 30 treatment sessions .   It is anticipated that a ll 
enrollme nt activi ties will be  concluded by May 15, 201 9 with the analysis completion anticipated  by the end of 
June 2019.  
 
End of the study : After 30 nTMS treatments, the patient will  have completed the study.  The primary and 
secondary outcome measu res will b e analyzed  after the last patient has  competed 30 sessions , every pati ent 
competed the patient c omfort sur vey and PHQ -9 assess ment an d every ope rator has compl eted the ope rator 
confidence sur vey Patients may receive additional treatments in a continued a ccess p hase of the study. No 
addition al study data will be collected d uring this phase.  
  
Hazard s: No procedures or situations relate d to this work are expected to be hazardous.  
 
Sample Collection: There is no sample collection associated with th is protoco l. 
 
Data : Information and clinical da ta col lected as part of the study  will be labeled with the subject’s initials and a 
study number , which will be in a locked file cabinet in the locked in the study coordinator’s office .  The record 
linking the  patient n ame to the study ID number will be ke pt ind efinitely in a confidential  manner.  Only study 
staff will have access to the study inform ation. All other data will be stored for  six years and then be destroyed.  
Information related to neuronavigation and tms tr eatment  will also be entered into a s ecure  web-based computer 
databas e (M agstim Insight) .  Coil positional data is stored within Mag stim StimGuide.    
Data Storage and Confidentiality:  
 
Patient identifiable information and clinical data collected  as part of  the study will be kept in the Magsti m 
Insight (“Insight”) platform. Insight is a secure, cloud  based, patient data management syste m developed by The 
Magstim Company Ltd. Access to the Insight system is controlled using user credentials (userna me and 
password), while communication to the Ins ight system is encrypted using S SL. Access to the Insight platform 
will be controlled by the PI , or an authorized study coordinator granted access by the PI.  
 
Each participant in the study will be assigned un ique coded (non-patient identifiable) identifier  whic h is stored 
as part of the patient record within the Insight platform. These unique identi fiers will be used when registering 
the patients within the Magstim StimGuide (“StimGuide”) system.  
 
StimGuide wi ll be used to store data relevant to the coils p osition during a treatment sessi on, along with the co -
ordinates of the participants motor thres hold and treatment locations. StimGuide employs Microsoft Bitlocker 
technology to encrypt all data stored on its internal ha rd drive. Access to StimGuide also re quire s the use of 
standard user credentials (username, pas sword).  
 
Positional data shall be exp orted from StimGuide for analysis by Magstim, Inc . in order the determine the 
positional accuracy of the TMS coil  for each treatment session .  The exported data shall not contain any p atient 
identifiable information as all data is associated with the unique coded identifiers as described previous ly. 
 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
7 
 Once t he study is completed all access to t he data stored within Insight s hall be disabled. The data will be kept 
for a period of 6 years at which time is shall be securely deleted.  
 
Participation in this study is completely voluntary. Each participan t has the r ight to choose not to participate or 
to withdraw participation at an y point in this study witho ut affecting his/her health care or o ther services to 
which they are entitled.  
 
 Confidentiality:  
 
The screening for ineligible candidates will be des troyed afte r the project's completion (12 months ). The 
information relating to an enrolled subjects contac t/personal details will be kept withi n the Insight platform.  
 
Direct identifiers such as name, address, and telephone number will be maintained within  the Insigh t platform 
and shall be kept for six years in accordance with HIPAA .  If new information is ob tained about safety during 
the course  of this study, participants will be contacted for re -consent.   
 
Data stored within StimGuide is anonymized by t he use of c ode identifiers.  
 
The clinical data wi ll be stripped of all identifyi ng in formation. This detai l will be thoroughly covered during 
the consent process. Additional details on confidentiality have been covered in Sections 13  
 
 
5) Potential Risks  
Risk Categor y: Minimal Risk.  The probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort  anticipated in the resear ch 
are not greater than those ordinar ily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or 
psychological examinations or test s. 
 
Potenti al Risks:  The stimulation parameters f or nTMS (traditional rTMS)  are safe and have been used on  many 
people to study the brain over recent decades.   Most people do not find the stimulation painful, but occasionally 
strong contractions of scalp m uscles can cause some discomfort and headache.   If the patient finds the 
procedu re too uncomfortable, they  may discontinue at any time.   Headac hes usually go away promptly with 
nonprescription medication.   The noise of the magnet may affect hearing, so ear plugs are w orn during nTMS.   
Magnetic stimulation  will not be performed in peopl e who  have pacemakers, imp lanted pumps or stimulators, 
metal ob jects inside the eye or skull, or who have a history or risk of seizure.   This study uses a stimulation 
protocol that has me dical (FDA) clearance for the treatmen t of MDD and has been used for many research 
studies of v arious other conditions. The risk of inducing a seizure with nTMS is considered very low (less than 
1%) and similar to the incidence of seizures assoc iated with antidepressant medications.   Safety st udies using 
TMS in patients wit h neu rological disorders h ave demonstrated no permanence.   Risks to a fetus are not known 
and that information is made clear in the Patient Consent Form.  It is expected that n TMS (the ad dition of a 
navigational system to rTM S) offers no additional risks t o pat ients.  
  
There are ri sks of stress, emotional distress, in convenience, and possible loss of privacy and confidentiality 
associated with participating in a research study.  There may be other risks that are currently unkn own.   
 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
8 
 Protection Against Risk s: These risks are expecte d to be reversible for the most part,  with the exception of 
hearing damage (mitigated by the ear plugs) , loss of confidentiality (mitigated  with data management 
safeguards), and seizure (mitigated by  exclusion criteria).   Discomfo rt and headache can be tre ated with OTC 
medication.    Personnel  will be trained to monitor for risks and to remove individuals from the study for whom 
participation appears to be producin g unexpected negative reactions.  
 
6) Potential Benefits:  
There is the  possibility of nTMS direc tly improving symptoms related to med ication -resistant MDD.   
 
Improved consistency and optimization of treatment delivery is expected to provide repr oducible ou tcomes with 
little variability, thus i mproving predictability of pati ent o utcomes.  
 
The knowled ge gained in this proposed research c ould lead to an optimization of nTMS delivery and improved 
care of patients with medication -resistant MDD.   In this case, improved quality of life could be expect ed with 
the successful and effe ctive  development of nTMS therapies.  
 
7) Subject Identification , Recruitment, and Consent/Assent  
Method of Subject Identification and Recruitment :  
Patients already referred fo r routine r TMS treatment for MDD will be recruite d (via referrals from physician ) to 
instead receive nTMS for the first five treatment sessions , followed by standard rTMS for the remainder of their 
treatment period.  Since the physician will speak to the p otential su bjects about the possibility of partic ipating in 
the study during an appoi ntment time that was already scheduled and in a room that is used for patient visits, 
this will be a private conversation.  Since the physician is the person referring the  patient to  receive rTMS 
treatment, the physician  is the best person to describe  the option for inclusion of the navigational system as part 
of a research study.   Following a description of the options, the study coordinator  will have no further 
interacti on with the  patient about the study.  Instead, to  minimize undue influence, the study  coordinator will 
meet with interested patients to review the details and obtain consent.  
 
HIPAA : Since identifiable information will be gathered, HIPAA Authorization form s will be s igned by each 
participant as part of t heir recruitment.  
 
Process of C onsen t: The process of con sent will take place at the clinic , following a standard appointment with 
the patient ’s physician. This process will occur in the clinic and no more 10 days  prior to the first nTMS 
treatment.  Subjec ts may take a s much  time as needed t o consider participat ion in the study.  The study staff wi ll 
make every effort to meet with the potential subjects as many times as needed to clarify any portions of the 
consent form .  The potential subject may take the consent form home with them and  they will have a number 
provided to them to call the study sta ff if they are interested in participating or have follow -up questions.   Any 
oral or written information will be  provided t o participants in their own language.  Nicole Krummel is the 
authoriz ed in dividual authorized t o provide consent.  
 
Subject Comprehe nsion : Subjects will be encouraged to ask questions during the consenting process.  
Additionally, the study coord inator will  ask the potential subjects if they ha ve any questions and will attem pt to 
assess their compreh ension of the study by asking them to  state their understanding of the research portion of 
the study prior to signing the consent form.  The recruiting  clinician will ensure that the subject themselve s or 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
9 
 representatives of the sub jects have sufficient know ledge and comprehension of all elemen ts of the informed 
consent and are able to make an informed decision about participation  
 
Documentation of Consen t: Consent will be documented  via signed informed  consent forms.  These forms wi ll 
be maintained in a secu re way that is accessible only to the  study staff . The study PI, Lothar Krinke, is 
responsible for ensuring that valid consent is obtained and documen ted for all  subjects.  
 
Costs to Subject: All par ticipants are receiving rTMS tr eatme nt as part of their s tandard of care.  Therefore, 
there is  no additional cost to them in terms of  their time, transportation, or the addition of neuronavigation to the 
protocol.   
 
Contact Information for Concerns:   
This research is being overseen by Aspir e Independent Review Board (“IRB”). An IRB is a group of p eople 
who perform independent review of research studies. You may talk to them at 1 -877-366-5414 (toll free) if:  
      You have questions, concerns, or complaint s that are not being answered b y the research team.  
      You are not getting answers from th e research team.  
      You cannot reach the research team.  
      You want to talk to someone else about the res earch.  
      You have questions about your right s as a research subject.  
- 
With drawal of Subjects: Any su bject is free to withdraw from the st udy at any time.  
Additionally, t he investigator can remove a participant from the study at any time if she believ es that con tinuing 
is not in his/her best medical  interest, or if he/she is unab le to comply with the requ irements of the study.  
Any subjects w ithdrawn or removed from the study will not be considered to have completed the study and 
therefore, no data from  these indi viduals will be utilized in the evalua tion of the results (except for  the purposes 
of reporting  an adverse event).  
 
Sharing of Resul ts with Subjects/Incidental Findings : Results will not be disseminated to participants.  
However, all participant s are recei ving navigation as part of this study and therefore no “unblinding” w ould be 
needed/useful.  
 
8) Consent Form  
A consent form is attac hed for review.  
 
9) Compensation of Subjects/Payment or Participation  
Subjects are not compensated for their part icipation.  In the event that this research activi ty results in an injury, 
treatm ent will be available, inc luding first aid emergency treatment,  and follow -up care as needed.  Care for 
such injuries will be billed in the ordinary manner, to the subject  or their insura nce company.  Any participant 
who thin ks they have suffered a researc h related injury  should no tify the study coordinator  right away .  No 
commitment is made by the study site  to provide free medical care or money for injuries to participants in this 
study.   
 
10) Data and Confidentiality  
 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
10 
 Coil position data for every  treatment session will be cap tured and stored in the study database.  Only  data from 
session 6 through 30 will be used to for the primary endpoint determination  to allow for operator s and patien ts 
to get used to the pro cedure during  the first 10 sess ions.  PHQ -9 will be ob tained from ever y patient prior to the 
first n TMS ses sion and weekly until after the last session has be en completed.  The patient com fort surve y will 
be administered after the last session has been completed.  The operator s urvey will be administered after the 
last study patients has  exited the study.  
 
Statistical Plan : This is a pilot st udy and therefore, the data will be used to assess feasibility, adverse events, 
time, cost, e tc. in an at tempt to predict an appro priate sample size and optimize design prior to a larger -scale 
study . 
Data Monitoring to Ensure Safety: This study is not cons idered greater than minimal risk.  
Since the rTMS system is a 510(k) -cleared HORIZON system, any adverse event will be reported to  MAUDE.  
When informed of an adverse event involving a cleared device in the US, Magstim will investigate a nd if , 
report the event in accordance with QP027 – Incident Reporting Procedure and the Medical Devic e Reporting 
(MDR) regulation (21 CFR 803). Furthermore, Magstim also has in place a Quality Procedure to in itiate field 
corrections should this be required QP059 Fie ld (Safety) Corrective Action Procedure. If an adverse event 
occurs related to the navigati on system, a  non-510(k) -cleared StimG uide, that  adverse event will be reported via 
the IDE program.  
Additi onally, any serious adverse event, th is will be reported t o the IRB immediately (within 24 hours).  Any 
recommendations will be implemented.  
Data Sto rage and Con fidentiality :  Informatio n and clinical data collected as part of the study will be labeled 
with participant initials and a study nu mber; information (wi thout the name) will be entered into a computer 
database and locked file cabinet in the study site coor dinator, Nicole Krummel’s  office.  The record linking the 
name to the MRN study ID number will be kept indefinitely at the MRN in a confidential manner i n case the 
participant needs future access to their data.  Only study staff  will have acces s to the stu dy information. All 
other  data will be stored for  six years and then be destroyed.  Access to th e data will be limited to the PI XXXX  
 
Identification infor mation and data collected from each participant will be entered into the Magstim Insight 
online data wa rehouse.  
 
Data relating t o the coils position during treatment is recorded by the Magstim StimG uide system.  
 
Participation in this s tudy is completely vo luntary. Each participant has the right to choose not to participate or 
to withdraw partici pation at an y point in this study wit hout affecting his/her health care or other services to 
which they are  entitled.  
 
Confidentiality: The scr eening for ineligible  candidates will be destroyed after the project's completion (12 
months). The document cont aining conta ct/personal information f or enrolled participants will be kept on a 
password -protected computer . 
 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
11 
 Direct identifiers such as name, a ddress, and telephone  number will be maintained in a password -protected 
computer in the locked office of the pri ncipal inves tigator and kept for six years in accordance with HIPAA.  If 
new information is obtained about safety during the course of this stud y, participants will be contacted for re -
consent.   
 
The clinical data will be stripped of all identifying infor mation. This  detail will be thoroughl y covered during 
the consent process.  
 
Privacy of Subject : Potential subjects will be approached by resear ch personnel in a pri vate room in the clinic.  
They will be assured that only research personnel will have acces s to the inf ormation provided.  All i nformation 
provided will be maintained in a secured research area for which only study staff have access.   
 
All nTMS appointmen ts are conducted within the clinic .  The door is kept closed during experiment 
appointments .  Because n ormal rTMS treatments are  also conducted at this clinic and the participants are 
already receiv ing those treatments as part of their  standard of care, th ere would be no obvious indication that the 
individual is a part of the research study.  Al l other stan dard privacy measures (as sociated with standard of care 
in the clinic) will be maintained.   
 
 
11) Background and Experience of Inve stigators  
 
PI CV/resu me and Human Subjects Protection training certificate is attached  
Research Staff:  most curr ent human su bjects protection trainin g certificate is attached.  
 
The Principal Investigator: As PI in this project, Dr. Lothar Krinke PhD  will b e responsible for sup ervising and 
coordinating all aspects of the research. Dr. Krinke  has the expertise and exp erience to p erform this role well in 
the proposed research.  
Research Coordinator :  Nicole Krummel  will serv e as the research coordinator and wil l be responsible for the 
day-to-day coordination of the trial.  Nicole  will ensure compliance with regulatory an d training r equirements 
for any other  research staff.  She is experienced at recruiting research subjects a nd ensuring their confidential 
partic ipation.  The PI will  directly oversee the research coordinator.  
Study Staff:  
Study Site :  2 Clinic s:  This fa cility conta ins all the TMS, rTMS and  Neuronavigation devices necessary for 
successful completion of the st udy.  It is also a private location e nsuring subject privacy.  
 
 
12) Instruments  
Device data collection will be managed electronically as noted. Conse nt data and simple survey tools will be 
managed in accordance with confidentiality standards noted earlier in the document.  
 
 
13) APPROVAL FORM  FROM PARTICIPATING ORIG INATING INSTITUTIONS  (where applicable)  
 Not applicabl e 
 
14) Devices  
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
12 
  
Medical Devices:  Please respo nd to all questions in th is section.  
A Horizon Performance System device and StimGuide TMS Neu ronavigation System are used in the s tudy 
(The Magstim Compan y Limited, Spring Gardens, Whitland, Carmarthenshire, SA34 0HR, UK).   
 
Has an Investiga tional Devic e Exemption (IDE) applica tion been submitted to the FDA?  
No an IDE has not been submitted to t he FDA  
 
The device meets the requirem ents for an abbreviated IDE if all of the following are TRUE. Please articulate 
responses to all of the followin g:  
The devi ce is not banned. TRUE.   The Horizon Performance System is FDA -approved for the treatment of 
medication -resistant depression  under K 180907 .   
The device is not a significant risk device.  TRUE .   Evidence -based guidelines have been published on  the safe 
use of rTMS as a therapeuti c device (Lefaucheur, et al., 2014)  
 
The sponsor or investigator will label the device in accordance with 2 1CFR812.5.  TRUE.   The d evices are 
labeled accordingly.  
 
The sponsor or investigator will comply with the requir ements of 21 CFR812.46 with respect to  monitoring 
investigations.  TRUE.   The investigator will comply with the requirements regarding monitoring  of 
investigations.  
 
The sponsor or investigator will maintain research records required under 21CFR812.140 (b) and (5) and 
make the reports required  under 21CFR812.150 (b) (1) through (3) and (5) through (10 ).  TRUE.   The 
investigator will maintain resear ch records as described.  
 
The sponsor or investigator will ensure that participating investigators maintain the records requ ired by 
21CFR812.140 (a)( 3)(i) and make the reports required under 21CFR812.150(a) (1) (2) (5) and (7 ).  TRUE.    
The investigator wi ll ensure that all study  staff and investigators maintain records as described above.  
 
The sponsor or investigat or will comp ly with the prohibitions in 21CFR812.7 against promotion and other 
practices.  TRUE.   The inves tigator will comply with all prohibit ions against promotion a nd other practices.  
 
Please complete the section below to determine if an IDE is require d:  
Is the d evice FDA -approved for ma rketing and is it being used or investigated in accordance with its la beling. - 
-The Horizon Performance  System has been cleared by the FDA for the treatment of Major Depressive Disorder 
in adult patients who have failed  to achieve satisfactory improvement from prior antidepressant medication in 
the current episode . 
-The Stim Guide TMS Neuronavigation System is n ot cleared by the FDA.  
 
Is the device a diagnostic device?  
No. 
Is the device undergoing consumer preference tes ting, testin g of a modification, or t esting of a combination of 
two or more devices in commercial distribut ion?  
No. 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
13 
  
Is the device testing for the purpose of determini ng safety and effectiveness?  
No.  This is a feasibility study.  
 
Is the device a custom d evice as def ined in 21CFR812.3(b)?  
No. 
 
Provide a detailed description of device storage and accountability  procedures:  
Devices for the study w ill be  sent from Magstim  headquarters in Whitland, Wales to US Headquarters in White 
Bear Lake, MN only upon app roval from t he IRB.  
 
Who will have a ccess to the device?   
The access to the device will be limited to the  study staff who are trained in the safe operation of these d evices.  
 
What security safeguards are in place to ensure proper accountability, access , and storage  of the device?   
The dev ices are stored with the locked at the Georgia Behavioral Health offic e at Sandy Springs, 5775 
Peachtree Du nwoody Road in Sandy Spr ings, Georgia, Suite 200, Atlanta, GA 30432 .  In addition to the 
security at the clinic,  the specifi c room in which the devic es are maintained is also locked when not in use.  
Only the study staf f have access to the room.  The PI as sumes accountability for  the devices and their proper 
use. 
 
If the device is experimental, will it be labeled “I nvestigation al Use Only”?   
Yes. 
 
Who will be responsible for:  
Device accountability.  The PI.  
Labeling/ di spensing. The PI.  
State the qualifica tions of this person .CV Attached  
 
Describe how the investigational device is controlled, and how accidental use outside of a pproved research will 
be avoided.  
The equipment is locked in the clinic.  Only the study staff have access to the locked rooms.  The  software  
program used t o run the equipment is password protected.  
Non-Significant Risk Determination Section  
Is the device intended as an implant (≥ 30 days)?  
No. 
Is the device for use supporting or sustaining human life?  
No. 
Is the device for a use of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating or treating disease or 
preventing impairment of human he alth? 
No. This  protocol is an exploratory study to determine whether  coil positioning via nTMS can be achieved 
during and throughout  treatment sessions.  
Does the use of the device present a potential for serious risk to health, safety or welfare of the sub jects? 
The use  of the device does not pose the potential for serious risk to health, safety or welfare of subjects.  The 
protocol parameters are well within the bounds determined by the FDA for approval for the treatment of 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
14 
 depression and migraine.   The on ly difference is the addition of a navigation  system  to optimize target 
localization and adher ence. 
 
Explain why the use of the device in this study poses non -significant risk, and attach any other supporting 
information. In addition, explain whether the s pons or, the FD A or any other oversight organization has already 
made a risk determination for the device.  
The device poses a non -significant risk to participants given that the parameters used are well within the FDA -
approved rTMS therapy for the treatment  of depression .  The exclusion and inclusion criteria also ensure an 
added level of safety in using this device.  
 
 
15) References  
 
1.Balslev, D., Braet, W., McAllister, C., & Miall, R. C. (2007). Inter -individual variability in optimal current 
direction for transcranial  magnetic stimulation of the motor cortex.  Journal of neuroscience methods , 162(1-2), 
309-313. 
 
2.Brasil -Neto, J. P., Cohen, L. G., Panizza, M., Nilsson, J., Roth, B. J., & Hallett, M. (1992). Optimal focal 
transcranial magnetic activation of the  human mot or cortex: effects of coil orientation, shape of the induced 
current pulse, and stimulus intensity.  Journal of clinical neurophysiology: official publication of the American 
Electroencephalographic Society , 9(1), 132 -136. 
 
3. Janssen, A. M., Oostend orp, T. F., & Stegeman, D. F. (2015). The coil orientation dependency of the electric 
field induced by TMS for M1 and other brain areas. Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, 12(1), 47.  
 
4.Lefaucheur, J.P., Andre -Obadia, N., Antal, A., Ayache, S., Baek en, C., Benninger, D.H., Cantello R.M., 
Cincotta, M., deCarvalho, M., Ridder, D.D., Devanne, H., DiLazzaro, V., Filipovic, S.R., Hummel, F.C., 
Jaaskelainen, S.K., Kimiskidis, V.K., Kock, G., Langguth, B., Nyffeler, T., Oliviero, A., Padberg, F., Poulet , E., 
Rossi, S., Rossini, P.M. Rothwell, J.C., Schonfeldt -Lecuona, C., Siebner, H.R., Slotema, C.W., Stagg, C.J., 
Valls -Sole, J., Ziemann, U., Paulus, W., Garcia -Larrea, L. (2014). Evidence -based guidelines on the therapeutic 
use of repetitive transcranial  magnetic stimulation (rTMS).  Clinical Neurophysiology, 125(11), 2150 -2206.  
5.Lefaucheur, J. P., Brugieres, P., Ménard -Lefaucheur,  
 
 
 
 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
15 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 INFORMED CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN CLINICAL RESEARCH STUDY  
 
Title: Precise Coil Positioning in Navigated Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (nTMS) in Medication - 
Resistant Major Depressive Disorder (MDD): A Feasibility Study  
 
Sponsor:     Magstim , Inc.    
    
Protoco l Number:     MGS -2018 -SS 
 
Principal  Investigator:    Dr. Lothar Krinke, PhD , Magstim, Inc.  
 
     Georgia Behavioral Health Professionals  
     5775 Peachtree Dunwoody Rd.  
     Atlanta, GA 30342   
 
     Georgia Behavioral Health Professio nals 
     2150 Peachford Road, Suite H   
     Dunwoody , GA 30338  
     
24-Hour Telephone Number:   (404) 256-2795  
 
 
This is a research study.  You are being asked to take part in this study because  your physician has referred you 
for repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) as a treatment for Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) .  
This study  include s only individuals  who voluntarily choose to participate .  Please take your time to make your 
decision.  Discuss it in confidence with your  regular doctor,  friends and family  if you want .  Be sure to ask 
questions about anything you do  not understand in this document.  
 
WHAT IS THIS STUDY ABOUT?  
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
16 
 The purpose of this study is to evaluate the feasibility of adding a navigational system to traditional 
rTMS (referre d to in the study as nTMS) to establish and maintain precise coil positioning (contact, 
rotation, and tilt) and consistent brain region targeting throughout a nTMS treatment session and in 
subsequent nTMS sessions.  The study device is investigational , which means that it  is not approved 
by the Food and Drug Administration  (FDA).  
 
This research is being done because  there is evidence that variability in patient response to rTMS is due to 
inconsistent placement and positioning of the coil during treatment.  Therefore, the goal of this research is to 
confirm that the addition of navigation to rTMS is feasible; this would aid in consistent application of the 
treatment.  
 
If you participate in this study, you will receive navigation as part of your rTMS treatmen t (for 30 of your total 
treatments).  Your rTMS treatment is standard of care. The navigation (nTMS) is the investigational procedure. 
Please ask the study staff if you have any questions about the difference.  
 
 
FINANCIAL DISCLOSRE:  
Dr. Krink e, the inv estigator, owns shares in the company and is the CEO. Please ask if you have any 
questions about this conflict of interest.  
 
HOW LONG IS THIS STUDY?  HOW MANY OTHER PEOPLE WILL BE  IN THIS STUDY ?  
About  25 people will take part in this study.   You will be in  the study fo r about  one week , which involves 
attendance at only your normal  appointments.  You will not need any additional appointments as a result of 
taking part in this research. The first appointment will take about an hour and the follow up sessions w ill take 
approximately 45 minutes.  
 
WHAT IF NEW INFORMATION  BECOMES AVAILABLE?  
If new information in relation to the study device becomes available , that may be relevant to the purpose and 
safety of the study and your willingness to continue participation  in this study, you will  be informed by the 
study staff .   
 
WHAT WILL HAPPEN DURING THE STUDY ? 
If you agree to take part in this research study, you will be required to sign this informed consent form 
before any procedures tak e place.   
 
STUDY PROCEDURES :  
During the screening and if you qualify and continue, during the study the following procedures will 
occur :   
• Questions asked about how you are feeling  and current  medications and medical conditions  
• Questions about your past health, possibly including req uests for your medical records  
 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
17 
 The study doctor will talk to you and give you a list of the things you must do to participate, such as:  
• Use of contraception by female participants during the five-treatment  study period.  
• Questions asked about how you are f eeling and current medications and medical conditions  
 
At your first appointment, the device will deliver pulses of stimulating energy on the left side of your 
head in order to stimulate a muscle twitch in your right hand. This will be repeated 10 times in  order to 
accurately locate the best position for the treatment application on your scalp. The actual treatment 
position is forward of the motor stimulation location (in an area called the pre -frontal cortex which is 
altered in major depression). So, the c oil will be moved forward to a position  based on the motor spot 
for actual treatment once the optimal  strength of impulse from the coil and precise location of the 
motor spot is determined and the treatment position is determined  
 
This treatment  position w ill then be saved in the navigation system and used for the this  initial and the 
subsequent 29 appointments  (a total of 30 of your treatmen ts).  
 
Please tell your regular health care providers and any emergency care providers that you are 
participating in this  research study.  
 
WHAT ARE THE RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS OF PARTICIPATING IN THIS STUDY?  
The study device has been associated with the following side effects:  
 
The stimulation parameters for nTMS (traditional rTMS)  are safe and have been used on many 
people t o study the brain over recent decades.   Most people do not find the stimulation painful, but 
occasionally occasional side effects include:  
• strong contractions of scalp muscles can cause some discomfort and headache.    
 
Some patien ts have experienced  dizziness and  a tingling sensation. If you find the procedure too 
uncomfortable, you may discontinue at any time.   Headaches usually go away promptly with 
nonprescription medication.  
   
The noise of the magnet may affect hearing, so earplugs are worn duri ng nTM S.   
 
Magnetic stimulation will not be performed in people who have pacemakers, implanted pumps or 
stimulators, metal objects inside the eye or skull, or who have a history or risk of seizure.   This study 
uses a stimulation protocol that has been pre viousl y used on patients.  The risk of inducing a seizure 
with nTMS is considered very low (less than 1%) and similar to the incidence of seizures associated 
with antidepressant medications.    
 
Safety studies using TMS in patients with neurological disorde rs hav e demonstrated no permanence.    
 
Risks to a fetus are not known.   
 
It is expected that nTMS (the addition of a navigational system to rTMS) offers no additional risks to 
patients.  
 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
18 
 There may be risks to being in this study that we cannot predict.   
 
You s hould discuss these risks with the doctor. Many side effects go away shortly after the treatment 
stops the study drug is stopped . These risks are expected to be reversible for the most part, with the 
exception of hearing damage ( prevented  by the ear plugs) , loss of confidentiality ( safeguards are in 
place to protect your data ), and seizure ( you must inform the study doctor if you have any previous 
history of seizures) .   
 
Discomfort and headache can be treated with over-the-counter  medication.   Perso nnel w ill be trained 
to monitor for risks and to remove individuals from the study for whom participation appears to be 
producing unexpected negative reactions.  
  
Side effects occurring during the trial can be treated by the study doctor, if this is deemed  neces sary. 
It is important that you inform the study doctor any unusual or unpleasant effects which you should 
feel.   
 
Are there p regnancy risks ? 
If you are a woman who can get pregnant , you will be required to use adequate methods of birth 
control.  If you ar e unsure of these methods, please discuss them with your study doctor.  You cannot 
participate in this study if you are pregnant .  Since no adequate and well -controlled studies of the 
study device in pregnant women have been performed you should not b ecome pregnant while 
participating in this study.  If you think you are pregnant during the study, you must tell the study 
coordinator  immediately. Risks to a fetus from TMS are not known. It is suggested that female 
participants of child bearing age take c ontrac eption for the duration they are involved in the study , but 
such use will not be confirmed.  If you become pregnant, you will have to leave the study.   
 
For more information about risks and side effects, ask the study doctor .  
 
ARE THERE BENEFITS TO T AKING PART IN THE STUDY?  
If you agree to take part in this study, there may or may not be direct medical benefit to you. 
Information learned from this study may benefit others in the future.  
 
There is the possibility of nTMS directly improving symptoms rel ated t o medication -resistant MDD.   
 
Improved consistency and optimization of treatment delivery is expected to provide reproducible 
outcomes with little variability, thus improving predictability of patient outcomes.  
 
The knowledge gained in this proposed  resea rch could lead to an optimization of nTMS delivery and 
improved care of patients with medication -resistant MDD.  In this case, improved quality of life could 
be expected with the successful and effective development of nTMS therapies.  
 
WHAT, IF ANY, ARE TH E ALTERNATIVES  TO PARTICIPATING IN THIS STUDY?  
This study is not designed to diagnose, treat or prevent any disease.  Your alternative is to not 
participate.   If you choose not to participate in the study, you will still receive rTMS therapy (as 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
19 
 recommende d by your physician); you simply will not receive the use of the navigational system 
during rTMS.  
 
CONFIDENTIALITY  
Your personal information will be kept confidential  to the extent permitted by law . We cannot guarantee 
absolute confidentiality.   By signing  this document, you give permission to access your medical records, 
including after withdrawal , for data verification purposes .   
 
Organizations that may inspect and/or copy your research records for quality assurance and data analysis 
include groups  such as: 
• The study staff and other researchers  involved in the study  
• Magstim  or those who work for or represent Magstim  
• The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)   
• Aspire I ndependent Review Board (IRB) 
 
The results from the study may be published for sci entifi c purposes, but your identity will be kept confidential.  
 
In the rare event that your information is required to be disclosed by law to another entity, privacy 
laws may not apply, and neither the Sponsor  nor Aspire IRB can protect your information.  
 
WHAT A RE THE COSTS ? 
There are no additional costs associate d with being in this study.  You are responsible for your regular health 
care while in this study.   You will not have to pay for the use of the navigation device during your study visits .   
 
INVEST IGATOR  PAYMENT                                        
 
The Prinicip al Investigator is the CEO of Magstim, Inc. As CEO , he receives salary from Magstim. 
The study sit e will be rec eiving no payment for participation in the study. The study site coordinator 
will receive regular compensation  from Georgia Behavioral Health professionals  as due course for her 
role in the delivery of patient care during the study.  
 
WILL YOU BE COM PENSAT ED DURING THE STUDY?  
You will  not be compensated for participating in and completing this research  study . 
 
WHAT HAPPENS IF YOU HAVE COMPLICATIONS OR ARE INJURED?  
If you have serious side effects, complications or are injured because of participating in thi s study, 
please contact the study doctor promptly.  If this research activity results in an injury, treatment will be 
available, including first aid emergency treatment, and follow -up care as needed.  Care for such 
injuries will be billed in the ordi nary m anner, to you or your insurance company. No commitment is 
made by the study site to provide free medical care or money for injuries to participants in this study.  
 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
20 
 YOUR RIGHTS AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT  
Taking part in this study is voluntary.  You may ch oose n ot to take part or may leave the study at any time.   
Leaving the study will not result in any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are entitled.  However, if you 
decide to stop participating in the study, we encourage you to talk to the study doc tor an d your regular doctor 
first.   
 
YOUR RESPONSIBILITIES  AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT  
You will be asked to adhere to all instructions issued by the study doctor and other study staff. 
Furthermore, you should answer all asked questions truthful ly.  
 
Should you not co mply with instructions, the study doctor may stop your study participation. Your 
study doctor may also exclude you from this trial if he/she  deems it beneficial for your health , or if you 
do not meet the study requirements .   Your participation in th is stu dy may be ended if the Sponsor 
stops the study for any reason.    
 
WHO M TO CALL IF YOU  HAVE QUESTIONS  
For questions, concerns or complaints or information about the study or a research -related injury, 
contact the study doctor at the number on page 1.  
 
This research is being overseen by Aspire Independent Review Board (“IRB”). An IRB is a group of 
people who perform independent review of research studies. You may talk to them at 1 -877-366-5414 
(toll free) if:  
• You have questions, concerns, or complaints  that are not being answered by the research 
team.  
• You are not getting answers from the research team.  
• You cannot reach the research team.  
• You want to talk to someone else about the research.  
• You have questions about your rights as a research subject.  
 
Although Aspire IRB has approved the information provided in this informed consent form and has 
granted approval for the investigator to conduct the study this does not mean Aspire has approved 
your being part of the study.  You need to read the information i n this  informed consent form for 
yourself and decide whether or not you want to be in this study.  
 
 
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
21 
 SIGNATURE AND CONSENT TO BE IN THE STUDY  
Your signature below means that you have read the above information about this study and have had 
a chance to ask questi ons to help y ou understand what you will be expected to do and  that you agree 
to participate in this study.   Your signature also means that you have had all your questions answered 
to your satisfaction and  that you have been told that you can change your m ind later if you want to.  
You will be gi ven a signed and dated copy of this agreement .  By signing this consent form , you are 
not giving up any of your legal rights . 
 
 
_______________________________________________  __________/________  
SIGNATURE OF SUBJEC T      DATE    
 
 
________________________________________________  
PRINTED NAME OF SUBJECT  
 
 
I confirm that a copy of this consent form has been given to this person to read and that this person 
has been told about the study.  The contents of the conse nt for m describing the study has been 
discussed with this person  and I have made every effort to answer all questions to his or her 
satisfaction.  I have watched this person sign the consent form.  
 
 
_______________________________________________  _________ _/____ ____  
SIGNATURE OF PERSON OBTAINING CONSENT    DATE    
 
 
_______________________________________________  
PRINTED NAME OF PERSON OBTAINING CONSENT   
 
 I., Wendling, S., Pommier, M., & Bellivier, F. (2007). The value of navigation -guided rTMS for the treatment 
of depression: a n illustrative case.  Neurophysiologie Clinique/Clinical Neurophysiology , 37(4), 265 -271. 
 
6.Nauczyciel, C., Hellier, P., Morandi, X., Blestel, S., Drapier, D., Ferre, J. C., ... & Millet, B. (2011). 
Assessment of standard coil positioning in transcranial mag netic stimulation in depression.  Psychiatry 
research , 186(2-3), 232 -238. 
 
7.Opitz, A., Fox, M. D., Craddock, R. C., Colcombe, S., & Milham, M. P. (2016). An integrated framework for 
targeting functional networks via transcranial magnetic stimulation.  Neuroi mage, 127, 86-96. 
 
8.Opitz, A., Windhoff, M., Heidemann, R. M., Turner, R., & Thielscher, A. (2011). How the brain tissue shapes 
the electric field induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation. Neuroimage, 58(3), 849 -859. 
 
9.Richter, L., Neumann, G., Oung,  S., Schw eikard, A., & Trillenberg, P. (2013). Optimal coil orientation for 
transcranial magnetic stimulation. PLoS One, 8(4), e60358.  
Precise Coil  Positioning in nTMS in MDD  
 
 11.26.2018  
 
 
22 
  
10.Ruohonen, J., & Karhu, J. (2010). Navigated transcranial magnetic stimulation.  Neurophysiologie 
clinique/Clinical neu rophysio logy, 40(1), 7 -17. 
 
11.Rusjan, P. M., Barr, M. S., Farzan, F., Arenovich, T., Maller, J. J., Fitzgerald, P. B., & Daskalakis, Z. J. 
(2010). Optimal transcranial magnetic stimulation coil placement for targeting the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
using novel m agne tic resonance image ‐guided neuronavigation.  Human brain mapping , 31(11), 1643 -1652.  
 
12.Sack, A. T., Cohen Kadosh, R., Schuhmann, T., Moerel, M., Walsh, V., & Goebel, R. (2009). Optimizing 
functional accuracy of TMS in cognitive studies: a c omparison of m ethods. Journal of cognitive 
neuroscience , 21(2), 207 -221. 
 
13.Schmidt, S., Cichy, R. M., Kraft, A., Brocke, J., Irlbacher, K., & Brandt, S. A. (2009). An initial transient -
state and reliable measures of corticospinal excitability in TMS stud ies. Clinical Neu rophysiology, 120(5), 987 -
993. 
 
14.Sparing, R., Hesse, M. D., & Fink, G. R. (2010). Neuronavigation for transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS): where we are and where we are going. Cortex, 46(1), 118 -120. 
 
15.Thielscher, A., Opitz, A., & Windhoff, M. (2011). Im pact of the gyral geometry on the electric field induced 
by transcranial magnetic stimulation. Neuroimage, 54(1), 234 -243. 
 
 
 