21-672H, Contreras, Form BC, 05 -23-22, AMD.docx                                vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
1  
COVER PAGE FOR PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN 
 
 
 
 
 
Official Study Title : The Effects of a Music Intervention on Stress, Anxiety and 
Academic Performance on Nursing Students  
 
NCT number : NCT 05590910 
 
IRB Approval Date : 05.23.2022  
 
Unique Protocol ID : HSC20210672H  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21-672H, Contreras, Form BC, 05 -23-22, AMD.docx                                vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
2  
 
Protocol Template Form  
 
Item 1 UTH SCSA 
Tracking Number  HSC20210672H :  
 
The Effects of a Music Intervention on Stress, Anxiety and Academic Performance on Nursing Students  
 
 
Item 2 Abstract / Project Summary  Provide a succinct and accurate description of the proposed research. 
State the purpose/aims. Describe concisely the research design and 
methods for achieving the stated goals. This section should be 
understandable to all members of the IRB, scientific and non-scientific.   
DO NOT EXCEED THE SPACE PROVIDED . 
Purpose/Objectives : The purpose of this study is to assess whether a music intervention , compared with no music 
intervention , influences stress and anxiety levels  and academic performance  of undergraduate nursing students.  
 Research Design/Plan:  A randomized controlled approach will explore the effects music has on stress and anxiety levels 
and academic performance among undergraduate nursing students.  
 
Methods : Students will be divided  and randomized into t wo recording  groups : 1.) Music Intervention  Group , 2.) Non-
Music Control  Group.  The music intervention  group will receive a 15 -minute music intervention and variables such as 
heart rate, blood pressure, anxiety , and academic performance will be measured. The non-music control  group will not 
receive the intervention;  however,  the same variables will be measured.  
 
Clinical Relevance :
 Music has been shown to beneficially affect stress -related physiological,  as well as cognitive, and 
emotional processes. The proposed study has the potential to highlight the acceptance of music used as a strategy for  
impacting  stress  and anxiety experienced  by nursing students during their undergraduate studies. Evidence of an y effect 
music has on stress and anxiety levels among undergraduate studies can determine existence by the measurement of vital signs, STAI responses, and skills performance. This type of study can be beneficial to further research and can be implemented b y nurse educators, healthcare institutions, and wellness clinics.  
 
 
 
 
Item 3 
Background   
Describe past experimental 
and/or clinical findings 
leading to the formulation 
of your study.   
For research involving 
unapproved drugs, 
describe animal and 
human studies.   
For research that involves 
approved drugs or devices, 
describe the FDA approved Nursing students experience higher levels of stress than students in any other health science 
academic programs (Kinchen & Loerzel, 2019). Since most nursing students are not able to 
avoid these stressor s, students must be able to cope with them. If students are not able to 
manage their stress, it can affect their performance, health, attitude, and role satisfaction as a nurse (Rafati et al., 2017). The levels of stress may vary during students’ education al 
training, depending on their ability to adopt various strategies or coping with stress, and other factors. Even though numerous studies have been published regarding stress and anxiety among nursing students, few studies are found addressing the benefit s of music 
utilized as an intervention to decrease emotional stress.  
21-672H, Contreras, Form BC, 05 -23-22, AMD.docx                                vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
3 uses of this drug/device in 
relation to your protocol.   
Item 4 
Purpose and rationale  
Insert purpose, objectives 
and research 
questions/hypotheses 
here.  
 If you cut and paste from 
another document, make 
sure the excerpted 
material answers the 
question  Music is an immensely powerful emotional tool that can be used as a coping mechanism for 
stress, but there is truly little existing research about its use by  students.  This study aims to 
explore the effects of music intervention on the stress and anxiety levels among nursing 
students in their first semester of undergraduate studies. Increased awareness of their own 
strategies used, as well as the willingness t o use holistic methods such as music, can offer a 
non-pharmacological and inexpensive intervention to many institutions.  
 
Research Questions:  
1. Is there a relationship between listening to music and stress , anxiety , and academic 
performance  among new undergraduate nursing students?  
2. Does listening to music help in decreasing anxiety among new undergraduate nursing 
students who are anticipating a skills assessment?  
3. Does listening to music help in decreasing stress among new undergraduate  nursing 
students who are anticipating a skills assessment?  
4. Does listening to music help to improve academic performance among new undergraduate nursing students?  
 
 
 
Item  5 
Study Population(s) Being 
Recruited  
 
In your recruitment plan, how 
many different populations of 
prospective subjects do you plan to 
target?  Provide number:  1 
 
Identify the criteria for inclusion : Identify the criteria for exclusion : e.g., a population can be individuals 
with type 2 diabetes controlled with 
diet and/ or a population of healthy 
controls .  Or  a population can be 
individuals attending an education 
program, etc.  
 
List each different population on a 
separate row and provide a sh ort 
descriptive label:   
(e.g., normal -healthy, diabetics, 
parents, children, etc.)  
 
To add rows use copy & paste  
Nursing Students  18 years and older  
Enrolled at UTHSCSA - School of 
Nursing  
Enrolled in a Foundations of Nursing 
Clinical  course  
First semester undergraduate nursing 
student  Younger than 18 years old  
2nd , 3rd ,4th semester undergraduate nursing 
student  
21-672H, Contreras, Form BC, 05 -23-22, AMD.docx                                vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
4  
Insert response here  Insert response here  Insert response here  
 
 
Item 6 
Research Plan / Description of the Research Methods  a.  Provide a comprehensive narrative  describing the research methods .   
Provide the plan for data analysis  (include as applicable the sample size calculation) . 
 Step -by-Step Methods:  
 
A randomized controlled approach will explore the effects music has on stress and anxiety levels and academic performance among undergraduate nursing students.  The study will be conducted with nursing 
students in the first semester of the undergraduate BSN program at UT Health Science Center at San 
Antonio.  The study will consist of P hase 1 (pilot) and Phase 2  (larger dissertation study) . Phase 1 will be the 
pilot study conducted in Spring 2022. T he total population of the cohort typically consists of ≈ 108 students. 
Approximately half- way through the semester, the students are required to sign -up for a skills competency 
recording. The students select the best date and time for their schedule. Students  sign- up electronically into 
a group consisting of up to 10  students. Typically,  there are 30 min  time slots  available for sign -up For Phase 
1, the pilot study will use a cluster randomization procedure to randomly assign  two of the  sign- up groups. 
The t wo gr oups will be  1) the music intervention  group  (n=up to 10 participants ), and 2.) the non -music 
control group  (n= up to 10 participants ). An online randomizer will be used to create the groups. Students 
assigned to these groups will be allowed to remove themselves. The academic performance of these 
students will be recorded for the study.  
 Phase 2 of the study will be informed from the findings of Phase 1, the pilot study. It is anticipated there will be no intended changes in the methodology or randomization procedures from Phase 1 to Phase 2. The only 
difference would be in Phase 2 the tot al population in the Summer 2022  cohort  (n≈108) will be randomized 
into approximately 6 slots per half hour  . Any changes to be made for Phase 2 will be immediately 
communicated to the IRB for approval prior to implementation . 
 
The following procedures will be used for Phase 1  and Phase 2 : 
The study will be conducted at the UT Health Science Center -  San Antonio’s Center for Simulation 
Innovation (CSI).  Two classroom s will be reserved in the CSI area at the School of Nursing. Students  will be  
divided into the  recording time slots  consisting of no more than 10 students at a time. The students receiving 
the music intervention will be assigned  an iPad  (only used to sync s martwatch) , a hard copy of S tate Trait 
Anxiety Inventory (STAI)  survey  form s Y-1 and Y -2, a demographic data form, pencil , and smart watch . 
Students will be advised to sit quietly, with desks spread out, in the reserved room. The participants will be 
asked to complete the STAI survey forms  prior to music listening. Students will be advised to wear the watch, 
and watches will be previous ly logged in and synced by researcher to measure heart rate and blood 
pressure.  Vital sign sheet will be completed by researcher using the data from the iPad. Fifteen minutes of 
classical music will be played overhead in the classroom. The students will be instructed not to use o ther 
electronic devices such as ear buds or phones during this time. The STAI survey  Y-1 will be completed again 
post -intervention, and heart rate and blood pressure re -assessed. Students will then proceed to perform the 
skills competency assessment. Vital s and  STAI  survey Y-1 will then be  reassessed post -skills competency and 
academic performance  (pass/fail)  will be measured.  
 
The students who will not be receiving the music intervention  (control group)  will be seated in a second 
reserved classroom and will be repeating the same process as the music intervention group except without 
music, instead they will be s itting  quietly for 15 minutes waiting to record their skills competency. The 
students will als o be instructed not to use other electronic devices such as ear buds or phones during this 
time. For any students  who have been randomly assigned to either group , and refuse to be in the study, they 
21-672H, Contreras, Form BC, 05 -23-22, AMD.docx                                vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
5 will be allowed to leave. O nly the academic performance w ill be measured  on these students that refuse to 
be assigned to a group . 
 
Data Analysis Plan:  
A priori power analysis was conducted using G*Power 3.1.9 to determine the minimum  sample size required 
to find statistical significance using a 3 (group) x 4 (time) repeated  measures analysis of variance (i.e., a 
mixed -model ANOVA). With a desired level of power set at .80, an alpha (α) level at .05, and a moderate 
effect size of .25 (f), it was determined that a  minimum of 30 total participants wou ld be required to ensure 
adequate power (Cohen, 1988).  
 
Mean heart rate, mean blood pressure, mean scores on STAI, and academic performance score (Pass/Fail) 
will be calculated for all groups. Demographic data will be analyzed in terms of frequencies and c omparisons 
between groups. For RQ1 : Pearson’s correlation  will examine the relationship between the music 
intervention on stress, anxiety , and academic performance.  For RQ2 : To measure anxiety, STAI mean scores  
will be analyzed . For RQ3: To measure stress  levels , the mean heart rate  and mean blood pressure  will be 
analyzed. For RQ4 : To assess academic performance , Pass/fail score s will be looked at . MANOVA will be 
considered for data analysis since there is one independent variable (music intervention) and multiple  
dependent variables. If any variables are not correlated, running a repeated -measures ANOVA to detect any 
overall differences between any related means would be considered. A paired samples t -tests could also be 
used for pre -and post -comparisons of vital signs. Using a Chi- Square test can also be beneficial in 
determining any differences in demographics and anxiety and/or stress.  Alpha will be set at 0.05 for the 
study.  
 
 
Item 7 Risks Section:  
Complete the following table to describe the risks of all research procedures listed in Step 2, Institutional  Form (items 28- 34).  Do not list risks of Routine care 
procedures here.   
  N/A, Risks are described in the informed consent document – do not complete this table.  
Research procedures  
 
example:  
• History and physical  
• Questionnaire 
• Laboratory tests  
 
Add or delete rows as needed  Risks  
 
List the reasonably expected risks  
under the following categories as appropriate:  
Vitals Signs  obtained via 
SmartWatch 
 
Heart Rate  
Blood Pressure  Serious and likely;  
o None  
Serious and less likely;  
o None  
Demographic data form, paper and 
pencil  Serious and likely;  
None  
STAI Survey : paper and pencil 
survey  Serious and likely;  
o None  
Academic Performance  Serious and likely;  
o Pass/Fail  
 
 
 
 