[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Cannabidiol Treatment in Patients With Early Psychosis  
 
Study Protocol  and Statistical Analysis Plan  5/17/2017  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 1 of 40DATE STAMPED-RECEIVED PROTOCOL NUMBER
YALE UNIVERSITY
HUMAN INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
Application to Involve  Human Subjects in Biomedical Research 
100 F R1 (2013-1)
Please refer to the HIC website f or application 
instructions and information required to complete 
this application. The Instructions are available at  
http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/forms-  
templates/biomedical.html
Submit the original application and one (1) copy  
of all materials including relevant sections of the 
grant which funds this project (if applicable) to 
the HIC.HIC OFFICE USE ONLY
SECTION I: ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION
Title of Research Project:
Cannabidiol treatment in patients with Early Psychosis
Principal Investigator:
Mohini Ranganathan, MDYale Academic Appointment:
Assistant Professor
Department: Psychiatry
Campus Address:
Connecticut Mental  Health Center, Clinical Neuroscience Research Unit, 3 4 Park S t. New Haven, C T 06519
Campus Phone:
203-932-5711 x.2546Fax:
203-937-4860Pager:
203-867-7923E-mail:
Mohini.Ranganathan@yale.edu
Protocol Correspondent Name & Address (if different than P I):
Madison Dykins
Campus Phone:
203-932-5711 x2526Fax:
203-937-4860E-mail:
 Madison.dykins@yale.edu
Yale Cancer Center CTO P rotocol Correspondent Name & Address (if applicable): N/A
Campus Phone: Fax: E-mail:
Business Manager:
Campus Phone : Fax : E-mail
Faculty Advisor:(required  if PI is a student, 
resident, fellow or other trainee) NAYale Academic Appointment:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 2 of 40Campus Address:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 3 of 40Campus Phone: Fax: Pager: E-mail:
Investigator Interests:
Does the principal investigator, or do any research personnel who are responsible for the design, 
conduct or reporting of this p roject or any of their family members (spouse or dependent child) 
have an incentive or interest, financial or otherwise, that may affect the protection of the human 
subjects involved in this project, the scientific objectivity of the research or its integrity? Note: 
The Principal Investigator (Project Director), upon consideration of the individual’s r ole and 
degree of independence in carrying out the work, will determine who is responsible for the 
design, conduct, or  reporting  of the research.
See Disclosures and Management of Personal Interests in Human Research  
http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/policies/index.html#COI
 Yes X No
Do you or does anyone on the research team  who is determined by you to be responsible for the 
design, conduct or  reporting  of this r esearch have any patent ( sole right to make, use or sell a n 
invention) or copyright (exclusive rights to an original work) interests related to  this research 
protocol?
 Yes X No
If yes to either question above,  list n ames of the investigator or responsible person:
The Yale University Principal Investigator, all Yale University co-investigators, and all Yale 
University individuals who are responsible for the design, conduct or reporting  of research must 
have a current financial disclosure form on file with the University’s Conflict of Interest Office. 
Yale New Haven Hospital personnel who are listed as con-investigators on a p rotocol with a 
Yale University Principal Investigator must also  have a current financial disclosure  form on file 
with the University’s Conflict of Interest Office. If this h as not been done, the individual(s) 
should f ollow this link to the COI Office Website to complete the
form:  http://www.yale.edu/coi/
NOTE: The requirement for maintaining a current disclosure form on file with the University’s 
Conflict of Interest Office  extends p rimarily to Yale  University and Yale-New Haven Hospital 
personnel.  Whether or not they are required to maintain a disclosure form with  the 
University’s Conflict of Interest Office, all i nvestigators and individuals deemed otherwise 
responsible by the PI who a re listed on t he protocol are required to disclose to the PI any 
interests that are specific to this protocol.
SECTION II: GENERAL INFORMATION
1.Performing Organizations:  Identify the hospital, in-patient or outpatient facility, school or 
other agency  that will serve  as the location of the research. Choose all that apply:
a.Internal Location[s] of the Study:
Magnetic Resonance Research Center Yale U niversity PET Center
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 4 of 40(MR-TAC) YCCI/Church Street Research Unit (CSRU) 
Yale C ancer Center/Clinical Trials Office (CTO) YCCI/Hospital Research Unit (HRU)
Yale C ancer Center/Smilow YCCI/Keck Laboratories
Yale-New Haven Hospital Yale-New Haven Hospital—Saint Raphael Campus 
Cancer Data Repository/Tumor Registry
Specify Other  Yale Location:
b.External Location[s]:
APT Foundation, Inc. Haskins Laboratories 
Connecticut Mental Health C enter John B . Pierce Laboratory, Inc.
Clinical Neuroscience Research  Unit (CNRU)Veterans Affairs Hospital, West H aven 
Other Locations, Specify: Institute of Living, Hartford Hospital
International Research Site
(Specify location(s)):
c.Additional Required Documents (check all that a pply): N/A
*YCCI-Scientific and Safety Committee (YCCI-SSC) Approval Date:
*Pediatric Protocol Review Committee (PPRC) Approval Date:
*YCC Protocol Review Committee (YRC-PRC) Approval Date:
*Dept. of Veterans Affairs, West  Haven VA HSS Approval Date:
*Radioactive Drug  Research Committee (RDRC) Approval Date: 
YNHH-Radiation Safety  Committee (YNHH-RSC) Approval Date: 
Magnetic Resonance Research Center  PRC (MRRC-PRC) Approval Date: 
YSM/YNHH Cancer Data Repository (CaDR) Approval Date: 
Dept. of Lab Medicine request for services or specimens form
Imaging on YNHH Diagnostic Radiology equipment  request form ( YDRCTO request) found 
at http://radiology.yale.edu/research/ClinTrials.aspx)
*Approval from these committees is required before final HIC a pproval is granted. See instructions 
for documents  required for initial s ubmission and approval of the protocol. Allow s ufficient time for 
these requests. Check with the oversight body for their time requirements.
2.Probable Duration of Project: State the expected d uration of the project, including all 
follow-up and data analysis a ctivities. 3 years
3.Research Type/Phase: (Check all t hat apply)
a.Study Type
Single Center Study  
Multi-Center Study
Does the Yale PI serve as the PI of the multi-site study? Yes No 
Coordinating Center/Data Management
Other:
b. Study Phase N/A
Pilot Phase I Phase II Phase III Phase IV
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 5 of 40Other (Specify)
4.Area of Research: (Check all that apply)  Note that these are overlapping definitions and 
more than one category may apply to your research protocol. Definitions for the following 
can be found in the  instructions s ection 4c:
Clinical Research: Patient-Oriented Clinical Research: Outcomes and 
Clinical Research: Epidemiologic and Behavioral Health Services 
Translational Research #1 (“Bench-to-Bedside”) Interdisciplinary Research 
Translational Research #2 (“Bedside-to-Community”) Community-Based Research
5.Is this study a clinical trial? Yes No
NOTE the current ICMJE (International Committee of Medical Journal Editors) definition of a 
clinical trial: “any research study that p rospectively assigns h uman participants or groups of h umans 
to one or more health-related interventions to evaluate the effects on h ealth outcomes.” Health-related 
interventions include any intervention used to modify a biomedical or h ealth-related outcome (for 
example, drugs, s urgical procedures, devices, behavioral t reatments, dietary interventions, and 
process-of-care changes). H ealth outcomes include any biomedical or h ealth-related measures 
obtained in patients or p articipants, including pharmacokinetic measures and a dverse events”
If yes, where is it r egistered?
Clinical Trials.gov registry 
Other (Specify)
Registration of clinical trials at their initiation is required by the FDA, NIH  and by the ICMJE.
If this study  is registered on c linicaltrials.gov, there is new language in the consent form  and compound 
authorization that s hould be used.
For more information on registering clinical trials, including whether your trial must  be 
registered, see the YCCI webpage, http://ycci.yale.edu/researchers/ors/registerstudy.aspx or 
contact YCCI at 203.785.3482)
6.Does the Clinical Trials Agreement (CTA) require  compliance with ICH GCP (E6)? 
Yes No
7.Will t his study have a billable service? A Billable Service is defined as a service or procedure 
that will be ordered, performed or result in charging in EPIC for individuals w ho are enrolled in 
a clinical research study, regardless if the charge is intended to be paid by the subject/their 
insurance or the research study.
Yes No 
If you answered "yes", this study  will need to be set up in OnCore Support  
http://medicine.yale.edu/ymg/systems/ppm/index.aspx
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 6 of 408.. Are there  any procedures involved in this p rotocol that will be performed at YNHH or 
one of its affiliated entities?  YesNo _X_  If Yes, p lease answer questions a through c  
and note instructions below.  If No, proceed to Section I II.
a.Does your YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that 
you will perform?
b.Will you be using  any new equipment or equipment t hat you have not used in the  
past for this p rocedure?
c.Will a novel approach using  existing equipment be applied?
If you answered “no” to question 7a, or "yes" to question 7b or c, please contact the YNHH 
Department of Physician Services (688-2615) for prior approval before  commencing with 
your research protocol.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 7 of 40SECTION IV:
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR/FACULTY ADVISOR/ DEPARTMENT CHAIR 
AGREEMENT
As the principal investigator of this r esearch project, I certify that:
The information provided in this a pplication is complete and accurate.
I assume full responsibility for the protection of human s ubjects and the proper conduct of the 
research.
Subject safety  will be of paramount concern, and every effort will be made to protect subjects’ 
rights and welfare.
The research will be performed according to ethical principles and in compliance with all federal, 
state and local laws, as well as institutional regulations and policies regarding the protection of 
human subjects.
All members of the research team will be kept apprised of research goals.
I will obtain approval for this r esearch study and any subsequent r evisions prior to my initiating the 
study or any change  and I will obtain continuing approval of this study prior  to the expiration date 
of any approval period.
I will report to the  HIC any serious i njuries and/or other unanticipated problems  involving  risk to 
participants.
I am in compliance with the requirements set by the University and qualify to serve as the 
principal investigator of this p roject or have  acquired the appropriate approval from the 
Dean’s Office  or Office of the Provost, or the Human Subject Protection Administrator at 
Yale-New Haven Hospital, or have a faculty  advisor.
I will identify  a qualified successor should I cease my role as principal investigator and facilitate a 
smooth t ransfer of investigator responsibilities.
PI Name (PRINT) and Signature Date
As the faculty advisor  of this research project, I certify that:
The information provided in this a pplication is complete and accurate.
This project has scientific value and merit  and that the student or trainee investigator has the 
necessary resources to complete the project and achieve the aims.
I will train the student investigator in matters of appropriate research compliance, protection of 
human subjects and proper  conduct of  research.
The research will be performed according  to ethical principles and in compliance with all federal, 
state and local laws, as well as institutional regulations and policies regarding the protection of 
human subjects.
The student investigator will obtain approval for this research study  and any subsequent revisions 
Prior to initiating the study or revision  and will obtain continuing approval prior to the expiration 
of any approval period.
The student investigator will report to the  HIC any serious i njuries and/or other unanticipated 
problems involving  risk to p articipants.
I am in compliance with the requirements set forth b y the University and qualify  to serve  as 
the faculty  advisor of this p roject.
Date
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 8 of 40Department Chair’s Assurance Statement
Do you know of any real or apparent institutional conflict of interest (e.g., Yale ownership of a 
sponsoring company, patents,  licensure) associated with this r esearch project?
Yes (provide a description of that interest in a separate letter  addressed to the HIC.) 
No
As Chair, do you have  any real or apparent protocol-specific conflict of interest between yourself and 
the sponsor of the research project, or its competitor or any interest in any intervention and/or method  
tested in the project that might compromise this r esearch project?
Yes (provide a description of that interest in a separate letter  addressed to the HIC) 
No
I assure the HIC that the principal investigator and all members of the research team are qualified by 
education, training, licensure and/or experience to assume participation in the conduct of this research 
trial. I also assure that the principal investigator has d epartmental support and sufficient resources to 
conduct this t rial appropriately.
Chair Name (PRINT) and Signature Date
Department
YNHH Human Subjects Protection Administrator Assurance Statement
Required when the study is conducted solely at YNHH by YNHH  health care providers.
As Human Subject Protection Administrator (HSPA) for YNHH, I certify that:
I have  read a copy  of the protocol and approve it being conducted at YNHH.
I agree to notify  the IRB if I am aware of any real or apparent institutional conflict of interest.
The principal investigator of this study is qualified to serve as P.I. and has the support of the hospital 
for this research project.
YNHH HSPA Name (PRINT) and Signature Date
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 9 of 40SECTION V: RESEARCH PLAN
1.Statement of Purpose: State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be  tested.
This is a four week, randomized, p lacebo controlled, crossover trial comparing cannabidiol 
(CBD) to placebo in outpatients w ith psychotic disorder within their first five years of disease 
onset. We hypothesize that treatment with CBD will result in:
a.Primary Hypotheses:
i.Improvement evidenced b y a reduction in scores on the Positive and Negative 
Syndrome Scale for Schizophrenia (PANSS).
ii.Improvement evidenced by a reduction in the  Clinical Global Impression of Severity 
scale (CGI).
b.Secondary Hypothesis:
i.Greater improvement in functioning  as measured on the “Patient Assessment of Own 
Functioning Inventory: (PAOFI) and the Quality of Life Scale (QLS)
ii.No worsening of depressive symptoms or suicidality as measured on the CDSS and 
CSSRS.
c.Exploratory Hypotheses:
i.Exploration of the effect of CBD on EEG recordings of MMN and P300  amplitude 
and latency, known endophenotypes/biomarkers of Schizophrenia
2.Background: Describe the background information that led to the plan for this p roject. 
Provide references to support  the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.
There is a n eed to develop a nti-psychotic therapeutics with n ovel mechanisms of action and 
fewer side effects:
Current first and second  generation anti-psychotics  employ a common mechanism of dopamine 
receptor antagonism leading to varying  degrees of motor side effects and QTc prolongation for 
the class as a whole. Second g eneration anti-psychotics h ave also been  demonstrated to cause 
significant metabolic side effects including weight gain, dyslipidemia, and diabetes mellitus [1- 
3]. S pecifically, the CATIE study found the prevalence of metabolic syndrome  in schizophrenia 
to be 42% compared to 23% in the general population  [4]. Given the significant morbidity and 
mortality associated with schizophrenia, even appropriate treatment with the currently available 
medications has the potential  to add serious medical illness to an already  poor prognosis [4, 5]. 
Thus, it is i mperative that new antipsychotics with novel mechanisms of action be developed not 
only to find m ore tolerable therapies for this high risk group but  also to  address the significant 
portion of p atients with incomplete response and potentially those with p sychotic symptoms 
derived from  neurodegenerative disease [6].
Cannabidiol, a component of herbal cannabis, may have antipsychotic effects via a n ovel 
mechanism of action:
Cannabidiol is a component of herbal cannabis, studied for a number of potential p harmaceutical 
indications since the 1970s g iven its p urported hypnotic, a nticonvulsant, neuroprotective and 
hormonal effects [7-10].   More recently, enthusiasm h as mounted surrounding its potential as an 
anti-psychotic and anxiolytic. Initially thought to be a CB-1 antagonist, the mechanism of action
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 10 of 40of cannabidiol has more recently  been  thrown into q uestion. Various alternative  mechanisms 
have been s uggested including modulation of the endocannabinoid system via FAAH inhibition 
leading to increased levels of the endogenous cannabinoid, anandamide, TRPV1  activation, 5- 
HT1A agonism, and NMDA  receptor modulation [11-13]. O verall, the true mechanism of action 
remains unknown.  Studies have proposed  that alterations in the endocannabinoid s ystem, 
manifesting as significantly elevated levels of anandamide in the cerebrospinal fluid of 
schizophrenic patients, may suggest a  protective role of this c ompound against psychosis, one 
that cannabidiol may modulate in therapeutically significant ways not yet fully understood. Brain 
imaging studies also demonstrate opposite  effects of CBD and THC in  particular brain r egions 
thought to be associated with the development of psychosis.  Specifically, fMRI  studies have 
demonstrated CBD’s augmentation of activity in the right posterior temporal gyrus, the left 
caudate and the hippocampus a s well as attenuated activity in the right prefrontal area, all of 
which are the opposite  of THC effects [14].  D espite the lack of clarity regarding its exact 
mechanism of action, c linical studies in both h uman and animal models have suggested 
antipsychotic effects as discussed b elow, with an extremely favorable side effect profile.
Cannabidiol has been shown to exhibit antipsychotic effects:
Within the last decade, animal m odels have demonstrated CBD’s ability  to decrease 
hyperlocomotion induced b y amphetamine and ketamine and to extinguish stereotyped behavior 
induced by apomorphine in rats [10, 15]. H uman case studies also suggested antipsychotic 
effects of CBD in patients u nable to tolerate or unresponsive to usual therapies. While  the exact 
mechanism of action r emains unknown, more recent  clinical studies have demonstrated that pre- 
treatment with CBD inhibits the  psychotomimetic effects of THC resulting in  a significant 
decrease in self-reported paranoia and a non-statistically significant trend t oward decreased 
PANSS scores [16]. I ndeed, a high ratio of THC to CBD has been  correlated with increased risk 
of psychotic symptoms further suggesting a protective role of CBD, a t least a mong cannabis 
users [17, 18].
Perhaps most  encouraging was a  recent clinical trial by Leweke, et al. which showed similar 
reduction in PANSS scores in patients treated with CBD versus the D2/D3 antagonist 
amisulpride [11].  In this double blind p arallel group randomized active controlled clinical trial, 
men and women aged 18-50 w ith acute exacerbation of schizophrenia or schizophreniform 
psychosis received four week courses of either cannabidiol or  amisulpride with recording of 
baseline, day 14 and day 28 PANSS scores. Side effects were also measured using the 
Extrapyramidal Symptom Scale. Results revealed a similar reduction in PANSS scores in both 
groups, no difference in the percentage of responders and significantly  fewer extrapyramidal side 
effects in the CBD group. This promising evidence for likely non-inferiority of CBD warrants 
replication as well a s investigation of its use outside the acute stage and in the outpatient setting, 
which the proposed study intends to investigate.  Furthermore, the addition of  objective outcome 
measurements including p sychosocial, cognitive, mood,  and biomarker data as well as the use of 
a wider range of cannabidiol dosages would contribute to the overall picture of CBD’s use as a 
novel anti-psychotic.
Cannabidiol has few side effects and is generally well  tolerated:
Based on earlier studies of the 1970s,  Cunha  et al. d emonstrated that 300-400mg  daily  doses of 
cannabidiol for 30 days in healthy subjects a s well as 100-200mg daily for 4.5 months in s ubjects 
with epilepsy revealed no adverse effects beyond mild s omnolence [19, 2 0]. High doses of the
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 11 of 40medication were also well t olerated in case studies of use in patients unable to tolerate or 
resistant to dopamine antagonists and in doses up to 10mg/kg (average of 700mg) daily for 6 
weeks in patients with Huntington’s Disease and in combination with alcohol [21-23].
Specifically, analysis of reported side effects in the  latter study showed no significant difference 
between placebo and CBD [22]. Also, in the aforementioned trial comparing anti-psychotic 
effects of CBD and amisulpride, patients treated with cannabidiol had a significantly fewer 
extrapyramidal symptoms, less weight gain, and lower prolactin levels [11].
Individuals early in their course of illness may particularly benefit from treatment with a 
medication such as cannabidiol:
In treatment settings caring for patients with early psychosis, ~30% drop out of care within the 
first year which  may be related to unwillingness to tolerate medication side effects associated 
with dopaminergic antipsychotic medications. As discussed above, CBD  is very well tolerated 
and may thus be a suitable choice especially  in early  psychosis when patients  are medication 
naïve and more sensitive  to the side effects. Furthermore, these individuals typically have  high 
rates of cannabis use (~30%) in this c ohort, which is associated with worsening of symptoms, 
course and engagement with treatment. CBD, in laboratory  studies has been s hown to attenuate 
the effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the main psychoactive component of cannabis 
and may potentially have benefits in this  population. Furthermore, since CBD is known to be a 
component of cannabis, patients may have  fewer reservations about accepting this a s a treatment.
Thus, given some evidence supporting the antipsychotic potential of CBD, its effects on non- 
specific symptoms  such as anxiety and insomnia and its favorable side effect profile, further 
study of CBD’s anti-psychotic effects may benefit from inclusion of more objective measures 
such as Event Related Potentials (ERPs).
ERPs are oscillatory brain r esponses seen on E EG triggered by particular stimuli. N umerous 
studies have demonstrated aberrations in event-related potentials in schizophrenia, specifically 
deficient mismatch negativity  (MMN) and significantly decreased P300 amplitude and latency 
which are hypothesized to  serve as indices of abnormal auditory sensory  memory, information 
processing speed and allocation of attention ([24-26]. A  recent study by Fisher, et al. 
demonstrated both a  correlation between decreased  MMN  and increased PANSS s cores as well 
as a correlation between decreased P300 a mplitude and increased auditory  hallucinations [25]. 
Attenuation of the MMN and decreased P300 m easures have thus been s uggested as 
endophenotypes of schizophrenia and potential biomarkers of disease  [24, 27]. S tudies assessing 
the effects of medications on the MMN and P300  are limited.  While  clozapine use has been 
associated with increases in P300 a mplitude, first generation anti-psychotics a nd olanzapine have 
not [28, 2 9]. However, further research on the use of biomarkers to assess m edication effect is 
needed and collection of this d ata will shed light on the potential role of antipsychotics and CBD 
in particular on normalizing these processes.
Significance:
As outlined above, CBD has shown potential anti-psychotic effect via novel m echanisms of 
action as compared to the currently available drugs. CBD is likely to have an extremely  
favorable side effect profile.  There is a need  for novel a nti-psychotics both to expand upon the 
currently available, effective battery of therapeutics and to limit the medical comorbidity  
associated with current therapies.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 12 of 40Consent Procedures: Subjects who meet entry criteria will be invited to m eet with the research 
staff, who will fully explain r isks and procedures as outlined in the consent form. After 
reviewing this i nformation and answering questions, i nformed consent will be obtained from all 
subjects. A copy of the consent  form will be provided to  all subjects.
Medical and P sychiatric Evaluation: Once written informed consent h as been obtained, the 
diagnosis will be confirmed by a Structured Clinical Interview for DSM IV (SCID). A detailed 
medical and psychiatric history, physical examination (including vital signs,  height, and weight), 
an electrocardiogram, and laboratory assessments (standard screening blood t ests: CBC with 
differential and platelet count, e lectrolytes, creatinine, BUN, liver enzymes, T4, calcium, 
phosphate, TSH, and magnesium levels) will be performed. In addition, a full lipid p rofile, 
fasting glucose and insulin levels w ill be obtained. A pregnancy test will be done in all 
premenopausal women. A routine urinalysis and drug  screen  will be done as part of the 
screening process.
Subjects will be administered the PANSS and motor side effects scales (AIMS, B arnes akathisia 
scale, Simpson A ngus scale). IQ will be measured at screening using the Wechsler  Test of Adult 
Reading (WTAR). Subjects will also be asked to provide an informant who  can be contacted to 
collect clinical and safety information relevant to the outcome measures on each visit. T his could 
be a clinician or a family member/friend who sees the patient at least on a  weekly basis.
Study Design: In this 2 p eriod cross over  design, subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to 
receive either: Order 1: CBD (Period 1) followed by placebo (Period 2) or Order 2: Placebo 
(Period 1) followed by CBD (Period 2) under double-blind c onditions. The 2 study periods will 
be separated by a washout o f at least 2 weeks. During each period s ubjects will receive study 
medications (CBD [total  800mg/day] or placebo) for a period of 4 weeks. This dose  is within the 
dose range of doses that have been  shown to be effective and safe. Randomization to the order of 
medication assignment will be stratified by baseline PANSS scores.
Study Visits:
Subjects will have the following visits  during each period except for Visit I (screening), which 
will occur only at the beginning of their participation in the study:
Visit I: Screening (At least t wo visits: V isit Ia and Visit Ib.)
Visit II: Baseline: Will i nitiate treatment with study drug following baseline assessments. 
(Visits III, IV, V: Weekly clinical evaluation and study medication refill)
Visit III: (Week 1) 
Visit IV: (Week 2) 
Visit V: (Week 3)
Visit VI: (Week 4): End of treatment period  visit  
Visit VII: Safety Follow up at week 5.
Visit VIII: One close-out visit w ill be conducted after Visit VII in Period 2 for lab review and 
safety follow up.
Note: Visits II-VI can be  split into two visits, which m ust be completed within +/- 3 days of 
each other based on the subject’s availability.
Outpatient Medication Compliance: Medication compliance will be monitored  throughout 
each study  period b y self-report and vial c ounts at study visits a nd using the Cellphone Assisted 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 13 of 40Remote Observation of M edication Adherence (CAROMA). CAROMA may be used 1-2 times 
per day during the treatment p eriod to confirm compliance. Flexible scheduling will be 
maintained regarding time and days of CAROMA depending on subject reliability, availability 
and frequency of in person visits. S ubjects will be provided with a cellphone with the hardware, 
software and service necessary to transmit high quality  video. Prior to randomization, the subject 
will be trained how to use the phone and also trained on the  compliance protocol.  For this, the 
subject will be placed in one clinic office with the phone. A research staff member will video call 
the subject from another location in the clinic and observe the subject  consuming a syringe of 
water. Once successfully  trained in the clinic, the subjects w ill be loaned the phone to take home  
for one trial CAROMA visit. T his is to e nsure that 1) the in-clinic training extends  to the home, 
and 2) that the subject has adequate cellular service  at home. Within a time period predetermined 
by agreement, subjects will be called on the cell phone and will be observed r emoving study 
medication from the packaging a nd swallowing the medication. The research assistant will log 
visual confirmation of compliance. Subjects will receive additional compensation for CAROMA 
visits a s outlined in the “Economic Considerations” section below. Subjects w ho are not 
contactable will be assumed to be noncompliant for that visit  and will not r eceive payment for the 
missed CAROMA visits.
Finally, compliance will also be confirmed by measuring CBD levels  in plasma from blood  
sampled at regular intervals throughout the study.
Study Procedures:
Safety Assessment: during each visit. T his will include assessment of psychiatric status, 
assessment of adverse events, vital signs, and safety  labs (CBC, C hem 19, u rinalysis, and urine 
toxicology).
Outcome measures:
1.Positive and N egative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) (Visits I-VI): The PANSS i ncludes 3 
scales and 30 items: 7 items t hat make up the Positive Scale (eg, delusions,  conceptual 
disorganization, hallucinatory behavior); 7 i tems that make up the Negative Scale (eg, 
blunted affect, emotional withdrawal, poor rapport, passive/apathetic social  withdrawal); and 
16 items that make up the General Psychopathology Scale (eg, somatic concern, anxiety, 
guilt feelings, mannerisms and posturing, motor retardation, uncooperativeness, 
disorientation, poor impulse control, preoccupation). Individual items are scored with values 
ranging from 1 to 7.
2.Personal and S ocial Performance Scale  (PSP) (Visits I-VI): The PSP scale is a validated 
clinician-related scale that measures personal and social f unctioning in the  domains o f: 
socially useful a ctivities (eg, work and study), personal and social relationships, self-care, 
disturbing and aggressive behaviors. Information from the subject and the informant will be 
utilized in d etermining the rating. The interview with the informant may be conducted by 
phone once the initial in-person interview has o ccurred and informed consent h as been 
obtained.
3.Clinical Global Impression (CGI) (Visits I-VI):
a.Clinical Global Impression of Severity (CGI-S): The CGI-S consists of a single 7- 
point r ating score  of illness s everity. Raters  select one response based on the 
following question, “Considering your total clinical experience with this p articular 
population, how mentally ill is your patient  at this time?” Scores are: 1, N ormal, not
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 14 of 40ill at all; 2, B orderline mentally ill; 3, Mildly ill; 4, Moderately ill; 5, Markedly ill; 6, 
Severely ill; or 7, Among the most  severely  ill subjects.
b.Clinical Global Impression of Improvement (CGI-I): The CGI-I consists of a 
single 7-point rating  score  total improvement, regardless of whether or not the change 
it is due entirely to drug treatment. Raters select one response based on the following 
question, “Compared to your patient’s condition at the beginning of treatment, how 
much has your patient changed?” Scores are: 1, V ery much improved; 2, Much 
improved; 3, Minimally improved; 4, N o change; 5, Minimally  worse; 6, Much 
worse; or 7, Very much worse. For the CGI-I Scale, t he subject’s condition at the 
Day 1 (Baseline) visit will be the criterion for judging improvement at 
subsequent visits.
4. Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS) (Visits I-VI): The CSSRS is  an 
interview based rating scale to systematically assess s uicidal ideation and suicidal behavior. 
Versions are available for Screening/Baseline and follow-up visits.
5. Quality of Life Scale (QLS) (Visits II-VI): The QLS is a structured interview providing 
clinician ratings of function in key areas of everyday living.
6. The Patient Assessment of Own Functioning Inventory: (PAOFI) (Visits II-VI): will be 
included as a subjective assessment of cognitive functioning. The PAOFI is a widely used 
self-report instrument that taps into the respondent’s own views and experiences regarding 
difficulty in everyday  functioning.
7. Motor side effect scales (Visits I-VI): Barnes Akathisia Scale, Simpson A ngus Scale, and 
the AIMS; Further, the UKU side effects scale will be administered at weekly visits  to 
assess for antipsychotic induced  side effects.
8. Metabolic parameters (Visits I, II, I V, VI): Appetite and food intake ratings (VAS) and 
three day dietary record (which have been  shown to be predictors of energy intake and 
weight loss [30]),  weight, fasting glucose and lipid p rofile.
9. Smoking and C annabis use (Visits I-VI): Past week Time Line Follow Back approach.
10. EEG testing: The main EEG outcome measures will be P50, P300 a nd ASSR as discussed 
above. Brain wave  activity  during tasks involved in the processing auditory and visual 
stimuli w ith different degrees of attentional and memory  demands w ill be recorded. 
Auditory stimuli w ill include tones, white noise bursts, o ther digitized sounds ( such as dog 
barks, rooster crows), or spoken words. Visual stimuli  will include letters, numbers, words, 
geometric shapes, c olored patterns, or photographic images. Some  audiovisual stimuli may 
have emotive/emotionally salient or neutral content. S timuli will be separated by intervals of
.5 to 30 seconds. Some stimuli will require a button-press response using a response pad. 
These may be target stimuli in target detection tasks, or recalled stimuli in memory tasks. 
The EEG session will last approximately  2 hours.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 15 of 40On the testing days (Visit II and Visit VI), participants w ill be brought to the EEG testing 
booth. In the EEG recording, an elastic cloth cap with Ag/AgCl electrodes is worn by the 
subject. A conductive gel is then placed between the skin a nd the electrode prior to 
recording. The subject will t hen listen to sounds  or view visual images produced by a 
computer. By varying the characteristics of the auditory and visual stimulation, different 
brain systems are activated. In some recordings, the subject will be asked to press a button 
to indicate what sort of stimulation he or she experienced. The EEG recordings will be 
obtained using  a commercial psychophysiological system. The entire EEG procedure will 
take approximately 1.5 hours.
EEGs will be recorded at a sampling rate of 1024 Hz with on-line low-pass filter of 256Hz 
to prevent aliasing of high f requencies. A 64-channel  electrode cap according to the 
extended 10-20 system will be utilized. Seven additional electrodes will be placed: two on 
the mastoid processes, two h orizontal EOG channels lateral to the left and right eyes’ lateral 
canthi, two vertical EOG  channels, one below  (infraorbital) and one above  (supraorbital) the 
right eye, and a channel on the  tip of the nose. All electrodes will be referenced during 
recording to a common-mode signal (CMS) electrode between POz and PO3 and will be 
subsequently re-referenced digitally. A conductive gel will be placed between the skin and 
the electrodes prior to recording. The cap and all electrodes that come into c ontact with the 
skin w ill be cleaned and disinfected after each use in an antibacterial soap, which kills 
almost all vegetative microbial and viral life forms.
The main dependent measures of the EEG portion  of the study will be traditional EEG 
waveform amplitude and latency. Secondary measures will be EEG spectral power, inter- 
electrode coherence, and inter-trial coherence.
11. CBD and E ndocannabinoid Levels: Blood will be drawn at visit  II-VI for plasma CBD 
and Anandamide levels.  CBD levels will be assayed by our collaborator, Thomas C ooper, at 
Nathan Kline Institute. Serum Anandamide levels will be assayed by our collaborator, Alex 
Makriyannis, Director, Center for Drug  discovery at Northeastern University.
12. Neuropsychological Testing (Visits I, II,  and V I): A cognitive battery  will be utilized to 
assess working memory, spatial working memory, episodic memory, and learning.
Drug Dose and A dministration: CBD will be used u nder IND# 126731 and s upplied by Insys 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. with a shelf life of 1 year. The product will be stored in the Veterans 
Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System pharmacy  in West H aven, CT as per package 
instructions. The investigators brochure from Insys Pharmaceuticals is submitted along with this 
application. Pharmacists will deliver medication vials to study staff for dispensing by study 
psychiatrists. The daily dose for this study is CBD 800mg in an oral solution. T his dose has been 
previously shown to be well tolerated in healthy  subjects as well as schizophrenia patients in a 
recent clinical trial of 42 patients who were treated  with CBD 800 mg vs. Amisulpiride for 4 
weeks [11].
3.Genetic Testing   N/A
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 16 of 40A.Describe
i.the types of future research to be conducted using the materials, specifying if 
immortalization of cell lines, whole exome  or genome sequencing, genome wide 
association studies, or animal s tudies are planned
Depending on the  future course of the project and the results of the work, 
genome wide (GWAS)  genotyping, full exome sequencing, or full genome 
sequencing – or some intermediate stage between these – may be employed. 
Results from these subjects may be compared to other subjects that we or our 
collaborators have recruited or may recruit in the future in the course of this 
project or other projects; or other publicly-available data. We will consider any 
phenotypes about which information can be collected, concentrating, however, on 
psychiatric diagnoses, imaging measures, and response to treatment.
ii.the plan for the collection of material or the conditions u nder which material will 
be received
Samples will be drawn at the Connecticut Mental Health Center, the West Haven 
Va and the Institute of Living and transported to the West Haven VA for storage 
via Yale’s Intracampus Transport system.
iii.the types of information about the donor/individual contributors that will be 
entered into a database
No identifiers will be entered in the database.
iv.the methods to uphold c onfidentiality 
Discussed on pages 20 and 3 2-33.
B.What a re the conditions or procedures for sharing  of materials and/or distributing for 
future research projects?
N/A, as below.
C.Is widespread sharing of materials planned? 
No, there is not.
D.When a nd under what  conditions  will materials be stripped of all identifiers?
All biological materials studied in the DNA lab will have been stripped of any personal 
identifiers. Keys that can be used to match subject with genotype (and personal ID) will 
be retained indefinitely.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 17 of 40E.Can donor-subjects withdraw their materials at any time, and/or withdraw the identifiers 
that connect them to their materials?
Yes, subjects are free to withdraw their identifiers at any time.
i.How will requests to w ithdraw materials be handled ( e.g., material no longer 
identified: that is, anonymized) or material destroyed)?
At subjects’ request, samples will be de-identified, however, we will continue to 
study genotype and phenotype data together.
F.Describe the provisions for protection of participant privacy
Bloods for genetic analysis will be collected at the screening visit a nd stored until 
analyzed.  The laboratory  will receive no identifying  information about the samples. A 
key linking the samples with identifying information will be stored in D r. Ranganathan’s 
laboratory.
G.Describe the methods for the security of storage  and s haring of materials
The genetic materials will be stored indefinitely  for future study including g enome-wide 
association studies.  There are no plans f or sharing the samples. Participants can 
withdraw their identifiers at any time.
4.Subject Population: Provide a detailed description of the types of human subjects who will 
be recruited into this s tudy.
Subjects with a diagnosis of Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorder will be recruited. The study aims 
to enroll patients with psychosis who do not currently require an inpatient hospitalization.  We will 
attempt to enroll a significant portion of patients whose current treatment does not include anti- 
psychotic medication. Target sample size is 36. Expecting a screen failure rate of 50%, we will 
enroll up to 72 s ubjects to achieve the target sample.
5.Subject classification: Check off all classifications of subjects that will be specifically 
recruited for enrollment in the research project. Will s ubjects who may require additional 
safeguards or other considerations be enrolled in the  study? If so, identify the population of 
subjects requiring special safeguards and provide a justification for their involvement.
Children Healthy Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus 
Non-English Speaking Prisoners Economically disadvantaged persons 
Decisionally Impaired Employees Pregnant women and/or fetuses
Yale Students Females of childbearing potential
NOTE: Is this research proposal d esigned to enroll c hildren who are wards of the state as 
potential subjects? Yes No (If yes, see Instructions section VII #4 for  further 
requirements)
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 18 of 406.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What are  the criteria used to determine subject i nclusion or 
exclusion?
Inclusion Criteria:
1.Primary psychotic disorder (Schizophrenia, Schizoaffective disorder, etc.)
2.   A ge 18-65
3.Capable of providing informed consent
4.Within a pproximately five years of onset of psychosis/ presentation to treatment 
for psychosis
Exclusion Criteria:
1.Other current major psychiatric diagnoses that require pharmacological treatment 
(example: PTSD). Some diagnoses will be allowed at the PI discretion (example: 
Adjustment disorder)
2.Current substance dependence (other  than nicotine or cannabis)
3.Serious medical or neurological illness or treatment f or a medical disorder that 
could interfere with study participation as determined by principal investigator
4.History of significant head i njury/trauma as determined by principal investigator
5.Women w ho are pregnant,  nursing or unwilling to use appropriate birth control 
measures during study participation
6.Inability to complete neuropsychological tests
7.History of treatment resistance or current treatment with clozapine
8.Current treatment with investigational agents  or participation in another clinical 
trial that may affect outcome measures
7.How will eligibility be determined, and by whom?
Subjects may first undergo a phone screen to initially determine eligibility. Information 
collected during the phone  screen will only  be used in the event that the subject c ontinues to 
participate in the  study.
After determining initial eligibility, research staff will provide a brief description  of the 
research and the subject will present to the  clinic for the screening procedures described 
above. Once  all screening  procedures have been collected, research staff as well as the 
principal investigator will review all relevant information and determine, based on the 
inclusion and exclusion  criteria, if the subject w ill continue with the remaining study 
procedures. Subjects already on antipsychotics or other medications will continue use of the 
medications while participating in the  current study.  Subjects will not be taken o ff their 
antipsychotic medications f or participation in this s tudy.
8.Risks: Participation in this study may be associated w ith risks related to:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 19 of 40a.Psychiatric evaluation: Subjects will undergo a Structured Clinical Interview for 
DSM-IV conducted by a research assistant and a psychiatric and medical evaluation 
during screening. The diagnostic interviews may cover issues, which are stressful to a 
person, for example, questions regarding the experience of paranoid thoughts or social 
isolation. Thus, they  may experience some distress during these interviews.
b.Loss of  confidentiality: Participation in research may involve a loss of privacy and 
confidentiality. Therefore, extensive measures are in place to protect the 
confidentiality of subjects. ( See below.)
c.Study assessments: During the baseline  and follow-up assessments, study participants 
may become tired or frustrated. If this o ccurs, they will be encouraged to take breaks. 
It is also possible that some individuals may  experience discomfort during  the 
interviews, when they are asked to talk about their psychiatric symptoms.  Subjects 
may feel bored, t ired, exhausted, discouraged or distressed by the questionnaires or 
EEG testing.
d.CBD administration: CBD  is a naturally  occurring component of cannabis t hat has 
been used recreationally and for medicinal purposes b y large populations. As 
mentioned above, studies have shown good tolerance of cannabidiol even in high 
doses with relatively  few side effects and no known s evere events. Sedation and/or 
lightheadedness are likely  to be the most c ommon reported adverse reaction.  Patient 
will be assessed weekly for the development of side effects.
e.Worsening of psychosis: Participation in this  study may be associated with worsening 
of psychosis especially in those individuals who are not on a ny other antipsychotics. 
Subjects will be evaluated on a  weekly  basis in f ace-to-face meeting with study staff. 
Psychotic symptoms, mood s ymptoms and suicidality  will be assessed at each of these 
meetings. Further, subjects w ill be contacted approximately 5 times per week using 
CAROMA for the confirmation of compliance. During  each of these visits, s ubjects 
will be asked if they have noticed any worsening of symptoms or any new side effects. 
If subjects report that they  do notice a worsening of symptoms or side effects, this w ill 
be evaluated by an investigator on the team a nd subject w ill be asked to come into the 
clinic to be evaluated if clinically indicated. Subjects are well aware that in case of 
significant worsening  of symptoms/ emergence of SI/HI, they may be escorted to  the 
ER or admitted to an inpatient unit.
f.Risk of blood d raws: Blood will be drawn weekly during  the study to monitor  
medication levels as well a s safety labs. There are usually  no serious m edical problems 
with blood d rawing, but there may be pain at the venipuncture site or bruising or 
infection may occur.
g.Risks of EEG: EEG is a non-invasive assessment. There are minimal risks associated 
with EEG/ERP recording. Traditionally, scalp a brasion has been used to  improve
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 20 of 40signal impedance at the electrode site. The EEG/ERP system used in this laboratory  is 
a high-impedance system and does not r equire scalp a brasion to obtain clean 
recording. A conductive gel is applied, which c an be easily washed out of the subject’s 
hair with warm water. A shower facility for hair washing and s terile linens are 
available in the  laboratory. Electrode caps and sensors  will be washed and sterilized  
between subjects to minimize the risk of transmitting infection.
Potential benefits: Subjects will receive no direct  benefit from this study.  Potential benefits 
may include improvement in psychotic and cognitive symptoms, decreased negative symptoms, 
avoidance of potential side effects from usual a nti-psychotic medications themselves or from 
dose increases of such medications.  Overall, the development of novel anti-psychotics will 
provide benefit to the schizophrenia population as a whole.
Risk/Benefit ratio: As described above, the primary  risks of this study are related to CBD 
administration and are low.  E xtensive safety measures are  in place to ensure that participants 
with worsening psychosis or mood s ymptoms are identified expeditiously. The overall risk- 
benefit ratio is therefore favorable.
9.Minimizing Risks: Describe the manner in which the above-mentioned risks will be 
minimized.
Loss of Confidentiality: There is a risk of loss of confidentiality in this study. All subject 
information will be kept confidential and only members of the investigative team with appropriate 
IRB/HIC and HIPAA training will have access to the study data.  Data will be maintained and s ecured 
in locked file cabinets or password protected electronic media. A numbering code will be used to 
assign a unique identifier to each subject. The researchers will be applying for a certificate of 
confidentiality (COC).
For the Cellphone Assisted Remote Observation of M edication Adherence (CAROMA) 
procedures, subjects will be called and observed while taking study medications. The 
CAROMA procedure is not recorded, broadcast, nor will the likeness of the subjects be used 
for anything other than what h as been specified. The potential for loss of confidentiality is if 
someone taps the phone while a call is being made, but this risk is no different from someone 
tapping into a phone (audio) conversation between the subject and the research team. The 
phones used for this practice will be encrypted by Yale University Information Technology 
Services (ITS) so that loss of confidentiality is minimized. CAROMA was set up with input 
from Yale ITS in order to conform to Yale’s policies.
Psychiatric Evaluation and S tudy Assessments: If subjects become tired, frustrated, or 
distressed during assessments or evaluations, they will be encouraged to take breaks.
CBD Administration: Patients w ill be assessed weekly for the development of side effects. 
Worsening of psychosis: Subjects will be evaluated on a  weekly basis in  face-to-face meeting  
with study staff. Psychotic  symptoms, mood s ymptoms, and suicidality will be assessed at each 
of these meetings. Further, subjects will be contacted approximately 5 times per week using 
CAROMA for the confirmation of compliance. During  each of these visits, s ubjects will be 
asked if they have noticed any worsening of symptoms or any new side effects. If subjects r eport
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 21 of 40that they  do notice a worsening of symptoms or side effects, this w ill be evaluated by an 
investigator on the team and subjects will be asked  to come into the clinic to be evaluated if 
clinically indicated. Subjects are well aware that in c ase of significant worsening of symptoms/ 
emergence of SI/HI, they may be escorted to the ER or admitted to an inpatient unit.
Risks of Blood D raws: Due to the risks associated with phlebotomy procedures, subjects who 
have donated blood within eight weeks to the present study will be excluded. S ubjects will be 
told t hat they should  not g ive blood for at least eight w eeks.
Risks of EEG: The risk of irritation during EEG set up w ill be minimized through careful 
application of electrodes and appropriate cleansing of the skin b y trained technicians.
10.Data and S afety Monitoring Plan: Include an appropriate Data  and Safety Monitoring Plan 
(DSMP) based on the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make 
the final determination of the risk to subjects.) For more information, see the Instructions, 
page 24.
a. What is the  investigator’s assessment of the overall r isk level for subjects 
participating in this s tudy? Moderate risk
b. If children are involved, what is the investigator’s assessment of the overall r isk 
level for the children participating in this s tudy?  No children will be enrolled.
c. Copy, paste, and then tailor an appropriate Data and S afety Monitoring Plan 
from  http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/forms-templates/biomedical.html  for
i.Minimal risk
ii.Greater than minimal/moderate risk
iii.High risk
SAFETY: Subjects will be closely monitored for worsening of symptoms or side effects. They 
will be provided with a 24 hour access to study  personnel  to discuss any concerns. Subjects will 
be given a wallet card indicating they are taking e xperimental medication and directions for how 
to determine what they are taking in case of an emergency.
Adverse events will be reported to the  HIC and any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies. 
The investigator will apprise fellow investigators and key study personnel of all serious and 
unanticipated adverse events t hat occur during the conduct of this r esearch project. Adverse 
events will be graded as per HIC policy.
Data safety and monitoring plan: This is a moderate  risk study, and no serious a dverse events are 
expected.  If any should occur, however, the following grading system will be used to assess the 
seriousness of the adverse events:
0 No adverse event or within normal limits
1 Mild  adverse event
2 Moderate adverse event
3 Severe adverse event resulting in hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization, a persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth 
defect.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 22 of 404 Life-threatening or disabling adverse event
5 Fatal adverse event
Serious unanticipated adverse events w ill be reported immediately to the VA Connecticut 
Healthcare System, Yale University School of Medicine, California Pacific Medical Center 
institutional review boards a nd any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies.  Serious 
anticipated adverse events w ill be reported immediately to the institutional review boards a nd 
others whenever their magnitude or frequency exceeds e xpectations.
The principal investigator will evaluate all adverse events and determine whether the adverse 
event affects the risk/benefit ratio of the study and whether modifications to the protocol or 
consent form are required. A summary of the adverse events w ill be reported to the institutional 
review boards p eriodically or, at minimum, w hen reapproval of the protocol is sought. The 
summary will include number of subjects enrolled and a summary of graded adverse events to 
date.  All adverse events w ill be graded using  the following  grading system:
Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4 Grade 5 Attribution
UNA 
TPATPUN 
ATPATPUN 
ATPATPUN 
ATPATPUN 
ATPATP
Unrelated
Unlikely
Possible
Probable
Definite
Totals
Total Subjects Enrolled to D ate
The principal investigator will be responsible for monitoring the data and conducting 
performance of safety reviews at regular intervals, as indicated above.   The principal investigator 
will conduct a data and safety review at least quarterly and at any time a serious a dverse event 
occurs. During the review process the principal investigator will evaluate whether the study 
should c ontinue unchanged, require modification, continue or close to enrollment.
DSMB: A Data Safety Monitoring Board is being assembled for this study. Unblinded safety  
data will be provided to the committee for monitoring purposes, in a meeting that will be held 
approximately every 6 months. DSMB reports will be provided to the HIC. 
11.Statistical Considerations: 
General Strategy:
All outcomes will be summarized descriptively and assessed for normality prior to analysis using 
normal probability plots and Kolmogorov test statistics. Transformations or nonparametric 
analyses will be performed as necessary. All tests will be two-sided and considered statistically 
significant at alpha=.05. Post-hoc comparisons will be performed as appropriate and significance 
levels for secondary analyses will be adjusted for multiple tests using the Bonferroni correction. 
All analyses will be performed using SAS, version 9.3 ( SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 23 of 40Linear mixed models will be used assess symptom improvement as measured by the PANSS 
(primary hypothesis) and CGI. In these models group (CBD vs. placebo) and time (see study time 
points) will be modeled as within-subjects factor. Oder effects will also be tested. Least squares 
means and standard errors will be calculated in the mixed model and plotted to interpret significant 
effect. A significant group by time interaction explained by reduced symptoms over time due to 
CBD treatment will be supportive of our hypothesis. In the above models, the best fitting variance- 
covariance structure will be selected based on information criteria. The mixed effects approach is 
advantageous in that it is unaffected by randomly missing data and allows greater flexibility  in 
modeling the correlation structure of repeated measures data [31]. Similar mixed  models as 
described above will be employed to evaluate secondary outcomes (e.g., PAOFI, EEG parameters).
Power Analysis:
We will recruit 36 subjects and randomly assign 18 to receive either CBD followed by placebo 
(order 1) or placebo followed by CBD (order 2). Based on a within-subjects design and a two- 
tailed alpha=0.05, 36 subjects will provide 80% power to detect moderate treatment effects as 
small as d’=0.49. This compares favorably with the effects (d=0.7) observed by Leweke in their 
study comparing CBD to amisulpiride in schizophrenia patients.
SECTION VI: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS, BIOLOGICS, RADIOTRACERS, PLACEBOS AND
DEVICES
If this section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not a pplicable, state N/A and d elete the rest of the 
section.
A.DRUGS, BIOLOGICS and R ADIOTRACERS
1.Identification of Drug, Biologic or Radiotracer: The investigational drug to be used in  this study 
is Cannabidiol provided by Insys Pharmaceuticals. This study will be conducted under an IND# 
126731.
2.Background Information:
Cannabidiol (CBD) is a component of herbal cannabis that is present in varying concentrations in 
cannabis extracts. CBD has b een shown to produce  central effects including hypnotic, 
anticonvulsive, anxiolytic and neuroprotective effects [10]. U ntil recently, the mechanism of action 
of CBD was u nclear. However, recently, CBD has been found to be  a potent n on-competitive 
inhibitor at CB-1 and CB-2 receptors [32] in addition to having effects at a third a s of yet 
unidentified central cannabinoid G-protein coupled r eceptor.
CBD has also been u sed to treat patients with schizophrenia. Early  case series suggested mixed 
results but g ood tolerability  even at high doses [9]. Preliminary results  from a n SMRI funded 4- 
week, double-blind c omparison of CBD vs. amisulpride in acute schizophrenic and 
schizophreniform psychosis h ave been promising. CBD significantly  reduced a cute psychotic 
symptoms after 2 and 4 weeks of treatment. CBD was equivalent to the amisulpride in efficacy and 
was also associated with fewer side effects [33].
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 24 of 403.Source: a) Identify the source  of the drug or biologic to be  used.
b) Is the drug provided f ree of charge to subjects? Yes No 
If yes, by whom?  Insys
4.Storage, Preparation and U se: Describe the method of storage, preparation, stability  information, 
and for parenteral products, m ethod of sterilization and method of testing sterility and 
pyrogenicity.
Check applicable Investigational Drug Service utilized:
YNHH IDS Yale Cancer Center
CMHC Pharmacy West Haven VA
PET Center None
Other:
Note: If the YNHH IDS (or comparable service at CMHC or WHVA) will not  be utilized, explain in 
detail how  the PI will oversee these aspects of drug a ccountability, storage, and p reparation.
The material will be stored in the West H aven VA pharmacy  as per package insert. P harmacists 
will deliver medication vials to study staff for dispensing by study psychiatrists.
5.Use of Placebo: Not applicable  to this research project
If use of a placebo is planned, provide a justification which addresses the following:
a.The study intervention include CBD or placebo. The inclusion of placebo is to permit 
comparison with CBD. However, we recognize that f or an individual with a psychotic disorder  
the standard of care is treatment with first or second-generation antipsychotic medication. A 
large proportion of individuals w ith early psychosis d iscontinue or never initiate antipsychotic 
treatment due to a number of factors including fear of side effects, stigma etc. T his study CBD 
versus Placebo will recruit a ll individuals. This study will not i nterfere with standard of care 
and will be in addition to treatment as usual. Due to the  prevalent refusal of traditional 
antipsychotic treatment among individuals with early psychosis we anticipate that some  
subjects who will receive CBD/Placebo will be on no other medication. However, requiring 
treatment with traditional antipsychotics or proposing an active control instead  of placebo will 
exclude this p roportion of individuals and in fact result in d ata that is not generalizable to this, 
most v ulnerable population. Safety assessments will be done in person weekly, and multiple 
times during the week over  the phone. Furthermore, subjects will be encouraged to remain 
compliant with their regular treatment sessions and m edications.
There is no a lternative to CBD since its efficacy is unknown. The alternative is not  to 
participate in this t rial.
b.State the maximum total length of time a participant may receive placebo w hile on the study.
Four weeks
c.Address the greatest potential h arm that may come to a participant as a result of receiving
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 25 of 40placebo.
No improvement in psychotic symptoms or course  of illness. Placebo by itself is not  anticipated to 
worsen psychotic symptoms. H owever, if psychotic  symptoms are worsening placebo will not 
prevent the decompensation.
d.Describe the procedures that are in place to safeguard participants receiving placebo.
Weekly follow up visits a nd safety assessments including PANSS assessments will be conducted 
to detect worsening of symptoms.
6.Use of Controlled Substances:
Will t his research project involve the use of controlled substances in human subjects?
No Yes  See HIC Application Instructions to v iew controlled substance listings.
If yes, is the use of the controlled substance considered:
Therapeutic: The use of the controlled substance, within the context  of the research, has the 
potential to benefit the research participant.
Non-Therapeutic: Note, the use of a c ontrolled substance in a n on-therapeutic research study  
involving human subjects may require that the investigator obtain a L aboratory Research License. 
Examples include controlled substances used for basic  imaging, observation or biochemical 
studies or other non-therapeutic purposes. See Instructions for f urther information.
7.Continuation of Drug Therapy After Study Closure Not applicable to this project
Are subjects provided  the opportunity  to continue to receive the study drug(s) after the study has 
ended?
Yes   If yes, describe the conditions under which continued access to study drug(s) may apply  
as well as conditions for termination of such access.
No
The use of CBD is experimental. At this point t here are no data supporting  its use in the 
treatment of any illness.
B.DEVICES
1.Are there  any investigational devices used or investigational procedures performed at YNHH, e.g., 
YNHH Operating  Room or YNHH Heart a nd Vascular Center?  Yes No
If Yes, p lease be aware of the following r equirements:
a.A YNHH New Product/Trial Request Form must be completed;
b.Your request must  be reviewed and approved by a Hospital Committee before 
patients may be scheduled; a nd
c.The notice of approval from Y NHH must be  submitted to the HIC for the protocol 
file.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 26 of 40Please contact Gina  D’Agostino, gina.d’agostino@ynhh.org or 203-688-5052 , to initiate the 
process.
2.What is  the name of the device to be studied in this  protocol? 
Has this d evice been FDA approved? Yes No
If yes, state for what indication.
3.Background Information: Provide a description of previous human use, known  risks, and any 
other factors that might influence risks. If this is t he first time this d evice is being used in humans, 
include relevant data on animal models.
4.Source:
a)Identify the source of the device to be used.
b)Is the device provided free of charge to subjects? Yes No
5.  What is  the PI’s assessment of risk level (significant or non-significant) associated with the use of 
the device?
Significant Risk (SR) Device Study: A study of a device that p resents a potential f or serious 
risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a participant a nd 1) is intended as an implant; 2) is used in 
supporting or sustaining h uman life; or otherwise prevents impairment of human h ealth; 3) is of 
substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating or treating disease, or otherwise prevents 
impairment of human health;  or 4) otherwise presents  a potential for serious r isk to the health, 
safety, or welfare of a participant.
Significant Risk D evices require an Investigational Device Exemption ( IDE) issued by the FDA. 
What is  the IDE number assigned by the FDA?
Did the FDA approve this IDE as Category A (experimental/investigational) or as Category B
(non-experimental/investigational)? 
Who holds the  IDE?
Non-Significant Risk (NSR) Device Study: A study of a device that does not  meet the 
definition for a significant risk device and does not p resent a potential for serious r isk to the health, 
safety, or welfare of participants.  Note that if the HIC concurs with this d etermination, an IDE is 
not required.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 27 of 406.Abbreviated IDE or Exempt IDE: There are abbreviated requirements for an IDE and there  also 
are exemptions to the  requirement for an IDE. See the criteria in the HIC Application Instructions, 
Section VI.B.4 at  
http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/resources/docs/100FR1aHICProtocol_Application_Instructions5-25-   
11.pdf to determine if these pertain to this s tudy.
Abbreviated IDE or Exempt IDE – If criteria set forth in the HIC Application Instructions 
are met, copy and paste the completed relevant section  from  the Instructions into this  application.
7. Investigational device accountability:
a.State how the PI, or named  designee, ensures that an investigational device is 
used only in accordance  with the research protocol approved by the HIC, and 
maintains control of the investigational device as follows:
b.Maintains appropriate records, including receipt of shipment, inventory  at the site, 
dispensation or use by each participant, and final disposition a nd/or the return of 
the investigational device (or other disposal if applicable):
Documents pertinent information assigned to the  investigational device  (e.g., date, q uantity, batch 
or serial number, expiration date if applicable, and unique code number):
Stores the investigational device according  to the manufacturer's recommendations with respect to 
temperature, humidity, lighting, and other environmental considerations:
Ensures that the device is stored in a secure area with limited access in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements:
Distributes the investigational device to subjects enrolled in the IRB-approved protocol:
SECTION VII: RECRUITMENT/CONSENT AND ASSENT PROCEDURES
1.Targeted Enrollment: Give the number of subjects:
a.targeted for enrollment at Yale for this p rotocol 
Approximately 70 to have 36 completers
b.If this is a multi-site study, give the total number of subjects targeted across all 
sites_N/A 
2.Indicate recruitment methods below.  A ttach copies of any recruitment materials that will be used.
Flyers Internet/Web Postings Radio
Posters Mass E-mail Solicitation Telephone
Letter Departmental/Center Website Television
Medical Record Review
Departmental/Center NewslettersDepartmental/Center Research Boards
Web-Based Clinical Trial R egistriesNewspaper
YCCI Recruitment database Clinicaltrials.gov Registry (do not send materials to HIC)
Other (describe):
3.Recruitment Procedures:
a.Describe how potential subjects will be identified.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 28 of 40Potential subjects will be identified through responses to the m ethods of advertisements listed 
above. An additional  document with the language used for internet/web postings has been 
included. F urthermore, the research team will reach out to local mental health facilities 
(including the Connecticut Mental Health Center, the West Haven VA and the Institute of 
Living) through “lunch and learns”, etc. for patient referrals. A lunch and learn is a meeting 
that research staff schedule with clinicians and therapists at local mental health facilities where 
an overview of current research protocols are presented and discussed.
b.Describe how potential subjects are contacted.
Subjects will be asked to contact research staff through the a dvertisement methods listed above. 
In the event that a subject responds to an advertisement, they will be contacting study staff. In 
the e vent that subjects are referred from clinics o r mental health facilities, research staff will 
require that the subjects’ clinician contacts the subject first and then refers the subject to the 
research clinic.
c.Who is r ecruiting potential s ubjects? 
Members of the research team.
4.Screening Procedures
a.Will email or telephone correspondence be used to screen potential subjects for 
eligibility prior to the potential  subject coming to the research office?      Yes       No
b.If yes, identify below all health information to be collected as part of screening  and 
check off any of the following HIPAA identifiers to be collected and retained by the 
research team during this s creening process.
HEALTH INFORMATION TO BE COLLECTED:
Please see attached phone screen
HIPAA identifiers:
Names
All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including: street address, city, county,  precinct, zip codes and their 
equivalent geocodes, except for the initial three digits of a zip code if, according to the current publicly-available data from  
the Bureau of the Census: (1) the geographic unit formed by combining all zip codes with the same three initial digits contains  
more than 20,000  people, and (2) the initial three digits of a zip code for all such geographic units containing 20,000 or fewer 
people is changed to 000.
Telephone numbers 
Fax numbers
E-mail addresses
Social Security numbers  
Medical record  numbers
Health plan beneficiary numbers  
Account numbers
All elements of dates  (except year) for dates related to an individual, including: birth date, admission date, discharge 
date, date of death, all ages over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) indicative of such age, except that such ages 
and elements may be aggregated into a single category of age 90 or older
Certificate/license numbers
Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers 
Device identifiers and serial numbers
Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs) 
Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers
Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints  
Full face photographic images  and any comparable images
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 29 of 40Any other unique identifying numbers, characteristics, or codes
5.Assessment of Current Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical 
relationship with any potential s ubject?
Yes, all subjects
Yes, some of the subjects  
No
If yes, describe the nature  of this r elationship.
PI and some  co-investigators may provide  clinical care to some potential subjects and/or may work in 
the clinic where some potential s ubjects are treated.
6.Request for waiver of HIPAA authorization: (When r equesting a waiver  of HIPAA Authorization 
for either the entire study, or for recruitment purposes o nly. Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of 
a phone or email s creen, you must r equest a HIPAA waiver for recruitment purposes.)
Choose one: For entire study: For recruitment purposes only:X
i.Describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for 
use/disclosure of this data;
NA
ii.If requesting a waiver of signed authorization, describe why it would be 
impracticable to obtain the subject’s signed authorization  for use/disclosure of this 
data;
This data will serve to prescreen subjects who meet  obvious exclusion c riteria for the study. 
Thus it avoids subject and investigator burden  related to screening of ineligible subjects.
Further, due to the stringent I/C criteria, the number  of subjects screened who w ill need to go 
through exhaustive  screening and be exposed to g reater risk will increase if all potential 
subjects are to be brought in for a face to face screening.
iii.  Authorization will be obtained prior to subject participation in any  research 
procedure. However, when the  subject is initially contacted by phone  when referred 
by a treater or in response to an ad, it would not be  feasible to obtain a signed 
authorization over the phone. Subjects will be notified that all personal health 
information will remain confidential and will be given the option to be contacted for 
future research in the  event  that they are not eligible for the study. By signing t his 
protocol application, the investigator assures that the protected health 
information for which a Waiver of Authorization has been requested will not be 
reused or disclosed to any person or entity other than those listed in this 
application, except as required by law, for authorized oversight of this research 
study, or as specifically approved for use in another study by an I RB.
Researchers are reminded that u nauthorized disclosures of P HI to individuals outside of the Yale 
HIPAA-Covered entity must be accounted for in the “accounting for d isclosures log”, by subject
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 30 of 40name, purpose, date, recipients, and a d escription of information provided.  Logs are to be 
forwarded to the  Deputy HIPAA Privacy Officer.
7.Required HIPAA Authorization: If the research involves the creation, use or disclosure of 
protected health i nformation (PHI), separate subject a uthorization is required under the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule. Indicate which of the following forms  are being  provided:
Compound C onsent and Authorization form 
HIPAA Research Authorization F orm
8.Consent Personnel: List the names of all members of the research team who w ill be obtaining 
consent/assent.
Mohini R anganathan, M.D., Deepak C. D ’Souza, M.D., Kim Bielen, B.S., Emma Deaso, B.A., Gina 
Creatura, B.A., Christina Luddy, B.S.,., Esra Sefik, B.S., Chloe Grond, B.A., Melissa Boucher, B.S., 
Madison Dykins, B.A., Mackenzie Griffin, B.S., and Ashley Sanders, B.A. 
9.Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting a nd conditions under which c onsent/assent will 
be obtained, including parental permission or surrogate permission and the steps taken to ensure 
subjects’ independent decision-making.
The consent process is a multistep process, whereby information about the risks and benefits of 
the study will be provided to  potential subjects across several sessions. The number of sessions 
over which this i nformation will be provided will depend on how well the subject understands 
and retains the information. The process begins with the subject initiating contact via telephone. 
The research staff will provide a brief description of the study following which the subject is 
screened by a member of the research team. T hereafter, potentially eligible candidates are 
scheduled for a face-to-face interview. The study procedures will be described as a research tool 
with potential to enhance our knowledge about the brain. Subjects will also be informed of all 
potential risks of participation. Subjects will be required to read the informed consent form and 
the investigator will additionally describe the risks a nd discomforts.
To ensure that the study  subject understands the study, the subject will be asked questions about 
the study procedures and the risks associated with participation. If any concern arises that the 
study subject did not f ully understand the study, the principal investigator (PI) may decide  that 
the subject is not s uitable for participation. This process generally  takes about one hour. If the 
subject is still i nterested after all questions have been a nswered, the PI or staff member 
consenting, will ask the subject to sign the informed consent form. Any subject who appears 
incapable of providing informed consent  will be excluded.  Subjects will be informed that they 
can decline  to participate in the study without penalty and given the opportunity  to withdraw 
from the study prior  to analysis of their data. Following the resolution of any questions, the 
subjects will be asked to sign the consent  form if he/she agrees to participate.
10.Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the 
personnel obtaining consent w ill assess the potential subject’s ability and capacity to consent to the 
research being  proposed.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 31 of 40Great care will be taken to ensure that the subject is a ble to give informed consent. If any 
concern arises that the study subject did not fully understand the study, the principal investigator 
may decide that the subject is  not s uitable for participation. This process will involve  careful 
explanation of the consent f orm by a member of the research staff and a post- test to ensure 
understanding of the procedures and risks of the study. The subject w ill be required to get 75%  
of all questions and all the asterisked critical questions  correct on a consent questionnaire in 
order to participate (see attached for details). Parents and family and non-research clinicians will 
be involved in the process when available. The patient’s primary  clinician i.e. n on-research 
clinician (if applicable) will be required to assent to patient’s participation. This is standard 
procedure for this c linic with all studies.
11.Documentation of Consent/Assent: Specify  the documents that will be used during the 
consent/assent process. Copies of all documents should be  appended to the protocol, in the same 
format that they will be given to subjects.
There will be consent forms f or all participating subjects. T he forms are attached to this  
application.
12.Non-English Speaking Subjects: Explain p rovisions in place to ensure comprehension for 
research involving non-English  speaking  subjects. Translated copies of all consent m aterials must  
be submitted for approval  prior to use.
While we do not p lan to actively seek out non-English speaking individuals, we may enroll 1 or  2 
Spanish speaking individuals to participate in this study. If the research staff recruits a Spanish 
speaking subject, an interpreter will be asked to go through the consent form thoroughly with the 
subject to make sure they have a complete understanding. If the subject is comfortable, they will then 
be asked to sign the Spanish short form consent form. We will have an interpreter present at all study 
visits to translate assessments and p rocedures. In addition, they will meet with a Spanish speaking 
medical doctor at all safety visits to assess for adverse events and side effects.
13.Consent Waiver: In certain  circumstances, the HIC  may grant  a waiver of signed consent, or 
a full waiver of consent, depending on the study. If you will request either a waiver of consent, 
or a waiver of signed consent f or this s tudy, complete the appropriate section b elow.
Not Requesting a consent waiver 
Requesting a waiver of signed consent 
Requesting a full waiver of consent
A.Waiver of signed consent: ( Verbal consent from s ubjects will be obtained. If PHI is 
collected, information in this s ection must match Section VII, Question 6)
Requesting a waiver of signed consent for Recruitment/Screening only
If requesting a waiver of signed consent, p lease address the following:
a.Would the signed consent f orm be the only record linking the subject and the research?
Yes No
b.Does a breach of confidentiality  constitute the principal risk to subjects? 
Yes No
OR
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 32 of 40c.Does the research activity  pose greater than m inimal risk?
Yes If you answered yes, stop. A w aiver cannot be granted. Please note: 
Recruitment/screening is generally  a minimal risk research activity
No
AND
d.Does the research include any activities that would require signed consent in a non- 
research context? Yes No
Requesting a waiver of signed consent for the Entire Study (Note that an information 
sheet may be required.)
If requesting a waiver of signed consent, p lease address the following:
a.Would the signed consent f orm be the only record linking the subject and the research?
Yes No
b.Does a breach of confidentiality  constitute the principal risk to subjects? 
Yes No
OR
c.Does the research pose  greater than minimal risk? Yes If you answered yes, stop. A 
waiver cannot be granted. No
AND
d.Does the research include any activities that would require signed consent in a non- 
research context? Yes No
B.Full waiver of consent: ( No consent from subjects  will be obtained for the activity.)
Requesting a waiver of consent for Recruitment/Screening only
a.Does the research activity  pose greater than m inimal risk to subjects?
Yes If you answered yes, stop. A w aiver cannot be granted. Please note: 
Recruitment/screening is generally  a minimal risk research activity
No
b.Will the waiver adversely affect subjects’ rights and welfare? Yes No
c.Why would the research  be impracticable to conduct w ithout the waiver?
d.Where appropriate, how will pertinent information be returned to, or shared w ith 
subjects at a later date?
Requesting a full waiver of consent for the Entire Study (Note: If PHI is 
collected, information here must match Section VII, question 6.)
If requesting a full waiver of consent, please  address the following:
a.Does the research pose  greater than minimal risk to subjects? 
Yes If you answered yes, stop.  A waiver cannot be granted.
No
b.Will the waiver adversely affect subjects’ rights and welfare? Yes No
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 33 of 40c.Why would the research  be impracticable to conduct w ithout the waiver?
d.Where appropriate, how will pertinent information be returned to, or shared w ith 
subjects at a later date?
SECTION VIII: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH SUBJECTS
Confidentiality & Security of Data:
a.What protected health information (medical information along with the HIPAA identifiers) 
about subjects will be collected and used for the research?
Required private identifiable information about individuals will be collected by the research staff and 
be used for research purposes and charting after consent is obtained. This information includes the 
results from laboratory tests for both blood  and urine, electrocardiogram (ECG) and physical 
examination results.
b.How will the research data be collected, recorded and stored?
Yale University study  team members will collect required research data through study procedures as 
outlined in this protocol and record it in confidential research records and protected computer files. 
Data will be stored at the Yale University or the VA in a manner that is compliant with IRB regulations 
at both institutions.
c.How will the digital data be stored? CD DVD Flash Drive Portable Hard 
Drive Secured Server Laptop Computer Desktop Computer Other
d.What m ethods and procedures will be used to safeguard the confidentiality and security of 
the identifiable study data and the storage media indicated above during  and after the subject’s 
participation in the study?
All information obtained in this research study will be kept confidential and only be made 
available to the investigators. In all records of this research study, subjects will be identified by a 
unique identifier number code known only to researchers working directly on this protocol. These 
codes will not be derived from subjects PHI (e.g. name, date of birth etc.). A master list of subject 
names along with unique identifier number will be kept in a locked cabinet in the Principal 
Investigators office.
Do all portable devices contain e ncryption software?      Yes        No
If no, s ee http://hipaa.yale.edu/guidance/policy.html
e.What will be done  with the data when the research is completed? Are there plans to destroy  
the identifiable data? If yes, describe how, by whom and when identifiers will be destroyed. If 
no, d escribe how the data and/or identifiers will be secured.
Procedures to ensure confidentiality follow the regulations and policies of Yale School of 
Medicine. If the results of this research study are reported in any scientific meetings or literature, 
subjects will not be identified by name or photograph. Records will be maintained according to 
FDA Good Clinical Practice guidelines to ensure protection of confidentiality and security of
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 34 of 40records. Yale Human Investigations Committee (HIC), who approves the completion of this study 
at Yale, may inspect study records.
f.Who w ill have access to the protected health  information (such as the research sponsor, the 
investigator, the research staff, all research monitors, FDA, Yale Cancer Center Data and Safety 
Monitoring Committee (DSMC), SSC, e tc.)? (please distinguish between PHI and de-identified 
data)
All protected health information collected specifically for this research will be secured in the manner 
described above. The data will be stored in a secure location- we anticipate that the data will be 
stored for at least 10-15 years.
g.If appropriate, has a Certificate of Confidentiality  been o btained? 
We have obtained a CoC from the Food and Drug A dministration.
h.Are any of the study procedures likely to yield information subject to mandatory reporting 
requirements? (e.g. HIV testing – reporting of communicable diseases; parent interview -incidents 
of child abuse, elderly  abuse, etc.). Please verify  to whom such instances will need to be reported.
If subjects report any threats of violence to a child or elderly person, this will be reported to the 
Department of Health and Human Services. Threats of violence to self or others will be assessed by 
the principal investigator who will determine appropriate reporting procedures. Furthermore, positive 
HIV, hepatitis B, or C results will be reportable to the Connecticut Department of Public Health.
SECTION IX: POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Potential Benefits:
Potential benefits: Subjects will receive no direct benefit from this study. Potential b enefits may 
include improvement in psychotic symptoms,  decreased negative symptoms, a voidance of 
potential side effects from u sual anti-psychotic medications themselves or from dose increases of 
such medications.  Overall, the development of novel anti-psychotics will provide benefit to the 
schizophrenia population as a whole.
Risk/Benefit ratio: As described above,  the primary risks of this study are related to CBD 
administration and are low.  Extensive  safety measures are in place to ensure that participants 
with worsening psychosis or mood s ymptoms are identified expeditiously. The overall risk- 
benefit ratio is therefore favorable.
SECTION X: RESEARCH ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
1. Alternatives: What other alternatives are available to the study subjects outside of the research? 
Alternatives include antipsychotics that are currently  used to treat psychosis.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 35 of 402. Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any 
payments that will be made to subjects, the amount  and schedule of payments, 
and the conditions for receiving this compensation.
Subjects will be paid as below. Subjects will be paid only for the visits  that they 
participate in. Visit payments can  be split if procedures for that visit occurred on two 
separate days, without changing the total  payment for that particular visit.  
Subjects may  be compensated up to $25 for unscheduled visits.
Table 1: Payment schedule
Purpose Visit Payment per visit in 
Period IPayment per visit in 
Period II
Screening Ia and Ib $25/visit up to $50 N/A
Baseline II $75 $75
Week III $50 $50
Week IV $50 $50
Week V $50 $50
Week VI $75 $75
Follow up VII $25 $25
Compliance CAROMA $5/ day up to $80 $5/ day up to $80
Return of phone $20 $20
Study close out visit N/A $25
Total per period Up to $475 Up to $450
Total for both periods: Up to $ 9 25
3. Costs for Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly describe the 
subject’s costs associated with participation in the research, and the interventions 
or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost  to subjects.
Subjects will not be charged for any aspects of this s tudy.
4. In C ase of Injury: This section is required for any research involving  more than 
minimal risk.
a.Will m edical treatment be available if research-related injury occurs? Yes
b.Where and from whom may treatment be obtained? Treatment may  be 
provided by the Yale-New Haven Hospital or any health c are provider 
chosen by the study subjects.
c.Are there any limits  to the treatment being provided? Only emergency  care 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 36 of 40will be provided. Limits to treatment may be imposed by the insurance carrier of the 
study subjects.
d.Who w ill pay for this t reatment?
How will the medical treatment be accessed by subjects? The study team w ill provide 
assistance to the study subjects in accessing medical treatment through referrals, or the study 
subject may choose to access treatment on their own. Furthermore, the study team w ill be in 
contact with the subject’s non-research clinicians who will also aid the subject in getting 
appropriate treatment.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 37 of 40Consent Questionnaire
This is a questionnaire to help us to t est your understanding of the study  protocol. F or you to 
qualify for this s tudy, you will need to pass this t est. To pass this t est, you will need to score 
at least a 75% and also get all three questions underlined.
You will have only 2 chances to take this t est. Incorrect answers on your first attempt will 
tell us those  parts of the study y ou did not u nderstand well,  so that we can go over the 
consent form again with you. If you answer more than 5 questions wrong  at your first 
attempt, you will not be considered for this study.
1.Will you need  to stop  taking your antipsychotic medication as part of this study?
Yes No Maybe I can decide
2.What m edications might you receive?
Cannabidiol Haldol Placebo Paxil Ativan
3.Will you be able to choose what medication that you may receive in this s tudy?
Yes No Maybe Don’t know
4.During the study, will you or the study  doctor or the research team  know exactly which 
study medication you are on?
Yes No Maybe Don’t know
5.Could  your schizophrenia symptoms get worse during this study?
Yes No Maybe Don’t know
6.Will blood be  drawn for this s tudy?
Yes No Maybe Don’t know
7.Can the study medication have side effects?
Yes No Maybe Don’t know
8.Name at least 2 side  effects of the study  medication.
9.Once you start the study, are you free to stop a t any time?
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 38 of 40Yes No Maybe Don’t know
10.What w ould happen to your regular treatment if you dropped out of the study?
a.Treatment with regular clinician will end
b.Treatment with regular clinician will continue
c.Don’t know
11.Will you be hospitalized f or this s tudy?
Yes No Maybe Don’t know
12.Will you get paid for taking part in this s tudy?
Yes No Maybe Don’t know
 /  
Signature Date
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 39 of 40WALLET CARD (CBD)
IMPORTANT
The holder of this c ard is participating in a clinical study  with an investigational drug called 
cannabidiol, as a treatment for schizophrenia. There is a 1/2 c hance this person c an be on 
placebo.
Treatment Period:
From:  
To: 
EMERGENCY CONTACT
If this s ubject presents to you for treatment, please contact the research clinic below:
Doctor: Mohini R anganathan, M.D. .HIC# 1412015000
Phone: 203-932-5711 x 2546 .CBD Study
Doctor: Deepak Cyril D’Souza, M.D. .HIC# 1412015000
Phone: 203-932-5711 x 2594 .CBD Study
24 H our Emergency: 203-974-7540 .
Dial 0 for the  operator and ask that the  on call research psychiatrist be paged.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 40 of 40References
1. Stahl, S.M., L . Mignon, and J.M. M eyer, Which comes first:  atypical antipsychotic treatment or 
cardiometabolic risk? Acta  Psychiatr Scand, 2009. 119(3): p. 171-9.
2. Meyer, J.M., e t al., Change  in metabolic syndrome parameters with a ntipsychotic treatment in 
the CATIE Schizophrenia Trial:  prospective data from  phase  1. Schizophr Res, 2008. 1 01(1-3): 
p. 273-86.
3. Newcomer, J.W.,  Metabolic considerations in the  use of antipsychotic medications: a review of 
recent evidence. J Clin Psychiatry, 2007. 68 S uppl 1: p. 2 0-7.
4. McEvoy, J.P., e t al., Prevalence of the  metabolic syndrome in patients with s chizophrenia: 
baseline results from the Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) 
schizophrenia trial  and c omparison with national estimates from  NHANES III. Schizophr Res, 
2005. 8 0(1): p. 19-32.
5. Nasrallah, H.A., e t al., Low rates of treatment for hypertension, dyslipidemia and d iabetes in 
schizophrenia: data from the CATIE schizophrenia trial s ample at baseline. Schizophr Res, 
2006. 8 6(1-3): p. 15-22.
6. Conley, R.R.  and D.L. Kelly, Management of treatment resistance in schizophrenia. Biol 
Psychiatry, 2001. 50(11): p. 898-911.
7. Zuardi, A.W.,  et al., Action of c annabidiol on the anxiety and o ther effects produced by delta 9- 
THC in normal subjects. Psychopharmacology, 1982. 7 6(3): p. 245-50.
8. Zuardi, A.W.,  J.A. R odrigues, and J.M. C unha, Effects of cannabidiol in animal models 
predictive of antipsychotic activity. Psychopharmacology, 1991. 104(2): p. 260-4.
9. Zuardi, A.W.,  et al., Cannabidiol m onotherapy for treatment-resistant schizophrenia. J 
Psychopharmacol, 2006.
10. Zuardi, A.W.,  et al., Cannabidiol, a Cannabis s ativa constituent, as an a ntipsychotic drug. B raz 
J Med Biol Res, 2006. 3 9(4): p. 421-9.
11. Leweke, F.M., et al., Cannabidiol  enhances anandamide signaling and a lleviates psychotic 
symptoms of schizophrenia.  Translational psychiatry, 2012. 2: p. e94.
12. Campos, A.C., et al., Multiple mechanisms involved in the large-spectrum therapeutic potential 
of cannabidiol in psychiatric disorders. Philos  Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 2012. 3 67(1607): p. 
3364-78.
13. Gururajan, A., D.A. Taylor, and D.T. Malone,  Cannabidiol and c lozapine reverse MK-801- 
induced deficits in social interaction and h yperactivity in Sprague-Dawley rats. J 
Psychopharmacol, 2012. 26(10): p. 1317-32.
14. Bhattacharyya, S., et al., Opposite effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and c annabidiol on 
human brain f unction and p sychopathology. Neuropsychopharmacology. 35(3):  p. 764-74.
15. Moreira, F.A. and F.S. Guimaraes, Cannabidiol inhibits the  hyperlocomotion induced by 
psychotomimetic drugs i n mice. Eur J Pharmacol, 2005. 5 12(2-3): p. 199-205.
16. Englund, A., et al., Cannabidiol i nhibits THC-elicited paranoid s ymptoms and h ippocampal- 
dependent memory impairment. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 2013. 27(1):  p. 19-27.
17. Morgan, C.J. and H.V. Curran, Effects of cannabidiol  on s chizophrenia-like symptoms in people 
who use cannabis. Br J Psychiatry, 2008. 1 92(4): p. 306-7.
18. Schubart, C.D., et al., Cannabis  with high c annabidiol content is associated with f ewer psychotic 
experiences. Schizophr Res, 2011. 1 30(1-3): p. 216-21.
19. Cunha, J.M.,  et al., Chronic administration of cannabidiol to healthy volunteers and e pileptic 
patients. Pharmacology, 1980. 2 1(3): p. 175-85.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 5/6/2018Page 41 of 4020. Carlini, E.A. and J.M. C unha, Hypnotic and antiepileptic effects of cannabidiol. Journal  of 
Clinical Pharmacology, 1981. 2 1(8-9 Suppl): p. 417S-427S.
21. Consroe, P., R. Sandyk, and S.R.  Snider, Open label evaluation of cannabidiol in dystonic 
movement disorders. International Journal of Neuroscience, 1986. 30(4):  p. 277-82.
22. Consroe, P., et al., Controlled clinical trial of c annabidiol in H untington's disease.
Pharmacology, Biochemistry & Behavior, 1991. 40(3): p. 7 01-8.
23. Consroe, P., et al., Interaction of cannabidiol and a lcohol in humans. Psychopharmacology, 
1979. 6 6(1): p. 45-50.
24. Umbricht, D. and S. Krljes, Mismatch negativity in schizophrenia: a meta-analysis. Schizophr  
Res, 2005. 7 6(1): p. 1-23.
25. Fisher, D.J., e t al., Attenuation of m ismatch negativity (MMN) and novelty  P300 in schizophrenia 
patients with auditory hallucinations experiencing acute exacerbation of illness. Biol Psychol, 
2014. 100: p. 4 3-9.
26. Bramon, E., et al., Meta-analysis of the P300 and P50 waveforms in schizophrenia. Schizophr 
Res, 2004. 7 0(2-3): p. 315-29.
27. Naatanen, R. and S. K ahkonen, Central auditory  dysfunction in schizophrenia as revealed by the 
mismatch negativity (MMN) and its m agnetic equivalent MMNm: a review. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol, 2009. 1 2(1): p. 125-35.
28. Umbricht, D., et al., Effects of clozapine on auditory  event-related potentials in s chizophrenia.
Biol Psychiatry, 1998. 44(8): p. 7 16-25.
29. Korostenskaja, M., e t al., Effects of olanzapine  on auditory P300 and m ismatch negativity 
(MMN) in schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry, 
2005. 2 9(4): p. 543-8.
30. Drapeau, V., et al., Appetite sensations and s atiety quotient: Predictors of energy intake and 
weight loss. A ppetite, 2007. 4 8(2): p. 159-66.
31. Gueorguieva R, K rystal JH. Move over ANOVA. Progress in analyzing repeated-measure data 
and its reflection in papers p ublished in the Archives of General Psychiatry. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 2004; 61: 310–317.
32. Thomas, A., et al., Cannabidiol d isplays unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of  CB(1) 
and C B(2) receptor agonists in v itro. Br J Pharmacol, 2007.
33. Leweke FM, K.D., Gerth CW. C annabidiol as an antipsychotic: a double-blind, c ontrolled 
clinical trial on  cannabidiol vs. amisulpride in acute schizophrenics. in Symposium on the 
Cannabinoids, I nternational Cannabinoid R esearch Society. 2005. B urlington, Vermont.