STU#:  
Version #:  1 Version Date:  12/4/18  Page 1 of 9 
HRP -593 / v052518   
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) for pain control during 
cervical dilator placement prior to dilation and evacuation: A randomized controlled trial  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Leanne McCloskey, MD, MPH  
675 N. St. Clair  
Suite 14- 200 
Chicago, IL, 60611  
Department of OB/Gyn  
312-926-8678  
 
 
VERSION NUMBER: 
1 
 
 
VERSION DATE:  
12/4/18  
 
  STUDY SUMMARY : 
 
Investigational Agent(s)  
(Drugs or Devices)  Primera TENS/NMES Unit with HAN Waveform by 
Chattanooga  
IND / IDE / HDE  #   
Indicate  
Special Population(s) Children  
 Children who are wards of the state   
 Adults Unable to Consent   
 Cognitively Impaired Adults   
 Neonates of Uncertain Viability   
 Pregnant Women  
 Prisoners  (or other detained/paroled individuals)   
 Students/Employees   
Sample Size  70 
Funding Source  Society of Family Planning Research Fund  
Indicate the type of consent 
to be obtained  Written  
Verbal /Waiver of Documentation of Informed Consent  
Waiver of HIPAA Authorization  
Waiver/Alteration of Consent Process   
Site  Lead  Site ( For A Multiple Site Research Study)  
 Data Coordinating Center (DCC)  
Research Related 
Radiation Exposure  Yes  
 No  
DSMB  / DMC  / IDMC  Yes  
No 
 
STU#:  
Version #:  1 Version Date:  12/4/18  Page 2 of 9 
HRP -593 / v052518  OBJECTIVES: 
• Primary Outcome: Self -reported pain on 100mm VAS immediately following dilator 
placement  
• Secondary Outcomes:  
− Self-reported pain at dilator exchange (if applicable)  
− Amount of time (in minutes) spent in clinic following dilator insertion  
− Self-reported highest level of pain between dilator placement and D&E  
− Number and type of adjunctive pain medications used 
− Patient acceptability  
 
The hypothesis is that use of TENS will decrease pain by 20mm on VAS during initial dilator placement prior to dilation and evacuation, improving patient’s overall pain management  
  BACKGROUND: 
Dilation and Evacuation is the most common method of second trimester abortion. Studies have 
shown that adequate cervical preparation is necessary for the procedure to be performed safely 
and reduce the risk of complications. However, in the majority of cases the placement of t hese 
dilators is done with minimal pain management options. Previous research has shown that paracervical block reduces pain with laminaria insertion, (Soon et al., 2017)  however despite 
this, the placement of dilators continues to be, for many, the most painful part of the dilation and 
evacuation procedure. Several studies have been performed comparing cervical dilation 
techniques and rated dilator placement pain as moder ate to severe (Mercier & Liberty, 2014) . 
Pain following insertion in the hours leading up to the dilation and evacuation has been rated as less severe, but persistent.  
 
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) has been used in pain relief since 1965, 
when Melzack and Walls proposed using electrical stimulation as analgesia based on the gate 
control theory of pain relief (Johnson, Paley, Howe, & Sluka, 2015; Vance, Dailey, Rakel, & 
Sluka, 2014) . TENS units a re small, inexpensive, portable, battery -powered devices which 
deliver mild, alternating electrical currents via electrodes positioned on the skin near the anticipated dermatomal distribution of pain. The parameters of pulse frequency and pulse 
intensity are adjustable and linked to TENS efficacy (Vance et al., 2014). They overall have a favorable safety profile. Contraindications include electronic  implants, such as cardiac 
pacemakers and implantable cardioverter defibrillators ("ELECTROPHYSICAL AGENTS - 
Contraindications And Precautions: An Evidence- Based Approach To Clinical Decision Making 
In Physical Therapy," 2010) . 
 Two main theories have been proposed regarding how TENS provides analgesia.  According to 
the “gate control” theory, neuromodulation may activate large myelinated afferent nerve fibers in 
the dorsal horn to inhibit transmission in primary afferent nociceptive fibers. The inhibitory input 
from the large myelinated afferent fibers is thought to be able to “close the gate” to prevent 
transmission of pain sensation. (Johnson et al., 2015) . The endorphin- mediated theory of pain 
relief states that a stimulus outside the central nervous system can raise the level of 
endogenous endorphins and therefore provide analgesia. (Vance et al., 2014)  
 Despite usage of a paracervical block for pain control, patients still experience significant pain 
during dilator placement. If TENS provided pain relief for patients undergoing dilator placement prior to dilation and evacuation, this could provide an inexpensive, non- pharmacologic method 
of pain control that could be widely utilized.  
STU#:  
Version #:  1 Version Date:  12/4/18  Page 3 of 9 
HRP -593 / v052518   
 STUDY ENDPOINTS : 
The study is a single -blind ed randomized controlled trial to evaluate pain control using TENS 
during osmotic dilator placement prior to dilation and evacuation. The intervention group will use an active TENS unit and the control group will use a sham device. The primary objective is s elf-
reported pain on 100mm VAS immediately following dilator placement. The secondary 
outcomes include self -reported pain at dilator exchange, self -reported highest level of pain 
between dilator insertion and dilation and evacuation, number and type of adjunctive pain medications used, and patient satisfaction with device.  70 patients will be included in a one to 
one allotment. The participants will have interaction with the study at two time points. The first is 
at the time of dilator placement and the sec ond is at the time of dilation and evacuation the 
following day. No other interactions or long term follow up is needed.   
 
STUDY INTERVENTION (S)  / INVESTIGATIONAL AGEN T(S): 
 
The device being used in this study is the Primera TENS/NMES Unit with HAN Wavefo rm by 
Chattanooga. Chattanooga is a manufacturer of rehabilitation equipment for treating 
musculoskeletal, neurological and soft tissue disorders. It is a division of DJO Global.  This 
device has been approved for pain control management and this is not a novel use for the 
device.  
 TENS units are small, inexpensive, portable, battery -powered devices which deliver mild, 
alternating electrical currents via electrodes positioned on the skin near the anticipated 
dermatomal distribution of pain.  
 The TENS units and electrodes will be kept in a locked cabinet in the Family Planning office on 
the 14
th floor of Galter Pavilion, suite 200, which is the location of the research study and where 
the primary outcome will be measured.  
 
PROCEDURES INVOLVE D: 
 
The proposed study is a single- blinded randomized controlled trial studying use of TENS for 
pain control during initial dilator insertion prior to dilation and evacuation. The participants  will be 
randomized in a 1:1 randomization scheme using opaque, sequentially numbered envelopes following consent. The experimental group will have an active TENS unit – Chattanooga 
Primera – and the control group will have a sham TENS unit. The sham TENS will be the same 
unit without  the true TENS electrical connections .  The true TENS unit  consists of the active unit 
and electrode pads connected to the unit via direct wires.  T he sham group will be given the 
active unit and have electrode pads placed but without wire connections.  These participants will 
be told the device is a wireless device. They will also be told they may or may not feel sensation 
from the TENS. Thi s will allow the device to be powered on and run in the same manner as the 
active group, but will not allow for electrical transmission between the unit and electrodes.  
 
Based on power calculations , 56 participants are needed to detect a 20mm difference i n VAS 
score with a standard deviation of 30mm.  This is based on both minimum clinically significant 
difference in pain scores as well as previous studies regarding pain during dilator insertion.  We 
will attempt to recruit 70 patients to account for possibl e TENS unit misuse or study dropout.  
 Eligible patients will be 18 years of age or older and between 14 weeks and 23 weeks 6 days gestation who meet inclusion/exclusion criteria as listed below. Two electrodes will be placed in 
STU#:  
Version #:  1 Version Date:  12/4/18  Page 4 of 9 
HRP -593 / v052518  the suprapubic area in the bilateral lower quadrants (as shown in the 
figure at right). The program that will be used is a high frequency 
(80Hz) program that runs for an hour in duration. It will be initiated 5 
minutes prior to speculum placement. Pa rticipants  will be instructed 
to increase the amplitude of the current as needed to provide 
analgesia but avoiding discomfort from the TENS stimulation. All participants will receive a paracervical block of 20mL 1% lidocaine 
with sodium bicarbonate followed by rigid dilation and dilator placement  per standard cervical preparation protocol . Participants  will 
complete 100mm VAS immediately following dilator placement. VAS 
is a 100mm line on sheet of paper with 0 being no pain and 100mm being worst pain of their life. The number of dilators, type of dilators, 
and use of adjunctive mifepristone/misoprostol will be according to 
providers’ clinical judgement. Dilator placement will be performed by either Family Planning 
Fellow, PGY -3 OB/GYN resident, or Nurse Practitioner. All par ticipants  will receive prescriptions 
for twenty tablets of ibuprofen (600mg) and twelve tablets of hydrocodone/acetaminophen 5/325, which is the standard post -dilator insertion pain protocol for this clinic site. Participants  
will be allowed to leave prior  to the end of the initial one- hour program. They will be sent home 
with instructions of how to run the TENS unit as needed for pain control.  
 
Following the initial hour of use patients can re -activate the TENS unit as often as desired, using 
the same pro gram. Pa rticipants  will be given a log to record when TENS unit was used and 
whether additional pain medications were taken (attached). They will return their completed log and bring pill bottles on the day of surgery to confirm medications used.  
 
Of note, in our practice a second set of cervical dilators is often placed 6 hours after first set in 
patients over 20 weeks gestation. During this placement the first set is removed, further rigid 
dilation is performed, and new dilators are placed  per standard cervical preparation protocol . 
Pain score on 100mm VAS will be recorded following this dilator placement as well as a 
secondary outcome. Participants  will run the TENS unit in the same manner as the initial dilator 
placement for dilator exchange.  
 
On the day of surgery pa rticipants  will record their highest interval pain score on 100mm VAS. 
They will also be asked their satisfaction with the TENS device. The TENS unit will be returned 
on the day of surgery.  
 The investigative procedures in this study are as  follows:  
- 100mm VAS immediately following dilator placement  
- 100mm VAS immediately following dilator exchange (if applicable)  
- 100mm VAS in the preoperative area rating highest pain level in the interval between 
dilator placement and surgery  
- Log detailing when pain was felt in pre-operative interval period, TENS use or nonuse, 
and use or nonuse of adjunctive pain medication  
- 5 Point Likert Scale determining patient satisfaction with TENS (attached) 
- Demographic information sheet (attached) 
 
VAS scoring and Log details will be completed on paper. Likert scale and demographics will be 
collected on tablets.  
 There are no plans for long- term follow up.  
 
Platon et al  
STU#:  
Version #:  1 Version Date:  12/4/18  Page 5 of 9 
HRP -593 / v052518  DATA AND SPECIMEN BA NKING  
No data or specimens will be banked for future use.  
 
SHARING RESULTS WIT H PARTICIPANTS  
Study results will be shared with the participants upon request.  This request can be made at 
any point within the study time period.  
 
Study results will be disseminated within the medical community via scientific publication in a 
peer-revie wed journal once study completion, data analysis, and manuscript approval has been 
achieved. 
 
STUDY TIMELINES 
The study will begin in March 2019 with p articipant recruitment .  It is anticipated, based on  a 
typical clinic volume of 400 patients requiring osmotic dilator placement prior to dilation and 
evacuation, that recruitment  will take  12 months. Primary data analyses will then take place over 
the next two months, with plan to complete analyses by May 2019.  Manuscript preparation, 
submission, and approval/publication will then occur.   
 
An individual’s participation in the study will be for no longer than 48 hours, which is the 
maximum amount of time between dilator placement and dilation and evacuation procedure. No 
further follow up will be required by the patient.  
 
INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Women ≥ 18 years of age 
2. Gestational age between 14 weeks and 23 weeks 6 days  
3. Willing and able to sign an informed consent in English 
4. No contraindications to TENS 
 
Exclusion criteria  
1. Incarceration  
2. Preterm Premature Rupture of Membranes or evidence of intra -amniotic infection  
3. Presence of implanted cardiac device 
4. Lack of sensation to touch on area of electrode placement  
5. Prior TENS use  
6. Opioid  dependence  
 
All patients between 14 weeks and 23 weeks 6 days gestation who schedule an appointment for a Dilation and Evacuation procedure with Northwestern Family Planning will be reviewed for 
study eligibility by the study team. All patients will be asked by clinical staff when scheduling an 
appointment if they have an implanted cardiac device or have used a TENS unit in the past. If 
eligibility criteria are met, then the patient will be approached regarding this study during the 
initial consultation appointment following description of dilator insertion procedure.  
   VULNERABLE POPULATIO NS 
The population being studied is pregnant women who have previously decided to have a  
termination of pregnancy  or have an intrauterine fetal demise . They will confirm their decision 
for termination and consent to the termination procedure prior to being approached for study 
participation and subsequent  TENS unit placement. TENS units have previously been studied 
STU#:  
Version #:  1 Version Date:  12/4/18  Page 6 of 9 
HRP -593 / v052518  during labor  without adverse effects on the fetus. Therefore, the only potential risk would be 
patient discomfort from the TENS or allergic reaction to the electrode pads .  These risks are  
rare and short -lived. Any fetal risk that has not previously been identified would be insignificant, 
as termination of pregnancy will occur 24- 36 hours later.   
 
 
PARTICIPANT  POPULATION(S)  
Accrual 
Number : Category/Group : 
(Adults/Children 
Special/Vulnerable 
Populations)  Consented:  
Maximum Number to be 
Consented or 
Reviewed/Collected/Screened Enrolled:  
Number to Complete 
the Study or Needed 
to Address the 
Research Question  
Local  Pregnant Women  70  70  
     
Study -wide      
   
Total:   70 70 
 
 RECRUITMENT METHODS  
Study participants will be recruited at the Family Planning Clinic at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago, IL. This study will be registered with ClinicalTrials.gov per protocol. 
Participation will be completely voluntary.  The Family Planning Clinic population is highly 
variable and includes patients with both Medicaid and private insurance. It includes patients 
referred from the greater Chicagoland area as well as from nearby states with more prohibitive 
abortion legislation. This clinic performs about 400 dilation and evacuation procedures requiring dilator placement per year.  
 
Patients will be approached for informed consent by a study team member  following 
determination of eligibility at the initial clinic termination consultation appointment at the 
Northwestern University Family Planning Clinic. No outsourced advertising for the study will be 
done.  
 
COMPENSATION FOR PAR TICIPATION IN RESEAR CH ACTIVITIES  
No compensation will be provided for the patients to participate in this study  
 
 WITHDRAWAL OF PARTICIPANTS  
Participants may choose to discontinue participation at any time.  
 A participant would be discontinued from this study if they opted to discontinue the TENS unit 
prematurely during initial dilator placement or if an unexpected allergy to the electrode pads was noted during initial placement. Participants  would be excluded f rom secondary analyses if they 
did not complete their pain log or agree to report pain/satisfaction with TENS on day of surgery, 
but would still be included in the primary analyses.  
 
RISKS TO PARTICIPANTS  
STU#:  
Version #:  1 Version Date:  12/4/18  Page 7 of 9 
HRP -593 / v052518  Minimal risk to participants is anticipated with this study protocol.   
The physical risk of this study is that the TENS may create a mildly uncomfortable sensation 
across the  lower abdomen.  The study participant  will be instructed to increase the intensity of 
the TENS to provide analgesia without excessive discomfort from the unit, however , some 
discomfort may be felt for a short period of time as the participant  is increasing and decreasing 
the intensity of the TENS. This discomfort is reversible , however , by decreasing the intensity or 
discontinuing use of the device. The participant  may also have a contact  allergic reaction to the 
electrode pads.   This contact allergy is short lived and is easily treated with t opical 
corticosteroids.  
 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS T O PARTICIPANTS  
If, as we anticipate, use of TENS improves  pain control during dilator insertion, this would 
provide an inexpensive, non- pharmacologic method of analgesia with few contraindications. 
This could improve the patient experience during a necessary but extremely uncomfortable part 
of the abortion process.  
 
DATA MANAGEMENT AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
 Data will be managed using REDCap. All data will either be entered directly into REDCap (with 
data collected on tablet) or will be entered manually by the primary investigator or research 
assistant. The paper forms  and iPads  will be stored in a locked cabinet in a locked office only 
accessible to the primary investigator and research assistant. All paper forms will be shredded 
in HIPAA bins following data entry .  
 
Study participants will be compared on baseline characteristics using appropriate statistical 
methods  depending on normal distribution (student t -test or chi -squared test) or non- normal 
distribution. Primary and secondary outcomes will be measured using appropriate statistical analyses for continuous or categorical data. A two- tailed p value of less than or equal to 0.05 
will be considered statistically significant.  
 The number of subjects needed to show a 20mm reduction on VAS with a standard deviation of 
30mm is 56, or 28 per arm. To account for subject discontinuation we will attempt to recruit 70 
participants.  
 
According to previous studies the minimum clinically significant difference in VAS is 15mm, 
however , this is within the standard deviation of typical VAS scores of pain during laminaria 
insertion and could confound study results .  Soon et al previously used a 25mm reduction on 
VAS to calculate power  in a previous study examining pain control during dilator insertion using 
paracervical block. We have chosen to use a 20mm reduction on VAS as this difference has 
shown significant in previous pain management research studies and we believe this to be a 
difference that will alter clinician practice patterns.  
 
PROVISIONS TO MONITOR THE DATA TO ENSURE  THE SAFETY OF PARTICIPANT S 
This study does not involve more than minimal risk to the participants  
 PROVISIONS TO PROTEC T THE PRIVACY INTERE STS OF PARTICIPANT S 
 
On the day of their pre-operative abortion consultation appointment , a study team member will 
approach eligible patients regarding study enrollment . The questions they are asked regarding 
STU#:  
Version #:  1 Version Date:  12/4/18  Page 8 of 9 
HRP -593 / v052518  personal health information and demographics are questions that would be asked regardless of 
study participation.  
 The participants will enter their demographic information directly onto the iPad themselves or 
can have the research team enter it for them. They will be assured that their information will be 
protected as personal health information.  Once enrolled, all participants will be given a study identification number.  No PHI will be used to identify the participants moving forward within the 
study period.    
 
COMPENSATION FOR RES EARCH- RELATED INJURY  
N/A 
  ECONOMIC BURDEN TO PARTICIPANT S 
No undue economic burden is anticipated for participants.  Participant s are not responsible for 
any costs for this research.  Insurance will be billed for dilation and evacuation procedure per 
standard clinical practice.   
 
CONSENT PROCESS  
The consent process will take place in a private exam  room following the abortion consultation 
prior to dilator placement. No waiting period will take place between informing the participant of 
the study and obtaining informed consent. The pa rticipant can discontinue involvement in the 
study at any time by notifying the study team. The individuals listed in the application will be directly responsible for the consent process . The minim um anticipated amount of time devoted 
to the consent  process is 20-30 minutes . Participants will receive the same pain medication 
regimen whether they consent to the study and are in the control or study cohort or if they 
decline study participation.   Eligible  patients will be asked throughout the consent process if 
they understand the study and if they have any questions. They will also be asked to repeat i n 
their own words what the study entails following the description of the study and consent 
discussion. Written consent will then be obtained.  
 WAIVER OR ALTERATION  OF CONSENT PROCESS (consent will not be obtained, required 
information will not be disclosed, or the research involves deception)  
N/A 
 
 
PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION (PHI  AND HIPAA)  
This research will use some medical record information (see attached demographics form). This 
information will be de -identified and attributed to a study ID number  after consent is obtained. 
Patients will sign a HIPAA Authorization form at the time of consent.  
 NON- ENGLISH SPEAKING  PARTICIPANT S 
N/A 
  
QUALIFICATIONS TO CONDUCT RESEARCH AND RESOURCES AVAILABLE  
The Northwestern Family Planning Clinic performs about 400 dilation and evacuation 
procedures requiring laminaria placement per year. Therefore, we would need to recruit 17.5% 
of these patients for this study. This is a feasible percentage given that the alternative option for pain control is local anesthesia, which all patients  receive regardless of study participation.   
 
STU#:  
Version #:  1 Version Date:  12/4/18  Page 9 of 9 
HRP -593 / v052518  Ashley Turner , MD  is the  primary clinical study team member of this study currently in her first 
year of the Family Planning Fellowship.  She is  in the clinic daily  and will consent the majority of 
eligible patients.  During the following year, she will be in her second year of the fellowship with 
few clinical responsibilities allowing for a large amount of time to be devoted to completing this 
study.  Ashley Turner, MD has participated in multiple other research studies including studies 
looking at anesthesia and REM sleep in rats as well as immediate post -partum LARC outcomes 
and provider satisfaction.  
 
The principal investigator  is Leanne McCloskey, MD, MPH. Dr. McCloskey is an Assistant 
Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Northwestern University and graduated from Northwestern’s Family Planning Fellowship in 2015.  She is currently director of the Ryan Program in Family Planning at Northwestern.  She has served as both primary investigator and 
co-investigator on multiple research endeavors throughout her career.  She has mentored both 
residents and fellows in the past during their research projects.   
 We do not  anticipate patients requiring further medical or psychological resources secondary to 
this study. However, all patients presenting to the Family Planning Clinic who have decided on an abortion procedure are offered services of Perinatal Loss Social Work if needed. All persons 
involved in the study will be trained by Dr. McCloskey or Dr. Turner regarding study protocol and 
will be able to ask questions at anytime. We will also be available during the participant consent 
process to answer any additional questions. All personnel will be trained prior to study 
recruitment initiation.  
STUDY -WIDE RECRUITMENT METHODS  
N/A 
 