 
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Study Description 
AAAQ8089 
VAPE-Tox Study 
Version 1.4 5/11/2017 
 
Protocol Title: Ventilation and Pulmonary Endothelium Toxicities (VaPE-Tox) of E-cigarettes: A 
Randomized Crossover Pilot Study  
1. Study Purpose and Rationale. 
 As e-cigarettes become increasingly popular, bolstered by claim s that they are relatively safe, 
there is an urgent need for data on the safety of inhalation of e-cigarette vapor. Decades of 
research have demonstrated that the primary site of toxicity of conventional cigarettes is the lungs. However, years of exposur e are required to affect most standard physiologic measures, 
and e-cigarettes have not been used for long enough to estimate reliably chronic effects. Recent advances in non-invasive, radiation-free imaging of the lung, d eveloped in part by our group, 
provide sensitive, specific and reproducible measures to quanti fy acute pulmonary effects of e-
cigarettes and to predict potential long-term harms. The proposed study employs these 
measures and, thus, may be used to inform regulation. 
 E-cigarettes may cause acute airway changes due a large number of airway irritants. 
Heated propylene glycol (PG), nicotine, and carbonyls – all com monly found in e-cigarette vapor 
– stimulate vagal C-fibers in t he pulmonary epithelium that tri gger neuropeptide release, 
inflammation, mucous production, bronchoconstriction, and, pote ntially, airway remodeling 
leading to chronic lung diseases. Consistent with this, e-cigarette liquid induces airway inflammation and hyper-responsiveness in mice and its use, in h umans, increases airway 
impedance and peripheral airway resistance by oscillometry. However, e-cigarettes have not 
been proved to reduce lung function, possibly due to the insens itivity of spirometry. 
Hyperpolarized helium (
3He) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been used to demonstra te 
the extent of ventilation defects in healthy persons with norma l spirometry; to measure 
ventilation changes in asthmatics pre- and post-challenge with albuterol and methacholine; and 
to predict pulmonary hospitalizations in persons with COPD. Hen ce, 3He MRI represents a 
promising but as-yet untested approach to detect, measure, and illustrate acute airway 
effects of e-cigarettes that may predict increased long-term ri sk of chronic lung disease.  
 Nicotine and carbonyls such as acrolein have well-established effects on the 
endothelium, suggesting that e-cigarettes may cause acute pulmo nary microvascular changes. 
E-cigarette vapor with and without nicotine causes endothelial barrier dysfunction in vitro and, in 
humans, has been associated with decreased exhaled nitric oxide , a major vasodilator and 
regulator of pulmonary microvascular tone.  E-cigarette-related  endothelial dysfunction may 
therefore decrease pulmonary microvascular perfusion, which is implicated in the pathogenesis 
of emphysema. Until recently, direct measures of pulmonary microvascular blood flow were lacking. Our group has developed an innovative measure of pulmonary micr ovascular 
blood flow (PMBF) on gadolinium (Gd)-enhanced magnetic resonanc e imaging (MRI), 
which we found to be markedly abnormal in early chronic obstruc tive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) and emphysema, and associated with increased endothelial  microparticles, a 
marker of endothelial apoptosis; however, PMBF has never been used to assess e-cigarette 
effects.  We therefore propose to test the acute effects of a standardized e-cigarette 
exposure on pulmonary ventilation and perfusion in a randomized  crossover design in 10 
young, healthy, e-cigarette users. We hypothesize that e-cigarette exposure will: 
 
 1. Increase global and regional ventilation defects on 3He-MRI. 
2. Decrease global and regional pulmonary microvascular blood f low. 
 
This pilot work will provide the experience and data to support subsequent funding 
applications powered to establish definitively the acute pulmon ary effects of e-cigarette 
vapor  of various compositions (e.g., with and without nicotine, with  and without flavoring) in 
persons with and without chronic lung diseases (e.g., asthma an d COPD) with respect to 
ventilation and microvascular perfusion. Furthermore, confirmation of our hypotheses in this 
modest sample would provide important, vivid preliminary data to inform regulatory 
decisions  regarding warning labels and public health education.  
 
2. Study Design and Statistical Procedures. 
 We propose a randomized crossover clinical trial following a ru n-in period to test the acute 
pulmonary effects of a standardized e-cigarette exposure on 
3He-MRI/MRA measures among 
ten young, healthy intermittent e-cigarette users.  
 
Pre-Screening Potential participants will be pre-screened for eligibility by trained research assistants via 
telephone. A verbal consent script will be used and an information sheet will be provided. 
Participants found to be eligible on pre-screening will be refe rred for the first study visit for full 
written informed consent for study procedures and for additiona l screening (See Figure 1, 
“Consent/Screen”). Screening forms for those who are found to be ineligible (or for those who are pre-screened as eligible but do not, for any reason, sign w ritten informed consent at the first 
study visit) will be abstracted, reviewed by the PI, and then discarded in a secure fashion such that no PHI is retained.   
First Study Visit 
All eligible participants will undergo written informed consent , additional screening procedures, 
and initial evaluation and then be entered into a run-in period to ensure their ability to abstain 
from non-study e-cigarettes and regular cigarettes for the duration of the study ( Figure 1). 
 
Randomization 
Participants who are confirmed as adherent after the run-in per iod will be immediately assigned 
by random number generator in SAS to receive the e-cigarette ex posure on days 2-3 or on days 

 
 
6-7, with a 72-hour period between exposed and unexposed condit ions. Allocation will be 
concealed until Day 2, when the first experimental exposure is administered. 
Experimental exposure 
 
For the experimental exposure, all participants will use identical, study-provided e-cigarette 
devices; however, these study dev ices will not be shared betwee n participants. Each device will 
be labeled with the participant number and stored securely betw een participant uses. After a 
participant completes the study, that participant’s dedicated device will be discarded by 
Environmental Health and Safety.  
 “Pen-style” e-cigarettes confirmed to be MRI-safe will be used. Cartomizers, batteries, and e-liquids will be obtained from commercial suppliers. The e-cigarette device will be loaded with 2 mL of flavorless e-liquid with a ratio of PG to vegetable glyce rin of 70:30 and 1.8 mg/dL of 
nicotine. Please see Section 5.3 for additional product details.  Consistent with prior literature, the study e-cigarette exposure will be 10 puffs with 30-second inter-puff intervals, as directly observed by a trained researc h assistant, using the standardized 
e-cigarette. This is anticipated to generate a plasma nicotine concentration of 19 ng/mL, similar 
to 10 puffs of a conventional cigarette. The exposure will be a dministered under a fume hood 
(Airtech Laminar Flow Workstation, Model ATG 220 UV Therapy Iso lation Booth, 
http://www.airtechlaminarflow.com/atg-220.htm ) at the enrollment visit in the CTSA and in the 
negative-pressure MRI scanner rooms at two of the four imaging visits. 
 
Blinding 
The “unexposed” condition will be breathing from the study e-ci garette with the battery off (or, if 
this is not feasible, completing the prescribed “puff” maneuvers using only room air). To assess 
the adequacy of blinding, participants will be interviewed at the end of study regarding whether they were able to guess correctly their  
allocation assignments. 
 
Imaging 
Gadolinium-enhanced MRI will be performed on days 2 and 6, 
ensuring >48-hour clearance of gadolinium, and 
3He-MRI for ventilation 
will be performed on days 3 and 7.  Statistics 
As this is a randomized crossover trial, statistical procedures  will 
consist mainly of permutation tests. The proposed study is designed to 
generate preliminary data rather than definitively to confirm o r rule out 
acute pulmonary toxicities of e-cigarettes, although the propos ed sample may be adequate to 
detect large effects ( Table 1). We will have 60% power at an alpha of 5% in two-tailed 
significance testing to detect the 1.02 increase in ventilation  defect percentage (VDP) that may 
be predicted based on prior literature showing an approximately  3% FEV
1 decline with e-
cigarettes and additionally assuming that prior associations be tween FEV 1 and VDP are linear. 
Based on published associations between secondhand smoke, endothelial microparticle concentrations, and pulmonary microvascular measures such as si gnal intensity (SI) we might 
anticipate a 5% decrement in PMBF from secondhand smoke exposure alone; however, the effect is likely to be larger for e-cigarette vapor given its much higher nicotine yield.  
3. Study Procedures 
 
 Pre-screening 
 After providing verbal consent for participation in the telepho ne screening questionnaire, which 
will be administered by a trained research assistant or a study  investigator, participants will 
answer 18 questions relating to major inclusion/exclusion crite ria for ongoing involvement in the 
study (see attached document). 
 
Main study procedures 
All participants will provide written informed consent prior to enrollment using the appropriate, 
approved consent form with signature obtained by one of the investigators or staff listed as such in the Personnel section.  The timing of procedures is schematized in Figure 1. The procedures are as follows: 
 
1. Questionnaires: Questionnaires will be administered to all s tudy participants covering 
respiratory symptoms, medical (including exacerbations) history , cigarette/e-cigarette 
use, and MRI and spirometry exclusions (including pregnancy).  
2. Physical Assessment: Blood Pressure will be measured following the MESA 
protocol. Height and Weight will be measured with a scale and s tadiometer. Resting 
and exercise oxygen saturation will be measured non-invasively with a pulse 
oximeter. 
3. Phlebotomy: At the enrollment visit and at Imaging Visits 1 and 3, non-fasting venous 
blood samples will be collected to measure creatinine, oxygen t ension, complete 
blood count, and serum nicotine. A maximum of 60 ml (4 tablespo ons) will be 
collected at a given visit. Samples will also be banked for fut ure analyses. 
4. Urine collection: urine will be collected at all study visit s for cotinine measurement 
(uCot) and pregnancy test (uPT) for all women. Urine will also be banked for future 
analyses. 
5. Exhaled carbon monoxide (ExCO): Participants will exhale int o a portable monitor, 
which will indicate whether the participant has recently smoked conventional 
cigarettes.  
6. Spirometry (Spiro): All participants will undergo uniform, s tandardized spirometry at 
the enrollment visit and prior to and after 3He-MRI scanning. Spirometry will be performed using a SensorMedics model 1022 rolling-barrel spirometer and/or the NDD EasyOne in accordance with American Thoracic Society (ATS) guidelines. 
7. Diffusion Capacity (DLCO) and lung volumes: These non-invasi ve tests are similar to 
spirometry, but involve less e ffort. Diffusion capacity may be measured by the 
rebreathing technique in which the participant will be asked to  breathe through a 
closed circuit while the flow and volume of inspired and expire d gas are measured 
following ATS guidelines. This will be performed at the enrollment visit and before 
and after 3He-MRI scanning by NDD EasyOne Pro. 
8. Exhaled breath condensate (EBC): Participants will be asked to breathe into an EBC 
collection device (Rtube System, Respiratory Research Inc, Charlottesville, VA) for 
up to 10 minutes. EBC will be aliquoted and stored for subsequent analyses.  
9. E-cigarette exposure: This will be completed as described in  (2) and (5) at the 
enrollment visit in the CTSA and at two out of the four imaging visits (days 2-3 or 6-7, 
depending on randomization). 
10. Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
a. Ventilation Scan (3He-MRI): this exam will be used to examin e the size and 
function of the lungs. For this exam, the participant will lie on a table inside of the 
MRI for about 30 minutes. Before having the MR exam, participan ts will be asked 
 
 questions about their medical history and any exclusion criteri a. Approximately 
250-400 mL of hyperpolarized 3He mixed with 600-750 mL of nitro gen will be 
inhaled through a one-way valve in one inhalation starting appr oximately at 
residual volume. After a rest, inhalations may be repeated up t o 3 times per 
session. Blood pressure, respiratory rate, pulse and oxygen saturation are 
monitored continuously during MRI procedures.  
b. Perfusion Scan (Gd-MRA): this exam will be used to evaluate pulmonary 
perfusion and cardiac function. For this exam, the participant will lie on a table 
inside of the MRI for about 30 minutes. Before having the MR ex am, participants 
will be asked questions about their medical history and any exclusion criteria. 
Gadolinium contrast will be injected into the antecubital vein through an 18-20 gauge IV. The type of gadolinium will be 0.03 mmol/kg bodyweigh t of dotarem 
(gadoterate meglumine). Participants will be coached to achieve  and hold in 
expiration (FRC) phase, with several practice attempts prior to  scan acquisition.  
 Participants will be asked to abstain from all tobacco products , with the exception of 
the study e-cigarette, from the first until the final study vis it (11 days). Of note, 
tobacco product use will not be proscribed during the interval between the pre-
screening telephone call and the first study visit. 
 4. Results Reports: No clinical reports will be generated for p articipants; however, a safety read 
will be performed as per CUMC policy.  5. Study Drugs or Devices: 
 
(1) Hyperpolarized helium . IND 123,115 has been obtained from the FDA. The helium gas 
is supplied by Linde Healthcare, 6600 Peachtree Dunwoody Road, Embassy Row 400, 
Suite 300, Atlanta, GA 30328 Phone: Main 678-225-2940. The heli um is hyperpolarized 
using the GE polarizer and administered by inhalation, as descr ibed in the IND 
application. There will be no charge to participants.  
(2) Dotarem (gadoterate meglumine)  will be used as the contrast agent for the Gd-MRA at 
a low dose of 0.03 mmol/kg bodyweight. It will be supplied by G uerbet, 120 West 7th 
Street, Suite 108, Bloomington, IN 47404-3835. Contacts include Toll Free: 877-729-
6679; Phone: 812-333-0059; Fax: 812-333-0084. 
(3) E-cigarette 
o Planned e-cigarette device: We will obtain e-cigarettes from KangerTech 
(Building A1, No 66 West He'xiu road, Fuyong Town, Shenzhen,Chi na; 
sales@kangeronline.com ). The model will be the Kanger Top Evod.  
 Alternate E-cigarette: If e-cigarette #1 is unavailable or the re are other 
logistical issues identified, our alternate (highly similar) pr oduct will be 
from Halo (Corporate : 7916 Evolutions Way Suite 200, Trinity, Florida 
34655 United States; Manufacturing : 5909 NW 18th Dr., Gainesville, FL. 
32653 United States; Customer Service: (888) 425-6649). We will  use the 
“Triton” Variable Voltage Battery (adjustable voltage 3.3-4.8V,  900mAh, 
10 seconds battery cut off time) “Triton” tank with 3.0-3.2 ohm  coil.  
o Study e-liquids: study e-cigarettes will be loaded with 2mL of  flavorless e-liquid 
with a ratio of PG to vegetable glycerin (VG) of 70:30 and 1.8 mg/dL of nicotine 
(AVAIL Vapor, 820 Southlake Blvd, Richmond, VA 23236, contact H olly Kempf 
Lewis (804) 677-1588). 
 
6. Study Questionnaires: See attached. 
 
  
7. Study Subjects: 
 
Inclusion criteria:  Age of 21-35 years at time of enrollment and self-reported voluntary, 
recreational e-cigarette use (>1x/month but <daily).  Exclusion criteria:  any chronic major medical or psychiatric p roblems including current asthma; 
self-reported heavy snoring/sleep apnea; pre-bronchodilator FEV 1 or FVC <80% predicted or 
FEV 1/FVC < lower limit of normal58; MRI exclusions (pregnancy, c laustrophobia, metal in body, 
gadolinium allergy, eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73m2); MRI scan with contrast within the last 12 months 
or planned MRI with contrast in the next 6 months; use of any of the following in the prior 30 days: any conventional cigarette s, marijuana >10 days, any other illicit drugs, any daily 
medication (including inhalers) except hormonal contraceptives. Persons with an adverse 
symptomatic response to the study e-cigarette exposure (e.g., p alpitations, shortness of breath, 
chest pain, headache, dizziness) will also be excluded. 
 8. Recruitment  
Participants will be recruited from the local community and universities via fliers and word of 
mouth. There will be partial co-recruitment with the PI’s relat ed e-cigarette pilot studies 
AAAQ9965 and AAAR2000. Healthy volunteers may be drawn from CUM C/NYP personnel 
including residents/fellows/interns/staff. This latter recruitment will not be coercive as it is 100% voluntary and there is no recrimination for non-participation. CUMC/NYP personnel who report 
directly to the PI or co-I will not be recruited. 
 
9. Informed consent and eligibility  Since the exclusion criteria for the VAPE-Tox Study are few but  cannot be fully determined prior 
to the first study visit (Day -3), the participant will come in to the clinic and first sign the informed 
consent and HIPAA forms. Participants will be invited to the Cl inical and Translational Science 
Awards (CTSA) research suite, where they will be confirmed to meet all inclusion/exclusion criteria via questionnaires, exhaled CO (exCO), pre-bronchodilator spirometry, serum creatinine assay, urine pregnancy test for women, and a practice session f or the study e-cigarette 
exposure under observation by a trained research assistant, bef ore being asked to abstain 
completely from non-study e-cigarette use for the duration of t he study. Eligibility will be 
confirmed by the PI in writing. 
Adherent participants, defined on Day 0 as no interim self-repo rted e-cigarette use, <=10 ppm 
exhaled CO (exCO), and urine cotinine (uCot) <100 ng/mL, will c ontinue immediately with 
randomization. 
 
10. Confidentiality of Study Data 
 The consent form signed by the participant will provide written  assurance that all individual data 
collected in the study will be kept confidential to the extent provided by the Privacy Act of 1974.  
Any personal identifiers will be maintained on limited-access, secure servers and never put on 
endpoint devices so that confidential data are not released. 
Participants will be informed that: (1) the only people who will know that they are 
research participants are members of the research team and, if appropriate, their physicians or health care providers; (2) no individual identifying informatio n about them will be disclosed to 
others, except if required by law; and (3) when the results of the study are published or 
 
 discussed in conferences, no information will be included that would reveal their identity. 
 Data identified by study ID and acrostic only may be transferr ed to the MESA COPD 
Reading Centers (John Hopkins University, University of Iowa, H annover University, University 
of Wisconsin, Northwestern University). Coded research data wil l be stored on password-
protected, secure servers hosted by the Division of General Medicine and certified by CUMC IT 
the CUMC Radiology PACS, and in locked filing cabinets in General Medicine, and potentially on endpoint devices that will, in all cases, be encrypted. 
Identifiable data will be stored in the General Medicine Server described above and in 
locked filing cabinets in separately partitioned drives/cabinet s. The linking file will be similarly 
protected with limited access. 
 
11. Potential Risks  
There are no direct risks or discomforts from participation in the questionnaire, anthropometry, 
blood pressure, oxygen saturation, urine collection, or exhaled  breath condensate. The only 
possible risk from these components involves the social-psychol ogical risk for the individual 
resulting from the inadvertent disclosure of confidential medical information .  
 Potential risks posed by the proposed study exposures and proce dures are as follows: 
1. E-cigarette use:  
a. Nicotine exposure: Side effects from products that contain nicotine can include 
sweating, lightheadedness, dizziness, nausea, and nervousness. These effects 
are unlikely in individuals who use nicotine-containing products regularly, but are 
more likely to occur in non-regular users. Regardless, these ef fects are transient 
and long-term adverse effects are not expected based upon the study exposure. Nicotine is also an addictive substance, therefore exposure to nicotine 
theoretically carries a risk of promoting addition; however, in  the amounts and 
manner administered in the study, this is very unlikely to occur.  
b. Propylene glycol exposure: propylene glycol is contained in most e-cigarette 
liquids, and will make up 70% of the study e-cigarette liquid. It is often used to make "theater fog" and is considered relatively safe, but it ha s occasionally been 
associated with shortness of breath or bronchospasm, especially  in people with a 
history of asthma. 
c. Unknown risks: The effects of e-cigarette use remain mostly unknown, which is 
the major motivation for this study. We are only recruiting you ng, healthy, adults 
who have already made the decision to use e-cigarettes intermittently, despite this uncertainty. A safety board will be monitoring the study. 
2. Claustrophobia: A minority of individuals may be subject to psychological ris ks if they 
develop previously unknown cl austrophobia inside the magnet. Cl austrophobic episodes 
can be psychologically traumatic to participants; however, the trauma ceases upon 
removal of the subject from the scanner and does not have any k nown lasting effects.  
3. Magnet risks: All MRI studies involve exposure to magnetic field strength, rate of change 
of magnetic field gradients, and RF power exposure within guide lines recommended by 
the Food and Drug Administration. 
4. Risks relating to gadolinium contrast :  
a. Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis  (NSF) is a rare fibrosing condition of the skin 
and organs that has been reported in association with gadoliniu m contrast agents 
and severe renal failure (GRF < 30 ml/min/1.73 m2). No reported  cases have 
occurred above this level in patients with chronic renal impair ment. Acute onset 
renal failure, hepatorenal syndrome, peri-hepatic transplant or kidney transplant represent additional risk factors. The clinical course of NSF i s progressive and 
 
 may be fatal. The incidence in the high risk population (severe  renal failure, stage 
4-5, transplant, dialysis) is 2-6%.  
b. Allergy : there is a risk of allergic reaction after the gadolinium inj ection, with a 
less than one in 300,000 chance that this will be severe. Metallic taste in mouth, 
tingling in the arm, nausea, or headache occurs in less than 1%  of people.  
c. Discomfort : Insertion of the needle to inject contrast may cause minor pa in, 
bruising and/or infection at the injection site. 
d. Deposition in brain tissue : Gadolinium has recently been reported to deposit in 
a dose-dependent manner in the brain, although the significance  of this is 
unknown and there is no evidence of harm.  
5. Risks relating to hyperpolarized helium contrast : 
a. Transient desaturation: Although generally proved to be well-tolerated, hyperpolarized helium inhalation and the subsequent breath-hold  maneuver have 
been found, in a subset of subjects, to cause a mean transient decrease of 4% in 
oxygen saturation, with recovery occurring within one minute.  
b. Discomfort : mild lightheadedness and headache have also been reported aft er 
3He inhalation, although these resolved during or immediately a fter imaging 
sessions. 
6. Spirometry : This is a non-invasive test that involves minimal risks, such as precipitating 
coughing or mild, transient dizziness. 
 For regular users of conventional or e-cigarettes, or other tob acco products, there is a risk of 
some discomfort during abstinence from e-cigarettes and nicotin e during the study. Side effects 
from tobacco/nicotine abstinence can include irritability, anxiety and restlessness, excessive 
hunger, difficulty concentrating, and sleep disturbance. Though  these potential side effects have 
not been characterized in e-cigarettes users, they are common abstinence symptoms in 
cigarette smokers. Though uncomfortable, these feelings are not  medically dangerous. 
 The only alternative to agreeing to participate is to decline t o participate. 
 
12. Protections Against Risk 
 
In addition to continuous monitoring by trained research assist ants during all study procedures, 
the following specific protections will be provided against the potential risks posed by the 
proposed study procedures.   
1. Anthropometry, blood pressure and pulse oximetry:  There are no direct risks or 
discomforts from participation in the anthropometry, blood pressure or pulse oximetry to 
measure oxygen saturation. 
2. Questionnaires: There is minimal risk related to questionnaires, this involve s the social-
psychological risk from the inadvertent disclosure of confident ial medical information. We 
guard against this by maintaining study information identified by study number only in a 
filing system separate from the name and address files. 
3. Phlebotomy : The risks associated with blood collection are minimal and include the 
potential to feel a little pain or get a bruise at the place wh ere the blood is drawn. It is 
possible, but not likely, that there may be swelling or bleedin g at the site. 
4. EBC testing is non-invasive and involves minimal risks. 
5. Spirometry: Spirometry is non-invasive and involves minimal risks. Spiromet ry can 
induce shortness of breath, coughing or chest tightness, and may cause the participant 
to feel lightheaded. It is very rarely complicated by syncope. No bronchodilators will be administered.  
 
 6. E-cigarette exposure : We will only recruit young, healthy, current e-cigarette usin g 
adults. Since these subjects choose to use e-cigarettes recreat ionally, it is reasonable to 
infer that they have determined independently that they are wil ling to accept the mostly 
unknown risks associated with e-cigarette vapor. Nonetheless, w e will mitigate any 
potential risks associated with the standardized study exposure – which will employ 
short-term exposure to publicly available e-cigarette products containing a standardized 
e-liquid with moderate nicotine content and without flavorings – by requiring a monitored 
“test run” of the study e-cigarette exposure at the enrollment visit. All persons with an 
adverse response (e.g., palpitations, shortness of breath, chest pain, headache, dizziness) will be excluded. We will also provide symptomatic a nd hemodynamic 
monitoring throughout the study procedures. 
7. Claustrophobia: We include severe, known claustrophobia as a contraindication  to 
participation in this project 
8. Magnet risks: All subjects will be screened to exclude those with contraindications to 
MR, including those with pacemakers, aneurysm clips, cochlear i mplants or other 
implanted electronic devices. Subjects with a history of occupa tional exposure to small 
metallic projectiles will also be excluded. The MR scanner areas at the sites are equipped with standard medical emergency equipment for a hospit al-based MR center. 
9. Gadolinium contrast :  
a. Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis  (NSF): Participants with high-risk conditions 
will be excluded. GFR will be measured within two weeks of imaging, and GFR < 60 ml/min/1.73 m
2 will be the cutoff for exclusion in this study. 
b. Deposition in brain tissue : We will mitigate against this risk by using a low dose 
of gadolinium (0.03 mmol/kg) and a type of gadolinium that is not believed to be 
associated with this problem.  
10. Hyperpolarized helium contrast : Medical grade 3He is hyperpolarized and mixed with 
inert nitrogen gas using a commercial polarizer (manufactured b y GE Healthcare). 3He-
enhanced MRI has been performed in over a thousand patients by 2008 and probably 
another 1000 since then. Since all of the inhaled 3He is expire d, it is well-tolerated by 
health controls and patients with severe lung disease alike. The major risk is transient 
hypoxemia following inhalation of the gas. The mean change in S pO2 in a series of 100 
subjects (controls, smokers, and severe COPD) was 0 +/- 2%, wit h a range from -4 to 
6%, although occasionally (<5%) a significant desaturation is o bserved (Lutey, 
Radiology 2008). These have all been asymptomatic and without s equelae, to our 
knowledge. Other minor symptoms reported after inhalation of 3H e include occasional 
(<5%) cough, lightheadedness and headache (similar to spirometr y). We have obtained 
an IND from the FDA and its production at CUMC to be used in this process.  
Potential problems and adverse events will be monitored and evaluated as per the Data Safety Monitoring Plan, which includes a DSMB.  12. Plan for Incidental Findings 
The imaging may reveal subclinical findings that require further testing or interventions, which 
may be harmful, costly or cause distress.   The MRI protocols are designed for research purposes and do not  necessarily provide standard 
clinical information on, for example, cardiac structure or function. The information obtained is specific to particular protocols, such that specific regions of  the heart or lungs may be visualized 
with poor or no visualization of other regions of these organs or of the chest or other parts of the 
body.  
 
 MRI of the lungs yields generally low-resolution images of the large airways and airspaces, 
respectively. Only large abnormalities (e.g., large bronchiogenic cancer) would be detected. 
 
Dr Prince, co-I (Dept of Radiology, CUMC and WCMC), will read a ll scans in a timely fashion for 
participants.  IFs of Clinical Significance will be communicated to the partic ipants verbally and in writing. 
Major abnormalities (eg carcinoma) will be reported; subtle alt ernations of unknown clinical 
significance (eg regional lack of ventilation in a patient with out respiratory symptoms) will not. 
 13. Potential Benefits  
Three are no direct benefits to participants expected from this  study except for the feeling of 
being involved in an important study. The societal benefits fro m the information on the 
relationship between e-cigarette vapor inhalation and pulmonary ventilation and microvascular 
perfusion are potentially large. 
 15. Alternatives: None.  
16. Data Safety and Monitoring Plan 
 Please see attached document and proposed Data Safety and Monit oring Board (DSMB) roster. 
 17. IND Holder Responsibilities 
 