 
  
MU: Waiver of Documentation of Consent   
 IRB USE ONLY  
Approval Date: December 12, 2016  
Expiration Date: November 20, 2017  WAIVER OF DOCUMENTATION OF CONSENT  
 
INVESTIGATOR ’S NAME: DEBRA PARKER OLIVER , PHD    
PROJECT # 2003012  
 
STUDY TITLE: SHARED DECISION MAKING TO IMPROVE PALLIATIVE CARE IN THE NURSING 
HOME 
 
1. I would like to ask you to participate in a study that involves rese arch.  
2. Participation is voluntary and your decision not to participate will not involve any penalty or 
loss of benefits and will in no way affect the nursing home care you receive . 
3. For this study,  your family member will be asked to answer  questions about their experience 
with you in the nursing home.  
4. The purpose of our study is to  investigate ways to improve nursing home care by including 
residents  and family in the care plan meeting.  
5. We are asking approximately 46 residents and their family to participate in this study.  
6. The study staff may withdraw you from the study at any time after explaining to you the 
reason for withdrawal.  
7. While on the study, you are at risk for  some people may experience frustration using 
technology with which they may not be familia r or may feel anxious or uneasy participating 
in team meetings. Please do not hesitate to discuss your concerns or concerns related to the 
questions with the research staff.  
8. If you agree to take part in this study, there may or may not be direct medical b enefit to you. 
If you are assigned to the intervention group, you will have access to the nursing home team 
and your family member . We hope the information learned from this study will benefit other 
nursing home residents and their family.   
9. If you choose t o participate,  Information produced by this study will be stored in the 
investigator’s locked file or secured computer and identified by a code number only. The 
code key connecting your name to specific information about you will be kept in a separate, 
secure location. Information contained in your records may not be given to anyone 
unaffiliated with the study in a form that could identify you without your written consent, 
except as required by law. All research materials, including the video recordings and  
transcripts will be maintained for 7 years following the completion of the study. The results 
of this study may be published in a medical book or journal or used for teaching purposes. 
However, your name or other identifying information will not be used i n any publication or 
teaching materials without your specific permission.  
10. There is no cost to you for the participating in the study. However, you will still be paying for 
the normal cost of your routine  nursing home .  
 
  
MU: Waiver of Documentation of Consent   
 IRB USE ONLY  
Approval Date: December 12, 2016  
Expiration Date: November 20, 2017  10. There is no compensation given t o you for participation in this study , however your family 
will receive $50 for their participation . 
11. If you have any questions regarding your rights as a participant in this research and/or 
concerns about the study, or if you feel under any pressure to enr oll or to continue to 
participate in this study, you may contact the University of Missouri Health Sciences 
Institutional Review Board (which is a group of people who review the research studies to 
protect participants’ rights) at (573) 882 -3181.  
12. If you ha ve an y problems or questions, you ma y contact Debra Parker Oliver 573 -884-5301 I 
would be happy to answer any questions that you may have.  
13. A copy of this script will be given to you to keep  