[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 SYNOPSIS 5
2I N T R O D U C T I O N 7
2.1 B ACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 7
2.2 B ENEFITS AND RISKS TO SUBJECTS 7
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 8
3.1 O BJECTIVES 8
3.2 P RIMARY ENDPOINT 8
3.3 A DDITIONAL ENDPOINTS 8
3.4 S AFETY ENDPOINTS 9
3.5 P HARMACOKINETIC AND PHARMACODYNAMIC ENDPOINTS 9
3.6 B IOMARKER RESEARCH SAMPLES 9
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 9
4.1 O VERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 9
5 STUDY ACTIVITIES 12
5.1 E LIGIBILITY CRITERIA 12
5.2 C ONTRACEPTION RECOMMENDATIONS 17
5.3 P ROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND THERAPY 17
5.4 P RIOR AND CONCOMITANT THERAPY 19
5.5 W ITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS AND DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY 20
5.6 F OLLOW -UP FOR SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL FROM STUDY 22
5.7 S TUDY DRUG 22
5.8 R ANDOMIZATION /DRUG ASSIGNMENT 23
5.9 P ROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 24
6 SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS 24
6.1 C OMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 24
7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE 27
7.1 S TATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 27
Page 2 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.2 D EFINITION FOR ANALYSIS POPULATIONS 28
7.3 S TATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 28
7.4 S TATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 28
7.5 S TATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR PHARMACOKINETICS /PHARMACODYNAMICS 29
7.6 O VERALL TYPE IERROR CONTROL 29
7.7 S AMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION 29
8E T H I C S 29
8.1 I NDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE /INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (IEC/IRB) 29
8.2 E THICAL CONDUCT OF THE STUDY 29
8.3 S UBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 30
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM COMPLETION 30
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE 30
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY 30
12 REFERENCES 30
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. WASHOUT INTERVALS FOR EXCLUSIONARY HORMONAL/ANTI-HORMONAL THERAPY 16
TABLE 2. PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS 18
TABLE 3. TREATMENTS ADMINISTERED DURING THE DOUBLE-BLIND TREATMENT PERIOD 23
TABLE 4. IDENTITY OF INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCTS 23
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. STUDY M16-824 SCHEMATIC 10
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY-SPECIFIC ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS 32
Page 3 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 36
APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIGNATORIES 37
APPENDIX D. STUDY ACTIVITIES SCHEDULE 38
APPENDIX E. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES 44
APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL 45
Page 4 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2 INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Why Is This Study Being Conducted
Uterine fibroids (leiomyomata) are the most common benign tumors in women and occur in up to 80% 
of women of reproductive age.1  The incidence increases with age, and uterine fibroids are the most 
common reason for hysterectomy in the United States (US).1,2  Uterine fibroids may develop in African-
American women on average 10 years earlier than in white women.3  The overall cost of symptomatic 
uterine fibroids exceeds $2 billion per year in the US.4
The growth of uterine fibroids is highly dependent on both estrogen and progesterone.5
Although often asymptomatic, fibroids may cause symptoms severe enough to warrant therapy in 20% to 50% of women.
3  The most common symptom and the most common reason for hysterectomy in 
women with uterine fibroids is heavy or prolonged menstrual bleeding.  Non-bleeding symptoms, such as pelvic pain, are also a common reason for hysterectomy.
While there are numerous surgical options available to manage heavy bleeding or other symptoms due 
to uterine fibroids, until recently there was no Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved long-term medical treatment for symptomatic uterine fibroids.
Elagolix sodium (hereinafter "elagolix," also referred to as ABT-620) is a novel, oral, short-acting, 
nonpeptide, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist that competitively inhibits the GnRH receptors in the pituitary gland.  Elagolix, unlike injectable GnRH analogs, produces a dose-dependent suppression of pituitary and ovarian hormone levels in women, i.e., from partial ovarian suppression at lower doses to nearly full suppression at higher doses.  To support long-term therapy with elagolix at higher doses, hormonal add-back therapy would be required to mitigate changes in bone mineral density (BMD) and minimize other hypoestrogenic adverse effects of estradiol (E2) suppression (e.g., hot flush).  A detailed discussion of the preclinical toxicology, metabolism, pharmacology, and pharmacokinetics (PK) of elagolix in humans and a summary of clinical studies can be found in the Investigator's Brochure.
6
This study is being conducted to provide an option of elagolix 150 mg once daily (QD) for premenopausal women with HMB associated with uterine fibroids who are not suitable for or prefer not to use hormonal add-back therapy and/or desire an option of once a day dosing.
Clinical Hypothesis
Elagolix 150 mg QD will be effective in reducing HMB compared to placebo in premenopausal women with uterine fibroids.
2.2 Benefits and Risks to Subjects
Elagolix (Oriahnn®) capsules 300 mg with 1.0 mg E2 and 0.5 mg Norethindrone acetate (NETA) has been approved by the US FDA on 29 May 2020 for the management of HMB associated with uterine fibroids.  
Page 7 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Completed Phase 2 studies and preliminary results from the Phase 3 studies of elagolix for the 
management of HMB associated with uterine fibroids show reduction in HMB in women with uterine 
fibroids compared with placebo.  The overall safety profile from Phase 2 showed elagolix is well 
tolerated.  Safety results for the Phase 3 studies in uterine fibroids are consistent with the Phase 2 safety results.  Elagolix 150 mg is approved for the management of moderate to severe pain associated with endometriosis.
7  Thus, the benefit/risk profile for the study is favorable.
For further details, please see findings from completed studies, including safety data in the elagolix Investigator's Brochure.
6
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
3.1 Objectives
To assess the safety and efficacy of elagolix 150 mg QD compared to placebo in reducing HMB associated with uterine fibroids in premenopausal women.  The primary hypothesis is that elagolix 150 mg QD, compared to placebo, reduces HMB associated with uterine fibroids in premenopausal women.   
3.2 Primary Endpoint
The primary endpoint will be the proportion of subjects meeting the following conditions:
!Menstrual blood loss (MBL) volume < 80 mL at the Final Month (the last 28 days of treatment), 
and
!≥50% reduction in MBL volume from Baseline to the Final Month (the last 28 days of 
treatment).
3.3 Additional Endpoints
!Proportion of subjects with suppression of bleeding at the Final Month and each month during 
the Treatment Period
!Proportion of subjects with amenorrhea at the Final Month and each month during the Treatment Period
!Change and percent change from Baseline in MBL volume at the Final Month and each month during the Treatment Period
!Change and percent change from Baseline in hemoglobin concentration at each month during the Treatment Period 
!Patient Global Impression of Change – Menstrual Bleeding (PGIC-MB) at each month during the Treatment Period
!Change from Baseline in Uterine Fibroid Symptoms Quality of Life (UFS-QoL) at each scheduled assessment
Page 8 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.4 Safety Endpoints
The safety endpoints will be based on the following evaluations: physical examinations, vital signs
measurements, electrocardiogram (ECG) variables, clinical laboratory testing (including hematology, chemistry, urinalysis, and lipid panel), and adverse event (AE) monitoring.
3.5 Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Endpoints
Pharmacokinetic Endpoints
Exposures of elagolix will be summarized, and elagolix concentrations may be combined with other studies and used to develop a population PK model.  Additional parameters may be calculated if useful for the interpretation of the data.
Pharmacodynamic Endpoint
Serum E2 concentrations will be determined at designated visits throughout the study and summarized.  Additional pharmacodynamic parameters may be calculated if useful in the interpretation of the data.  Estradiol data may be combined with data from other studies and used for exposure-response analysis.
3.6 Biomarker Research Samples
Optional samples (whole blood, serum, and plasma) will be collected at specified time points ( Appendix 
D) throughout the study to evaluate known and/or novel disease-related or drug-related biomarkers.  
Types of biomarkers may include nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and/or metabolites. The objective of research is to analyze samples for biomarkers that will help in the understanding of uterine fibroids, related conditions, response to treatment with elagolix (or similar compounds), and changes in BMD.  Research may also include changes in epigenetics, gene expression, and proteomics that may be associated with uterine fibroids, related conditions, or the subject's response to treatment.  This research is exploratory in nature and the results may not be included with the clinical study report.  Biomarker samples will be collected only from subjects who consent to the optional exploratory analyses, unless precluded by local regulations or restrictions.
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan
This is a Phase 4, randomized, double-blind, 6-month placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multicenter study.  Premenopausal women 18 to 51 years of age with uterine fibroids and HMB, as evidenced by MBL > 80 mL during 1 menses in Screening as measured by the alkaline hematin method, will be selected for this study.  See Section 5.1for information regarding eligibility criteria.
Once eligibility is established during the Screening Period, eligible subjects will be randomly assigned in the double-blind period at the baseline visit to receive either elagolix 150 mg QD or placebo in a 2:1 ratio for 6 months.  Following the double-blind Treatment Period, there will be a 1 month Post-
Page 9 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Treatment Follow-Up (PTFU) Period.  The study will be conducted in approximately 45 sites in the US 
(including Puerto Rico).
Total study duration can be up to 9 months (Screening Period of approximately 1.5 to 2.5 months prior 
to Study Day 1 [Baseline]).  The study consists of the following 4 study periods:
!Washout Period:  up to 10 months prior to Screening (only applicable if subject is taking exclusionary medication at the time of consent); duration is based on the excluded medication(Table 1 ).
!Screening Period:  approximately 1.5 to 2.5 months prior to Study Day 1 (Baseline).  Screening-related procedures to assess for eligibility must be conducted within first 1.5- to 2.5-monthduration.  However, in the event the cycle or product collection is not complete within 2.5 months during the Screening Period, the Screening Period may be extended with prior approval from AbbVie therapeutic area medical director (TA MD) and would result in a longer duration of participation for the subject than outlined.
!Treatment Period:  duration of 6 months (double-blind).  For all subjects who meet eligibility criteria during the Screening Period, each subsequent visit during the Treatment Period should be scheduled based on the date of the Day 1 (randomization) visit.
!PTFU Period:  One month following the last dose of study drug.  All subjects are expected to enter the 1-month PTFU after completing Treatment Month 6 or once a subject prematurely discontinues from the treatment period.  
The schematic of the study is shown in Figure 1 .  Further details regarding study procedures are located 
in Appendix F , Operations Manual.
Figure 1. Study M16-824 Schematic
M = month; QD = once daily; PTFU = Post-Treatment Follow-up; SPCV = Screening Product Collection Visit
* The Screening Period may be extended in certain circumstances (e.g., heavy menstrual bleeding < 80 mL) by obtaining 
sponsor approval.
Page 10 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Rescreening
Subjects who screen fail for this study (Study M16-824) may be rescreened with the TA MD's approval.  
The TA MD will determine which procedures need to be repeated if the subject was a screen failure for 
this study.  The subject must re-consent and meet all eligibility criteria at the time of re-screening to 
qualify for the study.
Choice of Control Group
The control group consists of subjects randomly assigned to receive placebo.  
Appropriateness of Measurements
Standard statistical, clinical, and laboratory procedures will be utilized in this study.  All clinical and laboratory procedures in this study are standard and generally accepted.
For efficacy assessments, validated questionnaires will be used to query study subjects about symptoms 
that occur commonly in patients with uterine fibroids or how uterine fibroids affects daily tasks and activities.
Suitability of Subject Population
Premenopausal women 18 to 51 years of age with uterine fibroids who have HMB (> 80 mL during 1menses in Screening) are selected for this study.  The lower age limit (18 years) was chosen based on the relative paucity of adolescent females with symptomatic uterine fibroids before 18 years of age; the upper age limit (51 years) is included to reduce the risk of subjects becoming menopausal during the study.  No studies in females outside of the reproductive years are necessary for this proposed indication.
Selection of Doses in the Study
The dose of elagolix 150 mg QD was selected to provide optimum efficacy while maintaining an acceptable safety profile in women with HMB and uterine fibroids not suitable for or prefer not to receive hormonal add-back therapy and/or desire an option of once a day dosing for HMB with uterine fibroids.
Based on preliminary integrated PK exposure-response analysis for efficacy from Phase 2 studies in 
women with HMB and uterine fibroids  
, elagolix 150 mg QD is predicted to provide clinically meaningful efficacy in reduction of 
HMB.  Elagolix has been evaluated extensively in women with HMB and uterine fibroids in Phase 2 studies.  No safety signals were observed in Phase 2a and 2b studies, and safety results from Phase 2 
and Phase 3 studies show that elagolix is generally well tolerated.  Refer to the elagolix Investigator's 
Brochure for further details.
Page 11 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5 STUDY ACTIVITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria in order to be included in the study.  Anything other than 
a positive response to the questions below will result in exclusion from study participation.
Consent
1. Subject has voluntarily signed and dated the informed consent form (ICF), approved by an 
institutional review board (IRB)/independent ethics committee (IEC), prior to washout (if 
applicable) or initiation of any screening or study-specific procedures.
2.Table 1 Subject agrees to the washout intervals for hormonal therapies, including any other 
medication that may require washout ( Table 1 ).
3. Subject is not taking exclusionary therapies ( Table 2 ) within the specified washout interval 
prior to the initiation of any screening procedures.
4. Subject must be willing to comply with study-related assessments and procedures and in the judgment the investigator is a suitable candidate for the study.
5. Subject must agree to the use of at least 2 forms of non-hormonal contraception (dual contraception) consistently throughout Washout (if applicable), Screening, Treatment, and PTFU Periods.  
6. Subject should agree to not participating in other investigational trials (drug or device) throughout the study.
Demographics
7. Subject is a premenopausal female, 18 to 51 years of age at the time of Screening.
8. Criterion has been removed.
9. Uterine fibroids documented by a pelvic ultrasound (transabdominal ultrasound [TAU], transvaginal ultrasound [TVU]) assessed by a central reader and verification that a uterine fibroid meets at least one of the following criteria:
!Intramural, submucosal non-pedunculated fibroid with a diameter ≥ 2 cm (longest diameter)
!Subserosal fibroid ≥ 4 cm (longest diameter)
!Multiple fibroids with a total uterine volume of ≥ 200 cm
3to ≤ 2,500 cm3
10. HMB associated with uterine fibroids as evidenced by MBL > 80 mL during 1 menses in 
Screening as measured by the alkaline hematin method.
Laboratory Assessments and Other Tests
11. Laboratory values must meet the following criteria at Screening (unless otherwise specified):
Page 12 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!Hemoglobin ≥ 7 g/dL (subjects with initial screening hemoglobin results < 7 g/dL can be 
prescribed iron supplements and have their hemoglobin levels retested prior to Day 1).
!Serum creatinine ≤ 2.0 mg/dL at Screening.
!Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine transaminase (ALT) < 3 × times the upper limit 
of the reference range and bilirubin < 2 times the upper limit of the reference range (unless known diagnosis of Gilbert's disease).
!Screening follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level of < 35 mIU/mL (35 IU/L).
!Negative urine and/or serum pregnancy test(s) during the Washout (if applicable) and/or Screening Periods, and a negative urine pregnancy test immediately before administration of the first dose of study drug.
12. Subjects must not have hepatitis B nor C based on the presence of the following:
!Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)
!Hepatitis C virus antibody (HCV Ab) with reactive ribonucleic acid (RNA) test
13. No clinically significant abnormalities in clinical chemistry, hematology, or urinalysis 
(excluding findings associated with the disease under study such as low hemoglobin or low hematocrit).  Clinically significant laboratory abnormalities may be retested once prior to Day 1.  For further retesting, contact the TA MD.
14. An adequate endometrial biopsy performed during screening or final report of endometrial biopsy done within 3 months prior to Screening available for Principal Investigator (PI) review showing no clinically significant endometrial pathology at Screening.
15. Subject ≥ 21 years of age at Screening (or age at which Papanicolaou [Pap] smears are 
routinely performed according to local or country guidelines) has a Pap smear result that meets eligibility criteria as indicated in Operations Manual Figure 1, Pap Test Eligibility (Operations Manual [ Appendix F ]) during Screening or within 3 months prior to Screening.
16. Subject ≥40 years of age at the time of informed consent has a normal mammogram (Breast 
Imaging Reporting and Data System [BI-RADS] Classification 1 to 3 or equivalent) during Screening or within 3 months prior to Screening.
17. No clinically significant abnormal ECGs during Screening.
Subject History
18. Menstrual cycles with interval of 24 to 38 days in length for the 3 consecutive months prior to Screening.
19. Must not have clinically significant gynecological finding from screening ultrasound or saline infusion sonohysterography (SIS) or MRI (if SIS is unevaluable), including:
!Persistent simple ovarian cyst > 5 cm in longest diameter (If the pelvic ultrasound shows a 
simple ovarian cyst > 5 cm and ≤ 7 cm, an ultrasound of the ovaries may be repeated in 
approximately 4 to 6 weeks; however, the results must be evaluated prior to Day 1 and meet eligibility criteria.)
!Complex ovarian cyst > 3.5 cm in diameter at longest point
Page 13 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!An endometrioma > 3.5 cm in diameter (longest diameter)
!Large endometrial polyp ( ≥ 1 cm)
!Intracavitary submucosal pedunculated fibroid
20. Must not have a myomectomy, uterine artery embolization, or high-intensity focused 
ultrasound (HIFU) within 6 months prior to Screening or an endometrial ablation within 6 months prior to Screening.
21. Must not have active pelvic inflammatory disease.
22. Must be > 6 months post-partum, post-abortion, post-pregnancy, and post lactation at the time of entry into the Screening Period.
23. Must not be pregnant or breastfeeding or planning a pregnancy until completion of the study.
24. No diagnoses or history of:
!Hereditary blood coagulation disorder (e.g., Von Willebrand disease, Factor V Leiden).
!History of surgery-related severe bleeding or severe and prolonged bleeding associated with 
dental work.
!Two separate events of blood transfusions within 9 months prior to Screening (with exception of transfusions associated with low hemoglobin or low hematocrit due to uterine fibroids) or blood transfusions within 60 days prior to Day 1.
!Active malignancy or history of malignancy (except basal cell carcinoma of the skin) with or without systemic chemotherapy.
!Documented history of a severe, life-threatening, or other significant sensitivity to any drug.
25. No osteoporosis, osteopenia, orother metabolic bone disease, including:
!Intercurrent bone disease (e.g., osteomalacia, osteogenesis imperfecta).
!History or presence of a condition associated with a decrease in BMD (e.g., uncontrolled hyperthyroidism, uncontrolled hyperparathyroidism, anorexia nervosa) or requires chronic treatment with systemic corticosteroids.
!History of low-trauma bone fractures (e.g., fracture resulting from a fall from a standing height or lower).
!Bilateral hip replacement.
!Clinically significant hypocalcemia, hypo- or hyperphosphatemia.
!Treatment with medication (excluding calcium and vitamin D) for bone disease associated with a decrease in BMD.
26. No history of:
!A newly diagnosed, clinically significant medical condition requiring therapeutic intervention 
(e.g., new onset hypertension) that has not been stabilized prior to Day 1.
!A clinically significant medical condition anticipated to require intervention during the course of the study participation (e.g., anticipated major elective surgery).
Page 14 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!An unstable medical condition making the subject an unsuitable candidate for the study in 
the opinion of the investigator.
!Any suicide attempts "ever" or subject answers "yes" to questions 4 or 5 on the suicidal ideation portion (referring to within the last year) of the Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS) when administered during Screening or prior to dosing on Study Day 1.
!Drug abuse and/or alcohol abuse within 12 months prior to Screening.
!Major depression or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) episode within 2 years prior to Screening.
!Other major psychiatric disorders at any time (e.g., schizophrenia, bipolar disorder).
27. No surgical history of:
!Hysterectomy (with or without oophorectomy)
!Bilateral oophorectomy
!Bariatric surgical procedures of any type within 6 months prior to Screening
28. Must not be using:
!Medications as identified in Table 1 Table 2
!Copper intrauterine device (CU-IUD)
!For a subject using a contraceptive sub-dermal implant or CU-IUD:!The contraceptive sub-dermal implant must be removed, and subject must 
complete the Washout per Table 1 and subsequently have 1 menses after 
completion of Washout.
!The CU-IUD must be removed and subsequently have 1 menses after completion of Washout.
!Levonorgestrel intra-uterine system (LNG-IUS) is allowed.  If a subject has LNG-IUS in place, the LNG-IUS must be in place for 6 months or longer before the subject will 
be screened, and the LNG-IUS should remain throughout the Treatment Period and 
the PTFU Month 1 visit.  If a subject does not have LNG-IUS in place at the beginning of Screening period or Washout Period (if applicable), therapy with LNG-IUS cannot be started until the subject has completed the Treatment Period and the PTFU Month 1 visit.
!Systemic corticosteroids for > 14 days within 3 months prior to Screening or is likely to require use of systemic corticosteroids for > 7 days yearly during study participation.
!Over-the-counter and prescription topical, inhaled, intranasal, or intra-articular 
injectable (for occasional use) corticosteroids are allowed.
29. Regarding other study participation, subjects must not be:
!Currently participating in another investigational study (drug or device)
!Participating in an investigational drug study (i.e., receiving or has received investigational 
product) within 1 month or 5 times the investigational drug half-life, whichever is longer, prior to screening procedures.
Page 15 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!If a subject has participated in an investigational trial with hormonal treatment, the 
washout interval specified in Table 1 applies.
!Previously enrolled in either an elagolix study or a study involving another investigational oral GnRH antagonist within 3 months from last dose of study drug to Screening in Study M16-824.  May not re-enroll in this study after receiving at least 1 dose of study drug.
Table 1. Washout Intervals for Exclusionary Hormonal/Anti-Hormonal Therapy
TherapyaMinimum 
Interval for 
WashoutNumber of Mensesb
Required AFTER 
Completion of Washout 
Period (Prior to Initial 
Screening Visit)
Medroxyprogesterone acetate injection (Depo-Provera®; Sayana®) 10 months 
from injection2 menses
GnRH antagonist and agonist (exception Synarel nasal spray and 
1-month depot is 1 month)
Selective progesterone receptor modulators (e.g., ulipristal 
acetate, vilaprisan) 3 months
1m e n s e sDanazol (Cyclomen®)
Aromatase inhibitors
Oral contraceptivesc
1 monthOral, transdermal, or intravaginal estrogen preparations
Synarel® Nasal Spray
GnRH agonist – 1 month depot (e.g., Lupron Depot 3.75 mg)
Hormonal and, sub-dermal progestin implant (e.g., Nexplanon®)
1 month after 
removalNuvaRing®Progesterone-containing intrauterine system (if subject chooses to 
remove within 1 month of Screening)
Antifibrinolytics 2 weeks
GnRH = gonadotropin-releasing hormone; TA MD = therapeutic area MD
a. If less than a full course of therapy is administered, the investigator should contact the AbbVie TA MD to discuss and 
confirm the required washout interval.
b. Subjects must complete the mandatory month of washout and subsequently have a menses.  Bleeding due to withdrawal 
of the hormonal therapy cannot be considered the required menses.
c. Levonorgestrel 1.5 mg or ulipristal acetate 30 mg will be used for emergency contraception.
Page 16 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.2 Contraception Recommendations
Subject must agree to the use of at least 2 forms of nonhormonal contraception (dual contraception) 
consistently throughout the Washout (if applicable), Screening, and Treatment Periods and through the end of PTFU Period.  Subjects may begin taking hormonal contraception after completing the PTFU Month 1 Visit and having returned to first full menses in the PTFU Period.
Acceptable methods of dual nonhormonal contraception include:
!Condom with spermicide (foam, gel, or polymer film)
!Diaphragm with spermicide (condom may or may not be used)
!Cervical cap with spermicide (condom may or may not be used)
Subject is not required to use dual contraception methods if:
!Sexual partner(s) is vasectomized at least 6 months prior to Screening.
!Subject has an LNG-IUS in place at least 6 months prior to the Screening visit and remains in 
place throughout the Treatment Period and PTFU Month 1 visit.
!Subject practices total abstinence from sexual intercourse, as the preferred lifestyle of the subject; periodic abstinence is not acceptable and requires dual nonhormonal contraception.
!Subject had a bilateral tubal ligation or bilateral tubal occlusion ≥4 months prior to Screening.
!Subject is not sexually active with men; however, periodic sexual relationship(s) with men requires the use of study-defined dual nonhormonal contraception.
5.3 Prohibited Medications and Therapy
The medications listed in Table 2 should not be taken during the Washout (if applicable), Screening, 
Treatment, and PTFU Periods (if applicable).
Due to the extensive list of herbal remedies and supplements, please contact the AbbVie TA MD for any 
that may be prohibited.  Generally-speaking, any supplements or herbal remedies used to treat premenstrual or gynecological problems, such as black cohosh, are excluded.
If a prohibited medication is used to treat an AE or a pre-existing condition other than uterine fibroids to 
prevent immediate hazard during treatment period, details must be recorded in source documents and the electronic case report form (eCRF).
Page 17 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Information regarding potential drug interactions with elagolix can be located in the elagolix 
Investigator's Brochure.
Prior Hormonal/Anti-Hormonal Medications
Subjects using hormonal contraception or other hormonal/anti-hormonal therapies may be considered for study participation provided they complete the required washout.  Subjects must have at least 1 menses after completion of Washout before entering into the Screening Period.  Subjects entering Washout will be required to undergo study-specific procedures, as outlined in Appendix D , Study 
Activities.
The minimum washout intervals for hormonal medications prior to Screening are described in Table 1 .  If 
the type of hormonal product and the length of Washout Period are not listed in Table 1 , a washout 
duration of 5 half-lives is recommended, or consult the AbbVie TA MD.
Iron Supplementation
Excessive blood loss from heavy menses may result in iron deficiency anemia.  Anemia is defined by the 
World Health Organization (WHO) as a hemoglobin (Hgb) concentration < 12 g/dL (120 g/L) for nonpregnant women, 15 years of age and above, at sea level.
8  Subjects entering the study with anemia 
or who develop anemia during the study, if not already taking iron supplements, should be prescribed iron supplementation by the investigator as per standard of care.  If the Investigator does not prescribe iron supplements for subjects with a Hgb < 12g/dL, the reason should be documented in source documents.
During Screening, all subjects with an Hgb level < 7 g/dL will be retested after receiving iron 
supplements; these subjects will only be eligible to randomize if their Hgb results meet eligibility prior to Day 1 (randomization) and they have not required a blood transfusion within 60 days prior to Day 1.  All iron supplements taken during the study, from Screening through the Final Visit, must be recorded on the concomitant medications eCRF.
Concomitant Use of Corticosteroids and Other Medications
Chronic use (> 14 days) of systemic corticosteroids within 3 months prior to Screening through PTFU period is prohibited.  Short-term use (no longer than 1 week [total of 7 days] per occurrence) of systemic glucocorticoids/corticosteroids to manage acute conditions is allowed during the Treatment Period.  A maximum of 14 days over the 6-month Treatment Period is allowed during a subject's participation.  Inhaled corticosteroids for the treatment of asthma are permitted.  Over-the-counter and prescription topical, inhaled, intranasal, or intra-articular injectable (for occasional use) corticosteroids are allowed.
5.5 Withdrawal of Subjects and Discontinuation of Study
The investigator may discontinue a subject from the study at any time if the investigator considers it necessary for any reason, including the occurrence of an AE or noncompliance with the protocol.  Subjects who withdraw from the study will not be replaced unless the investigator and AbbVie mutually agree in writing.  Subjects may voluntarily withdraw or will be withdrawn from study drug treatment and/or the study at any time for reasons including, but not limited to, the following:
!The subject decides to withdraw consent for any reason.
Page 20 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!The investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject.
!Clinically significant deterioration of the subject's medical status as determined by the 
investigator.
!The subject requires surgical intervention for treatment of uterine fibroids and menstrual bleeding or other procedures including hysterectomy, myomectomy, uterine artery embolization, high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU), endometrial ablation, dilation and curettage (D&C), etc. during the Treatment Period.  In the post treatment period, these procedures do not warrant withdrawal if performed during the PTFU Period unless a hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) is performed and the subject does not plan to use hormone replacement therapy within 1 month of the surgery date.
!The subject becomes pregnant or has a positive serum pregnancy test.
!The subject has ALT or AST elevation ≥ 5 × upper limit of normal (ULN), confirmed upon repeat 
testing during the Treatment Period.
!The subject develops clinically significant gynecological findings or condition that in the 
investigator's or AbbVie TA MD's opinion would preclude the subject from continuing in the Treatment Period due to safety reasons.
!If subject experiences a nontraumatic bone fracture during Treatment Period. 
!In the investigator's opinion, the subject is unable or unwilling to comply with study-related assessments and procedures.
!Any other medical reason that AbbVie or the investigator deems appropriate.
For subjects to be considered lost to follow-up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain information on the subject's final status.  At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made and 1 certified letter must be sent and documented in the subject's source documentation.
Treatment Interruption
AbbVie or the investigator may request that a subject temporarily discontinue study drug administration, which will be referred to as a "treatment interruption."  The following are examples for reasons of treatment interruption (not all inclusive):
!AE that, based on clinical judgment, requires temporary suspension of treatment or prevents a subject from taking study drug
!Malfunction of barrier contraception or unprotected intercourse
!After a positive urine pregnancy test, while waiting for results of the serum test
!Clinical laboratory findings that require repeating or confirmation of a clinically significant value (e.g., may necessitate discontinuation from the study).
!Subject forgets to take study drug, lost study drug, etc.
Page 21 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.If the subject has missed 10 or more consecutive days of study drug dosing, the AbbVie TA MD must be 
consulted to determine whether the subject may resume study drug administration or continue in the Treatment Period.
In the event a subject withdraws consent from the clinical study, biomarker research will continue 
unless the subject explicitly requests analysis to be stopped.  When AbbVie is informed that samples are 
withdrawn from research, samples will not be analyzed, no new biomarker analysis data will be 
collected, and the samples will be destroyed.  A subject may withdraw consent for optional biomarker research at any time and remain in the clinical study.  Data generated from clinical study and/or optional biomarker research, before subject withdrawal of consent, will remain part of the study results.
Study Discontinuation
AbbVie may terminate this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site. The investigator may also stop the study at his/her site if he/she has safety concerns.  If AbbVie terminates the study for safety reasons, AbbVie will promptly notify the investigator.
5.6 Follow-Up for Subject Withdrawal from Study
To minimize missing data for efficacy and safety assessments, subjects who prematurely discontinue study drug treatment should complete the procedures outlined for the Premature Discontinuation visit (PD visit) as soon as possible, preferably within 2 to 7 days of study drug discontinuation.
Subjects should be advised on the continued scientific importance of their PTFU data even if they 
discontinue treatment with study drug early.  All subjects should have an onsite PTFU visit 30 days after study drug discontinuation to ensure all treatment-emergent AEs/serious adverse events (SAE) have been resolved.
All subjects who prematurely discontinue will enter the 1-month PTFU Period unless the subject decides 
to discontinue the study participation entirely (withdrawal of informed consent).
All attempts must be made to determine the date of the last study drug dose and the primary reason for 
discontinuation of study drug and/or study participation.  The information will be recorded on the appropriate eCRF page.  However, these procedures should not interfere with the initiation of any new treatments or therapeutic modalities that the investigator considers necessary to treat the subject's 
condition.  Following discontinuation of study drug, the subject will be treated in accordance with the 
investigator's best clinical judgment, irrespective of whether or not the subject decides to continue participation in the study.
5.7 Study Drug
Eligible subjects will be randomly assigned to receive elagolix 150 mg QD or placebo for the 6-month double-blind Treatment Period.  The treatment administration is presented in Table 3 .
Page 22 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 3. Treatments Administered During the Double-Blind Treatment Period
Treatment Group Dosing Time Elagolix TabletMatching Elagolix 
Placebo Tablet
Elagolix 150 mg QD AM 1 0
Placebo AM 0 1
QD = once daily
Double-Blind Treatment Period
The study drug, consisting of elagolix 150 mg film-coated tablets, or matching placebo film-coated 
tablets, will be supplied in a carton with 5 blister cards.  Subjects will be instructed to self-administer their study drug throughout the 6-month double-blind Treatment Period.  The first dose of study drug will be administered at the site.
Identity of Investigational Product
Information about the drug formulations to be used in this study is presented in Table 4 .
Table 4. Identity of Investigational Products
Investigational Product Active Investigational Product Placebo
Investigational product name Elagolix 150 mg Matching Elagolix 150 mg placebo
Active ingredient Elagolix None
Mode/Route of administration Oral Oral
Formulation RC2 RC2
Dosage form Film-coated tablet Film-coated tablet
Dose and units 150 mg tablet N/A
Frequency of administration QD QD
Storage conditions 15° to 25°C 15° to 25°C
N/A = not applicable; QD = once daily; RC2 = roller compaction
Compliance
During the Treatment Period visits or PD visit, the subject will be asked to confirm whether doses were taken and to provide the dates and approximate times of the last 4 scheduled doses prior to the study visit (Month 3 and Month 6).  The subject-reported data will be recorded in source and in the eCRF.
5.8 Randomization/Drug Assignment
All subjects will be randomly assigned to receive either elagolix 150 mg QD or placebo centrally using an interactive response technology (IRT).  Before the study is initiated, contact information and user 
Page 23 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.guidelines for IRT will be provided to each site. Study drug will be dispensed at the study visits outlined 
in Appendix D .
As subjects enter into either the Washout Period or the Screening Period, a unique subject number will be assigned to each subject by the IRT.  This unique subject number will be used for each subject throughout the study.
Once the subject's eligibility has been confirmed and prior to the Day 1 (randomization) dose, a unique 
randomization number will be provided via IRT.  Subjects will be randomly assigned by IRT to receive one of the treatment groups as outlined in Section 5.7upon entry into the Day 1 to Month 6 Treatment 
Period.
Study drug must not be dispensed unless the IRT is contacted.  Study drug may only be dispensed to 
subjects enrolled in the study according to kit numbers provided by the IRT.
The randomization schedule will be computer-generated by the statistics department at AbbVie, North 
Chicago, IL, prior to the start of the study.  A copy of all of the randomization schedules will be kept by the statistics department at AbbVie and a copy will be forwarded to the IRT provider.
Breaking Blind
AbbVie must be notified before the blind is broken unless identification of the study drug is required for medical emergency, i.e., situation in which the knowledge of the specific blinded treatment will affect the immediate management of the subject's conditions (e.g., antidote is available).  AbbVie must then be notified within 24 hours after the blind is broken.  The date and reason that the blind was broken must be recorded in the source documents and eCRF, as applicable.
5.9 Protocol Deviations
The investigator is responsible for complying with all protocol requirements, written instructions, and applicable laws regarding protocol deviations.  Protocol deviations are prohibited except when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects.  If a protocol deviation occurs (or is identified), the investigator is responsible for notifying IEC/IRB, regulatory authorities (as applicable), and AbbVie.
6 SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, or oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the physical characteristics, identity, quality, purity, potency, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness, or performance of a product/device.  Complaints associated with any component of this investigational product must be reported to AbbVie.
Page 24 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the biologic or drug component of the product or to the 
medical device component(s).
For a product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, device not working properly, or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product and/or device must be reported to AbbVie 
within 1 business day of the study site's knowledge of the event.  Product complaints occurring during the study will be followed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
Medical Complaints/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment.  An AE, therefore, can be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal 
(investigational) product, whether or not the event is considered causally related to the use of the 
product.  Laboratory abnormalities and changes in vital signs are considered to be AEs only if they result in discontinuation from the study, necessitate therapeutic medical intervention, and/or if the investigator considers them to be AEs.
The investigators will monitor each subject for clinical and laboratory evidence of AEs on a routine basis 
throughout the study.  All AEs will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion.
An elective surgery/procedure scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an AE if the 
surgery/procedure is being performed for a pre-existing condition and the surgery/procedure has been pre planned prior to study entry.  However, if the pre-existing condition deteriorates unexpectedly during the study (e.g., surgery performed earlier than planned), then the deterioration of the condition for which the elective surgery/procedure is being done will be considered an AE.
If an AE, whether associated with study drug or not, meets any of the following criteria, it is to be 
reported to AbbVie clinical pharmacovigilance as an SAE within 24 hours of the site being made aware of the SAE (refer to Section 4.3 of the Operations Manual ( Appendix F ), for reporting details and contact 
information):
Death of Subject An event that results in the death of a subject.
Life-Threatening An event that, in the opinion of the investigator, would have resulted in immediate fatality if medical intervention had not been taken.  This does not include an event that would have been fatal if it had occurred in a more severe form.
Hospitalization or Prolongation of HospitalizationAn event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length of time or prolongs the subject's hospital stay.  This does not include an emergency room visit or admission to an outpatient facility.
Page 25 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Congenital Anomaly An anomaly detected at or after birth, or any anomaly that results in 
fetal loss.
Persistent or Significant Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condition that substantially interferes with the activities of daily living of a study subject.  Disability is not intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, 
and accidental trauma (e.g., sprained ankle).
Important Medical Event 
Requiring Medical or Surgical 
Intervention to Prevent Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately life-
threatening or result in death or hospitalization, but based on 
medical judgment may jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outcomes listed above (i.e., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or significant disability/incapacity).  Additionally, any elective or spontaneous abortion or stillbirth is considered an important medical event.  Examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.
Serious adverse events and protocol-related nonserious AEs will be collected beginning when the subject signs the study-specific informed consent.  From the time of study drug administration until PTFU Month 1 visit, all AEs, adverse events of special interest (AESIs), and SAEs will be collected whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the subject.  
AbbVie will be responsible for suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions (SUSAR) reporting for 
the investigational medicinal product (IMP) in accordance with global and local requirements.
AEs will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may indicate a trend 
or risk to subjects.
Adverse Events of Special Interest
The following AESIs will be monitored during the study:
!Bone fractures
!Mood and depression-related events
!Hepatic transaminase elevations
During the study, AbbVie may require additional information on AEs, SAEs, and/or AESIs to be collected and recorded in the eCRF.
Page 26 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Study Drug
The investigator will use the following definitions to rate the severity of each AE:
Mild The AE is transient and easily tolerated by the subject.
Moderate The AE causes the subject discomfort and interrupts the subject's usual 
activities.
Severe The AE causes considerable interference with the subject's usual activities and may be incapacitating or life threatening.
The investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of the AE to the use of study drug:
Reasonable PossibilityAfter consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is sufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
No Reasonable PossibilityAfter consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is insufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
Pregnancy
While not an AE, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 1 working day of the sites being made aware of the pregnancy and study drug must be discontinued (Section 5.5).  A positive 
urine pregnancy test result must be confirmed with a quantitative serum pregnancy test.  If the subject 
has a positive serum pregnancy test during the Treatment Period, no additional study procedures will be 
conducted; however, an ultrasound examination will be performed (and read locally) as early as possible during the first trimester of pregnancy to assess the gestational age and document an intrauterine pregnancy.
Pregnancies identified during the Treatment Period, although not AEs, will be monitored for fetus, 
pregnancy, and infant outcomes.  The pregnancy outcome of an elective or spontaneous abortion, stillbirth or congenital anomaly is considered an SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours of the site's being made aware of the event.  For live infant births, information on the health of the infant will be collected from the first post-delivery pediatrician visit and at 6 to 12 months after delivery.
7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
There will be only 1 database lock and 1 analysis after all subjects complete or prematurely discontinue 
from the study.  The statistical methods provided in this protocol will be focused on primary efficacy 
analysis.  Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis will be described in the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).  
Page 27 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.2 Definition for Analysis Populations
The full analysis set (FAS) is composed of all randomized subjects who have received at least 1 dose of 
study drug in this study.  The data from the FAS will be presented by the treatment group assigned at the time of randomization, even if a subject does not receive the correct treatment or does not follow the protocol until completion.  The FAS will be used for all baseline and efficacy analyses.
The Safety Analysis Set includes all randomized subjects who received at least 1 dose of study drug.  The 
data from the safety analysis set will be presented by the treatment actually received regardless of which treatment group was assigned at the time of randomization.  If a subject takes more than 1 treatment, the subject will be analyzed in the safety analysis set as taking the treatment to which she is randomized.  All safety analyses will be performed based on Safety Analysis Set.
7.3 Statistical Analyses for Efficacy
Primary Efficacy Analysis
The primary efficacy analysis will be based on the FAS, and the primary endpoint will be the proportion of responders meeting the following conditions:
!MBL volume < 80 mL at the Final Month (the last 28 days of treatment)
!≥50% reduction in MBL volume from Baseline to Final Month (the last 28 days of treatment)
Subjects whose primary reason for prematurely discontinuing study drug is "lack of efficacy," or "requires surgery or invasive intervention for treatment of uterine fibroids" will be considered as non-responders.
The primary endpoint will be analyzed using a logistic regression model including treatment as the main 
effect and baseline MBL volume as a covariate.  Missing Final Month MBL volume will be imputed using multiple imputation.  For subjects who prematurely discontinue the Treatment Period prior to Month 6, 
the Final Month (the last 28 days prior to and including the last dose date) will be used in the primary 
analysis.
Additional Efficacy Analyses
Details on other efficacy analyses are provided in the SAP.
7.4 Statistical Analyses for Safety
Analysis of safety parameters will include the following:
!The number and percentage of subjects with AEs
!A summary of laboratory values
The full list of safety endpoints and corresponding analyses will be presented in the SAP.
Page 28 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.5 Statistical Analyses for Pharmacokinetics/Pharmacodynamics
Plasma concentrations of elagolix and serum concentrations of estradiol will be listed for each subject by 
visit day and dose regimen, as applicable.  Pharmacokinetic data may be combined with data from other studies in women and exposure-response analyses may be conducted as appropriate.  For example, if PK exposures are estimated, analyses may be conducted to assess the relationship between PK parameters 
or estradiol concentrations and efficacy and safety responses.  Additional analyses will be performed if 
useful and appropriate.
7.6 Overall Type I Error Control
No multiplicity adjustment is needed for this study as there is only 1 endpoint being analyzed and there is only 1 analysis of this endpoint.
7.7 Sample Size Determination 
Approximately 48 subjects will be randomly assigned (in a 2:1 ratio) to receive either elagolix 150 mg QD (N = 32) or placebo (N = 16).  The sample size will provide at least 80% power to detect a difference between the elagolix 150 mg QD group and the placebo group in the percentage of subjects meeting the primary endpoint on MBL at the Final Month of the placebo-controlled Treatment Period, with a final volume < 80 mL and an improvement of ≥ 50% from Baseline, assuming response rates of 10% for the 
placebo group and 55% for the elagolix 150 mg QD group with a 2-sided α = 0.05.  The above sample size 
was calculated using nQuery Advanced 8.1.
8 ETHICS
8.1 Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board 
(IEC/IRB)
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subject materials will be submitted to the IEC/IRB for review and approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the ICF must be obtained before any subject is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will require review and approval by the IEC/IRB before the changes are implemented to the study.  In addition, all changes to the consent form(s) will be IEC/IRB approved.
8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines, applicable regulations, and guidelines governing clinical study conduct and the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  Responsibilities of the investigator are specified in Appendix B .
Page 29 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.8.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical 
study identifiers or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie.
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data reported.  All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Clinical site monitoring is conducted to ensure that the rights and well-being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the currently approved protocol, ICH good clinical practice (GCP), and applicable local regulatory requirement(s).
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial is conducted with a quality management system that will define quality tolerance limits in order to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results.  Data will be generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable regulatory requirements.
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end of study is defined as the date of the last subject's last visit/last procedure.
12 REFERENCES
1. Baird DD, Dunson DB, Hill MC, et al.  High cumulative incidence of uterine leiomyoma in black 
and white women:  ultrasound evidence.  Am J Obstet Gynecol.  2003;188(1):100-7.
2. Stewart EA.  Uterine fibroids.  Lancet.  2001;357(9252):293-8.
3. Laughlin SK, Schroeder JC, Baird DD.  New directions in the epidemiology of uterine fibroids.  
Semin Reprod Med.  2010;28(3):204-17.
4. Rein MS, Barbieri RL, Friedman AJ.  Progesterone:  a critical role in the pathogenesis of uterine 
myomas.  Am J Obstet Gynecol.  1995;172 (1 Pt 1):14-8.
5. Buttram VC Jr, Reiter RC.  Uterine leiomyomata:  etiology, symptomatology, and management.  
Fertil Steril.  1981;36(4):433-45.
6. AbbVie.  Investigator's Brochure for Elagolix.7. ORILISSA™ (eligolix) Prescribing Information.  AbbVie Inc.  July 2018.
Page 30 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.8. WHO.  Haemoglobin concentrations for the diagnosis of anaemia and assessment of severity.  
Vitamin and Mineral Nutrition Information System.  Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011 
(WHO/NMH/NHD/MNM/11.1) (http://www.who.int/vmnis/indicators/haemoglobin.pdf, 
accessed [15 November 2018]).
Page 31 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A. STUDY-SPECIFIC ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
AE adverse event
AESI adverse event of special interest
AGC atypical glandular cells
ALT alanine aminotransferase
APSI active pharmaceutical ingredient
ASC-H atypical squamous cells cannot exclude high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion
ASC-US atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance
AST aspartate aminotransferase
ATEMS AbbVie Temperature Excursion Management System
BID twice daily
BI-RADS Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System
BMD bone mineral density
BSO bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
BUN blood urea nitrogen
CIN cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
COVID-19 Coronavirus disease 2019
C-SSRS Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale
CU-IUD copper intrauterine device
CYP3A cytochrome P450 3A
DB double-blind
D&C dilation and curettage
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
DTP direct-to-patient
DXA dual x-ray absorptiometry
E2 estradiol
ECC endocervical curettage
ECG electrocardiogram
eCRF electronic case report form
EC/TZ endocervical/transformational zone
FAS full analysis set
FDA Food and Drug Administration
Page 32 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.FDC fixed-dose capsule
FSH follicle-stimulating hormone
GCP good clinical practice
GnRH gonadotropin-releasing hormone
HBsAg hepatitis B surface antigen
hCG human chorionic gonadotropin
HCV Ab hepatitis C virus antibody
HDL-C high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
Hgb hemoglobin
HIFU high-intensity focused ultrasound
HMB heavy menstrual bleeding
HPV human papilloma virus
HSIL high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion 
ICF informed consent form
ICH International Council for Harmonisation
IEC independent ethics committee
IM intramuscular
IMP investigational medicinal product
IRB institutional review board
IRT interactive response technology
IU international unit
IUD intrauterine device
IV intravenous
K2EDTA potassium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
LDL-C low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
LNG-IUS levonorgestrel intrauterine system
LSIL low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion
Mm onth
MBL menstrual blood loss
MCH mean corpuscular hemoglobin
MCV mean cell volume
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
NETA norethindrone acetate
Page 33 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.NILM negative intraepithelial lesion or malignancy
OATP organic anion transporting polypeptide
Pap Papanicolaou 
PCV Product Collection Visit
PD premature discontinuation
PD visit Premature Discontinuation visit
PGE1 prostaglandin E1
PGIC-MB Patient Global Impression of Change – Menstrual Bleeding
PGIC-NBUFS Patient Global Impression of Change - Non-Bleeding Uterine Fibroids Symptoms
PI principal investigator
PK pharmacokinetic
PRO patient-reported outcome
PSQ Physician Surgery Questionnaire
PT post-treatment
PTFU Post-Treatment Follow-Up
PTSD post-traumatic stress disorder
QD once a day
RANKL receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (also known as tumor necrosis 
factor ligand)
RBC red blood cells
RNA ribonucleic acid
rPTH recombinant human parathyroid hormone
RSI Reference Safety Information
SAE serious adverse event
SAP statistical analysis plan
SIS saline infusion sonohysterography
SOC system organ class
SPCV Screening Product Collection Visit
SUSAR suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions
TA MD Therapeutic Area Medical Director
TAU transabdominal ultrasound
TEAEs treatment-emergent adverse events
TIBC total iron binding capacity
TSH thyroid-stimulating hormone
Page 34 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TVU transvaginal ultrasound
UBQ Uterine Bleeding Questionnaire
UFS-QoL Uterine Fibroid Symptoms Quality of Life Questionnaire
ULN upper limit of normal
UNSCH Unscheduled Visit
US United States
WBC white blood cells
WHO World Health Organization
WO Washout
Page 35 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M16-824:  A Phase 4 Study to Evaluate the Safety and Efficacy of Elagolix for the Management 
of Heavy Menstrual Bleeding Associated with Uterine Fibroids in Premenopausal Women
Protocol Date:  12 June 2020Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the International Council for Harmonisation 
(ICH) Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and local regulations and guidelines governing the study at the site location.  In signing the Investigator Agreement, the investigator is agreeing to the following:
1. Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and operations manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying AbbVie and the appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee (IEC), except when necessary to protect the subject from immediate harm.
2. Personally conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3. Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being used for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requirements relating to informed consent and 
ethics committees (e.g., IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4. Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investigation(s) to AbbVie.
5. Reading the information in the Investigator's Brochure/safety material provided, including the 
instructions for use and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6. Informing all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
7. Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all study-related documents until notification from AbbVie.
8. Maintaining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and all of its amendments.
9. Reporting promptly, all changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involving 
risks to human subjects or others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, institution director) and/or directly to the ethics committees and AbbVie.
10. Providing direct access to source data documents for study-related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed)
Page 36 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIGNATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Clinical Program Development
Medical Writing
Clinical Development
Clinical Development
Data and Statistical Sciences
Data and Statistical Sciences
Clinical Pharmacology
Page 37 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX D. STUDY ACTIVITIES SCHEDULE
The required study activities are shown in the following table.  Individual activities are described in 
detail in the Operations Manual ( Appendix F ).
Page 38 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Versions 
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 27 November 2018
Version 2.0 28 August 2019
Version 3.0 17 October 2019
Administrative Change 1 11 May 2020
The purpose of this version is to truncate assessments in a clinically appropriate manner, as this will now 
become an exploratory study to evaluate the effectiveness of the 150 mg elagolix alone dose to reduce 
HMB associated with uterine fibroids.  Other administrative revisions and minor clerical errors were 
corrected for consistency throughout the protocol in addition to the following:
!Removal of dual x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan from all timepoints in the study.  Monitoring of BMD in the study will not be included as part of protocol-specified procedures.   
Rationale: This study evaluates the low dose regimen of 150 mg QD for uterine fibroids 
administered for 6 months.  There is sufficient safety data for BMD at the 150 mg QD dose. 
!Removal of the Day 1 and Month 6 pelvic ultrasound (TAU and TVU).  
Rationale:   Pelvic ultrasound will only be used to determine eligibility.  Fibroid and uterine 
volume are no longer endpoints in the study.
!The PTFU Period was shortened from 12 months to 1 month.  Rationale:   An extended PTFU period is no longer necessary due to removal of DXA/BMD 
assessment. 
!Removal of secondary endpoints in the study Rationale:  Study changed to exploratory study.
!Reduction of sample size from 150 to 48Rationale:  Study changed to exploratory study.
!Additional directions for protocol modifications related to the Coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19) pandemic were added to Operations Manual Section 2.2, Section 3.7, Section 3.8, Section 3.11, Section 3.22, Section 3.24, and Section 6.1.  
Rationale:  T o describe alternative processes that may be needed because of the COVID-19 
pandemic.
Page 44 of 86
STUDY M16-824  |  Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL
Page 45 of 86
p. 2 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1C O N T A C T S
Sponsor/
Emergency Medical ContactClinical DevelopmentAbbVie Inc.
1 North Waukegan Road 
North Chicago, IL 60064Office:Mobile:Fax:
Email:
EMERGENCY 24 hour Number:  +1 (973) 784-6402
Safety Concerns Men's and Women's Health Safety 
TeamDept. R48S, Bldg. AP31-11 North Waukegan RoadNorth Chicago, IL 60064 Phone: +1 847 935-7577
Email: 
GPRD_SafetyManagement_Hormones@abbvie.com 
SAE Reporting outside of RAVEEmail: PPDINDPharmacovigilance@abbvie.com Fax: 1 847-938-0660
Protocol Deviations Clinical Development
AbbVie Inc.
1 North Waukegan Road 
North Chicago, IL 60064OR
AbbVie Inc.
1 North Waukegan Road
North Chicago, IL 60064Office:Mobile:Fax:Email:
Phone:
Email:
Certified Clinical 
LabCovance CLS
8211 SciCor Drive
Indianapolis, IN 46214Phone: +1 317-273-7872 Fax: +1 317-616-4572 
Pharmacokinetic (Bioanalytical) LabBioanalysis Dept. R46W, Bldg AP13A
Room 2326
AbbVie Inc.1 North Waukegan RoadNorth Chicago, IL 60064 Phone: +1 847-936-1382 Fax: +1 847-938-9898 
Biomarker Sample LabGenomic Technologies, Genomics 
Resource Center (GRC)
AbbVie Inc.
1 North Waukegan Road
North Chicago, IL 60064 Phone:Email:
Page 47 of 86
p. 3 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 CONTACTS 2
2 PROTOCOL ACTIVITIES BY VISIT 5
2.1 I NDIVIDUAL WASHOUT /SCREENING PERIOD VISIT ACTIVITIES 5
2.2 I NDIVIDUAL TREATMENT PERIOD VISIT ACTIVITIES 7
2.3 P OST-TREATMENT FOLLOW -UP VISIT ACTIVITIES 14
3 STUDY PROCEDURES 15
3.1 S UBJECT INFORMATION AND INFORMED CONSENT 15
3.2 E LIGIBILITY CRITERIA 16
3.3 M EDICAL HISTORY 16
3.4 G YNECOLOGICAL /OBSTETRICAL AND UTERINE FIBROID HISTORY 16
3.5 A DVERSE EVENT ASSESSMENT 17
3.6 P RIOR AND CONCOMITANT THERAPY 17
3.7 P ATIENT -REPORTED OUTCOMES AND RATING SCALES 17
3.8 C LINICAL LABORATORY TESTS 19
3.9 P HARMACOKINETIC AND PHARMACODYNAMIC SAMPLING 21
3.10 B IOMARKER RESEARCH SAMPLING 22
3.11 C ONTRACEPTION COUNSELING /DISPENSE CONTRACEPTIVES 22
3.12 H EIGHT AND WEIGHT 23
3.13 V ITAL SIGNS 24
3.14 P HYSICAL EXAMINATION 24
3.15 G YNECOLOGICAL (PELVIC AND BREAST )EXAMINATION 24
3.16 P AP TEST 24
3.17 E NDOMETRIAL BIOPSY 26
3.18 12-L EAD ELECTROCARDIOGRAM 26
3.19 M AMMOGRAM 27
3.20 C ENTRAL IMAGING PROCEDURES 27
3.21 C OLLECTION OF SANITARY PRODUCTS 29
3.22 R ETURN SANITARY PRODUCTS 29
3.23 R ANDOMIZATION /DRUG ASSIGNMENT 30
Page 48 of 86
p. 4 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.24 D ISPENSE STUDY DRUG 31
3.25 D RUG ACCOUNTABILITY 32
4 SAFETY MANUAL 32
4.1 M ETHODS AND TIMING OF SAFETY ASSESSMENT 32
4.2 R ECORDING DATA AND ANALYSES OF SAFETY FINDINGS 33
4.3 R EPORTING ADVERSE EVENTS AND INTERCURRENT ILLNESSES 33
4.4 P REGNANCY 34
5 COUNTRY-SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 35
5.1 SUSAR R EPORTING 35
6 STUDY DRUG 35
6.1 T REATMENTS ADMINISTERED 35
6.2 P ACKAGING AND LABELING 35
6.3 M ETHOD OF ASSIGNING SUBJECTS TO TREATMENT GROUPS 36
6.4 S ELECTION AND TIMING OF DOSE FOR EACH SUBJECT 37
7 REFERENCES 37
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. CLINICAL LABORATORY TESTS 20
TABLE 2 MENSTRUAL BLOOD LOSS VOLUME ELIGIBILITY 30
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. PAP TEST ELIGIBILITY 25
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. REASON FOR STUDY PARTICIPATION 38
APPENDIX B. PHYSICIAN SURGERY QUESTIONNAIRE (PSQ) 39
Page 49 of 86
p. 16 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.signatories according to local requirements.  A copy of the signed informed consent will be given to the 
subject and the original will be placed in the subject's medical record.  An entry must also be made in 
the subject's dated source documents to confirm that informed consent was obtained prior to any 
study-related procedures and that the subject received a signed copy.
Optional biomarker research samples will only be collected if the subject has voluntarily signed and 
dated a written consent form describing the exploratory research.  The written consent may be part of 
the main consent form.  If the subject does not consent to providing optional samples, the subject will still be allowed to participate in the study.
Information regarding benefits for subjects and information regarding provisions for treating and/or 
compensating subjects who are harmed as a consequence of participation in the study can be found in the informed consent form.
3.2 Eligibility Criteria
Each investigator will employ their clinical judgment in conjunction with protocol-specified eligibility criteria to determine if a subject is eligible for the study.  If further clarification is required, questions should be directed to the AbbVie Therapeutic Area Medical Director (TA MD) listed in Section 1. 
3.3 Medical History
A complete medical history, including documentation of any clinically significant medical conditions and medications, history of tobacco and alcohol use, and drug abuse will be collected during the Washout Period (if applicable) or during the Screening Period for those subjects who do not require washout.  The medical history will be reviewed and should be updated if significant clinical findings are noted on Day 1 prior to dosing and will serve as the Baseline for clinical assessment.
3.4 Gynecological/Obstetrical and Uterine Fibroid History
A detailed gynecological/obstetrical and uterine fibroid history will be collected either during the Washout Period (if applicable) or during the Screening Period for those who do not require washout and will include the following:
!History of uterine fibroids, including year of diagnosis and uterine fibroid symptoms
!History of endometriosis, ovarian cysts, endometrial polyps, or other relevant gynecological conditions
!History of gynecological surgeries and gynecological diagnostic procedures
!History of bleeding, including average cycle length and average number of days with bleeding/cycle over the last 6 months and typical intensity of menstrual periods 
!History of irregular bleeding or prolonged bleeding
!Prior hormonal medications, including those taken for treatment of uterine fibroids or other gynecological conditions
Page 61 of 86
p. 17 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!Prior use of nonhormonal medications for the treatment of uterine fibroids and dates of use for 
6 months prior to either Washout (if applicable) or Screening
!History of sexually transmitted infections
!Obstetrical history
!Pregnancy history including:
!Total number of pregnancies
!Number of live births
!Number of abortions (including elective, therapeutic, and spontaneous abortions) 
!Delivery outcomes (specifically anomalies, including congenital malformations and 
chromosomal abnormalities)
The gynecological/obstetrical and uterine fibroid history will be reviewed and should be updated if needed prior to dosing on Day 1 (randomization) and will serve as the Baseline for clinical assessment.
3.5 Adverse Event Assessment
Please refer to Section 6 of the study protocol.
3.6 Prior and Concomitant Therapy
Prior and concomitant medications will be assessed at the time points specified in Section 2and as 
described in the protocol.
3.7 Patient-Reported Outcomes and Rating Scales
Prior to the start of the study, AbbVie and/or its designee will provide detailed instructions and training for study site staff administering these scales.  The objective of this training is to establish uniformity across sites in administration of these rating instruments.  The subjects and/or the investigator or site 
staff will complete the following questionnaires as appropriate at the time points indicated in Section 2; 
the questionnaires should be administered before any other study procedures are performed at that 
visit.  Subjects and site staff will be asked to record their responses electronically (which will then be entered into the electronic case report form (eCRF), as applicable).
In the event that a subject or study personnel cannot come to the site because of the COVID-19 
pandemic, patient-reported outcome entries may be administered by site staff over the phone and responses collected on paper (source) and transcribed into EDC or entered by site staff directly into an electronic system.  AbbVie should be notified.
Uterine Fibroid Symptoms Quality of Life (UFS-QoL) (4-Week Recall)
The UFS-QoL1is a disease-specific self-administered questionnaire used to measure health-related 
quality of life in women with symptomatic uterine fibroids.  At the times specified in Section 2, each 
Page 62 of 86
p. 18 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.subject will be asked to complete a modified (4-week recall) UFS-QoL Questionnaire to report fibroid-
related symptoms experienced during the previous 4 weeks.
Reason for Study Participation Questionnaire
In order to better understand the reason why a study participant has decided to enroll in this study, subjects will complete the single-question Reason for Study Participation Questionnaire at the Day 1 Visit ( Appendix A of the Operations Manual).
Physician Surgery Questionnaire (PSQ)
Each physician will be asked to complete the PSQ to evaluate the likelihood that the physician would consider surgery or a surgical procedure as one of the treatment options related to uterine fibroids for the subject ( Appendix B of the Operations Manual).  
Uterine Bleeding Questionnaire (UBQ)
Subjects who did not return a sanitary product collection keg (for alkaline hematin menstrual blood loss analysis) at applicable on-site visits (scheduled on-site visit, Product Collection Visit, Unscheduled, or the PD visit) during the study will be asked to indicate whether they had any uterine bleeding or spotting since their last study visit.  If the subject did not have uterine bleeding or spotting the site staff will indicate "No" on the UBQ.  If the subject did have bleeding or spotting, the subject will be asked the reason why they did not return sanitary product collection keg at the on-site visit.  This response will be 
recorded on the UBQ by the site staff.  Subjects who did not return the keg will be retrained on product 
collection.
Patient Global Impression of Change – Menstrual Bleeding (PGIC-MB)
Subjects will use the PGIC-MB to assess the change in their severity of menstrual bleeding (from very much improved to very much worse) since initiation of study drug.
Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS)
The C-SSRS2is a systematically administered instrument developed to track suicidal adverse events 
across a treatment study.  The instrument is designed to assess suicidal behavior and ideation and to track and assess all suicidal events, as well as the lethality of attempts.  Additional features assessed 
include frequency, duration, controllability, reason for ideation, and deterrents.  Site staff will 
administer the Screening/Baseline C-SSRS questionnaire in Screening and on Day 1.  During the Treatment Period, site staff will administer the C-SSRS Since Last Visit questionnaire at the time points specified in Section 2.2.  The C-SSRS administered at the Day 1 Visit will serve as the Baseline for clinical 
assessment.
During Screening or at the Day 1 visit, prior to randomization, any subject noted to have suicidal ideation 
with plan within the last year, either via answering "yes" to question 4 and/or question 5 to the suicidal ideation portion of the C-SSRS, or via clinical interview, is not eligible for randomization.  In addition, any subject noted to have history of any suicide attempts "ever" on C-SSRS or via clinical interview, is not eligible for randomization.  If the subject expresses suicidal ideation or suicidal behavior on the C-SSRS or via clinical interview at any time during the study, the investigator should take appropriate action to protect the subject (including possible discontinuation from the study and referral for appropriate psychiatric care) and then notify the AbbVie TA MD.  
Page 63 of 86
p. 19 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.8 Clinical Laboratory Tests
Laboratory samples will be assessed using a certified central laboratory selected for this study.  The 
central laboratory will provide instructions regarding the collection (including any fasting requirements), processing, and shipping of samples.  Blood draws should be performed after vital signs and 12-lead ECG recording are conducted at a visit.  
In the event that the central laboratory cannot be used to test samples because of the COVID-19 
pandemic, samples may be obtained at a local laboratory or by a home health care service. AbbVie should be notified.
All clinical laboratory samples will be shipped to the central laboratory, with the exception of the venous 
blood sample for alkaline hematin analysis, which will be sent to the alkaline hematin laboratory.  
All screening laboratory results must be reviewed prior to randomization, including any repeated test 
results.  Screening laboratory tests may be repeated one time prior to Day 1; however, results must satisfy entry criteria prior to randomization.  Subjects will not be randomized on Day 1 if screening laboratory results do not meet entry criteria or are assessed as clinically significant by the investigator.  The laboratory test results obtained prior to Day 1 will serve as the Baseline for clinical assessment.
The central laboratory will provide the laboratory results to the investigative site where they will be 
reviewed, signed, and dated by the investigator.  The investigator will receive sponsor-defined alerts from the central laboratory.  For any value outside of the reference range and/or sponsor-defined alerts, 
the investigator will review and indicate on the report if the result is clinically significant or not clinically 
significant.  The investigator will evaluate clinically significant laboratory values per standard of care, which may include repeating the test to verify the out-of-range value.  Clinically significant laboratory abnormalities after randomization may be documented as AEs if they require discontinuation or at the discretion of the investigator (see protocol).
Samples will be obtained for the laboratory tests listed in Table 1 at the time points specified in 
Section 2.
Page 64 of 86
p. 20 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 1. Clinical Laboratory Tests
Clinical Laboratory Tests
HematologyClinical Chemistry 
(After Minimum 8-Hour Fast)Lipid Panel
(After Minimum 8-Hour Fast)
Hematocrit
Hemoglobin
Red blood cell (RBC) countWhite blood cell (WBC) count
Neutrophils
Bands (if indicated)LymphocytesMonocytes
Basophils (if indicated)
Eosinophils (if indicated)Platelet count (estimate not acceptable)
Mean cell volume of RBC (MCV)
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin 
(MCH)
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin 
concentration (MCHC)Sodium
Potassium
ChlorideBicarbonate
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Serum creatinineGlucoseCalcium
Total protein
AlbuminTotal bilirubin Alanine aminotransferase 
Aspartate aminotransferase
Alkaline phosphataseScreening only
Serum iron
Serum ferritinTotal iron binding capacity (TIBC)Vitamin DLow-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(LDL-C) 
High-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(HDL-C)
TriglyceridesTotal cholesterol
Endocrine Panel (Screening Only)
Follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH)
Reflexive thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH)
Urinalysis Pregnancy Test Other Tests (Screening Only)
Specific gravityKetones ProteinBlood
Glucose
pHSerum pregnancy (only when 
urine pregnancy test is positive)Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)Hepatitis C virus antibody (HCV Ab)
Clinical Chemistry/Lipid Panel
Clinical chemistry and lipid panel samples should be obtained in the morning following an overnight fast 
(minimum of 8 hours); however, there may be circumstances when the sample is obtained later in the day and/or not under fasting conditions.  If the sample was obtained with less than 8 hours of fasting, the source documents and the lab requisition should be marked to indicate that the sample was obtained under nonfasting conditions.
Pregnancy Tests (Serum and Urine)
Urine pregnancy tests will be performed at the time points specified in Section 2, in all subjects 
regardless of sexual activity status or method of contraception, including subjects who are surgically sterilized.  
Page 65 of 86
p. 21 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The urine pregnancy test result on Day 1 must be reviewed and confirmed to be negative prior to 
randomization.  
During treatment period, a positive urine pregnancy test result must be confirmed with a quantitative 
serum pregnancy test.  Study drug must not be dispensed if the subject has a positive urine pregnancy test result at any visit during the Treatment Periods (including Day 1 result).  The site will immediately 
inform the subject to discontinue study drug temporarily while the subject waits for the results of the 
serum pregnancy test.  If a serum pregnancy test result is positive, the subject will be prematurely discontinued from the study drug.  The site should instruct the subject to complete a Premature Discontinuation visit within 2 to 7 days of study drug discontinuation.  
In the event that a subject or study personnel cannot come to the site for a study visit requiring a urine 
pregnancy test because of the COVID-19 pandemic, home pregnancy test kits may be provided to subjects to self-administer at home and report results to study site over the phone.  
If the subject becomes pregnant at any time after randomization up through 30 days after the last dose 
of study drug, an ultrasound examination will be performed as early as possible during the first trimester of pregnancy to assess the gestational age and estimated date of delivery.  Refer to Section 4.4for 
instructions on reporting of a pregnancy to the sponsor and the required follow-up on the subject's fetus, pregnancy, and infant outcomes.
Urine Test for Gonorrhea and Chlamydia (Optional)
Gonorrhea and chlamydia testing can be ordered at the investigator's discretion to test for active gonorrhea or chlamydia before the endometrial biopsy is performed.  These samples will be sent to the central laboratory for analysis.  If the investigator determines that an abnormal test result can be treated, treatment will be outside of the protocol.  Follow-up gonorrhea/chlamydia testing (per instructions from the central laboratory) can be performed after treatment at the investigator's discretion.
3.9 Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Sampling
Blood samples for assay of elagolix, also known as pharmacokinetic samples, will be collected by venipuncture into 3-mL evacuated K
2-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (K 2EDTA)-containing collection 
tubes at the time points specified in Section 2.  Samples will be collected regardless of the time of last 
dose.  Sufficient blood will be collected to provide approximately 1 mL of plasma from each sample. 
Blood samples for assay of estradiol, also known as pharmacodynamic samples, will be collected by 
venipuncture into 4-mL evacuated collection tubes without anticoagulant (red cap, no gel separators to be used) at the time points specified in Section 2.  On Day 1, estradiol samples will be collected prior to 
dosing.  Samples collected at all visits other than Day 1 will be drawn at any time during the visit.  Sufficient blood volume will be collected to provide approximately 1.6 mL of serum from each sample. 
The date and time of blood collections will be recorded on the Central Laboratory Requisition Form (see 
Section 5.7 of the protocol under compliance for recording the times of the last 4 doses prior to study visit).
Page 66 of 86
p. 22 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Refer to the study specific laboratory manual for detailed instructions on sample collection, 
handling/processing, and shipment.
The Bioanalysis Department at AbbVie will use validated assays to determine plasma concentrations of 
elagolix and serum concentrations of estradiol.
3.10 Biomarker Research Sampling
Optional biospecimens (whole blood, serum, and plasma) for biomarker research will be collected at the time points specified in Section 2.  All biomarker samples should be collected, labeled, and shipped as 
outlined in the study-specific lab manual.
AbbVie (or people or companies working with AbbVie) will store the biomarker samples and data in a 
secure storage space with adequate measures to protect confidentiality.  The samples may be retained while research on elagolix (or drugs of this class) or uterine fibroids and related conditions continues, but for no longer than 20 years after study completion, or per local requirement.
3.11 Contraception Counseling/Dispense Contraceptives
The sponsor will train investigators and study staff on the importance of contraception in this clinical trial.  The investigator or designated study staff will counsel subjects (excluding those who have had a bilateral tubal ligation or bilateral tubal occlusion) at every on-site visit throughout study participation 
on the importance of pregnancy prevention and the use of appropriate and effective methods of 
contraception.  
Subjects must agree to use at least 2 forms of nonhormonal contraception (dual contraception) as 
indicated in the protocol.  If a subject has used LNG-IUS at least 6 months prior to the Screening visit and 
that remains in place throughout the Treatment Period through the PTFU Month 1 visit, she is not required to use 2 forms of nonhormonal contraception. 
In the event that a subject or study personnel cannot come to the site for dispensing of nonhormonal 
contraceptive supplies because of the COVID-19 pandemic, nonhormonal contraceptive supplies may be 
provided to subjects via alternative means.  
The following measures will be taken to help ensure pregnancy prevention during the study.
1. The informed consent form will include an attestation requiring the subject to confirm in writing 
(via signature) her full awareness that the potential risks of study drug on the unborn child are 
unknown, and therefore, she must not get pregnant during the entire time of study 
participation, and that she agrees to consistently use protocol-required nonhormonal 
contraception throughout her study participation.
2. The investigator or designated study staff will counsel the subject that the study drug is not 
contraceptive, that ovulation may occur even though the study drug may have altered menstrual cycle patterns, and that fetal abnormalities have been reported in women who have received elagolix in clinical studies; however, it is unknown whether these abnormalities were the result of taking elagolix.
Page 67 of 86
p. 23 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3. The sponsor will provide training materials to the sites for instructing subjects on the types of 
protocol-allowed contraception methods, their effectiveness, and proper use.
!The sponsor will provide all investigative sites with a supply of materials to promote 
pregnancy prevention, including contraceptives (e.g., condoms and spermicides) to provide to subjects at no charge.  
!Subjects should only use the pregnancy prevention materials provided by the sponsor as 
these products have undergone analytical testing by the analytical lab to confirm there is no 
or limited interference with the alkaline hematin method.
!Subjects will be allowed to choose an acceptable contraception method of their choice from the contraceptives provided by the sponsor and will be expected to consistently practice the allowable methods of contraception.  The site will assess the subject's basic understanding 
of the proper contraceptive use through discussion and demonstration of proper 
techniques, if needed, including proper diaphragm use.
!The site will provide contraceptives and other supplies (e.g., lubricants) to subjects at the time points specified in Section 2, as necessary.  
!The source documents will capture the date that initial contraception counseling was performed, whether the subject meets protocol criteria for not requiring use of dual contraception, and the type of contraceptive provided to the subject (as applicable).  At subsequent study visits, the source documents will capture any change in contraceptive method, use of a non-study supply brand, and whether additional contraceptives were provided to the subject.
!The subject will be asked to attest by signature at the time of consent, and subsequently in a stand-alone attestation form at all on-site study visits that allowable methods of contraception, as described during the pregnancy prevention counseling, are being practiced.
!For subjects who have had a bilateral tubal ligation or bilateral tubal occlusion, (including Essure®) or LNG-IUS, attestation is only required to be collected once during the study prior to randomization, ideally at the time of consent.  Additionally, these subjects do not require contraception counseling at any study visit or the associated documentation of that counseling.
4. Monthly study contacts are used to promote frequent interaction with site staff and 
opportunities for continued education.
5. At each Treatment Period visit (on-site), the proper use of contraception will be reinforced to 
address possible ineffective use and the risk of unexpected pregnancy due to unprotected sexual activity.
3.12 Height and Weight
Height and body weight will be measured at Screening (Section 2.1).  The subject will wear lightweight 
clothing and no shoes during weighing.  The weight measurement at Screening will serve as the Baseline for clinical assessment.
Page 68 of 86
p. 24 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.13 Vital Signs
Vital sign determinations of systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, and body temperature will 
be obtained at the time points specified in Section 2.  The blood pressure and heart rate measurements 
should be taken prior to scheduled blood collections (if applicable).  Subjects should be seated for a minimum of 5 minutes before vital signs are taken; subjects are to remain seated when vital signs are taken.  Measurements should be assessed consistently throughout the study and will be recorded in the source documents and eCRF.
The vital signs measurements obtained prior to dosing on Day 1 will serve as the Baseline measurements 
for clinical assessment. 
3.14 Physical Examination
A complete physical examination will be performed at the time points specified in Section 2.  The 
complete physical examination performed during Screening will serve as the Baseline for clinical assessment.  A brief, symptom-directed physical examination will be performed at the Day 1 visit.
Any significant physical examination findings after the first dose will be recorded as AE.  All findings, 
whether related to an AE or part of each subject's medical history, will be captured on the appropriate eCRF page.
3.15 Gynecological (Pelvic and Breast) Examination
A complete breast and pelvic examination, including external genitalia, will be performed at the time 
points specified in Section 2.  The complete breast and pelvic examination completed during Screening 
will serve as the Baseline for clinical assessment.
3.16 Pap Test
A Pap test will be performed in Subjects > 21 years of age during the Screening Period unless the Subject 
has had a Pap smear or colposcopy within 3 months of the start of Screening, and results are reviewed by the principal investigator and deemed to meet eligibility requirements as outlined in Figure 1 , Pap 
Test Eligibility.  For those subjects who require a Pap smear during the Screening Period, the Pap test will be performed using the Thin Prep® Pap Test™ provided and analyzed by the central laboratory.  If the subject is experiencing uterine bleeding that precludes the performance of the Pap test, this procedure should be performed as soon as possible after the uterine bleeding has ended.  In the case of an unsatisfactory sample, the Pap test can be repeated.  The repeat Pap test should also be performed 
when the subject is not experiencing uterine bleeding.  In order to be enrolled in the study, the Pap test 
must meet eligibility requirements as outlined in Figure 1 , Pap Test Eligibility.
Subjects who are 25 to 51 years of age, with the Pap diagnosis of atypical squamous cells of 
undetermined significance (ASC-US), or low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) and those 
> 30 years of age with negative intraepithelial lesion or malignancy (NILM) but absent or insufficient 
Page 69 of 86
p. 25 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.endocervical/transformational zone (EC/TZ) component will have reflex human papillomavirus (HPV) 
testing as outlined in Figure 1 .  Those with high-risk HPV, NILM with absent or insufficient EC/TZ, or LSIL 
with or without high-risk HPV will be screen failed and may undergo additional evaluation/colposcopy outside of the protocol per local guidelines or standard of care.
If a Subject has a colposcopy performed outside of the study, they may be rescreened if they have no 
other exclusionary criteria and has had an adequate colposcopy with a negative endocervical sample 
post colposcopy.  If biopsies are performed, they must show a histological diagnosis of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 1 or less with an adequate colposcopy and a negative endocervical sample post colposcopy. 
Subjects with the cytology screening result of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL), atypical 
squamous cells cannot exclude HSIL (ASC-H), atypical glandular cells (AGC), or atypical endocervical cells are not eligible for the study.
Subjects should continue with recommended Pap testing outside of the protocol per standard of care 
and local guidelines during the study.
Figure 1. Pap Test Eligibility
AGC = atypical glandular cells; ASC-H = atypical squamous cells cannot exclude high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; 
ASC-US = atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance; CIN = cervical intraepithelial neoplasia; 
EC/TZ = endocervical/transformational zone; HPV = human papillomavirus; HSIL = high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; 
LSIL = low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; NILM = negative intraepithelial lesion or malignancy
* If a colposcopy is performed outside the study, subject may be eligible to rescreen provided the colposcopy results show a 
histologically negative endocervical curettage (ECC), and if biopsies were performed, they must be CIN 1 or less.
# Reflex performed only if subject is > 30 years of age.
Page 70 of 86
p. 26 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.17 Endometrial Biopsy
An endometrial biopsy will be performed in all subjects during the Screening Period unless final report of 
endometrial biopsy done within 3 months of Screening are available and results are reviewed by the principal investigator and deemed to meet eligibility requirements.  Subjects must have a negative urine pregnancy test within 24 hours before undergoing the endometrial biopsy.
Instructions on endometrial biopsy collection and processing procedures for shipping will be provided by 
the central laboratory.  Sites can either use the endometrial biopsy instruments provided by the central laboratory or any other endometrial biopsy instruments available at the study site.
Pre-medication for the endometrial biopsy procedure is allowable and should be recorded in source 
documents and on the appropriate eCRF.  At the investigator's discretion, misoprostol for cervical dilatation is allowable.  
If the endometrial biopsy is performed on the same day as the Pap smear or pelvic ultrasound, the 
endometrial biopsy should be performed after the Pap smear and pelvic ultrasound, including SIS.
The investigator must obtain and review biopsy results from the central laboratory to ensure that 
eligibility criteria are met before the subject can be randomized on Day 1.  In case of an insufficient sample, the biopsy may be repeated; however, results must be available prior to randomization.  If there is a need for an office hysteroscopy to obtain the endometrial biopsy sample, the AbbVie TA MD (Section 1) should be consulted.  If biopsy needs to be repeated and SIS is pending or repeat SIS is 
requested by central reader, it is recommended that both procedures be planned together; the endometrial biopsy should be performed immediately after SIS.  Subjects must have an adequate endometrial biopsy, (i.e., results show no endometrial pathology) to be eligible for randomization.
If an abnormal finding such as endometritis, hyperplasia (with or without atypia), or endometrial cancer 
is reported, subjects will not be eligible for randomization into the study.  If the investigator determines that an abnormal finding can be treated outside of the protocol, the subject will be considered a screen failure, but may be rescreened after treatment per rescreening guidelines in the protocol.
3.18 12-Lead Electrocardiogram
12-lead ECG will be performed at the designated study visits as specified in Section 2.1.  The ECG should 
be performed prior to blood collection.
The ECGs will be evaluated by an appropriately trained physician at the site ("local reader").  The local 
reader from the site will sign and date all ECG tracings and will provide his/her global interpretation as a written comment on the tracing using the following categories:
!Normal ECG
!Abnormal ECG – not clinically significant
!Abnormal ECG – clinically significant
Page 71 of 86
p. 27 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Only the local reader's evaluation of the ECG will be collected and documented in the subject's source 
folder.  The automatic machine reading (i.e., machine-generated measurements and interpretation that are automatically printed on the ECG tracing) will not be collected.
3.19 Mammogram
A mammogram will be obtained during Screening (only for subjects who will be 40 years of age or older at the time of consent) unless the subject had a mammogram performed within 3 months prior to Screening and results are reviewed by the principal investigator and deemed to meet eligibility requirements.  Local mammogram results and final interpretation must be entered into the eCRF upon receipt.
A local radiologist will read mammograms and that radiologist's interpretation will be used to determine 
if a subject meets eligibility criteria.
!Subjects with normal or benign findings or Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) Classifications 1, 2, or 3 (via mammogram or other mode of imaging) will be eligible for the study.  
!Subjects with an abnormal mammogram or BI-RADS 4, 5, or 6 will not be eligible for the study.  If the repeat mammogram or other breast imaging results indicate further testing is required (e.g., breast biopsy) to rule out any potential exclusionary findings, the subject is not eligible for the study.  Any further imaging or testing will be performed outside of the protocol and should follow standard of care.  
!If a subject's mammogram results are incomplete ([BI-RADS] 0) and need to be repeated, the AbbVie TA MD does not need to be contacted for approval before the repeat mammogram or other mode of imaging (e.g., ultrasound, spot compression) is conducted.  If results meet entry requirements, the subject will be allowed to continue in Screening.  
Subjects should continue with recommended mammography testing outside of the protocol per local guidelines and standard of care during the study.
3.20 Central Imaging Procedures
Pelvic Ultrasound:  TAU and TVU
The pelvic ultrasound (TAU, TVU, SIS) will be performed by the investigative sites' or affiliated radiology 
department.  If magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is requested by central reader for further evaluation of endometrial cavity it will be performed by the investigative sites' or affiliated radiology department.  The ultrasonographer at each investigative site will be required to acquire the ultrasound, SIS, and MRI (if applicable) images according to the Imaging Acquisition Guidelines provided by the central reader.  Images (still images and video clips as requested) should be transmitted to the central reader to determine eligibility for entry into the study.  
The principal investigator should review the pelvic ultrasound images or report to assess eligibility.  If no 
eligible fibroids are found on local read, the subject should be screen-failed, and no images should be 
Page 72 of 86
p. 28 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.submitted to central reader for further assessment.  To maintain screening timelines, it is recommended 
that there be short turnaround time for local read. 
The investigator or designee is responsible for review of local ultrasound, SIS reports, and/or MRI 
images for subject safety.  Any abnormal findings that are clinically significant and that requires medical intervention should be reported as AE.  The interpretation of the local report and/or images will be filed 
or recorded in the subject's source documents.  Data and/or local interpretation from the local 
ultrasound and SIS images will not be recorded in the eCRF.
Central Reader assessments for the pelvic ultrasound include, but are not limited to the following:
!Endometrial thickness
!Presence of abnormal endometrial appearance or endometrial pathology
!Presence of uterine fibroids
!Volume of largest fibroid at Baseline in cubic centimeters
!Uterine volume in cubic centimeters
!Presence of ovarian cysts:  Number; size (cm); location (right/left ovary); simple/complex/corpus 
luteum
!Endometrioma > 3.5 cm longest diameter
!Solid ovarian lesions > 1.5 cm longest diameter
Saline Infusion Sonohysterography (SIS)
In addition to the pelvic ultrasound, an SIS will also be performed in all subjects during the Screening 
Period, to assess eligibility criteria based on the presence of focal intracavitary lesions including:
!Large endometrial polyp ( ≥1 cm)
!Intracavitary submucosal pedunculated fibroid (FIGO Type 0)
Subjects should have a negative urine pregnancy test within 24 hours before undergoing the SIS.  It is recommended that video clips be captured during SIS (see Imaging Acquisition Guidelines). 
The SIS should be performed as early as possible during the Screening Period to rule out any 
exclusionary findings.  For subjects entering Washout, a SIS will not be performed until the subject enters the Screening Period to limit the number of invasive procedures before her eligibility is fully determined.
If a subject has an endometrial polyp ≥ 1 cm and desires to have the polyp removed outside of the study 
(before entering Screening), the subject must have a negative pathology report and return to 
one normal menses prior to Screening.  
Subjects who have qualifying uterine fibroids and/or uterine volume as assessed by central reader but 
do not have SIS images that adequately characterize the endometrial cavity, SIS may be repeated.  Alternatively, an MRI may be performed in lieu of SIS if SIS cannot be performed (e.g., due to location or 
Page 73 of 86
p. 29 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.size of fibroids) or images are unevaluable.  The AbbVie TA MD should be consulted if the investigator 
plans to perform MRI.
If SIS needs to be repeated and endometrial biopsy is pending or repeat endometrial biopsy is needed, it 
is recommended that both procedures be planned together; the endometrial biopsy be performed immediately after SIS.  
Ovarian Findings
During Screening, if the initial pelvic ultrasound shows a simple ovarian cyst > 5 and ≤ 7 cm in longest 
diameter, an ultrasound of the ovaries may be repeated in approximately 4 to 6 weeks.  The repeat results must be evaluated prior to Day 1 (randomization) and not meet exclusion criteria (i.e., persistent simple ovarian cyst > 5 cm).
3.21 Collection of Sanitary Products
Quantitative measurement of the volume of menstrual blood loss (MBL) will be performed using the alkaline hematin method.  Starting in Screening, subjects will be dispensed sanitary collection kits that consist of validated sanitary products, product collection bags and a keg with screw-on lid for storage as provided by the vendor.  
Validated products have undergone analytical testing by the analytical lab to confirm the following 
characteristics:
!adequate precision and accuracy of blood recovery
!no or limited interference with the alkaline hematin method  
It is important that only the sanitary products provided by the sponsor are used during the study.  Validated sanitary products may include:
!Tampax® tampons (Regular, Super, or Super-Plus absorbency)
!Stayfree® Maxi Pads (Regular, Super Long, or Overnight absorbency)
!Carefree® Original Long Unscented pantiliners
3.22 Return Sanitary Products
Subjects will be required to collect all sanitary products (with or without visible blood) on days with menstrual bleeding or spotting and return them to the clinical study site at visits during the Screening and Treatment periods of the study and at the Premature Discontinuation visit (Section 2).  There will be 
no product collection required during the Follow-up Period.  
Subjects will be required to collect and retain all sanitary products on days with menstrual bleeding or 
spotting (subjects must be instructed to collect and return all used or worn products even if there is no 
visible blood on the products or if non-validated products were used) as described in the Alkaline 
Hematin Laboratory Manual.
Page 74 of 86
p. 30 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Menstrual Cycle Product Collection Visit  
Subjects will visit the site within approximately 5 days after cessation of bleeding or spotting for 
Menstrual Cycle Product Collection Visit.  Sanitary products to measure MBL will be collected, and the 
site will submit the sanitary products to the alkaline hematin laboratory for analysis of MBL volume.  In 
addition, a venous blood sample will be obtained and sent with the collected products to the alkaline hematin laboratory.  It is recommended that site submit the sanitary products to alkaline hematin laboratory only after verifying that subject has qualifying fibroids per central reader based on the local ultrasound report.
In the event that a subject or study personnel cannot come to the site for venous blood sample 
collection and return of collected sanitary products because of the COVID-19 pandemic, a home health care service may be utilized to obtain such samples.  
If the first screening menstrual cycle does not qualify, an additional screening menstrual cycle may be 
permitted ( Table 2 ).  Screening menstrual Cycle 1 for menstrual bleeding assessment begins with the 
first day of bleeding or spotting associated with menses.
Table 2 Menstrual Blood Loss Volume Eligibility
Screening Cycle 1 
Blood LossScreening Cycle 2 
Blood Loss Eligible
> 80 mL N/A Yes
≤ 80 mLa> 80 mL Yes
N/A = not applicable
a. If Screening Cycle 1 blood loss is ≤ 60 mL, study site must consult AbbVie for approval to collect sanitary products for 
additional menstrual cycles in Screening.  Subjects with a Screening Cycle 1 blood loss between > 60 to 80 mL may proceed 
to collect a second Screening Cycle to determine eligibility without prior approval.
Subjects will be required to collect all sanitary products from the first cycle collected in the Screening 
period continuously to the end of the placebo-controlled Treatment Period.
Subjects will return their sanitary products to the site at the scheduled on-site visit or at a Product 
Collection Visit.  A Product Collection Visit is only necessary if an on-site visit is not scheduled to occur within approximately 5 days after cessation of bleeding or spotting.  Sites should notify the subjects when to start collecting products after they are dispensed the product collection kit on site.  This schedule is repeated through the rest of the placebo-controlled Treatment Period.
3.23 Randomization/Drug Assignment
The site will contact Interactive Response Technology (IRT) during the Washout or Screening Period to obtain a subject (Screening) number after the subject has signed the informed consent.  Consecutive and unique subject numbers will be assigned and used to identify each subject throughout the study.  The registration of the first Screening Visit will trigger shipment of clinical drug supplies to the study site.  
Subjects will be randomly assigned by IRT to receive either elagolix 150 mg QD or placebo on Day 1; a 
unique randomization number will be provided via IRT.  
Page 75 of 86
p. 31 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.During the Treatment Period, sites will register each onsite visit in IRT in order to obtain the appropriate 
amount of scheduled resupply of study drug to dispense to each subject.  In the event study drug 
becomes lost or damaged, the site can contact IRT to obtain an unscheduled re-supply of study drug kit 
numbers to dispense to the subject.  Sites will register subjects as "Completed" or "Discontinued" (if the subject prematurely discontinues) at the end of the Treatment Period and will also indicate whether the subject will enter the Post-Treatment Follow-Up Period.
All AbbVie personnel with direct oversight of the conduct and management of the trial (with the 
exception of the AbbVie Drug Supply Management Team), the investigator, study site personnel, and the subject will remain blinded to each subject's baseline to Month 6 treatment throughout the study.  To maintain the blind, the elagolix and respective matching placebo provided for the study will be identical in appearance.  The IRT will provide access to unblinded subject treatment information in the case of a medical emergency.
3.24 Dispense Study Drug
The site will dispense study drug at the time points specified in Section 2.2.  The subject will take the 
first elagolix 150 mg tablet or matching placebo at the study site on Day 1 (randomization) whether the subject's visit is scheduled in the morning or afternoon.  Subjects will be instructed to self-administer their study drug throughout the Treatment Period.
Depending on the local regulations, provisioning of study drug for direct-to-patient (DTP) and direct-
from-patient (DFP) transfer because of the COVID-19 pandemic will be available per request.  AbbVie should be notified.
Sites will be able to utilize Marken and/or another local courier for drug shipment.  AbbVie has set up an 
agreement with Marken (third-party vendor) for sites to use to ship study drug to subjects.
!Sites will be responsible for meeting IRB reporting requirements and submitting the booking form (which will be provided) to the local IRB. 
The PI must discuss the DTP process with the subject: 
!Obtain consent to provide delivery information to Marken and/or local courier and document this in the source.
!Obtain consent to provide delivery information to Marken and/or local courier and document this in the source. 
!Confirm that the subject will be available to accept delivery.
!The site will follow up with the subject after shipment is received.
!The subject should maintain the drug containers, as well as any unused drug for return to site.
Sites will be required to retain documentation of the shipment for the IP accountability and monitoring.
Page 76 of 86
p. 32 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.25 Drug Accountability
The study investigator or designee will verify via direct recording in IRT or by signature and date that 
study drug supplies are received intact and in the correct amounts indicated on the shipping document Clinical Site Shipment Request or similar shipping document.  The shipment receipt must be acknowledged in IRT in order to become available for dispensing to subjects.  The IRT must also be contacted when any subject completes or discontinues study drug.
The IRT will maintain a current and accurate inventory of all clinical drug supplies, accountability, 
reconciliation, returns, and destruction for each site.  The IRT will also include the lot number, kit number, clinical safety system receipt number, the number of blister cards/cartons dispensed, initials of person who dispensed the drug, and the date study drug was dispensed for each subject.  In addition to using IRT inventory, an accurate inventory of study drug can also be kept by the site.
An overall accountability of the study drug will be performed and verified by the site monitor via IRT 
throughout the study and at the study site closeout visit.  Throughout the study and upon completion or termination of the study, all used, unused, and unopened containers will be returned to AbbVie according to instructions from AbbVie.
The investigator or his/her designated representative agrees not to supply study medication to any 
persons not enrolled in the study.
4 SAFETY MANUAL
4.1 Methods and Timing of Safety Assessment
Serious adverse events (SAEs) and protocol-related nonserious AEs will be collected beginning when the subject signs the study-specific informed consent.  From the time of study drug administration until PTFU Month 1 visit, all AEs, adverse events of special interests (AESIs), and SAEs will be collected whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the subject.  
Page 77 of 86
p. 35 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.examination will be performed (read locally) as early as possible during the first trimester of pregnancy 
to assess gestational age and document intrauterine pregnancy.  The following information should be 
collected:  fetal outcome (e.g., spontaneous or elective abortion, live infant, or still birth), date and 
mode of delivery, birth weight, birth length, gender, any congenital anomaly, and medically significant complications during pregnancy or labor or delivery.  For live infant births, information on the health of the infant will be collected from the first post-delivery pediatrician visit and at 6 to 12 months after delivery.
5 COUNTRY-SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
5.1 SUSAR Reporting
AbbVie will be responsible for SUSAR reporting for the IMP in accordance with global and local guidelines and Appendix A of the investigator brochure will serve as the Reference Safety Information 
(RSI).  The RSI in effect at the start of a DSUR reporting period serves as the RSI during the reporting 
period.  For follow-up reports, the RSI in place at the time of occurrence of the "suspected" serious adverse reaction will be used to assess expectedness.
6 STUDY DRUG
6.1 Treatments Administered
Subjects will be centrally randomly assigned using an IRT.  Subjects randomly assigned to 1 of 2 treatment groups in a 2:1 ratio to receive elagolix 150 mg film-coated tablet or respective matching placebo tablet by oral administration for 6 months in the Double-Blind Treatment Period.
The study drug will be dispensed in the form of tablets at the visits listed in Section 2.2.  Study drug 
should be taken with approximately 8 oz. (240 mL) of water without regard to food and should be taken 
at approximately the same time each morning to promote compliance.  Subjects will be instructed to return all study drug kits (used/unused/unopened) to the study site staff at study visits throughout the Treatment Period or Premature Discontinuation visit (if applicable).
Study drug must not be dispensed without contacting IRT.  Study drug may only be dispensed to subjects 
enrolled in the study according to kit numbers provided by the IRT.  Sites should not contact IRT for kit 
assignment until a subject is onsite for the visit and urine pregnancy test is negative.  In the event that a 
subject cannot come to the site because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the site may contact the IRT for kit assignment after ensuring subject is eligible to continue with study drug dosing and confirming a that a home urine pregnancy test was performed and the result was negative.  Study drug dispensing can then be undertaken as outlined in Section 3.24 .
6.2 Packaging and Labeling
AbbVie will supply blinded study drug in monthly kits (i.e., cartons) for the 6-month Double-Blind 
Treatment Period.  Study drug is provided at each dispensing visit.  The study drug consists of elagolix or 
Page 80 of 86
p. 36 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.respective matching placebo tablets.  Each kit (carton) contains 4 weekly blister cards and 1 extra 
medication blister card.  Each kit supplies sufficient study medication for 4 weeks (28 days) of dosing, plus 1 week of extra medication.
Each individual blister card contains 7 tablets of elagolix or 7 tablets of matching placebo for a 7-day 
(weekly) supply of study medication.  
The kits will be assigned to a subject via IRT and will encode the appropriate study drug to be dispensed 
at the subject's corresponding study visit.
The study drug is labeled as per country requirements.  All blank spaces on the label will be completed 
by the site staff prior to dispensing to the subject.  Labels must remain affixed to the study drug containers.  Adequate supplies of study drug will be provided to each study site automatically via IRT.
Storage and Disposition of Study Drug
Elagolix and respective matching placebo study drug must be stored at controlled temperature 15° to 25°C (59° to 77°F).
The study drug storage temperature must be recorded on each business day.  Any temperature 
excursions must be entered into AbbVie Temperature Excursion Management System (ATEMS) immediately.  Study drug should not be dispensed until ATEMS or AbbVie deems the drug as acceptable.
The investigational products are for investigational use only and are to be used only within the context 
of this study.  The study drug supplied for this study must be maintained under adequate security and stored under the conditions specified on the label until dispensed for subject use or returned to AbbVie.  Returned study drug should not be re-dispensed to the subject.
6.3 Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups
This is a randomized, double-blind, 6-month placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multicenter study.  Subjects randomized in the Double-Blind Treatment Period will receive elagolix 150 mg or matching placebo for the duration of the Treatment Period. 
At the Screening visit, all subjects will be assigned a unique subject number through the use of the IRT.  
Subjects will be randomly assigned by IRT to receive 1 of the treatments on the Day 1 visit.  For subjects who do not meet the study selection criteria, the site personnel must contact the IRT system and identify the subject as a screen failure.
Subjects who are enrolled will retain their subject number assigned at the Screening visit throughout the 
study.  After confirming that the subject has met eligibility criteria and prior to the Day 1 (initial randomization dose), a unique randomization number for treatment assignment will be provided via IRT. 
Contact information and user guidelines for IRT use will be provided to each site.
Page 81 of 86
p. 37 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.4 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject
All randomized subjects will take study drug orally once daily for the entire 6-month Treatment Period at 
the scheduled visits (Section 2.2).  For Day 1 to Month 6, subjects will take a blinded morning dose of 
elagolix (150 mg) tablet or matching placebo tablet.
7 REFERENCES
1. Spies JB, Coyne K, Guaou Guaou N, et al.  The UFS-QoL, a new disease specific symptom and 
health-related quality of life questionnaire for leiomyomata.  Obstet and Gynecol.  2002;99(2):290-6.
2. Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS) [homepage on the Internet].  Columbia 
University Medical Center [cited March 9, 2018].  Available from:  http://cssrs.columbia.edu/.
Page 82 of 86
p. 38 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A. REASON FOR STUDY PARTICIPATION
Page 83 of 86
p. 39 of 39
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16-824 Version 4.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B. PHYSICIAN SURGERY QUESTIONNAIRE (PSQ)
Page 84 of 86