 
 
 
 
 
 
Official Title:  University of Alabama at Birmingham ( UAB ) Pediatric CBD Program  
NTC Number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Document Date:  February 25, 2020  
 
 
1 
 
Version Date : 25 February 2020  Statistical  Analysis  Plan  
The UAB Pediatric CBD Program  enrolled 89 treatment resistant ep ileptic children ages 1 -19 
years  old.  All study participants  received Epidiolex drug ( Cannabidiol; CBD) as an add -on to 
their previously stable anticonvulsive treatment  after baseline assessment . Participants received a 
starting dose of CBD at  5 mg/kg/day  in twice daily dosing and titrated by 5 mg/kg/2 weeks up to 
25 mg/kg/day, with  a maximum dose of 50 mg/kg/day. Seizure frequency, severity, and adverse 
events together , with other clinical participant measures , were assessed at baseline and bi -weekly  
for the duration of the study.  
The first 12- months  (1-year) of follow -up data were  analyzed as follows:  
1. The primary outcome measures include d: 
a. Severe adverse events (increase in seizure freq uency by more than 100% leading to 
emergency room visit or hospitalization),  
b. Change in resting blood pressure or heart rate by 25% if considered significant by 
managing neurologist,  
c. Any change in, CBC, CMP, Liver func tion tests (LFT s), Urinary Analysis or 
Antiepileptic drug (AED) levels considered by managing neurologists as clinically significant. Clinically significant will be determined by using the Common Toxicity 
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) Version 4.03. A dverse events (AE) categorized as 
a grade 3 or above will be considered clinically significant. Adverse Events graded 4 or above will be considered severe adverse events (SAE).  
The analysis plan was  focused on safety. The information on safety was  tabulate d as the percent 
of participants with each safety outcome AE and SAE, or others reported as meaningful as well 
as the number of occurrences of each AE and SAE. This enable d an event rate calculation per 
exposure time as well as the average number of occurr ences per participant with an AE or SAE.  
2. The secondary analysis assessed  the frequency and severity o f seizure  outcome measures to  
include:  
a. Mean (SD) and median (IQR) decrease in seizure frequency as measured in total 
number  of seizures per month. 
b. Mean (SD) and median (IQR) decrease in seizure severity as measured by the Chalfont Seizure Severity Scale (Duncan & Sander, 1991, JNNP).  
The analysis plan for frequency and severity of seizures (secondary outcome  measures ) assessed  
the pattern of change over ti me relative to baseline . The non- parametric Friedman’s test was  
used since seizure frequency and severity outcome measures were not normally distributed. Wilcoxon's sign ed rank test  with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison correction was utilized  as a 
post-hoc analysis for pairwise comparisons  between baseline and each post -baseline time point. 
2 
 
Version Date : 25 February 2020  Further parametric analysis used  the generalized least squares statistical techniques for modeling 
longitudinal data, an extens ion of m ixed effects models that accommodates  heteroscedacity and 
correlation  within group errors (Pinhe iro and Bates , 2000), after normality of outcome  measures  
were achieved through log -transformation  methods. The longitudinal analysis included each 
month following baseline up to t he 12- month endpoint, with a log transformation of seizure 
measu res regressed on time (months), gender , and several  identif ied baseline clinical variables 
including number of AEDs , number of AEDs tried, and history of epileptic surgery. A cubic 
spline with 4 knots (careful ly chosen with AIC and BIC) was put on time to capture the non -
linear trend in seizure  outcome measures. AIC and BIC also aided in the choice of the s pecified 
correlation structure for this analysis.  
Effectiveness of CBD exposure on the population of interest was established with contrast 
estimates of percentage reduction in seizure outcome measures  at each post -baseline time point 
relative to baseline from model.  
Both  parametric and no n-parametric methods were  repeated using  last observation carried 
forward (LOCF) principle  on the  data instead of complete cases of the data. An alpha level of 5% 
was used to ac hieve statistical significance.  