 
 
 Version Date:  1.0  01/30/2023  Page  1 of 9 
HRP -593 / v10222021  
 PROTOCOL TITLE: Do Anti -Snoring Appliance s Reduce the Amount of Airway 
Manipulation in Patients Undergoing Anesthetic Sedation? A Prospective Randomized 
Controlled Trial  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Mahesh  Vaidyanathan,  M.D.  
Department  of Anesthesiology  
(312)  695-2500  
mahesh.vaidyanathan@northwestern.edu  
 
 
VERSION DATE:  1.0  January 30, 2023  
  
STUDY SUMMARY:  
 
Investigational Agent(s)  
(Drugs or Devices)  Anti-snoring Appliance s including: Zyppah  
IND / IDE / HDE #  Zyppah FDA #K182312   
 
Indicate  
Special Population(s)  Children  
 Children who are wards of the state  
 Adults Unable to Consent   
 Cognitively Impaired Adults  
 Neonates of Uncertain Viability  
 Pregnant Women  
 Prisoners (or other detained/paroled individuals)  
 Students/Employees  
Sample Size  28 
Funding Source  TBD 
Indicate the type of 
consent to be obtained  Written  
Verbal/Waiver of Documentation of Informed 
Consent  
Waiver of HIPAA Authorization  
Waiver/Alteration of Consent Process   
Site  Lead Site (For A Multiple Site Research Study)  
 Data Coordinating Center (DCC)  
Research Related 
Radiation Exposure  Yes  
 No  
DSMB / DMC / IDMC  Yes  
No 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Version Date:  1.0  01/30/2023  Page  2 of 9 
HRP -593 / v10222021  
 OBJECTIVES : 
Would patients using an anti-snoring  appliance  intraoperatively require  less airway 
manipulation, interventions , and rescue maneuvers during anesthetic sedation cases 
compared to those who do not?  
 
Null Hypothesis:  
There  is no difference  in the number  of airway  manipulations,  interventions,  and rescue  
maneuvers  during  anesthetic  sedation  procedures  when  an anti-snoring  appliance  is 
used.   
  
BACKGROUND :  
Surgical cases requiring se dation by an anesthesia provider , also known as monitored 
anesthesia care (MAC), are a popular choice for outpatient surgical procedures with 
benefits of  “less physiologic disturbance and a more rapid recovery than general 
anesthesia” (Das 2015). However, MAC cases still come with risk : per the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists closed claim database , “the most common malpractice 
claim is inadequate oxygenation/ventilation, with more than 80% of claims of this nature 
resulting in brain damage or death” (McMurray 2020). Since 1908, ane sthesia providers 
have been utilizing interventional airway devices that manipulate the soft tissues of the 
nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx to relieve obstruction to support patient 
ventilation and oxygenation; however , there are few studies that directly compare the 
efficacy & side effect profiles between these devices (Matioc 2019). Additionally, a 
recent survey indicates that many anesthesia providers desire an alternative airway 
intervention device than the current ones most commonly used in cu rrent practice 
(McMurray 2020). We will examine the possibility of using at -home, over -the-counter 
anti-snoring device s as an intraoperative airway device.  
 
STUDY ENDPOINTS:  
PRIMARY ENDPOINT:  Combined total number of airway interventions during an 
anesthe tic sedation case  – including head tilt/rotation, mandible thrust, chin lift, shoulder 
lift, neck extension or flexion, tongue pull.  
 
SECONDARY ENDPOINTS :  
- Satisfaction of Anesthetist  via survey  
- Maximum/minimum end -tidal CO2 
- # of times  SpO2  value < 92%  
- % of time during the case SpO2 < 92%  
- maximum/minimum SpO2 value  
- EKG analysis that were not recorded as “Normal Sinus rhythm”:  
- Heart rate maximum & minimum  
- maximum/minimum Systolic, diastolic, and mean blood pressure  
- Total dose and type of hypnotic & narcotic given  
- Case type  
- Case duration  
- Baseline characteristics (Age, Gender, BMI)  
 
 
 Version Date:  1.0  01/30/2023  Page  3 of 9 
HRP -593 / v10222021  
 - Time spent in Phase 2 PACU Recovery  
- Adverse events ( i.e. regurgitation and aspiration, bronchospasm, cough , case 
converted to GA ) 
 
 
STUDY INTERVENTION(S)  / INVESTIGATIONAL A GENT(S):  
We will use anti-snoring  appliance  device s (specifically the FDA approved Zyppah) to 
attempt to relieve tissue obstructions that cause snoring during sleep. The application of 
the device s to the body is less invasive  than other common intraoperative rescue airway 
devices ( e.g. nasal trumpets and oral airways) which are not designed to be patient 
specific .  
 
We will be purchasing the device from the manufacturer’s website. We will be 
purchasing the devices via funds awarded by the James E. Eckenhoff Residents’ 
Research Award.  
 
The device will be stored in the PI’s key-locked office , until it is given to a research team 
member to be given to a subject after recruitment and prior to their procedure . Research 
personnel  will bring the appliance to the preoperative  holding area  & will help mold it for 
the patient , and will  insert  it prior to transport to the operating suite. The device will 
remain in place until the completion of procedure , unless the anesthesia provider in the 
room feels it needs to be removed for any reason. T he patient or anesthesia personnel 
can remove  the device at their leisure  after completion of the procedure . 
 
PROCEDURES INVOLVED:  
The study participants will be recruited in to two groups : patients wearing an anti-snoring 
appliance device during an anesthetic sedation procedure ; and those who do not wear 
an anti -snoring device.  To ensure anesthetic providers  have easy access to the 
patient’s airway  for standar d of care manipulation (if needed) , the patients eligible for 
this study would be those who are undergoing procedures bellow the umbilicus (e.g. 
gynecological, urological, orthopedic, etc .) in addition to having a STOP -BANG score of 
2 or greater . This will ensure patient safety and provide a wide d emographic of potential 
subjects  to increase the generalizability of the study .  
 
For both patient groups, the study procedure is the same. Eligible patients will be 
identified by chart review of various elements of the electronic medical r ecord, as 
follows:  
 
Patients will be identified and be seen by the study team in the pre -operative  clinic on 
17th floor Lavin and in the  holding area to  interview individuals who are to undergo 
eligible anesthetic sedation procedures as above. If the patient agrees to participate in 
the study, they will be randomized at that time to one of the two groups (anti -snoring 
appliance device to be used for procedure or not).  
 
The groups in the p rospective, randomized, controlled  trial in patients undergoing 
anesthetic sedatio n procedures will be as follows:  
 
 
 Version Date:  1.0  01/30/2023  Page  4 of 9 
HRP -593 / v10222021  
 Group #1: Anti-snoring appliance  (Zyppah) that will be utilized during the ir procedure  
Group # 2: Control  group,  that will not utilize  anti-snoring  appliance  
 
Participants will be randomized to treatment groups based on a random computer -
generated ( https://www.randomizer.org ). Anesthesia providers  will not be blinded to 
randomization, and research personnel will observe the procedure to collect all outcome 
measures in this study.  
 
For group  1, the study team will aid them in molding and preparing the device in the pre -
operative area. Anesthesia providers will be instr ucted on how the device works and 
when to place it  (with aid from the research team)  in addition  to receivin g a question  and 
answer  sheet and protocol they can follow to take with them to the operating room.  Prior 
to the administration of anesthetic medications, the patient will be aided in  insert ing the 
device, and wear it throughout the entirety of the case. Regardless of the group, f rom 
the start of sedation  until the patient leaves the procedure suite . When  an anesthesia 
provider believes they make a  clinically significant  airway intervention (either via jaw lift, 
head turning, etc.) they will be instructed to use the “mark now” icon in the anesthetic 
record and utilize the free text to indicate what intervention was done and why.  
 
All standard practices  and standard  monitors  for anesthetic sedation cases will be 
utilized.  
 
A post -survey will be administered to  anesthesia  providers in group 1  to gauge 
satisfaction . 
 
Anesthetic record will be reviewed by research team members following the  end of the  
case.  
 
DATA AND SPECIMEN BA NKING  
We will collect data including reason for procedure, type of procedure, and patient 
demographics (includi ng medical history, sex, age, and weight); in addition to data 
collected via electronic chart review  including: Documented  Obstructive Sleep Apnea  
(OSA ), date of procedure, surgical case length, anesthesia type requested, anesthesia 
type documented, Provider team staff composition, documented neuraxial or nerve 
block procedure (if applicable), “in room” time, max/min heart rate,  min/max  oxygen 
saturation, number of instance oxygen saturation fell below 92%, % of time during case 
where oxygen saturat ion was below 92%, min/max end tidal CO 2, min/max blood 
pressure, total dose of hypnotic & narcotic given, “out of room” time, adverse events 
noted in charting, free -text written by providers, and total hospital length of stay.  
 
 
SHARING RESULTS WITH  PART ICIPANTS  
Results will not be shared with participants.  
 
STUDY TIMELINES  
 
 
 Version Date:  1.0  01/30/2023  Page  5 of 9 
HRP -593 / v10222021  
 Individual subjects and anesthetic providers will participate in the study for the duration 
of their procedure requiring anesthetic sedation. It will take approximately 3 months to 
enroll participants and approximately 3 months to perform data analysis.  
 
INCLUSION AND EXCLUS ION CRITERIA  
Inclusion criteria   
Adult patients  (age 18 -89 years old)   
 
Undergoing procedures below the umbilicus requiring anesthetic sedation without an 
invasive  airway   
  
STOP -BANG score of 2 or greater.  
 
English or Spanish language speaking  
 
Exclusion criteria  
Patients  requiring general anesthesia.  
 
Sleep apnea  
 
Serious breathing or respiratory disorders such as COPD, asthma, emphysema  
 
Poor dental health including sever e gum disease, loose teeth, abscess, mouth sores, 
bleeding gum s 
 
Dental imp lant place within last 3 months  
 
TMJ disorder  
 
Mouth or jaw pain   
 
Full dentures  
 
Wear braces  
 
Sleep with CPAP or other device s 
 
Other special populations (individua ls who are not yet adults, prisoners, vulnerable 
populations , pregnant ) will also be excluded.  
 
 
VULNERABLE POPULATIO NS:  
Will not be a part of study.  
 
PARTICIPANT POPULATI ON(S)  
 
 
 Version Date:  1.0  01/30/2023  Page  6 of 9 
HRP -593 / v10222021  
 Accrual 
Number:  Category/Group:  
(Adults/Children 
Special/Vulnerable 
Populations)  Consented:  
Maximum Number to be 
Consented or 
Reviewed/Collected/Screen
ed Enrolled:  
Number to 
Complete the 
Study or Needed 
to Address the 
Research 
Question  
Local  Adults  28 28 
   
Study -wide  28 24 
   
Total:   28 24 
 
 
RECRUITMENT METHODS  
Patients  undergoing an eligible procedure requiring anesthetic sedation  will be identified 
by the anes thesiology team by chart review  and the schedule in the pre -operative clinic 
on the 17th floor Lavin pavilion  prior to their procedure. They may also  be approached 
by the research team the morning of their procedure  for possible enrollment into the 
study.  If the potiental subject is interested in the study a study team member will ask for 
the subject’s email address to send an Econsent using REDCap fo r their review.  
 
The source of participants will be NMH pavilions (Galter, Feinberg, Lavin) in addition to 
Prentice Women’s Hospital.  
 
COMPENSATION FOR PAR TICIPATION IN RESEAR CH ACTIVITIES  
There  will be no compensation  for participation;  however,  patients  who are randomized  
into one of the anti-snoring  device  groups  will be allowed  to keep  the device , if they 
wish.  
 
WITHDRAWAL OF PARTIC IPANTS  
Patients can withdraw from the study at any time and their data will be deleted, and in 
no way will this impact their care since the study explicitly does not affect the standard 
of care. The study team will notify the PI by secure NM or NU email if a subject 
withdraws from the study.  
 
RISKS TO PARTICIPANT S 
No significant risk to the patient exists with the utilization of an anti-snoring device. The 
device s are  non-invasive and can be easily removed  by the patient or anesthesia 
provider , if needed. There is the potential for damage to loose teeth, gums or ton gue 
since this is a moldable mouth guard. There is the potential for loss of confidentiality 
even with strict measures in place to prevent occurrence.  
 
 
 
 Version Date:  1.0  01/30/2023  Page  7 of 9 
HRP -593 / v10222021  
 POTENTIAL BENEFITS T O PARTICIPANTS  
If functional, the participants may benefit from utilization of an anti-snoring device by 
reducing snoring and airway obstruction; which would lead to improved sleep and less 
fatigue. It may also prevent the use of more invasive rescue airway devices that can 
cause patient discomfort including damage to the lips, teeth, gums, tongue, naso - and 
oropharynx.  
 
DATA MANAGEMENT AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
Data Statistics:  
Preparation: In previous studies looking at patient satisfaction for snoring relief, 570 
participants were analyzed with one of the anti -snoring devices resulting in  a statistically 
significant benefit. However, there are currently no large published studies that analyze 
the use of an anti -snoring devices in the setting of MAC anesthesia. Additionally, there 
are no large studies comparing the efficacy of traditional i nvasive airway rescue devices 
(e.g. oral/nasal airways).  
 
We utilized a study by Qiansong Xiao et al titled “Comparison of Nasopharyngeal 
Airway Device and Nasal Oxygen Tube in Obese Patients Undergoing Intravenous 
Anesthesia for Gastroscopy: A Prospective  and Randomized Study”, which compared 
the oxygen saturation levels in patients who did or did not have an invasive 
nasopharyngeal airway at the beginning of the anesthetic sedation procedure, to 
perform our power analysis. 260 patients were included and r andomized; with 3 patients 
excluded due to failure of the nasopharyngeal airway. Based on the differences in 
“change in SpO2” and “raising the mandible” between their test and control groups, and 
power analysis was completed with an alpha value of 0.05 and  power value of 80%. 
The n per group that was calculated to provide the appropriate power to identify a 
statistical difference was 12 patients per study group. To compensate for patients in our 
study being less obese we increased the number per group to 1 4 subjects. We plan to 
approach 28 subjects and randomize 28 patients to 2 groups, allowing for patients who 
may not end up getting their procedure or instances where data collection is incomplete 
or absent.  
 
Statistical analysis: Data will be compared betw een all groups using paired t -test with p< 
0.05 required to reject the null hypothesis.  
 
Data Security:  
All collected data will be stored in REDcap using NM password protected computers for 
data entry. Data in REDcap is backed up nightly using NM servers w hich are only 
accessible to the NM IT administrator. Paper  documents generated during the study   
will be stored in Arkes Pavilion 10th floor Department of Anesthesiology locked research 
cabinet. Data both paper and electronic  will be destroyed 5 years after the completion of 
the stud y using current department policy and approved vendors.   
 
 
PROVISIONS TO MONITO R THE DATA TO ENSURE  THE SAFETY OF 
PARTICIPANTS  N/A 
 
 
 Version Date:  1.0  01/30/2023  Page  8 of 9 
HRP -593 / v10222021  
  
 
PROVISIONS TO PROTEC T THE PRIVACY INTERE STS OF PARTICIPANTS  
Patients in this study undergoing a procedure under anesthetic sedation can be 
stressful. If a subject does not feel comfortable with participating, they will have the 
option to opt out at any time and it will not impact their care if they cho ose to do so.  
 
Research staff will interact with anesthesia providers on two occasions (at the beginning 
for ~10 minutes in the pre -operative area and end of procedure for ~5 minutes in the 
post-operative care are a), staff will interact with participants for ~30 minutes prior to the 
procedure in the pre -operative area in addition to helping mold the mouthpiec e. 
 
COMPENSATION FOR RES EARCH -RELATED INJURY  
n/a 
 
ECONOMIC BURDEN TO P ARTICIPANTS  
There is no cost to the patient to be in this study.  The device is being paid for by the 
Department of Anesthesiology.  
 
CONSENT PROCESS  
Introduction of the study to the potential participant and c onsent will take place  in 
Northwestern Hospital’s Lavin Anesthesia Pre -Operative C linic. The potential participant 
will then be sent a consent document from REDcap which includes the electronic 
consent document for their review.  If the potential participant consents one of the study 
team members will contact them to discuss the day of surgery planT he participant  will 
receive instructions on acquisition and preparation of the device , in addition to 
instructions on bringing it to the day of their procedure.  REDcap electronic consent will 
be utilized to decrease the number of times the paper consent would be touched.   
Multiple times throughout the process, the participant will be reminded that this in no 
way affects their standard o f care and that participation can be withdrawn at any time.  
 
NON -ENGLISH SPEAKING  PARTICIPANTS   
While we do not anticipate non -English speaking participants on this study, if a non -
English speaking patient would benefit from enrollment in this study, the investigator  will 
adhere to the IRB's standard requirements for non -English speaking participants.  
  
This includes providing the IRB the following in a timely fashion:  
• Certified translations of all documents the participant will be required to complete 
(such as sur veys and questionnaires);  
• A qualified translation service will be used to translate patient facing documents and 
consent forms  
 
• Certified translations of the modified consent document in a language understandable 
to the non -English speaking participant  if the English version of the approved consent 
document undergoes subsequent modification;  
 
 
 
 Version Date:  1.0  01/30/2023  Page  9 of 9 
HRP -593 / v10222021  
 • All patient -facing documents, including consent forms, will be translated into the 
patient’s preferred language.  Any modified patient facing document or consent  form will 
be translated by a qualified translation service, submitted to the IRB for approval, and 
presented to the patient with a translator present to communicate the changes to the 
patient and to translate any questions the patient might have, in the p atient’s preferred 
language.  
 
• Ongoing communication with the participant will be in a language understandable to 
the participant  
 
• Northwestern Medicine Interpretation services will be contacted by calling (312) 926 -
2521.  Face to face interpretation or video remote interpreting (VRI) will be scheduled 
via NM. This offers remote access to an interpreter via an iPad.  
 
• A qualified translator will be available to translate the consent and any other patient 
facing document in his or her preferred languag e.  The translator will communicate all 
questions to the study team member who is obtaining the patient’s consent.  
 
• A translator will be available for the entire duration of their participation on the study to 
translate any questions/requests from the p articipant to the study team and from the 
study team to the participant.  
 
Northwestern Medicine Interpretation s ervices will be contacted  by calling (312) 926 -
2521 .  Face to face interpretation or v ideo remote interpreting (VRI)  will be scheduled 
via NM. This offers remote access to an interpreter via an iPad.  
. 
WAIVER OR ALTERATION  OF CONSENT PROCESS  
n/a  
 
PROTECTED HEALTH INF ORMATION (PHI AND HI PAA)  
­ Will a HIPAA Authorization be obtained from for all participants? Yes  
- Name  
- Age (years)  
- Date of procedure  
- Telephone numbers  
- Medical Record Numbers  
- Email addres s 
 
QUALIFICATIONS TO CO NDUCT RESEARCH AND R ESOURCES AVAILABLE  
The PI has 10 plus years  clinical  research  experience.   Northwestern  Medical  Center  
cares  for thousands  of patients  who undergo  anesthetic  sedation  procedures  each  year. 
The research  team  includes  2 resident  physicians  and a research  assistant  on the 
anesthesia  care team  who will assist  the PI during  the study  period.  
 
MULTI -SITE OR COLLAB ORATIVE RESEARCH:  
n/a 