 
July 09, 2019  
  
IRB Protocol#:  UTK  IRB-15-02631-FB  
Title:  In vivo determination  of THA  kinematics  and sound  for subjects  for normal,  diseased  and 
implanted  hips 
  
  
Richard  David  Komistek  
UTK  - College  of Engineering  - Mech  Aero  &Biomed  Engineering  
  
  
Dear  Richard  David  Komistek:  
  
The UTK  Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB)  received  a Form  7 indicating  the project  referenced  above  has 
been  completed.   The original  date of approval  date for the study  is 12/17/2015.   The effective  date of 
closure  is 07/09/ 2019.  The IRB determined  that no further  information  is required  from  you for this 
protocol.  
  
As of the closure  date,  no further  work  is authorized  by the IRB,  including  recruitment,  consenting,  data 
collection,  or analysis  of any related  data.   If this study  received  funding,  no further  monies  are to be 
committed  as of the closure  date.   For funded  studies,  a copy  of this letter  will be forwarded  to the Office  
of Sponsored  Programs.  
  
The IRB determined  that no further  information  is required  from  you for this protocol.  
  
Sincerely,  
 
Colleen  Gilrane,  Ph.D.  
Chair  
In vivo d etermination of THA k inematics and sound for normal, 
diseased and implanted hips  
 
Richard D Komistek, PhD  
University of Tennessee  
1506 Middle Drive  
310 Perkins Hall  
Knoxville, TN 37996  
Phone: (865) 974 -2093  
Fax: (865) 946 -1787  
Email: rkomiste@utk.edu  
 
In vivo kinematics and acoustics will be assessed for 2 0 subjects for this study: 10 normal hips 
and 10  ten hips will be diseased, requiring  a THA and then those  same  ten diseased hips will be 
reanalyzed at least six months post -operative after implantation of a THA  manufactured by  
DePuy Synthes by Dr. Charles DeC ook of Northside Hospital  Forsyth  [1200 Northside Forsyth 
Drive , Cumming, GA 30041 ]: this is the location from which all study participants will be 
recruited.  Ten subjects will be implanted with a similar surgical technique and will be  implanted 
with either a Summit/Pinnacle THA or Corail/Pinnacle THA . All TH As should be judged 
clinically successful ( Harris Hip Scores HHS> 90 points ), without pain, functional deficits, or 
generalized inflammatory . All subjects must have demonstrated no evidence of post -operative 
hip subluxation or dislocation.  The remaining ten subjects will have n ormal hips.  None of the 
subjects can walk with a detectable limp and all subjects must be able to actively abduct their 
operated  or healthy  hip against gravity without difficulty.  
    
Deciding which patients r eceive  which  of the two  kinds of implant s is up to the discretion of Dr. 
DeCook, according to his professional opinion. The determination as to which type of implant  
patients receive  is outside the scope of this particular study. Participation in the study is entirely 
voluntary, and  the patient’s dec ision as to whether or not to participate will not impact the type 
or quality of care provided by the surgeon  or his staff.  
 
We will use the following inclusion criteria to recruit participants for  the diseased/ implanted 
cohort  of this study:  
1. Subjects will  require  a THA  and will be implanted with either Summit/Pinnacle THA or 
Corail/Pinnacle THA  by Dr. Charles DeCook . 
2. For Phase 2, subjec ts must be at least six months post -operative with no other surgical 
procedures conducted within the past six months  that w ill prohibit them from performing  
the study activities . 
3. Subject s must be between 40 -85 years of age.  
4. Potential subjects will have a body weight of less than 250 lbs.  
5. Participants must have Body Mass Index (BMI) of less than 38.  
6. Potential subjects’ THAs should be judged clinically successful with a HHS > 90. 
7. Subjects must have demonstrated no evidence of post -operative hip subluxation or 
dislocation . 
8. Subjects must not walk with a d etectable limp and must be able to actively abduct their 
operated hip a gainst gravity without difficulty.  
 
 
Page 2 of 10 
DePuy THA fluoroscopy protocol  and statistical analysis  9. Participants must be able to walk  on level ground , ascend and descend a ramp and rise 
from a chair  without assistance.  
10. Subjec ts from the physician’s list who do not meet the study requirements will not be 
considered.  
11. Subjects must be willing to s ign the Informed Consent (IC)/ HIPAA form to participate in 
the study.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Pregnant, potentially pregnant or lactating females.  To satisfy radiation protocol, each 
female subject will be asked if she is pregnant, o r possibly could be pregnant. A 
pregnant person will not be allowed to participate in the study . 
2. Subjects without one of the two types of required  hip implant s. 
3. Subjects who have had surgery within the past 6 months that would prohibit them  
from performing level walking , ascend and descend a ramp and rise from a chair 
without aid or support of any kind.  
4. Subjects who are unable to perform level walking , ascend and descend a ramp and 
rise from a chair  without aid or support . 
5. Subjects with  pain, functional deficits, or generalized inflammatory.   
6. Subjects who  walk with a detectable limp.  
7. Subjects who cannot  actively abduct their operated hip against gr avity without 
difficulty.  
8. Subjects who are unwilling to sign I C/HIPAA document . 
9. Subjects who ha ve a HHS <90 . 
 
*In orthopaedics, the Harris Hip Score (HHS) evaluates clinical outcomes to determine the 
patient ’s post -operative results. A  patient who receives a HHS score > 9 0 is considered excellent.   
 
We will use the following inclusion criteria to recruit participants for the normal hip  cohort  of 
this study : 
1. Subjec ts must not have any kind of hip  implant.  
2. Subjects mu st not have had any type of hip  surgery or any pathological hip 
conditions, including osteoarthritis, or hip  pain.  
3. Subjec ts must be between the ages of 18 and 65.  
4.  Potential subjects will have a body weight of less than 250 lbs.  
5. Participants must have BMI of less than 38.  
6. Pregnant or potentially pregnant f emales will be excluded from the study. To 
satisfy radiation protocol, each female subject will be asked if she is pregnant, or possibly 
could be pregnant. A pregnant person will not be allowed to participate in the study.  
7. Participants must be able to w alk on level ground , ascend and descend a ramp and 
rise from a chair without aid of any kind or have had any kind of surgical procedure 
within the past 6 months that would af fect his /her ability to perform the study activities . 
8. Subjec ts must be willing to sign the IC and HIPAA forms to participate in the 
study.  
9. Subjec ts must be between 160cm (5’3) and 193cm (6’4) tall.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
 
 
Page 3 of 10 
DePuy THA fluoroscopy protocol  and statistical analysis  1. Pregnant, potentially pregnant or lactating females. To satisfy radiation protocol, 
each female subject will b e asked if she is pregnant, or possibly could be pregnant. A 
pregnant person will not be allowed to participate in the study  
2. Subjects with any kind of hip implant.  
3. Subjects who have had any past hip surgery, have pathological hip conditions 
and/or hip pain.  
4. Subjects who have had surgery within the past 6 months that would prohibit them 
from performing level walking , ascend and descend a ramp and rise from a chair  without 
aid or support of any kind.  
5. Subjects who are  unable to perform level walk ing, ascend and descend a ramp and 
rise from a chair without aid or support.  
6. Subjects who are unwilli ng to sign IC/HIPAA document . 
 
Study locations  
Subjec t Recruitment (both diseased/implanted and norma l groups):   
Practice of Dr. Charles DeCook:  
Northsi de Hospital - Forsyth  
1200 Northside Forsyth Dr.  
Cumming, GA 30041  
 
Computer Tom ography (CT) scans : 
Northside Hospital - Forsyth  
1200 Northside Forsyth Dr.  
Cumming, GA 30041  
 
Pre-operative , diseased and normal hip f luoroscopic e xams performed on all 2 0 subjects :  
Dougherty Engineering Building  
The University of Tennessee  
1512 Middle Dr.  
Knoxville, TN 37996  
 
Post-operative fluoroscopy data collection for impla nted subjects performed :  
Abercrombie Radiology  
Weisgarber Medical Center  
1112 Weisgarber Rd.  
Knoxville, TN 37909  
 
Analysis will take place at the University of Tennessee’s Center for Musculoskeletal Research  
laboratories:   
Science and Engineering Research Facility   
1414 Circle Dr.   
Knoxville, TN 37996  
 
CMR administrative offices:  
Perkins Hall   
1506 Middle Dr.   
 
 
Page 4 of 10 
DePuy THA fluoroscopy protocol  and statistical analysis  Knoxville, TN 37996  
 
Recruitment  and Consenting of Diseased Hip/Implanted Subjects  
Dr. DeC ook will recommend eligible patients for recruitment  that require THA who  will be  
implanted with  either the DePuy  Summit/Pinnacle THA or Corail/Pinnacle  THA . Dr. DeCook’s 
staff will review those patient s’ medical records to determine if they meet th e remaining 
eligibility requirements  for the study according to the study -specific criteria.  Dr. DeCook may 
discuss participation with potentially eligible par ticipants during regularly scheduled office visits 
or may recommend certain patients who are eligible to  his staff  who will then contact the patients 
to explain the study via telephone utilizing  a script  and inquire as to whether or not they are 
interested  in participating; if a patient is agreeable to participate,  s/he will schedule a visit to  Dr. 
DeCook’s practice where s/he will be consented by Dr. DeCook’s staff . Dr. DeCook  will not be 
present during the consenting process or during any of the procedure s to be conducted  to avoid 
possible patient coercion to participate.  
 
Recruitment and Consenting of Normal Hip Subjects  
For the ten  normal hip s, these participants will  be recruited from the  surgeon’s office by means 
of a displayed recruitment fly er. Potential subjects will be advised per  the flyer to contact Dr. 
DeCook’s assistant  to inform her of their willingness to particip ate and schedule a visit to Dr. 
DeCook’s practice  to discuss any questions they may have about the study and collect the 
inform ation from inclusion criteria listed above from the subjects to ensure eligibility 
requir ements are met. After Dr. DeCook’s staff has  determined eligibility requirements are met, 
s/he will consent the subject, using the IC/HIPAA as a guide, including the r isks and benefit s 
associated with participation and will answer any questions potential subjects may have about 
participation.  Signing this form gives Dr. DeCook’s staff  the ability to relate the information 
collected from the normal hip subje cts during th e consenting visit  to UT researchers  to aid in the 
interpretation of the results and correlate clinical outcomes versus kinematic results . After the 
subject is officially enrolled in the study (i.e., has signed IC/HIPAA form), Dr. DeCook will 
examine  the subject’s hip to determine  the normal cy of it and s/he  will be schedule d for  the CT 
scan.  
 
Procedures  
Computer Tomography  
Since the normal  and diseased, pre -operative  hip subjects  will undergo a computer tomography 
(CT) scan of the hip so researchers can create the bone models nece ssary to analyze the  hip data 
acquired after  the fluoroscopy collection . These normal and pre -operative bone models will be 
compared to the  computer -aided designed (CAD) bone  models created from data acquired from 
DePuy’s implant -specific information  (size, reference and lot numbers), all of which will be used 
in the analysis of the fluoroscopy and sound data obtained during data collection.  
 
The CT scans for the normal subject s and diseased/pre -operative THA patients will take place at 
Northside Hospital Forsyth [ 1200 Northside Forsyth Drive , Cumming, GA 30041 ] six inches 
distally on the femur and six inches proximally on the pelvis . The stu dy will  be submitted to 
Northside Hospital ’s Institutional Review Board for  review and approval . After CT scans have 
been conducted, they will be provided to UT researchers by mail/courier or secure electronic 
transfer to CMR researchers .  
 
 
Page 5 of 10 
DePuy THA fluoroscopy protocol  and statistical analysis   
Fluoroscopy Data Collec tion at the University of Tennessee   
Subjects with a normal hip will travel to Knoxville for the fluoroscopy/sound data collection one 
time, while subjects with a diseased and then implanted hip will travel to Knoxville for data 
collection twice , once pre -operatively and a second time at least 6 months post -operatively.  
  
In addition to fluoroscopy video, subjects will be videotaped from the torso down (to m aintain 
patient anonymity) while performing the activities (live feed perspective). The speed level of 
each trial will be based on the comfort level of the subjec t. Activities will be performed without 
the aid of handrails; however, one of the researchers will be ready and in close proximity to 
assist each patient in case the participant requires help. This precaution will be practiced for all 
participants, regardless of physical wellbeing, age or prior results; no assumptions will be made 
as to any participant’s capabilities.  
 
Subjects will be video -recorded from the waist down while performing the activities while under 
fluoroscopy surveillance. The speed level of each trial will be based on the comfort level of the 
patient. The fluoroscopic im ages will be stored digitally for subsequent analysis on secure 
servers and workstations at UT. In vivo hip kinematics will be assessed for all 10 normal 
subjects, the 10 d iseased hip/pre -operative subjec ts who will be assessed again after they have 
been i mplanted with THA at least six months post -operatively.  
 
On the day of data collection, t here will be at least three UT researchers present to conduct the 
fluoroscopic eval uations, as well as a State of Tennessee or ARRT certified Radiation 
Technician (RT) to run the x -ray component of the machine. These three UT researchers, 
graduate research assistants (GRAs), will be appointed by either Drs. Richard Komistek  or 
William Ha mel and will have significant experience with this particular tracking fluoroscope 
system ( TFS).  
 
Fluoroscopy Activit y 
Normal Gait (walking)  
1. With the fluoroscopic unit in the off position (no radiation), the subject will be asked to 
practice the activity.  
2. The subject will begin standing in a resting position and when ready will take a step 
leading with her/his implanted  (or normal in case of n ormal subjects)  hip in focus and 
proceed to walk at a comfortable pace for approximately 10 paces, or until instructed to 
stop.  
3. Once the subjec t and researchers are ready to begin after the practice, the subjec t will 
return to starting position.  
4. The radiation technician (RT) will start the fluoroscopic machine (x -ray on).  
5. The subjec t will perform the gait activity as the mobile fluoroscopy unit tracks  the 
implanted hip.  
6. The RT will stop the fluoroscopic procedure after the patient successfully performs the 
maneuver twice or after two minutes of fluoroscopic “on -time” elapses.  
 
Participants will be ask ed to practice the activit y to ensure  they can comfortably complete them  
and experience no pain  with the fluoroscopy machine off (no radiation) . The practice portion 
 
 
Page 6 of 10 
DePuy THA fluoroscopy protocol  and statistical analysis  without radiation will not be video -recorded.  During th e fluoroscopy procedure, the  implanted 
hip will be tracked by  the mobile fluoroscopy machine  and the hip joint is the only area in which 
radiation will be directed .  The subject will perform the activities  until successful movements of 
each activ ity have been acquired, or a fluoroscopic “on -time” of two minutes is achieved. The 
participant will be allowed to rest as necessary and be  instructed to stop the activities  at the first 
sign of pain.  
 
The fluoroscopic footage for these activities will be stored on digital video files on  a computer 
workstation, and participant information will be removed and replaced with identifiers by 
researchers selected by Dr. Komistek to lead the study , which will include graduate research 
assistants and other re searchers . All researchers wi th access  to identifiable subjec t data will sign 
statements of confidentiality. This de -identified data will then be uploaded onto a secure server.  
Each participant will be under fluoroscopic surveillance for less than or equal to 2 minutes and 
only the hip joint (from the fluoroscopy machine) will be recorded on the videotape.  Individual 
still frames will be collected from the fluoroscopic video and these frames will be evaluated for 
hip sliding or separation. These frames from subjec t fluoroscopy will be loaded into a database 
for analysis.  
 
Mobile Tracking Fluoroscopy System (TFS)  
The TFS is similar to a standard fluoroscope in that it emits x -rays in a stream that produces a 
motion picture x -ray of the object in question, in this case, the implante d joint.  The difference 
between the standard fluoroscope and the TFS is that the TFS is motorized with an automatic 
tracking system that monitors the surrounding environment and itself.  This allows the subject to 
move freely while the implanted joint is a ccurately tracked by the machine.  
 
The TFS is not currently FDA approved, and each study wherein the machine will be used must 
be approved by the State of Tennessee for use within the State of Tennessee. Approvals from 
both t he State of Tennessee and the IRBs of UTK  and Northside Hospital were acquired for the 
pre-operative stage of the study .  
 
Sound Data Acquisition  
Previously, the Center for Musculoskeletal Research has used in vivo sound sensors to detect 
sound within the hip and knee joints. These sensors have detected some remarkable sounds for 
different  bearing surfaces that represent variable interactive conditions.  Patients with normal 
knees, degenerative osteoarthritic knees and well -functioning THAs have been analyzed under in 
vivo conditions using video fluoroscopy and vibration sensors while perfo rming various normal 
day activities.  
 
For this study, the data capture set -up will consist of video cameras, accelerometers, signal 
conditione rs, a data acquisition system , and a syn chronization trigger.  Sound /vibration data 
collection will be performed simultaneously with the fluoroscopic exam to ensure the vibration 
data completely correlates with the 3D kinematics.  
 
Private Health Information/Medical Record Data  
The surgeon and his staff will provide subjects’ clinical information from their medical records – 
PHI – to Dr. Komistek and his researchers to aid in the interpretation of the results and correlate 
 
 
Page 7 of 10 
DePuy THA fluoroscopy protocol  and statistical analysis  clinical outcomes versus kinematic results, although only  researchers present during data 
collection or those appointed by Dr. Komistek to lead the study will have access to PHI; they 
will sign confidentiality statements.   
 
The clinical/demographic information acquired from the medical records with participant 
authorization obtained as required by HIPAA will include:  
 the range -of-motion  (pre-operative and 6 months post -operative) ,  
 activity level,  
 athletic activities able to perform,  
 DOB  (or age at time of surgery) , body weight, height, Body Mass Index (BMI)  
 date of surgery  
 pre-operative and post -operative HHS  
 previous medical assessments t hat are not a part of this particular research study, that 
may alter the kinemati c results, such as previous hip  x-rays,  
 post-operative time and any other conditions that may alter the kinematic results, such as 
back problems, ank le fusion, or contra -lateral hip  problems.  
 
The surgeon’s office will also relate the implant component information:   
 Size of  (including offsets) : acetabular cup, acetabular liner, femoral stem, femoral 
head  
 Product/Reference # of: acetabular cup, acetabular liner, femoral stem, femoral 
head  
 Lot # of: acetabular cup, acetabular liner, femoral stem, femoral head  
 
The subjec t data – fluoroscopy frames , video footage , and sound – will be de -identified by the 
researcher(s) who attend data collection or appointed by Dr. Komistek  and then stored on CMR’s 
secure server for use in future studies (if participant permission is obtained via IC); the 
individuals not indicated as Investigators with access to PHI will sign a pledges of 
confidentiality. Researchers would like to retain thi s de-identified data in our secure database so 
as to continue to add relevant, current data to our digital collection to help us work with 
manufacturers in the future to create better implants that last longer and will not require revision 
surgery. Partici pants will be asked if their de -identified data may remain a part of the CMR data 
collection for use in future studies in the IC. Likewise, should a patient choose to withdraw from 
the study, s/he will have the option as to whether or not data collected fr om them at the point of 
withdrawal may be used for data analysis or if their information should be provided to them and 
destroyed from CMR records; patients choosing to withdraw will be asked to complete a 
Revocation of Consent wherein they may indicate th eir preference regarding the data collected 
from them.  
 
Participant Confidentiality  
The investigators will ensure subjec t confidentiality is maintained throughout the study and after. 
Researchers not notated as Investigators of this study that have access to PHI will sign pledges of 
confidentiality.  
 
Hard Copy : 
 
 
Page 8 of 10 
DePuy THA fluoroscopy protocol  and statistical analysis  In compliance with HIPAA regulation s, all participants will have their identities withheld from 
all public files. Individuals not indicated as investigators below will have access to participant 
information and they will sign pledges of confidentiality. The personnel in the following list w ill 
have access to private participant information:  
 
List of Persons Involved in Research:  
 Dr. Richard Komistek, PI, UT Professor, Biomedical Engineering  
 Dr. William Hamel , Co-PI, UT Professor, Mechanical Engineering  
 Dr. Charles DeC ook, Co-PI, Northside Hospital , Orthopaedic Surgeon  
 Selected staff from  Dr. DeCook’s office . 
 Radiation technician(s) will operate the fluoroscopy machin e.  
 Rebecca  Robertson, Research Coordinator  III. 
 Researchers present during data collection at the University of Tennessee and /or the lead 
researchers appointed by Dr. Komistek.  
 * Undergraduate student researchers employed by CMR will be involved in 
analyzing the data after it has been collected, de -identified and transferred to 
CMR’s digital data collection. Since patient infor mation will be removed and 
replaced with the assigned identifiers before the data is transferred to the 
database, it will not be possible for these undergraduate students to be able to 
identify patients. They will only have access to the de -identified data  that has 
been uploaded onto the secure CMR digital collection. These student researchers 
will not have contact with patients.  
 Institutional Review Boards  
 The University of Tennessee  
 Northside Hospital  
 
BENEFITS  
The potential benefits from this study incl ude, but are not limited to:  
 Subjec t stipend  
 Better understanding of the joints analyzed with the same technique in the past.  
 Future implant design improvements based on the kinematic findings.  
 New and adv anced surgical techniques for TH A based on the res ults.  
 There are no direct health benefits to participants of the study.   
 
Remuneration /Compensation for Travel Expenses   
Subjects were paid a stipend agreed upon by the sponsor and were also compensated for their 
travel to Knoxville.  
 
Clinical Observations : 
There are no clinical observations made during this data collection or from the images obtained 
through data collection. There will be no radiology report generated for this procedure conducted 
as a result of this study. Therefore, no RT will  review such a report for the procedures, which 
would be the only way such a “significant problem” would be determined. No data will be 
returned to the surgeon’s office for evaluation or surgeon review, and therefore, the imaging 
 
 
Page 9 of 10 
DePuy THA fluoroscopy protocol  and statistical analysis  collected during this stud y will not potentially provide benefit to specific patients by influencing 
the physician’s treatment plan.  
 
METHODS TO OBTAIN INFORMED CONSENT  FROM PARTICIPANTS  
Informed consent will be obtained prior to any procedures  being conducted . Subjects from both 
cohorts who are agreeable to participate will schedule a visit to Dr. DeCook’s practice where 
s/he will b e consented by Dr. DeCook’s staff . Dr. DeCook w as not present during the consenting 
process to avoid possible patient coercion to participate.  Consenting staff  will use  the IC/HIPAA 
as a guide, including the risks and benefits associated with participation and will answer any 
questions potential subjects may have about participation.  
 
Phase 2: Post -Operative Fluoroscopy data collection  
For Phase 2 of the study,  only seven of the ten hips that were diseased and required a THA that 
participated in Phase 1 of the study in Knoxville were reachable to participate in post -operative 
fluoroscopy at Abercrombie.  Radiology in Knoxville, TN Weisgarber Medical Center, 1112 
Weisgarber Rd., Knoxville, TN 37909 .  
 
The fol lowing inclusion criteria w ere used to ensure hip subjects that participated in Phase 1 
meet eligibility for continuing participation in Phase 2:  
1. Subjects required a THA and were implanted with either Summit/Pinnacle THA or 
Corail/Pinnacle THA by Dr. Charles DeCook.  
2. All subjects are well past the required six months post -operative time.  
3. Subjec ts must be between 40 -85 years of age.  
4. Potential subjects  will have a body weight equal to or less than 300 lbs.  
5. Participants must have Body Mass Index (BMI) of less than 40.  
6. Potential subjects’ THAs should be judged clinically successful with a HHS >90.  
7. Participants must be able to walk on level ground without assistance.  
8. Subjects from the physician’s list who do not meet the study requirements will not be 
considered.  
9. Subjects must be willing to sign the Informed Consent (IC)/HIPAA form to participate in 
the study.  
 
To ensure that all subjects who participated in Phase 1 of the study still met all study eligibility 
requirements prior to undergoing the post -operative fluoroscopy procedure, a subject specific 
form was completed for each of the subjects prior to contact for scheduling of post -operative 
fluoroscopy visit. Dr. DeCook’s office staff will be responsible for reviewing the medical files of 
the subjects that participated in Phase 1 and using the checklist to ensure all subjects meet study 
criteria. If subjects m eet the criteria, they will then be contacted by Dr. DeCook’s office to 
inform the subjects that the second phase of the study is underway and to schedule their 
appointments to Abercrombie Radiology in Knoxville.  
 
 
The same reimbu rsement of travel expenses applied  to Phase 2 as was in place for Phase 1. To 
facilitate implanted subject post -operative participation and compe nsate for the delay between 
data collections, the stipend for the implanted group was increased.  
Due to protocol revisions (only performing gait activity), change in post -operative fluoroscopy 
 
 
Page 10 of 10 
DePuy THA fluoroscopy protocol  and statistical analysis  data collection locatio n (Abercrombie Radiology instead of UT campus), and increase in stipend, 
each subject will be consented again by UT researchers so subjects are aware and understand the 
changes to the study. After signing the revised IC form, s/he will be fitted with non -invasive, 
surface -based sou nd/vibration sensors placed at the closest distance to the hip joint interface, 
allowing for the capturing of sound emissions during the gait activity. The sensor will be 
securely attached using a spica dressing, a tight -fitting, sleeve -like article of clo thing, designed 
for the purpose of the study, and adjusted to subject size using integrated Velcro strips. The 
sensors will be connected to a data acquisition system that will also be connected to the subject 
by thin, ultra -lightweight cables while s/he pe rforms the level walking (gait) activity.  
 
In addition to fluoroscopy video, subjects will be videotaped from the torso down (to maintain 
subject anonymity) while performing the activity (live feed perspective) under fluoroscopy 
surveillance. The speed le vel of each trial will be based on the comfort level of the subject. The 
activity will be performed without the aid of handrails; however, one of the researchers will be 
ready and in close proximity to assist each subject in case the participant requires h elp. This 
precaution will be practiced for all participants, regardless of physical wellbeing, age or prior 
results; no assumptions will be made as to any participant’s capabilities.  
 
In vivo hip kinematics will be assessed for all 10 normal subjects, 10 d iseased hip/pre -operative 
subjects and the same 10 subjects will be assessed again after they complete the post -operative  
 
Statistical Analysis  
Basic descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) were analyzed for femoral head center 
displacement from the acetabulum center for both implanted (post -operative) and non -implanted 
(normal, pre -operative) cases. This was evaluated for one complete gait cycle for each subject.  
 
 
 
 
 