Clinical Trial Protocol with Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Study: The Effects of Cannabidiol on the Driving Ability of Healthy Adults: a Clinical Trial  
NCT#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Last updated: 9/27/2021  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  1   
Protocol Number & Study Protocol Title  
The effects of cannabidiol on the driving ability of healthy adults: a clinical trial  
 
Table of Contents  
Section  Page  
Study Team Composition  2 
Research Summary  3 
Background and Significance  4 
Objectives  5 
Study Design and Methodology  6 
Target Population and Recruitment  9 
Risk and Benefits  10 
Statistical Analysis  10 
Safety Monitoring and Unanticipated Event Reporting  11 
Study Duration  12 
Protected Health Information  12 
Informed Consent  12 
Confidentiality and Privacy  12 
Conflicts of Interest  13 
Publications and Presentations  13 
References  13 
 
 
 
Abbreviations List  
AE=Adverse event  
BRT=Brake reaction time  
CBD=Cannabidiol  
CO-I=Co -investigator  
DSST=Digital Symbol Substitution Test 
IRB=Institutional Review Board  
IT=Information Technology  
PHI=Protected health information  
PI=Principal Investigator  
PVT=Psychomotor Vigilance Test  
SRT=Simple Reaction Time test  
SSS=Stanford Sleepiness Scale  
THC=  Delta -9-tetrahydrocannabinol  
TMT=Trail Making Test 
US=United States  
VAMS=Visual Analog Mood Scale  
WVU=West Virginia University  
  
 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  2  Section I: Team and Research Summary  
 
Study Team Composition  
Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD:  Principal Investigator/Project Director .   
Dr. Rudisill is a Research Assistant Professor in the Department of Epidemiology at the West Virginia University (WVU) 
School of Public Health.  She is an injury epidemiologist and experienced traffic safety researcher with numerous 
manuscripts related to drug -impaired driving.  Even though she is an early -stage investigator, Dr. Rudisill has been the 
Co-I on multiple federal and state grants. Dr. Rudisill will oversee all aspects of this study including staff, data 
collection, data management, data analysis, summarization of findings, drafting manuscripts and progress reports, 
dissemination of findings, and fiscal oversight of the project.   
 
Karen (Kim) Innes, PhD, MSPH: Co- Investigator.  
Dr. Innes is a Professor in the Department of Epidemiology at the Wes t Virginia University School of Public Health .  
She is  an experienced clinical researcher and epidemiologist and has extensive background and expertise in clinical 
trials, survey research, chronic disease epidemiology, public health, and behavioral medicine, and have been 
continuously grant -funded as a PI/Co -PI in clinical intervention and epidemiologic research since 1998 .  She has 
authored over 230 peer -reviewed articles.  Dr. Innes will support Dr . Rudisill in all aspects of the conduct of this study.    
 
Gordon Smith, MD, MPH: Co- Investigator.  
Dr. Smith, a Stewart M. and Joyce N. Robbins Distinguished Professor of Epidemiology, is an internationally renowned 
physician -epidemiologist with expertise in injury epidemiology, traffic safety, and substance use at WVU.  He has 
continuously maintained research funding from the NIH and CDC.  To date, he has published over 200 peer reviewed 
manuscripts.  Dr. Smith will support Dr. Rudisill in all aspects of this study including training staff, data collection, dat a 
management, data analysis, summarization of findings, drafting manuscripts and progress reports, dissemination of 
findings.   
 
Sijin Wen, MA, MS, PhD: Co- Investigator.  
Dr. Wen is an Associate Professor in the Department of Biostatistics at the West Virgini a University School of Public 
Health.  Dr. Wen has extensive expertise in the preclinical and clinical studies.  Dr. Wen will support Dr Rudisill in the 
statistical analysis of this study.    
 
Dr. Treah Haggerty, MD, MS: Physician  
Dr. Haggerty is an Associa te Professor and practicing physician in the Department of Family Medicine at West Virginia 
University Medicine.  She is located at the West Virginia University Health Sciences Center and will serve as the 
consulting physician for this study.  She will be available on site for consultation should medical issues arise during 
testing.   
 
OTHER PERSONNEL  
 
Oscar Oviedo -Trespalacios, MSc, PhD: Consultant.  
Dr. Oviedo -Trespalacios  is a Strategic Research Fellow at the Centre for Accident Research and Road Safety in 
Queensland, Australia.  He is an expert in using driving simulators and technology in transportation safety research.  
He will serve as a consultant -in-kind to Dr. Rudisill regarding the driving simulation aspect of this study.   
 
Hourly Graduate Research Assistant: To be determined.  
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  3  The PI will hire a graduate student to assist with the completion of this project.  This individual will assist with the PI 
with various ta sks such as overseeing the allocation of study groups, administering the study drug and tests, data 
collection, data management, manuscript preparation, and data dissemination.    
 
Cynthia Fisher -Duda: Study Coordinator  
Ms. Fisher- Duda will serve as the Study Coordinator for this project.  She will assist the PI with the completion of this 
project such as recruiting, consenting participants, overseeing the allocation of study groups, administering the study 
drug and tests , data collection, data managemen t. 
 
Michelle L. Chidester: Study Personnel  
Ms. Chidester  will serve as additional study personnel for this project.  She will assist the PI with the completion of 
this project such as completing IRB submissions, amendments and regulatory document collections.  
 
Research Summary  
Study Population  – Forty overall healthy adults will be recruited and randomized to receive either 300 mg of CBD 
(N=20) or placebo (N=20).   The criteria for eligibility are as follows: 1) the participant must be currently enrolled as a 
WVU student, 2) be 18 -30 years of age at time of study, 3) have a current drivers’ license  issued from any state in the 
United States , 4) has driven at least once in the past 30 days 5 ) is able to speak and read English, 6 ) is willing to be 
randomized and comply with study requirements including a urine drug test on the day they consent to participate in 
the experiment and complete a test drive to ensure the absence of  simulation sickness, 7) not currently taking any 
daily prescription medications  other than birth control , 8) ha ve not been diagnosed with any serious chronic disease 
by a licensed healthcare provider (including but not limited to Alzheimer’s and related dementias, Parkinson’s disease 
or other neurodegenerative disorder, major depressive or anxiety disorder, schizophrenia or oth er serious mental 
illness, arrhythmias, cataracts, glaucoma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, epilepsy, sleep apnea, and 
fibromyalgia) , and 9) has an individual able to drive them home after testing or is willing to be driven home by study 
staff after testing completion.  
 
 Participants will be excluded if they 1) currently smoke or use tobacco products , 2) have used illegal drugs (including 
cocaine/crack, heroin, methamphetamine, 3,4 -methylenedioxy -methamphetamine, inhalants, phencyclidine, 
lysergeic acid, mushrooms, or marijuana)  in the past 30 days, 3) has consumed CBD  in the past 7 days, or 4) is 
currentl y pregnant or lactating .  The health conditions and substances noted above have all been associated with 
changes in driving ability or performance.   Also, limiting participants to those who are currently not using illegal 
drugs, tobacco products, and prescription medications may help minimize bias potentially caused by drug interactions 
with CBD or known impediments to driving performance from the medications themselves.   Because the safety of 
CBD on fetuses or neonates is unknown, individuals who are preg nant or lactating are excluded for safety reasons.   
 
Study Design  – This is a randomized, parallel -group, double -blind, exploratory two -arm trial to assess the effects of 
CBD on driving ability along with changes in psychological status (e.g., sedation) and cognitive function.   Forty healthy 
West Virginia University (WVU) students will be recruited for this study.  Email notifications about the study will be 
sent to the student body and flyers will be posted on boards throughout campus; this type of recruitment has been 
successful in our other studies.  Interested students can contact study personnel.  Study personnel will tell them 
about the study and pre -screen participants using a standardized checklist.  If students are eligible and still want to 
participate, they will be asked to meet at the research office.  After eligibility is reassessed and consent is obtained, 
the individual will be allocated and randomized to receive: (1) 300 mg of pure CBD oil or (N=20) (2) placebo matched 
in appearance and taste (N=20). After consuming the study drug, each individual will participate in a 25 –35-minute 
driving simulation  (which includes a practice drive and brake reaction test (BRT))  and have their driving performance 
measured. To assess changes in mental status  (i.e., sedation  and drowsiness ) and drug impairment -related cognitive 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  4  function, the VAMS, SSS, DSST, PVT, SRT, and TMT will also be administered to participants at baseline (prior to study 
drug consumption) and following completion of the driving simulation test. The primary outcome of this study will be 
driving performance, quantified using measures strongly associated with collision risk including number of lane 
departures, standard deviation of lateral position (i.e., weaving), brake reaction time, and collision occurrence.   
Secondary outcomes will be pre -post changes in well -validated measures of mental sedation (VAMS, SSS) and 
cognitive function (DSST, TMT, PVT, SRT ). We will also collect baseline demographic, health, and driving history data 
along wi th data at the end of the survey to assess participant satisfaction and tests of blinding.  The entire protocol for 
each participant will be completed in one day and should take 4 -4.5 hours to complete.  We chose a parallel design as 
opposed to a cross -over design to minimize participant burden (i.e., to avoid 2 testing sessions) and facilitate 
retention.  As CBD is a legal nutraceutical  that can be obtained over the counter, and it typically is well -tolerated, this 
study is minimal risk.  All data will be deidentified and stored on a secure server that is compliant with WVU 
Information Technology (IT) Department.  An overview of the protocol is below.  
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of protocol  
 
Study Duration  – 24 months  
 

    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  5  Section II: Design  
 
Background & Significance  
BACKGROUND.   Drug -impaired driving has outpaced alcohol -impaired driving in the United States (US) partly due to 
the passage of state medical and recreational marijuana use laws and the national opioid epidemic.1-4 Delta -9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive component of marijuana ( Cannabis sativa), is consistently the most 
prevalent drug identified among drivers nationally and its detection has increased nearly 50% since 2007.1,5-7  THC is 
know n to impair drivers’ psychomotor function, divided attention, lane tracking, and cognitive function, which can 
increase their risk of motor vehicle collision.8-13  While knowledge of the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic 
properties of marijuana are expanding, virtually nothing is known regarding the effects of cannabidiol (CBD), the non -
psychoactive component of marijuana, and its relationship with driver performance,14-16  despite rapidly increasing 
use and health claims.  
 
Although little is known about CBD’s effects, it is a legal substance in the US and is currently being added to a myriad 
of foods, beverages, tobacco products, and dietary supplements in oil or tincture form.17,18 CBD is immensely popular 
and sales are projected to hit $23 billion per y ear by 2025.19 A survey of US CBD consumers (N=2,409) revealed that 
many individuals purchase the product for general wellness or recreation (38%), but most use CBD to treat a medical 
condition (62%), such as pain, anxiety, depression, or insomnia.20  Whet her CBD actually helps these maladies is 
unclear; peer -reviewed placebo -controlled studies of CBD have only been conducted in small, unique clinical 
populations suffering from conditions such as post -traumatic stress, addiction, anxiety, multiple sclerosis , epilepsy, 
psychosis, movement disorders, or insomnia.21-40  While most studies involving clinical populations show that CBD is 
well -tolerated in high doses, it is not without its side effects; patients often claim to experience drowsiness and 
sedation.41-44  In fact, the Food and Drug Administration package insert for Epidiolex, which is prescription CBD oil for 
Lennox -Gastaut and Dravet syndromes in children, contains a warning about sedation and potential driver 
impairment.45  However, the effects of CBD in healthy adult populations is severely lacking, especially with regard to 
effects on driving .   
 
To our knowledge, only 16 placebo- controlled peer -reviewed studies of CBD have been conducted to date in healthy 
volunteers ; most of these studies have been conducted using males and virtually all have involved South American or 
European populations.44,46- 59  The sample sizes are small with 79% of these studies having fewer than 16 people (range 
5-57 participants); all these studies have suggested that CBD is sedating and anxiolytic but were not statistically 
significantly different from the effects of placebo, which is likely driven by the very small sample sizes.44,46- 59  Surveys 
indicate that females appear to use CBD more than males, but the known effects  of CBD are virtually unstudied in 
healthy females .20  Thus, it appears that CBD is likely sedating, but it has not been formally assessed in a placebo -
controlled trial in a healthy US population consisting of both sexes.   Additionally, to date, no peer -reviewed studies 
have investigated whether CBD alone affects the driving ability of healthy adults.    
 
Thus, the objectives  of this application are to investigate the effects of CBD on driving performance, psychological 
status (i.e., mood, drowsiness, sedation), and cognitive function in healthy adults aged 18 -30 years.  Driving 
performance will be assessed using a driving sim ulator, which directly correlates with actual driving ability, 60-64 while 
cognitive function and psychological status will be assessed using a battery of well -validated instruments widely used 
in the evaluation of drug impairment.65,66  Given that CBD products are growing exponentially in popularity among all 
age groups,20 and their effects in a healthy population are understudied, the positive impact  of this study is the 
collection of essential preliminary data regarding the potential adverse effects of C BD, which may unknowingly put 
drivers and other road users at increased risk of motor vehicle collision and subsequent morbidity and mortality.  
 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  6   
Objectives  
The objective /purpose  of this study  is to investigate the effects of CBD on driving performance, psychological status 
(i.e., mood, sedation , drowsiness), and cognitive function in healthy adults aged 18- 30 years.  This is because CBD is 
widely sold and consumed and there is some evidence that it may be sedating; however, this has never been 
evaluated in healthy adults.  The primary outcome  of this study will be driving performance, quantified using 
measures strongly  associated with collision risk, including number of lane departures, standard deviation of lateral 
position (i.e., weaving), brake reaction time, and collision occurrence. Driving performance will be assessed using a 
driving simulator .  Secondary outcomes  will be changes in well -validated measures of mental sedation and cognitive 
function which includes  performance on the VAMS, SSS, TMT, DSST, PVT, SRT.   The VAMS and SSS are Likert -type 
scales which assess mental and physical sedation and sleepiness, resp ectively, at that moment and time.  VAMS 
consists of 16 questions, while SSS only consists of 1.  These measures can be summed with higher scores equating to 
more sedation.  The SSS will be summed with greater perceived sleepiness receiving a larger score,  similar to the 
VAMS.  The DSST measures psychomotor speed, attention and working memory by requiring participants to translate 
numbers into symbols; the test is scored by the degree of completion and accuracy over a timed 9 0 second period.  
The TMT measur es executive function and consists of two parts; the first part requires participants to connect 
numbers in ascending order, while the second part requires individuals to connect numbers and letters in sequence.  
The test is scored by the time it takes to accurately complete each test.  Increases in time correlate with greater 
impairment.  PVT and SRT are tests given on a computer tablet.  They both measure participants reactions to stimuli.  
 
Study Design & Methodology  
This is a randomized, parallel -group , double -blind, exploratory two -arm trial to assess the effects of CBD on driving 
ability along with changes in psychological status (e.g., sedation) and cognitive function.  Thus, the data will be 
collected prospectively.  The methodology of the study is below.  
 
Study Design and Protocol Overview.  We propose a randomized, parallel -group, double -blind, exploratory two- arm 
trial to assess the effects of CBD on driving ability along with changes in psychological status (i.e., mood, drowsiness, 
sedation) and cognitive function. Forty healthy West Virginia University (WVU) students will be allocated and 
randomized to receive: (1) 300 mg of pure CBD oil or (N=20) (2) placebo matched in appearance and taste (N=20). 
After consuming the study drug, ea ch individual will participate in a 25 –35-minute  driving simulation , which includes a 
practice drive and brake reaction test,  and their driving performance measured. To assess changes in psychological 
status (i.e., mood, drowsiness, sedation) and drug impairment -related cognitive function, the VAMS, SSS, DSST, TMT, 
PVT, SRT will also be administered to participants at baseline (prior to study drug consumption) and following 
completion of the driving simulation test. The  primary outcome  of this study  will be driving performance, quantified 
using measures strongly associated with collision risk including number of lane departures, standard deviation of 
lateral position (i.e. weaving), reaction time, and collision occurrence.78-80   Secondary outcomes will be pre -post 
changes in well -validated measures of mood, drowsiness, mental sedation (VAMS, SSS) and cognitive function (DSST, 
TMT, PVT  SRT).69-76  We will also collect baseline demographic, health  (including body mass index), and driving history 
data, including driving habits, along with data at the end of the survey to assess participant satisfaction and tests of SIGNIFICANCE .   West Virginia has a traffic fatality rate that is 70% greater than the national rate.67 While the exact 
reason for this disparity is unclear, previous studies have suggested that drug impaired driving may be partly 
responsible.68  Not only is the traffic fatality rate elevated in WV, but our preliminary studies indicate that CBD 
consumption is high as well.  Among WVU students, our preliminary study found that 60% of drivers surveyed had 
consumed CBD (see section C.5.4.1).  This demonstrates the high usage  in the population and the need to determine 
if CBD is safe for drivers to consume not only nationally, but also in WV, which already suffers from such a disparate 
traffic fatality rate.  These findings could facilitate public health intervention, driver e ducation, and/or legislative 
initiatives to protect this high -risk population of drivers.  
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  7  blinding.  The en tire protocol will be completed in one day and should take 4 -4.5 hours to complete for each 
participant.  We chose a parallel RCT design as opposed to a cross -over RCT to minimize participant burden, while still 
being able to study both within individual ( i.e., test battery results) and between group effects (i.e., simulator and test 
battery performance).  
 
Study Population, Eligibility, Setting, and Recruitment.  Forty healthy adults will be recruited and randomized to 
receive either 300 mg of CBD (N=20) or placebo (N=20).   The criteria for eligibility are as follows: 1) the participant 
must be currently enrolled as a WVU student, 2) be 18 -30 years of age at time of study, 3) have a current drivers’ 
license issued from any state in the United States, 4) has driven at least once in the past 30 days 5) is able to speak 
and read English, 6) is willing to be randomized and comply with study requirements including a urine drug test on the 
day they consent to participate in the experiment and complete a test drive to ensure the absence of  simulation 
sickness, 7) not currently taking any daily prescription medications other than birth control, 8) have not been 
diagnosed with any serious chronic disease by a licensed healthcare provider (including but not limited to Alzheimer’s 
and related dementias, Parkinson’s disease or other neurodegenerative disorder, major depressive or anxiety 
disorder, schizophrenia or other serious mental illness, arrhythmias, cataracts, glaucoma, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, diabetes, epilepsy, sleep apnea, and fibromyalgia), and 9) has an individual able to drive them 
home after testing or is willing to be driven home by study staff after testing completion.  
 
 Participants will be excluded if they 1) currently smoke or use tobacco  products , 2) have used illegal drugs (including 
cocaine/crack, heroin, methamphetamine, 3,4 -methylenedioxy -methamphetamine, inhalants, phencyclidine, 
lysergeic acid, mushrooms, or marijuana)  in the past 30 days, 3) has consumed CBD  in the past 7 days, or 4) is 
currently pregnant or lactating .   The health conditions and substances noted above have all been associated with 
changes in driving ability or performance.86-115 Also, limiting participants to those who are currently not using illegal 
drugs, tobacco products, and prescription medications may help minimize bias potentially caused by drug interactions 
with CBD or known impediments to driving performance from the med ications themselves.84 Participants  will be 
recruited from WVU.  Email notifications about the study will be sent to the student body and flyers will be posted on 
boards throughout campus; this type of recruitment has been successful in other studies.116 The study will take place 
at the WVU Health Sciences Center .  
 
Consent, Screening, and Baseline Assessments.  Students who are interested in participating in the study will be 
contacted via study personnel.  Participants will be given a brief overview of the study and its purpose and will be 
initially screened for eligibility using a standardized screening checklist.  If the individual meets the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria, they will be invited to participate in the study.  Participants will be given a list of instructions prior 
to their assessment.  While participants should not be taking any routine prescription medications as part of the 
inclusion criteria, they will be told to abstain from taking any other types of medications including nutraceutical s, 
over -the-counter medications, vitamins, supplements 24 hours prior to coming to their appointment.  Caffeine and 
alcohol should also not be consumed within 1 0 hours of their appointment.  They will be instructed to get at least 6 
hours of sleep the night prior and to only consume water prior to their scheduled visit.  
 
At the research office, study personnel will explain the requirements, re -screen the participant, and review the 
consent form with each individual in a private room and obtain signed consent.  After consenting, the participant will 
be asked to provide a urine sample which will be analyzed immediately onsite for potentially impairing or illicit drugs 
via a rapid urine test.  If the individual tests positive for any potentially impairing substance, they will not be able to 
participate in the study. Anyone who tests positive for a drug will be referred to the Carruth Center on campus .  If a 
participant’s sample tests negative, they will then be allowed to practice on the driving simulator for a pproximately 
10 minutes prior to engaging in any other study activities.  This is necessary as some individuals who are prone to 
motion sickness may experience brief, mild nausea (e.g., simulator sickness).85 If there is evidence of simulator 
sickness, the  individual will not be able to participate in the study, as they will likely not be able to complete the 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  8  protocol.  Any reasons as to why an individual is not eligible to participate will be documented in a screening log. If no 
simulation sickness is obse rved, the student will then take the standardized and pilot -tested baseline survey regarding 
their demographics, health  (including body mass index), and driving history along with the VAMS, SSS, TMT, DSST, 
PVT, and SRT tests.    
 
These tests have all been deemed valid and reliable instruments and have been described in detail elsewhere. 69-
76,78,117- 119 The tests will be administered by trained study personnel via a computer tablet and/or paper and pencil; 
personnel will then transfer the collected data to a secure, electronic database. Participants will also be given a 
standardized breakfast after baseline assessment.  
 
Allocation, Randomization and Blinding.  Participants will be randomized immediately after baseline assessments are 
completed to the CBD (N=20) or placebo group (N=20) using a sex- stratified 1:1 random block design to ensure equal 
distribution among treatment groups  and sex .120  The participant and the PI will be unaware of group assignment (i.e. 
double -blind).  Dr . Wen, who will not have contact with participants, will generate a randomized assignment master 
list and provide sequentially numbered envelopes containing group assignment to the team member that helps 
consent participants.  This team member will assign the unique number from the next envelope in sequence as the 
participant’s study identification number and will record the participant’s information in a secure, electronic master 
databas e.   
 
Intervention .  Protocol A consists of a 300 mg dosage of CBD oil  which will be consumed orally .  This dosage was 
chosen as it has been used in other studies consisting of both healthy and clinical populations and is well -tolerated 
with no major adve rse events.46,51,52,54,55,59,121- 123 CBD will be obtained from Zatural, a CBD manufacturer from Eden, 
Idaho.  The CBD oil will be tested by Botanacor Laboratories (Denver, CO) for microbials, potency, heavy metals, trace 
THC, pesticides, and residual solvents to ensure purity , label accuracy,  and safety; copies of laboratory reports will be 
maintained on premise .  Protocol B is a placebo matched on appearance to the treatment  (i.e., avocado oil potentially 
colored with food coloring) .  Both the CBD oil and placebo will be matched on taste (i.e., peppermint -flavored oil) 
prior to dispensing to each participant.  After consumption of the respective protocol drug, the participant will be 
given a standardized meal and will then wait for 120 minutes to allow for digestion and for CBD to begin taking effect; 
this time frame was chosen based on the pharmacodynamics of CBD along with the consideration of participant 
burden (max absorption 2 -5 hours).44,124 Next, 
individuals will undergo a driving simulation and all 
participants will drive the same course. The simulator 
presents the individual with real life driving scenarios 
and is equipped with screens, a steering wheel, signals, 
and pedals  (Figure 2) .  The participant will be instructed 
to drive the course for 25 -35 minutes  (this includes a 
practice drive and brake reaction time (BRT)) .  They will 
be instructed to follow normal driving rules, follow 
speed limits, and maintain constant speed and position 
within the lane, and brake when necessary.  The 
simulation will include  highway , suburban, rural, and 
urban driving s cenario s which will incorporate turns, 
changes in speed, and avoidance of cars/pedestrians; 
this course sequence and times were chosen to minimize simulator sickness.125  The simulator can monitor numerous 
aspects of drivers’ performance and collect the data which is then downloaded and analyzed.  Since we are 
investigating sedation and potential impairment, BRT , lateral position in the lane, lane departures, and collisio ns are 
the most telling performance measures. 79,80 After the simulation, participants will retake the VAMS, SSS, TMT, DSST, 

    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  9  PVT, SRT and complete an end of study questionnaire.  The questionnaire will inquire about acceptability and tests of 
blinding.  
 
Participant Compensation and Safety.  All individuals who complete the study will receive a $ 50 -gift card for their 
time and participation. All participants will be encouraged to report any adverse events (AE) to study staff during and 
after their participation in the study (i.e., up to 24 hours afterwards) and a physician (Dr. Haggerty) is available if 
needed. However, the half -life of consumed CBD is approximately 17 hours.44,124The PI will report AEs to the WVU 
Institutional Review Board (IRB).  All study  personnel will have completed Human Subjects Training and the PI will 
obtain WVU IRB approval prior to study inception.   As part of the inclusion criteria of the study, participants will be 
required to have a friend take them home after testing or they must agree to be transported home by study staff.  We 
will also advise all study participants not to drive 24 hours post -testin g for safety purposes . 
 
Data Collection, Management and Analysis.  All collected data will be entered by study staff into the secure, de -
identified database and maintained in accordance with WVU IRB and Informati on Technology.  All analyses will be 
performed in SAS (Cary, NC).   The variables to be collected and their source are summarized in Table 2 .  Missing data 
will be multipl y imputed to allow inclusion of all participants regardless of compliance.126-128 We will perform both an 
intent -to-treat analysis based on initial assignment and a protocol analysis, excluding those who fail to complete the 
study.129  Both between and wit hin-group analyses will be conducted.  Demographic characteristics and driving habits 
will be compared between groups via descriptive statistics to ensure proper randomization; we will also investigate 
tests of blinding by comparing 
accuracy of group assig nment 
(perceived group assignment 
will be asked on end of study 
survey). If dif ferences are 
noted, models can be adjusted. 
For between group effects, the 
data will be compared using 
Student’s T -tests and/or ANOVA 
for continuous variables if the 
data are no rmally distributed; if 
non-normally distributed a 
Mann -Whitney test may be 
utilized.130  For within group 
effects, the data will be 
compared using paired 
Student’s T -tests (for normally 
distributed continuous  paired 
observations ) or Wilcoxon 
signed -rank t est (for those 
continuous paired observations 
not normally distributed).  We 
will perform a correlation using 
Pearson’s R test between the 
variables collected for Aims 1 
and 2, both between and within 
groups, to assess whether 
driving performance is 

    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  10  correl ated with psychological or cognitive testing measures.  Data will also be analyzed via sex as well.  
 
 
As one can see, there is minimal risk to participants.  T here is no direct benefit to participants. However, there are 
potential benefits to society that offset the potential risks of this study, which are minimal.  The findings of this study 
will be extremely informative to the public, medical providers, policy makers, and public health practitioners.  
Cannabidiol is commonly used drug, yet its effects in healthy populations are virtually unknown.  Thus, the risk vs. 
benefit is reasonable . 
  
 
Target Population & Recruitment Methods  
Our sample size is 40 individuals.  We chose this number based on an a priori power analysis.   
 
Our inclusion and exclusions criteria are as follows: 1) the participant must be currently enrolled as a WVU student, 2) 
be 18- 30 years of age at time of study , 3) have a current drivers’ license issued from any state in the United States, 4) 
has driven at least once in the past 30 days 5) is able to speak and read English, 6) is willing to be randomized and 
comply with study requirements including a urine drug test on the day they consent to participate in the experiment 
and complete a test drive to ensure the absence of  simulation sickness, 7) not currently taking any daily prescription 
medications other than birth control, 8) have not been diagnosed with any serious chronic disease by a licensed 
healthcare provider (including but not limited to Alzheimer’s and related dementias, Parkinson’s disease or other 
neurodegenerative disorder, major depressive or anxiety disorder, schizophrenia or other serious mental illness, 
arrhythmias, cataracts, glaucoma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, epilepsy, sleep apnea, and 
fibromyalgia), and 9) has an individual able to drive them home after testing or is willing to be driven home by study 
staff after testing completion.  
 
 Participants will be excluded if they 1) currently smoke or use tobacco products , 2) have used illegal drugs (including 
cocaine/crack, heroin, methamphetamine, 3,4 -methylenedioxy -methamphetamine, inhalants, phencyclidine, 
lysergeic acid, m ushrooms, or marijuana)  in the past 30 days, 3) has consumed CBD  in the past 7 days, or 4) is 
currently pregnant or lactating . The health conditions and substances noted above have all been associated with 
changes in driving ability or performance.   Also,  limiting participants to those who are currently not using illegal 
drugs, tobacco products, and prescription medications may help minimize bias potentially caused by drug interactions 
with CBD or known impediments to driving performance from the medicatio ns themselves.  
  
Thus, we needed to specify the inclusion and exclusion criteria to avoid confounding.  We wanted a healthy 
population of drivers (i.e., not on medications nor without complex health conditions) to minimize confounding.  
Drivers older than 30 will probably be more likely to take medications and/or be diagnosed with a chronic condition.  
As long as a student meets the inclusion and exclusion criteria, they will be able to participate.  Thus, we will not limit 
anyone by gender or race.  As mentioned previously, we will recruit via flyers/posters and via emails to the student 
body.  All study advertisement will state that this is a research project conducted by the Department of Epidemiology, 
the PI’s contact information will be included along w ith the time commitment, inclusion/exclusion criteria, voluntary 
participation and that the WVU IRB approval is on file.  
 
 
 
Risk & Benefit  
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  11  Risk –There is minimal risk to participants.  The first concern may be the small risk of a data breaches.  However, this 
should be minimal as participants will be assigned an identification/study number.  All other data will be stored on a 
secure virtual environment maintained by WVU’s Information Technology department that only study personnel will 
have access to.  A second minimal concern is momentary motion sickness from the driving simulator (e.g., simulator 
sickness); some individuals may report feeling br ief nausea from the simulator.  It typically clears immediately when 
the simulation is stopped.  If participants experience this, the trial will stop immediately.  The third  risk involves the 
CBD itself.  CBD comes from the Cannabis Sativa plant that must have < 0.3% delta -9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) by 
federal law.  THC is the psychoactive component of Cannabis.  Thus, the CBD oil can contain very trace amounts of 
THC; thus, it is  theoretically  possible that an individual could test positive for THC/ mariju ana on an administered  drug 
test.  The CBD oil obtained for this study will be obtained from Za tural, a CBD manufacturer from Eden, Idaho.  Zatural 
does attempt to remove THC from their product.  The CBD oil will be tested by Botanacor Laboratories (Denver , CO) 
for microbials, potency, heavy metals, trace THC, pesticides, and residual solvents to ensure purity, label accuracy, 
compliance, and safety .  Testing of the product has shown that it is free of microbials, heavy metals, pesticides, and 
residual solv ents.  Potency tests have shown that the concentration of CBD is accurate and that THC and THCa (a 
chemical precursor of THC) were not detected by this test’s level of quantitation.  Trace THC tests, which have a very 
low level of quantitation (i.e., 0.001 %), detected no THCa, and 0.006% THC, which is well below acceptable limits 
(legal limit is 0.3%).  Copies of laboratory reports will be maintained on premise.   There are additional minimal risks 
with the CBD itself.  Very little research exists on the eff ects of CBD even though it is a legal product.  The CBD used in 
this study is a nutraceutical and it is not regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration.  The United 
States Food and Drug Administration does regulate Epidiolex, which is the p rescription version of CBD oil prescribed 
to treat seizure disorders.  According to the package insert for Epidiolex (available at: 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2018/210365lbl.pdf ) and the United States Food and Drug 
Administration website (available at: https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer -updates/what -you-need -know -and-
what -were -working -find-out-about -products -containing -cannabis -or-cannabis ), several side effects of prescription 
CBD oil have been noted and could potentially harm  participants.  Prescription CBD oil can cause liver injury/hepatic 
dysfunction by elevating liver enzymes such as  alanine aminotransferase [ALT] and/or aspartate aminotransferase 
[AST]).  Prescription CBD oil can interact with other drugs or alcohol the participant may be taking potentially resulting 
in serious side effects.  Mainly, using CBD oil with alcohol or othe r drugs, especially those used to treat anxiety, panic, 
stress, or sleep disorders, could slow brain activity, and increase the risk of sedation and/or drowsiness, which could 
lead to injury.  Prescription CBD oil has also been shown to impact the gastroin testinal tract with side effects such as 
decreased appetite, diarrhea, weight loss, gastroenteritis, and abdominal pain/discomfort.  Prescription CBD oil has 
also been shown to affect the nervous system and cause somnolence (drowsiness or sleepiness), leth argy, fatigue, 
malaise, insomnia, poor sleep quality, irritability, agitation, aggression, anger, drooling, or gait disturbances.  Anti -
epileptic drugs, such as prescription CBD oil, have been associated with suicidal behavior and/or suicide ideation.   
Prescription CBD oil has also caused hypersensitivity reactions, rashes, hypoxia, respiratory failure, and infection.  
Studies in animals exposed to CBD oil have also shown male reproductive toxicity, or damage to fertility in males or 
male off-spring of wom en who have been exposed to CBD oil.  For this study, w e are using 300 mg of CBD which is a 
relatively small dose. This dosage was chosen as it has been used in other studies consisting of both healthy and 
clinical populations and is generally well-tolerat ed with no major adverse events ; most studies use 150 -600 mg, while 
some have used >1,200 mg. 46,51,52,54,55,59,121- 123    
 
 
 
Benefit  –There is no direct benefit to participants. However, there are potential benefits to society that offset the 
potential risks of this study, which are minimal.  The findings of this study will be extremely informative to the public, 
medical providers, policy  makers, and public health practitioners.  Cannabidiol is commonly used nutraceutical , yet its 
effects in healthy populations are virtually unknown.  Thus, the risk vs. benefit is reasonable.  
 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  12  Statistical Analysis Plan  
All collected data will be 
entered by study staff into the 
secure, de -identified database 
and maintained in accordance 
with WVU IRB.  All analyses will 
be performed in SAS (Cary, NC).  
The primary outcome of this 
study will be driving 
performance, including number 
of lane departures, standard 
deviation of lateral position (i.e., 
weaving), mean brake reaction 
time, and number of collisions 
(Aim 1). Secondary outcomes 
will be pre -post changes in well -
validated measures of mental 
sedation (SSS, VAMS) and 
cogni tive function (DSST, TMT, 
PVT, SRT) (Aim 2).  The variables 
that will be collected and their 
source are summarized in Table 
2.  Missing data will be multiply 
imputed to allow inclusion of all 
participants regardless of 
compliance.118-120  We will 
perform both an intent -to-treat 
analysis based on initial 
assignment and a protocol 
analysis, excluding those who fail to complete the study .121Both between and within -group analyses will be 
conducted.  Demographic characteristics will be compared between groups via descriptive statistics to ensure proper 
randomi zation; we will also investigate tests of blinding by comparing accuracy of group assignment (perceived group 
assignment will be asked on end of study survey).  For between group effects, the data will be compared using 
Student’s T -tests and/or ANOVA for continuous variables if the data are normally distributed; if non -normally 
distributed a Mann -Whitney test may be utilized.122  For within group effects, the data will be compared using paired 
Studen t’s T- tests (for continuous paired observations which are normally distributed) or Wilcoxon signed -rank test 
(for continuous paired observations which are not normally distributed).  We will perform a correlation using 
Pearson’s R test between the variables collected for Aims 1 and 2, both between and within groups, to assess whether 
driving performance is correlated with psychological or cognitive testing measures. Data will also be analyzed via sex.  
 
Sample Size  – We conducted an analysis to ensure adequate sample size and power.  The analysis was based on mean 
reaction time, which is one of the primary outcomes between groups.  A total sample size of 26 students with a large 
effect size of 0.7 and α=0.05 using a two -sided, two -sample equal va riance t -test achieves 80% power to reject the 
null hypothesis of equal means.131 Thus, our total sample size (N=40) should be more than adequate for this study.  
 
 
Data Safety Monitoring  – A Data Safety Monitoring Board will not be appointed for this stu dy unless required.  
 

    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  13  Safety Monitoring & Unanticipated Event Reporting  
Study personnel will ensure that potential study participants fully understand study procedures and requirements 
before signing the consent, stress that they are under no obligation to participate and refusal to enroll in the study 
will in no way affect their care or university standing, and that they are fully aware that they can withdraw from the 
study at any time. In addition, all participants and study team members will be encouraged to report any adverse 
events (AE). The PI will promptly report AEs to the Institutional Review Board according to protocol and Institutional 
Review Board policies; complete an AE form and grade the AE.  If any AE is considered serious and unexpected, the 
event must be reported to the IRB within 7 days from the time the study  team receives knowledge of the event. 
Likewise, any unanticipated problems that occur will be reported to the Institutional Review Board within 7 days from 
the time the study team received knowledge of the event. Monitoring of this study will be performed  by the PI 
through annual review. In addition, the PI and other key personnel, will review any adverse events as they may occur 
in each subject, both during testing and afterward. No significant AEs are anticipated but should any occur the event 
will be promptly reported to the Institutional Review Board. Any unanticipated or serious AE will require re -evaluation 
of the risk of the study. Study staff will contact all participants 8- 12 hours post testing and approximately 24 hours 
post testing to ensure no AEs occurred.  We will advise all study participants not to drive 24 hours post- testing.  As 
part of the inclusion criteria of the study, participants will need to have a friend escort them home after testing or 
they must agree to being brought home by stud y staff.    Dr. Haggerty will also be available during testing incase issues 
arise during testing.  
 
 
Study Duration & Timeline  
The projected timeline of this study is below.  It should take 24 months to complete.   
 
C5.14. Projected Timeline (task and months to complete)  
TASK  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 
1. Recruitment  X X                       
2. Conduct testing   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X       
3. Data management & analysis                   X X X X    
4. Manuscript preparation                     X X X X  
5. Dissemination                        X X 
 
Section III: Informed Consent Process  
 
Protected Health Information (PHI)  
There will be PHI collected from this study.  This will mainly come from the consent process.  We will obviously collect 
the person’s name on the consent form.  After this, they will be assigned a study identification number and everything 
else will be de- identified.  We will ask if they have any chronic medical conditions or take medication or illegal drugs.  
If they do, they can’t participate in the study.   
 
 
Informed Consent Process  
Dr. Rudisill or her designee will perform the written consent process, which will take place in her office which is 
private.  The Informed Consent Form (ICF) will be written in lay terms and at a 6th grade reading level.  All study 
participants will be 18 or over so assent will not be necessary.   
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  14   
 
 
Confidentiality & Privacy  
Confidentiality  – All data collected will be kept for a minimum of 3 years after the conclusion of the research project.  
Physical copies of data collected will be locked in a drawer or file cabinet, within the PI’s locked office.  Digital data 
will be stored on an encrypted, password protected database located on a secure server maintained by WVU IT 
Department.  All participant identifiers will be stored separately from the data collected.  
 
Privacy – Data will be stored securely to protect the privacy of participants.  Only the minimum amount of data will be 
collected to ensure participant privacy.  The driving simulation and neurocognitive tests will occur in a quiet, secured 
office to maintain priv acy.   
 
A Federal Certificate of Confidentiality  will be obtained if necessary to further protect participants.   
 
 
Section IV: Other Considerations  
 
Conflict of Interest  
The PI and Co -Investigators have no conflicts of interest.  
 
Publications, Presentations, & References  
The PI will likely present the results of this study at one of the following conferences: Transportation Research Board, 
Society for the Advancement of Violence and Injury Prevention, American Public Health Associ ation.  
 
The PI will likely publish the results of this study in one of the following journals: American Journal of Epidemiology, 
Injury Prevention  
 
 
References  
 
1. Berning A, R C, K. W. Results of the 2013 -2014 National Roadside Survey of Alcohol and Drug Use by Drivers. 
Washington DC: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration; 2015.  
 
2. Brady JE, Li G. Prevalence of alcohol and other drugs in fatally injured drivers. Addiction 2013;108(1):104 -114.  
 3. Wilson FA, Stimpson JP, Pagan JA. Fatal crashes from drivers testing positive for drugs in the U.S., 1993 -2010. 
Public Health Rep 2014;129(4):342- 50. 
 4. Rudisill TM, Zhao S, Abate MA, Coben JH, Zhu M. Trends in drug use among drivers killed in U.S. traffic crashes, 
1999- 2010. Accid Anal Prev 2014;70:178 -87. 
 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  15  5. Lacey JH, Kelley -Baker T, Furr-Holden D, Voas RB, Romano E, Ramirez A, et al. 2007 National roadside survey of 
alcohol and drug use by drivers: drug results In: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, editor. Washington DC, 
2009.  
 6. Walsh JM, Flegel R, Atkins R, Cangianelli LA, Cooper C, Welsh C, et al. Drug and alcohol use among drivers 
admitted to a Level -1 trauma center. Accid Anal Prev 2005;37(5):894- 901.  
 7. Terhune KW, Hendricks DL, Michalovic YG, Bogeman SC, Santiga P, Blomberg R, et al. The incidence and role of 
drugs in fatally injured drivers. In: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, editor. Washington DC, 1992.  
 8. Hartman RL, Huestis MA. Cannabis effects on driving skills. Clin Ch em 2013;59(3):478- 92. 
 9. Hartman RL, Brown TL, Milavetz G, Spurgin A, Pierce RS, Gorelick DA, et al. Cannabis effects on driving lateral 
control with and without alcohol. Drug Alcohol Depend 2015;154:25- 37. 
 10. Hartman RL, Brown TL, Milavetz G, Spurgin A , Pierce RS, Gorelick DA, et al. Cannabis effects on driving 
longitudinal control with and without alcohol. J Appl Toxicol 2016;36(11):1418 -29. 
 11. Moskowitz H. Marihuana and driving. Accid Anal Prev. 1985 Aug;17(4):323- 45. 
 12. Ramaekers JG, Robbe HW, O' Hanlon JF. Marijuana, alcohol and actual driving performance. Hum 
Psychopharmacol 2000;15(7):551- 558.  
 
13. Robbe H, JF OH. Marijuana and actual driving performance. In: Dept of Transporttion, editor. Washington DC, 
1993.  
 
14. Andre CM, Hausman J -F, Guerrie ro G. Cannabis sativa: The Plant of the Thousand and One Molecules. Front 
Plant Sci. 2016; 7:19-. 
 15. Bhattacharyya SSS. Opposite effects of -9- tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol on human brain function and 
psychopathology. Neuropsychopharmacology 2010; 35(3):764- 774.  
 16. Millar SA, Stone NL, Yates AS, O'Sullivan SE. A Systematic Review on the Pharmacokinetics of Cannabidiol in 
Humans. Front Pharmacol 2018;9:1365.  
 17. Bonn -Miller MO, Loflin MJE, Thomas BF, Marcu JP, Hyke T, Vandrey R. Labeling Accuracy of Cannabidiol Extracts 
Sold OnlineLabeling Accuracy of Cannabidiol Extracts Sold OnlineLetters. JAMA 2017;318(17):1708- 1709.  
 18. Vandrey R, Raber JC, Raber ME, Douglass B, Miller C, Bonn -Miller MO. Cannabinoid Dose and Label Accuracy in 
Edible M edical Cannabis Products. JAMA 2015;313(24):2491-3.  
 
19. Mikulic M. Total U.S. cannabidiol consumer sales from 2014 to 2022.  Statista 2019 [22 Aug 2019]; Available 
from: http://statista.com/statistics/760498/total -us-cbd-sales/ . 
 20. Corroon J, Phillips J A. A Cross -Sectional Study of Cannabidiol Users. Cannabis Cannabinoid Res 2018;3(1):152-
161.  
 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  16  21. Peres FF, Lima AC, Hallak JEC, Crippa JA, Silva RH, Abílio VC. Cannabidiol as a promising strategy to treat and 
prevent movement disorders? Front Pharmacol. 2 018; 9.  
 
22. Premoli M, Aria F, Bonini SA, Maccarinelli G, Gianoncelli A, Pina SD, et al. Cannabidiol: Recent advances and new 
insights for neuropsychiatric disorders treatment. Life Sci. 2019; 224:120- 7. 
 
23. Prud’Homme M, Cata R, Jutras -Aswad D. Cannabid iol as an intervention for addictive behaviors: A systematic 
review of the evidence. Subst  Abuse . 2015; 9:33- 8. 
 
24. Rohleder C, Müller JK, Lange B, Leweke FM. Cannabidiol as a potential new type of an antipsychotic. A critical 
review of the evidence. Fron t Pharmacol. 2016; 7.  
 
25. Soares VP, Campos AC. Evidences for the anti -panic actions of cannabidiol. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2017; 15:291 -
9. 
 26. Turna J, Syan SK, Frey BN, Rush B, Costello MJ, Weiss M, et al. Cannabidiol as a Novel Candidate Alcohol Use 
Disorder Pharmacotherapy: A Systematic Review. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2019; 43:550- 63. 
 27. Zuardi AW, Crippa JA, Hallak JE, Bhattacharyya S, Atakan Z, Martin -Santos R, et al. A critical review of the 
antipsychotic effects of cannabidiol: 30 years of a translational investigation. Current Pharmaceutical Design 2012;18(32):5131- 5140.  
 28. Bitencourt RM, Takahashi RN. Cannabidiol as a therapeutic alternative for post -traumatic stress disorder: From 
bench research to confirmation in human trials. Front Neurosci. 2 018; 12.  
 29. Blessing EM, Steenkamp MM, Manzanares J, Marmar CR. Cannabidiol as a Potential Treatment for Anxiety 
Disorders. Neurotherapeutics 2015;12(4):825- 836.  
 30. Burstein S. Cannabidiol (CBD) and its analogs: A review of their effects on inflammatio n. Bioorganic and 
Medicinal Chemistry 2015;23(7):1377- 1385.  
 31. Celius EG, Vila C. The influence of THC:CBD oromucosal spray on driving ability in patients with multiple 
sclerosis- related spasticity. Brain and Behavior 2018;8(5).  
 
32. de Mello Schier AR, de Oliveira Ribeiro NP, Coutinho DS, Machado S, Arias -Carrión O, Crippa JA, et al. 
Antidepressant -like and Anxiolytic -like effects of Cannabidiol: A chemical compound of cannabis sativa. CNS and 
Neurological Disorders -  Drug Targets 2014;13(6):9 53-960.  
 
33. de Mello Schier AR, de Oliveira Ribeiro NP, de Oliveira e Silva AC, Cecilio Hallak JE, Crippa JAS, Nardi AE, et al. 
Cannabidiol, a Cannabis sativa constituent, as an anxiolytic drug. Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria 2012;34(S1):S104 -S110.  
 
34. Devinsky O, Cilio MR, Cross H, Fernandez- Ruiz J, French J, Hill C, et al. Cannabidiol: Pharmacology and potential 
therapeutic role in epilepsy and other neuropsychiatric disorders. Epilepsia (Series 4) 2014;55(6):791 -802.  
 
35. Guimarães Silva TB, Queiroz  Balbino C, Moura Weiber AF. The relationship between cannabidiol and psychosis: 
A review. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry 2015;27(2):134- 141.  
 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  17  36. Hermann D, Schneider M. Potential protective effects of cannabidiol on neuroanatomical alterations in cannabis  
users and psychosis: a critical review. Current Pharmaceutical Design 2012;18(32):4897- 4905.  
 
37. Lattanzi S, Brigo F, Cagnetti C, Trinka E, Silvestrini M. Efficacy and Safety of Adjunctive Cannabidiol in Patients 
with Lennox –Gastaut Syndrome: A Systemati c Review and Meta -Analysis. CNS Drugs 2018;32(10):905- 916.  
 
38. Lattanzi S, Brigo F, Trinka E, Zaccara G, Cagnetti C, Del Giovane C, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Cannabidiol in 
Epilepsy: A Systematic Review and Meta- Analysis. Drugs 2018;78(17):1791- 1804.  
 39. Osborne AL, Solowij N, Weston -Green K. A systematic review of the effect of cannabidiol on cognitive function: 
Relevance to schizophrenia. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 2017;72:310- 324.  
 40. Chagas MHN, Eckeli AL, Zuardi AW, Pena -Pereira MA, Sobreira- Neto MA, Sobreira ET, et al. Cannabidiol can 
improve complex sleep -related behaviours associated with rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder in Parkinson's 
disease patients: A case series. Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics 2014;39 (5):564- 566.  
 41. Iffland K, Grotenhermen F. An Update on Safety and Side Effects of Cannabidiol: A Review of Clinical Data and 
Relevant Animal Studies. Cannabis Cannabinoid Res 2017;2(1):139- 154.  
 42. Zhornitsky S, Potvin S. Cannabidiol in Humans --The Que st for Therapeutic Targets. Pharmaceuticals (14248247) 
2012;5(5):529- 552.  
 43. Bergamaschi MM, Queiroz RHC, Zuardi AW, Crippa JAS. Safety and side effects of cannabidiol, a Cannabis sativa 
constituent. Current Drug Safety 2011;6(4):237- 249.  
 44. Taylor L, Gidal B, Blakey G, Tayo B, Morrison G. A Phase I, Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled, Single 
Ascending Dose, Multiple Dose, and Food Effect Trial of the Safety, Tolerability and Pharmacokinetics of Highly Purified Cannabidiol in Healthy Subjects.  CNS Drugs 2018;32(11):1053- 1067.  
45. Food and Drug Administration. Full prescribing information.  2018; Available from: 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/l abel/2018/210365lbl.pdf
 
 46. Borgwardt SJSSJ. Neural Basis of -9- Tetrahydrocannabinol and Cannabidiol: Effects During Response Inhibition. 
Biological Psychiatry 2008;64(11):966- 973.  
 47. Consroe P, Carlini EA, Zwicker AP, Lacerda LA. Interaction of cannabidiol and alcohol in humans. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 1979;66(1):45- 50. 
 48. Crippa JAdS, Zuardi AW, Garrido GEJ, Wichert -Ana L, Guarnieri R, Ferrari L, et al. Effects of Cannabidiol  
(CBD) on Regional Cerebral Blood Flow. Neuropsychopharmacology 2004;29(2):417- 426.  
 49. Cunha JM, Carlini EA, Pereira AE, Ramos OL, Pimentel C, Gagliardi R, et al. Chronic Administration of Cannabidiol 
to Healthy Volunteers and Epileptic Patients. Pharmacology 1980;21(3):175- 185.  
 50. Dalton WSWWS. Influence of cannabidiol on delta -9-tetrahydrocannabinol effects. Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics 1976;19(3):300- 309.  
 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  18  51. Fusar -Poli PPP. Modulation of effective connectivity during emotional processing by sup9/sup -
tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology 2010;13(4):421 -432.  
 
52. Fusar -Poli PPP. Distinct effects of A9 -Tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol on neural activation during 
emotional processing. Archives of General Psychiatry 2009;66(1):95- 105.  
 
53. Hollister LE. Cannabidiol and cannabinol in man. Experientia 1973;29(7):825 -6. 
 54. Martin -Santos R, Crippa JA, B atalla A, Bhattacharyya S, Atakan Z, Borgwardt S, et al. Acute effects of a single, oral 
dose of d9 -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) administration in healthy volunteers. Current 
Pharmaceutical Design 2012;18(32):4966- 4979.  
 55. Winton -Brow n T. Modulation of auditory and visual processing by delta -9- tetrahydrocannabinol and 
cannabidiol: An fMRI study. Neuropsychopharmacology 2011;36(7):1340- 1348.  
 56. Zuardi AW, Guimaraes FS, Moreira AC. Effect of cannabidiol on plasma prolactin, growth hormone and cortisol in 
human volunteers. Braz J Med Biol Res 1993;26(2):213 -7. 
 57. Zuardi AW. Action of cannabidiol on the anxiety and other effects produced by sup9/sup -THC in normal subjects. 
Psychopharmacology 1982;76(3):245- 250.  
 58. Linares IMP, Guimaraes FS, Eckeli A, Crippa ACS, Zuardi AW, Souza JD, et al. No acute effects of Cannabidiol on 
the sleep -wake cycle of healthy subjects: A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, crossover study. Front 
Pharmacol. 2018; 9.  
 59. Linares IM, Zuardi AW, Pereira LC, Queiroz RH, Mechoulam R, Guimarães FS, et al. Cannabidiol presents an 
inverted U -shaped dose -response curve in a simulated public speaking test. Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria 
2019;41(1):9- 14. 
 60. de Winter JC, de Groot S, Mulder M, Wiering a PA, Dankelman J, Mulder JA. Relationships between driving 
simulator performance and driving test results. Ergonomics 2009;52(2):137- 153.  
61. Qin Y, Xiong J, Jiang Y, et al. Simulator Evaluation of Drivers’ Performance on Rural Highways in relation to 
Drivers’ Visual Attention Demands. Advances in Mechanical Engineering. 2014;7(1):249275.  
62. Philips B, Morton T. Making Driving Simulators More  Useful for Behavioral Research — Simulator Characteristics  
Comparison and Model -Based  Transformation. In: United  States Department of Transportation, McLean VA,2015.  
63. Ghosh D, Jamson SL, Baxter PD, Elliott MW. Continuous measures of driving performance on an advanced office -
based driving simulator can be used to predict simulator task failure in patients with obs tructive sleep apnoea 
syndrome. Thorax 2012;67(9):815- 821.  
64. Tatham AJ, Boer ER, Gracitelli CPB, Rosen PN, Medeiros FA. Relationship Between Motor Vehicle Collisions and 
Results of Perimetry, Useful Field of View, and Driving Simulation in Drivers With G laucoma. Translational Vision Science 
& Technology 2015;4(3):5- 5. 
65. Strand MC, Gjerde H, Mørland J. Driving Under the Influence of Non -Alcohol Drugs -- An Update. Part II: 
Experimental Studies. Forensic Science Review 2016;28(2):99- 101.  
 66. Morland J. D riving under the influence of non -alcohol drugs. Forensic Sci.Rev 2000;12:80- 105.  
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  19   
67. Plants K, Rudisill T, Zhu M. Traffic fatalities in West Virginia and the remaining United States, 2008 -2012. WV 
Med J 2017;113(Mar/Apr):42- 47. 
 68. Centers for Disease C ontrol and Prevention. Alcohol and other drug use among victims of motor vehicle crashes -
West Virginia 2004- 2005. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2006;55(48):1293- 1296.  
 69. Norris H. The action of sedatives on brain stem oculomotor systems in man. Neuropharmaco logy 
1971;10(21):181- 91. 
 
70. Jaeger J. Digit Symbol Substitution Test: The Case for Sensitivity Over Specificity in Neuropsychological Testing. J 
Clin Psychopharmacol 2018;38(5):513- 519.  
 
71. Shahid A, Wilkinson K, Marcu S, Shapiro CM. Stanford Sleepiness  Scale (SSS). In: Shahid A, Wilkinson K, Marcu S, 
Shapiro CM, editors. STOP, THAT and One Hundred Other Sleep Scales. New York, NY: Springer New York; 2012. p. 369 -
70. 
 
72. Hoddes E, Zarcone V, Smythe H, Phillips R, Dement WC. Quantification of sleepiness:  a new approach.  
Psychophysiology 1973;10(4):431- 6. 
 73. House ED, Arruda JE, Andrasik F, Grazzi L. The reliability and validity of the Visual Analog Mood Scales in non -
English -speaking pain patients. Pain Pract 2012;12(8):626- 32. 
 
74. Stern RA, Arruda JE , Hooper CR, Wolfner GD, Morey CE. Visual analogue mood scales to measure internal mood 
state in neurologically impaired patients: Description and initial validity evidence. Aphasiology 1997;11(1):59 -71. 
 
75. Luria RE. The validity and reliability of the Visual Analogue Mood Scale. Journal of Psychiatric Research 
1975;12(1):51- 57. 
 
76. Rosano C, Perera S, Inzitari M, Newman AB, Longstreth WT, Studenski S. Digit Symbol Substitution test and 
future clinical and subclinical disorders of cog nition, mobility and mood in older adults. Age and ageing 2016;45(5):688 -
695.  
 77. Wagner S, Helmreich I, Dahmen N, Lieb K, Tadic A. Reliability of three alternate forms of the trail making tests a 
and B. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 2011;26(4):314- 21. 
 78. Kay GG, Logan BK. Drugged Driving Expert Panel Report: A Consensus Protocol for Assessing the Potential of Drugs to Impair Driving. In: National HIghway Traffic Safety Administration, Washington DC; 2011.  
79. Gaspar JG, Brown TL, Schwarz CW, Lee JD, Kang J, Hi ggins JS. Evaluating driver drowsiness countermeasures. 
Traffic Inj Prev 2017;18(sup1):S58- S63.  
 
80. Owens JM, Dingus TA, Guo F, Fang Y, Perez M, McClafferty J, et al. Prevalence of drowsy driving crashes: 
estimates from a large -scale naturalistic driving study (research brief). In: Washington DC, editor: American Automobile 
Association Foundation for Traffic Safety, 2018.  
 
81. Rudisill TM. Fueled by an epidemic: a spatial analysis of opioid -positive drivers fatally injured in motor vehicle 
collisions in We st Virginia, 2011- 2015. American Journal of Public Health Research 2017;5(4):124- 129.  
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  20   
82. Rudisill TM, Zhu M, Abate M, Davidov D, Delagarza V, Long DL, et al. Characterization of drug and alcohol use 
among senior drivers fatally injured in U.S. motor vehi cle collisions, 2008 -2012. Traffic Inj Prev 2016;17(8):788- 95. 
 83. Rudisill TM, Zhu M, Davidov D, Leann Long D, Sambamoorthi U, Abate M, et al. Medication use and the risk of 
motor vehicle collision in West Virginia drivers 65 years of age and older: a ca se-crossover study. BMC Res Notes 
2016;9:166.  
 84. Rudisill TM, Zhu M, Kelley GA, Pilkerton C, Rudisill BR. Medication use and the risk of motor vehicle collisions 
among licensed drivers: A systematic review. Accid Anal Prev 2016;96:255- 70. 
 85. Classen S, Bewernitz M, Shechtman O. Driving simulator sickness: an evidence -based review of the literature. 
Am J Occup Ther 2011;65(2):179- 188.  
86. Fitten L, Perryman KM, Wilkinson CJ, et al. Alzheimer and vascular dementias and driving: A prospective roa d 
and laboratory study. JAMA 1995;273(17):1360- 1365.  
 87. Tuokko H, Tallman K, Beattie BL, Cooper P, Weir J. An examination of driving records in a dementia clinic. J 
Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 1995;50(3):S173- 81. 
 88. Beaussart M, Beaussart -Defaye J, Lamiaux JM, Grubar JC. Epileptic drivers -  A study of 1,089 patients. Medicine 
and Law 1997;16(2):295- 306.  
 89. Classen S, Brumback B, Monahan M, Malaty, II, Rodriguez RL, Okun MS, et al. Driving errors in Parkinson's 
disease: moving closer to predicting o n-road outcomes. Am J Occup Ther 2014;68(1):77- 85. 
 90. Cox DJ, Quillian WC, Thorndike FP, Kovatchev BP, Hanna G. Evaluating driving performance of outpatients with 
Alzheimer disease. Journal of the American Board of Family Practice 1998;11(4):264- 271.  
 91. Duchek JM, Carr DB, Hunt L, Rose CM, Chengjie X, Shah K, et al. Longitudinal Driving Performance in Early -Stage 
Dementia of the Alzheimer Type. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 2003;51(10):1342.  
 
92. Eby DW, Silverstein N M, Molnar LJ, LeBlanc D, Adler G. Driving behaviors in early stage dementia: A study using 
in-vehicle technology. Accid Anal Prev 2012;49(0):330- 337.  
 93. Frittelli C, Borghetti D, Iudice G, Bonanni E, Maestri M, Tognoni G, et al. Effects of Alzheimer's disease and mild 
cognitive impairment on driving ability: A controlled clinical study by simulated driving test. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry 2009;24(3):232- 238.  
 94. George CFP, Boudreau AC, Smiley A. Simulated driving performance in patien ts with obstructive sleep apnea. 
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 1996;154(1):175 -181.  
 
95. George CFP, Boudreau AC, Smiley A. Comparison of simulated driving performance in narcolepsy and sleep 
apnea patients. Sleep: Journal of S leep Research & Sleep Medicine 1996;19(9):711- 717.  
 
96. Gieteling EW, Bakker MS, Hoekema A, Maurits NM, Brouwer WH, van der Hoeven JH. Impaired driving 
simulation in patients with Periodic Limb Movement Disorder and patients with Obstructive Sleep Apnea Sy ndrome. 
Sleep Medicine 2012;13(5):517- 523.  
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  21   
97. Gresset J, Meyer F. Risk of Automobile Accidents Among Elderly Drivers with Impairments or Chronic Diseases. 
Canadian Journal of Public Health / Revue Canadienne de Sante'e Publique 1994;85(4):282 -285.  
 98. Guibert R, Duarte -Franco E, Ciampi A, Potvin L, Loiselle J, Philibert L. Medical conditions and the risk of motor 
vehicle crashes in men. Arch Fam Med 1998;7(6):554- 8. 
 99. Hansotia P, Broste SK. The effect of epilepsy or diabetes mellitus on the risk of au tomobile accidents. N Engl J 
Med 1991;324(1):22- 6. 
 
100.  Haymes SA, Leblanc RP, Nicolela MT, Chiasson LA, Chauhan BC. Risk of falls and motor vehicle collisions in 
glaucoma. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48(3):1149- 55. 
 
101.  Hours M, Fort E, Charnay P, Bernard M, Martin JL, Boisson D, et al. Diseases, consumption of medicines and 
responsibility for a road crash: a case -control study. Accid Anal Prev 2008;40(5):1789- 96. 
 102.  Karakontaki F, Gennimata S -A, Palamidas AF, Anagnostakos T, Kosmas EN, Stalikas  A, et al. Driving -Related 
Neuropsychological Performance in Stable COPD Patients. Pulmonary Medicine 2013:1 -10. 
 
103.  Koepsell TD, Wolf ME, McCloskey L, Buchner DM, Louie D. Medical conditions and motor vehicle collision injuries in 
older adults. Journal  of the American Geriatrics Society 1994;42(7):695- 700.  
 104.  Lings S, Dupont E. Driving with Parkinson's disease. A controlled laboratory investigation. Acta Neurologica 
Scandinavica 1992;86(1):33- 39. 
 
105.  Lundqvist A, Gerdle B, Rönnberg J. Neuropsychological aspects of driving after a stroke —in the simulator and on 
the road. Applied Cognitive Psychology 2000;14(2):135 -150.  
 106.  McGwin G, Jr., Sims RV, Pulley L, Roseman JM. Diabetes and automobile crashes in the elderly. A population -based 
case -control study. Diabetes Care 1999;22(2):220- 7. 
 107.  Mulgrew AT, Nasvadi G, Butt A, Cheema R, Fox N, Fleetham JA, et al. Risk and severity of motor vehicle crashes in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea. Thorax 2008;63(6):536 -541.  
 
108.  Owsley C, McGwin Jr G, Sloane M, Wells J, Stalvey BT, Gauthreaux S. Impact of cataract surgery on motor vehicle 
crash involvement by older adults. Journal of the American Medical Association 2002;288(7):841 -849.  
 
109.  Owsley C, Stalvey B, Wells J, Sloane  ME. Older Drivers and Cataract: Driving Habits and Crash Risk. The Journals of 
Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 1999;54(4):M203- M211.  
 110.  Redelmeier DA, Kenshole AB, Ray JG. Motor vehicle crashes in diabetic patients with tight glycemic control: A 
population -based case control analysis. PLoS Medicine 2009;6(12).  
 
111.  Redelmeier DA, Zung JD, Thiruchelvam D, Tibshirani RJ. Fibromyalgia and the Risk of a Subsequent Motor Vehicle Crash. The Journal of Rheumatology 2015;42(8):1502- 1510.  
 112.  Sagberg F. Driver health and crash involvement: a case -control study. Accid Anal Prev 2006;38(1):28- 34. 
 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  22  113.  Signorovitch JE, Macaulay D, Diener M, Yan Y, Wu EQ, Gruenberger JB, et al. Hypoglycaemia and accident risk in 
people with type  2 diabetes mellitus treated with non -insulin antidiabetes drugs. Diabetes Obes Metab 2013;15(4):335-
41. 
 114.  Stewart RB, Moore MT, Marks RG, May FE, Hale WE. Driving accidents in the elderly: an analysis of symptoms, diseases, and medications. Journal o f Geriatric Drug Therapy 1993;8(2):31- 44. 
 115.  Wingen M, Ramaekers JG, Schmitt JAJ. Driving impairment in depressed patients receiving long -term 
antidepressant treatment. Psychopharmacology 2006;188(1):84- 91. 
 
116.  Innes KE, Selfe TK, Khalsa DS, Kandati  S. Meditation and Music Improve Memory and Cognitive Function in Adults 
with Subjective Cognitive Decline: A Pilot Randomized Controlled Trial. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017; 56:899 -916.  
 
117.  Jongen S, Vuurman EF, Ramaekers JG, Vermeeren A. The sensitivity of laboratory tests assessing driving related 
skills to dose -related impairment of alcohol: A literature review.  Accid Anal Prev 2016;89:31- 48. 
118.  Brunet JF, Dagenais D, Therrien M, Gartenberg D, Forest G. Validation of sleep -2-Peak: A smartphone applicati on 
that can detect fatigue -related changes in reaction times during sleep deprivation. Behav Res Methods  2017;49(4):1460-
1469.  
119.  Deary IJ, Liewald D, Nissan J. A free, easy -to-use, computer -based simple and four -choice reaction time 
programme: the Deary -Liewald reaction time task. Behav Res Methods 2011;43(1):258 -268.  
120.  Vickers AJ. How to randomize. J Soc Integr Oncol. 200 6; 4:194- 8. 
 
121.  Bhattacharyya S, Wilson R, Appiah -Kusi E, O'Neill A, Brammer M, Perez J, et al. Effect of Cannabidiol on Medial 
Temporal, Midbrain, and Striatal Dysfunction in People at Clinical High Risk of Psychosis: A  
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA  Psychiatry. 2018; 75:1107- 17. 
 122.  Boggs DL, Surti T, Gupta A, Gupta S, Niciu M, Pittman B, et al. The effects of cannabidiol (CBD) on cognition and symptoms in outpatients with chronic schizophrenia a randomized placebo controlled trial. Psychopharmaco l. 2018; 
235:1923- 32. 
 123.  Hundal H, Lister R, Evans N, Antley A, Englund A, Murray RM, et al. The effects of cannabidiol on persecutory ideation and anxiety in a high trait paranoid group. J Psychopharmacol. 2018; 32:276 -82. 
 124.  Grotenhermen F. Pharm acokinetics and pharmacodynamics of cannabinoids. Clin Pharmacokinet 2003;42(4):327-
360.  
125. Klüver M, Herrigel C, Preuß S, Schoener H -P, Hecht H. Comparing the Incidence of Simulator Sickness in Five 
Different Driving Simulators. Presented at Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany; Sep 2015.  
126.  Lachin JM. Statistical considerations in the intent -to-treat principle. Control Clin Trials. 2000; 21:167 -89. 
 127.  Nielsen SF. Proper and improper multiple imputation. Int Stat Rev.  2003; 71:593- 607.  
 128.  Wood AM, White IR, Thompson SG. Are missing outcome data adequately handled? A review of published randomized controlled trials in major medical journals. Clin Trials. 2004; 1:368 -76. 
 
    Investigator Initiated Protocol  
Investigator Resources  
 
WVU+kc Protocol #:2003920900  
PI: Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  23  129.  Groenwold RHH, Moons KGM, Vandenbroucke  JP. Randomized trials with missing outcome data: how to analyze 
and what to report. CMAJ. 2014; 186:1153- 7. 
 
130.  Vickers AJ. Parametric versus non -parametric statistics in the analysis of randomized trials with non -normally 
distributed data. BMC  Med Res  Methodol. 2005; 5:35.  
 
131.  Faul F, Erdfelder E, Lang AG, Buchner A. G*Power 3: a flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behav Res Methods. 2007; 39:175- 91. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
V2019.05.23          Page  1 | 8 
 
 
 
Key Information for:  
The effects of cannabidiol (CBD) on the driving ability of healthy adults  
 
You are being asked to participate in the research described below.  This page provides key information that 
may help you to make this decision; more detailed information can be found after this section.   
Why is this research being done and what is involv ed? 
The purpose of this study is to determine  whether  cannabidiol ( CBD ) impacts the driving ability , cognition, and 
drowsiness of healthy adults’ aged 18- 30 years .  You will be asked to answer several questions about your 
current health and provide a urine sample which will be analyzed immediately on site for any drugs which may 
influence your performance.  If you meet the study criteria and your urine sample is negative, you will then be  
asked to complete a practice drive on a driving simulator for about 10 minutes.  The driving simulator is set up 
to mimic  a car—it has breaks, an accelerator, controls, and steering wheel, along with a computer screen.  You 
will be asked to drive a course on the simulator and follow the rules of the road ( i.e., follow speed limits, use 
turn signals, obey traffic control devices , etc. ).  You will then complete a brief survey inquiring about your 
driving habits and health history including body mass index where you may need to be weighed.  You will then 
complete 5 brief cognitive  tests using a computer tablet and  pen/paper.  You will then be randomized to receive 
either CBD or placebo and given food and a beverage to drink.  You will then wait 120 minu tes where you are 
free to relax, read, play on the internet, etc.  You will then complete a longer driving simulation (~25 -35 
minutes).  After the second simulation, you will retake the 5 computer or pen/paper tests and an end of study survey. These activi ties will take approximately 4-4.5 hours of your time.  
Do I have to participate and what are the risks involved?  
Participation in this research study is completely voluntary and you are free to withdraw from the research at any time.  If you do not wish to participate, please discuss alternatives with the researcher  or refer to the 
“Alternatives” section in the consent form.  You may or may not directly benefit from participating in this research.  
Risks from participation in this study include side effects from the CBD which could include liver injury, gastrointestinal changes, mood disturbances (i.e. drowsiness, sedation, anger, agitation), sleep disturbances, hypersensitivity reactions, and male reproductive toxicity.  You could also potentially experienc e mild nausea 
or dizziness from the driving simulator.  Also, we will be collecting health and driving information , which some 
may find invasive.   
Who can I talk to if I have questions or concerns? 
If you have any questions or concerns about this research or would want to withdrawal from the study, you can 
contact Dr. Toni Marie Rudisill  at 717-817-3028 from the Dept . of Epidemiology at West Virginia University.  
 
For more information, please see the Informed Consent Form  
 
 
V2019.05.23          Page  2 | 8 
 
Informed Consent  for Research  | Minimal Risk  
 
Principal Investigator (PI) |  Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, PhD  
Department | Epidemiology  
Co-Investigator(s) | Drs. Gordon Smith, Karen (Kim) Innes, Sijin Wen , Treah Haggerty    
Sponsor or Funding Source |  West Virginia Clinical and Translational Science Institute  
WVU IRB Protocol # |  2007073792 
Study Title |  The effects of cannabidiol (CBD) on the driving ability of healthy adults : a clinical trial  
 
Introduction 
You, _________________________, have been asked to participate in this research study, which has been 
explained to you by _________________________.  This study is being conducted by Dr. Toni Marie Rudisill, MS, 
PhD in the Department of Epidemiology at West Virginia University, along with Drs. Gordon Smith, M B ChB, 
MPH, Karen (Kim) Innes, PhD, MSPH , Sijin Wen MA, MS, PhD , and Treah Haggerty, MD, MS.  Funding for this 
research is provided by the West Virginia Clinical and Translational Science Institute .   
Purpose  
The purpose of this study is to determine whether CBD impacts healthy adults’ aged 18- 30 years ability to drive and 
whether CBD impacts th eir cognition and/or makes them drowsy.  WVU expects to enroll approximately 40 
subjects  at the WVU campus .   A total of approximately 40 subjects, at all sites, are expected to participate in this 
study.  
Description of Procedures  
This study involves a urine drug screen, 3 brief surveys, 5 cognitive tests (to be taken twice), and two short drives 
on the driving simulator (~10 and 25-35 minutes) and will take approximately 4-4.5 hours of time in one visit in 
total to complete.   
First, y ou will be asked to answer several questions about your current health status ( i.e., first survey).  This is done 
to ensure you meet the study requirements.   You are able to see these  questions prior to signing the consent form. 
You do not need to answer each question . 
Second, you will provide a urine sample which will be analyzed immediately on site for drugs that may impair 
driving performance and/or cognition.  This is done to ensure that any drugs you may have taken will not influence your performance on the activities you are asked to perform.   
If you meet the study criteria and your urine sample is negative  for potentially impairing drugs, you will then be 
asked to complete a practice drive on the driving simulator for a pproximately 10 minutes.  People who are prone to 
motion sickness sometimes experience brief mild nausea or dizziness when operating a driving simulator, which is known as simulator sickness.  This practice drive helps ensure that you do not experience simulator sickness and can complete the study requirements.  The practice drive will also familiarize you with the equipment.  The driving simulator is set up to mimic a car —it has breaks, an accelerator, controls, an d steering wheel, along with a computer 
 
 
V2019.05.23          Page  3 | 8 
screen.  You will be asked to drive a course on the simulator and follow the rules of the road ( i.e., follow speed 
limits, use turn signals, obey traffic control devices, etc.).  
If you do not experience simulator sic kness  on the practice drive, you will then complete a brief survey inquiring 
about your driving habits and health history  (second survey) .  This survey will also ask you about your height and 
weight so you may need to be weighed.  You are able to see these  questions prior to signing the consent form. You 
do not need to answer each question.  
You will then complete 5 cognitive tests using a computer tablet and pen/paper : the Sanford Sleepiness Scale (SSS), 
the Visual Analog Mood Scale (VAMS), Digital Symbol S ubstitution Test (DSST), Trail Making Test (TMT), 
Simple Reaction Time (SRT), and Psychomotor Vigilance Test (PVT) .  These are done to gather your baseline 
cognitive function.  The first test is the SSS, which is one multiple choice question regarding your  current level of 
sleepiness.  The second test is the VAMS which assesses mood, mental and physical sedation; this test is 16 
multiple choice questions in length.  The DSST and TMT are tests administered by paper and pencil.  The DSST 
measures psychomotor speed, attention and working memory by requiring participants to translate numbers into 
symbols; the test is scored by the degree of completion and accuracy over a timed 90 second period.  The TMT 
measures executive function and consists of two parts; the first part requires participants to connect numbers in ascending order, while the second part requires individuals to connect numbers and letters in sequence.  The test is scored by the time it takes to accurately complete each test.  Increases in time correlate with greater impairment.   
The SRT will be administered on a computer tablet  and it measures reaction time, general alertness,  and motor 
speed through delivery of a stimulus.  During the test, a specific object will randomly  appear on the t ablet screen and 
a participant  will have to select a button to acknowledge their  response. The program will record response time  to 
the stimulus, correct responses , as well as  errors of omission.  The PVT will be administered on a computer tablet 
and it will assess alertness and vigilance. The participants will have to respond to an object on the screen as quickly 
and accurately as possible.   The program will record response time to the  stimulus, correct responses, errors of 
omission,  and false starts.  
After  completing the cognitive testing, you will be randomized to receive CBD oil or placebo.  Y ou will then be 
given food and a beverage to drink.  You will then wait 120 minutes where you are free to relax, read, play on the 
internet, etc.  T his will allow the  CBD to be absorbed in your system  and/or take effect . 
You will then complete a longer driving simulation (25 -35 minutes).  This time frame includes a practice drive and 
brake reaction time assessment.  The second driving simulation will be similar to the first, but will be longer in length.  You will be asked to drive a course on the simulator and follow the rules of the road ( i.e., follow speed 
limits, use turn signals, obey traffic control devices, etc.) , avoid objects, and pass slower vehicles/objects .  The 
second simulation is scored and will assess your driving performance.  
After the second simulation, you will retake the 5 computer or pen/paper tests  (i.e., SSS, VAMS, DSST, PVT, SRT, 
TMT) .  This is to assess your cognitive function after you may have received CBD.   
Finally, you will complete a brief  end of study survey (third survey) . This is to gauge you thoughts on the study and 
see if you can identify what study drug you received ( i.e., placebo or CBD).  You are able to see these  questions 
prior to signing the consent form. You do not need to answer each question.  
All these activities , in total,  will take approximately 4- 4.5 hours of your time  and will be completed in one day.  
For patient safety purposes, Dr. Treah Haggerty, MD, MS  (Co-Investigator)  is a licensed family medicine physician 
in WV and will be available during testing and up to 24 hours post testing for stud y participants to consult with 
should they have any medical questions or health concerns regarding this research study.  You must first call Dr. 
Toni Marie Rudisill at 717- 817-3028 who will then connect you with Dr. Haggerty.   While CBD has a half -life of 
17 hours, we ask that you refrain from driving for 24 hours post -testing.  We also require that you have an 
 
 
V2019.05.23          Page  4 | 8 
individual take you home after the testing is completed.  If you do not have an individual available, you will be 
taken home by study personnel. 
Risks and Discomforts  
There are some potential risks and discomforts that you could experience if you  choose to participate in this study.  
The first concern may be the small risk of a data breach.  However, this should be minimal as participant s will be 
assigned a  study identification  number.  All other data will be stored on a secure virtual environment maintained by 
WVU’s Information Technology department that only study personnel will have access to.  A second minimal 
concern is momentary motion sickness from the driving simulator ( e.g., simulator sickness); some individuals who 
are prone to motion sickness may report feeling brief nausea or dizziness from the simulator.  It generally clears when the simulation is stopped.  If participants experience this, the trial will stop immediately.  The third risk involves the CBD itself.  CBD comes from the Cannabis Sativa plant that must have <0.3% delta -9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) by federal law.  THC is the psychoactive component of Cannabis.  Thus,  the CBD oil 
can contain very trace amounts of THC; thus, it is theoretically possible that an individual could test positive for 
THC/marijuana on an administered drug test.  The CBD oil obtained for this study was  obtained from Zatural, a 
CBD manufacturer  from Eden, Idaho.  Zatural does attempt to remove THC from their product.  The CBD oil has 
been tested by Botanacor Laboratories (Denver, CO) for microbials, potency, heavy metals, trace THC, pesticides, 
and residual solvents to ensure purity, label accuracy, compliance, and safety.  Testing of the product has shown that it is free of microbials, heavy metals, pesticides, and residual solvents.  Potency tests have shown that the concentration of CBD is accurate and that THC and THCa (a chemical precursor of THC) were not detected by this test’s level of quantitation.  Trace THC tests, which have a very low level of quantitation (i.e., 0.001%), detected no THCa, and 0.006% THC, which is well below acceptable limits (legal limit is 0.3%).  Copies of laborator y reports 
are available for your review .  There are additional minimal risks with the CBD itself.  Very little research exists on 
the effects of CBD even though it is a legal product.  CBD may increase ocular pressure; thus, you will be excluded from the s tudy if you have glaucoma.  The CBD used in this study is a nutraceutical and it is not regulated by the 
United States Food and Drug Administration.  The United States Food and Drug Administration does regulate Epidiolex, which is the prescription version of CBD oil prescribed to treat seizure disorders.  According to the package insert for Epidiolex (available at: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2018/210365lbl.pdf ) and the United States Food and Drug 
Administration website (available at:  https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/what-you- need-know- and-
what -were -working- find-out-about-products-containing- cannabis -or-cannabis ), several side effects of prescription 
CBD oil have been noted and could potentially harm partici pants.  Prescription CBD oil can cause liver 
injury/hepatic dysfunction by elevating liver enzymes such as alanine aminotransferase [ALT] and/or aspartate aminotransferase [AST]).  Prescription CBD oil can interact with other drugs or alcohol the participa nt may be 
taking potentially resulting in serious side effects.  Mainly, using CBD oil with alcohol or other drugs, especially those used to treat anxiety, panic, stress, or sleep disorders, could slow brain activity, and increase the risk of sedation and/or drowsiness, which could lead to injury.  Prescription CBD oil has also been shown to impact the gastrointestinal tract with side effects such as decreased appetite, diarrhea, weight loss, gastroenteritis, and 
abdominal pain/discomfort.  Prescription CBD  oil has also been shown to affect the nervous system and cause 
somnolence (drowsiness or sleepiness), lethargy, fatigue, malaise, insomnia, poor sleep quality, irritability, 
agitation, aggression, anger, drooling, or gait disturbances.  Anti -epileptic dru gs, such as prescription CBD oil, have 
been associated with suicidal behavior and/or suicide ideation.   Prescription CBD oil has also caused hypersensitivity reactions, rashes, hypoxia, respiratory failure, and infection.  Studies in animals exposed to CB D 
oil have also shown male reproductive toxicity, or damage to fertility in males or male off -spring of women who 
have been exposed to CBD oil.  For this study, we are using 300 mg of CBD which is a relatively small dose. This dosage was chosen as it has b een used in other studies consisting of both healthy and clinical populations and is 
generally well -tolerated with no major adverse events; most studies use 150- 600 mg, while some have used >1,200 
 
 
V2019.05.23          Page  5 | 8 
mg.  We strongly advise that you do not operate a motor vehicle/drive for 24 hours after your participation in this 
study.  Lastly, we will also be asking you about your driving and health history such as whether you have any chronic illnesses, number of motor vehicle collisions, number of speeding tickets, whethe r you use seat belts  when 
you drive , etc.  While most  participants will find these questions non- invasive, should you need counseling as a 
result, we encourage you to contact the WVU Carruth Center at 304-293-4431 .   
In addition, there is always the risk o f uncommon or previously unknown side effect(s) or event.   
Alternative s   
You do not have to participate in this study.   
Benefits  
You may or may not directly benefit from participating in this research.  The knowledge gained from this study may eventuall y benefit others.  
Financial Considerations  
You will be paid a $50 gift card for completing this study .  You can earn up to $50.   
Your information may be provided to the appropriate parties for billing and/or payment purposes.  Please be advised 
that any compensation received for participation in a research study, including a gift card, is considered taxable 
income,  and must be repor ted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).  
If you are a WVU employee or a WVU student -employee, you are required to report the total amount of 
compensation received for your participation in a research study to the WVU Tax Services Office upon receipt of payment.  
Your data, health information, research results, specimens , or any and all other information related to this research 
study used in this research study may contribute to a new discovery or treatment.   In some instances, your data, your 
health information, your research results, your specimens, these discoveries or treatments, or any other information related to this research study, even if identifiers are removed, may be of commercial value and may be sold, patented, or licensed by the investigators  and West Virginia University for use in other research or the development 
of new products.   You will not retain any property rights,  nor will you share in any money or commercial profit that 
the investigators, West Virginia University, or their agents may  realize.   
Confidentiality  
Any information about you that is obtained as a result of your participation in this research will be kept as confidential as legally possible.  Your research records and test results, just like hospital records, may be subpoena ed by court order or may be inspected by the study sponsor or federal regulatory authorities, including the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), without your additional consent.  
In addition, there are certain instances where the researcher is legally requir ed to give information to the appropriate 
authorities.  These would include mandatory reporting of infectious diseases, mandatory reporting of information about behavior that is imminently dangerous to you or to others, such as suicide, child abuse, etc.  
In any publications that result from this research, neither your name nor any information from which you might be 
identified will be published without your consent.  
Participant ’s information or biospecimen collected as part of the research, even if identifiers are removed, will not 
be used, or distributed for future research studies.  
 
 
V2019.05.23          Page  6 | 8 
ClinicalTrials.gov   
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required by U.S. Law.  This 
Web site will no t include information that can identify you.  At most, the Web site will include a summary of the 
results.  You can search this Web site at any time.   
HIPAA Authorization  
We know that information about your health is private. We are dedicated to protecting the privacy of that 
information. Because of this promise, we must get your written authorization (permission) before we may use or disclose your protected health information or share it with others.  
You can decide to sign or not to sign this authorization section. However, if you choose not to sign this authorization, you will not be able to take part in the research study. Whatever choice you make about this research study will not have an effect on your access to medical care.  
Persons/Organizat ions Providing the Information  
Patient /West Virginia University Hospitals/ WVU Medicine  
Persons/Organizations Receiving the Information  
• The research site(s) carrying out this study.  This includes UHA or UHA Affiliates, WVU, WVU Hospitals, 
West Virginia U niversity Health System (WVUHS).  It also includes each site’s research and medical staff.  
• Health care providers who provide services to you as part of this research study.  
• Laboratories and other people and groups that look into your health information as part of this study in 
agreement with the study protocol.   
• The members and staff of any institutional review board that oversees this research study.  
• The West Virginia University Office of Human Research Protection and the West Virginia University Office of  Sponsored Programs.  
 The Following Information Will Be Used  
Information from your existing medical records, and new information about you that is created or collected during this study, such as: laboratory results, demographic data, and study forms.  
The Information is Being Disclosed for the Following Reasons  
• Review of your data for quality assurance purposes  
• Publication of study results (without identifying you)  
• Other research purposes such as reviewing the safety or effectiveness of the study drug and other products or therapies; conducting performance reviews of the study drug; evaluating other products or therapies for patients; developing a better understanding of disease; improving the design of future clinical trials . 
You may Cancel this Authorization at Any Time by Writing to the Principal Investigator  
Dr. Toni Marie Rudisill  
West Virginia University School of Public Health  
PO BOX 9190  
Morgantown, WV 26506  
 
 
 
V2019.05.23          Page  7 | 8 
If you cancel this authorization, any information that was collected already for this study cannot be withdrawn. 
Once information is disclosed, according to this authorization, the recipient may re -disclose it and then the 
information may no longer be protected by federal regulations.  
This authorization will expire at the end of the study unl ess you cancel it before that time . 
Voluntary Participation  
Participation in this study is voluntary.  You are free to withdraw your consent to participate in this study at any time.  If you choose to withdraw your participation from the study, the data collected on you up until that time remains a part of the study database and may not be removed.  No additional information will be added to the study database after your withdrawal.   
Refusal to participate or withdraw will not affect your class standing or  grades and will involve no penalty to you. 
Refusal to participate or withdraw will not affect your employee status at West Virginia University.  Refusal to participate or withdraw will not affect your future care or status at West Virginia University.  
In the event new information becomes available that may affect your willingness to participate in this study, this 
information will be given to you so that you can make an informed decision about whether or not to continue your participation.  Individual research results will not be disclosed to subjects.   
Contact Persons  
If you have any questions, concerns, or complaints about this research, you can contact Dr. Toni Marie Rudisill at 717-817- 3028.   
If you are hurt from being in this research, you should contact Dr. Toni Marie Rudisill at 717 -817- 3028.  If injury 
occurs outside of business hours and is related to your participation in this research, please contact Dr. Toni Marie Rudisill at 717-817-3028.   
For information regarding your rights as a participant in research or to talk about the research, contact the WVU 
Office of Human Research Protection (OHRP) at (304) 293- 7073 or by email at IRB@mail.wvu.edu
.   
Future Contact   
Future research may be conducted for which you are eligible.  If you are interested in being contacted for future research, please indicate so by co mpleting this section.  
☐  Y es, I want to be contacted if future research studies, for which I  am qualified, become available.  
☐  No, I do not  want to be contacted if future research studies, for which I am qualified.  
Signatures and Authorization   
You have been given the opportunity to ask questions about the research and your authorization of HIPAA, and you have received answers concerning areas you did not understand.  Upon signing this form, you will receive a copy.  
 
 
V2019.05.23          Page  8 | 8 
 
 
 
Participant Signature  
I willingly consent to participate in this research.  
 
Signature of Subject or Subject’s Legal Representative  
 
 
Printed Name   Date 
 
 Consenting Individual Signature  
The participant has had the opportunity to have questions addressed.  The participant willingly agrees to be in the 
study.  
 
Signature of Person Obtaining Informed Consent  
 
 
Printed Name   Date 
 
 
 
 
 