Title: A Church -based I ntervention for  Increasing Screening for D ementia Among African American 
Older  Adults (ADC Pilot): Project Grace  
NCT#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Document date: 6/21/2022  
File: Consent f orm 
1 RESEARCH PLAN  
Specific Aims  
African Americans (AA) are at increased risk for dementia -related diseases  and experience significant 
differences in diagnosis and other health outcomes regarding dementia and dementia care  (e.g., Bonds & 
Lyons, 2018) , including delayed dementia diagnosis and treatment . Along the chronic disease continuum of 
care, early screening is one of the first  critical steps  to reduce diagnosis delays . However, AA experience many 
multi -layered barriers to dementia screening and f ollow -up services including limited access to care, mistrust of 
health professionals, dementia -related stigma, and limited cultural appropriateness of dementia services  
(Bonds & Lyons, 2018; Ep ps et al, 2018) . Despite growing calls to increase the reach of  dementia screening in 
nonmedical settings with  older adult AA to address disparities, no screening studies exist using culturally -
tailored approaches in AA community settings, particularly AA churches.  
AA churches have extensive influence and reach in Black communities, high attendance rates  especially 
among older adults , strong emphasis on health, and outreach ministries that serve community members who 
may be at greatest risk for dementia  (e.g., Pew Foru m on Religion and Public Life, 2 009; Pew Research 
Center, 2015; Taylor et al, 2004; Berkley -Patton et al., 2012) . Our AA church -based pilot and RCT health  
screening studies have demonstrated: a) church leaders can and will expertly deliver screening  interventions 
using prepackaged,  supportive tools, b) tailored  tools  and church -based screening  were highly 
acceptable/feasible and increased reach to  church members and community members using outreach 
services,  and c ) use of th is approach and such toolkits significantly  increased  screening for highly stigmati zed 
diseases, including HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases  (Berk ley-Patton et al., 2010, 2013, 2016, 
2018a) . We also established that AA churches can reach high risk groups,  including older adults with low levels 
of educat ion, income, and  insuranc e, and who suffer from diseases (e.g., diabetes, heart disease) that put 
them at greater risk  (Berk ley-Patton et al., 2018b) . 
The primary aim  of this study is to conduct a n exploratory pilot study  to examine  feasibility and outcomes of a  
culturally/religiously -tailored church -based dementia  screening intervention among  older adult AA church 
members and community members who use church outreach services  in 2 AA churches (N=100) . Our 
secondary outcomes are dementia -related stigma and linkag e to care (LTC) . Intervention content  is based on 
the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB ), intervention delivery  is based on the Social -Ecologi cal Model  (Ajzen, 
1991; Bronfenbrenner, 1979)  – both guided by a faith community engagement approach. Trained faith leaders 
will deliver the tailored intervention through multilevel church outlets: individual self -help resources (e.g., risk 
checklist, commitment to screening cards); group ministry discussion guides about dementia; church -wide 
services using sermon guide s, responsive readings, and church bulletin ins erts; and church -community level 
text messages , dementia screening , and linkage to care services. Two screening events will be held at each 
church. We will also conduct a process evaluation that will include p ost-test study focus groups.  
Specific Aim 1 . Test a religiously/culturally -tailored, church -based dementia  screening intervention on receipt 
of dementia screening , stigma, and LTC use among  an older adult AA church -population s at 4 months.  
Hypothesis . The tailored  church -based dementia screening intervention will evidence increased screening 
and LTC rates , and lower dementia -related stigma beliefs at 4 months . 
Specific Aim 2. Evaluate predictors of  receipt  of dementia  screening at 4 months among older adult AA 
church -populations to determ ine modifiable screening facilitators/barriers . 
Specific Aim 3.  Conduct a process evaluation to examine  study intervention implementation facilitators, 
barriers, and dose along with  exposure  and satisfactio n to identify  essential intervention components.  
Developing culturally -tailored approaches to address this disparity will permit earlier dementia diagnosis, assist 
in eliminating disparities and provide timely opportunities to make lifestyle changes and ta ke advantage of 
available treatment, make appropriate plans, seek support from family and friends, and maintain a desired 
quality of life for as long as possible.  Findings from this study could provide a feasible, acceptable, sustainable 
dementia screening  and LTC approach for older adult AA church -affiliated populations in faith community 
settings. Findings could contribute to understanding how to increase the capacity of AA churches to assist 
delivering and improving use of dementia services with underser ved AA populations, and thereby assist in 
reducing dementia AA health disparities.  
2 Significance  
African Americans (AA) have double the risk of developing dementia as whites . Dementia risk factors include 
diabetes, smoking, poor diet, obesity, hypertension, physical inactivity, and depression (e.g., Crous -Bou et al, 
2017; Deckers et al, 2018, Baumgart et al., 2015) – health conditions that  significantly burden AA.  AA are also 
diagnosed later in the disease than their white counterparts  (Gleason et al, 2017) . These disparities put older 
AA with cognitive impairment at risk for a variety of negative health outcomes such as falls, malnutrition, frailty, 
dehydration, and mortality (F ogg et al, 2017, 2018; Blackwood & Martin, 2017) because they do not receive 
disease -relevant  supports for maintaining their health.   
Past r esearch suggest s that a critical step in addressing unmet dementia care needs is to improve capacity for 
early dementia screening  in primary care  (e.g., Tan et al., 2016)  and in the community (e.g., Han et al.2013). 
Despite continued calls for earlier screening of AA  (e.g., Goldstein et al, 2014; Grober et al, 2016, Jackson et 
al, 2017), many screening  barriers  exist for AA  – and are multilayered . These  include limited access to 
dementia information and screening (e.g., Epps, 2018), stigma associated with cognitive decline  (e.g., Epps, 
2018 ; Gleason et al., 2016; Gupta et al., 2016; Tappen et al, 2011 ), and mistrust  of healthcare profes sionals to 
consider A A cultural needs (e.g., Bond & Lyons, 2018). In addition, only half of those who screen positive 
receive follow -up care (Dale et al., 2008). There is great need to increase acceptable  and accessible dementia 
screening as well as  timely linkage to care (LTC)  to improve access to dementia services and confront 
disparities.  
Dementia intervention s tudies  with AAs are slowly beginning to appear  in the literature (e.g., Cothran et al., 
2017;  Owusu et al., 2019;  Rovner et al., 2018). For example, Cothran et al . reported that a physical activity 
intervention  for AA caregivers of family members  living with dem entia  successfully reduced caregiver 
subjective burden . Rovner et al. (2018) found that a  culturally -tailored  intervention focused on behavioral 
activation (e.g., social, cognitive,  and physical activity ) slowed cognitive decline in AA older adults with mild 
cognitive impairment . This study  indicate d the inclusion of cultural aspects (social relationships, 
spirit ual/religious activities) as key activators . These studies  highlight  the need for tailoring  materials and 
strategies  to AA , including  social support and religiosity, to improve acceptability and impact  of such 
interventions. However, none of these studies have  addressed dementi a screening with older adult AA. Our 
pilot intervention will address screening  barriers with culturally -appropriate strategies in AA church settings to 
enhance screening acceptability and accessibility.  
AA churches are highly influential institutions that have many untapped strengths to extend the reach, 
influence, and impact of dementia screening interventions with older adult AA . For example, AA churches  have 
high attendance rates , especially among olde r adults , strong emphasis on health,  provide highly value d social 
support from fellow church members,  and include  outreach ministries that serve community members who  may 
be at greatest risk  for dementia . Thus , AA churches are well -positioned to serve church and community 
members  who might benefit most from dementia education, early screening , and LTC  opportunities . 
Additionally, p ast research has  demonstrated that the AA church can be a pract ical setting for health screening 
interventions  with older adult AA  (e.g., Campbell et al, 2007) . Critical intervention components in AA church 
studies have included church leaders’  delivery of culturally/religiously -tailored health messages via naturalistic 
church activities  (e.g., sermons, testimonia ls, ministry group meetings). Our own past church -based studies 
have demonstrated older adult AA are highly represented (> 40%) and believe the church plays an important 
role in providing health services  (Berkley -Patton et al, 2018 a). We will engage faith leaders in  implement ing our 
proposed  intervention using culturally -religiously tailored materials/ activities packaged in a supportive, church -
based Dementia Screening and Compassion  Tool Kit.   
Innovation  
To our knowledge , no community -based , culturally and  religiously -tailored  dementia screening intervention 
studies have been conducted with older adult A A in their churches. Our church -based dementia  screening  and 
LTC intervention study is innovative and fills gaps in the literature by:   
1)being the first to study dementia  screening,  including related risk factor s, and LTC among AA  church
populations;
2)uniquely including community members us ing church outreach services  (e.g., food/clothing programs,
social service s) – an underserved population with limited acc ess to health services ;
3 3)being th e first to use a culturally/ religiously -tailored  Dementia  Screening and Compassion Tool Kit with
content  designed to encourage dementia screening,  reduce stigma, be socio -ecologically and
theoretically -grounded , and be delivered by church leaders ;
4)using a multilevel approach for intervention delivery via peer -to-peer, group ministries, church -wide
services, and community level church outlets ; and
5)using religiously -tailored text messages to increase reach of screening m essages with church -
community members .
Approach  
Our pilot religiously -tailored  dementia screening intervention will assess  feasibility (e.g., intervention 
implementation dose, exposure, satisfaction, facilitators/barriers) and outcomes  (self-report and objective 
receipt of screening and LTC; stigma) with 100 older adult AA members in 2 AA churches. The primary 
outcome measure will be receipt of screening  (self-reported and objectively assessed)  at 4 months . Guided by 
the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) and a socioecological approach, we will produce a culturally and 
religiously tailored intervention package appropriate for the A A church -context and delivered through multilevel 
church outlets. We will engage our highly active KC FAITH Community Action Board led by Calvary 
Community Outreach Network (CCON) in the development of the intervention components , including the 
Dementia Screening and Compassion Tool Kit  to ensure cultural -religious appropriateness  for AA churches . 
Our team has extensive experience in developing, implementing, and sustaining culturally -religiously tailored, 
church -based AA health promotion interventions using TPB and socio -ecological approaches guided by faith 
community -engagement  (Berkl ey-Patton et al ., 2010, 2013, 2016, 2018a, b, c; Moore et al, 2016) . Our team 
also has extensive experience in conducting large -scale recruitment and data collection activities in church 
settings, especially before, during, and after Sunday morning service s and during church outreach activities 
(Berkley -Patton, 2010, 2016, 2018a, 2018b, 2018c).  
Setting and participants . Two AA  churches in the Kansas City , MO urban area  will participate and have 
already provided letters of support.  Criteria  for church participation  includes : a) a minimum of 15 0 adu lt church 
members  who re gularly attend  Sunday services; b) an a ctive church outreach ministry (e.g., food/clothing 
pantry, socia l services, daycare); c) c ommitment from the pastor  and two  church he alth liaisons  (CHLs)  to 
assist in study activities ; and d) commitment to hold 2 dementia screening /LTC  events over 4 months . Impact 
will be  tracked among 50 church and community member  participants from  the two participating  AA churches , 
for 100 participants total . Church members will be  recruited by study  staff who provide  study information during  
church services and flyers in participa ting churches.  Community members will be  recruited similarly during 
churches’ outreach ministries. Participants will: a) identify as AA, b) be  aged > 50; and c) regularly attend 
church ( >once a month ) or use church  outreach services ( 3-4 times per year). Prior screening will not be an 
exclusion for participation.  Anyone  will be able to receive free screening, regard less of their participation in the 
study. Participants will complete baseline and 4-month  follow up  surveys .  
Intervention implementation . Pastors , CHLs , and KC CARE Health Center  (our health agency partner; see 
letter of support) community health workers  (CHWs)  will participate in a pre - and midpoint training on study 
manualized implementatio n information, procedure s, and brain health . The trainings will also be used to  review 
the Dementia Screening and Compassion Tool Kit materials/activities and  plan/sch edule delivery of activities in 
targeted , multilevel  church services and ministries.  The project team will host an informational presentation in 
the churches on brain health and the importance of screening for dementia and cognitive impairment  as part of 
a church -hosted project -prescribed  Kick-off event to launch intervention  implementation . Pastors and church 
health liaisons  will deliver  2 to 3 toolkit items per month  over a 4-month period through multilevel church 
outlets, including: a)  self-help materials  (e.g., educati onal brochures,  risk checklist,  screening commitment 
cards ) (individual level ); b) discussion guides (ministry group level ); c) sermon  guide s, responsive readings, 
testimonials, and church bulletins (church level ); and d) screening via UMKC psychology students and faculty 
and linkage to care  (e.g., referral  for diagnostic evaluation , linkage to community resources ) via trained 
community health workers  (church -community level ). Two screening events will be held in each church , at 4 
weeks and 12 week s. UMKC psychology faculty and trained students will conduct the screening and provide 
immediate feedback via e lectronic -tablets.  
Measures . We will assess self-reported receipt of  screening  (ever/past year and where/why screening 
received) . A battery of assessments will be administered including the AD8 (Galvin et al., 2007)  for dementia 
screening, the LIBRA Index to assess modifiable risk factors (Schiepers et al., 2017), the Lubben Social 
4 Network Scale (Lubben et al., 2006)  to assess social engagement, the Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly 
(PASE , Washburn et al., 1993 ) to assess healthy lifestyle factors, the Duke University Religion Index  (Koenig & 
Bussing, 2010) to assess religious behaviors, the RCOPE  (Pargament et al., 2011) to assess religious coping, 
and the Perceptions Regarding Investigational Screening for Memory in Primary Care (PRISM -PC; Boustani et 
al., 2008)  and the Stigma Impact Scale (Fife & Wright, 2000 as modified for use with dementia by Burgener & 
Berger, 2008)  to assess perceived dementia -related stigma . We will also assess depression using the PHQ9 . 
Demographic factors  (e.g.,  age, education, occupation, marital status ) and  chronic health conditions  (e.g., 
diabetes, high blood pressure)  will be assessed. For our process evaluation, we will assess intervention  
implementation with CHLs  and intervention exposure/satisfaction with participants. All measures  will be 
assessed  at baseline and 4 months . We will conduct post-study focus groups with 24 participants to obtain 
feedback on study materials /procedures  and refine study  design /delivery for future projects.   
Data anal ysis. Self-reported r eceipt of screening (Yes/No) is our primary outcome . We will also collect 
objective data on persons screened. Stigma and LTC use are secondary outcomes. To explore pilot study 
outcomes and hypothesized pathways with baseline/ 4-month comparisons, we will use frequencies (ns), 
percentages, and means/SDs . Referrals to care and actual care received will be documented using CHW 
objective  records. Logistic regression analyses with demographic and psychosocial variable s, including TPB,  
will be conducted to determine association s with receipt of dementia screenin g screen  and LTC use . Linear 
regression will be conducted to examine stigma associations.  Perceived acceptability of study intervention 
materials/process and feasibility/challenges will be assessed in our post -study  focus groups. Together, this 
information  will provide a strong basis for designing a larger, randomized study of dementia screening in 
African American churches.  Power calculations will not be conducted since this is an exploratory pilot st udy.  
KUADC resource utilization . We anticipate using the Outreach and Recruitment  (OR) Core to tap the Core’s 
experience in community education  on the latest research in brain health and dementia. As described here, 
part of our project is to increase knowledge about AD and other dementias in the African -Amer ican community, 
which can then support our efforts to increase screening and linkage to care. As we pursue this work, the OR 
Core will help us build a network of colleagues and collaborators for future research projects.  
Dissemination of  findings  and plans for additional funding . We will prepare  presentations and at least 5 
scholarly publication s focus ed on study development, baseline findings, primary/secondary outcomes, process 
evaluation, and screening predictors . We plan to use  study findings to support a future clustered, RCT NIH 
application  and address  feasibility, acceptability , and statistical power to detect a change in screening rates. 
Our project fits well with NIH priorities . There is a new Program Announcem ent (PA-18-932) titled “ Incre asing 
Uptake of Evidence -Based Screening in Diverse Adult Populations (R01 Clinical Trial Optional) ”. This funding 
opportunity “ invites applications that seek to understand strategies to reduce disparities in the uptake of 
evidence -based screening across t he adult lifespan  in diverse clinical and community settings, and/or with 
traditional, non -traditional and/or allied health care providers ”. We plan to submit to this PA,  June 2020  cycle . 
Overview of primary intervention activities and timeline  
Week 0 1: Study implementation training with pastor, CHLs, an CHWs  
Week 0 2: Recruitment information via flyers and church bulletin information is distributed in churches  
Week 0 3:  Study introduced by study team in Sunday morning services and in outreach ministry act ivities, 
volunteering church and community members are consented, and baseline survey is administered  
Week 1:  Intervention Kick -off: Informational presentation on brain health and dementia screening; pastoral 
sermon, responsive reading, and risk checklis t delivered during Sunday morning service  
Week 2 – 12:  Pastors and CHLs deliver dementia toolkit items to encourage screening and reduce stigma  
Week 4:  First screening event with linkage to care services is held  
Week 7:  Refresher study implementation tr aining with pastor, CHLs and CHWs  
Week 12:  Second screening event with linkage to care services is held  
Week 16:  4 -month follow -up survey is administered  
Weeks 18: Focus groups with participants and CHLs are conducted  
5 References cited  
Ajzen I. The the ory of planned behavior. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process. 1991;50(2):179 -211. 
Baumgart, M., Snyder, H. M., Carrillo, M. C., Fazio, S., Kim, H., & Johns, H. (2015). Summary of the evidence 
on modifiable risk factors for cognitive decline and dementia: a popul ation -based 
perspective.  Alzheimer's & Dementia , 11(6), 718 -726. 
Burgener, S. C., & Berger, B. (2008). Measuring perceived stigma in persons with progressive neurological 
disease: Alzheimer’s dementia and parkinson's  disease. Dementia: The International Journal of Social 
Research and Practice, 7(1), 31 -53. doi:10.1177/1471301207085366  
Berkley -Patton, J., Thompson, C. B., Martinez, D. A., Hawes, S. M., Moore, E., Williams, E., & Wainright, C. 
(2012). Examining church capacity to develop and disseminate a religiously appropriate HIV tool kit 
with African American churches. Journal of urban health : bulletin of the New York Academy of 
Medicine, 90(3), 482 -99. 
Berkley -Patton, J., Bowe Thompson, C., Moore, E., Hawes, S., S imon, S., Goggin, K., Martinez, D., Berman, 
M., & Booker, A. An HIV testing intervention in African American churches: Pilot study findings. Annals 
of Behavioral Medicine.2016;50(3):480 -485.  
Berkley -Patton J, Bowe -Thompson C, Bradley -Ewing A, et al. Takin g It to the Pews: a CBPR -guided HIV 
awareness and screening project with black churches. AIDS Educ ation &  Prev ention . 2010;22(3):218 -
37. 
Berkley -Patton, J., Moore, E., Berman, M., Simon, S., Bowe Thompson, C., & Schleicher, T., Hawes, SM. 
Assessment of HIV  stigma in a U.S. faith -based HIV education and screening intervention. Journal of 
the International  AIDS Soc;2013:16(Suppl 2):18644. doi.org/10.7448/IAS.16.3.18644.  
Berkley -Patton, J., Bowe Thompson, C., Moore, E., Hawes, S., Berman, M., Allsworth, A., Wi lliams, E., 
Wainright, C., Bradley -Ewing, A., Bauer, A., Catley, D., & Goggin, K. (2018a). Feasibility and 
outcomes of an HIV testing intervention in African American churches. AIDS and Behavior.  
Berkley -Patton, J., Bowe Thompson, C., Bradley -Ewing, A., Be rman, M., Booker, A., Catley, D., Goggin, K., 
Williams, E., Wainright, C., Rhuland Petty, T., & Aduloju -Ajijola, N. (2018b). Identifying health 
conditions, priorities, and relevant multilevel health promotion intervention strategies in African 
American chu rches: A faith community health needs assessment. Evaluation and Program Planning. 
31(67)19 -28. 
Berkley -Patton, J., Bowe Thompson, C., Bauer, A., Berman, M., Bradley -Ewing, A., Catley, D., & Goggin, K. 
(2018c, April). Using faith community engagement to in crease reach and impact of a diabetes/CVD 
health promotion intervention in African American churches.  Annals of Behavioral Medicine , 52 (Suppl 
1), S2  
Blackwood, J., & Martin, A. (2017). Screening for cognitive impairment as a part of falls risk assessment in 
physical therapist practice.  Journal of Geriatric Physical Therapy , 40(4), 197 -203. 
Bonds, K., & Lyons, K. S. (2018). Formal service use by African American individuals with dementia and their 
caregivers: An integrative review.  Journal of Gerontological  Nursing , 44(6), 33 -39. 
Bronfenbrenner U. The ecology of human development: Experiments by design and nature. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press; 1979.  
Campbell MK, Hudson MA, Resnicow K, Blakeney N, Paxton A, Baskin M. Church -based health promotion 
interventions: evidence and lessons learned. Annu al Rev Public Health. 2007;28:213 -34. 
Cothran, F. A., Paun, O., Barnes, L. L., Epps, F., Schoeny, M., & Farran, C. J. (2017). Comparing the effect of 
a moderate physical activity intervention on the mental he alth outcomes of african american and 
caucasian dementia family caregivers: A secondary data analysis.  Issues in Mental Health 
Nursing , 38(12), 996 -1004.  
6 Crous -Bou, M., Minguillón, C., Gramunt, N., & Molinuevo, J. L. (2017). Alzheimer’s disease prevention : from 
risk factors to early intervention.  Alzheimer's Research & Therapy , 9(1), 71.  
Dale, W., Hemmerich, J., Hill, E. K., Hougham, G. W., & Sachs, G. A. (2008). What correlates with the 
intention to be tested for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in health y older adults?.  Alzheimer Disease 
& Associated Disorders , 22(2), 144 -152. 
Deckers, K., van Boxtel, M. P., Schiepers, O. J., de Vugt, M., Munoz Sanchez, J. L., Anstey, K. J., ... & Ritchie, 
K. (2015). Target risk factors for dementia prevention: a systemat ic review and Delphi consensus
study on the evidence from observational studies.  International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry , 30(3), 
234-246.
Epps, F., Weeks, G., Graham, E., & Luster, D. (2018). Challenges to aging in place for African American older 
adults living with dementia and their families.  Geriatric Nursing , 39(6), 646 -652. 
Fife, B. L., & Wright, E. R. (2000). The dimensionality of stigma: A comparison of its impact on the self of 
persons with HIV/AIDS and cancer. Journal of Health and Social B ehavior, 41(1), 50 -67. 
doi:10.2307/2676360  
Fogg, C., Griffiths, P., Meredith, P., & Bridges, J. (2018). Hospital outcomes of older people with cognitive 
impairment: An integrative review.  International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry . 
Fogg, C., Meredith,  P., Bridges, J., Gould, G. P., & Griffiths, P. (2017). The relationship between cognitive 
impairment, mortality and discharge characteristics in a large cohort of older adults with unscheduled 
admissions to an acute hospital: a retrospective observational  study.  Age and Ageing , 46(5), 794 -801. 
Galvin, J. E., Roe, C. M., Coats, M. A., & Morris, J. C. (2007). Patient's rating of cognitive ability: using the 
AD8, a brief informant interview, as a self -rating tool to detect dementia.  Archives of Neurology , 64(5), 
725-730.
Gleason, C., Dowling, N., Benton, S., Kaseroff, A., Gunn, W., & Edwards, D. (2016). Common sense model 
factors affecting African American’s willingness to consult a healthcare provider regarding symptoms 
of mild cognitive impairment.  American  Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry , 24, 537 -546. 
Goldstein, F., Ashley, A., Miller, E., Alexeeva, O., Zanders, L., &  King, V. (2014).  Validity of the Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment as a screen for mild cognitive impairment and dementia in African Americans. 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology , 27(3), 199 -203.  
Grober, E., Mowrey, W., Erlich, A., Mabie , P., Hahn, S., & Lipton, R.  (2016).  Two -stage screening for early 
dementia in primary care.  Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology , 38(9), 1038 -1049 
Han, H. R., Park, S. Y., Song, H., Kim, M., Kim, K. B., & Lee, H. B. (2013). Feasibility  and validity of dementia 
assessment by trained community health workers based on clinical dementia rating.  Journal of the 
American Geriatrics Society , 61(7), 1141 -1145.  
Jackson, J., Rentz, D., Aghijayan, S., Buckley, R., Meneide, T., Sperling, R., & Amari glio, R.  (2017). 
Subjective cognitive concerns are associated with objective memory performance in Caucasian but 
not African -American persons.  Age and Ageing , 46, 988 -993.  
Koenig, H. G., & Büssing, A. (2010). The Duke University Religion Index (DUREL):  a five -item measure for use 
in epidem iological studies.  Religions , 1(1), 78 -85. 
Lubben, J., Blozik, E., Gillmann, G., Iliffe, S., von Renteln Kruse, W., Beck, J. C., & Stuck, A. E. (2006). 
Performance of an abbreviated version of the Lubben Social Network  Scale among three European 
community -dwelling older adult populations.  The Gerontologist , 46(4), 503 -513. 
Moore, E., Burleson, C., Berman, M., Judah, A., & Berkley -Patton, J. (2016). Health screenings among African 
American church and community members. Journal of Religion and Health, 55(5), 1786 -99. doi: 
10.1007/s10943 -016-0264 -1. 
7 Owusu, J. E., Islam, S., Katumuluwa, S. S., Stolberg, A. R., Usera, G. L., Anwarullah, A. A., ... & Aloia, J. F. 
(2019). Cognition and vitamin D in older African -American wome n–physical performance and 
osteoporosis prevention with vitamin D in older African Americans trial and dementia.  Journal of the 
American Geriatrics Society , 67(1), 81 -86. 
Pargament, K., Feuille, M., & Burdzy, D. (2011). The Brief RCOPE: Current psychometri c status of a short 
measure of religious coping.  Religions , 2(1), 51 -76. 
Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. A religious portrait of African Americans, U.S. Religious Landscape 
Survey. Pew Research Center, Washington, DC. 2009. Retrieved from 
http://pewforum.org/docs/?DocID=389.  
Pew Research Center. America’s Changing Religious  Landscape. May 2015. Washington, DC. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewforum.org/files/2015/05/RLS -05-08-full-report.pdf. 
Rovner, B. W., Casten, R. J., Hegel, M. T., & Leiby, B. (2018). Preventing cognitive decline in Black individuals 
with mild cognitive im pairment: A randomized clinical trial.  JAMA Neurology , 75(12), 1487 -1493.  
Schiepers, O. J., Köhler, S., Deckers, K., Irving, K., O'donnell, C. A., van den Akker, M., ... & van Boxtel, M. P. 
(2018). Lifestyle for Brain Health (LIBRA): a new model for dement ia prevention.  International Journal 
of Geriatric Psychiatry , 33(1), 167 -175. 
Tan, Z. S., Damron, R. J., Cadogan, M., Gans, D., Price, R. M., Merkin, S. S., … Chodosh, J. (2017). Team -
based interprofessional competency training for dementia screening and m anagement.  Journal of the 
American Geriatrics Society , 65(1), 207 –211. 
Tappen, R., Gibson, S., & Williams, C.  (2011).  Explanations of AD in ethnic minority participants undergoing 
cognitive screening.  American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other De mentias , 26(4), 334 -339. 
Taylor, RJ, Chatters, LM, Levin, J. Religion in the lives of African Americans: Social, psychological, and health 
perspectives. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA. 2004.  
Washburn, R. A., Smith, K. W., Jette, A. M., &  Janney, C. A. (1993). The physical activity scale for the elderly 
(PASE): development and evaluation.  Journal of Clinical Epidemiology , 46(2), 153 -162. 
Title: A Church -based I ntervention for I ncreasing Screening for D ementia Among African American 
Older Adults (ADC Pilot): Project Gr ace  
NCT#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Document date: 6/21/2022  
File: Consent form 
Project Grace Consent for Participation in a Research Study 
Stud
y Title: Brain Health  Screening in African American Churches  
Jannett
e Berkley -Patton, PhD, Principal Investigator  
School of Medicine, University of Missouri -Kansas City, Kansas City, MO  
Request to Participate  
You are being asked to take part in a research study that examines brain health education and 
screening projects in African American churches. The study is taking place at this church. The 
researcher in charge of this study is Jannette Berkley -Patton, PhD. While the study will be run by her, 
other qualified persons who work with her may act for her. This study is funded by the University of Kansas Alzheimer’s Disease Center.  
The study
 team is asking you to take part in this research study because you are over the age of 55. 
You are also either: a) a church member or b) community member using this church’s outreach services (e.g., church daycare/afterschool/Summer School services for your children; food/ clothing programs, other church social services) of this predominantly African American church in the Kansas City, MO, or Kansas City, KS, metropolitan area. Church and community members from several churches will be asked to participate in this study. Research studies only include people who choose to take part. This document is called a consent form. Please read this consent form carefully and take your time making your decision. The researcher or study staff will go over this consent form with you. Ask him/her to explain anything that you do not understand. Think about it and talk it over with your family and friends before you decide if you want to take part in this research study. This consent form 
explains what to expect: the risks, discomforts, and benefits, if any, if you consent to be in the study.  
Background  
This research study is being conducted to: 
a) examine the health beliefs and behaviors related to brain health among African American
church congregants and community members;
b) describe the capacity of Black churches to develop and implement health ministries using a
church- based brain health t ool kit;
c) improve the delivery of training and materials with  health ministries to address  brain health.
You are being asked to take part in this st udy beca use you will ha ve an opportunity  to s ee how t his 
church carries out a brain health education and screening intervention named Project  Grace. You will 
be one of about 50 subjects in the study at t his ch ur ch. A bout 200 subjects t otal w ill take part acr oss 
all the churches participating in  this study.  
Purpose   
The information from
 this study will be used in collaboration with Calvary Community Outreach 
Network, a faith-b ased/community -based organization serving the Greater Kansas City area, to better 
develop services and tools to assist African American churches in developing health ministries 
focused on brain health. Calvary Community Outreach Network will assist with training and providing 
technical
 assistance on mental health topics with participating churches.  
Procedures  
Your ch urch/this ch urch will r eceive brain health materials/activities which will be implemented by 
your ch urch leaders a nd members.  Your ch urch/this ch urch will al so coordinate brain health 
screening events, which will t ake place at t his ch urch and wil l be run by UMKC and KU Medical 
Center pr ofessionals.   
You are not required to participate in this research study in order to receive tool kit materials/activities 
and partake in the trainings provided by the Community Health Research Group. Your participati on in 
any portion of this research study is completely voluntary. 
If
 you choose to participate in this research study, you will be asked to complete a contact sheet with 
your name, phone number, address, email address, and contact information for two other people who 
know how to contact you. We will contact you to tell you when upcoming surveys will take place at 
this
 church. You will also complete a Brain Health Beliefs and Behaviors Survey that will be passed 
out in your church/this church. The Health Beliefs and Behaviors Survey asks questions about your: 
a)mental health and other health screening behaviors, b)  mental health risks, and c) beliefs about
mental health. The survey also asks about your religious activities, your knowledge about brain
health, whether your church should be involved in brain health- related activities, and to what degree
you have participated in these activities. This survey will take about 20- 30 minutes to complete. You
will also be given information about brain health. The survey will be administered at this church, which
is participating in this research study. You will put your completed survey in unmarked envelope and
then place your envelope in a sealed box. Your survey responses will be completely confidential. Thesurvey does not ask you for any personal identification.
You ar
e asked to complete the Brain  Health  Beliefs and Behaviors survey at 2 separate time points , 
at an initial survey event, and then again four months later.  When you are done taking part in this 
study, you will still have access to the Project Grace  intervention if this  churc h chooses to continue to 
implement it as part of its health ministry. 
Part
icipat ion in this evaluation study is voluntary at all times. You may choose to not participate or to 
withdraw your participation at any time. Deciding not to participate or choosing to leave the study will not result in any penalty, loss of benefits, or other privileges at this church to which you are entitled. If 
you decide to leave the study, please inform the lead researcher of this study, Jannette Berkley -
Patton ( berkleypattonj@umkc.edu, 816-235-6362)
 . 
Risks and Inconveniences 
There are minimal r isks for par ticipating in this r esearch study w hich consists of co mpleting t wo 
surveys.  The survey w ill ask  you about yo ur per sonal h ealth status,  heal th behaviors,  and other 
personal h ealth information. Y ou may f eel a bit unco mfortable answering some of t he survey 
questions r elated to brain health risks, screening, and other health- related topics  when completing 
questionnaires,  particularly i n the church setting. H owever, because  your i dentity will be coded, yo ur 
responses w ill be totally co nfidential. The survey w ill not ask  you to write down any per sonal 
identifying information. I f for whatever r easons yo u include personal i dentifying information on the 
survey,  this information will be removed. A lthough information on your co ntact  sheet w ill hav e been 
viewable by study staff due t o the need to contact  you about co mpleting this st udy’s surveys,  that 
information will not be associat ed with your r esponses. U pon completion of t he study,  sum mary 
information gathered from par ticipants as a group will be use d in reports, pr esentations,  and/or f or 
grant w riting purposes. 
Benefits  
Potential b enefits f rom par ticipating in this eva luation study m ay be an increased knowledge of brain 
health and resources  that co ntribute to your  preventi on of brain health conditions.  You may gai n the 
ability to share this i nformation with friends a nd family.  You may al so choose to receive a free 
confidential brain health screening and linkage to car e services if needed. Also, ot her African 
American church and community members may benef it from the information yo u provide. You may 
also find that t alking about brain health- related symptoms and better under standing symptoms and 
care options w ill be beneficial t o you. This information will al so assist us i n improv ing the church-
base d Project Grace  trainings on deve lopment of health ministries.  
Fees and Expenses  
There are no fees /expenses costs to you for par ticipating in this study. 
Compensation   
In partnership with Calvary Community Outreach Network, your chur ch will rec eive promotional items 
for participating in this study, including a c hurch-b ased brain health Tool Kit, a monetar y stipend, 
promotional items, and meals/snacks during training sessions.  
You will have opportunities to receive $20 for completing the 1st survey and $20 for com pleting the 
post survey. This  adds up to a total of $40 if you c omplete both surveys.  
Alternatives to S tudy Participation  
You can choose to not take part i n this study, which means you will not complete the surveys. You 
may still partak e in the use of the brain health Tool Kit material/activities, c hurch-b ased brain health 
screening, and trainings offer ed through your church and Calvar y Community Outreach Network 
while choosing not to participate in this evaluation research study. 
Confidentiality  
While we will do our best to keep the information you share with us confidential, it cannot be 
absolutely guaranteed. Individuals  from the University of Missouri -Kansas City Institutional Review 
Board (a committee that reviews and approves research studies), Research Protections Program, and Federal regulatory agencies may look at records related to this study to make sure we are doing proper, safe research and protecting human subjects. The results of this research may be published or presented to others. You will not be named in any reports of the results. Also, church names will not be associated with any public use of the data.  
Y
our name will not be collected at any time during the survey process. There will be no personal 
identifiers on the surveys. You will be asked to not put personal identifiers on the surveys. After completing your survey, you will immediately put it in an unmarked envelope and then put the envelope in a sealed box. Upon publication of survey data in reports, all collected survey responses will be combined as not to be able to detect any information about you or your church/this church. Survey s will be mainta ined by the lead evaluator, Jannette Berkley -Patton, PhD in a locked filing 
cabinet in her secured study office and will be destroyed after 7 years. Your contact sheets will also be stored in a locked filing cabinet in her secured study office and will be destroyed after all follow -up 
data is collected.  
Contacts for Questions about the Study  
The University of Missouri -Kansas City appreciates the participation of people who help it carry out its 
function of developing knowledge through research. You should contact the Office of UMKC’s Institutional Review Board at 816- 235-5927 if you have any questions, concerns or complaints about 
your rights as a research subject. You may call the researcher Dr. Jannette Berkley -Patton at 816-
235-6362 if you have any questions about this study. You may also call her if any problems come up.
Dr. Berkley -Patton is located in the School of Medicine at the University of Missouri -Kansas City,
2411 Holmes Street , Kansas City, MO 64108.
Voluntary Participation  
Taking part in this research study is voluntary. If you choose to be in the study, you are free to stop participating at any time and for any reason. If you choose not to be in the study or decide to stop participating, your decision will not affect any care or benefits you are entitled to. The researchers or sponsors may stop the study or take you out of the study at any time if they decide that it is in your best interest to do so. They may do this for medical or administrative reasons or if you no longer meet the study  criteria. You will be told of any important findings developed during the course of this 
research.  
Y
ou have read this Consent Form or it has been read to you. You have been told why this research is 
being done and what will happen if you take part in the study, including the risks and benefits. You 
have had the chance to ask questions, and you may ask questions at any time in the future by calling Dr. Jannette Berkley -Patton at 816- 235-6362. By accepting this this consent form, you volunteer and 
consent to take part in this research study. Study staff will give you a copy of this consent form.  