Version: 07062020 1  
          
Dynamics of Inflammation and its Blockade on Motivational 
Circuitry in Depression 
  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Date: July 6
th, 2020 
 
IRB00087941 
                      
 
   
Version: 07062020 2 Research Protocol  
 
Title of Protocol: Dynamics of Inflammation and its Blockade on Motivational Circuitry in Depression   Short Title:  Infliximab  
 Principal Investigator:   Michael Treadway, Ph.D., Assistant Professor, Department of 
Psychology  Correspondence:  
 Michael T. Treadway, Ph.D. Department of Psychology  
36 Eagle Row, Room 491 
(404) 727-3166 (office) 
(404) 727-7541 (lab) 
mtreadway@emory.edu  
 Abstract 
Motivational a nhedonia–a subset of anhedonic symptoms involving dopamine-linked 
impairments in effort - based decision- making, reward anticipation and reinforcement 
learning–are common in psychiatric disorders such as major depression, and are 
notoriously difficult to tr eat. In recent years, these symptoms have been associated with 
alterations in dopaminergic corticostriatal circuitry, yet the underlying causes of this 
circuit dysfunction remain unknown. One candidate mechanism is inflammation; 
increased inflammatory cyto kines have been reliably found in depressed patients, and 
administration of inflammatory cytokines or cytokine inducers has been shown to foment depressive symptoms of apathy, anhedonia and fatigue. In addition, inflammatory cytokines have been found to di srupt dopamine synthesis, alter basal -ganglia metabolism, 
and blunt striatal responsivity during reward anticipation. To date, however, the majority of data supporting the relationship between cytokines and symptoms in patients with major depression and other disorders is correlational in nature, and thus alternative experimental strategies are required to elucidate causal relationships. One strategy is to block inflammatory cytokines in a sample of depressed patients with high inflammation so as to determine which symptom domains are most affected and through which molecular pathways. The current study will assess neuroimaging measures of corticostriatal circuitry before and after a placebo -controlled pharmacologic blockade of 
inflammation in 80 depressed patients (n = 40 per group) recruited to ensure high levels 
of peripheral inflammation [C -reaction protein (CRP ) > 3mg/L ]. We will also recruit two 
comparison samples consisting of  20 depressed patients with low levels of peripheral 
inflammation  [CRP <2mg/L] and 40 healthy controls. Primary aims are to evaluate 
whether 1) corticostriatal function during reward motivation and anticipation are associated with change in peripheral inflamm ation following pharmacologic blockade 
relative to placebo 2) the temporal dynamics of change in inflammation, gene - 
expression, reward motivation and reinforcement learning behavior and motivational 
Version: 07062020 3 symptoms assessed at baseline, and 24 hours, 3 days, 1 week and two weeks post 
infliximab infusion, and 3) test an integrative multi - level path model to determine 
whether change in corticostriatal circuitry following inflammation blockade mediates the relationship between change in inflammation and change in motivational anhedonia symptoms. These data will provide further validation of inflammatory cytokines as therapeutic targets for motivational symptoms in depression and will define symptom targets and biomarkers of response for future studies.  
 
Introduction and Background  
Development of new treatments for major depression has been substantially hindered by 
the marked heterogeneity of the disorder, leaving remission rates as low as 33% with 
conventional antidepressant therapies.
24 To address this problem, the N ational Institute of 
Mental Health (NIMH)  has emphasized transdiagnostic approaches focused on 
identifying pathophysiological mechanisms for specific symptoms, rather than disorders 
as a whole. Anhedonia and other reward- related symptoms represent an excellent 
opportunity for this type of transla tional neuroscience approach, given the vast basic 
science literature from which to draw upon.25 Additionally, anhedonic symptoms reflect 
an area of critical need as they frequently fail to respond to widely available psychosocial 
and pharmacological treat ments.26,27  
To date, however, application of this important preclinical work to humans has 
been hampered by the enormous heterogeneity in psychiatric disorders, and the reliance 
on clinical symptom definitions that are underspecified for the purposes of identifying their neurobiological mechanisms. For example, the DSM -V (p. 163) states that 
individuals meeting criteria for anhedonia “may report feeling less interested in hobbies, ‘not caring anymore,’ or not feeling any enjoyment in activities that were p reviously 
considered pleasurable.” In other words, clinical assessment of anhedonia does not discriminate between a decrease in motivation and a reduction in experienced pleasure. However, a wealth of preclinical data suggest that this distinction is crucial for purposes of specifying the neural processes involved in motivation and pleasure, with dopamine-
dependent corticostriatal function implicated in the former
28-30 but not the latter.31,32 In 
addition to distinct substrates, these different sub -domains of anhedonia likely have 
distinct etiopathophysiologies. Indeed, as summarized below, there is excellent evidence 
to suggest that one path towards the development of an anhedonic presentation is the effect of inflammation on dopaminergic circuits and subse quent corticostriatal 
dysfunction resulting in impaired motivation, anticipation and reinforcement learning 
(referred to herein as “motivational anhedonia”6).  
The goal of the proposed research is to establish the validity of an inflammation-
dependent path towards the development of motivational anhedonia. Importantly, we do 
not propose this model as a means of accounting for all forms of anhedonic symptoms; 
rather, we suggest this as a possible mechanism that may occur in the context of high inflammation a nd altered dopamine-dependent corticostriatal network functions  
Objectives.  There are three primary aims of this study, each of which generates one or 
more hypotheses to consider and explore in the protocol design. These are elaborated on 
Version: 07062020 4 below. 
Aim 1: Determine the relationship between inflammation and corticostriatal circuit 
function in patients with major depression and high inflammation before and after a 
placebo-controlled anti-inflammatory challenge.  
80 medication- free depressed patients pre -selected for high inflammation (CRP >3mg/L ), 
20 medication- free depressed patients with low inflammation (CRP<2mg/L),  and 40 
healthy controls  will be enrolled. fMRI assessments of corticostriatal circuit function 
during effort-based decision- making, reward antic ipation and reward attainment will be 
assessed using the EEfRT21, MID22, and a Reinforcement Learning (RL)23 task, 
respectively, at baseline and 2 weeks after double- blind, random assignment to receive 
administration of the TNF antagonist infliximab  or placebo (n = 40 per group). Peripheral 
protein and gene expression markers of inflammation will also be assessed.  Hypothesis 1a:  
Infliximab -induced decreases in inflammation will predict pre- post increases in neural 
activity in ventral striatal and vmPFC during the EEfRT and, MID tasks, as well as 
increased prediction -error signals in ventral striatum d uring the reward attainment. 
Hypothesis 1b:  Decreases in inflammation will additionally be associated with pre -post 
increases in vmPFC–striatal connectivity during the EEfRT task. 
 
Aim 2: Determine the temporal dynamics of change in CRP and interleukin- 6 (IL-6) and 
change in behavioral and clinical measures of motivational anhedonia in depressed 
patients before and after an anti- inflammatory challenge.  
Behavioral measures of effort -based decision -making and reinforcement learning as well 
as symptoms of anhedonia  will be collected in the subjects in Aim 1 at 4 time-points 
before and after anti -inflammatory challenge with infliximab  or placebo : baseline (pre), 
24 hours post-infusion, 3 days, 1 week, and 2 weeks. Peripheral protein and gene 
expression markers of inflammation will also be assessed  at each time point.  Hypothesis 2: 
Individual differences in the magnitude of infliximab -induced decreases in plasma CRP 
and (IL-6) as well gene expression changes in TNF signaling pathways  will be associated 
with reduced motivational anhedonia as assessed by behavioral and clinical measures. 
Aim 3: Explore the inter -relationship among inflammation, corticostriatal circuit function 
and reward motivation using path analysis. Hypothesis 3:  Across all subjects, the 
association between change in peripheral inflammation and symptoms of motivational 
anhedonia following inflammation blockade  or placebo will be mediated by changes in 
corticostriatal circuitry (ventral striatal BOLD signal & striatal- vmPFC connectivity). 
Mediation will be assessed using a well -validated bootstrapping procedure for indirect 
effects analysis. We will also test a m odel of moderated-mediation to examine whether 
indirect mediational effects of changes in corticostriatal circuitry are moderated by treatment with infliximab or placebo. 
 STUDY PROTOCOL AND METHODS .  
 
Virtual Study Visits: Due to COVID-19, the informed consent process, clinical interview, 
neuropsychiatric assessments, task administration, and self- report surveys may be 
completed virtually with trained research staff using Emory’s HIPPA-Compliant Zoom Account and REDCap. Participants will be paid $15/hour for time spent in study visits on 
Version: 07062020 5 Zoom. Please see the updated TReAD Lab Suicide Policy for information specific to 
virtual study visits.   
 The overall procedure for this study is summarized in the table, below.  
  
    
                 
 
 
Description of Study Procedures  
 
Research Evaluation Clinic:  Some subjects in this study will be recruited after 
completion of a separate “evaluation clinic protocol”, in which screening will be conducted to assess a subject’s eligibility  to participate in this study and/or others. 
Screening may include a structured clinical interview, administration of self -reports and 
computer ta sks, physical examination and EKG, urine drug and/or pregnancy screen, and 
blood work (CBC with differential platelet count, comprehensive metabolic panel, etc.). 
This pre-screening process will take place at the Behavioral Immunology screening 
Figure 1.  
Legend:  PE = physical examination ; MD  = major depression; SCID  = structured clinical interview for DSM -V; QIDS-SR = 
16-item Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptoms; MMSE = Mini Mental State Examination; C- SSR = Columbia Suicide 
Severity Rating Scale; CRP  = C-reactive protein; INFLIX  = infliximab; PBO  = placebo; MRI = magnetic resonance 
imaging; Psych Ass. =  Interviewer based assessments using the SCID Mood Disorders module, MGH Antidepressant Treatment Response Questionnaire (ATRQ), Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), SCID substance abuse modules, 
and Columbia Suicide Severity Rating scale (C-SSR). Self-report questionnaires will include the Multidimensional 
Fatigue Inventory (MFI), Inventory of Depressive Symptoms Self- Report (IDS -SR), 16 -item Quick Inventory of 
Depressive Symptoms (QIDS-16 SR), Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS), Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS), Mood and Pleasure scale (MAP-SR), and Positive Affect/Negative Affect Scale - Now (PANAS- X) Immune Eval  = blood draw 
for assessment of plasma concentrations of TNF-alpha, sTNF RI and R2, IL-1, IL-1ra, IL-6, sIL-6R and CRP, intracellular 
TNF-alpha expression and NF-κB activity; the kynurenine to tryptophan ratio Adv. Events = clinician -based assessment 
of medication side effects/adverse events.  Schema/Study Summary  
Version: 07062020 6 clinic, where subjects who are determined to be eligible for this study will be referred to 
study staff.  An overview of the study may  initially be provided in person or over the 
phone by study clinicians or trained study staff after a subject has completed the evaluation protocol and consented to be contacted about other studies. Before enrollment of a subject, study staff will review the screening test results and medical record of a referred subject to ensure he or she is medically healthy and eligible to participate. Any 
screening tests and procedures necessary to verify eligibility not performed through the Research Evaluation Clinic will be administered for a subject as a part of this protocol. Subjects who are recruited through this route may not undergo some of the  procedures 
described under the “Pre- Screening” and “Screening” visits if these were completed 
through the Research Evaluation Clinic and the results were still valid through completion of the study protocol. Screening tests and procedures may be repeated during the study as needed if the validity of a test has expired before completion of the study visits. For example, an EKG performed through the Research Evaluation Clinic could be 
deemed sufficient to assess for safety criteria f or this study, if performed within a 
reasonable amount of time before study enrollment (under advisement of PI and co-investigators). However, a serum pregnancy test would be completed during screening for this study regardless of whether a test was previously performed as a part of the other protocol. Serum Pregnancy will be repeated on infusion date , regardless of the date of the 
last negative result .  
 
Pre-Screening:  To obviate the full screening assessment, an initial CRP and QIDS -16 SR 
will be obtained before embarking on the full screening process. 
 Following pre- screening, participants will be scheduled to complete one or more 
screening appointments. The procedure s described under “Screening” may be divided 
between multiple visits depending on subject scheduling and preference, staff 
availability, and other factors. Screening visits  will occur at the Emory Department of 
Psychology and/or the Emory Clinics and Emory  University Hospital. If screening is 
performed in a single visit, it will occur at the locations listed above.  
 
Screening : Subjects potentially qualified for enroll ment will undergo a screening 
evaluation after written informed consent. Screening will involve a subject interview and evaluation, as well as obtained collateral history and data from other sources (i.e., medical records, referring physician). Screening will include the following assessments: (1) Assessment of past psychiatric history and current symptom severity using a) the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-V (SCID-V) and QIDS -16 SR, (2) Assessment of 
past and current psychiatric treatment history, (3) Evaluation of medical history obtained from interview of the patient and review of pertinent medical records, (4) Complete medical and neurological examination, (5) Screening laboratory evaluations as described in “medical exclusionary criteria” above, (6) H eight and weight (provided to the 
pharmacy to calculate appropriate infliximab dose), and (7) CRP. We anticipate that 50 
full-screens will be required annually to enroll 16- 20 subjects per year.  
 
Randomization and Blinding:   
Version: 07062020 7 A list containing the randomly  generated sequence of assignments to infliximab or 
placebo will be maintained in the Emory University Investigational Drug Service 
pharmacy. Independent pharmacists will dispense either infliximab  or placebo in a 250ml 
saline bag according to the randomiz ation list. Subjects will be stratified on the basis of 
sex to obviate any confounding effect of gender on the outcome variables. Study personnel responsible for administering the infusion, conducting psychiatric evaluations, conducting medical assessments, drawing blood and performing lab analyses will be blinded to subject group assignment. In the event of a significant adverse reaction to the study medication, the study blind will be broken if medically necessary, and the subject will be referred for app ropriate medical care. Unblinded subjects will be discontinued 
from the protocol. Based on our previous experience, infliximab was well- tolerated with 
no serious adverse events, no differences in side effects compared to placebo, and no ability to be distinguished from placebo by patients or staff.
20 
 
Important Note: In some cases, an FDA -approved i nfliximab  biosimilar, Inflectra 
(infliximab -dyyb) may be used in place of i nfliximab . Please note at each place where 
infliximab  is referenced in this protocol that Inflectra may be used as its substitute.  
 
Phone Calls:  
If a participant misses a study visit, a study staff member will contact that participant to determine the reason behind the missed visit and will actively follow  up with him or her 
as appropriate until the conclusion of the study (at the 30 day follow-up call).    
Healthy Controls  and Low CRP Depressed Patients: 
Healthy controls  and low CRP depressed patients will go through a pre -screen and 
screening process that will consist of psychiatric evaluations, research and safety labs, baseline assessments (clinician -rated assessments, self -reports, behavioral tasks) and will 
take part in one  scan visit. In total, t hese participants will take part in up to 3 study visits 
(prescreening, screening, scan visit); however, some participants may request to consolidate their visits into just 2 study visits (prescreening, screen/scan visit).  
 Healthy controls  and low CRP depressed patients will undergo all research -related 
screening procedures that high CRP patients would undergo but will not receive a 
Quantiferon Gold TB Test, EKG or Chest X -Ray, as these are only required in order to 
ensure safety and suitab ility for the study drug. Healthy controls  and low CRP depressed 
patients will not receive an infusion of either drug or placebo.  
 
Neuropsychiatric Assessments: 
 Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-V Axis I Disorders (SCID -V) is a semi-
structured clinical interview that provides a wide range of DSM-V diagnoses.
96 All patients 
will be evaluated by the SCID as part of the screening process. In addition to providing information for inclusion/exclusion purposes, the SCID will provide data about relevant psychiatric covariates in cluding number of past major depressive episodes, length of the 
current episode and presence of co -morbid anxiety disorders and/or dysthymia. Substance 
Version: 07062020 8 abstinence will be additionally confirmed by urine drug screen at multiple points over the 
course of the study . 
 
The MGH Antidepressant Treatment Response Questionnaire (ATRQ)97: The 
ATRQ provides specific criteria for adequate dose and adequate length of a trial for it to 
be considered a failure, thus allowing clinicians to systematically collect data aimed at assessing degree of treatment -resistance of the MD episode. The data obtained can then 
be used to calculate a score using the MGH  Staging Method (MGH -S) to classify degree 
of treatment resistance
98 Degree of resistance will be used as a covariate in relevant 
statistical analyses.  
 Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) is a 27-item interviewer- administered questionnaire 
widely used for the evaluation of general cognitive functioning and identification of alt ered 
mental status. At screening, subjects will be excluded for score ≤24 , indicating evidence of 
more than mild cognitive impairment.
95 
 Bipolarity Index (BI): Bipolarity will be measured as a continuous variable using the NIMH funded Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP -
BD) study.
99 The STEP-BD computed bipolarity index scores by rating the patient’s 
profile relative to five traits characteristic of Bipolar I disorder, including episode characteristics, age of onset, course of illness/associated features, response to treatment and family history. The Bipolarity Index (BI) assigns common clinical features along each of five dimensions using a 0–20 score, where 20 points represents the presence of traits considered most characteristics of Bipolar I Disorder.  
 
Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM -D): The HAM -D is a 21-item 
interviewer- administered questionnaire widely used for the evaluation of severity of 
symptoms of depression.
144 This clinician -rated assessment may be administered at the 
PI’s discretion.  
 
Wide Range Achievement Test (W -RAT3): The WRAT III is a very brief screening 
measure for achievement. It covers reading recognition, spelling, and arithmetic. It 
contains very easy beginning items (letter reading, basic counting, and dictation of 
letters) followed by spelling, pronouncing words, and written math problems.  
 
Note: Neuroimaging Measures and Computer tasks will be drawn from the tasks listed 
below. Participants will be required to complete a selection of these tasks.  
Neuroimaging Measures  
 All neuroimaging will be acquired on a 3T Siemens Prisma magnetom scanner with a 32-
channel headcoil. Collection of structural and functional data includes: a 13- s localizer 
scan; an “auto -align scout” scan that uses a reference database to ensure consistent slice 
positioning across subjects; a rapidly acquired (~2 min), T1- weighted, multi -echo 
MPRAGE volume for structural analysis and localization of fMRI data (0.8 mm isotropic voxels; TR = 2.3 s; flip angle = 8 deg; TE1 = 3.15 ms; 224 slices); and multiband echo 
Version: 07062020 9 planar imaging for task -related fMRI data (2x2x2.5 mm voxels; TR = 1.0 s; TE = 30 ms; 
flip angle = 46 deg; 56 transverse slices, no skip). This last sequence is re- used to acquire 
task-evoked fMRI data. The scanning session may also include diffusi on tensor imaging 
(DTI) and MR spectroscopy (MRS) scans.  All neuroimaging data will be analyzed in 
SPM using standard preprocessing routines involving realignment/motion- correction, co-
registration, normalization and smoothing with a 6mm Gaussian kernel.  
 fMRI-adapted EEfRT ( approx. 15-20 min) Assessment of reward motivation will be 
accomplished using an fMRI-adapted version of the EEfRT task. During each trial, subjects are presented with a choice between two levels of task difficulty, a High Effort option and a Low Effort option, which require different amounts of speeded manual button pressing for differing levels of monetary reward. The reward magnitude for a No Effort option remains constant ($1.00), while the reward magnitude for the High Effort option varies from $1.00 to $5.00. Additionally, the amount of effort required for the High Effort option will vary between 20%, 50%, 80% and 100% of the subject’ s max 
effort (set for each individual prior to scan). The task will use a rapid event- related desig n 
with an exponential jitter between trials drawn from a Poisson distribution in order to optimize HRF estimation. Responses will be made using MRI -compatible button-boxes 
and images will be presented on a rear projection screen visible with a mirror mounted on the head coil.   After the scan, subjects will be asked to complete a “post -scan” effort task. This task will 
present the same trial options the subject viewed and decided on in the scanner (e.g., $3.70 for 80% max effort or $1 for no effort). The subject may then choose to re- select 
the choice previously made or change it, and then complete the effortful button pressing 
or not (depending on the choice made). 
 
Main Effects Analysis:  Based on subject choices, indifference curves for each level of 
effort will first be establi shed using a logistic model, and then fit to a parabolic 
discounting effort function where the subjective value (SV) of each choice is defined as SV = Reward / (1 -k*effort
2). A parabolic discounting function is used based on prior 
work suggesting superior fits for effort-discounting as compared to hyperbolic or exponential functions 
89. Per-trial subjective values will then be used as a parametric 
regressor in a first-level model, such differences in subjective value between the high and low effort options will be modeled against BOLD signal for each subject. Single- subject 
parametric contrast maps will then be entered into an RFX GLM, which is expected to isolate areas of vmPFC and striatum.  
 Note: For this task, participants will be instructed that they may complete the EEfRT 
“post-scan” task during a mandatory 30-minute observation period, to follow the MRI scan session.  In reality, an observation period is not needed after an MRI scan. This 
instruction will help ensure that participants do not believe that visit length is dependent choices made in the EEfRT post -scan task. Once all study procedures are complete at the 
14-day follow up visit, this will be explained to participants and a debriefing form will be 
provided.      
Version: 07062020 10 Monetary Incentive Delay Task ( approx. 15 min): Assessment of reward anticipation 
will be achieved using the M onetary Incentive Delay Task.22 This is one of the most 
widely-used tasks for assessing reward function in psychiatric populations,8,10,100 and is one 
of the few imaging reward tasks with established test- retest reliability.91 Briefly, during this 
task participants have the opportunity to win or lose money by making a rapid button 
press in response to a target visual stimulus. The primary epoch of interest is the 
“anticipatory delay” – a period of ~2000ms that occurs after particip ants have been 
informed how much money they can win or lose on a given trial, but prior to the presentation of the target. This epoch has repeatedly been associated with robust ventral striatal activity
10,22,101- 103 and shows excellent test -retest reliability. Participants will 
complete 2 functional runs of 90 trials each, resulting in a total of 180 trials (72 win; 72 loss, 36 no- change), with evenly distributed reward magnitudes of $0.20, $1.00 and $5.00.  
An optional variant of this task may involve an additional cue at the beginning of each trial signifying different ranges of possible reward values with the precise amount for each trial revealed only at the outcome phase.   
 
Main Effects Analysis:  Primary contrasts of interest will focus on reward anticipation, 
and include Win > Neutral trials, Loss > Neutral trials, and Win > Loss trials. We will additionally examine these contrasts after restricting Win and Loss trials to only high reward amounts ($5.00).  
 
Adaptive MID (one run AdaptMID; approx. 9-10 min.  Total run time  approx. 18-
20 min.):  The adaptive MID task was designed to show how brain value signals adapt to 
the specific context that a person is experiencing.   The AdaptMID includes both training 
and a test phase.   During training subjects will see stimuli identical to what they see in the 
test portion.   Subjects are first shown a cue signal informing them of the context they are 
in.  The two contexts are low context rewards, where the trial could be worth $0.25 or 
$1.00, and high context rewards, where the trial could be worth $1.00 or $4.00.  The 
contexts are indicated by either one “+” symbol (low) or by three “+” symbols 
(high).  After the cue there is a jittered delay (mean 2.84 sec.) and the reward amo unt is 
displayed to them ($0.25, $1.00, or $4.00).  The lower value option and higher value 
option are displayed an equal number of times within each context. After all of the cue 
information has been presented there is an anticipation phase delay (mean 2. 36 sec.) 
before a target appears.   A target red box flashes briefly on the screen and the subject’s 
role is to quickly press a button before the box disappears.  An accurate response results 
in a “hit” and the subject is rewarded the amount shown previousl y.  An inaccurate 
response results in a “miss” and the subject is not rewarded.   The subject is shown 
feedback on whether they hit or missed, and how much money they earned if any.  The 
primary dependent variables are how subjects respond to low and high contextual 
situations and whether the reward amount revealed is the low value or high value within 
that context.  The AdaptMID will be administered as two runs with a novel order of trials 
for each of the runs.  
 
Gamble Task (approx. 30 min): To examine the relationship between chosen certain 
rewards the expected values of chosen gambles, the difference between experienced and predicted rewards and happiness;  we have added a Gamble Task . During this task, 
Version: 07062020 11 participants will have the option of se lecting between a certain choice and a gamble choice, 
with equal probabilities of the two outcomes. There will between 50 and 150 trials with an 
equal proportion of three trial types: mixed (a certain amount of $0 with a gain and loss 
amount), gain (with a  certain gain or a gamble with $0 and a larger loss), and loss (with a 
certain loss or a gain of $0 and a greater loss). Further, participants will be asked to rate their current level of happiness after every three trials. Also, before and after the task is 
complete, participants will be asked to measure their life happiness. Previous studies by Rutledge et. al. have demonstrated that this technique can be used to establish a relationship between task earnings and happiness. Further, fMRI measures have dem onstrated a 
relationship between ventral striatum activities with happiness ratings from this task.   
 RL Task ( approx. 15-20 min): To examine effects of infliximab on neural responses to 
reward attainment we have added an instrumental conditioning task (90 trials). Trials for 
this task involve a 3s cue presentation during which subjects choose between two abstract stimuli, followed by an exponentially jittered delay, and then a 3s feedback presentation 
with positive (monetary win), negative (monetary loss) or neutral outcomes. Behavioral responses will be analyzed by fitting a standard reinforcement learning (Q -learning) 
model
104  to each subject’s sequence of choices. Based on individual choices and 
outcomes for each trial, the Q- learning algorithm will compute the expected values (Q) of 
choosing a given stimulus: Q t = Qt-1 + alpha*RPE t, where RPE t = Reward t - Qt-1 and 
alpha represents the learning rate.104 Model-based expected values will be related to 
subject choices using a softmax selection rule105 to determine learning -rate parameters 
and generate behavioral RPE values for each trial, consistent with past studies from our group (Preliminary Study 5) and others.
23,106 We note that while some past work has 
suggested minor test -retest reliability issues with fMRI RL tasks107, these have only been 
observed using task designs with a very low number of trials (~25 as compared to 90 in the current proposal), which likely produce less reliable measurements for purposes of repeated assessments.  
 
Main Effects Analysis:  Primary contrasts of interest will focus on parametric modulation 
of RPE during reward attainment reward , which is expected to robustly recruit ventral 
striatal activity . 
 
Delay-discounting Task (approx. 5-15 min):  Participants are presented wi th choices 
between receiving one reward amount now, and a different reward amount that will be delivered some number of days later. Reward values will range between approximately $5.00 to $50.00, and number of days will range between today and 52 weeks.  T o ensure 
the ecological validity of this task, participants will be told that two of the choices they made will be added to their final compensation, with this added payment received either at the end of the study or some days later (depending on the choice made by the participant).  
 
Main Effects Analysis:  Primary contrasts of interest will focus on the parametric 
modulation of reward amount and delay of reward. 
 
Ramping Task  (approx. 10 min/run, 20 min total) : In this task, subjects will be trained on 
different computerized mazes with varying difficulties/lengths. There will be a group of 
Version: 07062020 12 easy mazes and a group of hard mazes.  After a subject has sufficiently learned the mazes 
(defined as reaching the end of a maze by a specified goal time), he or she will begin the task 
itself. In this task, subjects may be exposed to different trial types, like “navigate” and “passive viewing”. In “navigate” trials, subjects will have to reach the end of the maze for a varying known or unknown reward amount (ranging from $0 -10). Trials may be set to 
“time out” after a predetermined period of time has elapsed to ensure subject compliance and performance. In “passive viewing” trials, subjects will watch as they are navigated 
through the maze without needing to actively respond or move.   
 
Main Effects Analysis: Primary contrasts of interest will focus on the parametric modulation 
of reward amount and effort differences between ‘passive viewing’ and ‘navigate’ trial types.  
 
Behavioral Assessments of Reward Motivation and Reinforcement Learning  
 
Behavioral Effort -Expenditure for Rewards Task (beh EEfRT; approx. 20-25 min) : 
The behEEfRT task is a multi -trial game in which participants are given an opportunity 
on each trial to choose between two different task difficulty levels in order to obtain monetary rewards.
21 For all trials, participants make repeated manual button presses 
within a short period of time. Each but ton press raises the level of a virtual ‘‘bar’’ viewed 
onscreen by the participant. Participants are eligible to win the money allotted for each trial if they raise the bar to the ‘‘top’’ within the prescribed time period. Each trial presents subjects with  a choice between two levels of task difficulty, a ‘high- effort’ and 
‘low-effort’ task that require different amounts of speeded button pressing. Reward 
magnitudes for the high effort task vary between $1.24 and $4.33, while reward magnitudes for the low e ffort task remain constant ($1.00). Trials also vary in terms of 3 
levels of probability of winning the amount associated with the choice selected. Subjects participate in the task  for about 20 minutes and the first 50 trial s are used for analysis.  
For statistical analyses the proportion of hard- task choices across each level of 
probability is calculated. Lower proportions of hard task choices indicate decreased motivation for monetary rewards. The EEfRT will be administered 5 times. The task has excellent test- retest reliability (test -retest r > 0.85), and has been successfully used in 
prior multi- session studies with similar time intervals between administrations. 
43,108  
 Probabilistic Stimulus Selection Task (PST; approx. 15-20 min): The PST was 
designed to differentiate between “go” and “no-go” reinforcement learning and has been validated tested using a bio- realistic model of basal ganglia function, and empirical data 
in humans.
37,109,110 The PST includes a training phase and a test phase. During training, 
participants are presented with three different stimuli pairs (AB, CD, EF) in random order, and are instructed to choose one. After each choice, participants are informed if their selection was “correct” or “incorrect.” Correct/incorrect feedback is probabilistic such that for AB trials, A is correct 80% of the time and B 20%; for CD trials C is correct 70% and D 30%, and for EF trials, E is correct 60% and F 40%. After subject behavior demonstrates that they have accurately learned the “correct” option for each stimulus pair, they enter the testing phase. In this phase, subjects are presented with novel pairs involving either the A stimulus (AC, AD, etc.) or B stimulus (BC, BD, etc.). Since A always has the highest probability of being correct across all stimuli (80%), the extent 
Version: 07062020 13 that subjects choose A in this novel pairs represents a learned “go” association. 
Conversely, since the B stimulus has the lowest probability of being correct (20%), the extent to which subjects do NOT choose B in the novel pairs indicates a “no-go” association. The primary dependent variables are the proportions of correct go and no- go 
trials during the testing phase. The PST will be administered 5 times with a novel stimuli set used each time, consistent with past repeated measures designs using the PST.
111  
 
Go No-Go Variant Task ( approx. 32 min): On each trial of this task, one of four possible 
fractal images is briefly presented to the subject. Each represents the combination between action (either “go” or “no -go”, carried out by button pressing or withholding button 
pressing), and valance at outcome (either win or lose). Action will be required in response to a circle that follows the fractal image, after a brief variable delay. The circle will appear on the screen for approximately 500- 2500ms. In go trials, subjects will be asked to indicate 
which side of the screen the circle appeared on, by pressing a button. Subjects must make a response within a brie f amount of time (e.g. 700 ms). In no -go trials, subjects will simply 
be asked to withhold any response. After a short delay, the outcome will be presented to a subject (win, loss, or neutral). A green upward symbol indicates a win of $1, a red downward symbol indicates a loss of $1, and a horizontal bar indicates an absence of win or loss. In “go to win” trials, a correct button press is rewarded. In “go to avoid losing” trials, a correctly avoided button press avoids punishment. In “no- go to” win trials, 
withholding the button press leads to reward. In “no- go to avoid losing” trials, withholding 
a button press avoids punishment. The outcome will be designed in a probabilistic manner, so that 70% of correct responses are rewarded in win trials and 70% of co rrect responses 
are not punished in lose trials. On 50% of trials, target detection and outcome will be omitted. Participants will be asked to complete 4 blocks of this task, each approximately 8 
minutes in length.  
 
Behavioral Assessment of Emotional Memor y Pre/Post -Infusion  
 
Emotional Memory Task:  To examine the effects of infliximab on emotional memory, 
we have added a two -part (i.e., encoding & retrieval) emotional memory task that may be 
performed before and after the infusion.  Participants will complete the two -part 
emotional memory task before the infusion and again after the infusi on. We will use 360 
happy, angry, and neutral faces selected from the Carnegie Mellon University Multi- PIE 
Face Database (Gross et al., 2010) as stimuli. All images will be cropped to ovoid shape in order to remove distinctive hairstyles, jewelry, or cloth ing. During encoding, we will 
present each participant with 90 images of faces: 30 happy faces, 30 angry faces, and 30 neutral faces. On each trial, the participant will view the face for 2 seconds before indicating by button press whether the expression is happy, angry or neutral—the participant will have an additional 2 seconds to make this judgment. Trials will be separated by a jittered intertrial interval (ITI) during which time a fixation cross will be presented (mean duration: 2 seconds; range: 1- 5 seconds). Thus, the total trial time will 
by 6 seconds, on average, for a total encoding time of about 10 minutes (including time for setup and brief instructions). On the following day (or as close to the following day as possible we will administer a recognition memory test for the faces. Briefly, participants will view the 90 “old” faces from the encoding session mixed with 90 “new” faces—
Version: 07062020 14 lures—and will be asked to indicate whether each face is old or new and also how 
confident they are in their judgment (4 seconds). A fixation ITI will again separate the 
trials (mean: 2 seconds). Given 180 faces and an average trial length of 6 seconds, the recognition test is expected to last about 25 minutes. Identical procedures will be used before and after treatment with infliximab , with different faces presented at each session.  
 
We will first analyze the recognition memory data by computing d’ , which is a signal 
detection measure of memory accuracy unconfounded by response bias; d’ is calculated as Z(hit rate) – Z(false alarm rate). Next, we will submit the d’ data to a 2 Treatment  (pre, 
post) x 3 Emotion (happy, angry, neutral) repeated measures ANOVA. We expect to obtain a significant Treatment x Emotion interaction. We further predict that follow -up t-
tests will reveal significantly better memory for angry vs. happy faces before treatment, but no difference between angry and happy faces after treatment (i.e., memory for happy faces will be selectively improved by treatment with infliximab ). Furthermore, we expect 
a series of “post minus pre” within -subject t-tests to show no effect of treatment on 
memory for neutral or angry faces, but a positive effect of treatment on memory for happy faces. If possible, we will seek to correlate any observed change in memory for happy faces with measures of improved dopamine function. We predict that depressed 
adults will show poor memory for positive relative to negative stimuli before treatment, but that memory for positive stimuli will improve significantly after treatment.  
 
Behavioral Assessments of Psychomotor Slowing  
 Finger Tapping Task (FTT):  This task uses a specially adapted tapper that the subject 
taps as fast as possible using the index finger.  The subject is given 5 consecutive 10-
second trials for the preferred and non- preferred hands.  The finger tapping score is the 
mean of 5 trials a nd is computed for each hand.  Performance norms have been 
established, and scores have been shown to be stable over time.
112 The FTT is designed to 
assess subtle motor impairment and is altered in subjects with basal ganglia disorders and 
lesions.113     
 Reaction Time Task (RTT)(CANTAB):  The RTT provides measures of simple and 
choice movement and reaction time tasks and is divided into 5 stages requiring increasingly complex chains of r esponses and providing distinction between reaction (or 
decision) time and movement latencies. Movement times on the CANTAB reaction time task have been shown to be slowed during IFN- alpha treatment and correlate with IFN -
alpha-induced depression and fatigue.
114   
 Digit Symbol Task (DST): The Digit Symbol Task is a subtest of the Wechsler Adult 
Intelligence Scale (WAIS) and consists of rows of blank squares, each printed with a 
randomly assigned number.  The test involves graphimotor speed, visual scanning and memory, with about half of the variance being accounted for by graphimotor speed, a third by visual scanning and 4- 5% by memory.
115 This test is one of the most frequently 
used in neuropsychology and relevant norms and test-r etest reliability have been well 
established.112 Performance on the Digit Symbol Test has been found to correlate with 
Version: 07062020 15 subcortical atrophy in disorders involving the basal ganglia including Huntington’s 
disease and multiple sclerosis.116,117 
 
Self-Report Assessments  
 Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS) : The SHAPS is a 14 -item self- report scale 
that assesses hedonic tone.
121 The items 1,4,8 and 9 refer to interests, items 3 and 10 to 
food and drink, items 2,7,13 and 14 to social interaction and items 5,6,11 and 12 to sensory experiences.
122  
 Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI) : is a 20-item self-report instrument designed 
to measure fatigue, covering the dimensions General Fatigue (GF), Physical Fatigue (PF), Mental Fatigue (MF), Reduced Motivation (RM) and Reduced Activity (RA).
123 Separate 
scores for each of these five dimensions are generated from the MFI. We will only use the 
score from the RM dimension in this domain. The Reduced Motivation score from the MFI has been shown to highly correlate with reduced neural activation in the ventral striatum to a reward task during IFN -alpha administration as determined by fMRI.
124  
 Motivation and Pleasure Scale : The mood and pleasure questionnaire is a recently -
developed 18- item self-report inventory that was created to disentangle state -wise 
motivational and consummatory components of everyday activities over a 24- hour period, 
and has been previously validated a s a measure of reward -related symptoms in psychiatric 
populations.
125 This scale will be used to assess self -reported changes in motivational 
anhedonic symptoms before and after inflammation blockade.  
 
PANAS-X: The Positive Affect/Negative Affect Scale (PANAS) is a widely used measure 
of in-the-moment aspects of positive and negative affectivity126, and will be used as an 
additional measure of self -reported changes in anhedonic symptoms following 
inflammation blockade.  
 
Fatigue Severity Scale  (FSS): is a 9-item self-report scale that is one of the best known 
and most used fatigue scales. It has high internal consistency, has good test–retest reliability and is sensitive to change with time and treatment. It has been used in multiple medically ill pop ulations as well as in those with primary depression.
127,128 
 Inventory of Depressive Symptoms- Self Report  (IDS-SR) is a 30-item self-report 
instrument with excellent psychometric properties that was designed to measure symptom constructs consistent with current DSM nosology and that has been widely used as a self -
report outcome measure of depression in treatment trials.
94,118 
 Apathy Motivation Index (AMI): is an 18-item self-report index of apathy and 
motivation. It provides a useful means of probing different mechanisms underlying sub -
clinical lack of motivation in otherwise healthy individuals. It covers motivation within 
three dissociable domains: cognitive, emotional/affective and behavioral. This index will take about 5 minutes to complete.  
Version: 07062020 16 Apathy Evaluation Scale (AES) : The AES addresses characteristics of goal directed 
behavior that reflects apathy including behavioral, cognitive and emotional indicators. It 
consists of 18 items; Items are scored on 4 -point Likert scale with descriptors for the 
“self” version (not at all true, slightly true, somewhat true, very true). It takes 
approximately 10 minutes to complete.  
 Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ): The self-report questionnaire includes a 28 -
item test that measures 5 types of maltreatment – emotional, physical, and sexual abuse, 
and emotional and physical neglect and assesses individual's understan ding of their 
childhood trauma. This questionnaire should take about 5 minutes to complete.  Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale – Short Form (DAS-SF): is a self-report questionnaire 
containing nine items taken from the original DAS, using item- response analysis  to 
provide an efficient and accurate assessment of dysfunctional attitudes. It is designed to negative self -belief construct. This questionnaire should take about 5 minutes to 
complete.  
 HEXACO : HEXACO Personality Inventory- Revised, an instrument that assesses the six 
major dimensions of personality, Honesty- Humility, Emotionality , eXtraversion , 
Agreeableness (versus Anger) , Conscientiousness, and Openness to Experience.  
 Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) : The Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) is the most widely used 
psychological instrument for measuring the perception of stress. It is a measure of the degree to which situations in one’s life are appraised as stressful. Items were designed to tap how unpredictable, uncontrollable, and overloaded respondents find their lives. The 
scale also includes a number of direct queries about current levels of experienced stress.  
 
UCLA Loneliness Scale: A 20-item scale designed to measure one’s subjective feelings 
of loneliness as well as feelings of social isolation. Participants rate each item on a scale 
from 1 (Never) to 4 (Often). This measure is a revised version of the original UCLA Loneliness Scale.   
 State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) : The State -Trait Anxiety Inve ntory (STAI) is a 
commonly used measure of trait and state anxiety (Spielberger, Gorsuch, Lushene, Vagg, & Jacobs, 1983). It can be used in clinical settings to diagnose anxiety and to distinguish it from depressive syndromes. It also is often used in research as an indicator of caregiver distress 
Form Y, its most popular version, has 20 items for assessing trait anxiety and 20 for state anxiety. State anxiety items include: “I am tense; I am worried” and “I feel calm; I feel secure.” Trait anxiety items include: “I worry too much over something that really doesn’t matter” and “I am content; I am a steady person.” All items are rated on a 4 -point 
scale (e.g., from “Almost Never” to “Almost Always”). Higher scores indicate greater anxiety. 
 Stress and Adversity Inventory (STRAIN) : The STRAIN, or  Stress 
and Adversity In ventory, is a NIMH/RDoC- recommended instrument that efficiently and 
Version: 07062020 17 reliably assesses a person’s cumulative exposure to stress over the life course. The 
measure is entirely online and systematically inquires about a diverse array of acute life events (e.g., deaths of relatives, job losses, negative health events) and chronic difficulties (e.g., ongoing health problems, work problems, relationship problems, financial problems, etc.) that hav e implications for human health and well-being. 
Stressors occurring in early life (e.g., childhood maltreatment or neglect, parental loss/separation, etc.) are also queried in detail. Respondents are asked to rate the severity, frequency, timing, and duration of each stressor they endorse. The average time needed to complete the STRAIN is 25 minutes, with a range of approximately 18 -30 minutes based 
on the population being interviewed.  Index of Race -Related Stress (IRRS) : The IRRS  is a 46-item instrument developed 
according to the theoretical framework of daily hassles (R. S. Lazarus & S. Folkman, 1984) and integrated with P. Essed's (1990) concept of everyday racism. The self-report survey 
takes approximately 10 minutes to complete.  
 Menstrual Cycle Questionnaire: Female participants  may be asked to complete a short 
form with the following information: first day of last period, usual length of menstrual cycle, approximate onset of next period, and use of hormone contraceptives or hormone therapy. This self -report may be administered at the PI’s discretion.  
 Demographics Questionnaire: Participants  will be asked to complete a short form with 
basic demographic information like race, income level, and years of education.  
 
Mobile Assessments  
At the end of a participant’s screening appointment, we may ask him or her to install a mobile application on their cell phone to complete assessments from home. The application is free of charge and can be deleted at any time if the subject decides not to continue. If the subject does decide not to continue, we will stop collecting data from him or her upon notice of withdrawal. Each day, following the screening visit (up to 2 weeks following the last study visit [30-day 
Follow-Up Call]) we may send a notification to the subject (via phone or email) to 
complete a variety of computer tasks and/or short surveys through the application. Subjects may be asked to complete experiments at various points during the day or will be free to complete experiments as frequently as desired, depending on the study design. These will include a subset of the same measures used for the 
behavioral components of the study (described in detail elsewhere in the protocol).  
 
Insomnia Severity Index: Participants  may be asked to complete a short form with 
information about their sleeping habits.  
Laboratory and Biological Variables:  
 Blood collection: At the designated assessments, blood will be collected by venipuncture 
into EDTA -containing vacutainer tubes using standard sterile technique. Some research 
Version: 07062020 18 blood may be collected by point of care testing. Plasma for the evaluation of plasma 
concentrations of cytokines and their recep tors as well as CRP will be obtained by 
centrifugation of whole blood at 1000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. Plasma will be removed 
and aliquoted into siliconized polypropylene tubes and stored at - 80°C until batch assay. 
Blood for mRNA analyses will be collec ted in Tempus tubes and stored at - 80°C for later 
RNA extraction. In order to further assess immune cell profiles, we will also collect approximately 10 ml of whole blood in EDTA at room temperature for immune cell extraction  at Infusion Visit, 24- Hour Visit, and 14- Day Visit .  
 Plasma cytokines and soluble cytokine receptors: Customized Fluorokine MAP 
Multiplex Human Biomarker Panels (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) will be used to measure plasma IL -1ra, IL-6, sIL-6R, IL-10, TNF-alpha, sTNFR2 and MCP-1. Thes e 
inflammatory markers were chosen based on their reliable changes in depression and/or their relationship to symptoms of anhedonia and corticostriatal function in subjects administered inflammatory cytokines and cytokine inducers.
14,16,129 Each determination 
requires 50 -100 μl, and all samples will be assayed in duplicate according to 
manufacturer’s instructions. Quality control plasma o f both low and high cytokine 
concentrations will be included with every assay. The mean inter - and intra-assay 
coefficients of variation for control samples are reliably 10% or less.    
 C-reactive protein (CRP):  Plasma CRP will be assessed with a high sen sitivity 
turbidimetric assay. Sensitivity of the assay is rated at 0.18 mg/L, range of measure is 0.2 to 80 mg/L, and functional sensitivity (at 20% CV) is 0.2 mg/ L.  Gene Expression:  RNA will be isolated from Tempus tubes using 5 Prime PerfectPure 
RNA Blood kit (Gaithersburg, MD).  RNA quality will be verified using the Agilent 
Bioanalyzer, and only samples with a RIN factor >7.0 will be included.  Samples will be analyzed in the Emory Integrated Genomic Core for gene expression analysis using an Illumina platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA) . Raw microarray scan files from the Illumina 
HT-12 v4.0 arrays will be exported using the Illumina Beadstudio program and loaded into 
R for downstream analysis (http://www.R -project.org). The data will be transformed and  
normalized using the variance stabilizing normalization method.
130 An Illumina probe 
detection p- value of <0.01 in 5% of the individuals will be used to filter non- expressed 
transcripts which will be excluded from all subsequent analyses. To correct for confounding due to batch effects, the expression profiles will be normalized using ComBat, an empirical Bayes method for batch correction.
131 The results will be corrected for 
multiple testing using the permutation of regressor residuals test as implemented in the R package glmperm ( http://cran.r- project.org/web/packages/glmperm/ index.html
).132   
 Urine Samples: At one of the study visits where a urine sample is collected, up to 
500mL of urine may be collected and sent to a collaborating laboratory led by study Co-Investigator Zhexing Wen. The collaborator will use cells from this urine sample to create induced pl uripotent stem cells (iPSC). Over the past decade, researchers—
including Dr. Wen (Wen, et al., 2014; Tang, et al., 2016; Wen et al., 2016)—have harnessed the power of cellular -reprogramming technologies to turn differentiated cells in 
the adult, like those found in urine or skin, into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). 
Version: 07062020 19 Importantly, patient- derived iPSCs feature the same mutations as those found in the 
donor individual (Wen et al., 2016). Thus, researchers can use these cells to model a 
condition or dis ease in the context of an individual person. A description of how the cells 
will be used is laid out in detail in the consent form. If the amount of sample collected is not sufficient or a sample cannot be collected at a visit, additional samples may be collected at following visits while the participant is enrolled in the study. If the amount of 
sample collected is not sufficient or a sample cannot be collected at a visit, additional samples may be collected at following visits (if applicable) while the pa rticipant is 
enrolled in the study. If the sample collected is not sufficient or if a sample is not collected, participants may be asked to come back to the laboratory to provide a sample. Participants will have an opportunity to indicate consent for re -contact for this purpose in 
the study consent form.   Participants  
 140 medically stable male and female subjects between the ages of 21 and 65 will be 
included in this study. Subjects will meet criteria for current major depression (MD) or be 
recruited as healthy controls . MD subjects will be further screened based on levels of 
peripheral inflammation as determined by plasma CRP concentrations . The high CRP 
patient group (n=80) will have a CRP greater than 3mg/L at screening whereas the low 
CRP patient group (n=20) will have a CRP less than 2mg/L .  Healthy controls (n=40) will 
also be recruited. Based on a screening failure rate of 30 -50% and a dropout rate of 10%, 
we anticipate that including up to 3 50 subjects (65 full screens per year) will provide 140 
subjects for final data analysis.  Because this study is not a treatment trial, only subjects 
who complete all study procedures will be included in the analysis. This will be determined at the PI’s discretion. Subjects will continue to be enrolled until 140 completers are 
included.  There will be no exclusions for race/ethnicity and minority populations, and 
women will be actively recruited. Indeed, based on our previous work ~65% of the sample will be female. We will make active attempts to enroll minority patients in a proportion that is reflective of the areas surrounding Atlanta from which patients will be recruited. No patients will be enrolled from vulnerable populations, including neonates, children, prisoners, or institutionalized individuals.  
 Subjects may  be recruited after completion of an “ evaluation clinic  protocol” within the 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University School of Medicine and from advertising in radio, television, Internet (Facebook) and print media.  
Alternatively,  subjects may also express interest in the study directly to our lab personnel 
without first going through the Behavioral Immunology Research Evaluation Clinic. These participants may contact the lab through our master prescreen survey  (see 
TReADLab_MasterPrescreen.pdf) , phone, or email to request additional  information. This 
information is provided on our website, clinicaltrials.gov and through our social media (Facebook, Instagram , Twitter) platforms.  The evaluation clinic protocol evaluates 
potential subjects for appropriateness for participation in severa l on-going trials of various 
modalities for major depression. Most frequently, subjects come to these clinics as a result of referral from their primary physicians or as a result of seeing/hearing advertisements. An 
Version: 07062020 20 overview of the study will initially be provided in person or over the phone by study 
clinicians. If a subject shows interest in the study, research staff members will describe the 
general procedures involved and will answer relevant questions. If a subject remains interested in participation, the detailed nature, purpose, procedures, benefits risks of, and alternatives to this research study will be explained to each subject, and written informed consent will be obtained by the study clinician who provides this information. Informed consent will  be documented on an Emory Institutional Review Board- approved form. A 
copy of the signed form will be given to the subject and a copy will be placed in a casebook  
containing relevant demographic data for the subject. Of note, because this casebook  will 
contain personal identifiers (i.e. name), it will be kept separate from any data gathered as 
part of the study, and will be kept in a locked office. Some participants may elect to 
complete all screening and infusion -related visits under IRB Protocol #90667, Infliximab -
Glutamate Study, PI Dr. Andrew Miller, and participate in the task -based MRI visits only 
as part of this study . These participants will sign a consent form (MRI- Only Version) under 
the current protocol (IRB87941) only for completion of the fMRI study visits (Baseline, 14-Day) and be paid under this protocol for those visits.  
 To compensate for time required for participation, inconvenience and travel expenses, high CRP MDD patients will receive $ 100 after completion of an outpatient 24-Hour 
visit (OPTIONAL) , $60 for a 3- Day visit, and $200 for an optional 7- Day (OPTIONAL) 
visit post infusion. Subjects will receive $ 100 for the pre-screening visit, and $100 for 
screening procedures ( $50 for each screening visit ). Subjects will receive $410 for the 
infusion visit, and $310 for the study visit at 14 days (due to the MRI scan). Subjects may have the option of completing the MRI scan portion of the infusion visit one day before infusion. If they do so, the compensation for the MRI scan will be paid  as a separate visit . 
During the visits where subjects undergo an MRI scan (on the day of infusion and at 14 days after infusion), subjects will have the opportunity to earn an additional $150 per visit based on choices and performance o n the computer task s. At visits 3 and 7 days after 
infusion, subjects will have the opportunity to earn an additional $50 based on task choices and performance , making the total amount possible from task performance at 
study visits $400.   MRI-Only Participants will be paid up to $800 for the MRI related visits and task 
compensation, detailed below.  
            
Lab Visits  Total Amount Earned  
Baseline Task -Based fMRI Visit  $250 
14-Day Task -Based fMRI Visit  $250 
Task Performance  Total Amount Possible  
Baseline Task -Based fMRI Visit Up to $150  
14-Day Task -Based fMRI Visit  Up to $150  
Minimum for Task -Based fMRI Study 
Procedures  
 
Maximum for Task -Based fMRI Study 
Procedures  $500 
 
$800 
Version: 07062020 21  
Healthy controls  and low CRP depressed patients will receive $100 for the screening visit 
and $100 for the scan visit. Subjects will also have the opportunity to earn an addition $50 
on the scan visit based on choices and performances in the computer tasks.  
 Individuals who choose to participate in th e daily assessment portion of this study on 
their mobile phones , will receive an additional $2 -10 dollars for each day of mobile 
assessments completed. The exact compensation received will be based on their  choices 
and performance in the task(s) on the mobile app. If a participant  completes 3 days of 
assessments, they could receive between $6 and $30. If they complete 7 days of 
assessments, they could receive between $14 and $70, and so on. Participants will be 
prompted to complete two days prior to the infusion visit and 8 days following infusion visit, making the max amount possible $100 based on task performance. Subjects who complete at least 8 out of 10 days will receive an additional $50 as a completion bonus. Total possible compensation from the mobile assessments is $150.  
 If requested by the PI or designee to return for follow -up assessments (i.e. repeat 
measures or confirm eligibility/safety), compensation will be provided at a rate of $25/hour.  Subjects who travel over 30 miles to participate in study- related activities may receive an 
additional payment as compensation for time and travel, at the discretion of the PI or designee.    Participants who agree to be re-contacted for an additional urine or blood sample and 
come to the laboratory to provide the sample will be compensated an additional $30 for their time.  
 Note: Participants may be compensated by cash, check or Emory ClinCard (see bel ow) 
for their time and efforts in the study. If participants are compensated by check or Emory ClinCard, they will be asked  to fill out a tax form, including mailing address and  Social 
Security or Taxpayer Identification Number, in order to be reimbursed . Subjects will be 
informed that they are able to  decline payment if there are concerns around  
confidentiality, or that they  can talk to the study team to see if there are other payment 
options (i.e., cash) . If subjects elect to receive payment via the Emory  ClinCard, 
compensation earned from task performance will be paid at the end of study participation. If participants elect to be paid via check, all funds will be paid at the conclusion of the study. 
• The payment card (Emory ClinCard ) is a prepaid debit card issued to 
participants for free. It can be used exactly like a Mastercard. Study staff load money onto the individual's card electronically every time they need to be paid. The card scheme is run by Greenphire, an independent comp any 
specializing in payments for research studies and clinical trials. To issue the card, we need to provide Greenphire with some of the participant's personal information including SSN, Name, DOB, and Address. Banks and other financial institutions can access this information if they need to verify the 
Version: 07062020 22 participant's identity when using the card. If a participant wants to receive 
e-mail or text alerts when payments are made, we will ask them to provide 
an e-mail or phone number. All of this information will  be stored on 
computers owned by Greenphire. Greenphire will not have access to any other information collected during this study. Full instructions about using the card will be provided to the participant when it is issued.
 
• It will be explained to the par ticipant that payment by check would involve study -
related mail coming to his or her house, which may be seen by others in the 
household.  
 
                                
 
    Visit  Total Amount Earned  
PRE -SCREENING  $100  
Visit Total  $100  
SCREENING  VISIT(S)   
Visit A  $50 
Visit B  $50 
Visit Total  $100  
INFUSION  VISIT(S)   
fMRI  $250  
Infusion  $100  
Scheduled Assessment  $60 
Visit Total  $410  
24-HOUR  VISIT  (OPTIONAL)   
Scheduled Assessments  $100  
Visit Total  $100  
3-DAY  VISIT   
Scheduled Assessments  $60 
Visit Total  $60 
7-DAY  VISIT  (OPTIONAL)   
Scheduled Assessments  $200  
Visit Total  $200  
14-DAY  VISIT   
fMRI  $250  
Scheduled Assessments  $60 
Visit Total  $310  
TASK PERFORMANCE   
Infusion Visit  Up to $150  
3-Day Visit  Up to $50  
7-Day Visit  (OPTIONAL)  Up to $50  
14-Day Visit  Up to $150  
Assessment Total  Up to $400  
MOBILE APP  (Optional)   
Pre-Infusion Assessments  (2 Days)  $4-20 
Post -Infusion Assessments (8 Days)  $16-80 
80% Completion Bonus  (8 of 10 Days)  $50 
Assessment Total  Up to $150  
Minimum Over Course of Study  
 
Maximum Over Course of Study  $880  
 
$1,730  
Version: 07062020 23  
The inclusion and exclusion criteria for this study were formed on the basis of two general concerns: participant safety and data quality. Criteria related to participant safety (as indicated in the table below) will be assessed for each enrolled participant using study-specific eligibility checklists. These can be accessed through t he eIRB smartform 
for this study. For data quality criteria, assessments may  rely on participant self-report or 
observations by the PI or designee. In certain cases, not all data quality criteria are necessary, and exclusion criteria that solely affect data quality may be waived at the discretion of the PI or his designee. Inclusion and exclusion criteria that ONLY affect data quality (as indicated below) will be enforced at the discretion of the PI or designee. Inclusion/Exclusion criteria related to participant safety will never be waived.  
 Inclusion Criteria for  High CRP Depressed  Subject Safety  
 
1. All subjects will be fully ambulatory and in good medical health.  
a. Note: By DSM -V definition of depression, subjects will report impairment 
in ability to carry out daily activities as a result of their major depression.  
2. Subjects will be able to read and understand English. 
3. Women must be postmenopausal (no menstrual period for a minimum of 2 years) 
or surgically sterilized and/or have a negative serum pregnancy test on entry in the study and negative urine pregnancy tests throughout the study (performed at each 
visit after Screening ). Additional serum pregnancy tests will be completed at the 
Infusion and 14- Day Visits.   
4. Men and women of childbearing potential must use adequate birth control measures (e.g., abstinence, oral contraceptives, intrauterine device, barrier method with 
spermicide, implantable or injectable contraceptives or surgical sterilization) for 
the duration of the study and should continue such precautions for 6 months after receiving the last infusion.  Participants will also be required to abstain from sexual 
intercourse for two weeks prior to the schedule i nfusion visit. Appropriate methods 
will be documented and on a Birth Control Method Form and signed by both the participant and the PI, NP, or designee (see Birth Control Method Form).  
5. The following are considered eligible according to the following tuberculosis (TB) screening criteria:  
 a. Have no history of latent or active TB prior to screening. 
b. Have no signs or symptoms suggestive of active TB upon medical history and/or physical examination. 
c. Have had no recent close contact with a person with active TB or , if there has 
been such contact, will be referred to a physician specializing in TB to undergo additional evaluation to rule out infection. The candidate will be excluded from study participation if the specialist diagnoses active TB and or determines TB treatment is warranted.  
Version: 07062020 24 d. Have a chest radiograph (both posterior -anterior and lateral views), taken 
within 3 months prior to the first administration of study agent and read by a 
qualified radiologist, with no evidence of current active TB or old inactive TB.  
e. History of negative PPD test; or documentation of a negative blood test (Quantiferon -TB-Gold). Any candidate testing positive for tuberculosis in the 
medical screening evaluation, will be excluded from study participation. 
Inclusion Criteria for  High CRP Depressed  Data Quality  
 
1. Patients will have a primary diagnosis of DSM -V MD current, or Bipolar, 
depressed type as diagnosed by the SCID -V 
a. Individuals meeting criteria for both PTSD and MDD will only be included if depression is the primary diagnosis. 
2. Subjects will have a CRP of > 3 mg/L.  
3. Subjects will be required to be off all antidepressant therapy for a period of at least 
8 weeks prior to the baseline visit.  
a. Note: Subjects must agree to maintain this treatment status until the final assessment is complete.  
4. Subjects will be between the ages of 21 -65. 
6. Able to comfortably fit in MRI scanner. 
 
Exclusion Criteria for  High CRP Depressed  Subject Safety  
 
1. Subjects will be excluded for any prior use of a TNF -alpha antagonist (i.e. 
etanercept, i nfliximab, adalimimub) and/or use of any other immunosuppressant 
agent (i.e. systemic corticosteroids or anti -proliferative agents such as 
methotrexate) within one year of study entry.  
2. Subjects taking more than 2 mg of lorazepam (or equivalent benzodiazepine) for 
one month daily at the time of study participation will be excluded. 
3. Subjects will be required not to use anti -inflammatory agents, non- steroidal anti -
inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) (excluding 81mg of aspirin), glucocorticoid containing medicines or statins, or COX -2 inhibitors during the study as these 
agents may interfere with assessment of the relationship between inflammatory markers and treatment response.  
a. Note: Acetaminophen will be allowed.  
4. Potential subjects will be excluded for a history of any of the following conditions:  
a. Abnormal electrocardiogram  
b. Auto-immune condition as confirmed by laboratory testing (i.e. 
rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis, lupus) 
c. History of significant infectious sequelae, including but not limited to, abscess or sepsis  
Version: 07062020 25 d. Infection within one month prior to screening that required antibiotic or 
antiviral therapy  
e. History of a cognitive disorder or ≤ 24 on the Mini- Mental State Exam 
(MMSE), unless otherwise approved by PI or his designee  
f. Unstable cardiovascular or endocrinologic disease (as determined by physical examination and/or laboratory testing) 
g. Any other current or past medical condition that mig ht increase the risk of 
infliximab -related adverse events  
5. Potential subjects will be excluded for any of the following conditions: 
a. Active suicidal ideation defined as a score of  >3 on Columbia Suicide 
Severity Rating Scale (C -SSR).   
i. Note: PI will be consulted if score is > 1 
b. Suicide attempt within six months of study entry  
c. Schizophrenia or Schizoaffective Disorder  
d. Active eating disorder unless limited to binge eating in the context of a mood disorder and in absence of purging 
e. Comorbid PTSD and MDD where MDD is the secondary diagnosis  
f. History of any (non-mood related) psychotic disorder or active psychotic symptoms of any type 
6. Subjects will have had no infectious illnesses for one month prior to infusion. Should a subject develop an infection (i.e. f lu, upper respiratory viral infection) 
between screening and infusion, the infusion will be delayed until 4 weeks after resolution of symptoms. As noted above, patients with a chronic infectious condition or with a past history of serious infectious compli cations will be 
excluded. 
7. Subjects will be excluded for any evidence on laboratory testing (or by history) of hematologic, renal or hepatic abnormality. Subjects will be excluded if the anti-
nuclear antibody (ANA)  test indicates the presence of a possible autoimmune 
disease.  
Inclusion Criteria for Low CRP Depressed Patients & Health Controls for Safety 
1. All subjects will be fully ambulatory and in good medical health.  
a. Note: By DSM -V definition of depression, subjects will report impairment 
in ability to ca rry out daily activities as a result of their major depression.  
2. Subjects will be able to read and understand English. 
3. Women must be postmenopausal (no menstrual period for a minimum of 1 year) or surgically sterilized and/or have a negative serum pregnancy  test on entry in the 
study and negative urine pregnancy tests throughout the study (performed at each 
visit after the serum pregnancy test is completed) .   
 
Inclusion Criteria for  Low CRP Depressed Patients & Healthy Controls for Data 
Quality 
 
1. Patients will have a primary diagnosis of DSM -V MD current, or Bipolar, 
depressed type as diagnosed by the SCID -V  
Version: 07062020 26 a. If subject is a Healthy Control, then no diagnosis for current disorder will 
be present  
b. Low CRP patients meeting criteria for both PTSD and MDD will only be 
included if depression is the primary diagnosis.  
2. Patients will have a CRP of < 2  mg/L.  
a. Healthy Controls will not be ruled out for CRP, but this information will be collected 
3. Patients will be required to be off all antidepressant therapy for a period of at least 
8 weeks prior to the baseline visit.  
a. Note: Subjects must agree to maintain this treatment status until the final assessment is complete.  
4. Subjects will be between the ages of 21 -65. 
6. Able to comfortably fit in MRI scanner. 
 Exclusion Criteria for  Low CRP Depressed Patients & Healthy Controls  
1. Subjects will be excluded for any prior use of a TNF -alpha antagonist (i.e. 
etanercept, infliximab, adalimimub) and/or use of any other immunosuppressant agent (i.e. systemic corticosteroids or anti -proliferative agents such as 
methotrexate) within one year of study entry.  
2. Subjects taking more than 2 mg of lorazepam (or equivalent benzodiazepine) for 
one month daily at the time of study participation will be excluded. 
3. Subjects will be required not to use anti -inflammatory agents, non- steroidal anti -
inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) (excluding 81mg of aspirin), glucocorticoid containing medicines or statins, or COX -2 inhibitors during the study as these 
agents may interfere with assessment of the relationship between inflammatory 
markers and treatment response.  
a. Note: Acetaminophen will be allowed.  
4. Potential subjects will be excluded for a history of any of the following conditions:  
a. Auto-immune condition as confirmed by laboratory test ing (i.e. 
rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis, 
lupus) 
b. History of significant infectious sequelae, including but not limited to, abscess or sepsis  
c. Infection within one month prior to screening that required antibiotic or antiviral therapy  
d. History of a cognitive disorder or ≤ 24 on the Mini- Mental State Exam 
(MMSE), unless otherwise approved by PI or his designee  
e. Unstable cardiovascular or endocrinologic disease (as determined by physical examination and/or laboratory testing) 
f. Any other current or past medical condition that might increase the risk of infliximab -related adverse events  
5. Potential patients will be excluded for any of the following conditions: 
a. Active suicidal ideation defined as a score of  >3 on Columbia Suicide 
Severity Rating Scale (C -SSR).   
i. Note: PI will be consulted if score is > 1 
b. Suicide attempt within six months of study entry  
Version: 07062020 27 c. Schizophrenia or Schizoaffective Disorder  
d. Comorbid PTSD and MDD where MDD is the secondary diagnosis 
e. Active eating disorder unless limited to binge eating in the context of a 
mood disorder and in absence of purging 
f. History of any (non-mood related) psychotic disorder or active psychotic 
symptoms of any type 
6. Subjects will have had no infectious illnesses for one month prior to study 
enrollment. Should a subject develop an infection (i.e. flu, upper respiratory viral infection) between screening and infusion, the infusion will be delayed until 4 weeks after resolution of symptoms. As noted above, patients with a chronic infectious condition or with a past history of serious infectious complications will be excluded. 
7. Subjects will be excluded for any evidence on laboratory testing (or by history) of hematologic, renal or hepatic abnormality. Subjects will be excluded if the anti-
nuclear antibody (ANA) test  indicates the presence of a possible autoimmune 
disease.  
 All Subjects  (High CRP MDD, Low CRP MDD, Healthy Controls) : Study-
Specific Exclusion Criteria  
a. Have had any previous treatment with monoclonal antibodies or antibody fragments.  
b. History of receiving human/murine recombinant products or a known allergy to murine products. A known allergy to murine product is an exclusion criterion. 
c. Documentation of seropositive for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
Any candida te testing positive for HIV, in the medical screening 
evaluation, will be excluded from study participation. 
d. Documentation of a positive test for hepatitis B surface antigen or 
hepatitis C.  Any candidate testing positive for hepatitis B or hepatitis C, in the medical screening evaluation, will be excluded from study 
participation . 
e. Are unable or unwilling to undergo multiple venipunctures because of poor tolerability or lack of easy access.  
f. Use of any investigational drug within 30 days prior to screening or within 5 half-lives of the investigational agent, whichever is longer.  
g. Presence of a transplanted solid organ (with the exception of a corneal transplant >  3 months prior to screening).  
h. Have a concomitant diagnosis or history of congestive heart failure.  
i. Have a history of alcohol or substance abuse within the preceding 6 months that, in the opinion of the investigator, may increase the risks 
Version: 07062020 28 associated with study  participation or study agent administration, or may 
interfere with interpretation of results. (As determined by SCID) 
j. Have a known history of serious infections (e.g., hepatitis, pneumonia, or 
pyelonephritis) in the previous 3 months. 
k. Have or have had an opportunistic infection (e.g., herpes zoster [shingles], cytomegalovirus, Pneumocystis carinii, aspergillosis, histoplasmosis, or mycobacteria other than TB) within 6 months prior to screening. 
l. Have a history of lymphoproliferative disease, including lymphoma or signs suggestive of possible lymphoproliferative disease such as lymphadenopathy of unusual size or location (e.g., nodes in the posterior triangle of the neck, infraclavicular, epitrochlear, or periaortic area), or splenomegaly. 
m. Currently have any known malignancy other than the condition being treated or have a history of malignancy within the previous 5 years, with the exception of basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma of the skin that has been fully excised with no evidence of recurrence.  
8. Any contraindication(s) to fMRI scanning (as assessed with standard MRI screening form from the Facility for Research and Education in Neuroscience (FERN)
), including but not limited to: 
a. Cardiac pacemaker or pacemaker wires, 
b. Metallic particles in body, 
c. Vascular clips in the head,  
d. Previous neurosurgery, 
e. Prosthetic heart valves  
f. Claustrophobia.  
g. Notes: All MR -Safe Intra -Uterine Devices (IUDs) will be allowed  
 Assessments to Evaluate Eligibility  
 Laboratory values and other evaluations: The following medical evaluations will be obtained after consent is signed and prior to randomization: 
 Comprehensive metabolic panel,  
 HIV, Hepatitis B Surface Antigen, and Hepatitis C Antibody 
 Complete blood count with differential  
 C-Reactive Protein  
Version: 07062020 29  Serum pregnancy test 
 TSH 
 Urinalysis  with microscopic  
 Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA). 
 Urine drug screen 
 Quantiferon -TB-Gold blood test prior to randomization to rule out tuberculosis - 
High CRP Patients Only  
 A complete physical examination will be performed and a medical history will be 
obtained prior to randomization. 
 An electrocardiogram (EKG) – High CRP Patients Only  
 A chest X -ray - High CRP Patients Only  
 The following psychiatric instruments will be admin istered after consent is signed and 
prior to randomization to evaluate eligibility:  
 SCID 
 MMSE 
 ATRQ 
 C-SSR 
 Self-Reports: QIDS -16 SR, MFI, IDS- SR, PANAS -X, SHAPS, FSS, MAP- SR 
 Early Detection of Active Tuberculosis (High CRP Patients Only): 
 To aid in the ear ly detection of TB reactivation or new TB infection during trial 
participation, subjects must be evaluated for signs and symptoms of active TB at scheduled visits or by telephone contact approximately every 8 to 12 weeks.  The 
following series of questions is suggested for use during the evaluation:  
“Have you had a new cough of > 14 days’ duration or a change in a chronic cough?” 
• “Have you had any of the following symptoms: 
− Persistent fever?  
− Unintentional weight loss?  
− Night sweats?”  
• “Have you had close contact with an individual with active TB?”  (If there is 
uncertainty as to whether a contact should be considered “close,” a physician specializing in TB should be consulted.) 
If the evaluation raises suspicion that a subject may have TB reactivatio n or new TB 
infection, an immediate and thorough investigation should be undertaken, including, where possible, consultation with a physician specializing in TB.    Investigators should be aware that TB reactivation in immunocompromised subjects may present as disseminated disease or with extrapulmonary features.  Subjects with evidence of active TB must immediately discontinue study agent and should be referred for appropriate treatment.  
 
Version: 07062020 30 Subjects who experience close contact with an individual with active TB during the 
conduct of the trial must have a repeat chest radiograph, a repeat tuberculin skin test, and, if possible, referral to a physician specializing in TB to determine the subject’s risk of developing active TB and whether treatment for latent TB  is warranted.   
 Note: The presence of comorbid dysthymia and/or an anxiety disorders (excluding 
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder) will not disqualify subjects from enrollment as long as the mood disorder is the predominant diagnosis. 
Bipolar depressed patients will be included, given that these patients also commonly experience anhedonia and increased inflammation.  Enrolled subjects may also have a 
comorbid personality disorder. Patients with stable medical conditions and on medications 
for those conditions will not be excluded.  
  
History and physical:  
At enrollment, a general medical history and comprehensive phys ical and 
neurological examinations will be obtained. Medical history evaluation will focus specifically on conditions that might represent an increased risk for receiving infliximab or that might confound results. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, tuberculosis, chronic infection, autoimmune condition, malignancy or neurological condition. Findings will inform eligibility.  
 
Mandatory laboratory assessments:  
The following labs will be evaluated to assess study eligibility prior to randomizatio n: comprehensive metabolic panel, complete blood count with 
differential, antinuclear antibody (ANA), TSH, HIV, Hepatitis B Surface Antibody 
and Hepatitis C Antibody, urinalysis  with microscopic , and a serum pregnancy test  
(if applicable) . A tuberculosis blood test (Quantiferon- TB-Gold) will be drawn to 
rule out tuberculosis. A chest x- ray will be obtained, and an electrocardiogram will 
be obtained. Plasma concentrations of high- sensitivity CRP will be measured.  A 
urine drug screen will also b e performed.  
 Healthy Controls and Low CRP Patients will not obtain a TB -Gold test, chest x -
ray, or EKG as they will not be infused with the study drug.  
Other assessments:  
The pretreatment evaluation will also include interviewer- administered 
questionnaires: the mood and substance abuse modules from the Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM -V (SCID), the Bipolarity Index (BI), the Mini Mental State 
Examination (MMSE), the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSR), and 
the Massachusetts General Hospital Staging (MGH -S) questionnaire (to evaluate 
degree of treatment resistance). To qualify for entry, subjects will meet criteria for current major depression  by SCID, will have a score of > 24 on the MMSE, will a 
score of <4 on the C-SSR, indicating no active suicidal ideation and will have a 
MGH-S score of 2 or greater.   
Version: 07062020 31 Note: If a score >1 is recorded on the C -SSR scale, the PI will be notified 
to determine if further evaluation is needed.  
Healthy Controls shoul d have no current diagnoses as confirmed by the above 
measures.  
 
Registration/Randomization . 
 
Where and when to call:  
Subjects may be recruited through the Behavioral Immunology Program in the 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences. In addition, the program has an ongoing recruitment program utilizing IRB-approved advertisements. Registration 
will occur in person either in the offices of the Behavioral Immunology Program or 
the laboratory of the PI . If questions arise subjects will be able to call the P.I. , 
Michael T. Treadway,  at (404) 727-3166. Some participants may also express 
interest in the study directly to our lab personnel without first going through the Behavioral Immun ology Research Evaluation Clinic. These participants may 
contact the lab through our master prescreen survey, phone, or email to request additional information. This information is provided on our website, clinicaltrials.gov and through our social media (Facebook, Instagram , Twitter) 
platforms.  
 
Information to provide at entry:  
Prior to entry, at the time of obtaining consent, it will be explained to high CRP depressed patients that if they meet entry criteria  they will be randomized to receive 
one infusion of either infliximab  or placebo (salt water) in a random manner (like 
flipping a coin) and that neither they nor personnel who interact with them will know which they received. It will be explained that they will be followed at 24 
hours, 3 days, 7 days, 14 days, and one month after infusion  for changes in 
depressive symptoms and/or for the development of physical side effects to the medication . Study visits may deviate from these time points or be split into multiple 
visits at the approval of the PI to accommodate scheduling needs. Subjects will be 
given the Medication Guide for REMICADE® (infliximab) from Janssen Biotech, 
Inc. as well as the Drug Summary for REMICADE® (infliximab) from the 
Physicians Desk Ref erence (PDR) . A schedule of each subject’s participation will 
be given at study entry. Names and numbers to contact with complaints or in case of an adverse event will be provided at this time.  There are some medications that 
subjects will be asked to avoid during the study. Subjects will be given a take -home 
instruction sheet, which will explain in detail which medications to avoid. This sheet will also instruct subjects to contact study staff if they start antibiotics or any new medications while in the study. The sheet includes contact information for the study coordinators, and will also tell subjects what to do in the event of an after -
hours concern or emergency. 
 Infusion (High CRP Depressed  Patients Only)  
 
Version: 07062020 32 Infusion protocol:  Blinded infusions of infliximab or placebo will be conducted at the 
ACTSI or an infusion center at the Emory Clinic . Infusions will be performed following a 
standard protocol.  Specifically, intravenous access will be obt ained in a sterile manner and 
infliximab (5 mg/kg body weight) or placebo will be administered over an approximate 2-
hour period. Subjects will be monitored during the infusion and for approximately 10-20 
minutes (or longer if deemed clinically necessary) after completion for the development of 
anaphylaxis (allergic reaction). Significant anaphylactic reactions requiring treatment occur in less than 1% of patients receiving an initial dose of infliximab. All aspects of the infusion will be overseen by a trained nurse, and a physician will be available should 
subjects develop anaphylaxis during the infusion. A standard protocol is in place in the infusion center for the treatment of anaphylaxis.   
 Under advisement of the study physicians, NP, and nurses a t the infusion site , subjects may 
be administered a premedication prior to the infusion to prevent a possible hypersensitivity 
reaction. Subjects may be administered one of the premedications listed below  at least 30 
minutes before the infusion.  
 
1. Acetaminophen (Tylenol) 650mg PO  
2. Diphenhydr amine (Benadryl) 25mg or 50mg PO or IV  
3. Famotidine (Pepcid) 20mg IV push  
 In the event of an infusion -related drug hypersensitivity reaction a standard  protocol will 
be followed at the infusion site . 
 
  
Blinding/Randomization/Placebo Preparation:  A list containing the randomly generated 
sequence of assignments to infliximab or placebo will be maintained in the Emory University Investigational Drug Service pharmacy. Treatment allocation will occur when a patient is eligible for the study and the co nsent for randomization has been obtained. If a 
subject drops prior to receiving the initial infusion, he/she will not be included in data analyses and his/her randomization assignment will “roll over” to the next recruited subject. The research pharmacist  with the Emory Investigational Drug Service will be 
responsible for preparing the infusion bag with either infliximab or normal saline based on the pre-determined order of the randomization list. Infusion bags with infliximab will be 
indistinguishable fro m bags with normal saline (placebo). Study personnel responsible for 
administering the infusion, conducting psychiatric evaluations, conducting medical assessments, drawing blood and performing lab analyses will be blinded to subject group assignment. In t he event of a significant adverse reaction to the study medication, the study 
blind will be immediately broken by the unblinded study physician or research pharmacist  
and the subject will be referred for appropriate medical care. Such adverse reactions include, but are not limited to, anaphylaxis during infusion, serum sickness or development 
of symptoms of infection. 
     
Version: 07062020 33 Graphical Display of Study Procedures  
Assessment Pre-
Screening
4  Screening: 
Part A or 
Part B1,4     Optional 
Scan 
Visit3 Infusion 
(Infliximab  or 
Placebo)  
 Optio
nal 24 
hours  3 
days  
 Opti
onal 
7 
days  
 14 days  
 30 
day 
F/U 
Call 
 
 Clinician -Rated Assessments  
SCID   X        
Bipolarity Index   X        
MMSE   X        
ATRQ   X        
Substance Use 
Assessment    X X X X X X  
Adverse Events   X X X X X X X X 
C-SSR  X X X X X X X  
 Self- Report Questionnaires  
IDS-SR, PANAS -X  X  X X X X X  
SHAPS, FSS, MAP -SR, 
MFI  X    X X X  
QIDS -16 SR  X         
Behavioral Assessments  
behEEfRT,  Go No -
Go, FTT, RTT, DST2  X    X X X  
Medical Assessments Related to Safety  
Medical F/U 
Assessment     X X X X  
Physical Examination   X  X    X  
Medical History   X  X      
Vital signs   X  X X X X X  
Height, weight (BMI) 
waist circumference   X  X      
EKG, CXR   X        
Serum Pregnancy 
Test (if applicable)  X  X    X  
Urine Pregnancy Test 
(if applicable)    X X X X X X  
Comprehensive Metabolic Panel   X  X (Optional)    X 
(Optional)   
HIV, Hepatitis B 
Surface Antigen, and Hepatitis  C Antibody  
  X        
TSH  X        
Version: 07062020 34  
1Following pre -screening, participants will be scheduled to complete one or more screening appointments. 
The procedures described under “Screening” may be divided among these visits depending on subject 
scheduling  and preference , staff availability, and oth er factors. Screening  visits will occur at the Emory 
Department of Psychology and/or the  Emory Clinics and Emory University Hospital.  If screening is 
performed in a single visit, it will occur at the locations listed above.  Follow up appointments may deviate 
from the specified “3 -Day”, “7-Day”, and “14 -Day” dates or be split into multiple dates within a range 
approved by the PI in order to accommodate scheduling of the participant and study staff.  
2Behavioral assessments may  be skipped in the interest of time on visit days where visit length exceeds what 
was scheduled  
3Subjects may be asked to  or may prefer to  complete the MRI scan portion of the infusion visit one day prior 
to the infusion.  
4Bolded “X’s” signify prescreening  and screening procedures healthy controls  and low CRP depressed 
controls will undergo.   
 
Issues Related to Questionnaires, Rating Scales and Interviews:  
1. A copy of each questionnaire that will be used in this study has been included 
with this IRB submission. 
2. Time required for questionnaire completion: On average the SCID will require 90 minutes for completion. This may vary depending on the particular participant. 
Questionnaires and interviews for the screening visit s will require approximately 
3½ hours. Completion of questionnaires and inter views for the infusion visit 
through the visit at 14 days will take approximately  1½ hours. The QIDS -16 SR Anti -nuclear 
Antibody (ANA)  X        
Quantiferon TB Gold   X        
CBC with differential   X  X X X X X  
Urinalysis  with 
microscopic  X  X    X  
 Medical Assessments Related to Research 
Laboratory Testing     X X X X X X X  
Plasma CRP  
(assessed by finger 
stick and/or blood 
draw)  X X X X X X X X  
Fluorokine MAP 
Multiplex Human Biomarker Panel, 
mRNA    X X X X X X  
Immune Cell Analysis     X X   X  
Urine drug  screen   X X X X X X X  
 Other Procedures  
MRI scan (including 
fMRI tasks: EEfRT, 
Ad. MID, Gambles    X X    X  
Emotional Memory 
Assessment 
(Encoding & Recall)   X    X X   
Version: 07062020 35 will be completed at pre -screening . The SCID, Bipolarity Index, ATRQ, and 
MMSE will be completed once during screening. The C-SSR and an adverse events 
assessment will be completed  all study visits other than pre -screening , unless a 
subject completes a screening or study visit over multiple days or the assessment is 
deemed redundant  due to administering of a SCID in which case the C -SSR may 
not be administered at the PI’s discretion . The SHAPS, FSS,  MFI and MAP-SR 
will be completed at screening and at the 3, 7 and 14 day follow up visits. The IDS -
SR and PANAS -X will be completed at s creening, on the infusion day and each 
follow up visit. A brief substance use assessment will be completed on the day of 
infusion and at each study visit following this visit.  
3. Volunteers (subjects) in this study who are in active psychiatric treatment during their involvement with this study will be asked to sign a release of information for 
the study PI to communicate important clinical changes, such as the development of suicidal ideation, to the primary clinician. Psychiatric follow -up following study  
completion will be with pre -existing primary physician for these subjects.  
4. All information gathered for this study and the medical records generated will be kept locked with appropriate protection to maintain confidentiality. Research records will only be released with the subject's written permission. The subject's name will not appear elsewhere in any form and if publications evolve from the study, names will in no way be associated with the reports. 
 
Reliability of Clinical Ratings:  
Training on the SCID and other clinician rated assessments will be provided for 
relevant study personnel and interrater reliability will be established and maintained. New staff joining the study team will go through an apprenticeship for 
the ratings and training for reliability prior to performing independent ratings. 
 
Safety Monitoring  
As noted in Figure 1, all infusions will be conducted at the ACTSI at Emory 
University Hospital  or an infusion center at the Emory Clinic Building A . Subjects 
will be closely monitored during and after infusions for the development of any 
adverse reactions. Standard protocols are in place for treatment of any adverse 
reactions.  In addition, all subjects will have access to the study 24 hour pager 
number through the Emory Clin ic operator  to report adverse events to a study 
physician by phone following each infusion and will be evaluated weekly (or bi-
weekly) in person thereafter. Finally, a designated physician member of the 
research team will be available 24 hours a day seven days a week  by phone to study 
participants to address questions and evaluate potential adverse events.  
 
Discontinuation of Study Agent 
 Study agent must be permanently discontinued if any of the following occur: 
• Subject is deemed ineligible according to th e TB screening criteria:  
• A diagnosis of active TB is made.  
• A subject receiving treatment for latent TB discontinues this treatment prematurely or is noncompliant with the therapy. 
Version: 07062020 36 • A subject has symptoms suggestive of active TB based on follow -up assessment  
questions and/or physical examination, or has had recent close contact with a person 
with active TB, and cannot or will not continue to undergo additional evaluation. 
• A subject undergoing continued screening has a chest radiograph with evidence of 
current active TB and/or a positive tuberculin skin test, unless active TB can be 
ruled out and appropriate treatment for latent TB can be initiated either prior to or 
simultaneously with the next administration of study agent and continued to completion. 
 
Adverse Event Reporting and Follow- Up  
An adverse event is any unfavorable and unintended sign, symptom, or disease 
(including an abnormal laboratory finding), temporally associated with the use of a study agent(s), whether or not related to the study agent(s), occurring at any time during the study 
(i.e., any time after informed consent is obtained). Should there be an adverse event, PI Dr. Treadway or Co- I Dr. Miller shall inform the IRB within the stipulated time frame.  
Recording should be done in a concise manner using standard, acceptable medical terms.  
The adverse event recorded should not be a procedure or a clinical measurement (i.e., a laboratory value or vital sign) but should reflect the reason for the procedure or the diagnosis based on the abnormal measurement.  Preexisting conditions identified during screening that worsen in severity or frequency during the study will be  reported to the IRB  
within the stipulated time frame  (a preexisting condition that does not worsen is not an 
adverse event).  Further, a procedure or s urgery is not an adverse event; rather, the event 
leading to the procedure or surgery is considered an adverse event and will be reported to 
the IRB within the stipulated time frame . 
If, in the investigator’s judgment, a clinically significant worsening from baseline 
is observed in any laboratory or other test parameter (e.g., electrocardiogram, angiogram), physical exam finding, or vital sign, a corresponding clinical adverse event will be reported 
to the IRB within the stipulated time frame.   If a specifi c medical diagnosis has been made, 
that diagnosis will be recorded . For example, if clinically significant elevations of liver 
function tests are known to be secondary to hepatitis, “hepatitis” and not “elevated liver function tests” will be recorded. If the cause is not known, the abnormal test or finding 
should be recorded as an adverse event, using appropriate medical terminology (e.g., thrombocytopenia, peripheral edema, QT prolongation).  The actual numeric value of a test 
result will not be recorded . 
 A serious adverse event is any adverse event occurring at any dose that:  
• Results in death  
• Is life-threatening 
• Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity (i.e., a substantial disruption 
in a person’s ability to conduct normal activities of daily living) 
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
• In addition, an important medical event that may not result in death, be life -
threatening, or require/prolong hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse event when, based on appropriate medical judgment, it may jeopardize the subject 
Version: 07062020 37 and/or may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes 
listed above.  
An unexpected adverse event is any advers e event, the specificity or severity of which is 
not consistent with the current Investigator Brochure.  
 
A reasonably related adverse event is one that is, in the opinion of the investigator, 
possibly, probably or definitely related to study agent. 
 Any serious adverse event, regardless of relationship to the study agent, must be 
reported immediately.  A serious adverse event must be reported if it occurs during a subject’s participation in the study (whether receiving study agent or not) or within [30 days or 5-half lives of study agent – choose whichever is longer; if 5- half lives is chosen, 
put in the number of days that it represents, followed parenthetically by “5 -half lives”] of 
receiving the last dose of study agent, whichever is longer.  
 Investigato rs are also advised that active TB is considered a reportable disease in 
most countries.  
 
Any serious adverse event that is ongoing when a subject completes his/her participation in the trial must be followed until any of the following occurs: 
• The event re solves or stabilizes;  
• The event returns to baseline condition or value (if a baseline value is available);  
• The event can be attributed to agent(s) other than the study agent, or to factors 
unrelated to study conduct. 
 
Warnings and Precautions 
REMICADE® (infliximab)  
 
Serious infections, including sepsis and pneumonia, have been reported in subjects 
receiving TNF -blocking agents. Some of these infections have been fatal. Many of the 
serious infections in subjects treated with REMICADE have occurred in subjects on 
concomitant immunosuppressive therapy that, in addition to their underlying disease, could 
predispose them to infections. REMICADE should not be given to subjects with a clinically important, active infection. Caution should be exercised when considering the use  of 
REMICADE in subjects with a chronic infection or a history of recurrent infection. Subjects should be monitored for signs and symptoms of infection while on or after treatment with REMICADE. New infections should be closely monitored. If a subject develops a serious infection, REMICADE therapy should be discontinued. Cases of 
tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, listeriosis, pneumocystosis, other bacterial, mycobacterial and fungal infections have been observed in subjects receiving REMICAD E. For subjects who have resided in regions where histoplasmosis or 
coccidioidomycosis is endemic, the benefits and risks of REMICADE treatment should be carefully considered before initiation of REMICADE therapy.  
 
Malignancies 
Version: 07062020 38 In the controlled portions of clinical trials of some TNF -blocking agents including 
REMICADE, more malignancies have been observed in patients receiving those TNF -
blockers compared with control patients. Caution should be exercised in considering 
REMICADE treatment in patients with a history of malignancy or in continuing treatment 
in patients who develop malignancy while receiving REMICADE. 
Rare postmarketing cases of hepatosplenic t -cell lymphomas have been reported in 
adolescent and young adult patients with Crohn’s disease treate d with infliximab. All of 
these reports have occurred in patients on concomitant treatment with azathioprine or 6 -
mercaptopurine. The clinical course of this disease is very aggressive with a fatal outcome in most patients within 2 years of diagnosis. The causal relationship of hepatosplenic t -cell 
lymphoma to infliximab therapy remains unclear. 
In a clinical trial exploring the use of REMICADE in patients with moderate to 
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), more malignancies, the majority of 
lung or head and neck origin, were reported in REMICADE -treated patients compared with 
control patients. All patients had a history of heavy smoking (see ADVERSE REACTIONS, Malignancies). Prescribers should exercise caution when considering the use of REMICADE in patients with moderate to severe COPD.  
 
Malignancies, including non- Hodgkin’s lymphoma and Hodgkin’s disease, have 
also been reported in patients receiving REMICADE during post- approval use.  
 
Hepatotoxicity  
Severe hepatic reactions, including a cute liver failure, jaundice, hepatitis and 
cholestasis have been reported rarely in postmarketing data in patients receiving REMICADE. Autoimmune hepatitis has been diagnosed in some of these cases. Severe 
hepatic reactions occurred between two weeks to m ore than a year after initiation of 
REMICADE; elevations in hepatic aminotransferase levels were not noted prior to 
discovery of the liver injury in many of these cases. Some of these cases were fatal or necessitated liver transplantation. Patients with symptoms or signs of liver dysfunction should be evaluated for evidence of liver injury. If jaundice and/or marked liver enzyme elevations (e.g., ≥5 times the upper limit of normal) develops, REMICADE should be discontinued, and a thorough investigation of the abnormality should be undertaken. As with other immunosuppressive drugs, use of REMICADE has been associated with reactivation of hepatitis B in patients who are chronic carriers of this virus (i.e., surface antigen positive). Chronic carriers of hepatitis B should be appropriately evaluated and monitored prior to the initiation of and during treatment with REMICADE. In clinical trials, mild or moderate elevations of ALT and AST have been observed in patients receiving REMICADE without progression to severe hepatic injury.  
 
Patients with Heart Failure   
REMICADE has been associated with adverse outcomes in patients with heart 
failure, and should be used in patients with heart failure only after consideration of other treatment options. The results of a randomized study evaluating the use of REMICADE in patients with heart failure (NYHA Functional Class III/IV) suggested higher mortality in patients who received 10 mg/kg REMICADE, and higher rates of cardiovascular adverse events at doses of 5 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg. There have been post -marketing reports of 
Version: 07062020 39 worsening heart failure, with and without identifiable precipitating factors, in patients 
taking REMICADE. There have also been rare post -marketing reports of new onset heart 
failure, including heart failure in patients without known pre -existing cardiovascular 
disease. Some of these patients have been under 50 years of age. If a decision is made to administer REMICADE to patients with heart failure, they should be closely monitored during therapy, and REMICADE should be discontinued if new or worsening symptoms of heart failure appear.   
Hematologic Events  
Cases of leukopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and pancytopenia, some with 
a fatal outcome, have been reported in patients receiving REMICADE. The c ausal 
relationship to REMICADE therapy remains unclear. Although no high- risk group(s) has 
been identified, caution should be exercised in patients being treated with REMICADE who have ongoing or a history of significant hematologic abnormalities. All patients should be advised to seek immediate medical attention if they develop signs and symptoms suggestive of blood dyscrasias or infection (e.g., persistent fever) while on REMICADE. Discontinuation of REMICADE therapy should be considered in patients who develop significant hematologic abnormalities.  
 
Hypersensitivity  
REMICADE has been associated with hypersensitivity reactions that vary in their 
time of onset and required hospitalization in some cases. Most hypersensitivity reactions, which include urtica ria, dyspnea, and/or hypotension, have occurred during or within 2 
hours of REMICADE infusion. However, in some cases, serum sickness -like reactions 
have been observed in Crohn’s disease patients 3 to 12 days after REMICADE therapy was 
reinstituted following an extended period without REMICADE treatment. Symptoms 
associated with these reactions include fever, rash, headache, sore throat, myalgias, polyarthralgias, hand and facial edema and/or dysphagia. These reactions were associated with marked increase in antibodies to infliximab, loss of detectable serum concentrations of infliximab, and possible loss of drug efficacy. REMICADE should be discontinued for severe reactions. Medications for the treatment of hypersensitivity reactions (e.g., acetaminophen, antihistamines, corticosteroids and/or epinephrine) should be available for immediate use in the event of a reaction.  
 
Neurologic Events  
REMICADE and other agents that inhibit TNF have been associated in rare cases 
with optic neuritis, seizure and new onset or exacerbation of clinical symptoms and/or radiographic evidence of central nervous system demyelinating disorders, including multiple sclerosis, and CNS manifestation of systemic vasculitis. Prescribers should 
exercise caution in considering the use of REMICADE in patients with pre -existing or 
recent onset of central nervous system demyelinating or seizure disorders. Discontinuation of REMICADE should be considered in patients who develop significant central nervous 
system adverse reactions.  
 
PRECAUTIONS  
 
Version: 07062020 40 Autoimmunity  
Treatment with REMICADE may result in the formation of autoantibodies and, rarely, in the development of a lupus -like syndrome. If a patient develops symptoms suggestive of a 
lupus-like syndrome following treatment with REMICADE, treatment should be 
discontinued.  Vaccinations  No data are available on the response to vaccination with live vaccines or on the secondary transmission of infection by live vaccines in patients receiving anti -TNF therapy. It is 
recommended that live vaccines not be given concurrently.   Pregnancy Category B  
Since infliximab does not cross -react with TNFα in species other than humans and 
chimpanzees, animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with REMICADE. No 
evidence of maternal toxicity, embryotoxicity or teratogenicity was observed in a developmental toxicity study conducted in mice using an analogous antibody that selectively inhibi ts the functional activity of mouse TNFα. Doses of 10 to 15 mg/kg in 
pharmacodynamic animal models with the anti- TNF analogous antibody produced 
maximal pharmacologic effectiveness. Doses up to 40 mg/kg were shown to produce no adverse effects in animal reproduction studies. It is not known whether REMICADE can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman or can affect reproduction capacity. REMICADE should be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed.  Nursing Mothers It is not known whether REMICADE is excreted in human milk or absorbed systemically 
after ingestion. Because many drugs and immunoglobulins are excreted in human milk, 
and because of the potential for adverse reactions in nursing infants from REMICADE, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother. Please see the latest version of the REMICADE package insert and investigator brochure for further information on adverse reactions, warnings, and precautions.  
 Data Analysis Plan  For all three aims, analyses will focus on a priori inflammatory markers CRP and IL -6. 
These two inflammatory markers were chosen based on their role in sample selection, response to infliximab  and association with reward pathways in our preliminary data as 
well as published papers by our group
133 and meta-analyses of elevated inflammatory 
makers in depression.134 We did not include plasma measures of TNF in this analysis 
because measurement of plasm a TNF is confounded by infliximab, which binds to TNF 
and leads to arbitrarily high concentrations of TNF on ELISA. Instead, the role of TNF will be investigated using gene expression data examining TNF signaling pathways (See Aim 2 below).  
Aim 1: Determine the relationship between inflammation and corticostriatal circuit 
function in patients with major depression and high inflammation before and after an 
Version: 07062020 41 anti-inflammatory challenge.  Hypothesis 1a:  Mixed-effects models for repeated measures 
(MMRM) will first be employed to examine effects of group (infliximab  vs. placebo), 
time and their interaction on neuroimaging data using an a Region-of- Interest (ROI) 
approach. For ROI analysis, as described above, first- level GLMs will be created in 
normalized space f or each time -point for each task, and a priori functional ROI in the 
striatum and vmPFC will be defined for both main effects using the baseline scan. 
Anatomically -defined ROIs will also be examined. Parameter estimates will be extracted 
from these ROI for each time-point. Relevant covariates, including age, sex, race (white/non -white) and body mass index (BMI) as well as number of depressive episodes, 
length of current depressive episode (in months), treatment responsiveness (ATRQ), age of onset, bipolarit y index score and family history of depression (yes/no) will be 
sequentially tested in the models for goodness of fit (Akaike Information Criterion) and included as appropriate. To examine possible neural markers of inflammation change outside of our a priori ROIs, an exploratory voxel- wise approach will also be used. For 
this analysis, pre -post change in two primary inflammatory markers (CRP and IL -6) will 
be regressed against whole- brain corrected maps (pFWE < 0.05) for primary contrasts as 
described abov e. Hypothesis 1b:  A Psychophysiological Interaction Analysis
135 
implemented through the gPPI toolbox ( http://brainmap.wisc.edu/PPI ) will be used to 
investigate connectivity between vmPFC and ventral striatum during effort-based decisions. Seed -regions will be based on two striatal ROIs corresponding to ventral and 
dorsomedial striatum that have been previously shown to exhibit robust resting state connectivity with aspects of vmPFC. These ROIs are drawn from a 17 -network 
parcellation of corticostrial connectivity performed in a large (n = 1,000) sample
5. After 
single-subject connectivity maps have been generated for each time point, difference maps will be generated reflecting the change c onnectivity strength before and after 
infliximab or placebo treatment. A paired t- test as implemented through SPM12 will be 
used to compare pre-post change in corticostriatal connectivity (whole-brain corrected, pFWE < 0.05).  
Aim 2: Determine the temporal dynamics of change in inflammation and change in 
behavioral and clinical measures of motivational anhedonia in depressed patients before 
and after an anti - inflammatory challenge.  Hypothesis 2:  As above, initial analyses will 
focus on plasma CRP and IL-6. Random intercept linear mixed models will be used to assess whether change in these markers predicts change in self -reported anhedonic 
symptoms, effort expenditure (BehEEfRT) or reinforcement learning (PST) when controlling for relevant covariates as appr opriate (see above). For each of these two 
inflammatory markers, four separate models will be employed to assess the association between each inflammatory marker at each time point and 1) composite self -report data, 
2) behEEfRT performance (proportion of high effort choices) 3) Go learning performance (PST) and 4) No- Go learning performance. To control for multiple 
comparisons across these 8 models, alpha significance will be set to a Bonferroni -
corrected p<0.00625. Given the rapid changes that will likely occur in inflammatory markers prior to changes in behavioral measures, the models described above will be repeated using a “lagged regressor” that will test the associations between gene-expression at time t against inflammation, symptom and behavioral mea sures at time t+1. 
Exploratory analyses will be used to test for any incremental predictive power of 
Version: 07062020 42 additional collected cytokines and their receptors. For gene- expression analysis, an 
identical set of models will be run using gene-expression within the p reviously identified 
transcripts in TNF signaling pathways as described in Preliminary Study 9. In addition to 
these a priori transcripts, an exploratory gene expression analysis will be performed. 
Based on change in reported symptoms at week 2, participan ts will be divided into 
“responders” and “non-responders”. Individuals who cannot easily be assigned to one group or the other will be excluded from the analysis. A list of differentially expressed genes (based on a 1.2 fold difference and a false discover y rate of p<0.01) will be 
generated between infliximab “responders” versus “non responders” in self -report 
measures. To compare differences in gene expression at baseline between responders versus non- responders within groups, we will use logistic regressi on, correcting for 
relevant covariates as described above and including differential expression of white blood cells as determined by the white blood cell count. In addition, we will use a transcript origin analysis (see below). For differentially expresse d genes in responders 
versus non-responders as a function of group (infliximab vs. placebo), pathway analysis will be done using a number of tools including the WebGestalt WikiPathways tool and BibliosphereTM data mining software from Genomatix. Overrepres entation of specific 
transcription binding factors such as NF- kB in the promoters of the associated transcripts 
will be tested using the cREMaG interface (http://149.156.177.116/cremag/), TRAP 
(http://trap.molgen.mpg.de) and the TELIS database. (http://www .telis.ucla.edu).
136 
Transcript origin analysis will also be used.137 This analysis examines specific patterns of 
gene expression that are associated with immune cell subtypes and generates a cell origin 
diagnosticity score, which provides information on which cell types are contributing to changes in gene expression observed between responders and non- responders within 
groups.137, 138 Expression levels within transcripts identified by the exploratory analysis 
will be additionally employed as predictors of change in EEfRT and PST performance, as 
described above. Finally, to test whether changes in gene- expression may serve as an 
“early indicator” of infliximab response, lagged regressor models will also be explored to determine whether early changes in these inflammatory variables predict subsequent changes in task performance.  
Aim 3: Explore the inter -relationship among inflammation, corticostriatal circuit function 
and reward motivation using path analysis. Hypothesis 3:  A final aim of the study is to 
explore multi-level path modeling between measures of inflammation, corticostriatal 
circuitry, and motivational anhedonia. Using a bootstrapped estimation procedure, we will test whether change in VS signal and vmPFC-VS connectivity mediate the relationship be tween change in CRP and/or IL-6 and change in motivational anhedonic 
symptoms. Bootstrapping will be used to provide an empirical estimate of the sampling distribution for indirect effects and will be used to generate confidence intervals for the 
purpose of inferential testing.
139 We will additionally test a model of moderated -
mediation to assess whether mediation pathways are influenced by the presence of high 
vs. low baseline inflammation. Path analysis will be implemented using macros developed by Preacher and Hayes ( http://quantpsy.org/medn.htm ), which enable 
inclusion of covariates as well as possible moderators.  
Version: 07062020 43 Power Analysis: For neuroimaging measures in Aim 1, the MID, fMRI- EEfRT and RL 
tasks have excellent power for generating main effect contrasts140 and our sample is well 
above the minimum n=50 recommended for individual differences analysis in fMRI 
studies.141 For the within (pre -post treatment) by between (infliximab  vs. placebo) 
interaction, we have excellent power (99%) to detect a medium effect size of f = 0.25, 
and good power (84%) for smaller effect sizes (f = 0.15). For Aim 2, because data at 
multiple time -points are clustered within subject, effect sizes that ignore clustering may 
be inflated (i.e., design effects).142 Consequently, power analysis is based on a 
conservative effect size estimate of slope = 0.3, for which we have adequate power (80%). Finally, for Aim 3,  the use of bootstrapping to adjust for low sample sizes has 
received wide-acceptance in the literature
139, and will provide adequate power for partial 
mediation in the current sample.   Safety Issues and Safety Analyses:  We recognize that a single-dose of infliximab is a 
potent anti-inflammatory challenge with the potential to result in immunosuppression. Nevertheless, in our previous study, we found no differences in adverse events in infliximab versus placebo - treated patients for up to 6 months after 3 infusions (published 
and unpublished data). Moreover, in more recent studies (derived from large pre - and 
post-marketing databases) infliximab and other TNF antagonists have not been clearly associated with increased risk of cancer, serious adverse cardiovascular events or adverse de novo neurologic adverse events. Given that all adverse event data is largely derived from patients who have received months to years of treatment with these drugs, we believe a single infusion of an anti -inflammatory challen ge poses limited risk under the 
conditions of careful patient selection and monitoring. Adverse events (AEs) will be recorded and reported using standard Medra categories, and suicidality will be assessed at 
each visit using the C-SSR. Dropout rates by category (e.g., adverse events, SAE’s, non-
adherence, etc.) will be reported and compared using Fisher Exact Tests.  
GENERAL RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
There are 7 major areas of potential risk in the study, as outlined below.  
 Neuropsychiatric assessments: Neuropsychiatric assessments may uncover strong and 
potentially disturbing feelings about the subject’s past or present emotional state.  
 Blood draws: The risks of blood drawing include discomfort, bruising, infection, bleeding, and fainting.  
 Infliximab infus ion: Use of infliximab  has been associated with a number of short and 
long term  risks (in 10% -50% of subjects), including mild allergic reaction to the 
medication, stomach pain, nausea, diarrhea, heartburn, upper respiratory tract infections, sore throat, sinusitis, coughing, runny nose, rash, fatigue, fever, headache, joint pain, ba ck 
pain, urinary tract infection and hypertension. It should be noted however that in our previous study of infliximab, there were no differences in the number or severity of adverse events in the infliximab group compared to placebo over the 12 weeks of the study and up to 6 months post study completion.
1(unpublished observations) Very rarely (less than 1%), 
more serious adverse events have been reported, including severe anaphylactic reaction to 
Version: 07062020 44 the infusion, development of serum sickness following infusion, reactivation of 
tuberculosis, development of serious and occasionally life threatening infections, induction of autoimmunity, worsening of congestive heart failure, bone marrow suppression, optic neuritis, seizures, cerebral demyelination and development of lymphoma or other cancers including skin cancer. Of note, e arly data from pooled randomized clinical trials revealed 
increased malignancy including lymphoma with TNF inhibitors in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) leading to the current FDA black box warning.
2 Nevertheless, more recent data in 
RA patients (including analysis of more than 40,000 patients and 150,000 patient- years 
exposure) as well as patients with inflammatory bowel disease indicate that TNF inhibitors are  not clearly associated with increased malignancy.
3,4 In addition, data from 
pooled databases of over 100,000 patients and post-marketing data reported to the FDA indicate that TNF -inhibitors are also not clearly associated with major adverse 
cardiovascular events or de novo neurologic events.
5,6 Finally, althou gh there is a 
possibility of drug-drug interactions with infliximab, according to MicroMedex, an evidence-based drug information resource (used by Emory Healthcare), there are few drug-drug interactions with infliximab excluding other immunosuppressants, other monoclonal antibodies, and “moderate” interactions with the following psychotropic agents: phenytoin, thioridizine and pimozide (all of which are exclusionary – patients will be free of psychotropic medications).  
 Placebo treatment : Subjects in this s tudy also have a 50% chance of receiving a placebo 
infusion. Risks of placebo include lack of efficacy relative to active antidepressant treatments that might lead to a worsening of depressive symptoms, including the development of suicidal ideation.  
 
MRI scan : Undergoing fMRI scans poses no more risk than undergoing a routine MRI 
scan. Physical discomfort due to lying in the scanner, occasional headaches due to scanner 
sounds and previously unrecognized claustrophobic attacks are the prominent adverse effects of the fMRI procedure.  
 Suicidality : Given the fact that patients are not on any standard antidepressant 
medications, it is possible that they may experience worsening of their symptoms over the course of the study including the experiencing of suicidal ideation. Appropriate measures will be taken if patients exhibit significant suicidal risk.  
 Confidentiality: Confidentiality of all subjects will be protected per institutional and NIH 
and other federal requirements, and as described in greater detail below. At screening, study clinicians’ will discuss benefits and risks of participation as well as alternative options. 
 A number of procedures will be in place to prevent a breach of confidentiality from taking place. All potential subjects will be fully informed of their rights pertaining to disclosure of PHI in accordance with HIPAA regulations. Confidentiality will be maintained by assigning participants a study number and numerically coding all data. One hard copy file linking the code number with identifying information will be kept in separate locked file with direct access available to the PI only. All records and research 
Version: 07062020 45 data will be kept in locked filing cabinets or computers.  Only summaries of group data 
will be reported in any publications or presentations, with no identification of individuals. These precautions should serve to minimize legal risks to pa rticipants.  
 At the completion of the study, all MDD patients will be provided with a comprehensive list of treatment options for depression and related mental health issues. A copy of this information has been included as a separate attachment in our resubmission (please see “MDD_PostStudy_Treatment_Resource_List.doc”).  The key investigators will meet quarterly to discuss any potential adverse event and side effects. We will involve the IRB for consultation if any additional potential risks arise. Adverse events and unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others will be 
reported to the IRB in accordance with reporting guidelines. 
Appointment Scheduling & Reminders: All participants will be given the opportunity to 
receive appointment remi nders and scheduling information via text message on their 
mobile phones. If the subject consents to this form of communication, study staff will only 
use OhMD Texting Service to communicate with participants. This platform provides a 
Desktop and Mobile Ve rsion of OhMD for the research team to securely communicate 
with participants and maintain subject confidentiality. This service will only be used for 
communicating relevant appointment information and never used for PHI. Participants 
will receive the following text message from the study team upon first contact: “Please do 
NOT send any personal information via text. You may call the study team  at 404-727-
7541 to discuss any personal or health details.” Any PHI received via text message will 
be reported to the IRB  as a potential breach of confidentiality. 
 
Adverse Event Reporting  
 
Enrolled participants will be monitored closely by study clinicians for any adverse 
events. If any overt study- related adverse events occur, a decision will be made about study 
continuation. Additionally, a record of adverse events for study participants w ill be 
reported to the DSMB on a regular basis (see below). Subjects will be closely monitored 
during the course of the study for development of any serious or unexpected adverse reactions. Those events meeting Emory IRB criteria for a reportable event wil l be reported  
to the IRB or DSMB according to standard regulations and procedures.  The Emory IRB 
defines a serious adverse event as: “any adverse experiences occurring that result in any of the following outcomes: death, a life -threatening adverse experience, inpatient 
hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. For the purposes of this policy, death is never expected.” 
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP)  
 
This study utilizes an anti -inflammatory pharmacological challenge paradigm to 
explore the relationship among inflammation, corticostriatal circuit function and motivational anhedonia in patients with MD. Because study subjects will be receiving an active pharmacologic medication that has rare potentially serious side effects, we have elected to utilize a Data and Safety Monitoring Board as part of our data and safety -
monitoring plan. The DSMB is described in detail below. In addition, study clinic ians 
will be available by pager 24 hrs/7 days a week during the period between screening and completion of study assessments. Should a subject’s depressive symptoms appreciably 
Version: 07062020 46 worsen or should active suicidal ideation develop, either Dr. Treadway, Dr. Mil ler or 
their designee wil l be immediately notified. Dr. Treadway is a licensed clinical 
psychologist and Dr. Miller a board-certified psychiatrist. Both have extensive experience 
in the treatment of psychiatric emergencies. If the assessment in question wa s done by a 
clinician other than either of them, one of them will immediately contact the subject and will evaluate the need for further psychiatric treatment and will arrange psychiatric follow-up. They will evaluate each case individually to make a determination regarding 
whether the subject can remain in the study or whether the subject should be terminated in addition to receiving a mental health referral.  
 
Composition of the Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) 
 
The DSMB for this study will consist of Larry Tune, M.D. Chairman, Boadie Dunlop, 
M.D., Tanja Mletzko, M.S . and Marian Evatt, M.D. Each of these clinical researchers has 
agreed to serve as the external DSMB for investigator -initiated clinical trials conducted 
by Emory researchers in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences. If the 
DSMB requires additional specialized expertise to evaluate safety issues related to the performance of this study, a relevant specialist will be consulted by the DSMB. The frequency of Emory DSMB review for this protocol will be once every six months based on IRB recommendations consistent with the assessed risk status of the study. Of note, based on a random internal audit (not for cause) of the previous infliximab trial, accolades were given for regulatory compliance and documentation of all adverse events as well as timely reporting and processing with the Emory DSMB and IRB.  
Procedures and Responsibilities of the DSMB  
 
At least four weeks prior to each DSMB meeting, the data manager/research coordinators will prepare a report to be reviewed during that meeting. The report will include the number of participants who signed consent for the study, the number of screening failures and dropouts, reasons for these screening failures or dropouts, and any safety concerns, adverse events, etc. An up- to-date consent form will be p rovided, as well as a summary 
of measures taken to protect confidentiality (e.g., data storage, use of coded ID numbers, etc.) The PI will also prepare a report summarizing any new data/evidence that might alter the risk/benefit ratio for participating in the study (e.g., newly published studies, 
etc.). Data will be presented to the DSMB in such a way as to maintain patient confidentiality.  
Based on the information provided to the Emory DSMB, once every six months the DSMB will issue a report to the Emory IRB that summarizes the following: All serious and unexpected adverse events or other unanticipated problems that involve risk to study participants, and whether these appear related to the study - based interventions or 
research assessment protocols. Note that any serious adverse event (SAE) will be reported to the Emory IRB within 24 hours according to standard regulations.  
The IRB defines a serious adverse event as: “any adverse experiences occurring that 
result in any of the following outcomes: death, a life -threatening adverse experience, 
inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. For the purposes of this policy, death is never expected.”  
Version: 07062020 47 The PI will take responsibility for reporting any serious and unexpected adverse events in 
a timely fashion directly to the Emory DSMB. The PI will also report serious and unexpected adverse events or other unanticipated study problems or variances to the Emory. Actions taken by the IRB in response to adverse event reports will be immediately reported to the Emory DSMB. Statistical analysis of adverse event data will be provided by the study biostatistician.  
Literature Cited  
 
1. Schultz W. Multiple dopamine functions at different time courses. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 2007;30:259-288. 
2. Schultz W, Dickinson A. Neuronal coding of prediction errors. Annu Rev Neurosci. 
2000;23:473-500. 
3. Schultz W, Dayan P, Montague PR. A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science. 1997;275(5306):1593-1599. 
4. Schultz W. Neuronal reward and decision signals: from theories to data. Physiol 
Rev. 2015;95(3):853-951. 
5. Choi EY, Yeo BT, Buckner RL. The organization of the human striatum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol. 2012;108(8):2242-2263. 
6. Treadway MT, Zald DH. Reconsidering anhedonia in depression: lessons from translational neuroscience. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2011;35(3):537-555. 
7. Treadway MT, Zald DH. Parsing Anhedonia Translational Models of Reward-Processing Deficits in Psychopathology. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science. 2013;22(3):244-249. 
8. Pizzagalli DA, Holmes AJ, Dillon DG, Goetz EL, Birk JL, Bogdan R, Dougherty DD, Iosifescu DV, Rauch SL, Fava M. Reduced caudate and nucleus accumbens 
response to rewards in un medicated individuals with major depressive disorder. Am 
J Psychiatry. 2009;166(6):702-710. 
9. Kumar P, Waiter G, Ahearn T, Milders M, Reid I, Steele JD. Abnormal temporal 
difference reward -learning signals in major depression. Brain. 2008;131(Pt 
8):2084-2093. 
10. Juckel G, Schlagenhauf F, Koslowski M, Wustenberg T, Villringer A, Knutson B, Wrase J, Heinz A. Dysfunction of ventral striatal reward prediction in schizophrenia. Neuroimage. 2006;29(2):409-416. 
11. Gradin VB, Kumar P, Waiter G, Ahearn T, Stickle  C, Milders M, Reid I, Hall J, 
Steele JD. Expected value and prediction error abnormalities in depression and schizophrenia. Brain. 2011;134(Pt 6):1751-1764. 
12. Morris RW, Vercammen A, Lenroot R, Moore L, Langton JM, Short B, Kulkarni J, Curtis J, O'Donne ll M, Weickert CS. Disambiguating ventral striatum fMRI-
related bold signal during reward prediction in schizophrenia. Mol Psychiatry. 
2011;17(3):280-289. 
13. Felger JC, Mun J, Kimmel HL, Nye JA, Drake DF, Hernandez CR, Freeman AA, Rye DB, Goodman MM, Howe ll LL. Chronic Interferon -Œ± Decreases Dopamine 
2 Receptor Binding and Striatal Dopamine Release in Association with Anhedonia -
Like Behavior in Nonhuman Primates. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013. 
14. Capuron L, Pagnoni G, Drake DF, Woolwine BJ, Spivey JR, Cr owe RJ, Votaw JR, 
Goodman MM, Miller AH. Dopaminergic mechanisms of reduced Basal Ganglia 
Version: 07062020 48 responses to hedonic reward during interferon alfa administration. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 2012;69(10):1044-1053. 
15. Eisenberger NI, Berkman ET, Inagaki TK, Rameson LT, Mashal NM, Irwin MR. 
Inflammation -induced anhedonia: endotoxin reduces ventral striatum responses to 
reward. Biol Psychiatry. 2010;68(8):748-754. 
16. Miller AH, Maletic V, Raison CL. Inflammation and its discontents: the role of 
cytokines in the pathophysiology of major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 
2009;65(9):732-741. 
17. Dantzer R, Meagher MW, Cleeland CS. Translational approaches to treatment -
induced symptoms in cancer patients. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012;9(7):414-426. 
18. Zorrilla EP, Luborsky L, McKay JR, Rosenthal R, Houldin A, Tax A, McCorkle R, Seligman DA, Schmidt K. The relationship of depression and stressors to immunological assays: a meta- analytic review. Brain Behav Immun. 
2001;15(3):199-226. 
19. Dowlati Y, Herrma nn N, Swardfager W, Liu H, Sham L, Reim EK, Lanctot KL. A 
meta-analysis of cytokines in major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2010;67(5):446-
457. 
20. Raison CL, Rutherford RE, Woolwine BJ, Shuo C, Schettler P, Drake DF, Haroon 
E, Miller AH. A Randomized Contr olled Trial of the Tumor Necrosis Factor 
Antagonist Infliximab  for Treatment- Resistant DepressionThe Role of Baseline 
Inflammatory Biomarkers Infliximab  for Treatment -Resistant Depression. JAMA 
Psychiatry. 2013;70(1):31-41. 
21. Treadway MT, Buckholtz JW, Schwartzman AN, Lambert WE, Zald DH. Worth the 'EEfRT'? The effort expenditure for rewards task as an objective measure of motivation and anhedonia. PLoS ONE. 2009;4(8):e6598. 
22. Knutson B, Fong GW, Adams CM, Varner JL, Hommer D . Dissociation of reward 
anticipation and outcome with event -related fMRI. Neuroreport. 
2001;12(17):3683-3687. 
23. Pessiglione M, Seymour B, Flandin G, Dolan RJ, Frith CD. Dopamine -dependent 
prediction errors underpin reward- seeking behaviour in humans. Nature. 
2006;442(7106):1042-1045. 
24. Trivedi MH, Fava M, Wisniewski SR, Thase ME, Quitkin F, Warden D, Ritz L, Nierenberg AA, Lebowitz BD, Biggs MM, Luther JF, Shores -Wilson K, Rush AJ. 
Medication augmentation after the failure of SSRIs for depression. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354(12):1243-1252. 
25. Gold JM WJ, Prentice KJ, Morris SE, Heerey EA. Reward processing in schizophrenia: a deficit in the representation of value. Schizophr Bull. 
2008;34(5):835-847. 
26. Nutt D, Demyttenaere K, Janka Z, Aarre T, Bourin M, Canonico PL, Carrasco JL, Stahl S. The other face of depression, reduced positive affect: the role of catecholamines in causation and cure. J Psychopharmacol. 2007;21(5):461-471. 
27. Shelton RC, Tomarken AJ. Can recovery from depression be achieved? Psychiatr 
Serv. 2001;52(11):1469-1478. 
28. Salamone JD, Correa M, Farrar A, Mingote SM. Effort -related functions of nucleus 
accumbens dopamine and associated forebrain circuits. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl). 2007;191(3):461-482. 
Version: 07062020 49 29. Walton ME, Kennerley SW, Bannerman DM, Phillips PE, Rushworth MF. 
Weighing up the benefits of work: behavioral and neural analyses of effort -related 
decision making. Neural Netw. 2006;19(8):1302-1314. 
30. Floresco SB, Ghods -Sharifi S. Amygdala -prefrontal cortical circuitry regulates 
effort-based decision making. Cereb Cortex. 2007;17(2):251-260. 
31. Berridge KC, Robinson TE. Parsing reward. Trends Neurosci. 2003;26(9):507-513. 
32. Berridge KC. The debate over dopamine's role in reward: the case for incentive salience. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2007;191(3):391-431. 
33. Schultz W DP, Montague PR. A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science. 
1997;275(5306):1593-1599. 
34. Schott BH, Minuzzi L, Krebs RM, Elmenhorst D, Lang M, Winz OH, Seidenbecher CI, Coenen HH, Heinze HJ, Zilles K, Duzel E, Bauer A. Mesolimbic functional magnetic resonance imaging activations during reward anticipation correlate with reward-related ventral striatal dopamine release. J Neurosci. 2008;28(52):14311-
14319. 
35. D'Ardenne K MS, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD. BOLD responses reflecting dopaminergic signals in the human ventral tegmental area. Science. 
2008;5867(319):1264-1267. 
36. Frank MJ, O'Reilly RC. A mechanistic account of striatal dopamine function in 
human cognition: psychopharmacological studies with cabergoline and haloperidol. Behav Neurosci. 2006;120(3):497. 
37. Frank MJ, Seeberger LC, O'Reilly RC. By carrot or by stick: cognitive reinforcement learning in parkinsonism. Science. 2004;306(5703):1940-1943. 
38. Kravitz AV, Tye LD, Kreitzer AC. Distinct roles for direct and indirect pathway striatal neurons in reinforcement. Nat Neurosci. 2012;15(6):816-818. 
39. Salamone JD, Correa M. The mysterious motivational functions of mesolim bic 
dopamine. Neuron. 2012;76(3):470-485. 
40. Bardgett ME, Depenbrock M, Downs N, Points M, Green L. Dopamine modulates 
effort-based decision making in rats. Behav Neurosci. 2009;123(2):242-251. 
41. Floresco SB, Tse MT, Ghods -Sharifi S. Dopaminergic and gl utamatergic regulation 
of effort - and delay- based decision making. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2008;33(8):1966-1979. 
42. Venugopalan VV, Casey KF, O'Hara C, O'Loughlin J, Benkelfat C, Fellows LK, Leyton M. Acute Phenylalanine/Tyrosine Depletion Reduces Motiva tion to Smoke 
Cigarettes Across Stages of Addiction. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011. 
43. Wardle MC, Treadway MT, Mayo LM, Zald DH, de Wit H. Amping Up Effort: Effects of d -Amphetamine on Human Effort -Based Decision -Making. J Neurosci. 
2011;31(46):16597-16602. 
44. Rushworth MF, Noonan MP, Boorman ED, Walton ME, Behrens TE. Frontal cortex and re ward-guided learning and decision- making. Neuron. 
2011;70(6):1054-1069. 
45. Hunt LT, Kolling N, Soltani A, Woolrich MW, Rushworth MFS, Behrens TEJ. Mechanisms underlying cortical activity during value -guided choice. Nat Neurosci. 
2012;15(3):470-476. 
Version: 07062020 50 46. Hare TA, O'Doherty J, Camerer CF, Schultz W, Rangel A. Dissociating the role of 
the orbitofrontal cortex and the striatum in the computation of goal values and 
prediction errors. J Neurosci. 2008;28(22):5623-5630. 
47. Rangel A, Camerer C, Montague PR. A framework for studying the neurobiology of value-based decision making. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008;9(7):545-556. 
48. Hauber W, Sommer S. Prefrontostriatal Circuitry Regulates Effort- Related 
Decision Making. Cereb Cortex. 2009. 
49. Pizzagalli DA, Iosifescu D, Hallett LA, Ratner KG, Fava M. Reduced hedonic capacity in major depressive disorder: evidence from a probabilistic reward task. J 
Psychiatr Res. 2008;43(1):76-87. 
50. Treadway MT, Bossaller NA, Shelton RC, Zald DH. Effort -based decision- making 
in major depressive disorder: a translational model of motivational anhedonia. J 
Abnorm Psychol. 2012;121(3):553. 
51. Yang X-h, Huang J, Zhu C -y, Wang Y -f, Cheung EFC, Chan RCK, Xie G -r. 
Motivational deficits in effort -based decision making in individuals with 
subsyndromal depression, first -episode and remitted depression patients. 
Psychiatry Res. 2014;220(3):874-882. 
52. Barch DM, Treadway MT, Schoen N. Effort, anhedonia, and function in schizophrenia: Reduced effort allocation predicts am otivation and functional 
impairment. J Abnorm Psychol. 2014;123(2):387. 
53. Treadway MT, Peterman JS, Zald DH, Park S. Impaired effort allocation in patients with schizophrenia. Schizophr Res. 2014. 
54. Fervaha G, Graff -Guerrero A, Zakzanis KK, Foussias G, Agid O, Remington G. 
Incentive motivation deficits in schizophrenia reflect effort computation impairments during cost -benefit decision -making. J Psychiatr Res. 
2013;47(11):1590-1596. 
55. Felger JC, Mun J, Kimmel HL, Nye JA, Drake DF, Hernandez CR, Freeman AA, Rye DB, Goodman MM, Howell LL. Chronic interferon- α decreases dopamine 2 
receptor binding and striatal dopamine release in association with anhedonia -like 
behavior in nonhuman primates. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013;38(11):2179-
2187. 
56. Qin L, Wu X, Block ML, Liu Y, Breese GR, Hong JS, Knapp DJ, Crews FT. 
Systemic LPS causes chronic neuroinflammation and progressive neurodegeneration. Glia. 2007;55(5):453-462. 
57. Felger JC, Alagbe O, Hu F, Mook D, Freeman AA, Sanchez MM, Kalin NH, Ratti E, Nemeroff CB, Miller AH. Effects of interferon -alpha on rhesus monkeys: a 
nonhuman primate model of cytokine -induced depression. Biol Psychiatry. 
2007;62(11):1324-1333. 
58. Gentile A, Fresegna D, Federici M, Musella A, Rizzo FR, Sepman H, Bullitta S, De Vito F, Haji N, Rossi S. Dopaminergic dysfunction is associated with IL -1β-
dependent mood alterations in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Neurobiol Dis. 2015;74:347-358. 
59. Sarkar C, Basu B, Chakroborty D, Dasgupta PS, Basu S. The immunoregulatory role of dopamine: an update. Brain, behavior, and immunity. 2010;24(4):525-528. 
Version: 07062020 51 60. Yan Y, Jiang W, Liu L, Wang X, Ding C, Tian Z, Zhou R. Dopamine Controls 
Systemic Inflammation  through Inhibition of NLRP3 Inflammasome. Cell. 
2015;160(1):62-73. 
61. Harrison NA, Brydon L, Walker C, Gray MA, Steptoe A, Critchley HD. Inflammation causes mood changes through alterations in subgenual cingulate activity and mesolimbic connectivity. Biol Psychiatry. 2009;66(5):407-414. 
62. Vichaya EG, Hunt SC, Dantzer R. Lipopolysaccharide Reduces Incentive Motivation While Boosting Preference for High Reward in Mice. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014. 
63. Nunes EJ, Randall PA, Estrada A, Epling B, Hart EE, Lee CA, Baqi Y, Mueller 
CE, Correa M, Salamone JD. Effort -related motivational effects of the pro -
inflammatory cytokine interleukin 1 -beta: studies with the concurrent fixed ratio 
5/chow feeding choice task. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2013:1-10. 
64. Felger JC, Miller AH. Cytokine effects on the basal ganglia and dopamine function: 
the subcortical source of inflammatory malaise. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2014. 
65. Couch Y, Anthony DC, Dolgov O, Revischin A, Festoff B, Santos AI, Steinbusch HW, Strekalova T. Microglial activation, increased TNF and SERT expression in the prefrontal cortex define stress -altered behaviour in mice susceptible to 
anhedonia. Brain, behavior, and immunity.29:136-146. 
66. Thorne R, Hanson L, Ross T, Tung D, Frey Ii W. Delivery of interf eron-Œ≤ to the 
monkey nervous system following intranasal administration. Neuroscience. 
2008;152(3):785-797. 
67. Capuron L, Ravaud A, Miller AH, Dantzer R. Baseline mood and psychosocial characteristics of patients developing depressive symptoms during int erleukin-2 
and/or interferon -alpha cancer therapy. Brain Behav Immun. 2004;18(3):205-213. 
68. Capuron L, Miller AH. Immune system to brain signaling: neuropsychopharmacological implications. Pharmacol Ther. 2011;130(2):226-
238. 
69. Berridge KC. 'Liking' and 'wanting' food rewards: brain substrates and roles in eating disorders. Physiol Behav. 2009;97(5):537-550. 
70. Pecina S, Smith KS, Berridge KC. Hedonic hot spots in the brain. Neuroscientist. 
2006;12(6):500-511. 
71. Cannon CM, Palmiter RD. Reward without dopamine. J Neurosci. 
2003;23(34):10827-10831. 
72. Hnasko TS, Sotak BN, Palmiter RD. Morphine reward in dopamine -deficient mice. 
Nature. 2005;438(7069):854-857. 
73. Miller AH, Maletic V, Raison CL. Inflammation and its discontents: the role of cytokines in the pathophysiology of major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 
2009;65(9):732-741. 
74. Howren MB, Lamkin DM, Suls J. Associations of depression with C -reactive 
protein, IL-1, and IL- 6: a meta-analysis. Psychosom Med. 2009;71(2):171-186. 
75. Dowlati Y, Herrmann N, Swardfager W, Liu H, Sham L, Reim EK, Lanctot KL. A meta-analysis of cytokines in major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2010;67(5):446-
457. 
76. Pincus T, Griffith J, Pearce S, Isenberg D. Prevalence of self -reported depression 
in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Br J Rheumatol. 1996;35(9):879-883. 
Version: 07062020 52 77. Dickens C, Creed F. The burden of depression in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Rheumatology. 2001;40(12):1327-1330. 
78. Blume J, Douglas SD, Evans DL. Immune suppression and immune activation in depression. Brain Behav Immun. 2011;25(2):221-229. 
79. Raison CL, Miller AH. Is depression an inflammatory disorder? Curr Psychiatry 
Rep. 2011;13(6):467-475. 
80. Mehta D, Raison CL, Woolwine BJ, Haroon E, Binder EB, Miller AH, Felger JC. Transcriptional signatures related to glucose and lipid metabolism predict treatment 
response to the tumor necrosis factor antagonist infliximab  in patients with 
treatment- resistant depression. Brain, behavior, and immunity. 2013;31:205-215. 
81. Hyman SE. Neuroscience, genetics, and the future of psychiatric diagnosis. Psychopathology. 2002;35(2-3):139-144. 
82. Hyman SE. The diagnosis of mental disorders: the problem of reification. Annu Rev 
Clin Psychol. 2010;6:155-179. 
83. Treadway MT, Buckholtz JW, Cowan RL, Woodward ND, Li R, Ansari MS, Baldwin RM, Schwartzman AN, Kessler RM, Zald DH. Dopaminergic mechanisms of individual differences in human effort- based decision -making. J 
Neurosci. 2012;32(18):6170-6176. 
84. Treadway MT,  Buckholtz JW, Zald DH. Perceived stress predicts altered reward 
and loss feedback processing in medial prefrontal cortex. Front Hum Neurosci. 
2013;7:180. 
85. Treadway MT, Grant MM, Ding Z, Hollon SD, Gore JC, Shelton RC. Early adverse events, HPA activity  and rostral anterior cingulate volume in MDD. PLoS ONE. 
2009;4(3):e4887. 
86. Treadway MT, Waskom ML, Dillon DG, Holmes AJ, Park MTM, Chakravarty 
MM, Dutra SJ, Polli FE, Iosifescu DV, Fava M. Illness Progression, Recent Stress, 
and Morphometry of Hippocampal Subfields and Medial Prefrontal Cortex in Major Depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2014. 
87. Raison CL, Borisov AS, Majer M, Drake DF, Pagnoni G, Woolwine BJ, Vogt GJ, Massung B, Miller AH. Activation of central nervous system inflammatory pathways by interfe ron-alpha: relationship to monoamines and depression. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2009;65(4):296-303. 
88. Rushworth MFS, Kolling N, Sallet J, Mars RB. Valuation and decision- making in 
frontal cortex: one or many serial or parallel systems? Curr Opin Neurobiol. 
2012;22(6):946-955. 
89. Hartmann MN, Hager OM, Tobler PN, Kaiser S. Parabolic discounting of monetary rewards by physical effort. Behav Processes. 2013;100:192-196. 
90. Buckholtz JW, Treadway MT, Cowan RL, Woodward ND, Benning SD, Li R, Ansari MS, Baldwin RM, Schwartzman AN, Shelby ES, Smith CE, Cole D, Kessler RM, Zald DH. Mesolimbic dopamine reward system hypersensitivity in individuals with psychopathic traits. Nat Neurosci. 2010;13(4):419-421. 
91. Wu CC, Samanez -Larkin GR, Katovich K, Knutson B. Affective tra its link to 
reliable neural markers of incentive anticipation. Neuroimage. 2014;84:279-289. 
92. Reader BF, Jarrett BL, McKim DB, Wohleb ES, Godbout JP, Sheridan JF. Peripheral and central effects of repeated social defeat stress: Monocyte trafficking, microglial activation, and anxiety. Neuroscience. 2015. 
Version: 07062020 53 93. Rutgeerts P, Feagan BG, Lichtenstein GR, Mayer LF, Schreiber S, Colombel JF, 
Rachmilewitz D, Wolf DC, Olson A, Bao W, Hanauer SB. Comparison of scheduled and episodic treatment strategies of infliximab in Crohn's disease. 
Gastroenterology. 2004;126(2):402-413. 
94. Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Ibrahim HM, Carmody TJ, Biggs MM, Suppes T, Crismon ML, Shores -Wilson K, Toprac MG, Dennehy EB, Witte B, Kashner TM. The 
Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology, Clinician Rating (IDS -C) and Self -
Report (IDS -SR), and the Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology, 
Clinician Rating (QIDS -C) and Self -Report (QIDS -SR) in public sector patients 
with mood disorders: a psychometric evaluation. Psychol Med. 2004;34(1):73-82. 
95. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. "Mini -mental state". A practical method 
for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res. 
1975;12(3):189-198. 
96. First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, Williams JB. Structured Clinical Interview  for 
DSM-IV. Washington DC: American Psychiatric Press; 1997. 
97. Chandler GM, Iosifescu DV, Pollack MH, Targum SD, Fava M. RESEARCH: Validation of the Massachusetts General Hospital Antidepressant Treatment History Questionnaire (ATRQ). CNS Neurosci Ther.  2010;16(5):322-325. 
98. Fava M. Diagnosis and definition of treatment -resistant depression. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2003;53(8):649-659. 
99. Sachs GS. Strategies for improving treatment of bipolar disorder: integration of measurement and management. Acta Psychiat r Scand. 2004;110(s422):7-17. 
100. Knutson B, Bhanji JP, Cooney RE, Atlas LY, Gotlib IH. Neural responses to monetary incentives in major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;63(7):686-692. 
101. Knutson B, Cooper JC. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of r eward 
prediction. Curr Opin Neurol. 2005;18(4):411-417. 
102. Knutson B, Fong GW, Bennett SM, Adams CM, Hommer D. A region of mesial prefrontal cortex tracks monetarily rewarding outcomes: characterization with rapid event- related fMRI. Neuroimage. 2003;18(2):263-272. 
103. Samanez-Larkin GR, Gibbs SE, Khanna K, Nielsen L, Carstensen LL, Knutson B. 
Anticipation of monetary gain but not loss in healthy older adults. Nat Neurosci. 
2007;10(6):787-791. 
104. Sutton RS, Barto AG. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduc tion. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press; 1998. 
105. Luce RD. Individual choice behavior: a theoretical analysis . New York, NY: 
Wiley; 1959. 
106. Palminteri S, Justo D, Jauffret C, Pavlicek B, Dauta A, Delmaire C, Czernecki V, Karachi C, Capelle L, Durr A, Pessiglione M. Critical roles for anterior insula and dorsal striatum in punishment -based avoidance learning. Neuron. 2012;76(5):998-
1009. 
107. Chase HW, Fournier JC, Greenberg T, Almeida JR, Stiffler R, Zevallos CR, Aslam 
H, Cooper C, Deckersbach T, Weyandt S. Accounting for Dynamic Fluctuations across Time when Examining fMRI Test -Retest Reliability: Analysis of a Reward 
Paradigm in the EMBARC Study. 2015. 
Version: 07062020 54 108. Wardle MC, Treadway MT, de Wit H. Caffeine increases psychomotor 
performance on the effort expenditure for rewards task. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 
2012;102(4):526-531. 
109. Frank MJ, Moustafa AA, Haughey HM, Curran T, Hutchison KE. Genetic t riple 
dissociation reveals multiple roles for dopamine in reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2007;104(41):16311-16316. 
110. Frank MJ, Samanta J, Moustafa AA, Sherman SJ. Hold your horses: impulsivity, deep brain stimulation, and medication in parkinsonism. Science. 
2007;318(5854):1309-1312. 
111. Turi Z, Mittner M, Opitz A, Popkes M, Paulus W, Antal A. Transcranial direct current stimulation over the left prefrontal cortex increases randomness of choice 
in instrumental learning. Cortex. 2015;63:145-154. 
112. Spreen O, Strauss, E. A Compendium of Neuropsychological Tests . New York: 
Oxford University Press; 1991. 
113. Aparicio P, D iedrichsen J, Ivry RB. Effects of focal basal ganglia lesions on timing 
and force control. Brain Cogn. 2005;58(1):62-74. 
114. Majer M, Welberg LA, Capuron L, Pagnoni G, Raison CL, Miller AH. IFN -alpha-
induced motor slowing is associated with increased depr ession and fatigue in 
patients with chronic hepatitis C. Brain Behav Immun. 2008;22(6):870-880. 
115. Joy S, Fein D, Kaplan E. Decoding digit symbol: speed, memory, and visual scanning. Assessment. 2003;10(1):56-65. 
116. Bermel RA, Bakshi R, Tjoa C, Puli SR , Jacobs L. Bicaudate ratio as a magnetic 
resonance imaging marker of brain atrophy in multiple sclerosis. Arch Neurol. 
2002;59(2):275-280. 
117. Starkstein SE, Brandt J, Folstein S, Strauss M, Berthier ML, Pearlson GD, Wong 
D, McDonnell A, Folstein M. Neuropsychological and neuroradiological correlates 
in Huntington's disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1988;51(10):1259-1263. 
118. Rush AJ, Gullion CM, Basco MR, Jarrett RB, Trivedi MH. The Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (IDS): psychometric proper ties. Psychol Med. 
1996;26(3):477-486. 
119. Wildocher D, Ghozlan, A. The measurement of retardation in depression. In: Hindmarch I, Stonier, P.D., ed. Human Psychopharmacology. Vol 2. New York: 
John Wiley and Sons; 1989:1-22. 
120. Bonin- Guillaume S, Sautel  L, Demattei C, Jouve E, Blin O. Validation of the 
Retardation Rating Scale for detecting depression in geriatric inpatients. Int J 
Geriatr Psychiatry. 2007;22(1):68- 76. 
121. Smith RS, Maes M. The macrophage-T- lymphocyte theory of schizophrenia: 
additional evidence. Medical Hypotheses. 1995;45(2):135-141. 
122. Leventhal AM, Chasson GS, Tapia E, Miller EK, Pettit JW. Measuring hedonic capacity in depression: a psychometric analysis of three anhedonia scales. J Clin 
Psychol. 2006;62(12):1545-1558. 
123. Smets EM, Garssen B, Bonke B, De Haes JC. The Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI) psychometric qualities of an instrument to assess fatigue. J 
Psychosom Res. 1995;39(3):315-325. 
124. Capuron L, Pagnoni G, Drake DF, Woolwine BJ, Spivey JR, Crowe RJ, Votaw JR, Goodman MM, Miller AH. Dopaminergic mechanisms of reduced basal ganglia 
Version: 07062020 55 responses to hedonic reward during interferon alfa administration. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 2012;69(10):1044-1053. 
125. Llerena K, Park SG, McCarthy JM, Couture SM, Bennett ME, Blanchard JJ. The 
Motivation and Pleasure Scale –Self-Report (MAP -SR): Reliability and validity of 
a self-report measure of negative symptoms. Compr Psychiatry. 2013;54(5):568-
574. 
126. Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A. Development and validation of brief measur es 
of positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol. 
1988;54(6):1063-1070. 
127. Krupp LB, LaRocca NG, Muir -Nash J, Steinberg AD. The fatigue severity scale. 
Application to patients with multiple sclerosis and systemic lupus erythematos us. 
Arch Neurol. 1989;46(10):1121-1123. 
128. Dittner AJ, Wessely SC, Brown RG. The assessment of fatigue: a practical guide for clinicians and researchers. J Psychosom Res. 2004;56(2):157-170. 
129. Brydon L, Harrison NA, Walker C, Steptoe A, Critchley HD. Peripheral 
inflammation is associated with altered substantia nigra activity and psychomotor slowing in humans. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;63(11):1022-1029. 
130. Huber W, von Heydebreck A, Sultmann H, Poustka A, Vingron M. Variance stabilization applied to microarray data calibration and to the quantification of differential expression. Bioinformatics. 2002;18 Suppl 1:S96-104. 
131. Johnson WE, Li C, Rabinovic A. Adjusting batch effects in microarray expression data using empirical Bayes methods. Biostatistics. 2007;8(1):118-127. 
132. Potter DM. A permutation test for inference in logistic regression with small- and 
moderate-sized data sets. Stat Med. 2005;24(5):693-708. 
133. Felger JC, Li Z, Haroon E, Woolwine B, Jung MY, Hu X, Miller AH. Inflammation 
is associated with decreased functional connectivity within corticostriatal reward 
circuitry. Mol Psychiatry. in press. 
134. Haapakoski R, Mathieu J, Ebmeier KP, Alenius H, Kivim äki M. Cumulative meta-
analysis of interleukins 6 and 1 b, tumour necrosis factor a and C -reactive protein 
in patients with major depressive disorder. Brain Behav Immun. 2015;49:20. 
135. Friston KJ, Buechel C, Fink GR, Morris J, Rolls E, Dolan RJ. Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging. Neuroimage. 1997;6(3):218-229. 
136. Cole SW, Yan W, Galic Z, Arevalo J, Zack JA. Expression -based monitoring of 
transcription factor activity: the TELiS database. Bioinformatics. 2005;21(6):803-
810. 
137. Cole SW, Hawkley LC, Arevalo JM, Cacioppo JT. Transcript origin analysis identifies antigen -presenting cells as primary targets of socially regulated gene 
expression in leukocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108(7):3080-3085. 
138. Felger JC, Cole SW, Pace TW, Hu F, Woolwine BJ, Doho GH, Raison CL, Miller 
AH. Molecular signatures of peripheral blood mononuclear cells during chronic interferon -alpha treatment: relationship with depression and fatigue. Psychol Med. 
2011:1-13. 
139. Preacher KJ, Hayes A F. Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and 
comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behav Res Methods. 
2008;40(3):879-891. 
Version: 07062020 56 140. Gitelman DR PW, Ashburner J, Friston KJ. Modeling regional and 
psychophysiologic interactions in fMRI: the importance of hemodynamic deconvolution. Neuroimage. 2003;19(1):200-207. 
141. Braver TS, Cole MW, Yarkoni T. Vive les differences! Individual variation in neural mechanisms of executive control. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2010;20(2):242-
250. 
142. Liu G, Liang K -Y. Sample size calculations for studies with correlated 
observations. Biometrics. 1997:937-947. 
143.     Gross, R., Matthews, I., Cohn, J., Kanade, T., & Baker, S. (2010). Multi- PIE. 
Image and Vision Computing, 28, 807-813. 
144.     Hamilton, M. A rating scale for depression. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 23, 
56-62 (1960). 
145.  Bastien CH, Vallières A, Morin CM. Validation of the Insomnia Severity Index as 
an outcome measure for insomnia research.  Sleep Med.  2001;2:297–307  
  
 
 