Study Title:  Expanding popula�on -level interven�ons to help more low -income smokers quit  
 
NCT# :  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version:   01/04/2022  
1/4/22, 2:20 PM myIRB
https://myirb.wusm.wustl.edu/summary/projects.page?mode=pf&OID=1 11698948 1/10Smoke-Free Homes
PI: Matthew Kreuter
IRB ID #: 202002125
Project Details
1. Demographics
1.1 Project Title:
Expanding population-lev el interv entions to help more low -income smok ers quit
1.2 Short Title (required):
Smok e-Free Homes
1.3 Project is primarily:
Social Science/Beha vioral (includes History/Anthropology)
1.4 Type of Study:
Other Interv entional
1.4.a Is your research study one in which one or more human subjects are prospectiv ely assigned to one or more
interv entions (which ma y include placebo or other control) to ev aluate the effects of those interv entions on health-
related biomedical or beha vioral outcomes ( NIH clinical trial definition ).
Yes
1.5 Select how y ou plan to obtain consent:
• Script for use either in person or o ver the phone with no signature
2. Source(s) of Support
2.1 Source(s) of Support
Type/Source Grant TitleName
of PI
on
GrantStatus
Federal
Agency 
 NIH, National
Cancer
Institute
(NCI)Expanding population-lev el interv entions to help more low -income smok ers quit Matthew
W
KreuterAWARDED
3. Research Team
3.1 Principal In vestigator
Name E-mail Title School
Matthew Kreuter mkreuter@wustl.edu Eugene S . and Constance K ahn F amily Professor Brown 
3.4Team Members
Research Team Members
Role NameRole
DescStudent Email Title School Department ContactC
P
Inv
PI Matthew Kreuter , MPH, PHD No mkreuter@wustl.edu Eugene S .
and
Constance
Kahn
Family
ProfessorBrown
SchoolBrown School
Administr ationYes
Team Member Financial Interest
Name Financial Interests
Matthew Kreuter , MPH, PHD none
1/4/22, 2:20 PM myIRB
https://myirb.wusm.wustl.edu/summary/projects.page?mode=pf&OID=1 11698948 2/104. Other Information
4.6 Will a Certificate of confidentialit y be used for this research?
Yes, certificate automatically issued b y funding agency
4.7 Does this project need to be registered on ClinicalT rials.go v?
Yes
4.7.a Who is the R esponsible P arty for registering this study in ClinicalT rials.go v?
Principal In vestigator
4.8 Do an y of the objectiv es of this study in volve the diagnosis, prev ention, screening, ev aluation, treatment or support of
cancer patients?
Yes
4.9 Are more than 30% of the patients in volved in this study lik ely to ha ve an activ e cancer diagnosis?
No
4.14 Mark all that apply to y our study:
1. Protocol
1.1 Is there a separ ate, written protocol that will be submitted in addition to this form? (Note: a gr ant application is not
considered to be a protocol)
No
1.2 Select up to three k ey words below that best describe this research study:
•  Psychology
   • Clinical
 •  Public Health
 •  Social W ork
 
1.3 Provide a short summary/abstr act of the purpose and procedures of the study proposed in this IRB application.
DO NO T include information on studies not proposed in this application.
Use LA Y terminology only . This must be easily understandable b y IRB communit y members and nonscientists.
DO NO T cut and paste technical abstr acts from source of support applications that ma y not be understood b y a
gener al audience.
The current application is for testing an interv ention to help more low -income smok ers get closer to quitting. Despite a
decrease in the r ates smoking cigarettes in the gener al population, smoking r ates in low -income populations are still
compar atively high. The standard pr actice for smoking cessation progr ams is state tobacco Quitlines, but these services
are gener ally only offered to those who are ready to quit smoking in the next 30 da ys, effectiv ely ex cluding 70-80% of
low-income smok ers. This study will pro vide an alternativ e to people who aren't ready to quit y et, called Smok e-Free 
 Homes. Smok e-Free Homes in volves helping people to ban all smoking inside their home, which will reduce second-hand
smok e exposure for non-smok ers, including children, who liv e in the home. In addition, the smok ers themselv es are
more lik ely to reduce the number of cigarettes they smok e and get closer to quitting. 
 
The interv ention is a Hybrid T ype 2 design, which means that we will compare the standard pr actice interv ention (the
state Quitline; Arm 1) with the expanded service alternativ e (the Quitline in addition to Smok e-Free Homes; Arm 2)
among 1,980 low -income smok ers across nine states. P articipants will be r andomly assigned to each Study Arm. The
study outcomes are 7-da y and 30-da y point prev alence of smoking abstinence, number of cigarettes per da y, number of
24-hour quit attempts, and acceptance of the interv entions. P articipants will be recruited from nine state United W ay 2- 
 1-1 agencies. The Quitline (standard service) will be deliv ered b y our study partner Optum, a health-care services
compan y that runs the state Quitlines. 2-1-1 callers who are daily smok ers and interested in participating will be
contacted b y our study team who will conduct surv eys b y telephone with participants at Baseline, 3-month follow -up,
and 6-month followup .
1.4 Specif y your research question(s), study aims or h ypotheses:
Aim 1: Compare quit r ates in Quitline only vs. Quitline + Smok e-Free Homes groups 
 A. What proportion report 7-da y and 30-da y point prev alence abstinence at 3- and 6-month follow -up? 
 B. What proportion report making a quit attempt (of at least 24 hours) at 3- and 6-month follow -up? 
 C. What is the a verage change in cigarettes smok ed per da y at 3- and 6-month follow -up? 
 D. Among those who decline Quitline services at baseline, what proportion report abstinence, quit attempts, and
decrease in cigarettes smok ed per da y at 3- and 6-month follow -up? 
 Aim 2: Compare acceptance and use of Quitline services, and pro-cessation beliefs cumulativ ely over the study
period in Quitline only vs. Quitline + Smok e-Free Hoes groups. 
 A. What proportion accept Quitline services? 
 B. Among those who accept Quitline services, what proportion use 0, 1, or 2+ sessions of counseling? 
 C. Among those still smoking at 6-month follow -up, how does readiness to quit, pessimism about quitting, and
ambiv alence about smoking differ b y group? 
 
1/4/22, 2:20 PM myIRB
https://myirb.wusm.wustl.edu/summary/projects.page?mode=pf&OID=1 11698948 3/10Aim 3. Ev aluate the economics of adding Smok e-Free Homes to standard pr actice. 
A. What are the costs and benefits per smok er and quitter from Quitline and societ y perspectiv es?
1.5 Background and significance and/or Preliminary studies related to this project:
Cigarette smoking in the U .S. follows a socio-economic gr adient. Adult smoking prev alence is 26-28% among the
poor, least educated, and those on Medicaid or uninsured, compared to 14% in adults abo ve the po verty level and
7% in those with a college degree. Compared to other smok ers, low -income smok ers begin smoking at a y ounger
age, ha ve greater nicotine dependence, lower self -efficacy for quitting, lower readiness to quit, are less lik ely to use
evidence-based quitting methods, and succeed less often when trying to quit. Smoking-related cancers are more
common and more often diagnosed at a later stage in low -income and low -education populations.6,7,55 Medicaid
alone spends tens of billions of dollars annually treating smoking-related illnesses. Cancer is the largest contributor
to a growing gap in U .S. life expectancy b y education,8 and smoking has a significant independent effect. 
 
The main factors k eeping low -income smok ers from quitting are norms, stress and lack of assistance. Expanding
population-lev el tobacco treatment pr actice to include Smok e Free Homes directly addresses norms. In most U .S.
populations and places, smoking is relativ ely uncommon and/or not permitted. But in social networks of low -income
smok ers, it is prev alent, normativ e and acceptable, especially at home and work. In our recently completed U01
studies of Smok e Free Homes in low -income populations in fiv e states, 66% of participants reported that half or
more of their friends and relativ es smok e. In our ongoing R01 study of low -income smok ers, 42% liv e with at least
one other smok er, and of those who are emplo yed, 75% work with other smok ers. Smoking norms lik e these are
associated with higher r ates of indoor smoking and lower r ates of cessation among low -income smok ers, in part
because they feel less pressure to quit. 
 
Although 83% of U .S. households now ha ve smok e free home rules, only 46% of households with smok ers ha ve
bans, and just 37% of households with low -income smok ers ha ve them. W e hypothesiz e that expanding population-
level cessation services to include Smok e Free Homes will engage more low -income smok ers in pro ven interv entions
and yield greater cessation than current standard pr actice. Our proposed approach is based on six broad claims
supported b y strong evidence from multiple disciplines: 
 1. Most low -income smok ers are not ready to quit. R eadiness to quit is the strongest predictor of making a quit
attempt. Compared to smok ers not thinking about quitting, those planning to quit in the next 30 da ys are six times
more lik ely to try quitting and four times more lik ely to succeed.66 But low -income and low -education smok ers are
significantly less lik ely to be planning to quit. Studies in div erse populations and settings consistently find that only
20-30% of low -income smok ers are ready to quit in the next 30 da ys. In current standard pr actice, these smok ers
are ineligible to receiv e cessation services and offered nothing to help them prepare to quit. NCI’ s Tobacco Control
Research Priorities for 2016-2025 call for interv entions that “reach and engage” ambiv alent 
 smok ers and facilitate “tr ansition from unmotiv ated smok er to abstinence” (Priorit y 6-2). 
 
2. Creating a Smok e Free Home is easier than quitting smoking. Studies in communit y health centers, safet y net
hospitals, subsidiz ed housing, the V A system and homeless shelters consistently find that low -income smok ers ha ve
low confidence in their abilit y to quit and r ate quitting as “v ery hard. ” In sharp contr ast, creating a smok e free home
is viewed as less difficult and confidence for banning in-home smoking is high. In our team’ s SFH studies,
participants were confident (7.8 on a 1-10 scale) they could mak e their home smok e-free. Other research has
reported nearly identical confidence scores across 10 in-home smoking situations. In separ ate studies, only 21% of
participants said it would be “difficult ” or “v ery difficult ” to adopt a home smoking ban or “too hard” to comply with a
full smoking ban. In more motiv ated populations, parents who smok e rate adopting a smok e-free home as not
difficult (4.9 out of 10, where 10=most difficult) and most sa y making their 
 home smok e-free is “manageable” and a “first step” tow ards quitting. Among low -income individuals who adopt
home smoking bans, only 1 in 5 report difficult y sticking to the ban. 
 
3. Low income smok ers are motiv ated to protect children and non-smok ers. In studies of low -income Whites, African
Americans, Hispanics and American Indians in urban and rur al settings, protecting a family member or child from
tobacco smok e is b y far the main reason for thinking about and adopting a home smoking ban. Ev en in low -income
neighborhoods where smoking is normativ e and there are few restrictions on where people can smok e, smoking
around children is viewed as less acceptable. In gr aphic w arning label studies among low -income smok ers, labels on
cigarette packages depicting how smoking affects children and others were the most effectiv e in making low -income
smok ers think about quitting and feel motiv ated to quit. 
 
4. Sequential request str ategies increase effectiv eness. The study goal is to get low income smok ers to quit. W e
hypothesiz e that more will use cessation services if they first accept a Smok e Free Homes interv ention. This is
supported b y 50 y ears of F oot-in-the-Door (FITD) research. FITD is a sequential request str ategy to achiev e
behavioral compliance without pressure. P eople first receiv e a small request they are lik ely to accept, then a larger
request that is the actual target beha vior sought. Completing the larger request is more lik ely among those who first
complete the smaller request than among those who receiv e only the larger request. 
 
FITD can help people quit smoking. In a r andomiz ed study , 63% of smok ers who agreed to a small request (no
smoking for two hours) later agreed to a larger request (no smoking for 24 hours). Only 27% agreed to stop for a
day when that w as the only request. The effect persisted for actual smoking: 28% of FITD smok ers quit for a da y
compared to 12% who receiv ed only the request to quit for 24 hours. Findings from a communit y-based smok e free
homes initiativ e in low -income neighborhoods support FITD: of 523 smok ers who made a smok e free home pledge
(the initial small request), 12% went on to set a quit date and 6% quit within four weeks. 
Three conditions maximiz e FITD effects: (1) ha ving individuals perform – not just agree to – an initial request that
requires some effort to complete; (2) emphasizing that performing the initial request shows that a person is capable
of completing the larger request; and (3) making the larger request a natur al extension of the initial request. Our
design and interv entions reflect this; creating a smok e free home is the small request and quitting smoking is the
large one. NCI’ s Tobacco Control R esearch Priorities for 2016-2025 seek “sequential treatment str ategies” to increase
use of evidence-based interv entions b y unmotiv ated smok ers (Priorit y 6-3). 
1/4/22, 2:20 PM myIRB
https://myirb.wusm.wustl.edu/summary/projects.page?mode=pf&OID=1 11698948 4/105. Smok e Free Homes increase success in quitting. Evidence from cross-sectional and longitudinal studies shows an
association between ha ving a smok e free home and making a quit attempt, longer dur ation of quit attempts, and
abstinence from smoking. Ha ving a smok e free home is also associated with reduced relapse among ex -smok ers and
reduced cigarette consumption among continuing smok ers. This is in part because smok ers most lik ely to ha ve home
smoking bans are lighter smok ers or in adv anced stages of readiness to quit, but also due to genuine “treatment
effects” lik e reducing exposure to smoking and other smok ers, making it less con venient to smok e at home, and
disrupting smoking patterns and cues. 
To understand how establishing a smok e free home affects cessation in low -income smok ers, we analyz ed data from
our team’ s Smok e Free Homes interv ention trials (pooled n=941 with no home smoking ban at baseline). Controlling
for study group and correlates of cessation and Smok e Free Homes, creating a Smok e Free Home increased quit
rates at 3-month follow -up nearly 4-fold (15.6% vs 4.5%; OR=3.9, 95% CI=2.1,7.3) and ev en more at 6-month
follow -up (26.1% vs 5.1%; OR=6.6, 95% CI=4.1,10.3). Most promising for the proposed study , among smok ers
who had nev er tried quitting at baseline, those who created a Smok e Free Home were significantly more lik ely to
report a quit attempt at follow -up than those who did not create one. 
6. Expanding treatment offerings in population-lev el tobacco services will attr act more low -income smok ers.
Business scholars ha ve shown that because customer needs and preferences v ary, offering a v ariety of products or
services attr acts more customers and increases sales. These principles apply to reducing smoking in low -income
Americans; b y offering Smok e Free Homes, quitlines will engage more smok ers than with cessation alone. NCI’ s
Tobacco Control R esearch Priorities for 2016-2025 call for testing “population wide approaches” that increase
“uptak e and reach of existing evidence-based treatments” (Priorit y 1-1). 
Led b y Dr. Kegler (PI: U01 CA154282), our team dev eloped Some Things are Better Outside (hereafter , Smok e Free
Homes or SFH). Based on Social Cognitiv e Theory and the T ranstheoretical Model,SFH consists of goalsetting, role
modeling, persuasion, en vironmental cues and reinforcement deliv ered o ver six weeks via a telephone coaching call
and three mailings. Its impact w as ev aluated in three separ ate RCT s and its potential for scale-up ev aluated in a
national dissemination study (T able 1), all in low -income 2-1-1 populations. Across all RCT s, over half of participants
reported annual household income <$10,000; most were African American (83% in A tlanta; 61% in NC; 65% in TX)
or Hispanic (12% in TX). The dissemination study did not assess income, but 54% of participants were African
American, 24% had <HS education, 39% had a HS diploma or GED only , and 78% rented their home. 
An initial efficacy trial w as conducted in A tlanta, with SFH deliv ered b y a univ ersity research team to adults in
households that allowed smoking and had at least one smok er and one non-smok er. Compared to a no-interv ention
control group , those who receiv ed SFH were more lik ely to report a home smoking ban at 3-month (30% vs. 15%,
p<=0.001) and 6-month follow -up (40% v . 25%, p<0.01).1 Self -reports were v alidated with air nicotine monitors.
Next, we conducted a r andomiz ed effectiv eness trial in North Carolina with SFH deliv ered b y a 2-1-1 helpline. Again,
those receiving SFH were more lik ely than controls to report a home smoking ban at 3-month (38% vs.
19%,p<.001) and 6-month (43% vs. 33%, p<.05) follow -up. A third RCT , in Texas, sought to replicate the NC
findings in a different region and population. As before, those receiving Smok e Free Homes were more lik ely than
controls to report home smoking bans at 3-month (47% vs. 25%, p<.001) and 6-month (63% vs. 38%, p<.001)
follow -up. Findings remained significant in intent -to-treat and sensitivit y analyses in which those lost -to-follow -up or
reporting enforcement challenges were designated as failures. Process ev aluations showed that SFH w as well-
receiv ed and work ed for both smok ers and non-smok ers. 
Given the consistent interv ention effects across three separ ate RCT s in o ver 1,500 households, we launched a
dissemination trial in fiv e 2-1-1s in four states (AL, FL, OH, OK) selected through a competitiv e RFA process to
deliver SFH for one y ear and tr ack outcomes. They enrolled 2,345 households, deliv ered SFH, and reached 1,543
households (66%) at 2-month follow -up; 61% reported a home smoking ban and 11% reported quitting. 
Three secondary findings from these studies are highly relev ant to the proposed study . First, although changes in
smoking are not addressed b y SFH nor were aims of the studies, all three RCT s found greater reductions in
cigarettes smok ed per da y at follow -up in the SFH group (-2.9 per da y) vs. controls. Confidence in quitting w as
higher at 3-month follow -up in the SFH vs. control group , and there were more quit attempts. In all study groups,
those creating a home smoking ban had higher quit r ates (see abo ve). These findings bolster our claim that a smok e
free home can help smok ers progress tow ards quitting. Second, in all RCT s, the control group established home
smoking bans at a high r ate. W e believ e this w as due to an extensiv e battery of questions they answered about
home smoking bans at three time points (87 items in A tlanta; 96 in NC; 139 in TX). This “interv ention via
assessment ” led to family discussions and thoughts about home smoking bans. In the current study , we a void such
reactance b y asking <5 SFH questions see “Measures”). 
Helping the poor quit smoking: specializ ed quitlines and meeting basic needs. This ongoing RCT (CA -201429;
Kreuter , PI) is 16 months into a 39-month accrual period and pro vides v aluable data directly relev ant to the
proposed study . First, we are successfully recruiting low -income smok ers from 2-1-1. Through Oct. 2018, 734 ha ve
been consented from a single 2-1-1 in Missouri, and 3- and 6-month follow -up rates (73% and 60%) ha ve met
targets. Giv en the proposed study’ s more inclusiv e eligibilit y (adding smok ers not ready to quit) and plans to recruit
from nine (vs. one) 2-1-1s, we are highly confident about recruiting 1,980 smok ers. Second, low -income smok ers
who call 2-1-1 are using the quitline interv ention. Among 194 smok ers randomly assigned to the standard quitline
condition to date (identical to QL in the proposed study), 58% ha ve taken a quitline call, 27% ha ve taken 2 or more
calls, 72% signed up for text messages on quitting and 52% read the quit guide. Third, the need for Smok e Free
Homes is substantial. Despite the entire sample planning to quit in the next 30 da ys, data through Oct. 2018 show
that 75% allow smoking in their home, 43% liv e with one or more other smok ers, and 78% of work ers ha ve
cowork ers who smok e. An interv ention lik e SFH is much needed. Although the proposed study will benefit from
methods, measures and effect siz es from the current R01, the studies are quite different. In the current R01 we’v e
excluded 1,880 low -income daily smok ers since June 2017 because they were not planning to quit in the next 30
days (n=1,516) or weren’ t interested in a quit smoking progr am (n=364). The proposed study would enroll such
1/4/22, 2:20 PM myIRB
https://myirb.wusm.wustl.edu/summary/projects.page?mode=pf&OID=1 11698948 5/10smok ers and offer them an alternativ e, SFH. A 9-state sample and two evidence-based interv entions embedded
within a quitline also distinguish the proposed study .
1.6 Literature cited/references (if attaching a gr ant enter N/A):
N/A
1.7 Describe EACH of y our participant populations
Include description of an y control group(s)
Specif y the Inclusion/Ex clusion criteria for EACH group
All participants will be recruited from United W ay 2-1-1 lines in 9 states and must be at least 21 y ears old, English
speaking, not in crisis, not pregnant, smok e cigarettes ev ery da y of the week, not ha ve a total home smoking ban, be
comfortable receiving calls from smoking expert and project team, and be willing to pro vide phone numbers to be
reached. 
 Participants in Arm 1 of the study will be offered standard service: their state's tobacco quitline. P articipants in Arm 2
will be offered the quitline first and if they decline, they will be offered Smok e-Free Homes.
1.8 Check all materials that will be used in recruiting participants:
•  Telephone script 
Attachment Name Category Version Date Attached
2-1-1 screening for
SFH_Update TRACKCHANGES_5.14.21.rtfRecruitment Script:
Phone7 05/14/21
1.9 Describe where the consent discussion will occur (check all that apply):
• By phone
1.10 Participants and/or their legally authoriz ed representativ e will ha ve (check all that apply to the consent process):
• As much time as they desire to consider enrolling in the study , including:
An opportunit y to thoroughly review the consent materials with knowledgeable members of the research team,
and with family and/or friends as appropriate
Sufficient time to ha ve all of their questions answered
1.11 Provide a detailed description in sequential order of the study procedures following the consent process - DO NO T cut
and paste from the Consent Document.
 
Describe study populations separ ately if they will be participating in different procedures
 
DESCRIBE:
Control populations, if applicable
Any randomization, if applicable
What participants will be ask ed to do/what happens in the study (in sequential order)
The time period o ver which procedures will occur
Long-term follow -up and how it occurs
The recruitment and study procedures will occur for about 3 y ears and 3 months. P articipants will be ask ed to participate
in the study for a total of six months that ma y include completing the quitline coaching sessions which can tak e 1-4
months, Smok e-Free Homes which in volves 3 mailings and 1 coaching call o ver the course of 6 weeks, and follow -up at
3 and 6 months; howev er, they can withdr aw from the study at an y time. 
 
Study Arm 1 will be the control group who will be offered their state tobacco quitline services following the baseline
assessment. They will be giv en the option to enter this progr am. If they choose to do so , a Quit Coach from Optum will
reach out to them and pro vide between 1 and 4 coaching calls to help them quit smoking. The specifics of each state
quitline ma y vary slightly but the calls are scheduled to be flexible with the participant's a vailabilit y. Quit Coaches use
motiv ational interviewing and cognitiv e-beha vioral techniques to help the participant set a quit date and be ready to 
 quit. Progr ams also ma y have a printed Quit guide booklet, offer nicotine replacement ther apy (NR T) like nicotine gum
or patches, and pro vide texting and/or emailing services. P articipants are also giv en a number that they can call
whenev er they need to . 
 
Study Arm 2 will be the treatment group and they will also be offered their state tobacco quitline. What differs in this
condition is that if participants are not interested in the quitline, they will be offered Smok e-free homes (SFH), which
includes 3 mailings at 1 week, 4 weeks, and 6 weeks after enrollment and a coaching call at 2 weeks after enrollment.
The SFH coach will discuss the steps of making their home smok e-free, goal-setting, and potential challenges and
solutions. 
 
All participants who complete the baseline assessment will be sent a $25 grocery store gift card. 
 
The first follow -up assessment will occur 3 months after the baseline assessment. The primary study outcomes are
cessation-related. P articipants will be ask ed if they smok ed at all in the past 7 da ys and past 30 da ys to assess point
prevalence abstinence. They will also be ask ed how man y cigarettes per da y they use if they still smok e and if they were
able to create a smok e-free home if they are in the treatment group . Those who report an y smoking in the past 7 da ys
will be ask ed if they quit for at least 24 hours since the previous surv ey and to report on their nicotine dependence 
 
1/4/22, 2:20 PM myIRB
https://myirb.wusm.wustl.edu/summary/projects.page?mode=pf&OID=1 11698948 6/10measured b y the Hea viness of Smoking Index (cigarettes per da y; time elapsed between w aking and smoking). These
items from the F agerstrom T est of Nicotine Dependence are reliable o ver time with good predictiv e validity. All
participants will report use of an y pharmacologic cessation aids (i.e. , NRT, bupropion, Chantix). Successful quitters (7
days) will report their confidence in sta ying quit and all others will report readiness to quit. R eactions to the quitline and
smok e-free homes interv entions and staff will be assessed with measures from our previous studies assessing
usefulness (e.g. , was it helpful?), satisfaction (would y ou recommend it to others?) user experience (were they easy to
talk to?); coaches (similarit y, liking, expertise, sincerit y, trustworthiness); and interv ention appropriateness (relev ant to
my life and situation, designed for someone lik e me). P articipants who complete the assessment will be sent a $25 gift
card. Those who didn't quit smoking in the control group will be ask ed if they would lik e to try the quitline again. Those
who didn't quit who were in the treatment group will be offered whichev er progr am they weren't offered at baseline. 
The second follow -up assessment will occur at 6 months after baseline and will again be ask ed about smoking
abstinence and their success in creating a smok e-free home. Those who report that they don't smok e will be offered to
take an at -home urine cotinine test to v erify their lowered nicotine lev els. If participants are willing to participate, they
will be mailed a urine test to measure their cotinine lev els, which is a metabolite of nicotine. The urine test, which can
be purchased at an y local pharmacy o ver-the-counter , will be mailed to participants with instructions for sending the
results. The study team will not receiv e any biological samples or testing materials in the mail. Instead, participants will
be instructed to send a picture of their results to the study email account and/or phone account. The photo will include
only the results: a photo of the dipstick next to the results card. No personal identifiable information will be included in
the photo . The results will be link ed to the participants study ID via their phone number from which the photo w as sent.
Consent will be obtained prior to sending the testing kit in the mail via phone script. R esults will be recorded in
participants study record. Incentiv es will be mailed to participants after result has been receiv ed by study team. Those
who report a smok e-free home will be offered an in-home air monitoring kit. The study team will call participants to w alk
them through placing the monitor as well as how to send it back to use in one week. The study team will then send the
filters from the kit to a lab for processing. A gift card will be sent once results are receiv ed.
1.12 Will participants be r andomiz ed?
Yes
1.13 Will an y of the following be used to collect information from the participant or others?
Screening questions or screening/eligibilit y questionnaires
Surveys
Questionnaires
Stimuli
Any other written assessments
Yes
Attachment Name Category Version Date Attached
SFH 6mo
followup_CLEAN12.4.20.docxSubject Data Collection
Instruments5 12/09/20
SFH baseline with text for callers
5-7-21 TRACK CHANGES .docxSubject Data Collection
Instruments1 05/12/21
SFH baseline with text for callers
5-7-21 TRACK CHANGES-1.docxSubject Data Collection
Instruments5 05/12/21
SFH 3mo followup Dr aft 6
071720_clean.docxSubject Data Collection
Instruments5 09/09/20
1.14 Does this project in volve creating an y audio , video , or photogr aphs?
Yes
1.15 Does the study include an y form of deception (e.g. , providing participants with false information, misleading information,
or withholding information about certain study procedures)?
 Examples:
 
Procedure includes a co ver story that pro vides a plausible but inaccur ate account of the purposes of the research.
Participants will be pro vided with false information regarding the particular beha viors of interest in the research.
Procedures include a confeder ate pretending to be another participant in the study .
Participants will be told that the research includes completion of a particular task, when in fact, that task will not be
administered.
Study is designed to introduce a new procedure (or task) that participants are not initially told about.
No
1.16 Indicate an y payments or reimbursements to participants (check all that apply)
Gift or Debit Card
1.17 Does this study ha ve a plan to ha ve an individual or committee review combined data from all participants on a periodic
basis (such as summary or aggregate safet y and/or efficacy data)?
No
1.18 What ha ve you done to minimiz e any risks?
• Other  -  If a participant answers the depressiv e symptom screener item that they feel down, depressed, or hopeless
most da y or ev ery da y, then at the end of the surv ey, after they’v e gone through the offers for quitline and/or
1/4/22, 2:20 PM myIRB
https://myirb.wusm.wustl.edu/summary/projects.page?mode=pf&OID=1 11698948 7/10smok e-free homes but before they giv e their address for the gift card, a new screen will appear that sa ys:
“Sometimes people who ha ve been feeling a little down or depressed can benefit from talking to someone lik e a
counselor about their feelings. Would y ou be interested in some numbers to call or websites to help connect y ou with
someone lik e that?” The participant will select y es or no . If yes, the interviewer will ha ve at least 1 state specific
behavioral health referr al as well as the following national hotlines; the interviewer will use their judgment on which
would be most appropriate: Domestic Violence (1-800-799-7233), Suicide Prev ention (1-800-273-8255), Substance
Abuse and Mental Health(1-800-662-4357). These numbers will also be printed out and a vailable at each of the
calling stations. If a participant rev eals during the course of the phone call that they are experiencing sev ere
depression, suicidal thoughts, or would lik e help with substance abuse or domestic violence, then the interviewer will
provide the appropriate referr al.
• No forseeable risks
• Psychological consultation and/or referr als readily a vailable
1.19 What are the potential benefits related to this project for:
the participant (if an y)
benefits to societ y (if an y)
All participants will be giv en the opportunit y to receiv e free Quitline services and some will also be giv en the
opportunit y to create a smok e-free home. Both of these options will pro vide a significant health benefit to the
participants and those who liv e in the home. This study will show whether Quitlines can effectiv ely pro vide an
alternativ e to quitting smoking for those who aren't ready to quit y et, reducing exposure to secondhand smok e.
1.20 Provide a summary of the analysis methods y ou will use, including, if applicable, the data points or outcomes y ou
will analyz e.
Aim 1. The primary effectiv eness research question in this Hybrid T ype 2 r andomiz ed trial is whether adding a
Smok e Free Homes interv ention to standard population-lev el cessation services will increase the proportion of low -
income smok ers who quit b y 6-month follow -up. In this analysis, the independent and dependent v ariables are
dichotomous; the str ata variable is participants’ state of residence, also a pro xy for benefits offered b y their state
quitline. The primary outcome, self -report abstinence at 6-month follow -up, will be v alidated b y urine cotinine test:
Level 3-6 on the test strip will indicate continued smoking and Lev el 0-2 will confirm abstinence. Agreement between
self-report and cotinine test result will be assessed using the K appa statistic, with v alues > 0.75 viewed as ex cellent.
Aim 1 will use intention-to-treat analyses, pro viding the most conserv ative estimate of interv ention effects. With
randomization and a large sample, we expect baseline char acteristics to be similar b y group . We will test for this
using t -tests for continuous v ariables and chi-square tests for categorical v ariables. If significant differences are
found, we will include those v ariables as co variates in all analyses. F or Aim 1A (abstinence from smoking) the
Cochr an–Mantel–Haensz el test will be used to test the conditional association between study group and abstinence
at 3- and 6-month follow -up, controlling for states. A Breslow -Day test will be used to examine whether there is a
common odds r atio (OR) across states. Finding greater odds of abstinence across states for the group receiving both
Quitline and Smok e Free Homes would support the h ypothesiz ed interv ention effects. If the Breslow -Day test is
significant, we will estimate state-specific ORs. T o control for other potential co variates, we will regress abstinence at
3- and 6-month follow -up on study group and other co variates using logistic regression. In the regression model, 8
dumm y variables for states will be created to account for differences in state Quitlines. Adjusted odds r atios (OR)
and 95% confidence interv als (CI) will be reported to quantif y the associations. Study group effects for Aim 1B
(made a quit attempt or did not) will be examined in a series of analyses similar to those described for Aim 1A.
Finding a greater odds of quit attempts in the Quitline and Smok e Free Homes group across states would support
hypothesiz ed effects. F or Aim 1C, cigarettes smok ed per da y is a count dependent v ariable (DV) measured at
baseline, 3- and 6-month follow -up and assumed to follow the P oisson distribution. If the assumption of P oisson
distribution is met, we will regress the DV on study group , states and other potential co variates and allow the β for
study group as a r andom effect using r andom-effect P oisson regression. Otherwise, we will fit r andom effect negativ e
binomial regression to the data. Finding a larger decrease in cigarettes smok ed per da y in the combined group (vs.
Quitline alone) would support the h ypothesiz ed effect. Analyses for Aim 1D will replicate those for Aims 1A -C, but be
conducted in only the subset of participants from both groups who declined quitline services when offered at
baseline. R egression analyses for Aim 1D will also test baseline v ariables described previously (see “Baseline
survey”), because quitline acceptance r ates ma y differ b y group . These comparisons pro vide the best estimate of the
added benefit of offering Smok e Free Homes to smok ers who are not y et ready to quit. 
 
Aim 2. The primary implementation research question in this Hybrid T ype 2 trial is whether demand for and
engagement in quitline services – oper ationaliz ed as acceptance and use – differs b y study group . In Aim 2A, the DV
is dichotomous (accepts Quitline/does not). Using the same analytical str ategies and statistical methods described
for Aim 1A, we will examine cumulativ e probabilities of accepting quitline services during the study period b y group ,
adjusting for baseline co variates. Finding a greater lik elihood of accepting quitline services in the combined group
(vs. Quitline only) will support our h ypothesis. F or Aim 2B , the DV is whether participants use 0, 1 or 2+ quitline
counseling sessions, and will be treated as an ordinal v ariable. Counseling sessions include all inbound and outbound
phone inter actions between a quit coach and participant. Among those who accept quitline services, we will regress
number of quitline sessions used b y the end of the study on study group and other baseline measures using ordinal
logistic regression. The proportional odds assumption will be tested using the score chisquare test. If it is met,
adjusted ORs and 95% CIs will be reported from the ordinal logistic regression model. Otherwise, multinomial
logistic regression will be used to compare different probabilities (e.g. , 0 vs 1 and 0 vs 2+ sessions), adjusting for
potential baseline co variates. Finding greater odds of using more sessions in the Quiltine and Smok e Free Homes
group will support our h ypothesis. Aim 2C examines our h ypothesis that integr ating a Smok e Free Homes
interv ention into an existing tobacco treatment system will mo ve smok ers who are not y et ready to quit
incrementally closer to quitting. R eadiness to quit, pessimism about quitting and ambiv alence about smoking are
continuous DVs for this aim. Among participants still smoking at the end of the study , the lev el of readiness,
pessimism and ambiv alence at 6-month follow -up will be regressed on study group , states, baseline DV and baseline
1/4/22, 2:20 PM myIRB
https://myirb.wusm.wustl.edu/summary/projects.page?mode=pf&OID=1 11698948 8/10characteristics using ordinary least square regression. Finding greater readiness to quit, greater ambiv alence about
smoking, and less pessimism about quitting in the Quitline and Smok e Free Homes group (vs. Quitline only) would
support our h ypothesis. 
Aim 3. Economic ev aluation is essential in assessing implementation feasibilit y and sustainabilit y. We will assess
cost-effectiv eness (using CEA) of adding the Smok e Free Homes interv ention to quitline services compared to
Quitline alone from the QL pro vider perspectiv e, and conduct a cost -benefit analysis (CBA) of SFH compared to QL
alone from both the individual and societial perspectiv es. Short - (during progr am) and long-term horiz ons (multiple
years) will be considered, using accepted methods of economic ev aluation.208-210 From a pro vider perspectiv e, QL
and SFH progr ams incur a sunk cost of progr am setup that is in variant to the number of participants. Fix ed cost data
will be obtained from past accounting records of Optum. If SFH does not incur additional fix ed costs abo ve QL, fix ed
costs are ignor able in the CEA and CBA as they cancel out between interv entions. V ariable costs depend on scope
and number of activities. Coaching calls are core to the QL, but the number can v ary by state. SFH in volves one call
and three mailings (postage, printing costs). Costs per call in QL and SFH will be measured b y length in minutes,
average w age (including fringe benefits) of a coach, and the additional time spent on unsuccessful attempts to reach
a participant. In terms of cost -effectiv eness, Aim 1 will pro vide effectiv eness data, so the CEA ultimately yields the
cost per successful quit.
1.21 Provide the r ationale or power analysis to support the number of participants proposed to complete this study .
Based on previous reser ach, in both groups, 25% of participants will accept QL when offered (Pilot 1, ongoing
cessation R01); 42%, 31% and 27% will tak e 0, 1 and 2+ QL calls, respectiv ely (ongoing cessation R01); and 12%,
13% and 31% will report quitting, respectiv ely (ongoing cessation R01). In the QL+SFH group , 65% of those who
decline QL will accept SFH (Pilot 2, SFH trials); of those accepting, 37% will create a SFH and 63% will not, with
corresponding quit r ates of 26% and 5% (SFH trials). W e assume all who decline QL and SFH will quit at a v ery low
rate (2%). Using these data to estimate cessation after a first offer of QL and SFH yields intent -to-treat quit r ates of
5.9% (SFH) and 11% (QL+SFH). Ev en if no other cessation occurs, the study is powered to detect this difference. If
we assume the same interv ention use and quit r ates apply for a second offer of QL and SFH (at 3-month follow -up),
intent -to-treat quit r ates would be 9.6% (SFH) and 17.5% (QL+SFH), also within the study’ s power . We are
confident that the final quit r ates for each group will fall between these v alues. 
 
We used G*P ower to calculate the sample siz e required to detect study group quit r ate differences of 6 vs 11%
(minimum expected), 8 vs 14%, and 10 vs 17% (maximum expected) at three lev els of power . As shown, with
1,116 participants (558 per group) completing 6-month follow -up, we can detect a 6 vs 11% difference with 85%
power . Power will be greater for larger differences. A ttrition is expected to be 40% at 6-month follow -up, thus a
baseline sample of 1,980 assures enough participants at follow -up (n=1,188) ev en if attrition is slightly higher than
projected.
1.23 Will an y data from this project be stored for use in future research studies?
Yes - contribution for future use is mandatory for participation in the study
1.24 Does this project in volve the collection or use of biological samples or genetic data?
No
1.25 Are y ou requesting institutional certification to contribute human data or samples to a repository or database for broad
sharing (public or restricted access)?
No
2. Participants
2.1 Will there be an y adult participants?
Yes
2.1.a How man y adult participants do y ou expect to consent or enroll under a w aiver for this project?
1980
2.1.b What is the age of the y oungest adult participant?
21.0
2.1.c What is the age of the oldest adult participant?
No age limit
2.2 Will there be an y minor participants?
No
2.3 Will there be an y emancipated minor participants?
No
2.7 Do you plan to recruit/enroll non-English speaking people?
No
2.8 Do you propose to enroll an y of the following in this study as participants?
Emplo yee of the PI or emplo yee of a research team member
1/4/22, 2:20 PM myIRB
https://myirb.wusm.wustl.edu/summary/projects.page?mode=pf&OID=1 11698948 9/10Individual supervised b y PI or supervised b y member of research team
Individual subordinate to the PI or subordinate to an y member of the research team
Student or tr ainee under the direction of the PI or under the direction of a member of the research team
No
2.9 Is this project about  pregnant women?
No
2.10 Will this project in volve fetuses?
No
2.11 Does this project in volve the use of fetal tissue from an y source?
No
2.12 Does this project recruit adult participants who ma y be incompetent or ha ve limited decision-making capacit y on initial
enrollment into the study?
No
2.13 Does this project in volve prisoners as participants?
No
3. Performance Sit es
3.1 Indicate t ype of site(s) where research will occur (check all that apply):
• Academic Institution
3.2 Where will project procedures tak e place (check all that apply)?
Danforth Campus
U.S. off-campus - Optum will conduct the Quitline services via phone; United W ay 2-1-1's across 9 states will be
recruiting o ver the phone.
3.3 Is this project also being conducted b y other researchers at their own sites (e.g. a multi-site collabor ative project)?
Yes
3.3.a What is y our site's role(s) for this project (check all that apply)?
Coordinating Center
3.3.b Indicate the requirements for participating sites to report unanticipated problems to the coordinating center/lead
site:
Timeframe Contact Method
• Within 1 week
 • Email
 • Phone
 
3.3.c Indicate the requirements for the lead site to report unanticipated problems to the participating sites:
Timeframe Contact Method
• Within 2 weeks
 • Email
 • Phone
 
3.3.d Indicate the requirements for the lead site to communicate protocol modifications to the participating sites:
Timeframe Contact Method
• Greater than 2 weeks
 • Email
 • Phone
 
3.3.e Indicate the requirements for the lead site to communicate interim results to the participating sites:
Timeframe Contact Method
• Greater than 2 weeks
 • Email
 • Phone
 
3.3.f Indicate the requirements for the lead site to communicate other new information to the participating sites:
Timeframe Contact Method
• Greater than 2 weeks
 • Email
 • Phone
 
1/4/22, 2:20 PM myIRB
https://myirb.wusm.wustl.edu/summary/projects.page?mode=pf&OID=1 11698948 10/103.3.g What are participating site roles for this project?
Other - Representativ es from Emory Univ ersity will listen to audio recordings of the Smok e-Free Homes
coaching call and pro vide feedback to the coach(es).
5. Privacy & Confidentiality
5.1 Indicate y our plans to protect the priv acy interests of the participants during the conduct of the study (check all that
apply):
• Only the minimum necessary priv ate information is collected for the purposes of the study
• Any procedures or interv entions conducted as part of the study will be conducted in priv ate setting to the extent
possible
• Recruitment/consent will occur in a priv ate setting
• Participants will be able to ask questions in a priv ate setting
5.2 Are y ou collecting or using the Social Securit y Number of an y participants for an y purpose?
Yes
5.2.a Provide the intended usage of S SN:
To provide compensation to participants
5.3 Project uses paper or hard cop y consents, surv eys, data collection forms, research subject binders, or other hard cop y
materials (check all that apply):
No
5.4 Project collects, stores and/or tr ansmits electronic data on mobile devices, desktop computers, serv ers including cloud
servers, email, or an y other information in electronic form (check all that apply):
Yes
• Data are encrypted
• Password protected
• Access is limited to research team only
5.5 Project collects or uses biologic specimens (check all that apply):
No
5.6 Identif y any additional protections in place for data and or samples (check all that apply):
• Data Use Agreement (DU A)
• Formal research staff tr aining process