 
 
 
 
Cabergoline for Lactation Inhibition After Second-Trimester Abortion or 
Loss (LISTA)   
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
January 13, 2021 
 
Henkel – Cabergoline for Lactation Inhibition after Second-Trimester Abortion  or Loss  
 - 1 - 
Cabergoline for Lactation Inhibition after Second -Trimester Abortion  or Loss 
 
, MD 
, MD  
, MD MS 
, MD MPH  
 MD MPH   
, MD MS  
Stanford University School of Medicine  
 
                                  
 
Telephone:  
Email:  
  

 
 – Caber goline for Lactation Inhibition after Second-Trimester Abortion  or Loss  
 - 2 - 
1. Brief Summary  
Breast pain following second -trimester abortion is common. (Hagey  2020, Andersen 1990) Breast engorgement 
and milk leakage following second-trimester perinatal loss and abortion can cause both physical pain and 
emotional distress. (Seresheti 2016) Dopamine agonists have previously been shown to be effective in lactation  
inhibition for third-trimester  fetal/neonatal loss or contraindications to breastfeeding. ( Tulloch 2019) In a head -to-
head trial, cabergoline was more effective with a better safety profile than bromocriptine and has thus emerged as preferred treatment fo r term lactation inhibition internationally. ( Harris 2020, Giorda 1991, European 1991 ) 
Despite the frequency of breast symptoms after second -trimester abortions, there are no current guidelines for this 
population.  
 We will conduct a double -blinded, placeb o-controlled, superiority trial of those  undergoing abortion or 
intrauterine fetal demise between 18 and 28-weeks gestation at Stanford Health Care. Participants will be randomized to either cabergoline 1mg or placebo the day of procedure . Participants will complete a survey to 
assess symptoms, using the validated Bristol Breast Symptoms Inventory, and side-effects at baseline and Day  2, 
3, 4, 7, and 14 after the procedure. ( Bristol 1966 ) Our primary outcome is breast symptoms on Day 4 . Secondary 
outcomes include satisfaction, acceptability, and side- effects. We hypothesize that cabergoline is superior to 
placebo  for preventing breast engorgement after second -trimester abortion  or loss . We estimate that 32 subjects in 
each group are required to show a 30% decrease in  those reporting breast symptoms compared to the control 
group, with a power of 0.8 and an alpha of 0.05. We plan to recruit 100 subjects, anticipating 30% missing data 
and loss to follow up.  Electronic, online surveys regarding breast symptoms and side -effects will be sent via text 
message. (Friedlander, 2020) A sub -study of 10 participants will return for serum prolactin levels on Days 2, 4, 7, 
14. 
 This study has the potentia l to improve overall patient experience by validating the routine use of cabergoline for 
lactation inhibition after second-trimester abortion or loss . 
 2. Background  
2A. Lactogenesis  
Lactogenesis is a two -stage physiologic process of developing the ability to secrete milk that starts from 16th 
week of pregnancy and continues after delivery regardless of the birth outcome (Lawrence 2011). Stage I 
lactogenesis (secretory initiation) takes place during the second half of pregnancy  wher e high level of estrogen, 
progesterone, and prolactin stimulate anatomic growth of breasts . Prolactin initiates lactose synthesis in alveolar 
cells which remains inhibited by high levels of estrogen and progesterone secreted by the placenta during this 
stage in pregnancy.  
 
Stage II lactogenesis (secretory activation) starts after the removal of the placenta with a  rapid drop in 
progesterone . The  fall in progesterone removes the antagonizing effect  on prolactin to start milk production 
resulting in swelling of the breasts and milk production that starts postpartum days 2-3. Breast engorgement 
happens when lactation  supply exceeds  what is expressed  from breasts. 
 Prolactin is a peptide  synthesized in the anterior pituitary  and is both positively and negativel y regulated . Regular 
expression  of milk and nipple stimulation triggers prolactin release. Dopamine released by the hypothalamus acts 
as an inhibitory factor to prolactin release by stimulating D2 receptors in the anterior pituitary . The normal range 
in non-pregnant , non -lactating assigned female at birth  is 5-23 μg/L.  
 
In absence of physical stimulatio n, lactation eventually stops . Among those who do not breastfeed, milk leakage 
and breast pain begin between 1 to 3 days postpartum and engorgement begins between 1 and 4 days postpartum , 
all symptoms peaking 3- 5 days postpartum  and continuing up to three w eeks. (Spitz, 1998 , Melis 1988).  
 

 
 – Caber goline for Lactation Inhibition after Second-Trimester Abortion  or Loss  
 - 3 - 
 
Figure 1. Stage I lactogenesis (secretory initiation) takes place during the second half of pregnancy  where h igh 
level of estrogen, progesterone, and prolactin stimulate anatomic growth of breasts. Stage II lactogenesis 
(secretory activation) starts after the removal of the placenta with a  rapid drop in progesterone . The fall in 
progesterone removes the antagonizing effect on prolactin.  (Love 1990) 
 2B. Lactogenesis in second -trimester abortion or lo ss 
Breast pain following second -trimester abortion is common . In a prospective, longitudinal study following women 
after a 14 -20 week fetal loss of abortion found on day 3 post -procedure, 50% reported breast tenderness, 45% 
engorgement, and 20% milk leakage (Hagey 2020).   
 We can  further characterize baseline incidence of breast symptoms after second -trimester abortion  from t he 
placebo  and no treatment  arms of published randomized clinical trials of pharmacologic methods for lactation 
suppression . In a three-arm study testing bromocriptine after second-trimester loss or abortion occurring 15- 26 
weeks gestation , participants were randomized to bromocriptine vs placebo vs no treatment.  (Andersen 1990)  
Utilizing s ubjective  recordings of breast pain and mi lk secretion , they found t he peak breast pain and mil k 
secretion occurred on days 3-7 post -procedure , with only 9% of patients were completely free of breast symptoms 
in the placebo and no treatment groups.  
 2C. Emotional distress  
In a prior qualitative study of those with a neonatal demise occurring between 19 -27 week s gestation found that 
they universally did not expect to lactate. (Chen 2015) Prior qualitative work surrounding mid- trimester perinatal 
loss suggests that breast engorgement and milk leakage causes physical pain and emotional distress. In interviews 
with 18 individuals with a second trimester perinatal loss  or abortion, all reported pain and sensitivity of the 
breasts between 2nd and 5th day after perinatal loss (Sereshti  2016) . Four themes were extracted from the 
interviews: (1) breast engorgement and leaking was seen as reminder of the loss, (2) it was challenging to reconcile the motherhood identify associated with lactation with the absence of an infant, (3) frustr ation 
surrounding lack of knowledge about milk leakage  and available remedies, and (4) pain and disability from 
lactation exacerbating psychological pain from the loss.  
 2D. Special populations  
Not all individuals that become pregnant identify as women. In contrast to a mastectomy, chest masculinization  
“top”  surgery  removes most but not all mammary tissue ( Garcia- Acosta 2019). Prior qualitative studies on the 
experience of pregnancy for transgender men reports a significant amount of gender dysphoria assoc iated with 
chestfeeding . (MacDonald  2016)  Participants described situations where growth of chest tissue affected how their 
gender was perceived by others. Having prominent chest tissue result ed in individuals being identified by others 
as female more often than other typically female secondary sex characteristics, including a gravid abdomen. Some  
participants with a history of prior  chest masculinization surgery experienced engorgement and early signs of 
mastitis . As unintended pregnancy leading to termination may be further stigmatizing for transgender men and the 

 
 – Caber goline for Lactation Inhibition after Second-Trimester Abortion  or Loss  
 - 4 - 
risk of unintended pregnancy in this population is high, they may particularly benefit from lactation inhibition and we plan to include them in our study.  (Charlton 2020)  
 2E. Nonpharmacologic tr eatment of breast engorgement  
Managing painful engorgement in those choosing not to breastfeed has been described by physicians and midwives for centuries.  Midwifery techniques including belladonna ointment, intermittent expulsion, ice packs, 
and analgesics have been described but not rigorously studied for superiority (Spitz 1998) . In a randomized 
control trial of binder or support bra  for lactation inhibition after term delivery, breast-binder group reported  a 
greater degree of breast tenderness and breast leakage but there was no difference in breast engorgement on day 4. 
(Swift 2003)  However, both groups experienced a high rate of rebound  lactation within 14 days.  A Cochrane 
Review of nonpharmacologic interventions for breast engorgement found that  there was no evidence that 
ultrasound, cabbage leaves, or  oxytocin were associated with a more rapid resolution of symptoms . (Mangesi 
2010) The use of cold packs was not  found to cause harm  but may not be  associated with improvements in 
symptoms . While standard of care at this time in the United States is to offer cold compresses and support bras, 
these are non -evidence-based interventions, further emphasizing the need for effective intervention in this 
population.   
 2F. Dopamine agonists  for lactation inhibition  
There i s both biologic plausibility and existing evidence that a dopamine agonist can antagonize prolactin  release 
which then leads to cessation of lactogenesis.   Early research showed bromocriptine  2.5mg twice daily for two weeks  after second -trimester abortion caused a 
significant reduction in breast tenderness, milk secretion , and serum prolactin  levels on day 4 compared to 
placebo . (Andersen 1990)  Prolactin levels were suppressed more effectively with bromocriptine with 89% 
achieving serum prolactin levels less than 23 micro grams /L on day 4 as compared to only 28% with placebo.  
 Bromocriptine (0.25mg twice daily for  14 days) was then compared to cabergoline (1mg once, day of procedure) 
in a large, multi-center randomized control trial after term delivery. (European 1991) On postpartum day 3, a complete absence of breast symptoms was reported in 90.4% of individuals  in the cabergoline group and 83.8% in 
the bromocriptine group. Cabergoline  continued to be superior for the entire observation period of 21 days where 
an absence of symptoms was significantly better with cabergoline (74%) than with bromocriptine  (51% ). In a sub -
study where serum prolactin levels were measured up to 21 days after delivery, the initial drop in mean  prolactin 
levels was more dramatic from delivery to day 2 for cabergoline (131.3
 μg/L to 26.3 μg/L) compared to 
bromocriptine (129.9 μg/L to 45 .5 μg/L). Bromocriptine also showed a considerable prolactin rebound after day 
15 which was not observed in the cabergoline group.   
 In a dose -finding study comparing a single dose of cabergoline 1mg , 0.75mg, 0.5mg or  placebo  after term 
delivery resulted i n complete absence of breast symptoms in 90%, 70%, 45%, 20% , respectively  of participants 
up to day 14 postpartum.  (Caballero 1991) Similarly, a dose -finding  study of a single dose of cabergoline 0.8mg, 
0.6mg, 0.4mg or placebo  after term delivery reported no milk secretion in 100%, 100%, 50%, 12.5%, respectively 
(Mellis 1998). Prolactin levels dropped significantly for the three experimental doses compared to the placebo 
group on days 1-3 postpartum.  
 2G. Current uses of caberg oline for lactation inhibition  
Pharmacologic lactation inhibition has previously been studied in individuals with HIV to avoid vertical transmission. A scoping review of postpartum pharmaceutical lactation inhibition specific for individuals with 
HIV summarized five studies that  focused on this issue , all of which found cabergoline effective and safe in this 
setting. ( Tulloch  2019)  
 While the World Health Organization’s 2016 “ Updates on HIV and infant feeding ” does not include guidelines on 
lactation inhibition, multiple country-specific guidelines recommend measures to manage symptomatic  breast 

 
 – Caber goline for Lactation Inhibition after Second-Trimester Abortion  or Loss  
 - 5 - 
engorgement  for those for whom breastfeeding is contraindicated. In 2008, the British “Guidelines  for the 
management of HIV infection in pregnant women” first suggested for the use of cabergoline. Their 2018 
guidelines strengthened the recommendation where cabergoline should be offered cabergoline to suppress lactation.  The 2020 U nited States  Departm ent of Health and Human Services Panel on Treatment of Pregnant Women with 
HIV Infection and Prevention of Perinatal Transmission now recommends the use of cabergoline to suppress breast milk production after a shared decision -making discussion regarding l imited data about its use, potential 
side-effects, and the limited availability of non -pharmacologic alternatives.  
 2H. Safety  
In a recent, large systematic review including 25 articles for a total of 757 participants investigating cabergoline 
for postpartum lactation inhibition, adverse events were observed in 14.2%. (Harris 2020) S ymptoms were 
generally mild, transient, and self -resolving. The most common events were dizzine ss (4.6%), headache (3.9 %), 
and nausea or vomiting (2.5%) , typical of the dopaminergic class. Only 5 of the 757 participants required 
medication for adverse symptoms . Less common events were abdominal or epigastric pain, breast pain or tension,  
vertigo, pa lpitations, epistaxis, and drowsiness.  No serious adverse events were reported.  There is a theoretical 
risk of dopamine agonists potentiating psychiatric illness; this review identified four case reports where 
cabergoline was initiated following a diagnosis of postpartum psychosis without exacerbation of psychiatric 
outcomes. In another two cases, cabergoline was initiated for lactation inhibition with reports of psychotic symptoms developing within two days of treatment; in both of these cases, symptoms we re well -controlled with 
initiation of antipsychotic medications and remains unclear if cabergoline was provoking.  
 The safety of b romocriptine for lactation inhibition was called into question in  1984, when  the US Food & Drug 
Administration (FDA)  called at tention to reports of postpartum  hypertension, seizures , and strokes associated with  
the use of bromocriptine. (Rayburn 1996). While no studies found an increased incidence of these events compared to placebo or anticipated postpartum incidence, the FDA ul timately asked the manufacturer  in 1990 to 
voluntarily stop selling bromocriptine  as a lactation suppressant.  
 
In addition to the existing data showing safety of cabergoline, there is theoretic biologic plausibility as to why 
cabergoline is better tolerated  than bromocriptine . Cabergoline has a greater affinity for D2 receptors,  longer 
plasma half-life, and flat plasma drug concentration  resulting in a  shorter required duration of therapy compared 
to bromocriptine. (Rains 1995) Notably, in Canada, the UK, and France, cabergoline has an approved indication 
for the prevention of physiologic postpartum lactation.   
 
3. Research Questions  
We are aiming to answer whether cabergoline is superior to placebo at preventing breast symptoms after second -
trimester abortion  or loss . The goal is to improve patient experience and establish a standard of care for lactation 
inhibition after second-trimester abortion or loss . 
 Our primary outcome is breast symptoms on Day 4 post-abortion/ post fetal expulsion. Secondary outcomes 
include initiation of milk secretion, satisfaction, acceptability, and side -effects.  
 
We will test the following hypotheses:  
1. A smaller proportion of those receiving cabergoline will report breast symptoms on D ay 4 compared to 
placebo.  
2. Prolactin levels will be significantly lower on D ay 4 in those receiving cabergoline compared to placebo.  
3. The proportion of participants ever reporting secretion of milk within 14 days post -procedure will be lower in 
those receiving cabergoline compared to placebo.  
4. Participants receiving cabergoline will be more satisfied with their post-procedure breast symptoms compared to those receiving placebo.  

 
 – Caber goline for Lactation Inhibition after Second-Trimester Abortion  or Loss  
 - 6 - 
5. Side -effects will occur in less than 10% of patient and not differ between those receiving cabergoline compared 
to placebo.  
 4. Methods 4A. Research Design and General Methodological Approach  
The study is designed as a prospective double -blinded, placebo -controlled, superiority tria l to evaluate 
cabergoline’s role in relieving breast engorgement after second -trimester abortion or fetal demise. Breast 
symptoms will be defined by the validated Bristol Breast Inventory score . (Bristol 1966)  
 A superiority design was selected as cabergoline is fairly expensive with possible side-effects. For this study to be practice-changing, cabergoline needs to demonstrate  clear superiority over placebo.  
 
Day #0  – Pre- op
 erative visit/Cervical preparation visit  
Eligible patients who are scheduled for an abortion or are diagnosed with an intrauterine fetal demise between 1 8–
28 weeks gestation will be approached to enroll in the study. A research staff member will o btain informed 
consent  and randomization will occur. Basic demographic information will be collected and entered into REDCap 
by a research coordinator.  (Harris 2009)  Standard demographics, gender identity, prior breastfeeding / 
chestfeeding  experience, and  prior breast surgery  will be asked of participants. A baseline Bristol Breast 
Inventory questionnaire will be performed to establish existing breast symptoms related to pregnancy  followed by 
a 7-point Likert bother scale.  
 Standard counseling regarding med ical or surgical management will be provided , as applicable. A complete 
history and physical will be performed. If an ultrasound report is not available to confirm gestational age dating, an informal, bedside abdominal ultrasound will be performed to determine gestational age. All patients will 
receive mifepriston e 200mg PO . Those choosing D&E will also have osmotic dilators placed. Participants over 22 
weeks with a viable intrauterine pregnancy will receive feticidal injection with either lidocaine or digoxin as is 
standard practice at these sites. S tandard of car e antibiotics for prophylaxis will be provided, if indicated . 
 
Day #1  – Procedure/ Induction day  
Dilation and evacuation (D&E) are done in the  outpatient gynecology clinic or ambulatory surgical center, 
depending on patient preference and other medical con siderations.  All participants will receive pre-procedure 
misoprostol 90 minutes prior to procedure as is standard practice at our site.  
 
Those seeking medical abortion  or those with fetal demise over 24 weeks gestation  will be admitted to Labor & 
Delivery where they will receive repeat doses of misoprostol 400 mcg buccal every three hours until fetal 
expulsion occurs.  
 Those in the serum sub-study will have a prolactin level drawn at the time of  intravenous (IV) insertion. Rhogam 
will be provided if indicated.  
 
Within 4 hours of fetal expulsion and prior to discharge, the study coordinator will distribute the study drug or 
placebo as randomized on Day #0. All participants will receive standard information on support bras, analgesics, and cold compacts . 
 
Days # 2 -14 – Follo
 w-up 
Electronic, online surveys regarding breast symptoms using the Bristol Breast Inventory, 7 point Likert Scale to 
assess bother of symptoms, current bleeding profile ( Janssen  1995)  and side -effects will be collected on Days 2, 
3, 4, 7, 14. Additionally, participants will be asked on Day 14 to rate overall acceptability of the protocol, 
likelihood to re commend  to a friend, and willingness to pay. Surveys will be sent via text message over RedCap  at 
08:00. ( Friedlander  2020) A phone call will be made to participants between 17:00-20:00 if the survey is not 
completed that day. Day 14 survey will include measures of willingness to pay and overall satisfaction. 

 
 – Caber goline for Lactation Inhibition after Second-Trimester Abortion  or Loss  
 - 7 - 
 A substudy of 10 patients  enrolled at Stanford  (5 cabergoline, 5 placebo)  will return to Stanford laboratories for 
repeat serum prolactin levels on Day 2, 4, 7, 14.  
 An electronic gift card will be sent to the participant after 14 days . Participants will receive $  per survey 
completed with a $  bonus for completing all five surveys on-time for a maximum of $  for full participation. 
Those participating in the serum prolactin sub-study will receive $  per phlebotomy session  with a bonus $  for 
completing all lab draws on the appropriate day for a maxi mum of $  for full participation. With consent, the 
gift card will be distributed by e -mail or mobile phone number via Amazon. For patients who prefer a physical 
gift card, it will be mailed to their reported address.  Participants will have the opportuni ty to forego gift certificate 
and donate funds to a reproductive health organization.  
 
 
 4B. Criteria for selection of subjects 
Inclusion:  
Pregnant people, ages 18 years or older Intrauterine pregnancy between 18/0-28/0 weeks of gestation age (by ultrasound dating performed prior to or 
same day of enrollment visit)  
Consented for an induced, elective abortion or undergoing induction for demise  
English  or Spanish  speaking  
Able to consent  for a research study , literate  in English or Spanish  
Willing to comply with study procedures  and follow -up 
Access to smart phone throughout study  
Exclusion:  
Prior mastectomy (breast reduction or chest masculinization  surgery acceptable)  
Currently breastfeeding  
Currently receiving dopamine agonist therapy for other indication (prolactinoma, Cushings syndrome, 
acromegaly, restless leg syndrome)  
Contraindication to cabergoline (as per  package insert) 
 Uncontrolled hypertension – defined as baseline BP > 150/100 , or chronic hypertension requiring more 
than one baseline medication , or pregnancy-induced hypertension spectrum disorders (gestational 
hypertension, preeclamspia, eclampsia)  
 History of cardiac valvular disorders or valvular repair  
 History of pulmonary, perica rdial, or retroperitoneal fibrotic disorders  

 
 – Caber goline for Lactation Inhibition after Second-Trimester Abortion  or Loss  
 - 8 - 
 Current use of D2 antagonists (phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthenes, or metoclopramide)  
 
4C. Subject R ecruitment and A llocation  
Subjects will be recruited from Stanford Gynecology Clinic on the day of t heir Family Planning consultation, 
after consent for but  prior to  abortion  or the Lucille Packard Childrens Hospital Labor & Delivery after diagnosis 
of intrauterine fetal demise. Only patients in the appropriate gestational ages will be approached . Potential 
participants will be screened for the study and if eligible and willing to participate in the project, they will be 
consented for the study.   
 4D. Description of Drugs and Devices  
Cabergoline  is a long-acting dopamine receptor agonist with a high affinity for D2 receptors . It is FDA approved 
for the treatment of hyperprolactinemic disorders, either idiopathic or due to pituitary adenomas  (FDA package 
insert). We will be using cabergoline  off-label.   
 4E. Laboratory and O ther Investigations  
A substu dy of 10 participants (5 cabergoline, 5 placebo) will return to Stanford laboratories for repeat serum 
prolactin levels on Day 2, 4, 7, 14. The Stanford laboratory runs serum prolactin on a e lectrochemiluminescence 
immunoassay with a working range of was 0.5 –150 μg/L and  interassay coefficient of variation is 4.68% . The 
reference range in this lab for non -pregnant, non-lactating female-assigned at birth  is 4.8−23.3 μg/L. 
 4F. Data Management  & Analysis  
Stanford University has a license for the RedCap  data management system . (Harris 2009) REDCap is a web -based 
application that is secure, reliable, and HIPAA-compliant for storing research study data. REDCap is designed 
with built-in features to address confidentiality and compliance requirements. Electronic, online surveys will be 
sent via text message over RedCap  on Days 2, 3, 4, 7, 14. Data associated with patient health identifiers (PHI), 
including the  signed informed consent, will be collected electroni cally. REDCap allows for easy data download 
into SAS or other statistical software programs. No data will be collected on paper forms.  SAS OnDemand  will be 
used for data analysis.  Data will be analyzed with parametric or non -parametric statistical tests, as appropriate. 
Stratified analysis and logistic regression will be performed to assess demographic characteristics as predictors of breast symptoms and associate distress.  
 
A Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) will be used given that the use of cabergoline for lactation inhibition is a new and unfamiliar intervention and limited data exists for this use. A DSMC will be formed to monitor the progress of the study and review any of the following events under the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan: (i) Adverse events and/or serious ad verse events will be recorded in our data collection tool, REDCap (ii) 
The research coordinator will be responsible for directly monitoring the data and compliance with the protocol. All events will be immediately reported to the principal investigator/sponsor. The sponsor will be responsible for reporting any adverse or serious adverse events to the DSMC members and IRB (iii) Serious adverse events an d 
unanticipated problems will be reported immediately to the monitoring committee and any events of stroke, hospitalization for hypertensive emergency, hospitalization for psychiatric condition will lead to immediate 
termination of the study (iv) Side -effe cts that are common according to the FDA package insert including 
nausea/vomiting, headache, dizziness, orthostatic hypotension, constipation, abdominal pain, fatigue  will be 
reported to the DSMC during a planned interim analysis and the committee will rev iew the progress of the study 
and assess these safety events after 50% planned recruitment achieved (v) Outcome of the interim analysis from 
the DSMC will be communicated to the IRB by the principal investigator . All adverse events will be summarized 
with special attention to events that may be related to the study drug . 
 5. Study Population  
Number of Subjects and Statistical Power  
Incidence of symptomatic breast engorgement after second-trimester abortion has been reported to occur between 50-91% of individuals (Hagey 2020, Anderson 1990). In prior studies of term lactation inhibition using 

 
 – Caber goline for Lactation Inhibition after Second-Trimester Abortion  or Loss  
 - 9 - 
cabergoline 1  mg, complete absence of lactation was noted in 78 -100% of study subjects (European 1991, Mellis 
1998 , Giorda 1991 , Caballero 1991). We estimate that 41 subjects in each group are required to show a 30% 
decrease in those reporting breast symptoms compared to the control group, with a power of 0.8 and an alpha of 
0.025 (planned interim analysis) . We plan to recruit 10 0 subjects, anticipating 1 0% missing data and loss to 
follow up.  
 
Based on the prior RCT comparing bromocriptine to placebo after second-trimester abortion, the mean serum prola
ctin level in the placebo group was 44+ 8 μg/L on Day 4 and 12.2+2 μg/L in the bromocriptine group 
(Andersen 1990). The upper -limit of normal for a non-lactating female-assigned  at birth  is 23 μg/L. We will need 
8 patients to have a 90% chance of detecting, at the 5% significance level, a decrease in serum prolactin  from 44 
in the control group to 23 in the experimental cabergoline group.  We will recruit 10 subjects, anticipating 20% 
loss to follow up and missing data.  
 
Locat
ions 
Patients will be recruited at Stanford Gynecology Clinic in Palo Alto, CA . Stanford University is a large tertiary 
care center with patients referred from the seven Perinatal Diagnostic Centers (PDCs) across Northern California 
with fetal anomalies  as well as local practices and Planned Parenthood Mar Monte California. Medicaid covers 
abortio n care through 23/6 weeks.  In 2019, we performed 72 abortions between 18/0 and 23/6 weeks gestation at 
Stanford University and the Lucille Packard Childrens Hospital admitted an average of 1 patient each month for 
medical abortion or fetal demise between 1 8-28 weeks gestation.  
 6. Timeline  
With an  anticipated 66 % enrollment, we anticipate enrollment to take 19 months.  
 
Year 1  Sept-20 Oct-20 Nov-20 Dec-20 Jan-21 Feb-21 Mar-21 April -21 May-21 June-21  
Consent development  x x          
Survey development  x x          
IRB review   x x x        
Recruitment      x x x x x x  
Data collection      x x x x x x  
Year 2  July-21 Aug-21 Sept-21 Oct-21 Nov-21 Dec-21 Jan-21 Feb-21 Mar-21 April -21 May-21 
Recruitment  x x x x x x x x x   
Data collection  x x x x x x x x x   
Interim analysis  x           
Data analysis   x       x x  
Manuscript           x x 
 
 
7. Use of Research Results We aim  to present the findings at the ACOG Annual Clinical Meeting in spring 2022  as we believe th ese data will 
be broadly applicable for MFMs and generalist obstetricians caring for second -trimester losses in additional to 
Complex Family Planning subspecialists . We also plan to publish the findings in a peer -reviewed journal  and 
work with the Society of Family Planning and ACOG on guideline development . Results will also be used to 
inform future studies including a cost -effectiveness analysis.  
