Clinical Tria ls        9/26/19  
Internet -based videoconferencing to address alcohol use and pain  
among heavy drinkers in HIV -care 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Summary:   
 
Open pilot trial of 8 patients in HIV care.  All patients screened were assigned to 
the intervention condition with the goal of assessing acceptability and feasibility.  
 
Descriptive analyses only for this acceptability and feasibility study  
Mean and median ratings as pre -specified for primary outcomes  
 
Procedures  
Participants were screened by phone or in -person.  Eligible participants were scheduled to 
complete the initial visit that consisted of consent procedures, a 50 -minute baseline assessment, 
followed by an initial in-person session with a clinical psychologi st.  The initial in -person session 
provided a rationale for the program and established technology procedures for the subsequent 
video -conferencing intervention (e.g., downloading the app, receiving the session link, etc.).  Prior 
to leaving the initial se ssion, participants practiced videoconferencing using their own 
smartphones.  Participants were scheduled to complete the first videoconferencing session within 
a week of the baseline interview.  Subsequent sessions were scheduled weekly for a total of 6 
video-conferencing sessions.   
 To facilitate engagement, participants were reminded via text message the day before 
and the day of the intervention.  Five minutes prior to the appointment time, they were sent a link 
for the videoconferencing meeting either  by text or via email.  Those who experienced any 
difficulties using the technology were able to consult the “troubleshooting” form that they were 
given or call the study assistant who could guide them through the videoconferencing procedures.  
Videoconfer encing sessions were scheduled for up to 45 minutes and ranged from 20 -45 minutes 
depending on the topic and the participant.  Each videoconferencing session began with a review 
of symptoms and review of skills used in the previous week followed by the top ic for the current 
week.  In addition to the live session with the interventionist, participants were also sent brief (2 -
minute) video demonstrations for some of the skills that they learned and worksheets to remind 
them of content and homework through a s ecure app.  Participants were permitted to reschedule 
up to 3 sessions; more than 3 sessions counted as missed appointments.  The post -intervention 
assessment was conducted in person by a research assistant approximately 8 weeks after the 
baseline intervie w.   
Analysis Plan  
 Descriptive analyse s of self -report and behavioral outcomes were performed using SPSS v. 
24.  Number of videoconferencing sessions attended (out of 6) for all participants were recorded.  
Post-intervention assessments were available from 7 of the 8 participants in the study.  Means, 
standard deviations and medians were calculated for continuous var iables and count data.  Median 
pain severity and interference as well as number of heavy drinking days and drinks per week were 
examined as the primary symptom variables in addition to self -report measures of self -regulatory 
skills related to pain manageme nt and alcohol use.  
 