 
Version 11.1    Page 1 of 13 
 DigiPrEP Detailed Protocol  
 
Official title:   Feasibility and Acceptability of Digital Pills to Monitor PrEP Adherence in MSM With 
Substance Use   
 
NCT number:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
 
Document date:   November 05, 2019  
  
 
Version 11.1    Page 2 of 13 
 Detailed  Protocol  for Feasibility  and Acceptability  of Digital  Pills to Monitor  PrEP  Adherence  in MSM  with 
Substance  Use Disorder (DigiPrEP ) 
IRB Protocol : 108773 3 
Version 11.1, November 5, 2019  
Principal  Investigator : Peter  R Chai MD MMS  
 
I. Background  and Significance  
Digital  pills provide  real-time verification  of medication  ingestion  events  and can be used  to monitor  medication  
adherence ; previous  studies  have  demonstrated  their acceptability  in real-world  patient  populations .1-3 Digital  
pills comprise  a radiofrequency  emitter  combined  with a standard  gelatin  capsule  that is compounded  with a 
study  medication .4 Upon  ingestion  of the digital  pill, the chloride  ion gradient  in the stomach  energizes  the 
radiofrequency  emitter , transmitting  a unique  signal  of medication  ingestion  that is captured  by a wearable  
Reader . The Reader  acts as a relay , storing  and transmitting  ingestion  data to a smartphone  and cloud  based  
server . Ingestion  data is then available  for real time interpretation  by clinicians . Digital  pill technology  has been  
previously  applied  to opioid  ingestion , diabetes  management , and as a surrogate  for directly  observe  therapy  in 
schizophrenics .1-3  
 
Direct  measures  of medication  adherence  are an important  advance  in the study  of medication  adherence , 
especially  among  patients  with poor adherence  linked  to substance  use disorder . Although  recent  studies  have  
demonstrated  pre-exposure  prophylaxis  (PrEP ) with once  daily Truvada  is efficacious  in preventing  HIV 
infection , protection  is highly  dependent  on adherence . There  is a clear  dose  response  relationship  between  PrEP  
adherence  and prevention  of HIV transmission .2 Post-hoc analyses  of the iPrEX  data (corroborated  by the PROUD  
and iPERGAY  studies ) found  that individuals  whose  drug levels  were  consistent  with taking  4 or more  doses  of 
TDF/FTC a week  had a greater  than 90% level of protection  from HIV; but only 50% of MSM  in iPrEX  achieved  
consistent  adherence .2,4-6 Substance  use among  MSM  occurs  syndemically  in the context  of other  mental  health  
vulnerabilities  (most  notably  depression , sexual  trauma , and intimate  partner  violence7 that increase  their risk for 
condomless  anal sex and HIV infection ). Similarly , among  HIV-infected  MSM , the impact  of substance  use on ART 
adherence  and HIV treatment  outcomes  is also well established18, 20 and recent  studies  have  already  identified  
substance  use as a significant  barrier  to optimal  PrEP  adherence  among  MSM .19, 21 
 
II. Specific  Aims  
 
Aim 1: Technology  Optimization . To optimize  the acceptability  of DigiPrEP  among  MSM  or transgender individuals 
with self-reported substance  use through  individual  interviews  (N=30); 
Aim 2: Technology  Deployment . To deploy  DigiPrEP  in MSM  with self-reported  substance  use who are on PrEP  
(N=15) in a 90-day open  label, proof -of-concept  trial; and  
Aim 3: Technology  Evaluation . To evaluate  the user response  and primary  care physician  response  to using  
DigiPrEP  in the real-world  through  qualitative  interviews . 
 
III. Subject  Selection  
 
Aim 1 Inclusion  Criteria : 
1. MSM  (cisgender male )  
2. Self-reported use of non-alcohol 
substances of abuse in past 6 months  
3. On PrEP  or qualifies for PrEP  
4. Age 18 or older  Aim 1 Exclusion Criteria : 
1. Does not speak English  
2. HIV positive  
 
 
Version 11.1    Page 3 of 13 
 Aim 2 Inclusion  Criteria : 
1. MSM (cisgender male )  
2. Self-reported use of non -alcohol 
substance s of ab use in past 6 months  
3. Currently taking PrEP  
4. Has qualifying  laboratory tests (Cr, hepatitis 
B immunization , STI testing and syphilis ) 
5. Age 18 or older  Aim 2 Exclusion  Criteria : 
1. Does not speak English  
2. HIV positive  
3. Identifies as transgender  
4. Estimated creatinine clearance <60ml/min  
5. Active hepatitis B treatment  
6. Does  not own a smartphone  
7. Taking  proton  pump  inhibitors  
8. History of Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis  
9. History  of bowel  surgery , gastric  bypass , bowel  
stricture  
10. History  of GI malignancy  or radiation  to abdomen  
11. Unable/unwilling to ingest digital pill  
Aim 3 Inclusion  Criteria : 
1. Participants in Aim 2  will be enrolled  in 
Aim 3. Aim 3 Exclusion Criteria : 
1. Did not participate in Aim 2 . 
 
 
Due to the exploratory nature of  this proposal, we will enroll only MSM individuals ( cisgender male ) in this 
study with the intent of generating preliminary data on feasibility of the digital pill in order to conduct future 
studies with transgender men and women . 
 
IV. Subject  Enrollment  
 
For all aims  of this study , we will publicize  the study  at Fenway  Health  primary  care provider  (PCP) meetings .  
 
Recruitment of Fenway Patients  
Aim 1:  We will advertise the study through monthly research meetings at The Fenway Institute, and we will 
ask Fenway Health primary care physicians and other Fenway Health clinicians to refer patients to us. 
Potential participants will also be screened during clinical appointments at Fenway Health by study staff. New 
patients at Fenway H ealth are given a Notice of Privacy Practices which informs them that their protected 
health information may be utilized for research when the research proposal is IRB -approved and conducted in 
accordance with HIPAA privacy and confidentiality rules. Furth er, under HIPAA, as employees of the covered 
entity (Fenway Health), the study staff may utilize medical records to identify potential participants. Potentially 
eligible patients will be identified using crystal reports. A study staff member will then work  with medical 
assistants and/or providers before approaching patients to assess interest. After entering the room and prior to 
screening, the study staff member will explain the study before asking permission to complete the screening 
questionnaire. Those who appear to be eligible will be invited to participate in the study after their appointment, 
or set up an appointment in the future. We will also post flyers and cards advertising the study at Fenway 
Health and throughout the greater Boston area, as well  as via social media platforms (Grindr, Scruff, Growler, 
and Facebook). Participants who are interested in the study will call the RA and undergo a phone screen to 
ensure they meet enrollment criteria prior to being scheduled for a study visit.  
 
Aim 2/3:  We will utilize chart review, as well as screening during clinical appointments at Fenway Health (as 
described above) to identify HIV negative MSM with a history of substance use disorder who have qualifying 
laboratory evidence and are prescribed PrEP at Fenway Health. We will also identify potential participants 
through posted flyers in the greater Boston area , email blasts from the Fenway Health recruitment team,  and 
social media advertisements. Email blasts from the Fenway Health recruitment team are re ceived by patients 
and general public who sign up to receive general emails from Fenway Health regarding its daily operations, 
events and research studies. If applicable, we will inform their treating clinicians that their patient might be 
eligible for the  study. The clinician will tell the patient about the study and acquire permission from the patient 
for study staff to speak with them at their next regularly scheduled clinic appointment or provide them with 
contact information for the study team. We othe rwise will utilize crystal reports using our HIPAA Waiver to 
 
Version 11.1    Page 4 of 13 
 screen potential Fenway Health participants, and approach them on the medical floors after consultation with 
the medical team. If potential participants are interested in the study after a discus sion with their primary care 
physician, we will arrange a time to contact the participant and discuss the study in further detail. We will 
schedule an appointment with the study staff to discuss DigiPrEP. If participants enroll in the study, we will 
have t hem sign a medical release of information form to notify their treating clinician at Fenway Health about 
their participation. Additionally, we will ask participants in Aim 1 if they would be willing to participate in Aims 
2/3. Participants who are interest ed in the study can respond to posted flyers , recruitment emails,  or social 
media advertisements will call the RA and undergo a phone screen to ensure they meet enrollment criteria 
prior to being scheduled for a study visit.  
 
Passive Recruitment  
We will al so post fl yers and cards advertising the study at Fenway  Health  and throughout the greater Boston 
area, and engage in recruitment via social media platforms (Grindr, Scruff, Growler, and Facebook) in order to 
extend our reach to as many  potentially eligible individuals as possible . Participants who are interested in the 
study will call or email the RA and undergo a  preliminary  phone screen to ensure they meet basic enrollment 
criteria prior to being scheduled for a study visit . 
 
Shared C ross -study Recruitment  
As potential participants are screened for DigiPrEP, they may additionally be eligible for a parallel study that is 
testing the use of the digital pill for PrEP adherence linked to a smartphone behavioral intervention in MSM 
with mod erate to severe stimulant use disorder (PrEPSteps - IRB 1162312). While screening participants, if 
their schedules do not allow them to participate in DigiPrEP, but they indicate willingness to participate in other 
Fenway Studies, we will discuss the PrEPSt eps study with them as described in our cross study screener. 
Participants who would benefit from learning about their PrEP adherence would likely also benefit from 
interventions that boost adherence as studied in PrEPSteps. We therefore will share screene r data between 
the two studies in the case that participants also qualify for PrEPSteps and would like to participate. Both 
studies are conducted by the same PI and study coordinators.  
 
V. Study  Procedures  
 
Aim 1:  In this aim, we will conduct  individual  interviews  (see uploaded  document  Aim 1 Interview ) of MSM  with 
self-reported substance  use currently  on or qualifying for PrEP . Study  participants  will sign informed  consent  
prior to the qualitative interview . An audio -recorded  individual  interview  will be conducted  by the RA or study  
investigator . We will explore  the digital  pill, acceptance  of the technology , willingness  to use technology  for 
PrEP  adherence  and willingness  to interact  with the technology  to reinforce  adherence  and address  influencers  
of adherence . Interviews  will be audio  recorded , transcribed , and analyzed  by the study  team  (see section  VI), 
after that audio recordings will be destroyed . Participants will also complete a brief self-report questionnaire 
(see uploaded document (DigiPrEP_selfreport_questionnaire ). At the end of the visit, the participant will be 
remunerated  via a $40 gift card . 
 
Aim 2/3:  In Aims 2 and 3, we will deploy  DigiPrEP  in MSM  who are already prescribed  PrEP . This portion  of 
the study  will involve  5 study  visits  over the course  of 3-4 months  where  participant  ingest  DigiPrEP  daily. 
Participants will be prescreened via phone to assess initial eligibility for participation; if eligible, they will be 
scheduled for an in -person Screening Visit , where they will sign informed consent and full eligibility will be 
determined via rapid HIV test and review/conduct of necessary blood work . If determined to be eligible at the 
Screening Visit, participants will be scheduled for Study Visit 1; in the interim, a 90-day supply of digital pills will 
be ordered for shipment to the Fenway Pharmacy.  At Study  Visit 1, participants  will be trained  in the use of the 
digital  pill and complete a self-report questionnaire (same questionnaire  as in Aim 1) . At Study Visit 2, we will 
dispense  an additional 30 -day supply of the digital  pill, review  adherence  data with the participant , conduct a 
pill count of remaining pills, and conduct a blood draw for adherence. At Study Visit 3, we will dispense a final 
30-day supply of the digital pill , review participant adherence data , and conduct a pill count of remaining pills . 
Following both St udy Visits 2 and 3, w e will also forward  adherence  data from the study  visits  to the 
participant ’s Fenway  Health  PCP, if applicable . At Study Visit 4, the final visit, we will  review adherence data, 
 
Version 11.1    Page 5 of 13 
 conduct a pill count of remaining pills, and conduct a bl ood draw for adherence. Additionally, as part of Aim 3, 
we will conduct a 20 -minute semi -structured exit interview to assess participant s’ experience s in the study.  
 
Aim 2 – Prescreening:   Study participants prescreened on the phone  who do not have a PCP at Fenway 
Health  will be asked to bring their most recent copies of laboratory data  to the  in-person  Screening Visit  
(chemistry or creatinine, evidence of hepatitis immunization status (within the past 6 months), sexually 
transmitted  infection screening (STI) and syphilis screening (within the past 3 months)).  If participants do not 
have qualifying laboratory tests , we will notify the participant that we will conduct any needed  laboratory testing 
at the Screening Visit . We will send participants an email with a list of labs they should bring as part of the 
reminder for the Screening Visit.  
 
Aim 2 – Screening Visit:   This is the first study visit. During this visit, the participant  will meet  the RAs and 
study  team . We will explain  the course  of the study , obtain  written  informed consent , and obtain a signed 
medical release  of information form  and completed locator form from participants.  During the informed consent 
process, we will ask if participants want us to relay adherence data from the digital pill to their PCP; if they opt 
in, we will send monthly adherence information to their PCP. After obtaining consent, we will conduct  a rapid 
HIV test to ensure that participants are HIV negative. We will also review laboratory data  with participants; if 
they did not bring lab results with them (or grant us access to lab results via an online patient portal, following  
signing of  medical release  form), we will call their PCP and confirm  their eligibility for PrEP (see 
DigiPrEP_PCP_communication_script ). If participants are missing any required labs, they will receive those 
tests at this visit . If individuals screen positive for active hepatitis infecti on, or have creatinine clearance 
<60ml/min, they will be ineligible for the study and referred back to their PCP for continued medical care. 
Individuals who test positive for STI s will be referred to their PCP for treatment. If they do not have a PCP, they 
will be referred to HIV care or STI care at Fenway Health or Brigham and Women’s Hospital. Once we have 
reviewed all required laboratory work,  and confirmed HIV status as negative, we will schedule participan ts for 
Study Visit 1. Additionally, following this visit, and prior to Study Visit 1 , we will order  a 90-day supply of  digital 
PrEP for eligible participants (process detailed below following  description of study visit  procedure s). 
 
Aim 2 – Study  Visit 1:  During Study Visit 1 , participants will complete  a baseline self-report questionnaire , 
and the study team will conduct  a short  training  around  operation  of the digital  pill system  (i.e., d igital pills, 
Reader device, and mobile app lication ) and instruct  participants  on basic  troubleshooting  of the technology . 
We will also help participants to download the mobile app lication  where their adherence data will be recorded 
and accessible , train them  on how to use the app, and register them on the collaborator interface s (iAssis t and 
Nomi) . Participants will be provided with a 30 -day supply of digital PrEP (Truvada) ; participants  will then ingest  
their first digital  PrEP  dose  during  the visit to demonstrate  their understanding  of how to operate  the digital pill 
system  and to ensure  the technology  is functioning  properly . Participants will receive a brief reference guide 
(see refguide ) with key contact information and basic information regarding the digital pill and Reader. 
Participants  will be scheduled  for Study Visit 2, which will occur a maximum of 30 days  (i.e., 23 -30 days)  after 
Study Visit 1 , in order to ensure that participants  do not run out of digital pills prior to receiving a refill. We will 
contact  study  participants  via text message  on days  1, 2, 5, and 7 to ensure  technology  is functioning . 
Additionally, b eginning one week after Study Visit 1, p articipants will receive brief weekly surveys  through the  
Nomi  interface asking them to self -report substance use and sexual activity  (see DigiPrEP Study 
Messages_Participant Only). At the end of Study Visit 1 , participants will be remunerated  via a $25 check .   
 
Aim 2 – Study  Visit 2:  We will contact  participants  on days  23, 25 , and 29 to remind  participants  of their 
Study Visit 2 appointment . During  this study  visit, participants  will have  blood drawn via phlebotomy  and placed 
on a blood spot card  in order to assess  PrEP adherence . De-identified  specimens will be banked for future use 
in drug abuse screening. We will review  digital pill adherence  data with participants  in Nomi and conduct  a pill 
count  to validate  adherence  data from the digital  pill and Reader . We will review  discordant  counts , periods of 
Reader activity that suggest no use of the Reader device, and digital pill use  with the participant . We will 
additionally review any potential nonadherent events detected by the digital pill with participants using timeline 
followback to gauge potential reasons for nonadherence.  We will view the adherence interface with study 
participants and discuss even ts surrounding potential nonadherence events. We will record user responses to 
 
Version 11.1    Page 6 of 13 
 each of these timeline followback events.  We will also dispense  an additional  30-day supply of  digital  pills to 
participants . We will schedule  participants  for Study V isit 3 prior to discharge , which will occur a maximum of 
30 days (i.e., 23 -30 days) after Study Visit  2. Participants will be reminded that we will pass their adherence 
data along to their PCP; participants will have the option of opting out of this mechanism at each study visit.  At 
the end of Study Visit 2 , the participant will be remunerated  via a $25 check . 
 
Aim 2 – Study  Visit 3:  We will contact  participants  on days  53, 55 , and 59 to remind  them  of their Study Visit 
3 appointment . During  this visit, we will review  adherence  data from the digital  pill in Nomi , conduct  pill counts  
with participants , address  discordant  counts  and review reader activity  with the participants  and address any 
nonadherence events potentially linked to sexual activity or substance use . The p articipant  will receive  a final 
30 day refill of digital  pills and will be remunerated  via a $50 check . 
 
Aims 2/3 – Study  Visit 4:  This is the final study  visit. We will contact  participants  on days  83, 85 and 89 to 
remind  participants  of Study Visit 4 , including a reminder to bring  all DigiPrEP  equipment  to this visit to return 
to the study team . Participants  will have  blood drawn  for adherence , and we will review  adherence  data from 
the digital  pill in Nomi and conduct  pill counts . Additionally , we will conduct  a 20-minute  semi -structured  
interview  (see Aim 3 Exit Interview ) to assess  participants’  experience  working  with DigiPrEP  and participating 
in the study . Participants will be encouraged to return to their PCP for continued PrEP prescribing.  If they do 
not have a provider who can continue to prescribe PrEP  following the end of the study , we will refer them to a 
provid er at Fenway Health or the Brigham and Women’s Hospital infectious disease clinic.  Participants will be 
remunerated a total of $150 at the end of this visit (i.e., the planned $75, as well as an additional $75 for 
assistance finding and troubleshooting bugs in the mobile app, and for completion of all study procedures ). 
 
Participant contact :  We will contact participants via text message at described times after study visits  (see 
DigiPrEP Study Messages_Participant Only ). Addi tionally, if participants do not respond to text messages 
(e.g., technology check -ins at days 1, 2, 5, 7), or to study appointment reminders, we will contact them via 
phone , text, and/or email. If we do not detect digital pill ingestions for 48 hours (2 doses) or if there are more 
than 2 missed doses in a week, we will contact participants via phone, text, and/or email to understand if the re 
are issues with operating the digital pill or if missed doses represent true medication nonadherence.  If we are 
unable to reach participants, we will leave phone or text messages, and call participants back the next 
business day . We will also communicate information about the study, including required lab work 
documentation for the Screening Visit, to participants via email.  
 
Drug procurement :  Digital pills are procured from Curant Pharmacy (our collaborating pharmacy). Once 
participants sign informed consent during the Screening Visit, and we have confirmed qualifying  laboratory 
work  and eligibility , we will secure ly email a Drug Order Form to Curant. This order form will  contain the 
following information , as required by Curant : (1) participant’s  name ; (2) participant’s date of birth ; (3) participant 
study ID number; (4) participant’s anticipated start date; (5) target drug delivery date; and (6) delivery 
information for p harmacist at Fenway Pharmacy. Following receipt of the Drug Order Form, Curant will FedEx 
90 digital pills ( three 30 -day supplies ) to the Fenway Pharmacy. Confirmation of shipment receipt will be 
documented in the DigiPrEP Pharmacy SOP binder. At Study Vis its 1, 2, and 3, we will complete a Prescription 
Card that study staff will bring to the Fenway Pharmacy , who will sign out drug to us.  If participants no -show 
during their study visit, we will return and sign back in drug to the Fenway Pharmacy.  In the event that a 
participant drops out of the study and we have remaining drug  assigned to them  in the  Fenway P harmacy, we 
will secure ly emai l a Cancel Order Form to Curant , along with a new D rug Order Form, requesting the required 
number of replacement bottles of drug , and/or new participant labels (as applicable) . Curant will mail new 
participant labels to place on existing bottles of drug, as well as any additional bottles  of drug, as needed . 
 
Study visit scheduling :  We will schedule study visits as close to 30 days apart as possible. Recognizing that 
participants may have scheduling conflicts, we will seek to schedule participants fo r study visits 2, 3 and 4 
within 7 days prior to  the 30 -day mark in order to prevent participants from running out of digital  PrEP  pills. 
 
 
Version 11.1    Page 7 of 13 
 Participant messaging :  Participants will receive standard SMS text messages , as well as  notifications from the 
mobile application which receives their adherence data from the digital pill. Upon enrollment in Nomi and 
iAssist interfaces at Study Visit 1, participants will receive a welcome message , including a contact number for 
the DigiPrEP study team. Participants will receive three technology check -in messages during the first week 
using the digital pill (on days 2, 5, and 7) ; these messages will prompt participants to respond with “0” for “I 
need help with something,” or “1” for “Everythin g’s OK!” If participants text back “0,” the study team will contact 
the participant to assist them  further. Beginning one week after Study Visit 1, participant will also receive an 
anonymous  REDCap link to a brief weekly survey , asking them to self -report substance use and sexual activity 
for the past week. Participants will also receive text messages reminding them of upcoming study visits. 
Depending on messaging settings in the Nomi interface, participants may also receive app n otifications for 
ingestion confirmations, as well as messages related to Reader battery life and confirmations of manually 
recorded ingestions (see DigiPrEP Study Messages_Participant Only  for detailed content and timing of all 
participant messaging ).  
 
 
Version 11.1    Page 8 of 13 
  Potential participant directly contacted study RA, 
referred by Fenway Health primary care physician, or 
identified via medical record review and screened 
during clinical appointment at Fenway Health
Screening Visit:  Consent & Eligibility
-Meet RA and study team
-Explain study and sign informed consent
-Sign medical release of information form 
-Conduct rapid HIV test 
-Review and/or obtain lab work to confirm eligibility
Study Visit 1:  DigiPrEP Setup
-Self-report questionnaire 
-Technology training
-Dispense 30 days of PrEP (Truvada digital pill)
Study Visit 2:  Day 30  ( -7 days)
-Review DigiPrEP data
-Blood draw for adherence
-Refill 30 days of PrEP (Truvada digital pill)
Study Visit 3:  Day 60  ( -7 days)
-Review DigiPrEP data, pill counts
-Refill 30 days of PrEP (Truvada digital pill)
Study Visit 4:  Day 90  ( -7 days)
-Review DigiPrEP data, pill counts, return equipment
-Blood draw for adherence- DigiPrEP interface text messages 
on days 1, 2, 5, 7 to ensure DigiPrEP 
is working  
- DigiPrEP interface text messages 
on days 23, 25, 29 to remind 
participants  of Study Visit 2  
- DigiPrEP interface text messages on 
days 53, 55, 59 to remind 
participants  of Study Visit 3  
- DigiPrEP interface text messages on 
days 83, 85, 89 to remind 
participants  of Study Visit 4  If eligible:  
- Order 90 -day supply of digital PrEP   
 
If ineligible:  
 - Refer back to PCP for treatment / 
continued medical care  
 
Version 11.1    Page 9 of 13 
 VI. Biostatistical  Analysis  
 
Aim 1: We will conduct  qualitative  analysis  on individual  interviews  in aim 1 to elucidate  themes  of technology  
acceptance , design , and optimal  timing  and delivery  of messaging .  
 
Aim 2: We will calculate  descriptive  statistics  regarding  the degree  of adherence  collected  from the digital  pill. 
We will also calculate  the accuracy  of the digital  pill in comparison  to pill counts  and validate  ingestion  data 
compared  to dried blood spot  data. Because  this is a pilot, proof -of-concept  study , we will not be powered  to 
determine  the degree  of adherence  the use of a digital  pill alone  confers  upon  study  participants . 
 
VII. Risks  and Discomforts  
 
We anticipate  the major  risks due to DigiPrEP  are the potential  for exposure  to metal  components  in the digital  
pill, and retention  of the radiofrequency  emitter  portion  of the digital  pill. Major  psychological  discomforts  could  
occur  during  study  interviews  when  participants  are asked  about  their adherence  patterns . 
Exposure  to Metal  Components  in Digital  Pill: The Digital  Pill is manufactured  from the same  basic  
components  as other  ingestible  medical  devices . The radiofrequency  tags contain  minimal  amounts  of silver , 
zinc and magnesium  that are significantly  less than the recommended  daily intake  of these  metals . In order  
to prevent  absorption  of these  metals , the radiofrequency  tag is coated  with an epoxy  and ethyl cellulose  
coating  in a technique  that is used  for other  ingestible  medical  devices .8,9 Extensive  experience  in the use of 
ingestible  small  bowel  endoscopy  cameras  has not reported  adverse  events  related  to the exposure  of 
electronic  components .10,11  
 
Digital  Pill Radiofrequency  Emitter  Retention : Study  participants  may experience  retention  of the 
radiofrequency  emitting  portion  of the digital  pill. A study  assessing  the efficacy  of the capsule  portion  of 
DigiPrEP  among  healthy  volunteers  documented  560 successful  ingestion  events  without  any adverse  effects . 
Dr. Chai  has completed  a pilot study  that recorded  96 ingestions  with the digital  pill containing  oxycodone  
without  any adverse  events .2 Additional  pilot data from Novartis  of over 100 participants  who ingested  
radiofrequency  tagged  gelatin  capsules  revealed  no reports  of sensor  retention  (Personal  communication  
from Joris  VanDam , Novartis ). An additional  investigation  to determine  the safety  of digital  pills demonstrated  
no retention  of any of the components  of the digital  pill by abdominal  imaging .9 The best comparison  to the 
digital  pill are capsule  endoscopy  pills which  are over twice  the size of digital  pills. Over  a decade  of experience  
of capsule  endoscopy  has revealed  a capsule  retention  rate of less than 2%.10,12 In the case  of a retained  
endoscopy  pill, patients  were  mostly  asymptomatic , and treatment  consisted  only of oral fluid administration . 
Patients  who elected  to have  the capsule  removed  successfully  underwent  elective  partial  small  bowel  
resection  with pathologic  findings  including  mild bowel  stricture  or intimal  ulceration  from capsule  retention .13 
Complication  rates  among  patients  with Crohn ’s disease , bowel  neoplasm , radiation  enteritis , or stricture  were  
higher .14,15 In high-risk patients , standard  therapy  for retained  endoscopy  pills included  aggressive  oral 
hydration  with successful  removal  of the retained  pill.16 We believe  that the risk of retention  of a DigiPrEP  
capsule  will be less than that of a capsule  endoscopy  pill given  the smaller  dimensions  of the digital  pill. Unlike  
a capsule  endoscopy  pill, DigiPrEP  is dissolvable  with only the radiofrequency  emitting  portion  of the capsule  
passing  through  the gastrointestinal  tract. In order  to minimize  the risk of DigiPrEP  capsule  retention , we plan 
to exclude  patients  with underlying  bowel  disease  or surgical  intervention  to the bowel .  
 
Psychological  discomfort  of disclosing  adherence  patterns : Participants  may experience  psychological  
discomfort  in disclosing  and learning  of their adherence  data during  study  visits . As their Fenway  Health  PCP 
may be given  participant ’s adherence  data, participants  may also experience  the psychological  discomfort  
knowing  that their PCP knows  about  their adherence  to PrEP  during  the study  period . 
 
VIII. Potential  Benefits  
 
 
Version 11.1    Page 10 of 13 
 Participants  may indirectly  benefit  from participation  in the study  by improving  their adherence  to PrEP . 
Interacting  and using  DigiPrEP  may confer  some  increased  adherence  among  study  participants .  
 
IX. Data Monitoring  and Quality  Assurance  
 
We will review  and monitor  data from DigiPrEP  for each  study  participant . At each  study  visit, participants  will 
undergo  pill counts  to correlate  adherence  data from DigiPrEP , and calculate  the accuracy  of the digital  pill to 
measure  PrEP  adherence . Any discrepancies  between  the digital  pill and pill counts  will be addressed  in real 
time at each  study  visit with the participant . For each  participant , we will also review  signaling  from the digital  
pill to the Reader  with our industry  collaborator  (eTectRx ) to ensure  there  are no errors  in data transmission  
contribution  to missed  adherence  events . If errors  occur  as a result  of data transmission , we will annotate this 
on the ingestion data . 
 
The study  investigators  will conduct QA to review  data after half of the patients  (N=7) of Aim 2/3 are enrolled  to 
ensure  that data is accurate  and no errors  have  been  made . 
 
The principal investigator  (Dr. Chai)  will be responsible for monitoring advers e events during the study, but 
Drs. Mayer and O’Cleirigh  will assume this re sponsibility in the event that D r. Chai is unavailable.  The role of 
the responsible person is 1) to identify the concern, 2) develop and appropriate response that involves 
consultation whenever possible to alleviate or minimize any adverse event, and 3) to ensure that the adverse 
event is reported in a timely manner to the responsible authority.  
 
Participants will be monitored for occurrenc e of events defined as any undesirable experience or unanticipated 
benefit. Events may occur during recruitment, technology deployment, and qualitative interviewing. For 
example, a participant may become distressed when asked questions about substance abus e and its impact 
on PrEP adherence. Based upon previous research couched in technology among hidden populations, we 
anticipate that these effects will be minimal. The principal investigator will assess whether an undesirable 
experience occurred (adverse ev ent) and will record details of all adverse events (death, life threatening illness, 
new serious or permanent disability) that occur. Should such an event occur, the principal investigator will 
report the event within 24 hours to the Fenway Institute IRB.  
 
The adverse event case report form will include a description of all undesirable experiences, required 
interventions, and an assessment of the subject after the event if possible.  An estimate of the extent of injury, 
and prevention strategies will be rep orted. The principal investigator will classify the relationship of the study 
protocol to the event as follows:  
• Not related:  The event is clearly related to factors such as the subject’s clinical state, not with the study 
protocol.  
• Remote : The event was mo st likely related to factors such as the subject’s clinical state, not with the 
study protocol.  
• Possible:  The event follows a reasonable temporal sequence associated with participating in the study 
and/or is consistent with events related to responding to queries about stress/drug craving but is 
possibly related to factors such as the subject’s clinical state.  
• Probable:  The event follows a reasonable temporal sequence associated with participating in the study 
and/or is consistent with events related to res ponding to DigiPrEP  or digital pills  and cannot be 
reasonably explained by factors such as the subject’s clinical state.  
The severity of an adverse event in both groups is defined as a qualitative assessment of the degree 
or intensity of an adverse event a s determined by the principal investigator as follows:  
• Mild:  No impact (in anyway) on the subjects.  
• Moderate:  Impacts on the subject but is not life -threatening or incapacitating.  
• Severe:  Fatal, life threatening, permanently disabling; severely incapacitat ing; requires/prolongs 
inpatient hospitalization.  
 
Version 11.1    Page 11 of 13 
  
All adverse events will simultaneously be reported to the NIH project officer.  The report will summarize the 
facts of the case, including the date and a description of the subject; whether the event is re lated to the study’s 
protocols; the steps that have been taken to address the issue; whether the event provides emerging 
knowledge about the risks of the study that should be conveyed to respondents; and whether the consent 
form should be revised.  
 
Data Safety Monitoring Board  
Dr. Chai, will select three external investigators with expertise in PrEP, substance use disorder, technology 
security and behavioral interventions to participate on a data safety monitoring board (DSMB) for aim 2 (pilot 
random ized controlled trial) of the research plan. The DSMB will convene annually during aim 2 of the 
research plan. Additionally, the DSMB will meet when N=10 study participants are enrolled in aim 2. They will 
review the data, and any potential study related a dverse events prior to approving the continuation of 
recruitment. The responsibilities of the DSMB will include:  
• Reviewing the research protocol, consent form, and plans for DSMB.  
• Evaluating the progress of the pilot randomized controlled trial: recruitmen t, retention, data quality, site 
performance, adverse events.  
• Protection of participant safety  
• Making recommendations to Dr. Chai and the Fenway Institute IRB regarding continuation, termination 
or modification of the study depending on benefits or adverse  events.  
• Ensuring the confidentiality of study data.  
• Reviewing adverse events.  
• Providing annual written reports to Dr. Chai, and Gilead Sciences (study sponsor) required regarding 
safety concerns, continuation or modification of the research plan.  
 
Data Safety . The protection of data for this study includes the following: 1) Data are collected through a HIPAA 
compliant web server hosted by eTectRx, then securely relayed to a cloud -based program  (NOMI)  that drives 
smart interventions in DigiPrEP. The cloud -based database is hosted behind the secure firewall through 
eTectRx, and accessed through Fenway Health computers. 2) Study participants are identified by a unique 
numeric identification; their protected health information (PHI) is never linked to in gestion data captured by 
eTectRx, or the cloud -based program. 3) Study participant PHI is collected and stored on a secure Microsoft 
Excel worksheet which will be created on a secure, password protected desktop computer located at TFI where 
only Dr. Chai, his study mentors and a trained research assistant (RA) will have access. 4) All data (ingestion 
data on the cloud -based database and PHI) is stripped of all identifying information by Dr. Chai prior to 
transmission to collaborators at BWH, MGH, BIDMC and Children’s hospital.  We will also share deidentified 
data with our sponsor, Gilead Sciences . 5) Deidentified ingestion data as well as demographic data will be 
securely stored on the TFI server; we will access this data for later investigations under a sep arate IRB protocol. 
6) At study completion, the link between the identifying information and their data is destroyed, as is contact 
information. Two sets of the cleaned data set will be maintained —one working copy at Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, and one a t the Fenway Institute. This approach ensures that the data survives a failure of one storage 
location. 6) Finally, all study staff have completed the CITI Course in the Protection of Human Subjects online 
training in research ethics and good clinical prac tice to ensure that all staff are compliant with confidentiality 
training.  
Data Tracking : Data will be automatically logged into the web interface hosted by eTectRx  with a date/time 
stamp to ensure accurate record keeping of all data and linking to the results. All data will be securely accessed 
at Fenway Health.  
Data Entry Process : Protected health information, including study participant demographics, substance use 
disorder  history, and HIV risk factors will be collected by Dr. Chai and the research assistant and entered into 
REDCap, a secure web application being used for data storage and management.  A separate spreadsheet of 
 
Version 11.1    Page 12 of 13 
 study participant contact information and a technology log including participant mobile phone number, 
electronic mail (email) address, identifiers of the Receiver , study smartphone and a log of dispensed digital 
pills will also be maintained by Dr. Chai and the RA. All logs will be stored behi nd TFI firewall and password 
protected. Dr. Chai will also maintain a second copy of the logs as a backup in his secure office behind the 
BWH firewall Data loaded onto the interface cannot be edited. Each variable with missing data (such as an 
interruption  between smartphone and sensor) will be identified and a placeholder (“<< -99>>”) is entered to 
connote a missing value.  Data from the digital pill is recorded on the eTectRx interface and automatically 
transferred via a HIPAA -compliant secure link to the a dherence interface (NOMI). Ingestion data may 
potentially require editing if there are transmission failures, errors from the reader device , or manually recorded 
data from study participants. All of these potential edits will be identified by eTectRx in collaboration with the 
study team. Edits to data will be agreed upon by both parties and approved by the PI. An audit trail of all 
potential edits will be maintained, one copy at eTectRx and one copy at TFI. We will additionally comply with 
Fenw ay regulations regarding reporting of adverse events and ensuring data quality.  Landmark Associates Inc, 
an external company,  will be contracted  to transcribed audio -taped interviews.  
 
Data storage:  Raw ingestion data, transcripts from this study and self-report questionnaires will not be made 
publicly available. Deidentified data may be shared with Gilead Sciences who is funding the study, as well as 
industry collaborators eTectRx and NOMI. For future investigations that use deidentified  participant data, we 
will submit IRB protocols detailing the use of this data.  Partners Health  Dropbox is being used for file storage in 
the study . 
 
 
X. References  
 
1. Browne  SH, Behzadi  Y, Littlewort  G. Let Visuals  Tell the Story : Medication  Adherence  in Patients  with 
Type  II Diabetes  Captured  by a Novel  Ingestion  Sensor  Platform . JMIR  mHealth  uHealth  
2015;3(4): e108–19.  
2. Chai PR, Carreiro  S, Innes  BJ, et al. Digital  Pills to Measure  Opioid  Ingestion  Patterns  in Emergen cy 
Department  Patients  With Acute  Fracture  Pain: A Pilot Study . Journal  of medical  Internet  research  2017;  
3. Kane  JM, Perlis  RH, DiCarlo  LA, Au-Yeung  K, Duong  J, Petrides  G. First experience  with a wireless  
system  incorporating  physiologic  assessments  and direct  confirmation  of digital  tablet  ingestions  in 
ambulatory  patients  with schizophrenia  or bipolar  disorder . The Journal  of clinical  psychiatry  
2013;74(6): e533–40.  
4. Chai PR, Castillo -Mancilla  J, Buffkin  E, et al. Utilizing  an Ingestible  Biosensor  to Assess  Real-Time  
Medication  Adherence . J Med Toxicol  2015;:1 –6.  
5. Chai P, Rosen  RK, Boyer  EW. Ingestible  Biosensors  for Real-Time  Medication  Adherence  Monitoring : 
MyTMed . Hawaii : IEEE  & Computer  Society  Press ; 2016.  
6. Chai PR, Carreiro  S, Rosen  RK, Boyer  EW. Patient  Acceptance  of Ingestible  Biosensor  Systems . 
Washington  DC: 2016.  
7. Chai PR, Ranney  ML, Rosen  RK, Lewis  DM, Boyer  EW. Crowd -Sourced  Focus  Groups  on Twitter : 
140 Characters  of Research  Insight . Proceedings  of the th Hawaii  International  Conference  on 
System  Sciences  2017;:3746 –53.  
8. Euliano  N. ID-Cap GI Sensor  Toxicology  Report .  
9. Flores  GP, Peace  B, Carnes  TC, et al. Performance , Reliability , Usability , and Safety  of the ID-Cap 
 
Version 11.1    Page 13 of 13 
 System  for Ingestion  Event  Monitoring  in Healthy  Volunteers : A Pilot Study . Innovations  in Clinical  
Neuroscience  2016;13(10):1 –8.  
10. Li F, Leighton  JA, Sharma  VK. Capsule  endoscopy : a comprehensive  review . Minerva  
gastroenterologica  e dietologica  2007;53(3):257 –72.  
11. Nakamura  T, Terano  A. Capsule  endoscopy : past, present , and future . Journal  of gastroenterology  
2008;43(2):93 –9.  
12. Trifan  A, Stanciu  C. Capsule  endoscopy --a new frontier . Revista  medico -chirurgicala  a Societatii  de 
Medici  si Naturalisti  din Iasi 2004;108(4):739 –46.  
13. Li F, Gurudu  SR, De Petris  G, et al. Retention  of the capsule  endoscope : a single -center  experience  of 
1000 capsule  endoscopy  procedures . Gastrointestinal  endoscopy  2008;68(1):174 –80.  
14. Vanfleteren  L, van der Schaar  P, Goedhard  J. Ileus  related  to wireless  capsule  retention  in suspected  
Crohn 's disease : emergency  surgery  obviated  by early  pharmacological  treatment . Endoscopy  2009;41 
Suppl  2:E134–5.  
15. Cave  D, Legnani  P, de Franchis  R, Lewis  BS. ICCE  Consensus  for Capsule  Retention . Endoscopy  
2005;37(10):1065 –7.  
16. Li F, Gurudu  SR, De Petris  G, et al. Retention  of the capsule  endoscope : a single -center  experience  of 
1000 capsule  endoscopy  procedures . Gastrointestinal  endoscopy  2008;68(1):174 –80.  
 