Presurgical letrozole  1 
 
 
 
Presurgical treatment with letrozole in patients with early-stage breast cancer 
 
 
 
 Protocol Number: D13236  
Principal Investigator: Gary Schwartz, MD 
 Co-Investigators: Todd Miller, PhD 
  Kari Rosenkranz, MD 
  Richard Barth, MD   Christina Angeles, MD 
   
      
 
Date:  November 17, 2015 
 
Presurgical letrozole  2 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
   SCHEMA 3    ABBREVIATIONS 4  1.0 INTRODUCTION 5  2.0 OBJECTIVES 9  3.0 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 9 
 4.0 REGISTRATION 10 
 5.0 TREATMENT PLAN 11 
 6.0 DATA COLLECTION, HANDLING,  AND RECORD KEEPING 17 
 7.0 STUDY MONITORING, AUDITI NG, AND INSPECTING 18 
 8.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING 19 
 9.0                   STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 19   
10.0                 HUMAN SUBJECTS 21 
 11.0 BIBLIOGRAPHY 22  
  
 
Presurgica
 
l letrozole 
 
3 

Presurgical letrozole  4 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
CPHS Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at Dartmouth College 
DMBA 7,12-Dimethylbenz(a)anthracene DSMAC Data Safety Monitoring and Accrual Co mmittee of the Norris Cotton Cancer Center 
ER estrogen receptor alpha FDA Food & Drug Administration (U.S.) FFPE formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
HER2 HER2 / ERBB2 proto-oncogene 
IGF-1R insulin-like grow th factor receptor 
IHC immunohistochemistry  InsR insulin receptor IRS1 insulin receptor substrate 1 IRS2 insulin receptor substrate 2 mRNA messenger RNA mTOR mammalian target of rapamycin mTORC1 mTOR complex 1 mTORC2 mTOR complex 2 PHI protected health information PI primary investigator PI3K phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase PR progesterone receptor OPRR Dept. of Health and Human Services O ffice for Protection from Research Risks (U.S.)
  
 
 
  
Presurgical letrozole  5 
 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1. Breast cancer 
 Most patients are diagnosed with Stage I-III breast cancer, which is localized to 
the breast (and adjacent lymph nodes), and is surgically resectable and potentially 
curable.  Seventy-five percent of primar y breast tumors express estrogen receptor 
alpha (ER). Patients with Stage I-III ER-positive breast cancer are typically treated with adjuvant anti- estrogen therapy for 5 years after surgical removal of 
the primary tumor. Among the cases of ER+ breast cancer, ~10% harbor genomic 
amplification of the ERBB2  (HER2) proto-oncogene; patients with HER2+ cancer 
are treated with HER2-directed therapy, a nd will not be part of this study. This 
study focuses on patients with Stag e I-III ER+/HER2- breast cancer. 
 
1.2. The presurgical study model  
An initial diagnosis of breast cancer is typically made  by histological 
confirmation of a tissue biopsy specimen. Patients with Stage I-III cancer will 
then typically undergo surgery within a few weeks to remove the primary tumor(s).  Therefore, it is common to have a paired tumor biopsy specimen and a surgical tumor specimen.  The availability of such paired specimens has prompted 
a large initiative in recent years to treat patients ( e.g., with drug) during the 
intervening period between the time of diagnostic biopsy and the time of surgery. 
We can then compare the biopsy tissue (baseline, pre-treatment) to the surgical tissue (post-treatment) to assess biological changes ( e.g., changes in mRNA and 
protein expression).  This study design has provided a wealth of information on 
the effects of systemic therapies on  tumor biology [reviewed in ref. ( 1)], and it 
requires no additional biopsy procedure. 
 1.3. Therapeutic inhibition of mTORC1  
mTORC1 is a molecular hub that integrat es signaling inputs from an array of 
sources, including growth factor recepto r signaling pathways, nutrient sensing 
pathways, and energy sensing pathwa ys. Activated mTORC1 promotes cap-
dependent protein translation, and this pathway is hyperactivated in many cancer 
types. As such, mTORC1 is an attractive therapeutic target. The mTORC1 inhibitor RAD001 (Afinitor, Everolimus) was recently approved for the treatment of patients with advanced/metastatic ER +/HER2- breast cancer in combination 
with the steroidal aromatase inhibito r Exemestane following progression on a 
non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor (Letrozo le, Anastrozole). Everolimus is also 
approved for the treatment of other non- breast malignancies. While the phase 3 
BOLERO-2 study demonstrated that Exemestane/Everolimus increased 
progression-free survival compared to Exemestane/Placebo ( 2), nearly all patients 
eventually progressed. Genetic analysis has not identified a clear, individual 
biomarker that predicted benefit from Everolimus ( 3). Furthermore, it is unclear 
Presurgica
 
 
  l letrozole 
whet h
benefi
show n
addre s
vs. E
BOL E
 In so
m
p70-S
phos p
recep t
mTO R
upreg u
and M
stimu l
inhib i
 
 
Fig. 1. 
promo t
genes 
estrog e
PI3K/ A
her continue
ficial, given 
n to be equ a
ssed in the o
Exemestane/ E
ERO-2). 
me cell type
S6-kinase (
phorylates t
tor (InsR) e
RC1 inhibi t
ulation of I G
MEK/Erk to 
late cancer c
itors may in c
mTORC1 in h
tes IRS-1/2 ac t
encoding IRS
en-mediated s u
AKT induced b
d treatment 
that the 3 m
ally efficaci o
ongoing B O
Everolimus 
s, including 
(p70S6K) 
he insulin- l
effector IR S
tion (with R
GF-1R/Ins R
promote ce l
cell survival 
crease thera p
hibition block s
tivation, whic h
1, IRS2, and 
uppression of 
by mTORC1 i n
with Exem e
major arom a
ous on a p o
OLERO-6 st u
vs. Capeci t
ER+ breas t
elicits n e
like growt h
S-1 to pro m
RAD001) b l
R/IRS-1/2 si g
ll survival (
pathways. C
peutic effica c
s negative fee d
h in turn prom o
IGF-1R are t
IGF-1R, IRS 1
nhibition.  
estane (in t h
atase inhibit o
opulation le v
udy (NCT0 1
tabine; sa m
t cancer, m T
egative fe e
h facto r-1 
mote IRS-1
locks this n
gnaling that 
(6-9). As su c
Circumvent i
cy. 
dback signali n
otes PI3K/A K
transcriptional l
1, and/or IRS
he context o
ors in clinic
vel (4, 5); th
1783444; te
me patient p
TORC1-ind u
edback w h
receptor ( I
degradatio n
negative fe e
in turn act i
ch, mTOR C
ing these ef f
ng from p70S 6
KT activation a n
ly activated b
S2 expression 
6 
of Everolim u
al use have 
his issue is b
sting Evero l
population a
uced activati
hereby p7 0
IGF-1R)/ i n
n (Fig. 1). T
edback, ind u
ivates PI3K /
C1 inhibitor s
fects of mT O
6K to IRS-1/ 2
nd cell surviv a
by ER. Hence
blunts activat
us) is 
been 
being 
limus 
as in 
on of 
0S6K 
nsulin 
Thus, 
ucing 
/AKT 
s may 
ORC1 
 
2. This 
al. The 
, anti-
ion of 

Presurgica
 
 
1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
 
l letrozole 
.4. Precl i
We o b
lines i
anti-e
RAD 0
genespath
w
level s
likely that 
c
treatm
Presu r
sufficprofil
i
treatm
Letro z
the m o
and p
Letro z
 
inical findin g
bserved tha t
induces upr e
strogen ful v
001 -induce d
, and studi e
ways at seve r
 of IGF-1 R
suppressed 
continued a
ment with R A
rgical treat m
ient to sig n
ing of pre -
ment (surgic a
zole induce d
ost signific a
post-treatme n
zole (11). 
gs 
t mTORC1 
egulation of 
vestrant (w h
d PI3K/AK T
es have de m
ral levels [r e
R, IRS-1, an d
RAD001-i n
anti-estroge n
AD001 in p a
ment with 
nificantly s u
-treatment (
al) ER+ tu m
d changes i n
antly and co n
nt samples. 
inhibition w
PI3K/AKT 
hich blocks 
T signaling. 
monstrated c
eviewed in ( 1
d IRS-2 at t
nduced PI3 K
n therapy w
atients. 
the aromat a
uppress pl a
(baseline, d
mor specime n
n expression 
nsistently d o
IGF1R  wa
with RAD0 0
signaling ( F
ER transcr i
IGF1R , IRS
crosstalk b e
10)]. Fulves
the protein 
K/AKT activ a
would be b
ase inhibit o
asma estrog e
diagnostic b
ns revealed 
of ER-regu l
ownregulate d
as also sig n
01 in ER+ b
Fig. 2). Pret r
iptional act i
S1, and IRS2
etween the 
strant treatm e
and/or mR N
ation. Thes e
eneficial i n
or Letrozol e
en levels. G
biopsy) and 
that estroge n
lated genes. 
d genes whe
nificantly d o
7 
breast cance r
reatment wi t
ivity) suppr
2 are ER-in d
ER and I G
ent decreas e
NA levels, w
e findings s u
n the conte x
e for 3 da y
Gene expr e
post-two- w
n deprivati o
IRS1  was o
n comparin g
ownregulat e
r cell 
th the 
essed 
duced 
GF-1R 
ed the 
which 
uggest 
xt of 
ys is 
ession 
week-
on via 
one of 
g pre- 
ed by 

Presurgical letrozole  8 
 
Fig. 2. Anti-estrogen-mediated inhibition of ER with  fulvestrant abrogates PI3K/AKT activation induced 
by mTORC1 inhibition with RAD001. Left: MCF-7 cells were pre-treated with medium containing 10% 
FBS ± 1 M fulvestrant for 24 hours. Then cells were treated with medium ± 1 M fulvestrant ± 20 nM 
RAD001 for 24 hours before lysis. Lysates were  analyzed by immunoblo tting using the indicated 
antibodies. Right : ZR75-1 cells were pre-treated with medium containing 10% FBS ± 1 M fulvestrant for 
3 days. Then cells were treated with medium ± 1 M fulvestrant ± 20 nM RAD001 for 24 hours before 
lysis. Lysates were analyzed as in  (A). Note that RAD001 treatment decreases P-S6 (marker of mTORC1 
activity) but increases P-AKT. Fulv estrant treatment decreases IRS-1 and IGF-1R levels, which are 
encoded by ER-inducible genes. 
 
1.5. Presurgical endocrine therapy 
 
Letrozole is appropriate neoadjuvant therapy for postmenopausal women with 
hormone receptor positive breast cancer .  Ellis et al randomized 250 post-
menopausal women with locally-advanced hormone receptor positive breast cancer requiring mastectomy, to four mont hs of neoadjuvant endocrine therapy 
with either letrozole or tamoxifen.  Sixt y percent of subjects receiving presurgical 
letrozole had an objective radiologic re sponse and 48% were able to undergo 
breast-conserving surgery, while only 41% of subjects receiving tamoxifen had an 
objective response and 36% were able to undergo breast-conserving surgery ( 12).  
The Ki-67 proliferation biomarker can be assayed at diagnosis and again after a 
short run-in period of treatment with letrozole, and Ellis showed that suppression of Ki-67 with persistent expression of  ER in a node negative patient with a 
primary tumor under 5 cm in size is predic tive of such a low risk of recurrence 
that adjuvant chemotherapy is obviated ( 13).  377 post-menopausal women with 
clinical Stage II-III hormone receptor pos itive breast cancer were randomized to 
receive letrozole, anastrozole, or exemestane for 16 to 18 weeks prior to surgery.  The clinical response rate to letrozole was 75% versus 69% for anastrozole and 63% for exemestane.  51% of the pati ents who were j udged to require a 
mastectomy at the time of study registration were able to achieve breast preservation ( 14).  Neoadjuvant endocrine ther apy can therefore increase the 
likelihood of achieving breast preservation in a woman with a locally advanced 
hormone receptor positive breast cancer , and biopsies after a brief treatment 
interval have provided biomarkers whic h were predictive of prolonged disease-
free survival with endocrine therapy alone . Letrozole is an active agent in the 
neoadjuvant setting and can be considered  an appropriate standard of care as 
neoadjuvant therapy for locally  advanced breast cancer. 
 1.6. Study rationale 
 
We propose a presurgical study in patient s with Stage I-III ER+/HER2- breast 
cancer to determine whether anti-estr ogen therapy (Letrozole) suppresses 
mTORC1 inhibitor (RAD001)-induced activ ation of PI3K/AKT signaling. As the 
primary objective is to determine whethe r anti-estrogen ther apy alters mTORC1 
inhibitor-induced signaling that can be assessed in a short time frame ex vivo , we 
will treat patients with or without Letrozol e for 10-21 days prior to surgery; this 
time frame will allow sufficient time for maximal estrogen suppression and 
downstream changes in the levels of ER-regulated transcripts and encoded 
Presurgical letrozole  9 
 
proteins. Viable core samples of surgically resected tumors will be used for ex 
vivo culture to assess the effects of RAD001 on signaling, to avoid exposing 
subjects to potentially adverse side e ffects of RAD001. Findings from this study 
will provide mechanistic insight into the effects of mTORC1 and ER inhibition on 
oncogenic signaling pathways in cancer cells. 
 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES 
2.1 Primary Objectives 
1. Arm A: To determine whether mTORC1  inhibition with RAD001 increases 
IRS-1/PI3K/AKT pathway activatio n in ER+/HER2- breast tumors ex vivo . 
2. Arm B (comparison with Arm A): To de termine whether presurgical treatment 
of patients with ER+/HER2- breast can cer with Letrozole suppresses IRS-
1/PI3K/AKT pathway activation compared to tumors from untreated patients. 
 
2.2 Secondary objectives 
1. To determine whether presurgical treat ment with Letrozole suppresses IRS-
1/PI3K/AKT pathway activati on compared to baseline. 
2. To determine whether the level of IR S-1/PI3K/AKT pathway activation is 
correlated with rate of tumor cell pro liferation as determined by Ki67 score. 
3. To determine whether RAD001-indu ced changes in IRS-1/PI3K/AKT 
signaling ex vivo  are correlated with rate of tumor cell proliferation as 
determined by Ki67 score. 
4. To identify changes in mRNA leve ls of ER-regulated gene induced by 
presurgical treatment with Letrozole. 
 
 3.0 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  
   Inclusion Criteria: 
 
3.1. Histologic documentation of invasive br east cancer by core need le or incisional 
biopsy. Excess baseline biopsy tumor tissu e sufficient to make three 5-micron 
sections must be available for molecu lar analyses as part of this study. 
 3.2. The invasive cancer must be estrogen receptor alpha (ER)-positive, with ER 
staining present in greater than 50% of invasive cancer cells by IHC 
 3.3.  The invasive cancer must be HER2-nega tive (IHC 0-1+, or with a FISH ratio of 
<1.8 if IHC is 2+ or if IHC has not been done).  
3.4. Clinical Stage I-III invasive breast cancer with the inte nt to treat with surgical 
resection of the primary tumor. Tumor must be ≥2 cm to provide adequate tissue. 
 
Presurgical letrozole  10 
 
3.5 Patients with multicentric or bilateral disease are eligible if the target lesions meet 
the other eligibility criteria. Samples from all available tumors are requested for research purposes. 
 
3.6. Women ≥ age 18, for whom adjuvant treatment with an aromatase inhibitor would 
be clinically indicated. Women must be either post-menopausal, or pre-
menopausal having undergone oophorectomy. 
 
3.7. Patients must meet the following clinical laboratory criteria: 
 Absolute neutrophil count (ANC)  1,000/mm
3 and platelet count  
75,000/mm3. 
 Total bilirubin  1.5  the upper limit of th e normal range (ULN). 
 Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST)  3  ULN. 
 
3.8. Ability to give informed consent. 
 
 
   Exclusion Criteria: 
 
 3.8. Prior endocrine therapy for any histol ogically-confirmed can cer is not allowed. 
Prior endocrine therapy that was administered ≥5 years ago for the prevention of 
breast cancer in patients with no hi story of breast cancer is allowed. 
 
3.9. Systemic drug treatment to induce ovarian suppression if woman is pre-
menopausal. 
 
3.10. Any other neoadjuvant th erapy for breast cancer [ i.e., treatment with any other 
anti-cancer agent besides Le trozole (10-21 days) before surgical resection of the 
primary breast tumor]. 
  
4.0 REGISTRATION 
Patients will be registered by the Clinical Research Associ ate through the Norris Cotton 
Cancer Center Clinical Trials office follo wing completion of pre-treatment evaluations 
and informed consent. At the time of regi stration, the following information will be 
recorded: 
 - Patient's name and subject identification number. 
 - Patient's date of birth.  - Date of treatment start. Eligibility criteria will be verified at the time of regi stration. A case number will be 
assigned following registration.    
 
Presurgical letrozole  11 
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN 
 5.1 Screening Period 
Subjects will provide written informed c onsent, be evaluated for eligibility 
criteria, and undergo standa rd baseline clinical an d tumor assessments and 
staging. Subjects will undergo our standard  pre-treatment surgical evaluation. To 
determine our ability to provide breast conservation, patients at DHMC have imaging of the breast prior to ne oadjuvant chemotherapy to include 
mammography, ultrasound, and breast MRI, to determine the suitability of breast 
conservation, and to guide the surgical  oncologist on surgical planning. This 
period will be up to 4 weeks prior to th e start of presurgical treatment with 
Letrozole for subjects enrolled onto Ar m B (this time period does not apply to 
Arm A).  
5.2 Treatment Period 
Patients will receive either A) no presur gical drug treatment, or B) presurgical 
treatment with Letrozole for 10-21 days prior to surgery. Arm A will enroll patients first until accrual is full (n=10). Following successful completion of molecular analyses to support the first primary objective (To determine whether mTORC1 inhibition with RAD001 in creases IRS-1/PI3K/AKT pathway 
activation in ER+/HER2- breast tumors ex vivo ), we will proceed to enroll 
patients in Arm B (presurgical Letrozol e, as below in Section 5.2.2).  An 
estimated 10 subjects will be enrolled into Arm B to obtain the necessary evaluable number of subjects (n=10).  
 
5.2.1. Surgery and tumor specimens 
The patient will undergo definitive su rgical resection of the primary 
tumor. Management of the axilla will be left to the judgment of the surgical oncologist and the patient.  It is strongly preferred that surg ery be scheduled between Monday and 
Thursday for optimal timing of tissue fixation and processing.  
 The Pathologist will promptly dissect the surgical primary tumor specimen. ASCO-CAP guidelines require  initiation of dissection of a 
surgical specimen within 1 hour of removal from the patient; for this 
study, minimal “cold ischemia time” is preferred.   The Pathologist will assess whether the tumor specimen is large enough to 
procure:    A. tissue for routine diagnostics    B. ≥8 core punch biopsies that ar e 1 mm in diameter and ≥0.5 cm long 
for research 
Presurgical letrozole  12 
 
   C. ≥4 core punch biopsies that ar e 3 mm in diameter and ≥0.25 cm long 
for research  A 2-cm tumor is expected to provide  sufficient material for all needs. 
 When the tumor is sufficiently large to provide adequate tissue ( e.g., >3 
cm), the Pathologist will first remove core punch biopsies for this research study using 1-mm and 3-mm punch biopsy devices.  All research samples 
must be acquired within 1.5 hours of  tissue removal from the patient; 
a shorter lag time is strongly preferred to maximize tissue viability.  
The Pathologist will then acquire ti ssue samples for routine diagnostics. 
 If the tumor specimen is approximately 2 cm, the Pathologist may opt to first procure tissue for routine diagnostics. Then if adequate tumor tissue remains to provide punch biopsies for research purposes, these samples will be taken from the tumor. If the tumor is too small to provide adequate tissue for research, the tumor will be  considered non-evaluable and the 
patient will need to be replaced.  Punch biopsy tumor specimens required fo r this research study are listed 
below in order of priority.  A) Fresh tissue (n=8) -  Using a 1-mm  punch biopsy device with plunger 
(provided by Dr. Miller), remove 8 tumor samples ≥0.5 cm long. These 
samples will be immediately  placed into cold (0-4°C) tissue culture 
medium (serum-free DMEM + Pen/Stre p; provided by Dr. Miller to be 
kept on-hand in Pathology lab) and ke pt on ice or refrigerated (0-4°C). 
These tissues will be transported within 30 minutes  of dissection to Dr. 
Miller’s lab on the 6th floor of Rubin Research  Building. Jennifer Bean, 
Wei Yang, and Todd Miller (members  of the Miller lab) will be 
responsible for transporting tissues, a nd need to be contacted early on the 
date of surgery with notification that samples will be available the same day. They will be paged when tumor tissues are available for pick-up. 
 B) Frozen tissue (n=2) -  Using a 3-mm  punch biopsy device  with plunger 
(provided by Dr. Miller), remove 2 tumor samples ≥ 0.25 cm long, put 
into cryotubes (1 core per tube), an d snap-freeze in li quid nitrogen. Liquid 
nitrogen can be provided in a small c ontainer by the Miller lab, if they are 
notified early on the day of surgery.  C) Formalin-fixed (FFPE) tissue (n=2)  - Using the same 3-mm  punch 
biopsy device, remove 2 tumor samples ≥ 0.25 cm long, fix in formalin (3 
hours to overnight), and paraffin-embed the next day as per standard tissue 
processing procedures in Pathology lab. Alternatively, if Pathology will be processing diagnostic FFPE tumor 
samples that will provide sufficient excess tissue for molecular analyses, 
Presurgical letrozole  13 
 
and tissues are fixed for less than 24 hours, then such samples may be 
used in lieu of punch biopsies.  D) Extra tumor tissue-  If tissue requirements for categories A, B, and C 
are filled and excess tumor tissue is available, more 1-mm cores of fresh 
viable tissue for tissue culture are re quested (up to 20 more). Such extra 
cores should be placed into tissue cult ure medium as in section A (above). 
 Histological qualification of tumor samples- The Pathologist will perform routine histological anal ysis of the diagnostic FFPE surgical tumor 
specimen. If the diagnostic  tumor sa mple is found to have <50% tumor 
cellularity, the tumor samples procured for research will be considered non-evaluable, and this patient will need to be replaced. 
 
5.2.2. Presurgical Letrozole 
Patients enrolled on Arm B will be treated with Letrozole (2.5 mg/day, 
administered orally) for 10-21 days pr ior to surgery. This time period has 
been and continues to be used as a standard time frame in presurgical 
studies with aromatase inhibitors in patients with ER+ breast cancer. This 
drug and dose are given as standard adjuvant therapy for up to 5 years following surgical removal of a primary ER+/HER2- breast tumor in patients with Stage I-III disease.  Th e final dose of Le trozole should be 
taken on the morning of surgery. 
 
It is strongly preferred that surg ery be scheduled between Monday and 
Thursday for optimal timing of tissue fixation and processing. 
 
The primary tumor will be surgica lly resected as in Section 5.2.1. The 
Pathologist will promptly dissect the surgical tumor specimen, and obtain punch biopsies for this study as in Section 5.2.1.  
5.2.3. Letrozole drug information  
Letrozole (4,4'-(1H-1,2,4-Triazol-1-ylmet hylene)bis-benzonitrile) is a syn-
thetic achiral benzydryltrizole derivativ e. It is an orally active highly 
selective, non-steroidal competitive inhibitor of the aromatase enzyme system ( 15, 16 ). Aromatase inhibitors block the aromatase enzyme, 
consequently lowering estrogen levels and thereby deprive the tumor of its growth stimulus. Letrozole effec tively inhibits the conversion of 
androgens to estrogens in both in vitro and in vivo (15).  This property 
makes it in particular suitable for postmenopausal women whose main source of estrogen is via peripheral ar omatization of androgen precursors. 
 
Preclinical and pharmacodynamic data in humans 
In vivo , in female rats, the aromatase inhibition manifests itself in a 
reduction in uterine weight, an incr ease in body weight, a decrease in 
serum estradiol concentration, an in crease in plasma LH concentration 
Presurgical letrozole  14 
 
(16, 17 ) and suppression of the growth of DMBA-induced rat mammary 
tumors ( 15, 18 ). The ED50 values for some of these effects lie in the range 
of 0.001 to 0.03 mg/kg with maximal e ndocrine and anti-tumor efficacy in 
the dose range of 0.3 to 1.0 mg/kg po ( 18). 
 Comparison to Aminoglutethimide (AG) Letrozole is up to 150-250 times more  potent than the first generation 
aromatase inhibitor AG, in vitro and more than 10,000 times as potent as 
AG in inhibiting aromatase in vivo (15). The high potency  of letrozole is 
not accompanied by any significant e ffect on adrenal steroidogenesis in 
vitro or in vivo over its maximally effective dose range ( 16, 17 ). Inhibition 
of adrenal steroidogenesis resulting in  adrenal hypertrophy does occur 
with therapeutic doses of AG. Th e high potency a nd selectivity of  
letrozole explains its ph armacological profile and high therapeutic index. 
 
Activity in breast cancer patients 
In postmenopausal patients with advan ced breast cancer, daily doses of 0.1 
to 5 mg letrozole suppressed plasma levels of estradiol, estrone and estrone sulfate to 75-95% from baseline ( 15, 19 ).  Estrogen suppression 
was maintained throughout the treatmen t period of 28 days in all patients. 
 Selectivity of letrozole Letrozole is a highly selective inhibitor of the aromatase enzyme. No clinically relevant changes in the plasma levels of cortisol, aldosterone, 11-deoxycortisol, 17-hydroxyprogester one, ACTH or plasma renin 
activity were found in postmenopausal pa tients treated with  a daily dose of 
letrozole ranging from 0.1 to 5 mg ( 15, 20, 21 ). Synacthen7 tests 
performed after 6 weeks of treatmen t with daily doses  of 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 
2.5 and 5 mg letrozole indicated no atte nuation of aldostero ne or cortisol 
production ( 22). 
 Toxicities of letrozole Most adverse reactions to le trozole in the literature are mild to moderate in 
severity and are indistinguishable fro m the consequences of the patient’s 
metastatic breast cancer, the effects of estrogen deprivation, or other 
concurrent illness.  Reported events in greater than 5%  of subjects incl ude chest pain, 
hypertension, edema, hyperlipidemia, cough, dyspnea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, anorexia, increased  appetite, constipation, diarrhea, 
weight gain, weight loss, bone fractures , arthralgias, arthritis, back pain, 
bone pain, breast pain, myalgias, weakness, asthenia, dizziness, 
depression, fatigue, headache, inso mnia, lethargy, malaise, rash, hot 
flashes, sweats, vaginal bleeding, vaginal dryness, and infections. 
 
Presurgical letrozole  15 
 
Letrozole will be prescribed by the subject’s oncology provider and the 
subject will be asked to fill the pr escription at her commercial pharmacy. 
 
5.3 Study exit 
Following surgery, the patient’s role in  the study will end. The patient will 
then be treated as per standard-of-ca re by her treating oncologist. Subjects 
who begin letrozole in the pre-surgi cal setting may receive chemotherapy 
followed by resumption of letrozole or letrozole alone following the definitive surgical resection.  
 
5.4. Evaluable patients 
Subjects who proceed to a definitive surg ical procedure with A) tumor tissue 
sufficient to provide punch biopsy specimens for research purposes, and B) histologically-confirmed tumor tissue in the surgical specimen with ≥50% tumor 
cellularity, will be considered evaluabl e. Subjects whose surgical specimens do 
not contain adequate tumo r tissue to assess the pr imary endpoint will not be 
considered evaluable, and will need to be replaced.  
5.5.  Analyses 
  5.5.1. Ex vivo analysis of RAD001 effe cts on IRS-1/PI3K/AKT signaling. 
Fresh viable tumor cores in tissue culture medium (serum-free DMEM + Pen/Strep) will be placed into me dium containing 20 nM RAD001 (4 
cores) or DMSO control (4 cores) a nd cultured at 37°C for 1 hour. If extra 
tissue cores are available, we will treat +/- 20 nM RAD001 for 2-8 hours 
to evaluate delayed changes in si gnaling, and treat +/- 1 uM OSI-906 
(IGF-1R/InsR inhibitor) for 1-8 hour s to determine whether PI3K/AKT 
signaling is IGF-1R/InsR-dependent in these tumors. Tissue cores will 
then be snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. 
 Immunoblotting- Two cores each of DMSO- and RAD001-treated tumor 
will be homogenized and lysed on ice in RIPA buffer containing protease 
and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples w ill be sonicated and centrifuged, 
and supernatant will be used to qu antify protein concentration. Protein 
lysates for immunoblotting will then  be mixed with reducing sample 
buffer and stored at -80°C.  Lysates will be heated at 95°C for 1 min. just 
before SDS-PAGE following by immunobl ot analysis using antibodies 
against:  IRS-1 phospho-IRS-1-Ser636/639 (mar ker of p70S6K activity) 
IRS-2 AKT phospho-AKT-S473 (marker of mTORC2 activity) phospho-AKT-T308 (marker of PIP
3 levels and PI3K/PDK1 activity) 
4E-BP1 phospho-4E-BP1-Thr37/46 (marke r of mTORC1 activity) 
Presurgical letrozole  16 
 
p70S6K 
phospho-p70S6K-Thr389 (marke r of mTORC1 activity) 
S6 phospho-S6-Ser240/244 (marker of p70S6K activity) phospho-S6-Ser235/236 (marker of p70S6K and RSK activity) Erk1/2 phospho-Erk1/2-Thr202/Tyr204 (marker of MEK activity) IGF-1Rb InsRb 
 
If excess protein lysate  is available, we w ill immunoprecipita te the p85 
subunit of PI3K, and immunoblot for IRS-1 and IRS-2 to assess drug 
induced changes in IRS-1/2-induced PI3K activation.  We will also immunoprecipitate using phospho-Tyro sine antibody, and immunoblot for 
IGF-1Rb, InsRb, IRS-1, and IRS-2 to assess protein activation. 
 
The primary goal of this analysis is to determine whether RAD001 
treatment ex vivo  globally decreases mTORC1 signaling (indicated by a 
decrease in levels of phospho- p70S6K, phospho-S6, and phospho-4E-
BP1), increases IRS-1/2 levels an d phosphorylation, and increases AKT 
phosphorylation. Secondary goals are to  assess changes in IGF-1R and 
InsR activation, and compensatory  signaling through the MEK/Erk 
pathway. 
 
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) on frozen  tissues- Two cores each of 
DMSO- and RAD001-treated tumor will be sectioned and processed for 
IHC in the Pathology Translational Re search Shared Resource. Tissue 
sections will be immunostained using antibodies against phospho-S6-
Ser240/244, phospho-AKT-S473, phospho-AKT-T308 and phospho-IGF-1Rb/InsR- Tyr1131/Tyr1146. Samples will  be scored using a Histoscore 
scale that incorporates stai ning intensity and frequency ( 12). 
 
The primary goal of this analysis is to determine whether RAD001 
treatment ex vivo  decreases mTORC1 signaling (indicated by a decrease in 
levels of phospho-S6) and increases AKT phosphorylation uniformly throughout tumor cores, and whether dr ug treatment alte rs IGF-1R/InsR 
phosphorylation (which cannot be asse ssed by immunoblot analysis of 
protein lysates). Staining intensities in the center of each core will be 
compared to the outer edges to assess uniformity of signal; non-uniformity may be due to time of exposure of cells to drug or medium. 
  5.5.2.  Immunohistochemical analysis of pre- vs. post-Letrozole tumors.  
Baseline (diagnostic core biopsy speci men) and post-Letrozole (surgical 
specimen) tumor samples will be sec tioned and processed for IHC in the 
Pathology Translational Research Shar ed Resource. Tissue sections will 
be immunostained using antibodies ag ainst ER, PR, and Ki67. ER and PR 
Presurgical letrozole  17 
 
will be scored using a Histoscore scale ( 23); we expect Letrozole 
treatment to decrease PR levels, while ER may be unaffected. Ki67 will be scored by counting the number of positively-stained cells in 10 high-power (400x magnification) microscopic fields ( 24, 25 ). Pre- and post-
Letrozole Ki67+ cell counts will be compared by t-test; Letrozole treatment should induce an overa ll decrease in Ki67 score. 
 
The primary goal of this analysis is to determine whether changes in signaling induced by RAD001 treatment ex vivo  are associated with Ki67 
score. A higher post-anti -estrogen Ki67 score, and a smaller decrease in 
Ki67 score in response to presurgical treatment with an anti-estrogen, are associated with shorter recurrence-free survival ( 26). Hence, it is thought 
that a higher level of residual tumor cell proliferation (h igher Ki67 score) 
following anti-estrogen treatment, or a weaker biological response (change 
in Ki67 score) to anti-estrogen treatm ent, are indicative of less dependence 
of tumor cells on ER for growth and su rvival. Our preclinical data indicate 
that ER drives IRS-1 and IGF-1R expression, which facilitate RAD001-
induced PI3K/AKT activation. Theref ore, in tumors that are less 
dependent upon ER, Letrozole treatment is expected to have less of an 
effect on IRS-1/PI3K/AKT signaling. Such findings would support the use 
of combinations of anti-estrogens and mTORC1 inhibitors in patients with 
ER-driven tumors. 
 
6.0 DATA COLLECTION, HANDLIN G AND RECORD KEEPING  
6.1. Confidentiality 
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according 
to the requirements of the Health Insura nce Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA). Participants will sign an aut horization that includes the following:  
• What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in 
this study 
• Who will have access to that information and why • Who will use or disclose that information • The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of 
their PHI.  
 
In the event that a subjec t revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the 
investigator, by regulation, retains the ability  to use all information collected prior 
to the revocation of s ubject authorization. 
 
Loss of patient confidentiality is a risk  of participation.  Study participant 
identities will be kept confidential except as required by law.  Subjects’ samples 
will be identified by code only (i.e., linked, but de-identified).  Patient samples will be de-identified at the time and site  of collection.  Participant and study 
information will be kept in the Velos eResearch password-protected database or its equivalent.  Additionally, documents cont aining participant identifiers, such as 
those from the medical record to confirm eligibility, will be filed in binders and 
Presurgical letrozole  18 
 
kept in a locked, secure location in the Office of Clinical Research at the Norris 
Cotton Cancer Center. 
 
6.2. Data retention 
Following closure of the study, th e investigator  will maintain all site study records 
in a safe and secure location.  The record s are maintained to allow easy and timely 
retrieval, when needed (e.g., audit or inspection) and, wh enever feasible, to allow 
any subsequent review of da ta in conjunction with assessment of the facility, 
supporting systems, and staff.  Upon co mpletion of study analysis, research 
information is stored in Dartmouth Colle ge Records Management off-site storage 
located at 6218 Etna Road, Hanover, NH  03755.  Documents are shredded on site 
after 50 years of storage.  Participant and study information will be kept in the Velos eResearch password 
protected database (or its equivalent) indefinitely. 
 
7.0 STUDY MONITORING, AUDI TING, AND INSPECTING  
 
7.1 Safety and Data Monitoring 
 
This study will be monitored by the Data Safety Monitoring and Accrual Committee (DSMAC) of the Norris Cotton Cancer Center.  The Committee meets 
quarterly to review accrual rates and info rmation of all studies that have accrued 
participants.  The DSMAC has the authority  to suspend or terminate all research 
activities that fall with in its jurisdiction.  In the event that a study is suspended or 
terminated by the DSMAC, that informa tion will be forwar ded to the CPHS 
office.   
 
7.2 On-Site Monitoring  
Clinical research monitoring will be c onducted by appropriatel y trained staff of 
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center Clinical Trials Office. This monitoring will 
include periodic assessment of the regulat ory compliance, data quality, and study 
integrity. Study records will be reviewed  and directly compared to source 
documents and the conduct of the study will  be discussed with the investigator, 
Monitors may request access to all re gulatory documents, source documents, 
CRFs, and other study documentation for on-site inspection. Direct access to 
these documents is guaranteed by the i nvestigator, who must  provide support at 
all times for these activities. 
 7.3 Auditing and Inspecting  
Participation as an investigator in this study implies acceptance of potential 
inspection by government regulatory auth orities and applicable Dartmouth 
compliance and quality assurance offices. The investigator will permit study-
Presurgical letrozole  19 
 
related audits and inspections by the Dartmouth CPHS, government regulatory 
bodies, and Dartmouth compliance and quality assurance groups of all study 
related documents (e.g. source documents, regulatory documents, data collection 
instruments, study data etc. ) The investigator will ensure the capability for 
inspections of applicable study-relate d facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic 
laboratory, etc.) 
 
 8.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING
 
 
Patients on Arm B will be instructed to repor t the occurrence of any adverse event (this 
will not apply to participants on Arm A). An adverse event is any undesirable event 
associated with the administration of letrozol e. Adverse events will be graded according 
to the NCI Common Toxicity Criteria Versi on 4.0.  A copy of the CTC version 4.0 can be 
downloaded from the CTEP home page (http://ctep.info.nih.gov).  All appropriate 
treatment areas should have access to a copy of the CTC version 4.0. 
 This trial will be independently monitored by the Norris Cotton Cancer Center Data Safety and Accrual Monitoring Committee.  
 The following definitions will be used to assess causality: No: The clinical adverse event is definitely unrelated to the study 
medications (e.g., does not follow  a reasonable temporal sequence 
from study medication administration, present prior to receiving study 
medication, etc.) 
Unlikely: The study medications do not ha ve any reasonable association with the 
observed experience; however, rela tionship cannot be definitely 
excluded. 
Possibly: The connection with study medi cation administration appears feasible, 
but cannot be excluded  with certainty (e.g.,  follows a reasonable 
temporal sequence from medication administration, but may also be 
related to other known factors). 
Probably: The clinical expe rience appears relate d to the study me dications with a 
high degree of certainty (e.g., follows  a reasonable temporal sequence 
from medication administration and abates upon discontinuation of the 
medication, cannot be reasonably explained by known characteristics 
of the patient’s clinical state or ot her modes of therapy administered to 
the patient, etc.) 
  
9.0. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
9.1 PRIMARY ENDPOINT – The pr imary endpoint of this trial is the level of IRS-
1/PI3K/AKT pathway activation in prim ary tumors, measured by densitometric 
analysis of immunoblot signals of ma rkers of pathway activation (IRS-1, 
phospho-IRS-1-Ser636/639, phospho-AKT-T308, phospho-AKT-S473). 
9.2  SECONDARY ENDPOINT – The seconda ry endpoint is Ki67 score, as 
determined by the percentage of Ki67+ tumor cells by IHC. 
Presurgica
 
9
9
9
9
l letrozole 
.3 PRI M
RAD 0
patie n
tumo r
phos p
immu
Signa
be co
separ a
treate d
the m
indep e
RAD 0
.4 SEC O
presu r
comp a
1/PI3 K
samp l
surge r
is as s
RAD 0
corre l
mark e
.5 STA T
type I
.6 SAM P
tumo r
MARY AN A
001 treatme
nts with L e
rs. Signal va
pho-AKT-S 4
unoblots. Be l
l values of c
ompared us
ately in tu m
d, as shown 
magnitude o
endent t-tes t
001 (shown b
ONDARY A
rgical treat m
ared to bas
K/AKT pa t
les from p a
ry (post-Let r
sociated wi t
001-induce d
lation betw e
ers as deter m
TISTICAL T
 error will b
PLE SIZE –
r samples ex
ALYSIS P L
nt of tumo r
trozole, alt e
lues of IRS -
473 will b
low is an ill u
control (DM S
ing a 2-si d
mors from e a
below in lef
of change i n
t), to deter m
below in rig
ANALYSIS 
ment with 
eline will b
hway mar k
atients acqu i
rozole). We 
th the level 
d changes 
een Ki67 s c
mined by im m
TESTING -
e 0.05. 
– The prima r
x vivo , and/ o
LAN - The 
r samples e
er IRS-1/PI
-1, phospho -
be determ
ustration of p
SO)-treated 
ded paired 
ach arm of 
ft and cente r
n signal v a
mine wheth e
ght panel). 
PLAN – S e
Letrozole s
be achieve d
kers scored 
ired A) at b
will also d e
of IRS-1/ P
in IRS-1 /
core and d
munoblot a n
All statisti c
ry analyses d
or presurgi c
 primary a
ex vivo , and
I3K/AKT p a
-IRS-1-Ser6 3
mined by 
projected d a
and RAD0 0
t-test. The s
the study (
r panels). A n
alues in A r
er Letrozole 
econdary a n
suppresses I
d using a p a
by IHC a
baseline (d i
etermine w h
PI3K/AKT p
/PI3K/AKT 
densitometri c
nalysis or IH C
cal tests wil l
determine w
cal treatmen t
analyses de t
d/or presurg i
athway act i
36/639, pho s
densitomet r
ata and rele v
01-treated t u
se tests wi
(i.e., untrea t
n additional 
rm A vs. A
treatment a
nalysis to d e
IRS-1/PI3K /
aired t-test 
analysis of 
iagnostic bi
hether tumo r
pathway ac t
signaling, 
c signal va l
C Histoscor
l be 2-side d
whether RA D
t of patient s
20 
termine w h
ical treatm e
ivation in b
spho-AKT- T
ric analysi s
vant compar i
umor sample s
ll be perf o
ted, or letr o
test will co m
Arm B (2 -
alters respo n
etermine w h
/AKT acti v
comparing 
matching t
opsy) and B
r Ki67 IHC 
tivation, or 
by Spe a
lues of pat h
e. 
d, and the o v
D001 treatm e
s with Letr o
hether 
ent of 
breast 
T308, 
s of 
isons. 
s will 
ormed 
ozole-
mpare 
-sided 
nse to 
 
hether 
vation 
IRS-
tumor 
B) at 
score 
with 
arman 
hway 
verall 
ent of 
ozole, 

Presurgical letrozole  21 
 
alter IRS-1/PI3K/AKT pathway activat ion in breast tumors. RAD001-induced 
pathway activation will be defined as a ≥50% increase in phospho-AKT 
densitometric signal value compared to DMSO-treated control; this scoring 
system provides a binary metric for sample  size determination for Arm B (below). 
Given that this is a pilot study, we do not know what fraction of ER+/HER2- 
breast tumors will exhibit RAD001-induced  IRS-1/PI3K/AKT activation. Hence, 
tumors from 10 untreated patients in Arm A will be used to determine the 
frequency with which RAD001 induces AKT activation. 
The fraction of tumors in Arm A (unt reated patients) th at exhibit RAD001-
induced AKT activation will be used to determine the number of patients that 
need to be enrolled in Arm B (presurgical Letrozole treatment) to detect a significant effect of presurgical Letr ozole treatment on RAD001-induced AKT 
activation. We estimate that ≤15% of Letrozole-treated tumors will exhibit 
RAD001-induced AKT activation. If we  observe that RAD001 increases 
phospho-AKT in _X_ of 10 tumors in Arm A, we will enroll _Y_ patients in Arm 
B (presurgical Letrozole) to provide a su fficient number of tumors to detect a 
significant effect ( p≤0.05) of presurgical Letrozol e on RAD001-induced changes 
in phospho-AKT levels with 80% power (calculated using uncorrected chi-
squared statistic). If we observe that ≤3 tumors from untreated patients in Arm A 
exhibit RAD001-induced AKT activation, th e study will be terminated at this 
point, and Arm B will not enroll patients. To account for interpatient/intertumor 
variability, we will enroll a minimum of 10 patients in Arm B. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.  
10. HUMAN SUBJECTS 
10.1 Subject patient population X 
(n of tumors  from untreated patients that exhibit 
a ≥50% increase in P-AKT levels in response 
to RAD001 treatment ex vivo )  Y 
(n of patients to be enrolled in 
Arm B, presurgical Letrozole) 
0-3 Terminate study 
4-6 30 
7-8 14 
9-10 10 
Presurgical letrozole  22 
 
Patients with potentially resectable Stage I-III biopsy-proven ER+/HER2- breast 
cancer.  
10.2 Consent Procedures 
Patients must give a statement of informed consent.  The informed consent must be approved by the Committee for the Pr otection of Human Subjects at Dart-
mouth College, the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Me dical Center IRB.  Before initiating 
a trial, the investigator w ill have written and dated approval from the CPHS of 
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center fo r the trial protocol, amendment(s), 
written informed consent form, consen t form updates, subject recruitment 
procedures (e.g., advertisements) and writ ten information to be provided to 
subjects.  The investigator s, or a person designated by the investigators, will 
explain the benefits and risks of particip ation in the study to each subject (and  
impartial witness when applicable) and obt ain written informed consent prior to 
the subject entering the study (before initiation of non-routine tests and 
administration of study drug).  The final fo rm must be agreed to by the CPHS of 
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and must contain all elements in the sample form, in language readily understood by th e subject.  Each subject’s original 
consent form, signed and dated by the subject and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion, will be re tained by the investigator.  In addition, 
a copy of the signed informed consen t will be given to the subject. 
 
10.3  Potential Risks and Benefits 
The physical risk of study participation is low. Subj ects in Arm A are receiving 
no study-related treatment. Subjects in  Arm B are receiving 10-21 days of 
treatment with 2.5 mg/day Letrozole prior to  surgery; adjuvant therapy with this 
drug and dose are standard-of-care fo r this patient population, and will be 
administered for up to 5 years after surger y. The results of this  investigation may 
provide novel information on ER and PI 3K/mTOR signaling pathways in breast 
cancer, which may shape the development of future treatment regimens to benefit 
future patients with breast cancer. Loss of patient confidentiality is a risk of participation.  Participation in this study is of low overall risk and has no potential 
for direct clinical benefit.  
10.4  Confidentiality 
The pathology specimens from the patient biopsies will be la beled only with the 
patient case number.  The key matching pati ent identification with the patient case 
number will be kept in a locked drawer in the PI’s office.  Only the PI and his designated representatives will have access to this key.  No one will have access to the study records but for the I nvestigators and CRA’s, the Dartmouth-
Hitchcock CPHS, the FDA, and OPRR.
 
 
 
11.  BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
1. S. Seifert, I. Wachter, G. Schmelzle, R. Dillmann, A knowledge -based approach to soft tissue 
reconstruction of the cervical spine. IEEE transactions on medical imaging  28, 494 (Apr, 2009). 
Presurgical letrozole  23 
 
2. J. Baselga  et al. , Everolimus in postmenopausal hormone-r eceptor-positive advanced breast cancer. N Engl 
J Med  366, 520 (Feb 9, 2012). 
3. H. Yoshida, M. Ueta, Y. Maki, A. Sakai, A. Wa da, Activities of Escherichia coli ribosomes in IF3 and 
RMF change to prepare 100S ribosome formation on entering the stationary growth phase. Genes to cells : 
devoted to molecular & cellular mechanisms  14, 271 (Feb, 2009). 
4. S. Chia  et al. , Association of leukocyte and neutrophil counts with infarct size, left ventricular function and 
outcomes after percutaneous coronary intervention for ST-elevation myocardial infarction. The American 
journal of cardiology  103, 333 (Feb 1, 2009). 
5. J. Ahn  et al. , Variation in KLK genes, prostate-specific antigen and risk of prostate cancer. Nat Genet  40, 
1032 (Sep, 2008). 
6. K. E. O'Reilly  et al. , mTOR inhibition induces upstream receptor tyrosine kinase sign aling and activates 
Akt. Cancer Res  66, 1500 (Feb 1, 2006). 
7. A. Carracedo  et al. , Inhibition of mTORC1 leads to MAPK pathway activation through a PI3K-dependent 
feedback loop in human cancer. J Clin Invest  118, 3065 (Sep, 2008). 
8. Y. Shi, H. Yan, P. Frost, J. Gera, A. Lichtenstein, Mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitors activate the 
AKT kinase in multiple myeloma cells by up-regula ting the insulin-like growth  factor receptor/insulin 
receptor substrate-1/phosphati dylinositol 3-kinase cascade. Mol Cancer Ther  4, 1533 (Oct, 2005). 
9. A. Tzatsos, Raptor Binds the SAIN (Shc and IRS- 1 NPXY Binding) Domain of Insulin Recepto r Substrate-
1 (IRS-1) and Regulates the Phosphorylation of IRS-1 at Ser-636/639 by mTOR. Journal of Biological 
Chemistry  284, 22525 (Aug 21, 2009). 
10. D. Fagan, D. Yee, Crosstal k Between IGF1R and Es trogen Receptor Signa ling in Breast Cancer. J 
Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia  13, 423 (Dec, 2008). 
11. W. R. Miller  et al. , Changes in breast cancer transcriptional profiles after treatment  with the aromatase 
inhibitor, letrozole. Pharmacogenet Genomics  17, 813 (Oct, 2007). 
12. Ellis MJ, Coop A, Singh B, Mauriac L, Llombert-Cussac A, Janickie F, et al. Letrozole is more effective 
neoadjuvant endocrine therapy than tamoxifen for ErbB-1 and/or ErbB-2 positive, estrogen receptor–
positive primary breast cancer: evidence fr om a phase III randomized trial. J Clin Oncol  19:3808-3816 
(Sept, 2001). 
13. Ellis MJ, Tao Y, Luo J, et al. Outcome prediction for estrogen rece ptor positive breast cancer based on 
postneoadjuvant endocrine therapy tumor characteristics. J Natl Cancer Inst  100:1380-1388,( 2008.) 
14. Ellis MJ, Suman VJ, Hoog J, et al.  Randomized phase II neoadjuvant comparison between letrozole, 
anastrozole, and exemestane for postrmenopausal wome n with estrogen receptor rich stage 2 to 3 breast 
cancer: clinical and biomarker outcomes and predic tive value of the baseline PAM50-based intrinsic 
subtype – ACOSOG Z1031. J Clin Oncol  29:2342-2349 (June 2011).   
15. Investigator’s Brochure, CGS 20267, Letrozole Edition No. 4. Ciba-Geigy Ltd., Basel, Switzerland. 14 
August 1996. 
16. Bhatnagar AS, Häusler A, Schieweck K, et al. Highly selective inhibition of estrogen biosynthesis by CGS 
20267, a new non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor. J Steroid Biochem Molec Biol  37: 1021-27, 1990. 
17. Bhatnagar AS, Batzl C, Häusler A, et al. The role of estrogen in the feedback regulation of 
folliclestimulating hormone secretion in the female rat. J Steroid Biochem Molec Biol  47: 161-166, 1993. 
18. CGS 20267 (Aromatase Inhibitor): Effects on mammary tumor-bearing rats. BIOLOGY REPORT 56/91. 
CIBA-GEIGY Ltd., Basel, Switzerland. May 28, 1991. 
19. Iveson TJ, Smith IE, Ahern J, Smithers DA, et al.  Phase I study of the oral nonsteroidal aromatase 
inhibitor CGS 20267 in postmenopausal patients with advanced breast cancer. Cancer Res  53: 266-270, 
1993. 
20. CGS 20267: (Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor): Open, Phase I trial in post menopausal patients with 
advanced breast cancer. Trial protocol No. AR/BC 1. CIBA-GEIGY Ltd., Basel, Switzerland. October 22, 
1993. 
21.  CGS 20267: (Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor): Open, Phase I trial in post menopausal patients with 
advanced breast cancer. (Execution Phase). Report AR /BC 1. CIBA Pharmaceuti cals Ltd., Horsham, UK. 
July 31, 1994. 
22. Open-Label Dose Range Finding Trial of CGS 20267 in postmenopausal Women with Metastatic Breast 
Cancer (Phase I). Report Protocol 01. Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Summit NJ, USA, June 9, 1994. 
23. N. Wadamori, R. Shinohara, Y. Ishihara, Photoacoustic depth profiling of a skin model for non-invasive 
glucose measurement. Conference proceedings : ... Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Presurgical letrozole  24 
 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. 
Conference  2008 , 5644 (2008). 
24. D. Chen  et al. , Recognition of aggressive human behavior using binary local motion descriptors. 
Conference proceedings : ... Annual International Conference of the IE EE Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. Conference  2008 , 5238 (2008). 
25. S. Hiratsuka, K. Ishihara, T. Kitagawa, S. Wada, H. Yokogoshi, Effect of dietary docosahexaenoic acid 
connecting phospholipids on the lipid peroxidation of the brain in mice. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo)  54, 
501 (Dec, 2008). 
26. M. Dowsett  et al. , Prognostic value of Ki67 expression after short-term presurgical endocrine therapy for 
primary breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst  99, 167 (Jan 17, 2007). 
  