 
Document No. <  >      
CONFIDENTIAL i of i  26Jun2017 
 
 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN 
 
 
A Multicenter, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study Evaluating the 
Efficacy, Safety, and Pharmacokinetics of Brachial Plexus Block with EXPAREL for 
Postsurgical Analgesia in Subjects Undergoing Total Shoulder Arthroplasty or Rotator 
Cuff Repair  
 
 
 
 
Protocol No.:  402-C-327 
IND No.:  69,198  
Study Phase:  3 
Study Drug:  EXPAREL (bupivacaine liposome injectable 
suspension)  
Date/Version:  26 June 2017 / Version 1.0   
Prepared by:  Richard Willey , M.S. 
Sponsor:  Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc.  
5 Sylvan Way  
Parsippany, NJ 07054  
Tel: 973 -254-3560  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidentiality Statement 
The information contained in this document is confidential and the property of Pacira Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc.  It should not be reproduced, revealed, or sent to third parties other than Institutional Review 
Boards/Independent Ethics Committees and the Investigator’s research support staff participating in the 
conduct of the study without the prior written authorization of Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc.  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 3 of 167 26Jun2017 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. SIGNATURE PAGE 2 
2. TABLE OF CONTENTS 3 
3. LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 5 
4. INTRODUCTION 6 
5. STUDY OBJECTIVES 7 
5.1. Primary Objective 7 
5.2. Secondary Objectives 7 
6. STUDY OVERVIEW 8 
7. DEFINITIONS 10 
8. ANALYSIS SETS 13 
9. STATISTICAL METHODS OF ANALYSIS 14 
9.1. General Principles 14 
9.1.1.  Handling Missing Values 16 
9.1.1.1.  Area under the VAS-Time Curve 16 
9.1.1.2.  Exposure, Surgery, and Rescue Medication Date or Time 17 
9.1.1.3.  Rescue Pain Medication 17 
9.1.1.4.  Adverse Event or Concomitant Medications Dates or Times 17 
9.1.1.5.  Adverse Event Severity or Relationship to Study Drug 18 
9.1.1.6.  Time to Event 18 
9.1.2.  Multiplicity Adjustments 18 
9.1.3.  By-Center Analyses 18 
9.2. Subject Disposition 18 
9.3. Description of Demographics and Baseline Characteristics 19 
9.3.1.  Demographics 19 
9.3.2.  Baseline Characteristics 20 
9.4. Surgery Characteristics 20 
9.5. Intraoperative, Prior, and Concomitant Medications 20 
9.6. Measurements of Treatment Compliance 21 
9.7. Efficacy Analysis 21 
9.7.1.  Efficacy Endpoints 21 
9.7.1.1.  Primary Efficacy 21 
9.7.1.2.  Secondary Efficacy 21 
9.7.1.3.  Tertiary Efficacy 22 
9.7.1.4.  Area under the Curve 22 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 4 of 167 26Jun2017 9.7.1.5.  Opioid Consumption 22 
9.7.1.6.  Time to First Opioid Rescue Medication Use 23 
9.7.1.7.  Pain-free 23 
9.7.1.8.  Overall Benefit of Analgesia Score (OBAS) 23 
9.7.2.  Methods of Analysis 23 
9.7.2.1.  Primary Efficacy Analysis 24 
9.7.2.2.  Secondary Efficacy Analyses 24 
9.7.2.3.  Tertiary Efficacy Analyses 25 
9.8. Safety Analyses 28 
9.8.1.  Vital Signs 28 
9.8.2.  Electrocardiograms 28 
9.8.3.  Neurological Assessments 29 
9.8.4.  Sensation Tests 29 
9.8.5.  Degree of motor nerve block Assessments 30 
9.8.6.  Adverse Events 30 
9.8.7.  Laboratory Parameters 32 
9.9. Pharmacokinetic Analysis 32 
9.10.  Interim Analysis 33 
9.10.1.  Pharmacokinetic Review 33 
9.10.2.  Sample Size Review 33 
9.11.  Significance Testing 34 
10. SAMPLE SIZE CALCULATIONS 35 
11. REFERENCES 36 
12. TIME AND EVENTS SCHEDULE OF STUDY PROCEDURES 37 
13. MULTIPLE IMPUTATION EXAMPLE PROGRAM CODE 38 
14. TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR TABLE MOCK-UPS 40 
15. TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR LISTING MOCK-UPS 127 
16. TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR FIGURE MOCK-UPS 162 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 5 of 167 26Jun2017 3. LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
Abbreviation  Description  
AE Adverse event  
ANOVA  Analysis of variance  
ATC  Anatomical therapeutic class  
AUC  Area under the curve  
BLOQ  Below the limit of quantification  
BMI  Body mass index  
bpm Beats per minute  
CI Confidence interval  
CMH  Cochran -Mantel -Haenszel  
CRF  Case report form  
CSR  Clinical study report  
d Day 
ECG  Electrocardiogram  
EMA  European Medicines Agency  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
FNB  Femoral nerve block  
hr, h hour 
ICF Informed consent form  
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
IV Intravenous  
LOCF  Last observation carried forward  
LS Least square  
MedDRA  Medical dictionary for regulatory affairs  
MPADSS  Modified Postanesthesia Discharge Scoring System  
min minutes  
MED  mg Morphine equivalent  dose in mg  
n Number of subjects  
OBAS  Overall benefit of analgesia  
OR Operating room  
PACU  Postanesthesia care unit  
PCA  Patient -controlled analgesia  
PK Pharmacokinetics  
PO Oral 
ROW  Rest of world  
RCR  Rotator cuff repair  
SAE  Serious adverse event  
SAP Statistical analysis plan  
SD Standard deviation  
SE Standard error  
SPI Sum of pain intensity scores  
TEAE  Treatment -emergent adverse event  
TLF Table, listings and figures  
TSA  Total shoulder arthroplasty  
VAS  Visual analog scale  
WHO  World Health Organization  
WHO -DD World Health Organization – Drug Dictionary  
wWOCF  Windowed worst observation carried forward  
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 6 of 167 26Jun2017 4. INTRODUCTION 
This Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) describes the planned statistical analysis and reporting of 
the clinical study 402-C-327 titled “A Multicenter, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-
Controlle
d Study Evaluating the Efficacy, Safety, and Pharmacokinetics of Brachial Plexus 
Block with EXPAREL for Postsurgical Analgesia in Subjects Undergoing Total Shoulder 
Arthroplasty or Rotator Cuff Repair ”. This study is intended to evaluate the magnitude and 
duration of the analgesic effect of a single-dose injection brachial plexus block with EXPAREL 
in subjects und
ergoing primary unilateral total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA) or rotator cuff repair 
(RCR)
. 
The structure and content of this SAP provide sufficient detail to meet the requirements 
identified by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), European Medicines Agency 
(EMA), and International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) of Technical Requirements for 
Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use: Guidance on Statistical Principles in Clinical 
Trials1.  All work planned and reported for this SAP will follow internationally accepted 
guidelines, published by the American Statistical Association2 and the Royal Statistical Society3, 
for statistical practice.   
The purposes of this SAP are to: 
 Outline the types of analyses and presentations of data that will form the basis for 
drawing
 conclusions to the study objectives and hypotheses outlined in the protocol. 
 Explain in detail how the data will be handled and analyzed, adhering to commonly 
accepted standards and practices for Good Statistical Practice. 
The planned analyses identified in this SAP may be included in clinical study reports (CSRs), 
regulatory submissions, or manuscripts.  Post-hoc exploratory analyses not necessarily identified 
in this SAP may be performed to further examine study data.  Any post-hoc, unplanned, or 
explora
tory analyses performed will be clearly identified as such in the final CSR. 
The following documents were reviewed in preparation of this SAP: 
 Amendment 1  of Protocol 402-C-327 issued on 15Feb2016. 
 Amendment 2 of Protoc
ol 402-C-327 issued on 17Nov2016. 
 Original P
rotocol 402-C-327 issued on24Nov2015. 
 CRF
 version 1.0 issued on 04Dec
2015.  
 ICH G
uidance on Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (E9). 
The reader of this SAP is encouraged to also read the clinical protocol and other identified 
documents for details on the planned conduct of this study.  Operational aspects related to 
collection and timing of planned clinical assessments are not repeated in this SAP unless relevant 
to the planned analyses. 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 7 of 167 26Jun2017 5. STUDY OBJECTIVES 
5.1. Primary Objective  
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the magnitude and duration of the analgesic 
effect achieved following single-dose injection brachial plexus block with EXPAREL in subjects 
undergoing primary unilateral total shoulder arthroplasty or rotator cuff repair. 
5.2. Secondary Objectives 
The secondary objectives of this study are to assess the efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetic 
(PK) profiles of EXPAREL, as well as the onset and duration of sensory and motor function 
blockade, following administration for analgesia in subjects undergoing primary unilateral total 
shoulder arthroplasty or rotator cuff repair.  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 8 of 167 26Jun2017 6. STUDY OVERVIEW 
This is a Phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study.  Subjects will be 
monitored for 5 days after surgery and followed for 30 days after surgery.  Subjects will be 
randomized (1:1) to receive a 20mL injection of EXPAREL 133mg (10mL of EXPAREL 
266mg/20mL expanded with 10mL of normal saline) via an ultrasound guided single-injection 
brachial plexus, interscalene or supraclavicular, nerve block at least 1 hour before surgery. 
Major c
hanges impacting the statistical analysis plan between Protocol Amendment 1 and 
Protocol Amendment 2 are as follows (for a complete record of the changes, see Protocol 
Amendment 2) :  
 Under Protocol Amendment 1, subjects were randomized to (1:1:1) to receive 
EXPAREL 133mg, EXPAREL 266mg or placebo.  Under Protocol Amendment 2 the 
EXPARE
L 266mg dose was removed from the randomization scheme and efficacy 
endpoints for the study.  
 Under Protocol Amendment 1, 300 subjects were planned to be randomized into the 
study.  Under Protocol Amendment 2, approximately 120 subjects were planned to be 
randomized into the study in order to achieve 50 subjects on EXPAREL 133mg and 
50 subjects on placebo. 
 Under Protocol Amendment 1, the VAS was not scheduled to be measured every 15 
minutes while in the PACU and prior to PACU discharge as it is in Protocol 
Amendment 2.  
 Under P
rotocol Amendment 1,  subjects had their PK assessments scheduled under 
the same sampling schedule, where under Protocol Amendment 2, a population PK 
sampling scheme was implemented. 
 Under Amendment 2, assessments at 84, 96, 108, and 120 hours were removed.  
 The Stud
y Stopping Rules were modified.   
 Under Amendment 2, postsurgically, all subjects will receive 
acetaminophen/paracetamol up to 1000 mg PO or IV every 8 hours (q8h) unless 
contraindicated.  The total daily dose of acetaminophen/paracetamol should not 
exceed 3000 mg. 
Subjects will be allowed rescue medication upon request to control their pain.  Rescue 
medication will be oral (PO) immediate release oxycodone.  If subject cannot tolerate PO 
medication, intravenous (IV) morphine or hydromorphone may be used as rescue medication. 
 
Pain will be assessed using a 10 cm visual analog scale (VAS).  Pain will be assessed at multiple 
timepoints during the study. 
Plasma bupivacaine concentrations will be determined at multiple timepoints during the study.   
Other postsurgical assessments include: 
 Postsurgical opioid consumption;  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 9 of 167 26Jun2017  Overall benefit of analgesia score (OBAS);  
 S
ubject satisfaction with overall analgesia using a 5-point Likert scale;  
 S
ubject’s discharge readiness as assessed by Modified Postanesthesia Discharge Scoring 
Sy
stem (MPADSS);  
 Unscheduled phone calls or office visits related to pain;   
 Clinical laboratories;  
 Vital sign measurements; 
 ECGs;
 
 Ne
urological assessment ;  
 S
ensory function assessment at 2 locations as measured by: 
o C
old, 
o P
inprick, 
o L
ight touch; 
 De
gree of motor nerve block (Lovett scale) assessments : 
o Thumb,
 
 Abducti
on (radial nerve), 
 Adduction (ulnar nerve), 
 Opposition (median nerve), 
o Elbow flexion (musculocutaneous nerve) ;  
 Adverse events; 
 C
oncomitant medications.  
 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 10 of 167 26Jun2017 7. DEFINITIONS 
Study Day 
Study Day is calculated as the date of event minus the date of surgery plus one (1), if the date of 
event is on or after the date of surgery.  Study Day is based on the calendar dates, thus days 
before the date of surgery have negative values while those on or after the date of surgery are 
positive.   
This Study Day definition differs from the protocol defined Study Day.  By this definition Day 1 
is the day of the operation while the protocol defines this as Day 0.  The definition assigning the 
operation to Day 1 aligns with the CDISC implementation guidance and FDA expectations. 
Treatment-emergent Adverse Events 
Treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) are those with onset between the start date and 
time of study drug administration and end of study (Study Day 30±3 days). 
Time 0 (zero) 
Time 0 is defined as the date and time of the start of study drug administration. 
Time Periods 
All schedule times have a window associated with them (see Time and Events Schedule for 
individual timepoint windows).  Various time frames are used in the data analyses which are 
dependent on these windows.  The table below defines the actual elapsed times with allowance 
for the windows that can be included in the window. 
Defined time frame (hrs)  Acceptable ela psed times (hrs)  
0-12 [0 to 13]  
0-24 [0 to 25]  
0-48 [0 to 50]  
0-72 [0 to 76]  
0-96 [0 to 100]  
0-Day 5  [0 to 144]  
0-Day 10  [0 to 264]  
24-48 [23 to 50]  
48-72 [ 46 to 76]  
72-96 [68 to 100]  
48-96 [46 to 100]  
If there are two or more data points that fit the time window the data point that occurs the latest 
and with highest value in the window should be used.  For example when selecting the data point 
for the 48 hour timepoint, if a subject has data points collected at 47 and 49 hours then the 49 
hour timepoint should be used.  In this example the 49 hour timepoint record will be used as the 
end and start of all time intervals, thus the 0-48 hour interval will end using the 49 hour record 
and the 48-72 hour interval will start using the same 49 hour record.   In addition, if there are two 
measurements for a given assessment at the exact same time, the measurement with the highest 
value should be used. 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 11 of 167 26Jun2017 Baseline 
Baseline is defined as the last available measurement or assessment prior to start of study 
treatment. 
Sensation Loss 
Sensation loss is when the subject reports absence of sensation for the sensory test (cold, 
pinprick or light touch) at each location (dermatome) [ shoulder (axillary), forearm 
(musculocutaneous), middle finger (median), fifth finger (ulnar) and thumb (radial) ]. Subjects may 
expe
rience loss of sensation multiple times and at different times in different locations.  A 
subject must have a return of sensation in the same sensory test in the same location before 
another loss of sensation can occur. 
Time to Sensation Loss 
Time to first loss of sensation is the first timepoint after baseline at which one of the three 
sensations (cold, pinprick and light touch) is absent at any of the test locations (dermatomes).  If 
sensation is not lost, time to sensation loss will be censored at the last available sensory 
assessment available for that subject.   Subjects who experience multiple losses of sensation will 
have multiple times to sensation loss but the time to first sensation loss will be used for analysis 
of time to first sensation loss.  
Return of Sensation 
Return of sensation is when a subject reports the presence of sensation after reporting a loss of 
sensation for the same sensory test (cold, pinprick and light touch) and location (dermatome).  
Subjects may experience returns of sensation multiple times.  A subject must experience multiple 
losses of sensation before multiple returns can be experienced .  Subjects who experience 
multiple returns of sensation will have multiple times to sensation return. 
Time to Return of Sensation 
Time to return of sensation is when all three sensations (cold, pinprick and light touch) are 
present after a subject experienced a loss of sensation in at least one of the sensory tests.  If 
sensa
tion doesn’t return, it will be censored at the time of the last sensory assessment available 
for that subject.   Only subjects who experience a loss of sensation can experience a return of 
sensati
on. 
Duration of Sensory Loss 
Duration of sensory loss is defined as the time from sensation loss to the time of sensation return.  
Subjects who never lost sensation will not be included in any analysis of Duration of Sensory 
Loss.  If sensation doesn’t return, then duration will be censored and is defined as the time 
betwee
n sensation loss and last sensory assessment.  
Duration will be calculated for each loss-return cycle for those subjects with multiple cycles.  If 
after the last sensation loss there is no return of sensation, the duration of the last cycle will be 
censored and defined as the time between sensation loss for that cycle and last sensory 
assessment. 
Total duration is the sum of all durations for a subject. 
Onset of Motor Function Loss 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 12 of 167 26Jun2017 Onset of loss motor function is the first timepoint after baseline where the Lovett score drops 
below a three for at least one of the motor function assessments. 
Return of Motor Function 
Return of motor function is defined as when the Lovett score returns to three or above for any 
motor function assessment.  
Time to Return of Motor Function 
Time to return of motor function is the time from first loss of motor function to return of motor 
function for the motor assessment.  If a subjects doesn’t have return of motor function, the time 
to return of motor function will be censored on the date and time of last motor function 
assessment.  For those subjects who never lose motor function, time to return will be missing; 
these subjects will not be included in any analysis of time to return.   
Loss-Return Cycle 
A loss-return cycle is the event where a subject has loss and return of sensory or motor function.  
Subjects may experience multiple cycles.  Cycles are defined separately for each sensory and 
motor function tests. 
Ready for Discharge 
Ready for discharge is defined as a total score of 9 or more on the MPADSS.  The total score is 
the sum of all scores.  If there are missing data then the total score will not be calculated. 
Sum of Pain Intensity Score (SPIS) 
Sum of pain intensity scores (SPIS) are calculated by summing the imputed VAS scores for the 
timeframes of interest.  Only scheduled VAS assessments under Protocol Amendment 1 will be 
used to derive SP
IS.  
Region 
Region is defined as US and ROW where ROW is any site outside of the US. 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 13 of 167 26Jun2017 8. ANALYSIS SETS 
The safety analysis set will include all subjects who receive study drug.  All analyses based on 
the safety set will be by actual treatment received. 
The efficacy analysis set will include all subjects in the safety analysis set who undergo the 
planned surgery.   All analyses based on the efficacy analysis set will be by randomized treatment 
regardless of treatment actually received. 
The per-protocol efficacy analysis set will include all subjects in the efficacy analysis set and do 
not have any important protoco l deviations.  Important protocol deviations may include, but are 
not limited to, the following: 
1) Planned concurrent surgical procedure; 
2) 50% or more of the rescue medications are missing a VAS assessment (baseline through 48 hours +/- 
2 hours) within 30 minutes prior to rescue medication use and at least 4 rescue medication doses are 
missing the associated VAS assessments within 30minutes prior to rescue medication use.; 
3) Missing two or more scheduled VAS assessments between start study drug administration as the 
baseline  VAS assessment and the 48 hour VAS assessment; 
4) Subject did not receive the study treatment to which he/she was randomized (determined after 
database lock and unblinding). 
All analyses for the per-protocol analysis set will be by randomized treatment. 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 14 of 167 26Jun2017 9. STATISTICAL METHODS OF ANALYSIS 
9.1. General Principles 
The statistical analyses will be reported using summary tables, listings, and figures (TLFs).  All 
anal
yses and tabulations will be performed using SAS Version 9.1 or later.  Continuous 
variables 
will be summarized using descriptive statistics [sample size (n), mean, standard 
deviation ( SD)
, minimum, median, and maximum ].  Categorical variables will be tabulated with 
number and percentage of subjects.   Unless otherwise noted, percentages will be based on the 
number of subjects in the treatment group within the population. 
Individual subject data will be provided in listings.  All listings will be sorted by treatment, site, 
subject and, if applicable, collection date and time. 
Unless othe
rwise stated summaries will present data across all sites (overall). 
Unless otherwise noted, tabulations of categorical data will present only those categories 
appearing in the data. 
On all figures, the comparator treatment will be represented in black with solid lines and filled 
squares; EXPAREL will be represented in red with solid lines and dots.   
For table
s presenting summaries of VAS scores , if more than one VAS score is presented for a 
specific timeframe/timepoint of interest, the highest  score within that specific 
timeframe/timepoint should be used. 
Plots 
of the VAS  scores will show both observed and imputed scores.  A change in color and line 
type will differentiate the imputed VAS  scores.  Imputed values will be represented by blue and 
green symbols and dashed lines for the comparator and EXPAREL respectively.  VAS  scores 
obtained immediately prior to rescue will be indicated by a change in symbol.  For the 
comparator the symbol should be a triangle, for EXPAREL the symbol is a star.  The following 
table shows the SAS symbol statements: 
Treatment  VAS Score SAS Statement  
Comparator  Observed  symbol font=marker interpol=j line=1 value=U color=black  
 Imputed  symbol font=marker interpol=j line=3 value=C color=blue  
EXPAREL  Observed  symbol font=marker interpol=j line=1 value=W color=red  
 Imputed  symbol font=marker interpol=j line=3 value=V color=green  
Note the symbol statement number will be dependent on the sort order of the treatment and VAS 
score group indicator variables. 
Sites with fewer than 5 subjects per treatment arm will be pooled with other sites for analysis.  
US sites will be pooled with other small US sites based on the US Census Bureau geographic 
regions (see  Table 1 ) and European sites will be pooled with other small European sites based on 
country.  Sites meeting the criteria for pooling will be pooled with other similar sites within their 
census division.  If the resulting pooled site within a division still doesn’t have enough subjects 
per treatment group, it will be pooled with the site within the division with the smallest 
enrollment that doesn’t meet the pooling criteria.  If all sites within a division are pooled and the 
resulting pooled site still meets the pooling criteria, the site will be pooled with other small sites 
within the region.  If the pooled site with the region still meets the pooling criteria it will be 
pooled with the site with the smallest enrollment from the neighboring regions.   
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 15 of 167 26Jun2017 Table 1: US Census Regions and Divisions  
Region  Division  State  
Midwest  East North Central  Illinois , Indiana , Michigan , Ohio , Wisconsin  
West North Central  Iowa , Kansas , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , North  Dakota, South  Dakota  
Northeast  Middle Atlantic  New  Jersey, New  York, Pennsylvania  
New England  Connecticut , Maine , Massachusetts , New  Hampshire, Rhode  Island, Vermont  
South  East South Central  Alabama , Kentucky , Mississippi , Tennessee  
South Atlantic  Delaware , District  of Columbia, Florida , Georgia , Maryland , North  Carolina, 
South  Carolina , Virginia , West  Virginia  
West South Central  Arkansas , Louisiana , Oklahoma , Texas  
West  Mountain  Arizona , Colorado , Idaho , Montana , Nevada , New  Mexico, Utah , Wyoming  
Pacific  Alaska, California, Hawaii, Oregon, Washington  
 
Subjects who use opioid rescue medication will have the pain scores obtained after rescue 
replaced using pain scores obtained prior to rescue medication use.  Pain scores obtained during 
the opioid medication window will be replaced.  For this study the prescribed opioid rescue 
medication is oxycodone; however morphine or hydromorphone may be used.  The durations of 
effect for various opioids are listed in Table 2.  
Table 2: Opioid Windows  
Medication  Route Window Used to Impute VAS 
Oxycodone , Oxycocet, Percocet, 
acetaminophen -oxycodone , 
Oxycontin  PO, IM, IV, SC  6 hours  
Morphine  IV, PO, SC  4 hours  
Hydromorphone (Dilaudid) , 
Hydromorphone  hydrochloride  IV 2 hours  
Hydromorphone (Dilaudid)  ), 
Hydromorphone  hydrochloride  PO, IM, SC  4 hours  
Hydrocodone  PO 6 hours  
Fentanyl  IV, PO, IM  6 hours  
Vicodin, Norco, Lorcet, Lortab, 
hydrocodone -acetaminophen  PO 6 hours  
Codeine ( Tylenol 3, 
acetaminophen -coedine, 
Paracetamol Forte , Tylenol 4)  PO 6 hours  
Ultram, Tramadol, Tramacol 
hydrochloride  PO 6 hours  
PO = oral; IV = intravenous; VAS = visual analog scale.  
If other rescue medications are given then the window will be determined post -hoc.  If a combination 
opioid product is given then the window will be determined by the opioid part of the medication.  
Opioids given post surgically with an indication such as ‘anesthesia maintenance’ will not be included 
for imputation purposes.  
 
 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 16 of 167 26Jun2017 All non-efficacy tables will present EXPAREL 133 mg, EXPAREL 266 mg, All EXPAREL 
(combined doses), placebo, and all treatments as separate columns. 
Effica
cy tables will present EXPAREL 133 mg and placebo as separate columns.   EXPAREL 
266 mg 
will not be presented in the efficacy tables and figures, but will be presented in the 
efficacy listings.    
If there are multiple VAS records with the same actual date/time for a given subject, then the record 
with the highest VAS score will be used for that actual date/time for all endpoint derivations, 
summaries, and analyses.  
    
9.1.1. Handl
ing Missing Values 
9.1.1.1.  Area under the VAS-Time Curve 
9.1.1.1.1.  Multiple Imputation Method 
Rubin’s (1987 )4 multiple imputation procedure will be applied to replace each missing value 
with a set of plausible values that represent the uncertainty about the right value to impute.  This 
multiple imputation method is being implemented per the advice provided in “The prevention 
and tre
atment of missing data in clinical trials.”5 For calculation of area under the curve (AUC) 
of VAS  pain intensity scores, the windowed worst observation carried forward (wWOCF) 
multiple imputation procedure will be used in the following order: 
a) Windowed worst observation carried forward (wWOCF) for rescue medications.   
For subjects who take a rescue medication, their VAS  scores recorded within the window 
of controlled type of rescue medication (see Table 2) will be replaced by the ‘worst’ 
observati
on.  The non-rescue VAS score recorded right before taking a rescue medication 
(start of Rescue window) is considered as the ‘worst’ observation. This non-rescue worst 
VAS score shall be after the end of previous rescue window, where a rescue window ends 
once 
a subject is no longer considered under the effect of opioids (see Table 2 for 
individual rescue medication durations).  If there is no value available between the end of 
previous rescue window and the start of the current rescue window, then the first VAS 
score recorded on or right after the start of the current rescue window will be used for the 
imputation.   VAS scores recorded prior to the end of surgery will not be considered. 
b) After the wWOCF imputation, described in Step a, subject data still missing scheduled 
assessments with a non-monotone missing pattern (i.e., all pain scores between the last 
non-missing score and last timepoint) will have missing scores imputed using the 
Markov-
Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) method (Schafer 1997)6 within each surgery and 
treatment, which will be applied in the multiple imputation procedure for arbitrary 
missing patterns.  This MCMC method will simulate 10 datasets with only monotone 
missing data. In order to achieve the stationary distribution and to avoid dependency 
within samples generated by MCMC method, the number of iteration for the burn in 
period will be set to 2000 and the number of iterations between each sample will be set to 
1000 (i.e.,  NBITER=2000 and NITER=1000.) 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 17 of 167 26Jun2017 c) The AUC and SPIS at various time intervals will be derived from the imputed VAS  
scores resulting from Step b.    
d) Rubin’s (1987) synthesizing procedure for the multiple imputed data will be applied to 
synthesize analysis results for each imputation.  SAS PROC MIANALYZE will be used 
for this procedure.  The mean parameter estimates, the asymptotic variance for this mean 
from the imputed data analysis in Step c will be created based on Rubin and Schenker 
method (1986)7. 
SAS pseudo-code for multiple imputations is provided in Section 13. 
9.1.1.2.  Exposure, Su
rgery, and Rescue Medication Date or Time 
It is expected that all necessary information on study drug exposure, surgery, and postsurgical 
rescue
 medication (dates and times) will be complete.  Any such information that is missing and 
cannot be obtained through query resolution may be imputed, on a case- by-case basis, in a 
conservative manner that minimizes bias.  For example, if pain medication taken on Day 1 has 
no time of administration recorded, the imputed time will be the end of surgery. 
9.1.1.3.  Rescue Pain Medication 
For calculation of the total rescue pain medication usage (IV Morphine Equivalent) through a 
time point, if a subject is discontinued early (e.g., dies, withdraws consent, is withdrawn from the 
study, or is lost to follow-up) before the end of the time interval (e.g., 24 hours after study drug 
administration), his or her total rescue pain medication usage through the time interval will be a 
projected amount.  For example, if a subject discontinues early at 6 hours after surgery, the 
projected amounts through 24 hours will be actual amount + average amount (actual amount/6 
hours) multiplied by the number of hours remaining in the time interval (18=24-6). 
9.1.1.4.  Adver
se Event or Concomitant Medications Dates or Times 
For AEs or concomitant medications with missing or partially missing start/stop date/time, the 
following imputation rules will be applied: 
For partial start date/time: 
 If the year is unknown, then the date will be assigned the date and time of first dose of 
study treatment. 
 If the month is unknown, then:  
i) If the year matches the year of the dose of study drug date, then the month and 
day of the dose of study drug d ate will be used to impute  the missing month and 
corresponding day . 
ii) Otherwise, ‘January’ will be assigned.  
 If the day is unknown, then:  
i) If the month and year match the month and year of the dose of study drug date, 
then the day of the dose of study drug date will be imputed.  
ii) Otherwise, ‘01’ will be assigned.  
 If the time is unknown, then:  
i) If the date (day, month, and year) matches the date of the administration of study 
drug, then the time of the dose of study drug time will be imputed. 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 18 of 167 26Jun2017 ii) Otherwise, ’ 00:00’ will be assigned. 
For partial stop date/time: 
 If the year is unknown, then the date will be assigned the date subject discontinued from 
study, time will be set to the last time of the day (‘23:59’) . 
 If the month is un known, then month subject discontinued from study  will be assigned.  
 If the day is unknown, then the last day of the month will be assigned.  
 If the time is unknown, then the last time of the day will be assigned ( ‘23:59 ’). 
9.1.1.5.  Adverse Event Severity or Relationship to Study Drug 
If severity of an AE is not reported, then for tables of AEs by severity, the event will be 
classified as ‘Severe’.  If relationship to study drug is not reported for an AE, then for tables of 
study-drug related AEs, the event will be assigned the relationship of ‘definite’.   Tables 
presenting related AEs will include all AEs with relationships of ‘possible’, ‘probable’ or 
‘definite’ as assessed by the investigator. 
9.1.1.6.  Time to Event  
For calculating time to an event when only the hour is reported, the minutes will be set to zero.  
9.1.2. Multiplicity Adjustments 
For the efficacy analyses, EXPAREL 133 mg will be compared to placebo at the 0.05 alpha level 
for the efficacy analysis set.  In order to maintain strong type I error control, a hierarchical 
gatekeeping structure will be utilized.  If a test fails to reject the null hypothesis at the 0.05 alpha 
level, then no additional hypothesis testing will be conducted.  The hierarchical gatekeeping 
order will be as follows: 
1) AUC of the VAS  pain intensity scores through 48 hours [AUC(0-48)] 
2) Total postsurg
ical opioid consumption (mg) through 48 hours 
3) Percentage of opioid-free subjects through 48 hours 
4) Time to first rescue medication (opioid) dose through 48 hours 
Any analyses of tertiary efficacy endpoints are for sensitivity or exploratory purposes.  No 
multiplicity adjustments will be made for these endpoints. 
9.1.3. By-Cent
er Analyses 
By-site summaries will present descriptive statistics only; no statistical analyses will be 
performed on individual sites.  By-site summaries will be presented for disposition, 
demographics, the primary efficacy endpoint, and the secondary efficacy endpoints.  By-site 
summarie
s will present both pooled and individual sites.  The pooled site should be presented 
first immediately followed by the sites within that pool.  
9.2. Subject Disposition 
Subject disposition summaries will include the number of subjects that were: 
 Screened, 
o Screen failure 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 19 of 167 26Jun2017 o Enrolled 
 Randomized  
o R
andomized not treated,  
o R
andomized treated,  
 I
n the safety analysis set, 
 I
n the efficacy analysis set,  
 In the per-protocol analysis set,  
 P
rotocol 
o Enr
olled under Amendment 2 
o Enr
olled under Amendment 1 
o Enr
olled under Original Protocol 
 C
ompleted the study as planned, 
 D
iscontinued from the study, and 
 Reasons for discontinuation from the study. 
Perc
entages will be reported for the screen failures and enrolled using the number of subjects 
scree
ned as the denominator; efficacy analysis set and per-protocol analysis set will use the 
number of subjects randomized, treated, and having surgery as denominator for percentages; all 
other percentages will use the number of subjects randomized and treated as denominator. 
The safety analysis set data and enrollment data will be presented as treated.  All other data will 
be presented as randomized.  
The disposition summary will present the data for each treatment group (EXPAREL 133 mg, 
EXPAREL 266 mg, placebo), EXPAREL treatments combined (All EXPAREL), and across 
treatment groups (Total).  This summary table will present overall sites and for each site 
separately. 
9.3. Description of Demographics and Baseline Characteristics  
9.3.1. Demographics  
The summary of demographic data will present: 
 Age (years) – descriptive statistics 
 Sex –  n (%) 
 Ethnicity –  n (%) 
 Race –  n (%) 
 Country –  n (%) 
 Dominant hand – n (%) 
Age is calculated from the date the subject signed the informed consent form (ICF) and birth.  It 
is presented as the number of years between, rounding down to the nearest integer year.   For 
partial 
birthdates, impute the first of the month for missing day and January for missing month to 
calculate age.  It is presumed that birth year is known. 
The demographic summary will present the data for each treatment group (EXPAREL 133 mg, 
EXPAREL 266 mg, placebo), EXPAREL treatments combined (All EXPAREL), and across 
treatment groups (Total).  Summaries will be provided for all (safety, efficacy, and per-protocol ) 
analysis sets.  This summary will present overall sites and for each site separately. 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 20 of 167 26Jun2017 9.3.2. Baseline Characteristics 
The summary of baseline characteristic data will present: 
 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Classification – n (%) 
 B
aseline VAS scores 
 Baseline neurological assessments 
 B
aseline ECG interpretation 
 B
aseline degree of motor nerve block assessments  
o Thumb a
bduction 
o Thumb a
dduction 
o Thumb opposi
tion  
o Elbow flexion 
 He
ight (cm) 
 W
eight (kg) 
 B
ody Mass Index (BMI) (kg/m2) 

 Baseline vital signs 
o He
art rate (bpm) 
o S
ystolic blood pressure (mmHg) 
o Dia
stolic blood pressure (mmHg) 
The 
formula for BMI is        , where w is weight in kilograms and h is height in meters.  
Weig
ht in pounds will be converted to kilograms using the conversion factor of 2.2046 pounds to 
1 kilogram.  Height in inches will be converted to centimeters using the conversion factor of 2.54 
centimeters to 1 inch.  Height in centimeters will be converted to meters using the conversion 
factor of 100 centimeters to 1 meter. 
Baseline characteristics summaries will present the data for each treatment group (EXPAREL 
133 mg, EXPAREL 266 mg, All EXPAREL doses, placebo) and across treatment groups (Total).  
Summa
ries will be provided for all (safety, efficacy, and per-protocol) analysis sets.  This 
summary table will show summ
aries across all sites and for each site separately.  
Descriptive statistics (n, mean, SD, median, minimum and maximum) will be provided for VAS  
scores, degree of motor blockade, height, weight, BMI and vital signs.  The number and percent 
of subjects will be tabulated for the various categories of sensory assessments, neurological 
assessments and ECG interpretation. 
9.4. Surger
y Characteristics 
Surgery characteristics include surgery type (TSA or RCR), and if TSA then the type of TSA 
(conventional or reverse), nerve block type (interscalene or supraclavicular), duration of surgery, 
and tot
al incision length.  Duration of surgery is calculated as the difference between the end of 
surgery and start of surgery times and reported in hours.  Descriptive statistics will be provided 
for the duration of surgery and total incision length by treatment group and across all treatment 
groups. Surgery, TSA type, and nerve block type will be tabulated by treatment group and across 
all tre
atment groups. 
9.5. Intraoperative, Prior, and Concomitant Medications 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 21 of 167 26Jun2017 Intraoperative, Prior, and concomitant medications will be coded using the World Health 
Orga
nization Drug Dictionary (WHO- DD) and will be classified according to the default 
anatomical therapeutic chemical (ATC 4) classification term and standard medication name. 
Intra
operative medications are defined as medications given as part of the surgical procedure. 
These may include anesthesia, opioids or other medications with start and stop dates on the day 
of surgery and start and stop times overlapping with the surgery start and stop times. 
Prior 
medications are defined as medications with a stop date and time prior to the start of study 
drug administration.   
Concomi
tant medications are defined as medications taken after the start of study drug 
administration (i.e., started prior to the start of study drug administration and continued after or 
started after the start of study drug administration). 
Intraoperative, prior and concomitant medications will be summarized separately using n (%) of 
subjects for each treatment group and across treatment groups by ATC class term and standard 
medicati
on name for the safety analysis set.  Subjects may have more than one medication per 
ATC category and standard medication name.   At each level of subject summarization, a subject 
will be counted once if one or more medications are reported by the subject at that level.  
A listing mapping the ATC term and standard medication name to verbatim term will be 
presented.  
9.6.
 Measurements of Treatment Compliance 
Study treatment is administered by a party other than the subject, therefore compliance is 
assured.   
9.7. Efficacy Analysis 
For Primary and Secondary Efficacy Analyses, descriptive statistics that are appropriate for the 
effic
acy variable will also be shown by site but no statistical analyses will be performed within a 
site.  The primary and secondary efficacy analyses will be performed on the efficacy and 
per-protocol analysis sets.   Tertiary efficacy analyses will be performed on the efficacy analysis 
set only.  
9.7.1. Efficacy Endpoints 
9.7.1.1.  Primary Efficacy 
The primary endpoint is AUC of the VAS  pain intensity scores through 48 hours [AUC(0-48)] . 
9.7.1.2.  Secondary
 Efficacy 
The following secondary endpoints will be analyzed as described in Section 9.1.2 : 
 Total postsurgical opioid consumption (in IV morphine equivalents per mg) through 48 
hours. 

 Percentage of opioid-free subjects through 48 hours. 
 Time to first rescue medication (opioid) dose through 48 hours. 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 22 of 167 26Jun2017 9.7.1.3.  Tertiary Efficacy 
 The AUC of the VAS pain intensity scores through 12, 24, and 72 hours.  
 The AUC
 of VAS pain intensity scores from 24- 48 and 48-72 hours.  
 VAS pa
in intensity scores at each assessed timepoint. 
 Proportion of subjects who are pain free (VAS score of ≤ 1.5) at each assessed timepoint. 
 SPIS through 24, 48, and 72hours. 
 SPIS from 24-48 and 48-72 hours. 
 Total opioid 
consumption in IV morphine equivalents through 24 and 72 hours.  
 Total opioid consumpti
on in IV morphine equivalents from 24-48 and 48-72 hours. 
 Perc
entage of subjects who are opioid-free through 24 and 72 hours. 
 Overall
 benefit of analgesia scale (OBAS) total score at 24 and 72 hours and Day 10. 
 Subject satisfaction with overall analgesia (using a 5-point Likert scale) at 24 and 72 
hours, and Day 10. 
 Proporti
on of subjects ready for discharge at 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours 
 Number of unsc
heduled phone calls or office visits related to pain after discharge through 
Day 10. 
9.7.1.4.  Area
 under the Curve 
Area under the pain-time curve is derived using the trapezoidal rule (see formula below) on the 
pain sc
ores adjusted for rescue medication use using the imputed values (see Section 9.1.1.1) .  
AUC 
will start with the first pain assessment obtained after surgery and use all following pain 
assessments including those collected prior to rescue medication and unscheduled.  Actual 
assessment times will be used in deriving AUC. 
     ∑  
                            
Where pi is the VAS pain score at time i and ti is the time, in hours, from end of surgery.  Note that i starts at 3 since 
t1 is not used in AUC calculation (prior to surgery) and t2 is arrival at PACU.  
9.7.1.5.  Opioid Consumption 
Opioids will be converted to IV morphine equivalent dose (MED mg) using the appropriate 
conversion factor from Table 3 for all summaries.  Total opioid dose is the IV morphine 
equivale
nt sum of all opioids taken after surgery up to the timepoint of interest.  Subjects with no 
opioid use during the period in question will be assigned a dose of 0 for summaries and changed 
to the lesser of 0. 1 or half of the smallest total amount observed in the study, whichever is 
smaller, prior to bein
g transformed with the natural logarithm for analysis. 
 
Table 3: IV Morphine Equivalents  
Medication  Unit Route Conversion (Multiplication) 
Factor 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 23 of 167 26Jun2017 Oxycodone , Oxycocet, Percocet, acetaminophen -
oxycodone , Oxycontin  mg PO, 
IV,IM,SC  2 
Morphine  mg IV,IM,SC  1 
Morphine  mg PO 0.33 
Hydromorphone (Dilaudid) , Hydromorphone 
hydrochloride  mg IV,IM 7.7 
Hydromorphone (Dilaudid) , Hydromorphone 
hydrochloride  mg PO 1.3 
Hydromorphone (Dilaudid) , Hydromorphone 
hydrochloride  mg SC 4 
Fentanyl  mg IV,PO,IM  100 
Vicodin, Norco, Lorcet, Lortab, hydrocodone -
acetaminophen  mg PO 2 
Codeine ( Tylenol 3, acetaminophen -coedine, 
Paracetamol Forte , Tylenol 4)  mg PO 0.05 
Ultram, Tramadol, Tramacol hydrochloride  mg PO, IM  0.08 
PO = oral; IV = intravenous; VAS = visual analog scale.  
If other rescue medications are given then the conversion to IV Morphine Equivalent will be determined post -
hoc.  If a combination opioid product is given then the IV Morphine Equivalent will be determined by the opioid 
part of the medication .  Opioids given post surgically with an indication such as ‘anesthesia maintenance’ will not be 
included. 
 
9.7.1.6.  Time to First Opioid Rescue Medication Use 
Time to first opioid rescue medication use will be calculated as the time from end of surgery to 
time of event in hours. 
9.7.1.7.  Pain-
free 
Pain-free is defined as an observed VAS score less than or equal to 1.5 with no prior rescue 
medication and all prior VAS scores less than or equal to 1.5. 
9.7.1.8.  Over
all Benefit of Analgesia Score (OBAS) 
The OBAS is derived as follows: 
1. Add all of the scores of questions 1 to 6. 
2. To this number, add four. 
3. Subtract the score of question 7 from this number.  
If a
 response is missing to any question in the OBAS, the total score will not be calculated. 
9.7.2. Methods of Analysis 
For Primary and Secondary Efficacy Analyses, descriptive statistics that are appropriate for the 
effic
acy variable will also be shown by site but no statistical analyses will be performed within a 
site.   
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 24 of 167 26Jun2017 9.7.2.1.  Primary Efficacy Analysis 
The primary efficacy variable is the AUC of VAS scores through 48 hours [AUC(0-48)] using 
the multiple
 imputation method described in Section 9.1.1.1 . 
Tests 
for the treatment effect of EXPAREL 133 mg versus placebo will be based on the 
following null hypothesis (H o) and two-sided alternative hypothesis (H a): 
Ho: μs = μ p versus H a: μs ≠ μ p 
where μ s and μ p are the mean of AUC(0-48)  for EXPAREL 133 mg and the mean of AUC(0-48)  
for plac
ebo, respectively. A two-sided test will be performed at 5% level of significance 
comparing EXPAREL 133 mg to placebo. The treatment effect of EXPAREL 133 mg will be 
considered significantly better than that of placebo if the null hypothesis of no difference is 
rejected and a difference in mean of AUC(0- 48) in favor of EXPAREL 133 mg (mean for 
EXPAREL 133 mg less than the mean for placebo) is observed.  
For the 
primary efficacy variable of AUC(0- 48), EXPAREL 133 mg will be compared to 
place
bo using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with age, weight, and height as covariates. Based 
on the model, the least squares (LS) mean and the standard error (SE) of the LS mean, will be 
reported for each treatment group.   The LS treatment difference for the active minus placebo, 
95% CI for the active minus placebo treatment difference, and p-value will be reported as well as 
for each active treatment. 
Descriptive statistics of the primary efficacy variable will also be shown by site but no statistical 
analyses will be performed within a site. 
 
 
9.7.2.2.  Secondary Efficacy Analyses 
9.7.2.2.1.  Postsurgical Opioid Consumption 
Postsurgical narcotic consumption (MED mg) will be summarized (n, Geometric Mean, 
coeff
icient of variation, minimum, and maximum) by treatment group for the total dose 
consume
d over the 48 hours after the end of surgery.  The number and percentages of the types 
of opioid
s used will be presented by treatment group, subjects will be counted only once for each 
opioid used.   This summary table will show summaries across all sites and for each site 
separately. 
Prior to analysis, the natural logarithm transformation will be applied to the total amount. When 
total amount of opioids (IV Morphine Equivalent) used is 0, the result will be changed to 0.1 or 
half 
of the smallest total amount observed in the study, whichever is smaller, prior to being 
transformed with the natural logarithm. To test for significant differences between EXPAREL 
133 mg and placebo, the sa me ANOVA model used in the primary efficacy analysis will be used. 
The 
LS means, LS mean difference between the two treatment groups, 95% CI for the LS mean 
difference between EXPAREL and placebo, and p-value will be reported.   The LS means, LS 
mean differences and 95% CI will be back transformed for presentation (note the LS mean 
difference becomes the ratio when back-transformed) along with the descriptive statistics 
(untransformed) by treatment. 
9.7.2.2.2.  Opioi
d-free 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 25 of 167 26Jun2017 Percentage of opioid-free subjects through 48 hours will be analyzed using a Cochran-Mantel-
Haensz
el (CMH) test.  The p-value from the CMH analysis and mean treatment difference and 
95% CI a
bout the mean difference using the Newcombe8 method (SAS pseudo-code below) will 
be presented. The tabulation of opioid-free subjects will be presented across all sites and 
surgeries separately.  No inferential statistics will be calculated for individual sites. 
The number and percentage of subjects opioid-free will also be tabulated by timepoint.   
Pseudo-code for Newcombe method: 
PROC FREQ; 
TABLE TREATMENT*RESPONSE / RISKDIFF(CL=NEWCOMBE COMMON); 
RUN;  
9.7.2.2.3.  Time to First Opioid Rescue Medication 
Time to first opioid rescue medication will be computed in hours as the date and time of the first 
opioid rescue medication minus the date and time of the end of surgery. If a subject is not 
administered an opioid rescue medication, the time to first administration will be censored at 48 
hours after surgery or at the time of last follow-up, whichever is earliest. Time of last follow-up 
will be defined as the latter of (1) the last pain assessment, (2) the start time of the last 
concomitant medication, or (3) the start time of the last AE.  
Time to first opioid rescue will be analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method and the log-rank test . 
The n (%) of subjects administered an opioid as well as the n (%) of censored observations will 
be presented for each treatment group. In addition, Kaplan-Meier estimates in terms of the 
median and its 95% CI, and the 25th and 75th percentiles will be presented for each treatment. 
Log-rank tests will be used to compare EXPAREL to placebo. 
9.7.2.3.  Ter
tiary Efficacy Analyses 
P-values computed for the tertiary endpoints are for descriptive purposes only and are not 
adjusted for multiple comparisons. 
9.7.2.3.1.  Visua
l analog scale (VAS) AUC  
Summary statistics will be presented by treatment for VAS AUC(0-12), VAS AUC(0-24), VAS 
AUC(0-72 ), AUC(24-48), and AUC(48-72).   For each of these variables, EXPAREL 133 mg 
will be compared to placebo using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with age, weight, and height 
as covariates. Based on the model, the LS mean and SE of the LS mean will be reported for each 
treatment. The LS treatment difference for the active minus placebo, 95% CI for the active minus 
placebo treatment difference, and p-value will be reported as well as for the active treatment. 
9.7.2.3.2.  Visual analog scale (VAS) 
Summary statistics will be presented by treatment for VAS at each assessment timepoint.  This 
summary will be based on the observed VAS values. 
9.7.2.3.3.  Proporti
on of Pain-Free Subjects 
The proportion of pain-free subjects will be tabulated by treatment.  The number and proportion 
of subjects who are pain-free and not pain-free (or VAS score is missing) will be presented at 
assessment timepoint. For the proportion of pain-free subjects, EXPAREL 133 mg will be 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 26 of 167 26Jun2017 compared to placebo using a Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) test.  The p-value from the CMH 
ana
lysis and mean treatment difference and 95% CI about the mean difference derived using the 
Newcombe9 method.  
9.7.2.3.4.  Sum of Pain Intensity Scores (SPIS) 
Summary statistics will be presented by treatment for SPIS(0-12), SPIS(0-24), SPIS(0-48), 
SPI
S(0-72), SPIS(24-48), and SPIS(48-72). For each of these variables, EXPAREL 133 mg will 
be compared to placebo using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with age, weight, and height as 
covariates. Based on the model, the LS mean and SE of the LS mean will be reported for each 
treatment. The LS treatment difference for the active minus placebo, 95% CI for the active minus 
placebo treatment difference, and p-value will be reported as well as for each active treatment.  
9.7.2.3.5.  Tot
al Opioid Consumption through 24 and 72 hours 
Total opioid consumption through 24 and 72 hours will be summarized and analyzed by 
treatment group.  The se summaries and analyses will be calculated similar to the postsurgical 
opioid consumption through the 48 hour secondary endpoint (see Section 9.7.1.2 ).  
9.7.2.3.6.  Total Opioid Consumption during Specific Time Intervals 
Total opioid consumption from 24-48 and 48- 72 hours will  be summarized and analyzed by 
treatment group.  The se summaries and analyse s will be calculated similar to the postsurgical 
opioid consumption through the 48 hour secondary endpoint (see Section 9.7.1.2 ).  
9.7.2.3.7.  Percent
age of Opioid-free Subjects through 24 and 72 hours  
The percentage of opioid-free subjects will be tabulated and analyzed by treatment.  The se 
summaries and analyses of the percentage of opioid-free subjects at 24  and 72 hours will be 
calculated similar to the percentage of opioid-free subjects at 48 hours secondary endpoint (see 
Section 9.7.2.2.2) . 
9.7.2.3.8.  Overall Benefit of Analgesia (OBAS) 
The OBAS total score will be summarized by treatment and individual question responses 
tabulated at following timepoint s: 24 and 72 hours and postsurgical Day 10.  For the OBAS total 
score, 
EXPAREL 133 mg will be compared to placebo using a Kruskal-Wallis test at 24 and 72 
hours and postsurgical Day 10. 
9.7.2.3.9.  Subject Satisfaction with Overall Analgesia 
Subject satisfaction with overall analgesia (obtained using a 5-point Likert scale) will be 
summarized and individual responses tabulated by treatment for each of the following 
assessment timepoints: 24 and 72 hours and postsurgical Day 10.  The numeric value of the 
response will be presented using descriptive statistics.  For each value of the scale the number 
and percentage of subjects selecting that value will also be presented. For the subject satisfaction 
with overall analgesia, EXPAREL 133 mg will be compared to placebo using a Kruskal-Wallis 
test for each of the following assessment timepoints: 24 and 72 hours and postsurgical Day 10. 
9.7.2.3.10.  Disc
harge Readiness 
Time to discharge ready will be computed in hours as the date and time of subjects first meeting 
the discharge readiness criteria and time of the end of surgery.  Discharge ready criteria will be 
met when the MPADSS criterion is met (total score of 9 or more) for discharge readiness or the 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 27 of 167 26Jun2017 subject is discharged, whichever occurs first.  If a subject has not met the discharge ready criteria 
prior to or at a given timepoint (12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours), then the time to discharge 
ready will be censored at the time of the ir last MPADSS assessment in the study or the specific 
assessment timepoint
 (12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours), whichever occurs sooner. 
Time
 to discharge ready will be analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method for each of the following 
assessment timepoints: 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours.  The n (%) of subjects who are discharge 
ready
 as well as the n (%) of censored observations will be presented for each treatment group. 
In addition, Kaplan-Meier estimates in terms of the median and its 95% CI, and the 25th and 
75th percentiles will be presented for each treatment at 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours. Log-
rank tests will be used to compare EXPAREL 133 mg to placebo at 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 
hours.  
The 
number and pe
rcent of subjects meeting the discharge readiness criteria at 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, 
and 72 hours will
 be summarized.   
If 
a subj
ect is discharge ready at an early timepoint, the subject will be considered discharge 
ready at all subsequent (future) timepoints.  If a subject has a discharge readiness total score of 
less than 9 or if the total score is missing, the subject will be considered not discharge ready, 
unless they were previously considered discharge ready. 
9.7.2.3.11.  Number of Pain-Related Visits/Phone Calls after Discharge 
The number of pain-related unscheduled phone calls or office visits after discharge through 
postsurgical Day 10 will be summarized (n , mean, SD, median, minimum and maximum) by 
treatment group.  The number and percentage of subjects reporting for each number of pain-
related unscheduled phone calls or visits (0, 1, 2, … maximum number observed) will be 
presented by treatment group.   For the number of pain-related unscheduled phone calls or office 
visits, EXPAREL 133 mg will be compared to placebo using a Kruskal-Wallis test.  
9.7.2.3.12.  Regi
on Analysis 
Summaries and tabulations looking at region will be performed for the following: 
 Dispo s
ition 
 Demographics 
 Baseline Characteristics 
 Intraoperative medicines 
 VAS AUC(0- 48)  
 Total 
opioid consumption through 48 hours 
 Perce
ntage opioid-free through 48 hours  
 Senso
ry loss and return 
 Motor function loss and return 
 Overall summary of adverse events 
 Incidence of TEAEs 
 Incidence of Serious TEAEs 
The populations for each the summary and tabulation as planned for the non-region tables will be 
repea
ted for the region tables.   
For a
nalyses considering region, the age, weight, and height scovariates will be replaced with 
region, this will be performed for the following: 
 VAS AUC(0- 48)  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 28 of 167 26Jun2017  Total opioid consumption through 48 hours 
 Perce
ntage opioid-free through 48 hours  
 Sensa
tion Loss and Return 
 Motor Function Loss and Return    
Reg
ion summaries, tabulations, and analyses will be the final block within the 14.1, 14.2 and 
14.3 series of tables. 
9.8. Safety Analyses 
Safety assessments in this study consist of vital signs, 12-lead ECGs, neurological assessments, 
sensory and motor nerve block assessments, motor function assessments and AEs.  Vital signs, 
ECGs, neurological, nerve block assessments (sensory and motor) and motor function 
assessments will be serially collected (see Time and Events Schedule of Study Procedures). 
Adverse events will be collected from the time of informed consent through Day 30. 
P-va
lues computed for the safety endpoints are for descriptive purposes only and are not adjusted 
for multiple comparisons. 
9.8.1. Vital Signs 
Vitals signs are resting heart rate (bpm), systolic blood pressure (mmHg), and diastolic blood 
pressure (mmHg).  Vital signs will be summarized by treatment group and the All EXPAREL 
group at each assessment timepoint.  The assessment timepoints for the vital signs are: at 
baseline (prior to the nerve block); every 5 minutes during performance of the block up to 30 
minutes; and every 15 minutes until entering the OR; at PACU arrival; at 6, 9, 12, 24, 36, 40, 44, 
48, 52, 56, 60, and 72 hours; and on postsurgical Days 5 and 10.  Summaries will present both 
actual and change-from-baseline results.  Baseline statistics will be presented at each assessment 
timepoint for those subjects reporting data at that timepoint.  
Vital signs will also be assessed for potentially clinically significant abnormal values (see  Table 
4).  The number and percentage of subjects satisfying the potentially clinically significant 
abnormal 
criteria (critical value, critical change separately and then value and change 
concurrently) at any time during the study and at each assessment timepoint will be tabulated by 
treatment and overall treatments.   
Table 4: Criteria for Potentially Cli nically Significant Abnormal Vital Signs  
Vital Sign  Unit Critical Value  Critical Change1 
Resting Heart Rate  beats/minute (bpm)  High: ≥ 120  
Low: ≤ 50  Increase of at least 15  
Decrease of at least 15  
Systolic Blood Pressure  mmHg  High: ≥ 180  
Low: ≤ 90  Increase of at least 20  
Decrease of at least 20  
Diastolic Blood Pressure  mmHg  High: ≥ 105  
Low: ≤ 50  Increase of at least 15  
Decrease of at least 15  
1Change criteria not applicable at baseline or screening. 
9.8.2. Electrocardiograms 
Investigators will classify ECG tracings as ‘normal, ‘abnormal not clinically significant’ or 
‘abnormal clinically significant’.  The investigator classifications will be tabulated by treatment 
and overall treatments at any time during the study and each assessment timepoint.   The 
assessment timepoints for the ECGs are: at baseline (prior to the nerve block); upon arrival at the 
PACU; at 6, 9, 12, 24, 36, 40, 44, 48, 52, 56, 60, and 72 hours; and on postsurgical Days 5 and 
10.   
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 29 of 167 26Jun2017 A shift table comparing the investigator classification of the ECG results at baseline to each 
timepoint will also be provided. 
9.8.3. Neurolog
ical Assessments 
Neurological assessments include orientation (orientated, disoriented, not assessable), numbness 
(of lips, tongue, or around mouth), metallic taste, hearing problems, vision problems, and muscle 
twitching
.  The number and percentage of subjects will be tabulated for each neurological 
assessment by treatment group at any time after baseline and at each assessment timepoint.  The 
assessment timepoints for the neurological assessments are: at baseline (prior to the nerve block); 
upon arrival at the PACU; at 6, 9, 12, 24, 36, 40, 44, 48, 52, 56, 60, and 72 hours; and on 
postsurgical Days 5 and 10.   
9.8.4. Sensation Tests 
Sensations tests are assessed on the shoulder (axillary nerve), forearm (musculocutaneous nerve), 
middl
e finger (median nerve), fifth finger (ulnar nerve) and thumb (radial nerve) .  The number and 
perc
entage of subjects will be tabulated for each response (present/absent) within each nerve and 
sensory test (cold, pinprick and light touch) by treatment group at each assessment timepoint.  
The assessment timepoints for the sensation tests are: at baseline (prior to the nerve block); at 
approximately 15, 30, and 45 minutes after the nerve block; prior to discharge from the PACU; 
at 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours. 
The number and percentage of subjects will be tabulated for loss and return of sensation (see 
Section 7) across all locations and within each location and each sensory test (cold, pinprick and 
lig
ht touch) and combinations of sensory tests (ANY, CPL, CP, CL, and PL) by treatment group 
at e
ach assessment timepoint.   Where the combinations of ANY, CPL , CP, CL and PL are 
defined as follows: 
 ANY = at least one sensation 
 C
PL = all sensations (cold, pinprick and light touch) 
 CP = cold and pinprick 
 C
L = cold and light touch 
 P
L = pinprick and light touch 
A subj
ect will be considered as having a loss of sensation if either of the locations has a loss of 
sensation; a return across locations is when both locations have return of sensation for the 
subject. 
The times to loss of and return of sensation (see Section 7, subsections loss of sensation and 
return of sensation) will be summarized by treatment using Kaplan-Meier estimates.  In addition, 
Kaplan-Meier estimates in terms of the median and its 95% CI (using log-log method), and the 
25th and 75th percentiles will be presented for each treatment. Log-rank tests will be used to 
compare EXPAREL 133 mg to placebo.  . 
Duration of sensation loss will be summarized across locations and within each location.  Total 
duration is defined as the sum of durations of each lost-return cycle for a subject.  If more than 
10% of the subjects in at least one treatment group experience multiple lost-return cycles, then 
duration will be summarized for total duration and within each cycle. 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 30 of 167 26Jun2017 An additional table summarizing the number of cycles and tabulating the distribution number of 
cycles by treatment group will be presented within each location by treatment group. 
9.8.5. Degree
 of motor nerve block Assessments 
Degree of motor nerve block assessments includes thumb abduction (radial nerve), thumb 
adduction (ulnar nerve), thumb opposition (median nerve) and elbow flexion (musculocutaneous 
nerve) as assessed using the Lovett scale.  The actual and change from baseline values for each 
of these parameters will be summarized by treatment at each assessment timepoint.  At each 
assessment timepoint the baseline values will be summarized for those subjects who have data at 
that timepoint. 
The assessment timepoints for the degree of motor nerve block are: at baseline (prior to the nerve 
block);  
a
t approximately 15, 30, and 45 minutes after the nerve block; prior to discharge from the 
PACU; at 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours.  At each assessment timepoint, the number 
and percent of subjects with loss and return of motor function (see Section 7) will be summarized 
by tre
atment. 
For each active assessment the time to return to motor function will be analyzed by treatment in 
the same manner as time to first rescue medication (see Section 9.7.1.6).   
9.8.6. Adverse Ev
ents 
Adverse events will be coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities 
(MedDRA).   
An AE will be considered TEAE if the onset date and time is between the start date and time of 
study treatment and Day 30.   
If 
an AE has a partial onset date and time the imputed start and stop dates and times will be used 
to determine treatment-emergence (e.g., stop date and time is before start date and time of study 
treatm
ent). All AE summaries will present TEAEs only; AEs that are not treatment-emergent 
will be included in listings but not summarized. 
The incide
nce of subjects reporting TEAEs will be tabulated by the number and percentage of 
subjects reporting the TEAE.  Incidence is defined as a subject reporting at least one TEAE 
within the summary level.  Summary levels are ‘at least one TEAE’, system organ class and 
preferred term.  Subjects will be counted only once within each reporting level on the table.  For 
example if a subject reports a TEAE of headache on two separate occasions, the subject will be 
counted only once in the headache row of the table.  Similarly if a subject reports two separate 
TEAEs within the same system organ class the subject will only be count ed once in the summary 
row for that system organ class.  A summary of subjects reporting at least one TEAE during the 
study will also be presented. 
The first row on every TEAE table will be the number and percentage of subjects reporting at 
least one TEAE.  Subsequent rows will be presented in descending order of subject counts for 
the overall treatment group with the most common system organ class first, followed within each 
system organ class by the preferred terms in descending subject count order.  For tables 
presenting the severity or relation to study treatment of AE, the sort order will be determined by 
the number and percentage of subjects reporting the preferred term, thus the sort order of rows 
will remain the same for the relation or severity tables as the tables by preferred term. . 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 31 of 167 26Jun2017 The following summaries will be presented for the AEs reported by the subjects: 
An overview of all TEAEs, serious TEAEs and TEAEs of Special Interest will present the 
number and percentage of subjects in the following categories: 
 Any TEAE 
o Ma
ximum severity: Mild 
o Ma
ximum severity: Moderate 
o Ma
ximum severity: Severe 
 At lea
st one related TEAE 
 At lea
st one serious TEAE 
 Subjects discontinued due to a TEAE 
 Die
d on study 
Subjec
ts will be counted once in each of the above categories except for maximum severity.  
Subjects will be counted only once at the highest severity reported.  For example, if a subject has 
a mild and severe headache and a moderate rash, the subject will be counted under maximum 
severity of severe only. 
Adverse event tables will present the data by treatment group and across all treatment groups.  
Incidence tables will be created for the following groups of TEAEs: 
 All TEAEs 

 Study treatment related TEAEs 
 TEA
Es leading to study withdrawal 
 S
tudy treatment related TEAEs leading to study withdrawal 
 All TEAE
s by  severity  
 All TEAEs by relationship to study treatment 
 All serious TEAEs 
 S
tudy treatment related serious TEAEs 
 Serious TEAEs leading to study withdrawal 
 S
tudy treatment related serious TEAEs leading to study withdrawal 
 Serious TEAEs resulting in death 
 Stud
y treatment related serious TEAEs resulting in death 
 All TEAEs of special interest 
 Study treatment related TEAEs of special interest 
 TEAEs  of special interest leading to study withdrawal 
 Study treatment related TEAEs of special interest leading to study withdrawal 
 TEAEs  of special interest resulting in death 
Study treatment related TEAEs of special interest resulting in deathIf there are no AEs to report 
on any of the above tables, the table should be created with the line ‘no adverse events were 
reported’ in the body of the table. 
Adverse events will be considered related if the investigator assessment of relationship to study 
treatment is either ‘possible’, ‘probable’ or ‘definite’.  
All AE summaries based on related AEs will be produced based on the investigator assessment 
of relatedness.  Below are the MedDRA terms for the adverse events of special interest: 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 32 of 167 26Jun2017 A listing of the mapping of the system organ class and preferred terms to verbatim terms will be 
presented.   
9.8.7. Laboratory Parameters 
Clinical laboratory assessments (hematology, chemistry, and urinalysis) are collected at 
screening, baseline and Day 10. Laboratory results will be summarized by treatment group and 
the All EXPAREL group at each assessment timepoint.  Summaries will present both actual and 
change-from- baseline results.  Baseline statistics will be presented at each assessment timepoint 
for those subjects reporting data at that timepoint. 
Tabulations of the number and percentage of subjects with value below normal, normal or above 
normal will be provided by treatment group, All EXPAREL group and across all treatment 
groups at each timepoint. 
Shifts in laboratory results categorized as low (below the lower limit of the normal range), 
normal (within the normal range, limits inclusive) and above (above the upper limit of the 
normal range) will be presented in shift tables with baseline categories across the columns and 
Day 10 down the rows for EXPAREL 133 mg, EXPAREL 266 mg, All EXPAREL and placebo 
separately.   Each cell will present the number and percentage of subjects in that cell. Due to the 
width of these tables, only 2 treatments can be presented on a page.  For ease of comparing 
active treatments to placebo, placebo data will be presented on each page.  Thus the shift table 
will present all laboratory data for EXPAREL 133 mg and placebo then for EXPAREL 266 mg 
and placebo and finally for All EXPAREL and placebo. 
9.9. Pharmacokinetic Analysis   MedDRA 18.1 Dictionary Terms  
Group  Protocol term  Term Level  Term  
Cardiac  Angina  Preferred term  Angina Pectoris  
Myocardial infarction  Preferred term  Myocardial Infarction  
Bradycardia  Preferred term  Bradycardia  
Tachycardia  Preferred term  Tachycardia  
Extrasystoles  Preferred term  Extrasystoles  
Shortness of breath requiring intervention  Preferred term  Dyspnoea  
Neurologic  Altered mental status  Preferred term  Mental Status Changes  
Altered sensorium  Preferred term  Depressed level of consciousness  
Rigidity  Preferred term  Muscle Rigidity  
Dysarthria  Preferred term  Dysarthria  
Seizure  Preferred term  Seizure  
Tremors  Preferred term  Tremor  
Metallic taste  Preferred term  Dysgeusia  
Tinnitus  Preferred term  Tinnitus  
Perioral numbness  Preferred term  Hypoaesthesia Oral  
Visual disturbance  Preferred term  Visual Impairment  
Dizziness  Preferred term  Dizziness  
Hyperesthesia  Preferred term  Hyperaesthesia  
Muscular twitching * Preferred term  Muscle Twitching  
Tingling * Preferred term  Paraesthesia  
Paresthesia * Preferred term  Paraesthesia  
Other  Fall Preferred term  Fall 
* if event  persists beyond or occurs after 72 hours after start of study treatment dose.  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 33 of 167 26Jun2017 The analysis of the PK endpoints will be described in a separate document.   
9.10. Interi
m Analysis 
9.10.1. Pharmacokinetic Review 
 An interim PK analysis was completed by QuantPharm LLC after 13 subjects completed the 
assessments throug
h postsurgical Day 10. All of the plasma samples from the subjects who 
received EXPAREL were analyzed and the plasma samples from the subjects randomized to 
placebo were analyzed through the 24-hour timepoint. Enrollment continued while the interim 
PK data were analyzed.  The goal of this third-party analysis was to determine the 
appropriateness of the PK timepoints selected and make recommendations to Pacira 
Pharmaceuticals (while maintaining the blind within Pacira Pharmaceuticals) to keep, remove, or 
revise the PK sampling scheme in order to fully characterize the PK profile. 
QuantPha
rm LLC indicated that the results of this analysis showed a median T max of 48 hours for 
the 133 mg EXPAREL group and a median T max of 60 hours for the 266 mg EXPAREL group. 
Based on this information, QuantPharm LLC recommended changes to the PK collection 
schedule contained protocol amendment 2. 
In a
ddition, the safety assessment timepoints, including the neurological exam, vital signs, and 
ECG were adjusted based on the initial interim PK data.  
A c
onfirmatory interim PK analysis w as conducted by QuantPharm LLC once 30 subjects had 
comple
ted the assessments through postsurgical Day 10.  No changes to the  conduct of the study 
were recommended by QuantPharm LLC based on the confirmatory interim PK analysis. 
9.10.2. Sample Siz
e Review 
The Original Protocol 402-C-327 issued on 24Nov2015 and Amendment 1 of Protocol 402-C-
327 issued on 15Feb2016 randomized subjects (1:1:1) to one of three treatment-arms 
(EXPARE
L 266 mg, EXPAREL 133 mg, or Placebo).  Subjects randomized under Amendment 
2 of Protocol 402-C-327 were randomized (1:1) to one of two treatment-arms (EXPAREL 133 
mg or Pla
cebo).    
The sample size of 120 subjects from Amendment 2 of Protocol 402-C-327 section 15.3 was 
calculated based 
on the assumption that the observed efficacy through 72 hours in 402-C-323 
would be 
the same as the observed efficacy through 48 hours in 402-C-327.  In 402-C-323, a 
comm
on standard deviation (SD) of 170 was observed and with a 100-unit treatment difference 
for pain intensity scores through 72 hours.     
At the two
-sided alpha level of 0.05, 47 subjects per treatment group would have at least 80% 
power to detect a 100 unit difference between treatment groups for the AUC of pain intensity 
scores through 48  hours, if the assumption of a common standard deviation (SD) of 170 is 
correct.  Approximately 120 subjects were planned for enrollment in to this study in order to have 
at least 94 evaluable subjects between the EXPAREL 133 mg and placebo treatment groups. 
Within Amendment 2 of Protocol 402 -C-327 section 15.8.1, an interim analysis was planned 
after 66 subjects had completed the assessments through Day 5.  This goal of this blinded interim 
analysis was to assess the assumption of a common standard deviation (SD) of 170.  This was to 
be based on the “quick and simple” procedure described by the Kieser and Friede paper10.  The 
procedure was designed to assess a blinded sample with subjects randomized 1:1 to two 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 34 of 167 26Jun2017 treatment-arms, however the blinded 402-C-327 data contained subjects from three different 
treatment-arms.  Based on this revelation, it was concluded that the procedure described by 
Kieser and Friede would yield an inaccurate estimate of the common standard deviation (SD). 
A blinde
d interim analysis was conducted after 66 subjects had completed their assessments 
through Day 5.  This analysis did not utilize the blinded 402-C-327 data or the proc edure 
described by Kieser and Friede.  Instead, this blinded interim analysis focused on the original 
assumptions linking the 402-C-323 results to the 402-C-327 sample size calculation. 
Consideration had not been previously given to the differences in statistical analysis methods 
between 402-C-323 and 402-C-327.  There were three key differences identified in the blinded 
interim analysis, they were: 
 In the ANOVA model, 402-C-323 used the baseline pain intensity score as the covariate 
while 402-C-327 considered age, weight, and height as covariates. 
 The 402-C-323 pain intensity score AUC from 0-72 hours was assumed to be the same as 
the observed 402
-C-327 pain intensity score AUC from 0-48 hours. 
 The 402-C-323 study addressed missing pain intensity score data using a single 
imputation tec
hnique while 402-C-327 addresses missing pain intensity score data using a 
multiple imputation technique.  
When the 402-C-323 data was reanalyzed using the 402-C-327 statistical analysis methods, the 
common standard deviation (SD) was found to be approximately 97 and a 46.6-unit treatment 
difference in 0-48 hour AUC of Pain Intensity scores was identified.  The sample size re-
esti
mation was based on these updated assumptions for a common standard deviation (SD) and 
treatment difference..  
9.11. Significance Testi
ng 
See section 9.1.2 . 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 35 of 167 26Jun2017 10. SAMPLE SIZE CALCULATIONS 
The sample size was calculated based on efficacy as measured by the AUC of Pain Intensity 
scores through 48 hours from a previously conducted nerve block study using the 402-C-327 
primary
 analysis methods.  Assuming a 2-sided 0.05 alpha and a common standard deviation 
(SD) of 
97, a sample size of 69 subjects per treatment group should have approximately 80% 
power to 
detect a 46.6-unit treatment difference.  Approximately 156 subjects are planned for 
enrollme
nt into this study in order to have at least 138 evaluable subjects between the EXPAREL 
133 mg and pla
cebo treatment groups.  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK)  
EXPA
REL® Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL Page 36 of 167 26J un2017 11. REFERENCES 
 
                                                      
1 American Statistical Association.  Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice.  Prepared by the Committee on 
Professional Ethics, 07 August 1999.  http://www.amstat.org/profession/ethicalstatistics.html  
2 US Federal Register.  International Conference on Harmonisation; Guidance on Statistical Principles for Clinical 
Trials.  Department of Health and Human Services: Food and Drug Administration [Docket No. 97D-0174].  Federal 
Register Volume 63, Number 179, pages 49583-49598.  16 September 1998. 
3 Royal Statistical Society.  The Royal Statistical Society: Code of Conduct, August 1993. 
http://www.rss.org.uk/about/conduct.html . 
4 Rubin, D. B. (1987). Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
 
5 The National Academies Press. The Prevention and Treatment of Missing Data in Clinical Trials, prepared by the 
Panel on Handling Missing Data in Clinical Trials and Committee on National Statistics, 2010. 
 
6 Schafer, J. L. (1997). Analysis of Incomplete Multivariate Data. New York: Chapman & Hall. 
 
7 Rubin DB, Schenker N.  Multiple imputation for interval estimation from simple random samples with ignorable 
nonresponse.  J Am Stat Assoc 1986;81:366- 374. 
 
8 Newcombe RG, Interval Estimation for the Difference between Independent Proportions: Comparison of Eleven 
Methods.  Statist. Med. 17, 873-890 (1998). 
 
9M Keiser, T Friede.  Simple procedures for blinded sample size adjustment that do not affect the type I error rate.  
Statistics in Medicine.  2003;22:3571-3581. 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 37 of 167 26Jun2017 
 12. TIME A
ND EVENTS SCHEDULE OF STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Please see the Protocol for the full “Time and Events Schedule of Study Procedures”.  Note that 
the study days defined in the table and footnotes start with surgery as Day 0; however, the SAP 
definitions start with surgery as Day 1.  The SAP follows the CDISC convention to define study 
day.  Thus in the SAP preop Day 0 is Day 1, Day 7 is Day 8, Day 10 is Day 11 and Day 29 is 
Day 30. 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 38 of 167 26Jun2017 
 13. MULTI
PLE IMPUTATION EXAMPLE PROGRAM CODE 
 
** Note: INPUT_DATA is the dataset that contains the VAS data with the wWOCF imputation performed 
**; 
 
** Step 1 use Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) method **; 
** Note the value for the random seed is fixed to be 123 so that the results are reproducible **; 
proc mi data= INPUT_DATA seed=123 nimpute=10 out= OUTPUT_STEP1 minimum=0 maximum=10; 
        by TRT01P; 
        mcmc impute=monotone nbiter=2000 niter=1000; 
        var aval atptn; 
run; quit; 
 
*** Step 2 derive endpoint using appropriate techniques   from INPUT_DATA to create INPUT_DATA2 
 **; 
 
*** Step 3 analyze imputations          **;  
DATA &a;  
 set INPUT_DATA2; 
 if param = &select and efffl = 'Y' and trt01pn ne 2; 
run; quit; 
proc sort data=&a; by _IMPUTATION_; run; quit; 
 
PROC MIXED DATA= &a METHOD=TYPE3; 
 by _IMPUTATION_; 
 class TRT01P; 
 model AVAL = TRT01P AGE WEIGHT HEIGHT; 
 lsmeans TRT01P/ diff= CONTROL('Placebo')  CL ; 
 ods output LSMeans  = &b; 
 ods output diffs    = &c; 
run; quit;  
 
proc sort data= &b; by TRT01P; run; 
PROC MIANALYZE DATA=&b ALPHA=0.05 THETA0=0;  
 by TRT01P; 
 modeleffects ESTIMATE;  
 stderr STDERR; 
 ods output PARAMETERESTIMATES=&d; 
run; quit; 
 
** Step 4 build report           **; 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 39 of 167 26Jun2017 
  
 
LAYO
UT OF TABLES, LISTINGS AND FIGURES 
The following are planned summary tables.  Tables will be numbered according to the 
nomenclature used to support the CSR.  The final table numbering may be different from the 
SAP.  No amendment will be made for changes in table numbering.  All headers, titles, 
footnotes, and footers specified in the table templates will be displayed in the produced output 
unless otherwise specified.  Notes to programmers will not be included in the tables.   
Tables and listings will have 10 point font size.  Listings font size may be reduced to 9 point if 
needed.  The TLFs will have either Times New Roman, Courier New or SAS Monospace type 
face.  All final TLFs will be provided in both PDF and Word (or RTF) file formats. 
Percentages should not appear if the count is zero.  
Italicized text in the TLF mock-ups indicate notes to programmers and is not to appear on any 
TLF. 
Note headers and footers on mock-ups are reflective of the SAP document and are not intended 
to appear on the TLFs. 
Titles on the TLFs in the mock-ups are presented left-justified as a single line of text.  However, 
the presentation for final TFLs should be center-justified with the TLF number on one line and 
the remaining titles on multiple lines of text where the line breaks are delimited by hyphens (-) in 
the TLF mock-ups titles.  For example, for Table 14.2-1.1.1 the title in the mock-up appears as: 
Table 14.2- 1.1.1: Analysis of AUC of VAS Pain Intensity Scores through 48
 
hours – Efficacy Analysis Set –  Multiple Imputation Results  
but should appear as follows on the final TLF: 
Table 14.2- 1.1.1 
Analysis of AUC of VAS Pain Intensity Scores through 48
 hours 
Efficacy Analysis Set  
Multiple Imputation Results  
The title format in the mock-ups is due to limitations of MSWord.  The mock-up format enables 
MSWord to generate a table of contents for the mock-ups. 
On all listings the treatments, in order of appearance, are: EXPAREL 133 mg, EXPAREL 266 
mg, PLACEBO and, if applicable, NOT RANDOMIZED.  Always insert a page break between 
treatments. 
Sort all listings within treatment by site, subject with further sorts dependent on listing. 
Table and li
sting shells follow. 
For categorical variables, i f subjects are missing data for a certain category (example Race), a 
missing subcategory should be added under the respective category.  
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 40 of 167 26Jun2017 
 14. TABLE OF
 CONTENTS FOR TABLE MOCK-UPS  
TABLE 14.1-1: SUMMARY OF SUBJECT DISPOSITION – ALL SCREENED SUBJECTS 46 
TABLE 14.1-2.1.1: SUMMARY OF SUBJECT DEMOGRAPHICS - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 48 
TABLE 14.1-2.1.2: SUBJECT DEMOGRAPHICS – EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 48 
TABLE 14.1-2.1.3: SUBJECT DEMOGRAPHICS – PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 48 
TABLE 14.1-2.2.1: SUMMARY OF SUBJECT BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS - SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET 49 
TABLE 14.1-2.2.2: SUBJECT BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS – EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 53 
TABLE 14.1-2.2.3: SUBJECT BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS – PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 53 
TABLE 14.1-3.1: SUMMARY OF SURGERY CHARACTERISTICS - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 54 
TABLE 14.1-3.2: SUMMARY OF SURGERY CHARACTERISTICS (HOURS) – EFFICACY 
ANALYSIS SET 54 
TABLE 14.1-3.3: SUMMARY OF SURGERY CHARACTERISTICS (HOURS) – PER-PROTOCOL 
ANALYSIS SET 54 
TABLE 14.1-4.1: TABULATION OF INCIDENCE OF INTRAOPERATIVE MEDICATIONS - 
SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 55 
TABLE 14.1-4.2: TABULATION OF INCIDENCE OF INTRAOPERATIVE MEDICATIONS - 
EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 55 
TABLE 14.1-4.3: TABULATION OF INCIDENCE OF INTRAOPERATIVE MEDICATIONS – PER-
PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 55 
TABLE 14.1-5.1: SUMMARY OF SUBJECT DISPOSITION – BY REGION – ALL SCREENED 
SUBJECTS 56 
TABLE 14.1-5.2.1.1: SUMMARY OF SUBJECT DEMOGRAPHICS – BY REGION - SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET TABLE 14.1-5.2.1.2: SUMMARY OF SUBJECT DEMOGRAPHICS – 
BY REGION – EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 56 
TABLE 14.1-5.2.1.3: SUMMARY OF SUBJECT DEMOGRAPHICS – BY REGION – 
PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 56 
TABLE 14.1-5.2.2.1: SUMMARY OF SUMMARY OF SUBJECT BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS – 
BY REGION - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 56 
TABLE 14.1-5.2.2.2: SUMMARY OF SUBJECT BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS – BY REGION – 
EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 56 
TABLE 14.1-5.2.2.3: SUMMARY OF SUBJECT BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS – BY REGION – 
PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 56 
TABLE 14.1-5.3.1: SUMMARY OF SURGERY CHARACTERISTIC S – BY REGION - SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET 56 
TABLE 14.1-5.3.2: SUMMARY OF SURGERY CHARACTERISTICS – BY REGION – EFFICACY 
ANALYSIS SET 56 
TABLE 14.1-5.3.3: SUMMARY OF SURGERY CHARACTERISTICS – BY REGION – 
PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 56 
TABLE 14.2-1.1.1: ANALYSIS OF AUC OF VAS PAIN INTENSITY SCORES THROUGH 48 HOURS 
– EFFICACY ANALYSIS SE T - MULTIPLE IMPUTATION RESULTS 57 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 41 of 167 26Jun2017 
 TAB
LE 14.2-1.1.2: SUMMARY OF AUC OF VAS PAIN INTENSITY SCORES THROUGH 4 8 
HOURS BY SITE AND SURGERY – EFFICACY ANALYSIS SE T - MULTIPLE 
IMPUTATION RESULTS 58 
TABLE 14.2-1.2.1: ANALYSIS OF AUC OF VAS PAIN INTENSITY SCORES THROUGH 48 HOURS 
– PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SE T - MULTIPLE IMPUTATION RESULTS 62 
TABLE 14.2-1.2.2: SUMMARY OF AUC OF VAS PAIN INTENSITY SCORES THROUGH 4 8 
HOURS BY SITE AND SURGERY – PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SE T - MULTIPLE 
IMPUTATION RESULTS 62 
TABLE 14.2-2.1.1: ANALYSIS OF POSTSURGICAL TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION (MED MG) 
THROUGH 48 HOURS – EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 63 
TABLE 14.2-2.1.2: SUMMARY OF TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION (MED MG) THROUGH 48 
HOURS BY SITE AND SURGERY - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 64 
TABLE 14.2-2.1.3: ANALYSIS OF TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION (MED MG) BY TIME PERIOD 
- EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 66 
TABLE 14.2-2.1.4: SUMMARY OF THE NUMBER OF TIMES OPIOID (RESCUE) MEDICATION 
WAS USED BY SUBJECT - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 68 
TABLE 14.2-2.2.1: ANALYSIS OF POSTSURGICAL TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION (MED MG) 
THROUGH 48 HOURS – PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 69 
TABLE 14.2-2.2.2: SUMMARY OF TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION (MED MG) THROUGH 48 
HOURS BY SITE AND SURGERY - PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS 69 
TABLE 14.2-2.2.3: ANALYSIS OF TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION (MED MG) BY TIME PERIOD 
- PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 69 
TABLE 14.2-2.2.4: SUMMARY OF THE NUMBER OF TIMES OPIOID (RESCUE) MEDICATION 
WAS USED BY SUBJECT - PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 69 
TABLE 14.2-3.1.1: ANALYSIS OF OPIOID-FREE SUBJECTS THROUGH 48 HOURS - EFFICACY 
ANALYSIS SET 70 
TABLE 14.2-3.1.2: SUMMARY OF OPIOID-FREE SUBJECTS THROUGH 48 HOURS BY SITE A ND 
SURGERY - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 71 
TABLE 14.2-3.2.1: ANALYSIS OF OPIOID-FREE SUBJECTS THROUGH 48 HOURS - 
PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 72 
TABLE 14.2-3.2.2: SUMMARY OF OPIOID-FREE SUBJECTS THROUGH 48 HOURS BY SITE A ND 
SURGERY - PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 72 
TABLE 14.2-4.1: ANALYSIS OF TIME TO FIRST RESCUE MEDICATION USE (HOURS) - 
EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 73 
TABLE 14.2-4.2: ANALYSIS OF TIME TO FIRST RESCUE MEDICATION USE (HOURS) – 
PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 73 
TABLE 14.2-5.1: ANALYSIS OF VAS AUC AT VARIOUS TIME INTERVALS - EFFICACY 
ANALYSIS SET 75 
TABLE 14.2-5.2: SUMMARY OF VAS AT ASSESSMENT TIMEPOINTS - EFFICACY ANALYSIS 
SET 77 
TABLE 14.2-5.3: ANALYSIS OF VAS SPIS AT VARIOUS TIME INTERVALS - EFFICACY 
ANALYSIS SET 78 
TABLE 14.2-6: ANALYSIS OF PAIN-FREE SUBJECTS AT ASSESSMENT TIMEPOINTS - 
EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 79 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 42 of 167 26Jun2017 
 TAB
LE 14.2-7: ANALYSIS OF OPIOID-FREE SUBJECTS THROUGH 24 AND 72 HOURS - 
EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 80 
TABLE 14.2-8: ANALYSIS OF OVERALL BENEFIT OF ANALGESIA TOTAL SCORE BY 
TIMEPOINT AND QUESTI ON - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 81 
TABLE 14.2-9: ANALYSIS OF SATISFACTION WITH POSTSURGICAL PAIN CONTROL 
QUESTIONNAIRE SCORE BY TIMEPOINT - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 83 
TABLE 14.2-10.1: ANALYSIS OF TIME TO DISCHARGE READY - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 84 
TABLE 14.2-10.2: SUMMARY OF DISCHARGE READY AT ASSESSMENT - EFFICACY 
ANALYSIS SET 85 
TABLE 14.2-11: ANALYSIS OF NUMBER OF UNSCHEDULED PHONE CALLS OR OFFICE 
VISITS RELATED TO PA IN - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 87 
TABLE 14.2-12.1.1.1: REGION ANALYSIS OF AUC OF VAS PAIN INTENSITY SCORE S 
THROUGH 48 HOURS – EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET - MULTIPLE IMPUTATION 
RESULTS 88 
TABLE 14.2-12.2.1.1: REGION ANALYSIS OF POSTSURGICAL TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION 
(MED MG) THROUGH 48 HOURS – EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 88 
TABLE 14.2-12.2.1.2: REGION SUMMARY OF TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION (MED MG) 
THROUGH 48 HOURS BY REGI ON - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 88 
TABLE 14.2-12.2.1.3: REGION SUMMARY OF TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION (MED MG) BY 
TIME PERIOD - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 88 
TABLE 14.2-12.2.1.4: REGION SUMMARY OF THE NUMBER OF TIMES OPIOID (RESCUE) 
MEDICATION WAS USED BY SUBJECT - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 88 
TABLE 14.2-12.2.2.1: REGION ANALYSIS OF POSTSURGICAL TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION 
(MED MG) THROUGH 48 HOURS – PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 88 
TABLE 14.2-12.2.2.2: REGION SUMMARY OF TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION (MED MG) 
THROUGH 48 HOURS BY SITE - PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 89 
TABLE 14.2-12.2.2.3: REGION SUMMARY OF TOTAL OPIOID CONSUMPTION (MED MG) BY 
TIME PERIOD - PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 89 
TABLE 14.2-12.2.2.4: REGION SUMMARY OF THE NUMBER OF TIMES OPIOID (RESCUE) 
MEDICATION WAS USED BY SUBJECT - PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 89 
TABLE 14.2-12.3.1.1: REGION ANALYSIS OF OPIOID-FREE SUBJECTS THROUGH 48 HOURS - 
EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 89 
TABLE 14.2-12.3.1.2: REGION SUMMARY OF OPIOID-FREE SUBJECTS THROUGH 48 HOURS 
BY SITE - EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 89 
TABLE 14.2-12.3.2.1: REGION ANALYSIS OF OPIOID-FREE SUBJECTS THROUGH 48 HOURS - 
PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 89 
TABLE 14.2-12.3.2.2: REGION SUMMARY OF OPIOID-FREE SUBJECTS THROUGH 48 HOURS 
BY SITE - PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 89 
TABLE 14.3-1.1.1: SUMMARY OF CLINICAL LABORATORY DATA BY TIMEPOINT – 
HEMATOLOGY - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 90 
TABLE 14.3-1.1.2: SUMMARY OF CLINICAL LABORATORY DATA BY TIMEPOINT – 
CHEMISTRY - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 91 
TABLE 14.3-1.1.3.1: SUMMARY OF CLINICAL LABORATORY DATA BY TIMEPOINT – 
URINALYSIS - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 91 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 43 of 167 26Jun2017 
 TAB
LE 14.3-1.1.3.2: TABULATION OF CLINICAL LABORATORY DATA BY TIMEPOINT – 
URINALYSIS - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 92 
TABLE 14.3-1.2.1: TABULATION OF CLINICAL LABORATORY RANGE BY TIMEPOINT – 
HEMATOLOGY - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 93 
TABLE 14.3-1.2.2: TABULATION OF CLINICAL LABORATORY RANGE BY TIMEPOINT – 
CHEMISTRY - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 93 
TABLE 14.3-1.2.3: TABULATION OF CLINICAL LABORATORY RANGE BY TIMEPOINT – 
URINALYSIS - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 93 
TABLE 14.3-1.3.1: SHIFT TABLE FOR CLINICAL LABORATORY DATA BY TIMEPOINT – 
HEMATOLOGY - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 94 
TABLE 14.3-1.3.2: SHIFT TABLE FOR CLINICAL LABORATORY DATA BY TIMEPOINT – 
CHEMISTRY - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 94 
TABLE 14.3-1.3.3: SHIFT TABLE FOR CLINICAL LABORATORY DATA BY TIMEPOINT – 
URINALYSIS - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 94 
TABLE 14.3-2.1: SUMMARY OF VITAL SIGNS BY TIMEPOINT – SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 95 
TABLE 14.3-2.2: SUMMARY OF POTENTIALLY CLINICALLY SIGNIFICANT ABNORMAL 
VITAL SIGNS – SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 97 
TABLE 14.3-3.1: SUMMARY OF ELECTROCARDIOGRAM INTERPRETATION – INVESTIGATOR 
READ - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 100 
TABLE 14.3-3.2: SHIFT TABLE FOR ELECTROCARDIOGRAM INTERPRETATION – 
INVESTIGATOR READ - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 101 
TABLE 14.3-4: SUMMARY OF NEUROLOGICAL ASSESSMENTS BY TIMEPOINT- SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET 102 
TABLE 14.3-5.1: TABULATION OF SENSATION TESTS – SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 103 
TABLE 14.3-5.2: SUMMARY OF SENSATION LOSS AND RETURN BY TIMEPOINT – SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET 104 
TABLE 14.3-5.3.1: ANALYSIS OF TIME TO FIRST SENSATION LOSS – SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 106 
TABLE 14.3-5.4.1: ANALYSIS OF TIME TO FIRST SENSATION RETURN – SAFETY ANALYSIS 
SET 108 
TABLE 14.3-5.5: SUMMARY OF DURATION (HRS) OF SENSATION LOSS – SAFETY ANALYSIS 
SET 110 
TABLE 14.3-5.6: SUMMARY OF THE NUMBER OF SENSATION LOSS-RETURN CYCLES - 
SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 111 
TABLE 14.3-6.1: SUMMARY OF MOTOR FUNCTION LOSS AND RETURN BY TIMEPOINT – 
SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 112 
TABLE 14.3-6.2: ANALYSIS OF TIME TO ONSET OF MOTOR FUNCTION LOSS - EFFICACY 
ANALYSIS SET 113 
TABLE 14.3-6.3: ANALYSIS OF TIM E TO RETURN OF MOTOR FUNCTION - EFFICACY 
ANALYSIS SET 114 
TABLE 14.3-6.4: SUMMARY OF MOTOR FUNCTION ASSESSMENTS BY TIMEPOINT – SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET 115 
TABLE 14.3-7.1.1: OVERVIEW OF TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) - 
SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 117 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 44 of 167 26Jun2017 
 TAB
LE 14.3-7.1.2: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE 
EVENTS (TEAES) - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 118 
TABLE 14.3-7.1.3: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF STUDY DRUG-RELATED TREATMENT-
EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 118 
TABLE 14.3-7.1.4: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE 
EVENTS (TEAES) LEADING TO STUDY WITHDRAWAL - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 118 
TABLE 14.3-7.1.5: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF STUDY DRUG-RELATED TREATMENT-
EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) LEADING TO STUDY WITHDRAWAL - 
SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 118 
TABLE 14.3-7.1.6: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE 
EVENTS (TEAES) BY SEVERITY - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 119 
TABLE 14.3-7.1.7: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE 
EVENTS (TEAES) BY RELATIONSHIP TO STUDY DRUG - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 120 
TABLE 14.3-7.2.1: OVERVIEW OF SERIOUS TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS 
(TEAES) - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.2.2: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF SERIOUS TREATMENT-EMERGENT 
ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.2.3: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF STUDY DRUG-RELATED SERIOUS 
TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.2.4: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF SERIOUS TREATMENT-EMERGENT 
ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) LEADING TO STUDY WITHDRAWAL - SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.2.5: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF STUDY DRUG-RELATED SERIOUS 
TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) LEADING TO STUDY 
WITHDRAWAL - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.2.6: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF SERIOUS TREATMENT-EMERGENT 
ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) RESULTING IN DEAT H - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.2.7: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF STUDY DRUG-RELATED SERIOUS 
TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) RESULTING IN DEATH - 
SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.3.1: OVERVIEW OF TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) OF 
SPECIAL INTEREST - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.3.2: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE 
EVENTS (TEAES) OF SPECIAL INTEREST - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.3.3: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF STUDY DRUG-RELATED TREATMENT-
EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) OF SPECIAL INTEREST - SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.3.4: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE 
EVENTS (TEAES) OF SPECIAL INTEREST LEADING TO STUDY WITHDRAWAL - 
SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 121 
TABLE 14.3-7.3.5: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF STUDY DRUG-RELATED TREATMENT-
EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) OF SPECIAL INTEREST LEADING TO 
STUDY WITHDRAWAL - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 122 
TABLE 14.3-7.3.6: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE 
EVENTS (TEAES) OF SPECIAL INTEREST RESULTING IN DEATH - SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET 122 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 45 of 167 26Jun2017 
 TAB
LE 14.3-7.3.7: SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF STUDY DRUG-RELATED TREATMENT-
EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) OF SPECIAL INTEREST RESULTING IN 
DEATH - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 122 
TABLE 14.3-8.1: INCIDENCE OF PRIOR MEDICATIONS – SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 123 
TABLE 14.3-8.2: INCIDENCE OF CONCOMITANT MEDICATION S – SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 123 
TABLE 14.3-9.1.1: REGION TABULATION OF SENSATION TESTS – SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 124 
TABLE 14.3-9.1.2: REGION SUMMARY OF SENSATION LOSS AND RETURN BY TIMEPOINT – 
SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 124 
TABLE 14.3-9.1.3: REGION ANALYSIS OF TIME TO SENSATION LOSS – SAFETY ANALYSIS 
SET 124 
TABLE 14.3-9.1.4: REGION ANALYSIS OF TIME TO SENSATION RETURN – SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET 124 
TABLE 14.3-9.1.5: REGION SUMMARY OF DURATION (HRS) OF SENSATION LOSS – SAFETY 
ANALYSIS SET 124 
TABLE 14.3-9.2.1: REGION SUMMARY OF ACTIVE MOTOR FUNCTION LOSS AND RETURN 
BY TIMEPOINT – SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 124 
TABLE 14.3-9.2.2: REGION ANALYSIS OF TIME TO ONSET OF MOTOR FUNCTION LO SS - 
EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 124 
TABLE 14.3-9.2.3: REGION ANALYSIS OF TIME TO RETURN OF MOTOR FUNCTION - 
EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 124 
USE MOCK-UP 14.3-6.4 FOR TABLE:  124 
TABLE 14.3-9.2.4: REGION SUMMARY OF MOTOR FUNCTION ASSESSMENTS BY TIMEPOINT 
– SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 124 
TABLE 14.3-9.3.1: REGION OVERVIEW OF TREATMENT- EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENT S 
(TEAES) - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 125 
TABLE 14.3-9.3.2: REGION SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF TREATMENT-EMERGENT 
ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 126 
TABLE 14.3-9.3.3: REGION SUMMARY OF INCIDENCE OF SERIOUS TREATMENT-EMERGENT 
ADVERSE EVENTS (TEAES) - SAFETY ANALYSIS SET 126 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 46 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402
-C-327 
Table 14.1 -1: Summary of Subject Disposition – All Screened Subjects  
 
Site: Overall  EXPAREL   
 133 mg 
n (%) 266 mg 
n (%) All EXPAREL  
n (%) Placebo 
n (%) Total 
n (%) 
Screened [1]      xx 
   Screen Failure [1]      xx (xx.x)  
   Enrolled [1]      xx (xx.x)  
      
Randomized  xx xx xx xx xx 
  Not Treated  xx xx xx xx xx 
  Treated xx xx xx xx xx 
      
Safety Analysis Set [2]#  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) 
      
Efficacy Analysis Set [3]@  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
Per-Protocol  Analysis Set [4] @ xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
Protocol       
  Enrolled under Amendment 2 [2]#  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Enrolled under Amendment 1 [2]#  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Enrolled under Original Protocol [2]#  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
Completed Study@  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
Discontinued from Study@  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Reasons for Discontinuation@  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Death@ xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Adverse Event@  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Lack of Efficacy@  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Lost to Follow -up@ xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Withdrawal by Subject@  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Other@ xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
# = as treated ; @ = as randomized ; 
[1] Signed the informed consent form ; [2] Received study drug ; [3] Received study drug and surgery ;  
[4] All subjects in the efficacy analysis set who do not have any important protocol deviations ;  
Percentages for screen failure and enrolled based on number screened; others on number randomized.  
Subjects randomized to EXPAREL but treated with placebo: list subjects; 
Subjects randomized to placebo but treated with EXPAREL: list subjects ; 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 47 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name
 
Note to programmer:  First page will present overall sites; subsequent pages will present each site –  one 
site per page. For reasons for discontinuation only those reasons that appear in the data will appear on 
the table.  For individual sites the label should be the site number.  For the foo tnotes “Subjects 
randomized to … treated with...” if no subjects were mistreated, then omit footnote. 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 48 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.1 -2.1.1: Summary of Subject Demographics - Safety Analysis Set  
 
Site: Overall   EXPAREL   
 Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XX] 266 mg 
[N=XX] All EXPAREL 
[N=XX] Placebo 
[N=XX] Total 
[N=XX] 
Age (yrs)  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
Sex       
  Female n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Male n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
Ethnicity        
  Hispanic or Latino  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Not Hispanic or Latino  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
Race       
  American Indian/Alaska Native  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Black/African American  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Asian n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  White  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
Country       
  Belgium n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) 
  Denmark n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  USA n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
Dominant Hand        
  Left n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Right n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
       
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
Note to programmer:  First page will present overall sites; subsequent pages will present each site – one 
site per page. Only categories available in the data will appear on the table.  For individual sites the 
label should be the site number. If subjects are missing data for a category  (example Race), a missing 
subcategory should be added  under the respective category. Use this template also for table:  
 
Table 14.1 -2.1.2: Subject Demographics – Efficacy Analysis Set   
Table 14.1 -2.1.3: Subject Demographics – Per-protocol Analysis Set    
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 49 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page 1 of 4)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.1 -2.2.1: Summary of Subject Baseline Characteristics - Safety Analysis Set 
 
Site: Overall   EXPAREL   
 Statistic  133 mg  
[N=XX] 266 mg 
[N=XX] All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] Placebo 
[N=XX] Total 
[N=XX] 
       
Neurological Assessments        
   Subject oriented        
    Yes n (%) xxx (xx.x%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
    No n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Numb lips, tongue, mouth        
    Yes n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
    No n (%) xxx (xx.x%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Metallic taste        
    Yes n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
    No n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Problems hearing        
    Yes n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
    No n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Problems with vision        
    Yes n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
    No n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Muscle twitch        
    Yes n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
    No n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
ECG       
  Normal n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Abnormal, NCS  n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Abnormal, CS  n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
       
NCS = Not clinically significant  CS = Clinically significant  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: If subjects are missing data for a category (example Race), a missing subcategory should be added under the respective 
category.   
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 50 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page 2 of 4)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.1 -2.2.1: Summary of Subject Baseline Characteristics - Safety Analysis Set 
 
Site: Overall   EXPAREL   
 
Statistic  133 mg  
[N=XX] 266 mg 
[N=XX] All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] Placebo 
[N=XX] Total 
[N=XX] 
       
Motor Assessments        
  Thumb Abduction  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
  Thumb Adduction  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
  Thumb Opposition  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
  Elbow Flexion  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 51 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page 3 of 4)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.1 -2.2.1: Summary of Subject Baseline Characteristics - Safety Analysis Set 
 
Site: Overall   EXPAREL   
 Statistic  133 mg  
[N=XX] 266 mg 
[N=XX] All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] Placebo 
[N=XX] Total 
[N=XX] 
       
VAS Score (cm ) n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
ASA Classification        
  1 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  2 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  3 n (%) xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  ≥ 4 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
       
Height(cm)  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
Weight (kg)  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 52 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page 4 of 4)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.1 -2.2.1: Summary of Subject Baseline Characteristics - Safety Analysis Set 
 
Site: Overall   EXPAREL   
 Statistic  133 mg  
[N=XX] 266 mg 
[N=XX] All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] Placebo 
[N=XX] Total 
[N=XX] 
       
Body Mass Index (kg/m2) n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
Heart Rate (bpm)  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
Systolic Blood Pressure (mmHg)  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
Diastolic Blood Pressure (mmHg)  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  First page will present overall sites; subsequent pages will present each site – one 
site per page. For individual sites the label should be the site number. Use this template also for table:  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 53 of 167 26Jun2017 
  
Table 14.1 -2.2.2: Subject Baseline Characteristics – Efficacy Analysis Set 
 
Table 14.1 -2.2.3: Subject Baseline Characteristics –  Per-protocol  Analysis Set  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 54 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.1 -3.1: Summary of Surgery Characteristics - Safety Analysis Set  
 
Site: Overall  EXPAREL   
Characteristic  Statistic  133 mg  
[N=XX] 266 mg 
[N=XX] All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] Total 
[N=XX] 
       
Surgery Type       
  Rotator Cuff Repair  n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Total Shoulder Arthroplasty  n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
    Conventional  n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
    Reverse n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
       
Nerve Block Type        
  Interscalene  n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Supraclavicular  n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
       
Duration of Surgery (hours)  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Median xx xx xx xx xx 
 Minimum xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
Total Incision Length (cm)  n xx xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Median xx xx xx xx xx 
 Minimum xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
       
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  First page will present overall sites; subsequent pages will present each site – one 
site per page. For individual sites the label should be the site number. Use this template also for table s: 
 
Table 14.1 -3.2: Summary of Surgery Characteristics (hours) – Efficacy Analysis Set  
Table 14.1 -3.3: Summary of Surgery Characteristics (hours) –  Per-protocol Analysis Set 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C- 327 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 55 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Table 14. 1-4.1: Tabulation of Incidence of Intraoperative
 Medications - Safety Analysis Set  
 EXPAREL   
Anatomical Therapeutic Class (ATC)  
  Preferred Name  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo  
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total  
[N=XX] 
n (%) 
      
Subjects taking at least one medication  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
ATC1 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PN1.1 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PN1.2 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
ATC2 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  
  PN2.1 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PN2.2 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
ETC.      
      
Medications are coded using World Health Organization Drug Dictionary (WHO -DD) March 2015.  
Sorted by descending total incidence by ATC for Total column.  Subjects using the same intraoperative 
medication (PT) more than once or multiple medications within an ATC class are counted only once at each  
ATC summary level.  
Intraoperatives medications are those indicated as such by the investigator . 
Subjects using the same prior medication more than once are counted only once at each summary level.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Note to programmer:  First page will present overall sites; subsequent pages will present each site – one 
site per page. For individual sites the label should be the site number. Use this template also for tables: 
 
Table 14. 1-4.2: Tabulation of Incidence of Intraoperative Medications - Efficacy Analysis Set   
Table 14.1 -4.3: Tabulation of Incidence of Intraoperative Medications – Per-Protocol Analysis Set   
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 56 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer:   For the following region summaries, ‘Site:’ will be replaced with ‘Region:’.  Regions, 
in order of appearance, are US and ROW.  There will be no overall region summary presented on these 
tables. 
  
Use template 14.1 -1 for table: 
 
Table 14.1- 5.1: Summary of Subject Disposition  – By Region – All Screened Subjects 
 
Use template 14.1 -2.1.1 for tables:  
 
Table 14.1- 5.2.1.1: Summary of Subject Demographics – By Region  - Safety Analysis Set 
Table 14.1- 5.2.1.2: Summary of Subject Demographics – By Region  – Efficacy Analysis Set  
Table 14.1 -5.2.1.3: Summary of Subject Demographics – By Region  – Per-protocol Analysis Set   
 
Use template 14.1 -2.2.1 for tables:  
 
Table 14.1- 5.2.2.1: Summary of Summary of Subject Baseline Characteristics  – By Region - Safety Analysis 
Set 
Table 14.1-5. 2.2.2: Summary of Subject Baseline Characteristics  – By Region – Efficacy Analysis Set   
Table 14.1-5. 2.2.3: Summary of Subject Baseline Characteristics  – By Region – Per-protocol  Analysis Set  
 
Use template 14.1 -3.1 for tables:  
 
Table 14.1- 5.3.1: Summary of Surgery Characteristics –  By Region  - Safety Analysis Set 
Table 14.1-5. 3.2: Summary of Surgery Characteristics –  By Region  – Efficacy Analysis Set  
Table 14.1-5. 3.3: Summary of Surgery Characteristics –  By Region  – Per-protocol Analysis Set  
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 57 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -1.1.1: Analysis of AUC of VAS Pain Intensity Scores through 48 hours – Efficacy Analysis Set  - 
Multiple Imputation Results  
 
Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
   
N  xx  xx 
Mean  xxx.x  xxx.x 
SD  xxx.xx  xxx.xx 
Median  xxx.x  xxx.x 
Minimum  xx  xx 
Maximum  xxx  xxx 
   
LS Mean [1]   xxx.x  xxx.x 
Standard Error of LS Mean  [1]  xxx.xx  xxx.xx 
LS Treatment Difference [1][2]   xx.x  
Treatment Difference 95% Confidence Interval [1][2]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
Treatment Difference p -value [1][2]   0.xxx   
   
AUC = area under the curve calculated using the trapezoidal method;  LS = least squares; 
VAS = 10 cm visual analog scale for pain, where 0 = no pain and 10 = worst possible pain;  
[1] From an ANOVA with age, weight, and height  as covariates.   
[2] Treatment difference is EXPAREL – placebo. 
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM
 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  The raw SAS outputs from the procedures used to produce ALL 14.2 -1.1.* & 14.2-1.2 
series tables should be saved as a possible appendix to the clinical study report (CSR) ..  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 58 of 167 26Jun2017 
  
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-
C-327 
Table 14.2 -1.1.2: Summary of AUC of VAS Pain Intensity Scores through 48 hours by Site and Surgery – 
Efficacy Analysis Set - Multiple Imputation Results  
 
 
Site Surgery Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
XXX All n xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx 
      Minimum xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx 
     
 RCR n xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x 
      Maximum xx xx 
     
 TSA-All n xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx 
     
 TSA-Conventional   n xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx 
     
     TSA-Reverse  n xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 59 of 167 26Jun2017 
  
Site Surgery Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
  Median xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx 
RCR = Rotator Cuff Repair; TSA = Total Shoulder Arthoplasty ; 
AUC = area under the curve calculated using the trapezoidal method;   
VAS = 10 cm visual analog  scale for pain, where 0 = no pain and 10 = worst possible pain;  
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Present for each site  by surgery (All, RCR, TSA -ALL, TSA- Conventional, TSA -Reverse).  
For pooled sites, present the pooled site first and then each site contributing to the pool immediately 
after.  Do not split a site’s /surgery  statistics across pages.   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 60 of 167 26Jun2017 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 61 of 167 26Jun2017 
   
Note to programmer: The raw SAS outputs from the procedures used to produce ALL 14.2 -1.1.* series tables 
should be saved as a possible appendix to the clinical study report  (CSR). 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 62 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer:   Use the mock -ups indicated to for following tables:  
Mock-up 14.2- 1.1.1:  
Table 
14.2-1.2.1: Analysis of AUC of VAS Pain Intensity Scores through 48 hours – Per-protocol  Analysis Set 
- Multiple Imputation Results  
  
Mock-up 14.2- 1.1.2:  
Table 14.2 -1.2.2: Summary of AUC of VAS Pain Intensity Scores through 48 hours by Site and Surgery – 
Per-protocol Analysis Set - Multiple Imputation Results  
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 63 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -2.1.1: Analysis of Postsurgical Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg) through 48 hours – Efficacy 
Analysis Set  
Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
   
N  xx  xx 
Geometric Mean  xxx.x  xxx.x 
%CV  xxx.xx  xxx.xx 
Minimum  xx  xx 
Maximum  xxx  xxx 
   
LS Mean [1]   xxx.x  xxx.x 
 Standard Error of LS Mean  [1]  xxx.xx  xxx.xx 
LS Treatment Ratio [1][2]  xx.x  
Treatment Ratio 95% Confidence Interval [1][2]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
Treatment Ratio p-value [1][2]   0.xxx   
   
[1] From an ANOVA with age, weight, and height  as covariates  on log-transformed total opioid consumption .   
    Subjects without any opioid use are set to 0.1 or half of the smallest total amount observed in the 
study, whichever is smaller, prior to being transformed with the natural logarithm
. Results are back -
transformed.  
[2] Treatment ratio is EXPAREL / placebo. 
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 64 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -2.1.2: Summary of Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg) through 48 hours by Site and Surgery - 
Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
 
Site Surgery Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
XXX All n xx xx 
  Geometric Mean xx.x xx.x 
  %CV x.xx x.xx 
      Minimum xx xx 
  Maximum xx xx 
     
 RCR n xx xx 
  Geometric Mean xx.x xx.x 
  %CV x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
      Maximum xx xx 
     
 TSA-All n xx xx 
  Geometric Mean xx.x xx.x 
  %CV x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
  Maximum xx xx 
     
 TSA-Conventional   n xx xx 
  Geometric Mean xx.x xx.x 
  %CV x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
  Maximum xx xx 
     
     TSA-Reverse  n xx xx 
  Geometric Mean xx.x xx.x 
  %CV x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
  Maximum xx xx 
RCR = Rotator Cuff Repair; TSA = Total Shoulder Arthoplasty;  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 65 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer: Present for each site  by surgery (All, RCR, TSA -ALL, TSA- Conventional, TSA -Reverse).  
For pooled sites, present the  pooled site first and then each site contributing to the pool immediately 
after.  Do not split a site’s /surgery  statistics across pages.   
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 66 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -2.1.3: Analysis of Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg ) by Time Period - Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
Time Period  Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
    
0-24 hrs N xx xx 
 Geometric Mean xxx.x xxx.x 
 %CV xxx.xx xxx.xx 
 Minimum xx xx 
 Maximum xxx xxx 
    
 LS Mean [1]  xxx.x xxx.x 
  Standard Error of LS Mean [1]  xxx.xx xxx.xx 
 LS Treatment Ratio [1][2]  xx.x xx.x 
 Treatment Ratio 95% Confidence Interval [1][2]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
 Treatment Ratio p -value [1][2]  0.xxx  
        
0-72 hrs N xx xx 
 Geometric Mean xxx.x xxx.x 
 %CV xxx.xx xxx.xx 
 Minimum xx xx 
 Maximum xxx xxx 
    
 LS Mean [1]  xxx.x xxx.x 
      Standard Error of LS Mean [1]  xxx.xx xxx.xx 
 LS Treatment Ratio [1][2]  xx.x xx.x 
 Treatment Ratio 95% Confidence Interval [1][2]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
 Treatment Ratio p -value [1][2]  xxx.x  
    
    
[1] From an ANOVA with age, weight, and height  as covariates  on log-transformed total opioid consumption.   
    Subjects without any opioid use are set to 0.1 or half of the smallest total amount observed in the 
study, whichever is smaller, prior to being transformed with the natural logarithm
. Results are back -
transformed.   
[2] Treatment ratio is EXPAREL / placebo. 
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 67 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer: Present overall sites and for each site. Time periods to appear on this table, in 
order, are 0 -24, 0-72, 24
-48 and 48 -72.  Do not split a time period statistics across pages.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 68 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -2.1.4: Summary of the Number of Times Opioid (Rescue) Medication was used by Subject - Efficacy 
Analysis Set  
 
 Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
    
Count Summary  n xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx.x xx.x 
 Median xx xx 
 Maximum xx xx 
    
Count Distribution     
  0  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  1 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  2 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  3 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  4 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  5 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  … n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  U n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Present overall sites and for each site. Distribution should present all counts up to 
the highest number of times for opioid rescue  in the data (U) on each page.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 69 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer:   Use the mock -ups indicated to for following tables:  
Mock-up 14.2.1.1: 
Table 14.2 -2.2.1: Analysis of Postsurgical Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg) through 48
 hours – 
Per-protocol Analysis Set  
Mock-up 14.2.1.2: 
Table 14.2 -2.2.2: Summary of Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg) through 48 hours by Site and Surgery - 
Per-protocol Analysis  
Mock-up 14.2.1.3: 
Table 14.2 -2.2.3: Analysis of Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg) by Time Period - Per-protocol  Analysis Set  
Mock-up 14.2.1.4:  
Table 14.2 -2.2.4: Summary of the Number of Times Opioid (Rescue) Medication was used by Subject - 
Per-protocol Analysis Set 
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 70 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -3.1.1: Analysis of Opioid -Free Subjects through 48  hours - Efficacy Analysis Set 
 
 
Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
    
No Opioid Use  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
Opioid Used  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
 Treatment Difference [1]  xx.x  
 95% CI for Difference [1]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
 p-value [2]  0.xxxx  
    
[1] Treatment difference (EXPAREL – placebo) and confidence intervals (CI) are based on the normal 
approximation to the binomial distribution using SAS PROC FREQ with RISKDIFFC option.  
[2] From Cochran -Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) test . 
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 71 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -3.1.2: Summary of Opioid -Free Subjects through 48  hours by Site and Surgery - Efficacy Analysis 
Set 
 
Site Surgery Opioid Use  Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
      
XXX All No Opioid Use  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Opioid Used  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
 RCR No Opioid Use  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Opioid Used  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
 TSA-All No Opioid Use  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Opioid Used  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
 TSA-Conventional  No Opioid Use  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Opioid Used  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
 TSA-Reverse No Opioid Use  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Opioid Used  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
RCR = Rotator Cuff Repair; TSA = Total Shoulder Arthoplasty;  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Present for each site  on a separate page.  For pooled sites, present the pooled site 
first and then each site contributing to the pool immediately after.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 72 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer:   Use the mock -ups indicated to for following tables:  
Mock-up 14.2- 3.1.1: 
Table 14.2 -3.2.1: Analysis of Opioid -Free Subjects through 48  hours 
- Per-protocol Analysis Set   
Mock-up 14.2- 3.1.2: 
Table 14.2 -3.2.2: Summary of Opioid -Free Subjects through 48  hours by Site and Surgery - Per-protocol 
Analysis Set   
 
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 73 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402
-C-327 
Table 14.2 -4.1: Analysis of Time to First Rescue Medication Use (hours) - Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
 Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo 
[N=XX] 
    
Number of Subjects on     
  Rescue Medication (Opioid)  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  No Rescue Medication (censored)  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
Time to First Rescue    
  Quartiles [1]     
    First (25% rescued)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    
    Median (50% rescued)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    
    Third (75% rescued)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    
  Minimum Observed  xx.xx xx.xx 
  Maximum Observed  xx.xx* xx.xx 
    
  p-value [2]   0.xxxx  
    
* indicates censored observation   CI = confidence interval  
[1] Estimates from Kaplan -Meier analysis.   
[2] p-value from Log- Rank test comparing EXPAREL to placebo.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Use this mock-ups indicated to for following table: 
Table 14.2 -4.2: Analysis of Time to First Rescue Medication Use (hours) – Per-protocol Analysis Set  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 74 of 167 26Jun2017 
   
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 75 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -5.1: Analysis of VAS AUC at Various Time Intervals - Efficacy Analysis Set 
 
 
Parameter  Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
    
AUC(0-24) n xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx 
    
 LS Mean [1]  xxx.x xxx.x 
 Standard Error of LS Mean [1]  xxx.xx xxx.xx 
 LS Treatment Difference [1][2]  xx.x  
 Treatment Difference 95% Confidence Interval [1][2]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
 Treatment Difference p -value [1][2]  0.xxx  
    
    
Etc. n xx xx 
     Mean xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx 
    
 LS Mean [1]  xxx.x xxx.x 
 Standard Error of LS Mean [1]  xxx.xx xxx.xx 
 LS Treatment Difference [1][2]  xx.x  
 Treatment Difference 95% Confidence Interval [1][2]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
 Treatment Difference p -value [1][2]  0.xxx  
    
AUC = area under the curve calculated using the trapezoidal method;  LS = least squares; 
VAS = 10 cm visual analog scale for pain, where 0 = no pain and 10 = worst possible pain;  
[1] From an ANOVA with age, weight, and height  as covariates.   
[2] Treatment difference is EXPAREL – placebo. 
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM
 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 76 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer: VAS AUCs to be presented on this table are, in order, AUC(0 -12), AUC(0 -24), AUC(0- 72), 
AUC(24-48), and AUC(48- 72). Do not break an AUC’s statistics across pages.   
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 77 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -5.2: Summary of VAS at Assessment Timepoints - Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
 
Timepoint  Statistic EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
    
Baseline  n xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx 
    
PACU n xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx 
    
Etc. n xx xx 
     Mean xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx 
    
PACU is Post Anesthesia Care Unit  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order, Baseline, PACU , and 6, 12, 24, 36, 
48, 60, and 72 hours.   
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 78 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer:  Use the indicated mock -up for the following tables:  
 
Use mock -up 14.2-5 .1:
 
 
Table 14.2 -5.3: Analysis of VAS SPIS at Various Time Intervals - Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
VAS SPIS to be presented on Table 14.2 -5.3 are, in order, SPIS(0 -12), SPIS(0- 24), SPIS(0- 48), SPIS(24- 48), 
SPIS(48-72), and SPIS(0- 72). Do not break an SPIS’s statistics across pages.   
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 79 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -6: Analysis of Pain- free Subjects at Assessment Timepoints - Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
Timepoint  Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
    
Baseline     
  Pain-Free n (%) xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  
  Pained n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
 Treatment Difference [1]  xx.x  
 95% CI for Difference [1]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
 p-value [2]  0.xxxx  
    
Etc.    
  Pain-Free n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Pained n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
 Treatment Difference [1]  xx.x  
 95% CI for Difference [1]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
 p-value [2]  0.xxxx  
    
[1] Pain- Free Treatment difference (EXPAREL – placebo) and confidence intervals (CI) are based on the 
normal approximation to the binomial distribution using SAS PROC FREQ with RISKDIFFC option.  
[2] From Cochran -Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) test . 
Pain-free = VAS score ≤ 1.5 and no prior rescue medication use  and all prior VAS scores ≤ 1.5 . 
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order, Baseline, PACU and 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 
60, and 72 hours.  Do not split a timepoint across pages.   
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 80 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -7: Analysis of Opioid -Free Subjects through 24 and 72 hours - Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
Time Interval  
  Opioid Use  Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
    
0-24    
    Yes  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    No n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
 Treatment Difference [1]  xx.x  
 95% CI for Difference [1]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
 p-value [2]  0.xxxx  
    
0-72    
    Yes  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    No n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
 Treatment Difference [1]  xx.x  
 95% CI for Difference [1]  (xx.x, xx.x)   
 p-value [2]  0.xxxx  
    
[1] Opioid- Free Treatment difference (EXPAREL – placebo) and confidence intervals (CI) are based on the 
normal approximation to the binomial distribution using SAS PROC FREQ with RISKDIFFC option.  
[2] From Cochran -Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) test . 
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Use the indicated mock -up for the following tables:  
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 81 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -8: Analysis of Overall Benefit of Analgesia Total Score  by Timepoint and Question - Efficacy 
Analysis Set   
 
Timepoint  
  Question   
Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo 
[N=XX] 
     
24 hours     
  Total Score  Summary  n xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx 
  p-value[1]  0.xxx  
 Score    
 0 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 1 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 2 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 … n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 … n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
     
  1. Current Pain  Summary  n xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx 
 Score    
 0 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 1 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) 
 2 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 3 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 4 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
     
Total score = sum of scores from questions 1 to 6 plus 4 minus question 7 score.   
[1] p-value from Kruskal- Wallis test.  
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 82 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer:  Timepoints to appear on this table, in order, are 24 and 72 hours ,
 and Day 10.  
Questions to appear on this table, in order, are ‘Total Score’, ‘1. Current Pain’, ‘2. Vomiting’, ‘3. 
Itching’, ‘4. Sweating’, ‘5. Freezing’, ‘6. Dizziness’, ‘7. Satisfaction’ . Do not split a question’s 
statistics across pages.  P-Values should only be generated for ‘Total score’.   
Note to programmer:  Use the indicated mock -up for the following tables:  
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 83 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -9: Analysis of Satisfaction with Postsurgical Pain Control Questionnaire Score by Timepoint - 
Efficacy Analysis Set   
 
 
Timepoint  Score Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
     
24 hours  Summary  n xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx 
  p-value[1]  0.xxx  
 Score    
 1: Extremely dissatisfied  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 2: Dissatisfied  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 3: Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 4: Satisfied  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 5: Extremely Satisfied  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
     
[1] p-value from the Kruskal- Wallis test.  
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Timepoints to appear on this table are 24 and 72 hours and Day 10.  Do not split 
timepoint across pages.   
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 84 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -10.1: Analysis of Time to Discharge Ready - Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
Assessment Time  
  Discharge Ready  Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo 
[N=XX] 
    
12 hours    
  No n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Yes n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
    
Time to Discharge Ready     
  Quartiles [1]     
    First (25% Discharge Ready ) Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    
    Median (50% Discharge Ready ) Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    
    Third (75% Discharge Ready ) Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    
  Minimum Observed  xx.xx xx.xx 
  Maximum Observed  xx.xx* xx.xx 
    
  p-value [2]   0.xxxx  
    
 
 
* indicates censored observation   CI = confidence interval  
[1] Estimates from Kaplan -Meier analysis.   
[2] p-value from Log- rank test comparing EXPAREL to placebo.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:   Assessment s Time to be presented are 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours .  
 
 
 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 85 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.2 -10.2: Summary of Discharge Ready at Assessment - Efficacy Analysis Set 
 
Assessment Time  
  Discharge Ready  Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
    
12 hours     
    No  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Yes n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
24 hours     
    No  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Yes n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
36 hours     
    No  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Yes n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
48 hours     
    No  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Yes n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
60 hours     
    No  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Yes n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
72 hours     
    No  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    Yes n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 86 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer:  Do not split timepoint across pages.   
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 87 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14. 2-11: Analysis of Number of Unscheduled Phone Calls or Office Visits Related to Pain - Efficacy 
Analysis Set  
 
 Statistic  EXPAREL 133 mg 
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
    
Count Summary  n xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx.x xx.x 
 Median xx xx 
 Maximum xx xx 
 p-value[1]  0.xxx  
    
Count Distribution     
  0  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  1 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  2 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  3 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  4 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  5 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  … n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  U n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
    
[1] p-value from Kruskal- Wallis test.  
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Distribution should present all counts up to the highest number of unscheduled visits 
(phone calls + office  visits) related to pain in the data (U).   
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 88 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer:   For the following region summaries, ‘Site:’ will be replaced with ‘Region:’ in the 
statistical models, row labels, footnotes and by lines of summaries as appropriate.  When summarizing by 
region, the regions are, in order of appearance, US and ROW.  There 
will be no overall region summary 
presented on these tables.  
 
Use template 14.2 -1.1.1 for table s: 
 
Table 14.2 -12.1.1.1: Region Analysis of AUC of VAS Pain Intensity Scores through 48 hours – Efficacy 
Analysis Set - Multiple Imputation Results  
 
Table 14. 12-1.2.1: Region Analysis of AUC of VAS Pain Intensity Scores through 48 hours – Per-protocol
 
Analysis Set - Multiple Imputation Results  
 
Use template 14.2 -2.1.1 for table:  
 
Table 14.2 -12.2.1.1: Region Analysis of Postsurgical Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg) through 48 hours – 
Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
Use template 14.2 -2.1.2 for table:  
 
Table 14.2 -12.2.1.2: Region Summary of Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg) through 48 hours by Region - 
Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
Use template 14.2 -2.1.3 for table:  
 
Ta
ble 14.2- 12.2.1.3: Region Summary of Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg
) by Time Period - Efficacy Analysis 
Set 
 
Use template 14.2 -2.1.4 for table:  
 
Table 14.2 -12.2.1.4: Region Summary of the Number of Times Opioid (Rescue) Medication was used by Subject - 
Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
Use template 14.2 -2.1.1 for table:  
 
Table 14.2 -12.2.2.1: Region Analysis of Postsurgical Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg) through 48 hours 
– 
Per-protocol Analysis Set 
 
Use template 14.2 -2.1.2 for table:  
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 89 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Table 14.2 -12.2.2.2: Region Summary of Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg) through 48 hours by Site -
 Per-
protocol  Analysis Set 
 
Use template 14.2 -2.1.3 for table:  
 
Table 14.2 -12.2.2.3: Region Summary of Total Opioid Consumption (MED mg) by Time Period 
- Per-protocol 
Analysis Set  
 
Use template 14.2- 2.1.4 for table:  
 
Table 14.2 -12.2.2.4: Region Summary of the Number of Times Opioid (Rescue) Medication was used by Subject -
 
Per-protocol Analysis Set 
 
Use template 14.2 -3.1.1 for table:  
 
Table 14.2 -12.3.1.1: Region Analysis of Opioid -Free Subjects through 48 hours - Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
Use template 14.2 -3.1.2 for table:  
 
Table 14.2 -12.3.1.2: Region Summary of Opioid -Free Subjects through 
48 hours by Site -
 Efficacy Analysis 
Set 
 
Use template 14.2 -3.1.1 for table:  
 
Table 14.2 -12.3.2.1: Region Analysis of Opioid -Free Subjects through 48 hours -
 Per-protocol  Analysis Set 
 
Use template 14.2 -3.1.2 for table:  
 
Table 14.2 -12.3.2.2: Region Summary of Opioid -Free Subjects through 
48 hours by Site - Per-protocol 
Analysis Set  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C- 327 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 90 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Table 14.3 -1.1.1: Summary of Clinical Laboratory Data by Timepoint  – Hematology -
 Safety Analysis Set  
Laboratory parameter (units)  EXPAREL   
Timepoint  Value Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 266 mg 
[N=XXX] All 
EXPAREL 
[N=XXX] Placebo 
[N=XXX] Total 
[N=XXX] 
        
Baseline  Actual n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
Day 10 Baseline [1]  n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
 Actual n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
 Change  n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
[1] Baseline (prior to surgery) for subjects with data at the timepoint.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites. Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order of 
appearance, Baseline (prior to surgery) and Day 10 .  Do not split timepoint statistics across pages.  See 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 91 of 167 26Jun2017 
 protocol for list of lab analytes.  Analytes should be sorted in alphabetical order.  Use this mock -up for 
the following tables:  
 
Table 14.3 -1.1.2: Summary of Clinical Laboratory Data by Timepoint  – Chemistry 
- Safety Analysis Set  
Table 14.3 -1.1.3.1: Summary of Clinical Laboratory Data by Timepoint  – Urinalysis - Safety Analysis Set 
 
For urinalysis results only numeric results will appear on this table.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 92 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -1.1.3.2: Tabulation of Clinical Laboratory Data by Timepoint  – Urinalysis - Safety Analysis Set  
    EXPAREL   
Analyte   Timepoint  Category  Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 266 mg 
[N=XXX] All EXPAREL  
[N=XXX] Placebo 
[N=XXX] Total 
[N=XXX] 
         
         
Analyte 1  Baseline  [1] Cat 1 n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Cat 2 n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Etc. n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
         
 Day 10 Cat 1 n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Cat 2 n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Etc. n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
         
Analyte 2 Baseline  [1] Cat 1 n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Cat 2 n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Etc. n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
         
 Day 10 Cat 1 n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Cat 2 n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Etc. n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
Etc.         
         
[1] Baseline (prior to surgery) for subjects with data at the timepoint.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Only present overall sites. Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order of 
appearance, Baseline (prior to surgery) and Day 10.  Do not split timepoint statistics across pages, if 
possible.  Present all avaliable  lab analytes. Categories are the superset of those reported in the data 
for both timepoints combined.  All categories should appear for both timepoints with zeros (0) as counts 
where needed.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 93 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402
-C-327 
Table 14.3 -1.2.1: Tabulation of Clinical Laboratory Range by Timepoint  – Hematology - Safety Analysis Set  
Laboratory parameter (units)  EXPAREL   
Timepoint  Normal 
Range Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 266 mg 
[N=XXX] All EXPAREL 
[N=XXX] Placebo 
[N=XXX] Total 
[N=XXX] 
        
Baseline  Below n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
 Normal n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
 Above n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
Day 10 Below n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
 Normal n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
 Above n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%) xxx (xx.x%)  
        
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites. Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order of 
appearance, Baseline (prior to surgery)and Day 10.   Do not split timepoint statistics across pages.  
Present all avaliable  analytes.  Analytes should be sorted in alphabetical order.  Use this mock -up for the 
following tables:  
 
Table 14.3 -1.2.2: Tabulation of Clinical Laboratory Range by Timepoint – Chemistry - Safety Analysis Set  
Table 14.3 -1.2.3: Tabulation of Clinical Laboratory Range by Timepoint – Urinalysis - Safety Analysis Set  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 94 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14. 3-1.3.1: Shift Table for Clinical Laboratory Data by Timepoint  – Hematology - Safety Analysis Set  
  Baseline  
 Normal Range  EXPAREL All EXPAREL  [N=XXX] Placebo [N=XXX]  
Analyte Day 10 Below Normal Above Below Normal Above 
        
Analyte 1  Below xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Above xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
        
Analyte 2  Below xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Above xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
        
Analyte 3  Below xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Above xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
        
ETC. Below xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Above xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
        
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites.  Do not split an analyte across pages.  EXPAREL 133 mg and 
EXPAREL 266 mg will appear on separate pages.  All analytes for an EXPAREL group (combined, 133 mg, 266 mg) 
should appear on consecutive pages before starting the next EXPAREL group.  Analytes should be sorted in 
alphabetical order.  Use this mock -up for the following tables:  
 
Table 14.3 -1.3.2: Shift Table for Clinical Laboratory Data by Timepoint – Chemistry - Safety Analysis Set  
Table 14.3 -1.3.3: Shift Table for Clinical Laboratory Data by Timepoint – Urinalysis - Safety Analysis Set  
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 95 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -2.1: Summary of Vital Signs  by Timepoint – Safety Analysis Set  
Heart Rate (bpm)  EXPAREL   
Timepoint  Value Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 266 mg 
[N=XXX] All 
EXPAREL 
[N=XXX] Placebo 
[N=XXX] Total 
[N=XXX] 
        
Baseline  Actual n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
PACU Baseline [1]  n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
 Actual n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
 Change  n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
[1] Baseline (prior to surgery) for subjects with data at the  timepoint. 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites. Vital signs are ‘Heart Rate (bpm)’, ‘Systolic Blood 
Pressure (mmHg)’ and ‘Diastolic Blood Pressure (mmHg)’. Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order of 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 96 of 167 26Jun2017 
 appearance, Baseline (prior to surgery), PACU , and 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, 
and 72 hours, and Days 7 and 10 .  
Do not split timepoint statistics across pages.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 97 of 167 26Jun2017 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14. 3-2.2: Summary of Potentially Clinically Significant Abnormal Vital Signs  – Safety Analysis Set  
Heart Rate (bpm)  EXPAREL   
Timepoint  Criteria  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
Baseline  <= 50 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Decrease >= 15  NA NA NA NA NA 
 <= 50 & Decrease >= 15  NA NA NA NA NA 
       
 >= 120 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Increase >= 15  NA NA NA NA NA 
 >= 120 & Increase >= 15  NA NA NA NA NA 
       
Any Time  <= 50 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
After Decrease >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
Baseline  <= 50 & Decrease >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
 >= 120 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Increase >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  
 >= 120 & Increase >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
Etc. <= 50 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Decrease >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 <= 50 & Decrease >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
 >= 120 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Increase >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 >= 120 & Increase >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 98 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14. 3-2.2: Summary of Potentially Clinically Significant Abnormal Vital Signs  – Safety Analysis Set  
Systolic Blood Pressure (mmHg)  EXPAREL   
Timepoint  Criteria  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
Baseline  <= 90 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Decrease >= 20  NA NA NA NA NA 
 <= 90 & Decrease >= 20  NA NA NA NA NA 
       
 >= 180 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Increase >= 20  NA NA NA NA NA 
 >= 180 & Increase >= 20  NA NA NA NA NA 
       
Any Time  <= 90 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
After Decrease >= 20  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
Baseline  <= 90 & Decrease >= 20  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
 >= 180 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Increase >= 20  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 >= 180 & Increase >= 20  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
Etc. <= 90 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Decrease >= 20  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 <= 90 & Decrease >= 20  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
 >= 180 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) 
 Increase >= 20  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 >= 180 & Increase >= 20  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 99 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14. 3-2.2: Summary of Potentially Clinically Significant Abnormal Vital Signs  – Safety Analysis Set  
Diastolic Blood Pressure (mmHg)  EXPAREL   
Timepoint  Criteria  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
Baseline  <= 50 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Decrease >= 15  NA NA NA NA NA 
 <= 50 & Decrease >= 15  NA NA NA NA NA 
       
 >= 105 xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Increase >= 15  NA NA NA NA NA 
 >= 105 & Increase >= 15  NA NA NA NA NA 
       
Any Time  <= 50 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
After Decrease >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
Baseline  <= 50 & Decrease >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
 >= 105 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Increase >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) 
 >= 105 & Increase >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
Etc. <= 50 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Decrease >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 <= 50 & Decrease > = 15 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
 >= 105 xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Increase >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 >= 105 & Increase >= 15  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites. Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order of 
appearance, Baseline (prior to surgery), Any Time After Baseline, PACU and, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 
hours and Days 7 and 10.  Do not split timepoint statistics across pages. 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 100 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14. 3-3.1: Summary of Electrocardiogram Interpretation – Investigator Read - Safety Analysis Set  
  EXPAREL   
 
Time Point  Interpretation  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All 
EXPAREL 
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
      
Baseline (Prior to Surgery)  Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Abnormal, NCS  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Abnormal, CS  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
Any Time After Baseline  Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Abnormal, NCS  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Abnormal, CS  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
At Tmax* Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  N/A N/A 
 Abnormal, NCS  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  N/A N/A 
 Abnormal, CS  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  N/A N/A 
       
Etc. Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Abnormal, NCS  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 Abnormal, CS  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
       
*QuantPharm LLC indicated that the results of the interim PK analysis showed a median Tmax of 48 hours for 
the 133 mg EXPAREL group and a median Tmax of 60 hours for the 266 mg EXPAREL group.  The ‘at Tmax’ 
timepoint is the time nearest in absolute value to  the population PK estimated median Tmax.  
NCS = not clinically significant   CS = clinically significant  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites.  Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order of 
appearance, Baseline (prior to surgery), At any time after baseline, At Tmax, PACU , and 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 
60, and 72 hours, and Days 7 and 10 .  Do not split a timepoint across pages.  For the timepoint ‘ any time 
after baseline’ report the worst interpretation reported at any timepoint but baseline.  For the ‘at Tmax’ 
timepoint, report the interpretation at the time of Tmax for those subjects with Tmax reported and median 
Tmax for those subjects without Tmax.  
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 101 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402
-C-327 
Table 14. 3-3.2: Shift Table for Electrocardiogram Interpretation – Investigator Read - Safety Analysis Set  
  Baseline  
  EXPAREL All EXPAREL  [N=XXX] Placebo [N=XXX]  
   Abnormal   Abnormal  
Time Point  Interpretation  Normal NCS CS Normal NCS CS 
        
Any Time  Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
After NCS xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
Baseline  CS xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
        
 Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 NCS xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 CS xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
        
At Tmax* Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  N/A N/A N/A 
 NCS xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  N/A N/A N/A 
 CS xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  N/A N/A N/A 
        
Etc. Normal xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  
 NCS xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
 CS xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
        
*QuantPharm LLC indicated that the results of the interim PK analysis showed a median Tmax of 48 hours for 
the 133 mg EXPAREL group and a median Tmax of 60 hours for the 266 mg EXPAREL group.  The ‘at Tmax’ 
timepoint is the time nearest in absolute value to  the population PK estimated median Tmax.  
NCS = not clinically significant   CS = clinically significant  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites.  Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order of 
appearance, Baseline (prior to surgery), At any time after baseline, At Tmax, PACU , and 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 
60, and 72 hours, and Days 7 and 10.  Do not split a timepoint across pages.  For the timepoint ‘ any time 
after baseline’ report the worst interpretation reported at any timepoint but baseline.  For the ‘at Tmax’ 
timepoint, report the interpretation at the time of Tmax for those subjects with Tmax reported and median 
Tmax for those subjects without Tmax.  EXPAREL 133 mg and EXPAREL 266 mg will appear on separate pages.  
All timepoints for an EXPAREL group (All EXPAREL, 133 mg, 266 mg) should appear on consecutive pages before 
starting the next EXPAREL group.  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 102 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -4: Summary of Neurological Assessments by Timepoint - Safety Analysis Set  
   EXPAREL   
Timepoint  Assessment   133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
Baseline (Prior to Surgery)        
 Subject Oriented  No XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
  Yes XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
        
 Numb lips, tongue or mouth  No XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
  Yes XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
        
 Metallic taste  No XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
  Yes XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
        
 Hearing problems  No XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
  Yes XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
        
 Vision problems  No XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
  Yes XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
        
 Muscle twitching  No XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
  Yes XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) XX (XX.X) 
        
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites.  Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order of 
appearance, Baseline (prior to surgery), At any time after baseline, PACU and, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 
72 hours and Days 7 and 10. Put one timepoint per page.  For the timepoint ‘any time after baseline’ if 
there is at least one ‘yes’ at any timepoint other than
 baseline, the subject will be a ‘yes’.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 103 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -5.1: Tabulation of Sensation Tests  – Safety Analysis  Set 
 
Location: location -name EXPAREL   
Timepoint  Sensation   133 mg 
[N=XXX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Total 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
        
Baseline  Cold  Absent xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Present xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
 Pinprick  Absent xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Present xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
 Light Touch  Absent xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Present xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
Etc. Cold Absent xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Present xxx (xx.x%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
 Pinprick  Absent xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Present xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
 Light Touch  Absent xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Present xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Locations to appear on this table, in order, are ‘Shoulder’, ‘Forearm’, ‘5th finger’, 
’Middle finger’ and ‘Thumb’ . Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order, are: Baseline, 15, 30 and 45 
minutes and 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours.  Do not split a timepoint across pages.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 104 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -5.2: Summary of Sensation Loss and Return by Timepoint  – Safety Analysis Set 
 
Location: location -name  EXPAREL   
Timepoint  Sensation   133 mg 
[N=XXX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Total 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
        
At Any Time  Any Loss xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Return xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%) 
        
 CPL Loss xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Return xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
 CP Loss xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Return xxx (xx.x%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
 CL Loss xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Return xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
 PL Loss xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Return xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
 Cold (C)  Loss xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Return xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
 Pinprick (P)  Loss xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Return xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
 Light Touch (L)  Loss xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Return xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
        
Loss is the absence of sensation  Return is the presence of sensation after a loss of sensation  
Sensation: CPL = All; CP = cold & pinprick; CL = cold & light touch; PL = pinprick &  light touch  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Locations to appear on this table, in order, are ‘Shoulder’, ‘Forearm’, ‘5th finger’, 
’Middle finger’ and ‘Thumb’ .  Timepoints to appear  on this table are, in order, are: At Any Time, 15, 30 
and 45 minutes , and 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours.  For ‘at any time’ timepoint subjects’ 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 105 of 167 26Jun2017 
 experiencing a loss/return at any time during the study will be counted only once. For ‘any’ sensa tion, 
subjects’ experiencing a loss/return for at least one of the sensation  at that timepoint will be counted 
only once.  Do not split a timepoint across pages.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 106 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -5.3.1: Analysis of Time to First Sensation Loss –  Safety Analysis Set 
 
Location: location -name  EXPAREL  
Sensation  Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
      
Loss      
  Ever n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Never* n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
      
Time to First Loss (hrs)       
  Quartiles [1]       
    First (25%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    Median (50%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    Third (75%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
  Minimum Observed  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
  Maximum Observed  xx.xx* xx.xx* xx.xx xx.xx 
  p-value [2]   0.xxxx 0.xxxx 0.xxxx  
      
Loss: absence of at least one of cold, pinprick or light touch sensation.  * = censored 
Time to sensation loss is the time from end of surgery to first loss of sensation.  
[1] Estimates from Kaplan -Meier analysis.   
[2] p-value from log- rank test comparing EXPAREL to placebo.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Locations to appear on this table, in order, are ‘Shoulder’, ‘Forearm’, ‘5th finger’, 
’Middle finger’ and ‘Thumb’ .    
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 107 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -5.3.2: Analysis of Time to Last Sensation Loss – Safety Analysis Set 
 
Location: location -name  EXPAREL  
Sensation  Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
      
Time to Last Loss (hrs)       
  Quartiles [1]       
    First (25%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    Median (50%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    Third (75%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
  Minimum Observed  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
  Maximum Observed  xx.xx* xx.xx* xx.xx xx.xx 
  p-value [2]   0.xxxx 0.xxxx 0.xxxx  
      
Loss: absence of at least one of cold, pinprick or light touch sensation.  * = censored 
Return: all 3 (cold, pinprick and light touch) sensations are present after loss of sensation  
Time to sensation return is the time from first sensation loss to first sensation return.  
[1] Estimates from Kaplan -Meier analysis.   
[2] p-value from log- rank test comparing EXPAREL to placebo.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Locations to appear on this table, in order, are ‘Shoulder’, ‘Forearm’, ‘5th finger’, 
’Middle finger’ and ‘Thumb’ .  If a subject meets the loss criteria at any timepoint, the subject will be 
counted in ‘loss ever’ category; otherwise the subject will be counted in ‘loss never’ category.  Note time 
to last loss will only be provided if more than 10% of the subjects in a treatment arm have more than 1 
sensation loss -return cycle.    
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 108 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3- 5.4.1: Analysis of Time to First Sensation Return – Safety Analysis Set 
 
Location: location -name  EXPAREL  
Sensation  Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
      
Loss Ever  n (%) xxx (xx.x%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
Return      
  Ever n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
  Never* n (%) xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  xxx (xx.x%)  
      
Time to First Return (hrs)       
  Quartiles [1]       
    First (25%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    Median (50%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    Third (75%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
  Minimum Observed  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
  Maximum Observed  xx.xx* xx.xx* xx.xx xx.xx 
  p-value [2]   0.xxxx 0.xxxx 0.xxxx  
      
Loss: absence of at least one of cold, pinprick or light touch sensation.  * = censored 
Return: all 3 (cold, pinprick and light touch) sensations are present after loss of sensation  
Time to sensation return is the time from first sensation loss to first sensation return.  
[1] Estimates from Kaplan- Meier analysis.   
[2] p-value from log- rank test comparing EXPAREL to placebo.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Locations to appear on this table, in order, are ‘Shoulder’, ‘Forearm’, ‘5th finger’, 
’Middle finger’ and ‘Thumb’ .  This table based on only those subjects who lost sensation (ie, the loss ever 
row is the population appearing in analyses).    
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 109 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y) Protocol: 402-
C-327 
Table 14.3 -5.4.2: Analysis of Time to Last Sensation Return – Safety Analysis Set 
 
Location: location -name   EXPAREL  
Sensation  Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
      
Time to Last Return (hrs)       
  Quartiles [1]       
    First (25%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    Median (50%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
    Third (75%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
  Minimum Observed  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
  Maximum Observed  xx.xx* xx.xx* xx.xx xx.xx 
  p-value [2]   0.xxxx 0.xxxx 0.xxxx  
      
Loss: absence of at least one of cold, pinprick or light touch sensation.  * = censored 
Return: all 3 (cold, pinprick and light touch) sensations are present after loss of sensation  
Time to sensation return is the time from first sensation loss to first sensation return.  
[1] Estimates from Kaplan -Meier analysis.   
[2] p-value from log- rank test with terms for treatment comparing EXPAREL to placebo.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Locations to appear on this table, in order, are ‘Shoulder’, ‘Forearm’, ‘5th finger’, 
’Middle finger’ and ‘Thumb’ . ‘Loss Ever’ counts on this table should agree with ‘loss ever’ counts on Table 
14.3-5.1.1. If a subject meets the return criteria at any time , the subject will be counted in ‘return 
ever’ category; otherwise the subject will be counted in the ‘return never’ category.  The sum of ‘return 
ever’ and ‘return never’ should add up to ‘loss ever’; subjects who did not experience a loss of sensation 
cannot have a return of sensation.  Only subjects experiencing a ‘loss ever’ will contribute to the body of 
this table.  Note time to last return will only be provided if more than 10% of the subjects in a treatment 
arm have more than 1 sensation loss -return cycle. 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 110 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -5.5: Summary of Duration (hrs) of Sensation Loss – Safety Analysis Set 
 
Location: location -name   EXPAREL  
 Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
      
Total Duration  n xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx 
      
Cycle 1 n xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx 
      
Etc. n xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx xx xx xx 
 Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx 
      
Duration is the time between loss and return of sensation.  
Total duration is the sum, within a subject, of all sensation loss -return cycles. 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Locations to appear on this table, in order, are ‘Shoulder’, ‘Forearm’, ‘5th finger’, 
’Middle finger’ and ‘Thumb’ . Only subjects experiencing a sensation loss will contribute to the body of 
this table.  Note summaries of cycles will only be provided if more than 10% of the subjects in a treatment 
arm have more than 1 sensation loss -return cycle. 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 111 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14. 3-5.6: Summary of the Number of Sensation Loss- Return Cycles - Safety Analysis Set  
 
Location: location -name EXPAREL  
 Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XX] 266 mg 
[N=XX] All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] Placebo  
[N=XX] 
      
Count Summary n xx xx xx xx 
 Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
 Minimum xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
 Median xx xx xx xx 
 Maximum xx xx xx xx 
      
Count Distribution       
  0  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  1 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  2 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  3 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  4 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  5 n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  … n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  U n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Locations to appear on this table, in order, are ‘Shoulder’, ‘Forearm’, ‘5th finger’, 
’Middle finger’ and ‘Thumb’ . Distribution should present all counts up to the highest number of loss- return 
cycles in the data (U). Only subjects experiencing a sensation loss will contribute to the body of this 
table.  This table will only be provided if at least 1 subject has more than 1 sensation loss -return cycle. 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 112 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -6.1: Summary of Motor Function Loss and Return by Timepoint  – Safety Analysis Set  
 
 EXPAREL   
Timepoint  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) All 
EXPAREL 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Placebo 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) Total 
[N=XXX]  
n (%) 
      
At Any Time       
  Loss      
    Thumb abduction (radial nerve)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
    Thumb adduction (ulnar nerve)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
    Thumb opposition (median nerve)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
    Elbow flexion (musculocutaneous nerve)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%) xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
      
Return      
    Elbow flexion (musculocutaneous nerve)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
    Thumb adduction (ulnar nerve)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
    Thumb opposition (median nerve)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
    Elbow flexion (musculocutaneous nerve)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  xx (xx.x%)  
      
Loss: Lovett scale score < 3 in at least one of the motor function assessments 
Return: Lovett scale score returns to 3 or more in any motor function assessment.  
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Locations to appear on this table, in order, are Thumb  abduction (radial nerve), Thumb 
adduction (ulnar nerve), Thumb opposition  (median nerve), and Elbow flexion (musculocutaneous nerve).  
Timepoints to appear on this table are, in order, are: At Any Time, 15, 30 and 45 minutes and 6, 9, 12, 18, 
24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 hours.   
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 113 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14. 3-6.2: Analysis of Time to Onset of Motor Function Loss - Efficacy Analysis Set 
 
Location:  location -name (nerve name)  EXPAREL  
 Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XX] 266 mg 
[N=XX] Placebo 
[N=XX] 
     
Number of Subjects with     
  Motor Function Loss  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  No Motor Function Loss  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
     
Time to Loss     
  Quartiles [1]      
    First (25%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
     
    Median (50% ) Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
     
    Third (75%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
     
  Minimum Observed  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
  Maximum Observed  xx.xx* xx.xx* xx.xx 
     
  p-value [2]   0.xxxx 0.xxxx  
     
Locations to appear on this table, in order, are Thumb abduction (radial nerve), Thumb adduction (ulnar 
nerve), Thumb opposition (median nerve), and Elbow flexion (musculocutaneous nerve) . 
Loss: Lovett scale score < 3 in at least one of the motor function assessments  
 
* indicates censored observation   CI = confidence interval  
[1] Estimates from Kaplan -Meier analysis .  
[2] p-value from log- rank test comparing EXPAREL to placebo.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 114 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14. 3-6.3: Analysis of Time to Return of Motor Function - Efficacy Analysis Set 
 
Location: location -name (nerve name)  EXPAREL  
 Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XX] 266 mg 
[N=XX] Placebo 
[N=XX] 
     
Number of Subjects with     
  Motor Function Return  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  No Motor Function Return  n (%) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
     
Time to Return     
  Quartiles [1]      
    First (25%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
     
    Median (50%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
     
    Third (75%)  Estimate  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
 (95% CI)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  (xx.xx,xx.xx)  
     
  Minimum Observed  xx.xx xx.xx xx.xx 
  Maximum Observed  xx.xx* xx.xx* xx.xx 
     
  p-value [2]   0.xxxx 0.xxxx  
     
Locations to appear on this table, in order, are Thumb abduction (radial nerve), Thumb adduction (ulnar 
nerve), Thumb opposition  (median nerve), and Elbow flexion (musculocutaneous nerve) . 
Return: Lovett scale score returns to 3 or more in any motor function assessment.  
* indicates censored observation   CI = confidence interval  
[1] Estimates from Kaplan -Meier analysis.   
[2] p-value from log- rank test with terms for treatment comparing EXPAREL to placebo. 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 115 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -6.4: Summary of Motor Function Assessments by Timepoint  – Safety Analysis Set 
 
Active Flexion (degrees)  EXPAREL   
Timepoint  Value Statistic  133 mg 
[N=XXX] 266 mg 
[N=XXX] All EXPAREL  
[N=XXX] Placebo 
[N=XXX] Total 
[N=XXX] 
        
Baseline  Actual n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
15 min Baseline [1]  n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
 Actual n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
 Change  n xx xx xx xx xx 
  Mean xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  SD x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx x.xx 
  Minimum xx xx xx xx xx 
  Median xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x xx.x 
  Maximum xx xx xx xx xx 
        
[1] Baseline (prior to surgery) for subjects with data at the timepoint.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 116 of 167 26Jun2017 
   
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 117 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3- 7.1.1: Overview of Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) - Safety Analysis Set  
 EXPAREL   
Number of  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo  
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total  
[N=XX] 
n (%) 
      
Subjects with Any TEAE  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Maximum Severity of Mild  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Maximum Severity of Moderate  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Maximum Severity of Severe  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
  At least one Related  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
  At least one Serious  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
Subjects Discontinued due to TEAE  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
Died on Study  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
Related TEAEs are those AEs indicated as ‘possible’, ‘probable’ or ‘definite’ related by the investigator 
on the AE CRF.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites.  All categories on this table should appear, even if not 
present in the data.   
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 118 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3- 7.1.2: Summary of Incidence of Treatment- Emergent Adverse Events (TEAEs ) - Safety Analysis Set  
 EXPAREL   
System Organ Class  
  Preferred Term  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo  
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total  
[N=XX] 
n (%) 
      
Subjects with at least one TEAE  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
SOC1 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PT1.1 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PT1.2 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
SOC2 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PT2.1 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PT2.2 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
ETC.      
      
Adverse events coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA TBD).  
Sorted by descending total incidence by system organ class and preferred term within system organ class.  
Subjects experiencing the same TEAE more than once are counted only once at each summary level.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites.  Use mock- up Table 14.3 -2.1.2 for the following tables:  
 
Table 14.3 -7.1.3: Summary of Incidence of Study Drug -Related Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAEs) - 
Safety Analysis Set   
Table 14.3 -7.1.4: Summary of Incidence of Treatment- Emergent Adverse Events (TEAEs ) Leading to Study 
Withdrawal - Safety Analysis Set  
Table 14.3 -7.1.5: Summary of Incidence of Study Drug- Related Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) 
Leading to Study Withdrawal - Safety Analysis Set  
 
For related tables add the following footnote to the table:  
Related TEAEs are those AEs indicated as ‘possible’, ‘probable’ or ‘definite’ related by the investigator 
on the AE CRF.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 119 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -7.1.6: Summary of Incidence of Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAEs) by Severity - Safety 
Analysis Set  
  EXPAREL   
System Organ Class  
  Preferred Term  Severity  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All 
EXPAREL 
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo  
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total  
[N=XX] 
n (%) 
       
Subjects with at least one TEAE  Mild xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Moderate  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Severe xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) 
       
SOC1 Mild xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Moderate  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Severe xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
       
  PT1.1 Mild xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  
 Moderate  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Severe xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
       
Adverse events coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA TBD).  
Sorted by descending  total incidence by system organ class and preferred term within system organ class.  
Subjects experiencing the same TEAE more than once are counted only once at each summary level.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 120 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3 -7.1.7: Summary of Incidence of Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAEs) by Relationship to 
Study Drug - Safety Analysis Set  
  EXPAREL   
System Organ Class  
  Preferred Term  Relation  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All 
EXPAREL 
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo  
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total  
[N=XX] 
n (%) 
       
Subjects with at least one TEAE  Unrelated  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Unlikely  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Possible  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Probable  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Definite  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
       
SOC1 Unrelated  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Unlikely  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Possible  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Probable  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Definite  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) xx (xx.x)  
       
  PT1.1 Unrelated  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Unlikely  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Possible  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Probable  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 Definite  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
       
Adverse events coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA TBD).  
Sorted by descending total incidence by system organ class and preferred term within system organ class.  
Subjects experiencing the same TEAE more than once are counted only once at each summary level.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 121 of 167 26Jun2017 
  
Note to programmer:  Only present overall sites. For related tables add the following footnote to the table , 
“Related TEAEs are those AEs indicated as ‘possible’, ‘probable’ or ‘definite’ related by the investigator 
on the AE CRF. ”  
Use indicated mock -up for the following tables:  
 
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.1 
Table 14.3 -7.2.1: Overview of Serious Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) - Safety Analysis Set   
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.2 
Table 14.3 -7.2.2: Summary of Incidence of Serious Treatment- Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) - Safety 
Analysis Set  
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.3 
Table 14.3 -7.2.3: Summary of Incidence of Study Drug- Related Serious Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events 
(TEAEs) - Safety Analysis Set  
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.4 
Table 14.3 -7.2.4: Summary of Incidence of Serious Treatment- Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) Leading to 
Study Withdrawal - Safety Analysis Set   
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.5 
Table 14.3 -7.2.5: Summary of Incidence of Study Drug- Related Serious Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events 
(TEAEs) Leading to Study Withdrawal - Safety Analysis Set  
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.6 
Table 14.3 -7.2.6: Summary of Incidence of Serious Treatment- Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) Resulting in 
Death - Safety Analysis Set  
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.7 
Table 14.3 -7.2.7: Summary of Incidence of Study Drug- Related Serious Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events 
(TEAEs) Resulting in Death - Safety Analysis Set  
 
  
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.1 
Table 14.3 -7.3.1: Overview of Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) of Special Interest  - Safety 
Analysis Set   
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.2 
Table 14.3 -7.3.2: Summary of Incidence of Treatment- Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) of Special Interest  - 
Safety Analysis Set   
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.3 
Table 14.3 -7.3.3: Summary of Incidence of Study Drug- Related Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) of 
Special Interest  - Safety Analysis Set   
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.4 
Table 14.3 -7.3.4: Summary of Incidence of Treatment- Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) of Special Interest  
Leading to Study Withdrawal - Safety Analysis Set   
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.5 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 122 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Table 14.3 -7.3.5: Summary of Incidence of Study Drug- Related Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s
) of 
Special Interest  Leading to Study Withdrawal - Safety Analysis Set   
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.6 
Table 14.3 -7.3.6: Summary of Incidence of Treatment- Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) of Special Interest 
Resulting in Death - Safety Analysis Set   
Use mock -up 14.7- 1.7 
Table 14.3 -7.3.7: Summary of Incidence of Study Drug -Related Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAEs)  of 
Special Interest  Resulting in Death - Safety Analysis Set 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 123 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer:  Use mock- up 14.1-4.1 for tables
: 
 
Table 14.3 -8.1: Incidence of Prior  Medications –  Safety Analysis Set .  
 
On this table change the footnote ‘ Intraoperatives medications are those indicated as such by the 
investigator ’ to read ‘Prior medications are those stopped before start of study drug administration. ’ 
 
Table 14.3 -8.2: Incidence of Concomitant Medications – Safety Analysis Set .  
 
On this table change the footnote ‘ Intraoperatives medications are those indicated as such by the 
investigator ’ to read ‘Concomitant medications are those taken between the start of study drug 
administration  and discharge from study  and are not designated intraoperative medications. ’ 
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 124 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmer:  For the following tables, only present US and ROW
 regions; there is no overall regions  
group.  All of the following mock -ups will put the region as a by -line title in the table.  
 
Use mock -up 14.3- 5.1 for table:  
 
Table 14.3 -9.1.1: Region Tabulation  of Sensation Tests – Safety Analysis Set  
 
 
Use mock -up 14.3- 5.2 for table:  
 
Table 14.3 -9.1.2: Region Summary of Sensation Loss and Return by Timepoint  – Safety Analysis Set  
 
Use mock -up 14.3- 5.3 for table:  
 
Table 14.3 -9.1.3: Region Analysis of Time to Sensation Loss – Safety Analysis Set 
 
Use mock -up 14.3- 5.4 for table:  
 
Table 14.3 -9.1.4: Region Analysis of Time to Sensation Return – Safety Analysis Set 
 
Use mock -up 14.3- 5.5 for table:  
 
Table 14.3 -9.1.5: Region Summary of Duration (hrs) of Sensation Loss – Safety Analysis Set  
 
Use mock -up 14.3- 6.1 for table:  
 
Table 14.3 -9.2.1: Region Summary of Active Motor Function Loss and Return by Timepoint  – Safety Analysis 
Set 
 
Use mock -up 14.3- 6.2 for table:  
 
Table 14. 3-9.2.2: Region Analysis of Time to Onset of Motor Function Loss - Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
Use mock -up 14.3- 6.3 for table:  
Table 14. 3-9.2.3: Region Analysis of Time to Return of Motor Function - Efficacy Analysis Set  
 
Use mock -up 14.3- 6.4 for table:  
 
Table 14.3 -9.2.4: Region Summary of Motor Function Assessments by Timepoint  – Safety Analysis Set  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 125 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402
-C-327 
Table 14.3-9 .3.1: Region Overview of Treatment- Emergent Adverse Events (TEAE s) - Safety Analysis Set  
Region: US  EXPAREL   
Number of  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo  
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total  
[N=XX] 
n (%) 
      
Subjects with Any TEAE  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Maximum Severity of Mild  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Maximum Severity of Moderate  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  Maximum Severity of Severe  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
  At least one Related  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
  At least one Serious  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x) 
      
Subjects Discontinued due to TEAE  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
Died on Study  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present US and ROW regions; there is no overall regions  group. All categories on 
this table should appear, even if not present in the data.   
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 126 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Table 14.3-9 .3.2: Region Summary of Incidence of Treatment- Emergent Adverse Events (TEAEs ) - Safety 
Analysis Set  
Region:  EXPAREL   
System Organ Class  
  Preferred Term  133 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) 266 mg 
[N=XX] 
n (%) All EXPAREL  
[N=XX] 
n (%) Placebo  
[N=XX]  
n (%) Total  
[N=XX] 
n (%) 
      
Subjects with at least one TEAE  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
SOC1 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PT1.1 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PT1.2 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
      
SOC2 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PT2.1 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
  PT2.2 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
 xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  xx (xx.x)  
ETC.      
      
Adverse events coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA TBD).  
Sorted by descending total incidence by system organ class and preferred term within system organ class.  
Subjects experiencing the same TEAE more than once are counted only once at each summary level.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Only present US and ROW regions; there is no overall regions  group. Use this template 
for table: 
 
Table 14.3-9 .3.3: Region Summary of Incidence of Serious Treatment -Emergent Adverse Events (TEAEs ) - Safety 
Analysis Set  
 
 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 127 of 167 26Jun2017  15. TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR LISTING MOCK-UPS  
LISTING 16.2-1: SUBJECT DISPOSITI ON – ALL SUBJECTS 129 
LISTING 16.2-2: RANDOMIZATION AND ANALYSIS SETS – ALL SUBJECTS 130 
LISTING 16.2-3: DEMOGRAPHICS – ALL SUBJECTS 131 
LISTING 16.2-4: HEIGHT AND WEIGHT – ALL SUBJECTS 132 
LISTING 16.2-5: SURGERY – ALL SUBJECTS 133 
LISTING 16.2-6: VISUAL ANALOG SCALE (VAS) – ALL SUBJECTS 134 
LISTING 16.2-7.1: RESCUE MEDICATION TOTAL DOSE (MED MG) AND OPIOID-FREE STATUS 
- ALL SUBJECTS 135 
LISTING 16.2-7.2: RESCUE MEDICATI ON – ALL SUBJECTS 136 
LISTING 16.2-8: OVERALL BENEFIT OF ANALGESIA – ALL SUBJECTS 137 
LISTING 16.2-9: SUBJECT SATISFACTION WITH POST-SURGICAL PAIN CONTRO L – ALL 
SUBJECTS 138 
LIST
ING 16.2-10: MODIFIED POST-ANESTHESIA DISCHARGE SCORING SYSTEM (MPADSS)– 
ALL SUBJECTS 139 
LISTING 16.2-11: DAY 29 PHONE CAL L – ALL SUBJECTS 140 
LISTING 16.2-12: HEMATOLOGY – ALL SUBJECTS 141 
LISTING 16.2-13: CHEMISTRY – ALL SUBJECTS 141 
LISTING 16.2-14.1: URINALYSIS – NUMERIC RESULTS – ALL SUBJECTS 141 
LISTING 16.2-14.2: URINALYSIS – CHARACTER RESULTS – ALL SUBJECTS 142 
LISTING 16.2-15: VITAL SIGNS ASSESSMENT – ALL SUBJECTS 143 
LISTING 16.2-16: ELECTROCARDIOGRAM FINDINGS – INVESTIGATOR ASSESSMENT – ALL 
SUBJECTS 144 
LISTING 16.2-17: NEUROLOGICAL ASSESSMENT – ALL SUBJECTS 145 
LISTING 16.2-18.1: SENSORY FUNCTION ASSESSMENT – ALL SUBJECTS (PART 1 OF 3) 146 
LISTING 16.2-18.1: SENSORY FUNCTION ASSESSMENT – ALL SUBJECTS (PART 2 OF 3) 147 
LISTING 16.2-18.1: SENSORY FUNCTION ASSESSMENT – ALL SUBJECTS (PART 3 OF 3) 148 
LISTING 16.2-18.2: TIME TO LOSS AND RETURN OF SENSORY FUNCTION – ALL SUBJECTS 149 
LISTING 16.2-19.1: MOTOR FUNCTION ASSESSMENT – ALL SUBJECTS 150 
LISTING 16.2-19.2: TIME TO LOSS AND RETURN OF MOTOR FUNCTIO N – ALL SUBJECTS 151 
LISTING 16.2-20.1: ALL ADVERSE EVENTS – ALL SUBJECTS 152 
LISTING 16.2-20.2.1: TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS – ALL SUBJECTS 152 
LISTING 16.2-20.2.2: TREATMENT-EMERGENT STUDY DRUG RELATED ADVERSE EVENTS – 
ALL SUBJECTS 152 
LISTING 16.2-20.3: ALL SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS – ALL SUBJECTS 152 
LISTING 16.2-20.4.1: TREATMENT-EMERGENT SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS – ALL SUBJECTS 152 
LISTING 16.2-20.4.2: TREATMENT-EMERGENT STUDY DRUG RELATED SERIOUS ADVERSE 
EVENTS – ALL SUBJECTS 152 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 128 of 167 26Jun2017  LISTING 16.2-20.5.1: TREATMENT-EMERGENT ADVERSE EVENTS OF SPECIAL INTEREST – 
ALL SUBJECTS 152 
LISTING 16.2-20.5.2: TREATMENT-EMERGENT STUDY DRUG RELATED ADVERSE EVENTS 
OF SPECIAL INTEREST – ALL SUBJECTS 152 
LISTING 16.2-21.1: ALL PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS – ALL SUBJECTS 153 
LISTING 16.2-21.2: PRIOR MEDICATIONS – ALL SUBJECTS 153 
LISTING 16.2-21.3: CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS – ALL SUBJECTS 153 
LISTING 16.2-22: MEDICAL HISTORY – ALL SUBJECTS 154 
LISTING 16.2-23: INTRAOPERATIVE MEDICATIONS – ALL SUBJECTS 155 
LISTING 16.2-24: STUDY DRUG ADMINISTRATION – ALL SUBJECTS 156 
LISTING 16.2-25: URINE DRUG SCREEN, ALCOHOL BLOOD TEST AND PREGNANCY TEST – 
ALL SUBJECTS 157 
LISTING 16.2-26: ADMISSION AND DISCHARGE – ALL SUBJECTS 158 
LISTING 16.2-27: UNIQUE ADVERSE E VENTS TERMS AND ASSOCIATED CODED TERMS 159 
LISTING 16.2-28: UNIQUE MEDICATION TERMS AND ASSOCIATED CODED TERMS 160 
LISTING 16.2-29: PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS – ALL SUBJECTS 161 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 129 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-1: Subject Disposition – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject Date of 
Last Visit  End of Study Status  Specify 
     
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYY    
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: End of study status for subject who early terminated from the study is  the primary 
reason for termination. If subject discontinued due to an AE then the reason should read ‘ADVERSE EVENT, AE 
# X’. If subject discontinued due to death the reason should read ‘DEATH ON DDMONYYYY’. For those reasons 
that also collected a specify  text, that text belongs in the specify column.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 130 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-2: Randomization and Analysis Sets – All Subjects  
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
  Randomization  Protocol  
Amendment  Analysis Set  
Site Subject Date and Time  Number Safety Efficacy  Per-protocol  
        
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXXXX X X X X 
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Analysis set will by ‘Y’ if subject in set, blank otherwise.    
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 131 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-3: Demographics –  All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
 Subject Birth  
Date Age 
(yrs)  Dominant 
Hand   ASA 
Class   
Site Number Init. Sex Race Ethnicity  Region Country 
            
XXX XXX-YYYY AMZ DDMONYYYY  XX X XXXXX XXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXXX  X XXX XXXXXXX 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  If race is ‘other’ then race should be ‘Other: other -specify- text’.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 132 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-4: Height and Weight – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
      Body Mass  
Site Subject  Height and Weight 
Collection Date  Height (cm)  Weight (kg)  Index 
(kg/m2) 
       
XXX XXX-YYYY  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXX.X XX.X 
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 133 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-5: Surgery –  All Subjects  
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject Date Start 
Time Stop 
Time Duration  
(hrs) Location  Incision  
Length 
(cm) Anesthesia Type  
         
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYY  HH:MM HH:MM X.X XXXXX XX.X XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  If anesthesia type is ‘other’ then text should read ‘other: specify -text’. 
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 134 of 167 26Jun2017 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-6: Visual Analog Scale (VAS) – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
   Time From Dose      
Site Subject Date Time  Scheduled  
(hr) Actual 
(hr) Deviation  
(hrs) VAS 
(cm) Pain-Free   
          
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XX.XX XX.XX XXXX XX.X Y   
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
Pain-free is VAS ≤ 1.5 cm and no prior rescue medication use.  
VAS: 0=No pain to 10=Worst Pain Imaginable   ND=Not Done  NA=Not Applicable  
* = out of window  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create  table  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by VAS  collection date and time. If VAS was taken due to rescue medication dosing, 
put RESCUE in scheduled column and hours from dose in actual column – leave deviation column blank. Do not 
split a subject’s data across pages  if it can be avoided.   Pain-free will have Y if VAS ≤ 1.5 otherwise 
blank.  An asterisk (*) will be placed next to the deviation if an assessment is out of window.  See Table 
of Time and Events for windows.
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 135 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402
-C-327 
Listing 16.2-7.1: Rescue Medication Total Dose (MED mg) and Opioid -free Status - All Subjects  
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject 48 hrs 24 hrs 72 hrs 24-48hrs 48-72hrs Opioid-Free 
        
XXX XXX-YYYY XXXX.X XXXX.X XXXX.X XXXX.X XXXX.X NO 
XXX XXX-YYYY - - - - - YES 
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
Total dose is dose from end of surgery through timepoint. 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: If medication is ‘Other’, text should read ‘Other: specify -text’.  Sort by date and 
time within subject.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 136 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-7.2: Rescue Medication – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject Date and Time  Time to  
Rescue (hr)  Medication  Dose 
(units) Conversion  
Factor Dose 
(MED 
mg) Route  
          
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXXXXXXXXXXX  XX(XXXX) X.XX XXX.X XXXXXXX  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXXXXXXXXXXX  XX(XXXX) X.XX XXX.X XXXXXXX  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXXXXXXXXXXX  XX(XXXX) X.XX XXX.X XXXXXXX  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXXXXXXXXXXX  XX(XXXX) X.XX XXX.X XXXXXXX  
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
Time to rescue is time from end of surgery to rescue medication dose.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: If medication is ‘Other’, text should read ‘Other: specify -text’.  Sort by date and 
time within subject.  
 
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 137 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-8: Overall Benefit of Analgesia – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type   
  Assessment  Question   
Site Subject Date and Time  Schedule  
(hrs) Actual 
(hrs) Deviation  
(hrs) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Total 
Score 
              
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  24 XX.X XX.X X X X X X X X XX 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  72 XX.X XX.X X X X X X X X XX 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  240 (D10)  XXX.X XX.X X X X X X X X XX 
              
Total score = sum of questions 1 to 6 scores minus question 7 score  plus 4. 
1) Please rate your current pain at rest on a scale between 0=minimal pain and 4=maximum imaginable pain  
2) Please grade any distress and bother from vomiting in the past 24 h (0=not at all to 4=very much)  
3) Please grade any distress and bother from itching in the past 24 h (0=not at all to 4=very much)   
4) Please grade any distress and bother from sweating in the past 24 h (0=not at all to 4=very much)  
5) Please grade any distress and bother from freezing in the past 24 h (0=not at all to 4=very much)  
6) Please grade any distress and bother from dizziness in the past 24 h (0=not at all to 4=very much)  
7) How satisfied are you with your pain treatment during in the past 24 h (0=not at all to 4=very much)  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject.   
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 138 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-9: Subject Satisfaction with Post -Surgical Pain Control – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject Assessment  Date and Time  Rating Score     
          
XXX XXX-YYYY 24 hr DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  EXTREMELY DISSATISFIED  1     
  72 hr DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DISSATISFIED  2     
  Day 10 DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  NEITHER SATISFIED NOR DISSATISFIED  3     
          
XXX XXX-YYYY 24 hr DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  SATISFIED  4     
  72 hr DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  EXTREMELY SATISIFIED  5     
  Day 10 DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  EXTREMELY SATISIFIED  5     
          
Etc.          
          
          
          
          
Time to rescue is time from end of surgery to rescue medication dose.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 139 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-10: Modified Post-A nesthesia Discharge Scoring System (MPADSS) – All Subjects  
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type   
  Assessment  Question   
Site Subject Date and Time  Schedule  
(hrs) Actual 
(hrs) Deviation  
(hrs) 1 2 3 4 5 Total 
Score 
            
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  24 XX.X XX.X X X X X X XX 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  72 XX.X XX.X X X X X X XX 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  240 (D10)  XXX.X XX.X X X X X X XX 
            
*=out of window  
Total score = sum of scores.  
1) Vital signs: 2 = ≤ 20%; 1 = 20 -40%; 0 = >40% of preoperative value.  
2) Ambulation: 2 = steady gait/no dizziness; 1 = with assistance; 0 = none/dizziness 
3) Nausea and Vomiting: 2 = minimal; 1 = moderate; 0 = severe  
4) Pain: 2 = minimal; 1 = moderate; 0 = severe  
5) Surgical bleeding: 2 = minimal; 1 = moderate; 0 = severe  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject.   
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 140 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-11: Day 29 Phone Call – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type   
      Number of pain -related  
Site Subject Date Schedule  
(days) Actual 
(days) Deviation  
(days) Phone 
Calls Visits Total 
         
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYY  29 XX.X XX.X XX XX XXXX 
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYY  29 XX.X XX.X XX XX XXXX 
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYY  29 XX.X XX.X XX XX XXXX 
         
Total = sum of calls and visits.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject.   
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 141 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402
-C-327 
Listing 16.2-12: Hematology –  All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type    
     Normal Range     
Site Subject Visit Date and Time  Analyte (units)  Low High Result Change Flag 
          
XXX XXX-YYYY Screening  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx - H 
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx -  
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx - L 
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units) xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx -  
    …      
          
  Baseline  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx -  
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx -  
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx - L 
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx -  
    …      
          
  Day 10 DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx XX.X  
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx XX.X  
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx XX.X L 
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (units)  xxx.xx xxx.xx xxx.xx XX.X  
          
Flag: L=below normal range; H=above normal range.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and  time within subject and analyte alphabetically within date.  Change is 
only calculated for Day 10 visit.  Use this mock- up for the following listings:  
 
Listing 16.2-13: Chemistry –  All Subjects 
Listing 16.2-14.1: Urinalysis –  Numeric Results –  All Subjects  
 
 
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 142 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-14.2: Urinalysis –  Character Results –  All Subjects  
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type   
Site Subject Visit Date and Time  Analyte  Normal Criteria  Result Flag 
        
XXX XXX-YYYY Screening  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  A 
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
    …    
        
  Baseline  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  A 
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
    …    
        
  Day 10 DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
        
Flag: A = abnormal.  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject and analyte alphabetically within date.  
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 143 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-15: Vital Signs Assessment – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type   
      Heart Rate  Blood Pressure  (mmHg) 
  Assessment   (bpm) Systolic  Diastolic  
Site Subject Date and Time  Schedule  
(hrs) Actual 
(hrs) Dev. 
(hrs) Actual Change Actual Change Actual Change 
            
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Screening  - - XX - XXX - XX - 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Baseline  - - XX - XXX - XX - 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  PACU - - XX XX XXX -X XX X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  6 XXX.XX XXX XX -XX XXX X XX -X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  12 XXX.XX XXX XX XX XXX X XX X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  24 XXX.XX XXX XX XX XXX -X XX X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  36 XXX.XX XXX XX XX XXX X XX X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  48 XXX.XX XXX XX -XX XXX X XX -X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  60 XXX.XX XXX XX XX XXX -X XX X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  66 XXX.XX XXX XX XX XXX -X XX -X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  72 XXX.XX XXX XX -XX XXX X XX X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  120 (D5) XXX.XX XXX XX XX XXX X XX -X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  240 (D10 ) XXX.XX XXX XX -XX XXX -X XX X 
            
*=out of window    
Change is change from baseline (Preop).  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject.  An asterisk (*) will be placed next to the 
deviation if an assessment is out of window.  See Table of Time and Events for windows.  
  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 144 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-16: Electrocardiogram Findings – Investigator Assessment – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
  Assessment   
Site Subject Date and Time  Schedule  
(hrs) Actual 
(hrs) Deviation  
(hrs) Finding 
       
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Screening  - - Normal 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Preop - - Abnormal, clinically significant  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  PACU - - Abnormal, not clinically significant  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  6 XXX.XX XXX Normal 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  12 XXX.XX XXX Normal  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  24 XXX.XX XXX Normal  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  36 XXX.XX XXX Normal  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  48 XXX.XX XXX Normal  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  60 XXX.XX XXX Normal  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  66 XXX.XX XXX Normal  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  72 XXX.XX XXX Normal  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  120 (D5) XXX.XX XXX Normal  
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  240 (D10 ) XXX.XX XXX Normal  
       
*=out of window 
 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject.  An asterisk (*) will be placed next to the 
deviation if an assessment is out of window.  See Table of Time and Events for windows. 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 145 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-17: Neurological Assessment – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
  Assessment  Question  
Site Subject Date and Time  Schedule  
(hrs) Actual 
(hrs) Deviation  
(hrs) 1 2 3 4 5 6 
            
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Screening  - - X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Preop - - X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  PACU - - X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  6 XXX.XX XXX X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  12 XXX.XX XXX X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  24 XXX.XX XXX X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  36 XXX.XX XXX X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  48 XXX.XX XXX X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  60 XXX.XX XXX X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  66 XXX.XX XXX X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  72 XXX.XX XXX X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  120 (D5) XXX.XX XXX X X X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  240 (D10 ) XXX.XX XXX X X X X X X 
            
*=out of window  
1) Is subject oriented?  
2) Do you have numbness of the lips, the tongue or around the mouth?  
3) Do you have a metallic taste in your mouth?  
4) Are you having problems with your hearing not related to the use of a hearing aid?  
5) Are you having problems with your vision not related to the use of eye glasses? 
6) Are your muscles twitching?  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject.  An asterisk (*) will be placed next to the 
deviation if an assessment is out of window.  See Table of Time and Events for windows.  
 
 
 
 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 146 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-18.1: Sensory Function Assessment – All Subjects  (Part 1 of 3) 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type   
  Assessment  Axillary  Nerve Musculocutaneous  
Nerve 
Site Subject Date and Time  Schedule  
(hrs) Actual 
(hrs) Dev. 
(hrs) Cold Pin- 
prick Light 
Touch Cold Pin- 
prick Light 
Touch 
            
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Screening  - - + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Baseline  - - + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  PACU - - + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  6 XXX.XX XXX + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  9 XXX.XX XXX -L + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  12 XXX.XX XXX - + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  18 XXX.XX XXX - + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  24 XXX.XX XXX - + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  36 XXX.XX XXX - -L + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  48 XXX.XX XXX +R +R + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  60 XXX.XX XXX + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  72 XXX.XX XXX + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  120 (D5)  XXX.XX XXX + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  240 (D10)  XXX.XX XXX + + + -L + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Unsched.  - - + + + - + + 
            
*=out of window  ‘-/+‘=Absent/Present; L/R=Loss/Return of sensation  Unsched=Unscheduled 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject.  An asterisk (*) will be placed next to the 
deviation if an assessment is out of window.  See Table of Time and Events for windows.   
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 147 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-18.1: Sensory Function Assessment – All Subjects (Part 2 of 3)  
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
  Assessment  Median Nerve Ulnar Nerve 
Site Subject Date and Time  Schedule  
(hrs) Actual 
(hrs) Dev. 
(hrs) Cold Pin- 
prick Light 
Touch Cold Pin- 
prick Light 
Touch 
            
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Screening  - - + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Baseline  - - + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  PACU - - + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  6 XXX.XX XXX + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  9 XXX.XX XXX -L + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  12 XXX.XX XXX - + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  18 XXX.XX XXX - + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  24 XXX.XX XXX - + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  36 XXX.XX XXX - -L + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  48 XXX.XX XXX +R +R + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  60 XXX.XX XXX + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  72 XXX.XX XXX + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  120 (D5)  XXX.XX XXX + + + + + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  240 (D10)  XXX.XX XXX + + + -L + + 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Unsched.  - - + + + - + + 
            
*=out of window  ‘-/+‘=Absent/Present; L/R=Loss/Return of sensation  Unsched=Unscheduled 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject.  An asterisk (*) will be placed next to the 
deviation if an assessment is out of window.  See Table of Time and Events for windows.  
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 148 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402
-C-327 
Listing 16.2-18.1: Sensory Function Assessment – All Subjects (Part 3 of 3)  
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type   
  Assessment  Radial Nerve  
Site Subject Date and  Time Schedule  
(hrs) Actual 
(hrs) Dev. 
(hrs) Cold Pin- 
prick Light 
Touch    
            
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Screening  - - + + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Baseline  - - + + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  PACU - - + + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  6 XXX.XX XXX + + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  9 XXX.XX XXX -L + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  12 XXX.XX XXX - + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  18 XXX.XX XXX - + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  24 XXX.XX XXX - + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  36 XXX.XX XXX - -L +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  48 XXX.XX XXX +R +R +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  60 XXX.XX XXX + + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  72 XXX.XX XXX + + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  120 (D5)  XXX.XX XXX + + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  240 (D10)  XXX.XX XXX + + +    
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Unsched.  - - + + +    
            
*=out of window  ‘-/+‘=Absent/Present; L/R=Loss/Return of sensation  Unsched=Unscheduled 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject.  An asterisk (*) will be placed next to the 
deviation if an assessment is out of window.  See Table of Time and Events for windows.  
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 149 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-18.2: Time to Loss and Return of Sensory Function – All Subjects  
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Loss-Return Date and Time of  Time to (hrs)  
Site Subject Cycle Number  Location  Dose Loss Return Loss 
[1] Return 
[2] 
         
XXX XXX-YYYY 1 XXXXXXX DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXX.X 
  2  - DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXX.X 
  …  - DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXX.X 
  n  - DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM*  XXX.X XXX.X* 
  Total  - - - - D.D 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
[1] Time to loss is the time from start of study drug administration to loss of sensation  
[2] Time to return is time the time from most recent loss of sensation to return of sensation  
*=Censored return (time of last sensory assessment)Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Locations are axillary, musculo ., median, ulnar and radial.  Sort by date and time 
within subject.  In total row, L is the total number of times subject lost sensation, R is total number of 
times subject had return of sensation; and D.D is sum of durations from all cycles.  Some subjects may have 
more losses of sensation than returns.  
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 150 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-19.1: Motor Function Assessment – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
  Assessment  Thumb 
Elbow 
Flexion Site Subject Date and Time  Schedule  
(hrs) Actual 
(hrs) Dev. 
(hrs) Abduct Adduct Oppos 
          
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Screening  - - X - X - 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Baseline  - - X - X - 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  PACU - - X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  6 XXX.XX XXX X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  9 XXX.XX XXX X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  12 XXX.XX XXX X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  18 XXX.XX XXX X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  24 XXX.XX XXX X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  36 XXX.XX XXX X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  48 XXX.XX XXX XL X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  60 XXX.XX XXX X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  72 XXX.XX XXX X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  120 (D%)  XXX.XX XXX X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  240 (D10)  XXX.XX XXX X X X X 
  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  Unsched.  - - X X X X 
          
*=out of window  L=Loss of function/R=Return of function  Unsched=Unscheduled 
Abduct=Abduction  Adduct=adduction  Oppos=opposition 
0=no evidence of contractility;   1=evidence of slight contractility;  
2=complete range of motion without gravity;   3=complete range of motion with gravity;  
4=complete range of motion  against gravity with some  resistance;  
5=complete range of motion against gravity with full  resistance . 
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Sort by date and time within subject. An asterisk (*) will be placed next to the 
deviation if an assessment is out of window.  See Table of Time and Events for windows.   
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 151 of 167 26Jun2017 
  Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-19.2: Time to Loss and Return of Motor Function – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
  Loss-Return Date and Time of  Time (hrs) to  
Site Subject Cycle 
Number Assessment  Dose Loss Return Loss 
[1] Return 
[2] 
         
XXX XXX-YYYY 1 Abduct DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXX.X 
  2 Flexion - DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXX.X 
  …  - DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXX.X XXX.X 
  n  - DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM*  XXX.X XXX.X* 
  Total  - - - - D.D 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
[1] Time to loss is the time from start of study drug  administration  to loss of motor function  
[2] Time to return is time the time from most recent loss of to return of motor function 
Total Return is the time from first loss to last return of motor function.  
*=Censored return (time of last motor assessment)  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer: Assessments are Abduct, Adduct, Oppos and Flexion.  Sort by date and time within 
subject.  In total row, D.D is the time from first loss of motor function to last return of motor function  
Some subjects may have more losses of motor function than returns.   
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 152 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2 -20.1: All Adverse Events – All Subjects 
Treatment: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject TEAE Data Type  Data 
XXX XXX-YYYY N Start DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  
   Stop DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  
   AE Number  X 
   System Organ Class  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
     Preferred    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
       Verbatim      XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
   Severity  XXXXXXXX  
   Relationship to Study Drug  XXXXXXXX  
   Action Taken  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
   Outcome XXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
   Serious XXX 
     Serious Cause(s)    XXXXXXXXXXXXX  
      XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
     
     
     
TEAE: Treatment -emergent AE (Y=TEAE/N=Not TEAE)  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create listing  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  If AE is ongoing, put ONGOING in stop row.  Do not split an AE across pages.  Insert a 
page break between subjects.  Use this template for the following listings:  
Listing 16.2 -20.2.1: Treatment- emergent Adverse Events –  All Subjects  
Listing 16.2 -20.2.2: Treatment- emergent Study Drug Related Adverse Events – All Subjects  
Listing 16.2 -20.3: All Serious Adverse Events – All Subjects   
Listing 16.2 -20.4.1: Treatment- emergent Serious Adverse Events – All Subjects 
 
Listing 16.2 -20.4.2: Treatment- emergent Study Drug Related Serious Adverse Events – All Subjects   
Listing 16.2 -20.5.1: Treatment- emergent Adverse Events of Special Interest – All Subjects   
Listing 16.2 -20.5.2: Treatment- emergent Study Drug Related Adverse Events of Special Interest – All 
Subjects  
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 153 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2 -21.1: All Prior and Concomitant Medications – All Subjects  
Treatment : treatment-name 
  Surgery: surgery -type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject Category  Data Type  Data 
XXX XXX-YYYY  Start DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  
   Stop DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  
   Medication Number  X 
   ATC Level 1  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
     ATC Level 2    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
       ATC Level 3      XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
         ATC Level 4        XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
     Preferred Name  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
       Verbatim    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
   Route XXXXXXXX  
   Frequency  XXXXXXXX  
   Given for AE or MH?  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX AE # XX (or MH # XX)  
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
ATC=Anatomical therapeutic class  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create listing  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  If medication is ongoing, put ONGOING in stop row.  Do not split a medication across 
pages.  Insert a page break between subjects.  Values for category column are: CONCOMITANT; 
SURGICAL/ANESTHESIA; NON -MEDICATION; PRIOR.  Use this template for the following listings:  
 
Listing 16.2 -21.2: Prior Medications – All Subjects  
Listing 16.2 -21.3: Concomitant Medications – All Subjects 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 154 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2 -22: Medical History – All Subjects 
Treatment : treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery -type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject Data Type  Data 
XXX XXX-YYYY Start DDMONYYYY  
  Stop DDMONYYYY  
  System Organ Class  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
    Preferred    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
      History Verbatim      XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
    
  Start DDMONYYYY  
  Stop DDMONYYYY  
  System Organ Class  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
    Preferred    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
      History Verbatim      XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
    
    
    
    
Source: list SAS datasets used to create listing  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 155 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-23: Intraoperative Medications –  All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject Administered  Name Dose Unit Route    
          
XXX XXX-YYYY YES OPIOID-NAME XXX.XX (UNITS) XXXX    
XXX XXX-YYYY NO        
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 156 of 167 26Jun2017 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-24: Study Drug Administration – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject Date Start 
Time Stop 
Time Total Volume  
(mL)     
          
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYY  HH:MM HH:MM XXX     
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 157 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-25: Urine Drug Screen, Alcohol Blood Test and Pregnancy Test – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject Visit Urine Drug  Blood 
Alcohol Pregnancy   
       
XXX XXX-YYYY Screening  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
  Day 0 (Preop)  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
       
XXX XXX-YYYY Screening  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
  Day 0 (Preop)  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
       
XXX XXX-YYYY Screening  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
  Day 0 (Preop)  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
       
XXX XXX-YYYY Screening  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
  Day 0 (Preop)  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX   
       
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
 
 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 158 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2-26: Admission and Discharge – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
  Date and Time   
Site Subject Admission  Discharge   
     
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM   
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM   
XXX XXX-YYYY DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM   
     
*=out of window  
Total score = sum of scores.  
1) Vital signs: 2 = ≤ 20%; 1 = 20 -40%; 0 = >40% of preoperative value.  
2) Ambulation: 2 = steady gait/no dizziness; 1 = with assistance; 0 = none/dizziness  
3) Nausea and Vomiting: 2 = minimal; 1 = moderate; 0 = severe  
4) Pain: 2 = minimal; 1 = moderate; 0 = severe  
5) Surgical bleeding: 2 = minimal; 1 = moderate; 0 = severe  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create table   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM 
SAS X.Y  program_name 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 159 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2 -27: Unique Adverse Events Terms and Associated Coded Terms  
MedDRA Terms  
SOC 
  Preferred Term  Verbatim(s)  
SOC1 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
  PT1.1 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
  
  PT1.2 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
   XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
  
SOC2  
  PT2.1 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
  
Coded using MedDRA  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create listing  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Sort by SOC and preferred term in alphabetical order . 
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 160 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2 -28: Unique Medication Terms  and Associated Coded Terms  
Who Drug Dictionary Terms  
ACT1 
  ACT2 
    ACT3 
      ACT4 
        Preferred name  Verbatim(s)  
ATC1  
  ATC1.2  
        PN1.2.1 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
  
        PN1.2.2 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
  
ATC2  
  ATC2.2  
    ATC2.3  
      ATC2.4  
        PN2.2.3.4.1  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
Coded using Who Drug Dictionary  
Source: list SAS datasets used to create listing  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Sort by ATC1, ATC2, ATC3, ATC4 and preferred name in alphabetical order  
 
  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 161 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Pacira Pharmaceuticals  (Page X of Y)  Protocol: 402-C
-327 
Listing 16.2 -29: Protocol Deviations  – All Subjects 
TREATMENT: treatment -name 
  Surgery: surgery-type 
    Nerve Block: nerve-block type  
Site Subject Important  Date Description  
     
XXX XXX-YYYY XXX DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
   DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
Categories: Important, might significantly impact; Not- Important, none to minimal impact on study outcomes.  
Important:   
Source: list SAS datasets used to create listing  DDMONYYYYTHH:MM  
SAS X.Y  program_name 
 
Note to programmer:  Subjects may have multiple deviations.  Sort deviations by treatment, surgery type, 
nerve block type, site, subject, then category ‘ Important’ followed by ‘ Not-Important’ and finally 
important (‘YES’ then ‘NO’).  Date may or may not include time.  
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 162 of 167 26Jun2017 
 16. TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR FIGURE MOCK-UPS  
FIGURE 1.1: PLOT OF MEAN PAIN INTENSITY SCORE (VAS) VS TIME THROUGH 48 HOURS – 
EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 167 
FIGURE 1.2: PLOT OF MEAN PAIN INTENSITY SCORE (VAS) VS TIME THROUGH 48 HOURS – 
PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 167 
FIGURE 2.1: PLOT OF MEAN PAIN INTENSITY SCORE (VAS) VS TIME THROUGH 72 HOURS – 
EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 167 
FIGURE 2.2: PLOT OF MEAN PAIN INTENSITY SCORE (VAS) VS TIME THROUGH 72 HOURS – 
PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 167 
FIGURE 3.1: PLOT OF INDIVIDUAL SUBJECT PAIN INTENSITY SCORE (VAS) VS TIME 
THROUGH 48 HOURS – EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 167 
FIGURE 3.2: PLOT OF INDIVIDUAL SUBJECT PAIN INTENSITY SCORE (VAS) VS TIME 
THROUGH 48 HOURS – PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 167 
FIGURE 4.1: PLOT OF INDIVIDUAL SUBJECT PAIN INTENSITY SCORE (VAS) VS TIME 
THROUGH 72 HOURS – EFFICACY ANALYSIS SET 167 
FIGURE 4.2: PLOT OF INDIVIDUAL SUBJECT PAIN INTENSITY SCORE (VAS) VS TIME 
THROUGH 72 HOURS – PER-PROTOCOL ANALYSIS SET 167 
 
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 163 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Figure M
ock-up 1 
  

Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 164 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Figure M
ock-up 2
 

Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 165 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Figure M
ock-up 3 
  
Pain Intensity Score (VAS)
012345678910
Time (hours)-5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55Treatment=EXPAREL XXX mg surgery=XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX Subject=XXX-XXX-XXXX
Gray bars indicate rescue medication windowsVAS - Actual VAS - Imputed
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 166 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Figure M
ock-up 4 
  
Pain Intensity Score (VAS)
012345678910
Time (hours)-5 5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95 105 115 125Treatment=EXPAREL XXX mg surgery=XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX Subject=XXX-XXX-XXXX
Gray bars indicate rescue medication windowsVAS - Actual VAS - Imputed
Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 402-C-327 (BRACHIAL PLEXUS BLOCK) 
EXPA
REL  Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Document No. <  >  
CONFIDENTIAL 167 of 167 26Jun2017 
 Note to programmers:    Note the colors and symbols used in the figure mock -ups are not correct per the SAP 
description; all figures created should use the SAP defined colors and symbols.  In figure mock -ups 
3 and 4: 
the gray bars highlight the rescue medication windows for that subject; the time axe s are set to ensure the 
entire period is captured and doesn’t end at the limits of the figure.   Use the indicated figure mock -up 
for the following figures.   
 
Use Figure mock -up 1 for the following  (do not include EXPAREL 266 mg) : 
Figure 1.1: Plot of Mean Pain Intensity Score (VAS) vs Time through 48 hours –  Efficacy Analysis S
et  
Figure 1.2: Plot of Mean Pain Intensity Score (VAS) vs Time through 48 hours –  Per-protocol Analysis Set   
 
Use Figure mock -up 2 for the following  (do not include EXPAREL 266 mg and the x-axis should track through 
76 hours) : 
Figure 2.1: Plot of Mean Pain Intensity Score (VAS) vs Time through 72 hours –  Efficacy Analysis Set   
Figure 2.2: Plot of Mean Pain Intensity Score (VAS) vs Time through 72 hours –  Per-protocol Analysis Set   
 
Use Figure mock -up 3 for the following  (do not include EXPAREL 266 mg subjects, use actual hours since the 
end of surgery and not scheduled hours, include all VAS scores collected, include the following footnote  
“RCR = Rotator Cuff Repair; TSA = Total Shoulder Arthoplasty; ”): 
Figure 3.1: Plot of Individual Subject Pain Intensity Score (VAS) vs Time through 48 hours – Efficacy 
Analysis Set   
Figure 3.2: Plot of Individual Subject Pain Intensity Score (VAS) vs Time through 48 hours – Per-Protocol 
Analysis Set  
 
Use Figure mock -up 4 for the following  (do not include EXPAREL 266 mg subjects, use actual hours since the 
end of surgery and not scheduled hours, include all VAS scores collected, the x- axis should track through 
76 hours,  include the following footnote “RCR = Rotator Cuff Repair; TSA = Total Shoulder Arthoplasty; ”): 
Figure 4.1: Plot of Individual Subject Pain Intensity Score (VAS) vs Time through 72 hours – Efficacy 
Analysis Set  
Figure 4.2: Plot of Individual Subject Pain Intensity Score (VAS)  vs Time through 72 hours – Per-Protocol 
Analysis Set  
 