HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  1 of 35[USE THIS BIOMEDICAL  PROTOCOL TEMPLATE IF YOUR PROJECT INVOLVES ANY 
PHYSICAL CONTACT OR MEDICAL INTERVENTIONS WITH PARTICIPANTS]  
INSTRUCTIONS:
Use this template to prepare a document with the information from  the following 
sections. 
Depending on the nature of what you are doing, some sections may not  be applicable to 
your research. Do not  delete any sections, questions, or  help  text and mark “N/A” if 
sections do not  apply
When you  write a protocol,  keep an electronic copy. You  will need to  modify this copy  
when making  changes. 
PROTOCOL TITLE:
Include the full protocol title.
Measuring Brain  Activity of School Age Children.
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
Name:  Deanne  Wilson-Costello  
Primary Department: Pediatrics
Telephone Number: 216-844-3387  
Email Address:  Deanne.wilson-costello.uhhospitals.org
UH FACULTY ADVISOR:
If the principal investigator’s primary role at UH is resident,  fellow or  student, identify a faculty 
advisor.  N/A
Name  
Primary Department
Telephone Number 
Email Address
OTHER DEPARTMENTS INVOLVED  IN THIS STUDY  (IF APPLICABLE):
Case Western Reserve University School of  Nursing
Case Western Reserve University School of  Medicine
Department of Radiology, Case School of Medicine  
VERSION NUMBER:
Include  the version number of this protocol if assigned by an outside entity.
N/A
DATE: 
Include  the date of submission  or revision.
03/13/2021
Objectives
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  2 of 351.Describe the purpose, specific aims, or objectives.
2.State the hypotheses to be tested .   
Purpose: Our  goal  is to  characterize structure  and function of dopaminergic pathways  and 
the cortical regions innervated by those pathways in post-hypoxic  former  preterm 
children. We  hypothesize  that dopaminergic projections, originating in  the substantia  
nigra pars  compacta (SNpc) and  ventral  tegmental area (VTA),  projecting primarily to 
the striatum and  prefrontal cortex (PFC)  to modulate  motor  control and cognitive  
function, will  be structurally and functionally impaired. Our  primary study cohort is 
comprised of  former  preterm children born in 2004-2010  with  birth gestational age  
between 22-28 weeks in whom we have  characterized their postnatal hypoxic exposure 
continuously during their first eight weeks of life.  To meet  recruitment targets, we may 
additionally recruit additional  former  preterm children born between  the ages  of 9 and 17 
years old at consent, with birth gestational  age between 22-30 weeks and birth weight 
appropriate for gestational age (AGA). For comparison, we plan to also  recruit  healthy 
control children based on eligibility  criteria  (between  the ages of 9 and  17 years at time of 
consent; without  diagnosis of autism,  epilepsy, metallic implants, dental braces, or those  
who have been treated  for a concussion),  and who are within the age  range of the eligible 
former preterm children at  the time of consent.
Specific Aim 1: We will quantify and  compare  the structural integrity of dopaminergic  
circuits originating in the substantia nigra  pars compacta (SNpc) and  ventral  tegmental 
area (VTA)  that project to striatum, prefrontal cortex, and nucleus accumbens,  in post-
hypoxic former preterm  children versus healthy control children born at term within the 
age range  of the eligible former preterm  children. 
Specific Aim 2: We will quantify and  compare  functional activity  during  tasks that 
engage executive  function within cortical brain  regions of post-hypoxic former  preterm 
children versus  healthy control children born at  term within the age range  of the eligible 
former preterm children at  the time of consent.  Our emphasis will be upon the prefrontal 
cortex which receives projections from the SNpc and  VTA.
Hypothesis 1: Post-hypoxic former preterm  children will manifest significantly reduced  
white matter  density within dopaminergic  circuits originating from  the SNpc  and VTA 
when compared  to healthy controls.
Hypothesis 2: Post-hypoxic former preterm  children will exhibit reduced activity within 
cortical networks innervated by the SNpc and VTA  when compared to  healthy controls.
Background
1.Describe the relevant prior experience and gaps in  current knowledge describing  how  it 
will add to existing knowledge . 
2.Describe any relevant preliminary data.  
Please add relevant references  at the end of the protocol, not at  the end of  this section.
Hypoxic insults occurring during the  perinatal period remain the leading cause  of 
permanent brain impairment.1 Apparent cognitive and motor dysfunction, such as that 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  3 of 35seen in cerebral palsy,  will occur in 4-10% of those post-hypoxic newborns.2,3 Subtle 
impairment, such as  that seen in disorders  of minimal brain dysfunction will occur  in > 3 
million post-hypoxic newborns.4,5 Collectively,  hypoxia-induced morbidity and  mortality 
afflicts 3%  of all newborns, worldwide,  and leads to substantial personal and 
socioeconomic burden.6
Specific neuropathology, elicited by subtle hypoxic insults that lead  to cognitive 
dysfunction, is not well  described in humans. Over 84% of preterm  infants experience 
apnea of prematurity with accompanying intermittent hypoxia.7,8 Neuropathology,  
cognitive impairments, and motor impairments induced by severe  hypoxic insults  are 
well described9 and frequently lead to a clinical diagnosis  of cerebral palsy.6,10 Cognitive  
and motor  deficits are also associated  with mild to moderate hypoxic insults,11 but the 
specific neuropathology  is poorly defined. Mild to moderate hypoxic insults  resulting  
from apnea of prematurity  do not elicit  the overt neuropathology  observed  following 
severe hypoxic events. As such, standard neuroimaging and diagnostic techniques,12 with  
the exception of positron emission tomography requiring infusion of  radioactive 
ligands,13 have failed to identify  major changes in brain structure or function. 
Nonetheless, disorders of minimal brain dysfunction  and cognitive impairments do 
exist.14-16
To better characterize  the behavioral and neurochemical morbidity induced  by mild  
hypoxic insults, we  developed a rodent  model emulating this clinical scenario. Our rodent 
model recapitulates many cognitive  and behavioral dysfunctions observed  in preterm 
infants including impaired working memory,  hypersomnolence, locomotor hyperactivity, 
and increased responsivity to novelty.17-19 Analyses of post-hypoxic rodent brains has 
revealed reduced levels of extracellular dopamine and increased  protein expression of 
dopamine D1 receptors and vesicular monoamine  transporter (VMAT2) within the 
caudate putamen nucleus.17,18 These findings suggest functional and structural deficits 
within dopaminergic circuits comprising mesotelencephalic pathways. 
Our goal is  to characterize  structure  and function of dopaminergic pathways  and the 
cortical regions innervated by those pathways  in post-hypoxic former  preterm children. 
This project’s  scientific  premise and specific aims are supported  by findings  from our 
rodent model  and represent  the next logical  step of our research.
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
1.Describe how individuals  will be  screened for eligibility. 
For Study Group  Children: Birth gestational age  between 22-30 weeks and birth weight 
appropriate for gestational age (AGA). Healthy  control children: Birth gestational age ≥ 
38 weeks gestation and birth weight appropriate  for term gestation within the  age range 
of the eligible former  preterm children  at the time  of consent.
Our primary  study group will  first be recruited from a cohort of children,  born between 
23-28 weeks gestation, with available oxygen  saturation level data recorded continuously 
from the first day of life to 8 weeks  postnatal age. Eligible and interested  former  preterm 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  4 of 35children will be identified by site  principal investigator Deanne  Wilson-Costello,  MD and 
co-investigator Juliann Di Fiore. These  children are  prematurely born survivors from  
Rainbow Babies  & Children's Neonatal  Intensive Care Unit,  and have  been followed 
since birth. Children  in this  cohort have already participated in  research,  and remain 
willing to participate in future projects. Eligibility from this group includes children born in 2004-2012, male or female, and able  to provide assent. Exclusion  criteria includes 
history of epilepsy,  autism, or mental  or physical  impairment preventing valid 
administration of cognitive testing measures. Other exclusions include children  who  have  
contraindications to MRI such  as cardiac  pacemakers, intracranial aneurysm  clips, 
metallic implants  or external clips within 10 mm of the head; implanted metallic devices 
such as pumps or  previously implanted  neurostimulation devices; cochlear  implants, 
defibrillators, pacing wires,  body piercings that cannot be removed; metal filings such as 
shrapnel; dental braces; tattoos on the  head and neck, or medical conditions 
contraindicated for  MRI safety.  Additionally, we will exclude children  with  a history of 
claustrophobia or  who are currently pregnant or planning pregnancy. Dr.  Wilson-Costello 
and/or Juliann Di Fiore will provide our research team with names/contact information of interested individuals. We will contact those individuals  by telephone  to describe the 
study and conduct a prescreening.
If recruitment  targets for study group  children  cannot  be achieved, we will engage the  
assistance of  Dr. Wilson-Costello to recruit additional former preterm  children between 
the ages  of 9-17 with birth gestational age between 22-30 weeks and birth weight 
appropriate for gestational age (AGA). We will also expand recruitment with study 
notices in print and  digital  newsletters, community bulletin  boards,  flyers,  and targeted 
emails using  the TriNetX database.
We will approach a subset of 5 children  if they are willing to  be re-studied (i.e. volunteer 
a second time for  the same study) to enable the team to  establish  reproducibility of study 
measures. 
PRESCREENING
The purpose  of the prescreening telephone  call will be to further explain the study to the 
parents, confirm their interest in taking part, and  determine their  child’s eligibility. We  
will introduce ourselves as research scientists from Rainbow Babies and Children’s Hospital, University  Hospitals  Cleveland  Medical Center and  Case Western Reserve 
University conducting  a research study comparing  the brains  of children  born at full term, 
with brains of children born prematurely.  We will tell them  we are  looking at how  certain  
parts of the brain look and  how they  work. We  will tell the interested individual  that we 
plan to take pictures of  the brain using an MRI scanner. We will also record EEG,  which 
measures brain waves, by having the child wear a stretchy cap on their head with gel placed into little holes in the cap. These same  tests are often done in  medical  practice. 
During the MRI scan,  we will ask the child  to do a  memory test. We will also ask 
children to play a timed  board game during the  EEG recording. While the child is  being  
tested, we will ask parents  to fill out questionnaires about the child’s health,  behavior,  
and sleep.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  5 of 35We will describe  that an MRI involves using a strong  magnet and radio waves to  produce  
a picture  of body parts.  EEG involves recording electrical activity of the brain from the 
scalp. This  research project  will involve taking pictures of a person’s head combined with 
patterns of  brain activity recorded on the surface  of their head. This will help us gain a 
better understanding of  the human brain. We will tell the parents/children that we expect 
to enroll  at least 20 children  for this study who were  born prematurely and 10 children 
who were born at or near  their due  date. We  will emphasize  that participation in this  
study is voluntary.
If they continue to express interest  in study participation, we will determine  if they meet 
study inclusion criteria (e.g. we will ask them if  the child is between 9 and 17 years  old; 
how close to the  due date the child was born; if the child would be  able to play a  board 
game and push a button during a memory  game).  Then we will determine if they have 
any exclusionary criteria including a history of epilepsy, autism, or previous history of  
concussion requiring medical  treatment.  We will also assess for any  contraindications to 
MRI scans.  We will ask  them if they have  a cardiac pacemaker, intracranial aneurysm 
clips; intravascular shunt; dental devices such as braces or dentures;  metallic  implants or 
external clips within 10 mm of the  head; implanted  metallic devices  such  as pumps or 
previously implanted  neurostimulation devices;  cochlear implants, defibrillators, pacing 
wires, body piercings that cannot  be removed; metal filings such as shrapnel; tattoos  on 
the head and neck; or a history of claustrophobia, or a current pregnancy (if female).
If they meet inclusion criteria and do not possess any exclusionary criteria, one of the 
certified research team members will schedule an appointment with the child/parent to obtain written informed assent and  consent.
2.Describe the criteria that define  who will be included in  your final  study  sample .
 
Inclusion
1.For Study Group  Children: Birth gestational age  between 22-30 weeks and birth 
weight appropriate  for gestational age (AGA).
2.For Healthy Control Children: Birth  gestational  age ≥ 38 weeks gestation and birth 
weight appropriate  for term gestation  within the age  range of the eligible former  
preterm children.
3.Ability of the  child  to provide assent, with the parent/legal guardian able to 
provide written  informed consent for study procedures.
4.Sensory and motor capability to complete study tasks (i.e. Grooved Pegboard test;  
verbal n-back memory  test).
3.Describe the criteria that define  who will be excluded in  your final study sample .
Exclusion
1.Mental Development index <  80 at 2-year follow-up for preterm  cohort.
2. Past history  of concussion requiring medical  treatment to avoid confounding of MRI  
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  6 of 35data.
3.Current history of epilepsy to avoid confounding of  EEG data.
4.Current diagnosis of autism.
5.Child who suffers  from  claustrophobia (per  parent  report).
6.Child unable to participate in neuroimaging due  to claustrophobia or medical  
contraindication to MRI including any implanted medical  device, dental braces, surgical 
clips for aneurysms in the head, heart  valve  prostheses,  electrodes  or other metallic 
objects; pregnancy
7. Healthy control children who  were  treated  in the Neonatal ICU  during  the newborn  
period for breathing  difficulties.
8.Healthy control children who  were  hospitalized  for breathing problems in  the first 3 
months of infancy.
9.If the child is suffering from an  acute  illness, he  or she will be temporarily deferred.
Number of Research Participants
1.Indicate the target number of research participants  to be accrued  locally . 
Our goal is  to obtain  30 complete data sets (preferably Study group = 20; Healthy control 
= 10). Due to movement  artifact  in the MRI, some scan data  may  not be usable so we 
may need to enroll up to 35 participants. We  may  also conduct repeat studies on a subset 
of up to 5 children (~15%) to establish  reproducibility of collected data. Only subjects 
who checked "yes I agree to  be contacted..." on their first signed  parent consent form will 
be approached by phone to ascertain interest in participating in  the study a  second time. 
Participants studied twice will be re-consented for the second data collection session.
2.If this is  a multi-site study, indicate  the total number  of research participants  to be 
accrued across all sites.
N/A
Vulnerable Populations
1.Indicate specifically if you will include each  of the following special populations by  
checking the appropriate box: 
☐ Adults unable to consent
☒ Minors (infants, children, teenagers) 
☐ Wards of the state
☐ Foster Children
☐ Pregnant  Women  
☐ Neonates
☐ Neonates  of Uncertain Viability
☒ Employees of CWRU or  UHHS
☐ Prisoners
☐ Illiterate  Individuals
☒ Non-English Speaking
☐ University  Students
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  7 of 352.If the  research involves individuals that are  included in  a vulnerable population,  describe 
the additional safeguards included to  protect  the rights and welfare of  the individuals for 
each population indicated.
We intend to recruit  pediatric patients ages  9-17 who qualify as a  vulnerable population  
because they are minors. These children  will have a separate pediatric assent form  along 
with a parental consent form. We  will make sure  all the child's questions  are answered  
regarding the study. We will take the  necessary time to explain all  procedures and explain 
things in a more basic language to the children participating in this  study, appropriate to 
their level.
It is possible that children/parents in the former preterm study cohort may not be fluent  in 
the English language. Eligible study participants (children or their parent) who  are not  
fluent in  English  will not be excluded. We will submit a  translated version of the 
informed consent form to the IRB for  approval  prior to use. Only a UH-based certified  
professional translator who is fluent in both English and the child's/parent's  language will 
conduct the informed consent. Other study related documents and procedures that  need  to 
be completed by the child  or parent  will be translated into the participant's native  
language.
We may encounter candidate study  recruits whose parents are  coincidentally employees 
of either Case Western  Reserve University or University Hospitals.  Although  meeting  
criteria as a  "vulnerable population" our recruitment procedures are not specifically  
targeting employees or  students  of University  Hospitals/Case  Western  Reserve 
University. Nonetheless, all research participants,  including potential employees/students 
of UH/CWRU, will have their records and study findings stored in de-identified formats and all efforts are made to maintain study  participant  anonymity.
3.If excluding pregnant women, illiterate or non-English speaking individuals, provide  a 
scientific rationale for the exclusion.   Inconvenience or  cost is not  an acceptable  
rationale.
Child participants may not  be pregnant because  they will  receive an MRI scan as part of 
participation and the effect of MRI on pregnancy and a fetus is not known.  Pregnancy in  
the female parent of  the child is permissible. 
Recruitment Methods
1.Describe the source of the research participants. 
Many subjects will come from the practice  of a study investigator (i.e. Dr. Wilson-
Costello) and  may  be referred or recruited  from  other physicians’  practices. Subject 
recruitment will also occur by advertisement  or flyers, particularly for recruitment  of 
healthy control participants.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  8 of 352.Describe the methods that will be used to identify  potential  research  participants .
The proposed study will involve participation of male and  female  children to  achieve  a 
total number  of 30 complete data  sets. All children  to be  studied will range  in age  
between 9-17 years during the funding period.  Study participants  will include survivors 
of preterm birth, with birth gestations of 22-30  weeks and birth weights  appropriate for  
gestational age. 
We intend to focus our recruitment on 20 children who  were  born  preterm with birth 
gestational ages between 22-30 weeks,  are survivors  from Rainbow Babies  & Children's 
Neonatal Intensive  Care Unit, and have been followed since birth. The  children invited 
for participation will be part of the  maintained  cohort  for whom continuous oxygen 
saturation data were  collected in their first  8 weeks of postnatal life. Co-Investigator 
Juliann Di Fiore maintains  this research cohort. In  the event that we cannot enroll  20 
children who  have continuous oxygen  saturation data from  their neonatal hospital stay, 
Dr. Wilson-Costello  will assist us to identify other  preterm survivors who  are similar to  
the study group population but may  be between 9 and 17 years old and/or  have birth 
gestations up to 30 weeks. We will also recruit for other preterm survivors via study 
flyers and  advertisements.
In addition  to children recruited from  the existing preterm cohort, we aim to study 10 
children who  were  born at  term, and were within the range of  normal  birth weights.  
Healthy control participants will be recruited  using various strategies: (1) study flyers 
given to the parents of the  prematurely born cohort children to pass along  to parents of 
other children with ages similar to their own child. Interested parents will be asked  to 
contact us if  they wish to learn  more  about the study. This  approach is currently and 
successfully used by our  Co-Investigator  Dr. Taylor in  his research  (Heverly-Fitt et al., 
2014);(2) the study flyers will be given to the  parents of the prematurely born cohort 
children to pass along to parents of  other children with  ages similar to their  own child; (3) 
study flyers will be  posted in Primary Care  Pediatric  Clinics;  (4) Study  flyers will be 
distributed by professional colleagues/pediatric physicians to potential candidate 
children/families meeting study inclusion criteria; and (5) Study flyers will  be posted in  
libraries, coffee shops, community/recreational centers, and  local  government and/or 
nonprofit organizations that provide services  or are in communications with families. 
Study flyers will instruct  interested parents  of eligible children to contact us  if they would 
be interested in learning more about the study.
Social media recruitment and virtual  recruitment:
Facebook: We will digitally post study flyers on Facebook and post  to community groups 
created to  share knowledge within the Northeast Ohio area, groups specifically geared 
toward parents (with and  without former pre-term children),  with appropriate permission 
from the group’s  administrator and/or  organization. We will also  allow individuals to  
‘share’ our study flyer on their personal  pages. Individuals will be  allowed to comment  
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  9 of 35on posts but study investigators will direct  individuals to  the contact information  posted 
on the study flyer for more information.
NextDoor: NextDoor is  a platform  to communicate information throughout the 
community. Investigators  will post  the study flyer  on the app/website, which provides  
contact information if  families are  interested in participating. Individuals will be  allowed 
to comment on posts but study investigators will direct individuals to the contact information posted on the study flyer  for more  information.
Twitter: Study investigators  will post their  flyer  on Twitter accounts operated  by 
investigators and CWRU-owned and operated  accounts. Individual Twitter  users  will be 
able to retweet and reply to investigators.  Investigators and account owners will respond 
by directing families to our contact information  on the flyer.
ResearchMatch.org: The study will be posted on ResearchMatch.org  so that families  
searching for research studies can  view our study title and  contact information. 
Recruitment language to be used on ResearchMarch.org : Dr. Michael Decker and  Dr. 
Elizabeth Damato at CWRU, and Deanne  Wilson-Costello at Rainbow  Babies and  
Children’s Hospital  are looking for families  to participate in a study on brain 
development. The study involves one 3-hour  visit  to the CWRU/University  Hospitals  
campus where a  research team  will measure  brain activity. First, children will lie quietly 
for about 30 minutes in the MRI scanner while playing a visual task-response game.  
After the MRI scan, brain activity will again be  measured with  EEG. This  involves 
having the child  wear  a stretchy cap  while playing the visual task response game and  
completing a pegboard  puzzle. Parents will complete questionnaires about the child’s 
health history, behavior, and sleep.  Both parents and children will be compensated for 
their time. The investigators are especially seeking  children who  were born prematurely 
(gestation 22-30 weeks) and also  children who were born full term  (gestation  38-41 
weeks). Children with epilepsy, autism, medical implants, dental braces, or those  who  
have been treated  for concussion are not eligible.  Please call 216-368-2597 for more 
information.
The CWRU Daily:  We plan to advertise our study on the CWRU Daily. The submission 
to the Case Daily  is attached to this modification.  Interested families are instructed  to 
contact the study investigators.
TriNetX: Research personnel will work  the with TriNetX personnel to identify  families  
who meet eligibility requirements. Researchers will then  use the  approved email template 
to contact families as  well  as phone scripts for communication. We will call  families  a 
total of  3 times and  leave  a voicemail  if they do not pick  up our  phone  call. The  original 
application to  IRB requested a HIPAA waiver authorization  and we will continue to 
utilize this  authorization to  work with the TriNetX  team.
Heverly-Fitt, S., Wimsatt,  M.A., Menzer,  M.M.,  Rubin, K.H., Dennis, M.,  Taylor,  H.G., 
Stancin, T.,  Gerhardt, C.A., Vannatta, K., Bigler,  E.D., &  Yeates,  K.O. (2014). 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  10 of 35Friendship quality and  psychosocial outcomes among children with traumatic brain 
injury. Journal of the  International Neuropsychological Society, 20(7), 684–693. 
doi:10.1017/S1355617714000393
3.Justify  the feasibility of recruiting the required  number  of suitable  research  participants  
within the agreed recruitment period. For example,  how  many potential  research  
participants do you have access to? 
Inclusion of the  20 children for  the study cohort will be based  upon the age  range 
represented within  the total cohort maintained by Co-Investigators Di Fiore  and Wilson-
Costello. There are  currently 42 children  in the cohort available  for recruitment.
4.Describe when, where, and how potential research participants will  be recruited. 
Co-Investigator Julie Di Fiore and site principal  investigator Dr. Wilson-Costello  will 
identify former preterm children who meet study criteria. Dr.  Wilson-Costello  will 
contact the parent and determine if they  are interested in  learning  more about the study. 
With parent  permission, Investigators Dr.  Damato,  Dr. Decker or one of the study 
research assistants  trained  for consenting will contact the parent to  further  explain the 
study using the IRB-approved  pre-screening  script.  If the parent/child remains interested  
after hearing of the  study,  Dr. Damato,  Dr. Decker  or one of the  study research assistants  
trained for  consenting  will obtain informed  consent.
Interested healthy control participants who respond to a study flyer will contact the investigators. We will further  explain the study using the IRB-approved pre-screening 
script.
5.Describe materials that will be  used to recruit research participants .
The flyer will indicate  that we are conducting a  study on brain activity in  school  age 
children and  that we wish to  enroll  a broad representation of  children. Parents  would then  
be asked  to contact us if they would be interested in taking  part in the study. This strategy  
would allow us access  to a large  pool of potential controls who meet eligibility 
requirements. Using  an IRB-approved telephone script, our research staff will then 
contact the parents of the child. The purpose  of the telephone call  will be  to further 
explain the study to the parents, confirm their interest in taking part, and determine  their 
child's eligibility.  We are prepared to discuss any aspect of a child's  participation at 
greater length,  including research participant rights. Telephone numbers  of the study PIs 
are provided to those asking for  more or different information. 
The term-born healthy control participants are  selected based on eligibility criteria  
(between 9 and  17 years old; without diagnosis of autism,  epilepsy,  metallic  implants, 
dental braces, or those who’ve  been treated for  a concussion) and  approximately matched 
to study  children  based on age.  All healthy  control candidate participants will have been  
of normal birth weight (> 2500 grams) and with gestational age  > 37 weeks. 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  11 of 35Additionally, we will exclude children  from the healthy control group if they were treated 
in the neonatal ICU during their birth  hospitalization  for breathing problems or were 
hospitalized for breathing problems in the first 3 months of  infancy.  Children in  special  
education programs will not be excluded as controls. Both  groups of children  are 
expected to be  in generally good physical health, although we anticipate  that the group of 
preterm-born children may have  more chronic conditions (e.g. asthma)  and more health-
related functional limitations than the term  group.
Setting
1.Describe the sites or  locations  where your research team will conduct the research. 
2.Identify where your research  team  will identify and recruit potential research 
participants. 
3.Identify the physical location where  research  procedures will be performed. 
The research team will conduct the research from affiliated Case  Western  Reserve University 
departments of study  investigators Dr. Damato-FPB Nursing; Dr. Decker-Physiology & 
Biophysics-Case SOM.  Both have private  offices where research materials can  be kept in a  
locked cabinet behind  locked doors. Identification  and recruitment  of potential research 
participants will  take place in University Hospitals/Rainbow Babies & Children’s Hospitals,  
primarily in the  Preterm Follow-Up clinic,  and by telephone follow-up  to interested research 
participants. Consented study participants (child and parent) will be asked to  come to  the 
Case Western Reserve University Magnetic  Resonance (MR)  Facility located within 
University Hospitals on 11100 Euclid  Ave, Cleveland OH 44106 at a  scheduled date/time  to 
participate in the research  study. 
Consent Process
Indicate whether you will be obtaining consent :
☒ Yes ☐ No
If yes describe:
Where the consent  process will take place
Any waiting period  available between informing the prospective subject and 
obtaining the consent
Any process  to ensure ongoing consent
The role of the  individuals listed in the  application as being involved in the 
consent process
The time that will be devoted to the consent  discussion
Steps that will be taken  to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence
Steps that will be taken  to ensure the research  participants’ understanding
Following a telephone  pre-screening process, the consent form will be presented privately  
in person or by telephone to the child  and parent,  based on parent’s preference. One of 
the study investigators  (Dr. Damato  or Dr.  Decker) or one of the research staff certified to  
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  12 of 35obtain consent  will be present  during the  presentation of the informed consent, the 
signing of the consent, and initiation of the research study. Study personnel  will present 
the benefits, risks and alternatives to study participation. Subjects will be given a copy  of 
the assent and consent  forms explaining  the procedure. The child/parent will be given 
adequate time  to read  the information and ask questions before they sign and date  the 
form. A delay of at least 2 days will be allowed between the telephone screening process  
and the scheduled date to obtain written consent.  The certified staff will allow adequate 
time for the child/parent to make an informed decision and  to minimize the possibility of 
coercion or undue influence. Throughout the  telephone pre-screening process and  written 
informed consent process, we  will repeatedly inform the parent/child that study 
participation is voluntary  and confirm  their  interest  in participating. The research team 
member obtaining consent  will ask the  parent/child to  describe  the study procedure in  
their own words to ensure understanding of  the protocol. Prior to  the scheduled MRI 
study date,  one of  the principal  investigators or certified staff will contact the parent by 
phone to confirm  continued consent  for study participation. Copies of the assent  and 
consent forms will be  given to the person signing the  document.  The language used by 
those obtaining consent  will be in English for those children/parents who are  fluent  in 
English; documents  will be translated  into the appropriate language for any interested 
families and a certified person proficient  in the  specific language will be used to translate 
during the consent  process and protocol.  We will use the child  assent/parent  consent form  
submitted with this application and the UH MRI safety screening form, which has also  
been submitted.
In rare instances, a parent  may be unable  to attend a  consent visit or study visit (due  to 
illness, location, etc.). Because of this, we  will allow parents to  sign consent forms while 
a study team member explains  the consent process  via phone. Our language to  the parent  
is identified in a  document called, “R21 Parental  consent via telephone.”  The parent  will 
understand that  they are giving  permission for their child to be accompanied by a parent 
proxy with whom they  have trusted to leave their child (prior to our study team’s 
involvement). In this instance, child assent  will still  happen in person  and we will instruct 
the parent to  ask the child  the parent’s  first and  last name to  confirm identity. Prior to  
consent, the  study team will also ask the parent to provide us with  the first  and last name 
of the caregiver who is accompanying the child to the study visit. During consent and study day, we will ask caregiver to provide identification that bears  the same  name.
Waiver or Alteration  of Consent Process or Documentation (consent  will not  be obtained, 
written consent will not be  documented)
Indicate which part of the  consent process  you are requesting be  waived  or altered:
☐ I will  obtain  consent, but not participant’s signature
☒ I will  obtain  consent, but request  a waiver for pre-screening purposes
☐  I will obtain consent, but request  a waiver  of some  of the elements of consent 
                      (e.g. use of deception)
☐  I will not obtain consent,  and I am requesting a full waiver of consent
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  13 of 351.Give the rationale for  the request of a waiver or alteration  of the consent process or 
documentation. 
2.If you will obtain consent, but  not document consent in  writing (e.g.  over the phone, 
verbally, electronic survey, etc.),  please  describe and provide a rationale. 
Describe how you  will be documenting that a research participant has  consented
Be sure to upload a consent script or information  sheet with your study  protocol
We are requesting  a waiver of HIPAA authorization for the pre-screening process 
over the  telephone. The waiver  also includes pre-screening for  eligible former 
preterm infants by accessing their  information in the database maintained by Co-
Investigator Di Fiore and site investigator  Dr. Wilson-Costello and obtaining their 
contact information to further describe the study and recruit  participation.
The telephone pre-screening process requires that we  access subject phone  numbers 
and other  potentially identifying information (e.g. names, knowledge of gestational 
birth history)  in order to determine study eligibility. The waiver  of signed  consent 
will allow us to accurately identify those persons  who are  study eligible. For 
interested parents  whose child has exclusionary criteria, the informed  consent  
document would be  the only document  linking the  interested parent/child with  the 
study. All study eligibility  data will be  destroyed for any parent/child found not 
meeting study eligibility criteria. Study eligible  parents who express  an interest in  
participation will be  asked to sign a written informed  consent  document and  their 
child will sign a  child  assent document.
Using telephone pre-screening, we  need  to determine  study eligibility of study 
cohort children, identified by Co-Investigator Di Fiore and  site investigator Dr. 
Wilson-Costello, who agree  to learn  more  about the study. We will also need to 
determine study eligibility  of healthy cohort children  who contact us in  response to  
study flyers. If interest is affirmed  after  learning more about the  study  and the child 
meets study eligibility  criteria, we will meet with  the parent/child  and obtain written  
parent consent and  written  child assent for participation.
This project will involve two groups: study participants and  healthy  controls. For 
both groups, we will  speak  to the parent first before approaching a child  about  the 
study. 
Study participants will primarily be selected from  a cohort of families who have  
expressed interest in research study participation. Parents of children  maintained  in 
the cohort will be first identified by Co-Investigator Di Fiore and  then contacted by 
Dr. Wilson-Costello  by telephone and/or via  postal mail  and given an opportunity to 
indicate their willingness to be contacted to discuss possible participation in a research study. Using our HIPAA-compliant and IRB-approved pre-screening telephone script, our research staff will contact those parents who  assented  to be 
contacted for research,  and identify children  who meet major study eligibility 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  14 of 35criteria. Eligible families  that express  an interest  in participation  will be invited to  
participate. We are  prepared  to discuss any aspect of a child’s participation at 
greater length,  including research participant rights. Telephone numbers  of the 
study PIs are provided  to those asking for more  or different information. 
Healthy control children will  be selected from those responding to study flyers.  The 
flyer will indicate that  we are conducting a study on brain activity in school age 
children and  that we wish to  enroll  a broad representation of  children. Potentially 
eligible children/parents would then be  asked to contact us  if they would be 
interested in taking part in the study.  The purpose of the telephone call will be to 
further explain the  study  to the parents,  confirm their  interest in  taking  part, and 
determine their child’s eligibility. We are  prepared  to discuss  any aspect of a  child’s  
participation at greater length, including research participant rights. Telephone numbers of the  study PIs  are provided to those asking for more or different 
information. 
Participants approached for re-study  will have  indicated their willingness to  be 
contacted for future studies  on the  initial signed parent consent form. Only parents 
who indicated  on their first signed consent form will be approached by telephone. A 
separate telephone  screening script for re-study  participants is included in this 
addendum submission.
Only trained research  personnel who have  completed necessary certification for 
human subjects research will directly  interact with children and  parents  involved  in 
this study. Only  parents who provide  consent  to be contacted for  potential research 
participation are contacted by our  research  personnel. Following  the telephone pre-
screening process,  the consent  form  will be presented in  person or by telephone to  
the child/parent. Written child assent  and written informed consent  from  the parent 
is obtained.  One of  the key study investigators or  one of the listed research team 
members who can obtain  consent on this  protocol  will always be present during the 
signing of the consent and the initiation of the  research study. We will present the 
benefits, risks and  alternatives to study participation. Children/families will be 
given a copy of the consent form explaining the procedure.  The child/family will be 
given adequate  time to read the information and  ask questions  before they sign and 
date the assent/consent  forms. We  will allow adequate time for the child/family to  
make an informed  decision and to minimize  the possibility of coercion or undue 
influence. A  copy  will be given to the child/parent  signing the documents. We will 
also provide every consented child/parent with a copy of the study flyer as an easy-to-read information  sheet about the  study.  The language of the informed consent is 
written at an 8th grade reading level  and the language of  the child  assent is written  
at a 4th grade reading level.  We will seek translation  to another language as needed 
for eligible children/parents in the  cohort study sample and in  the healthy  control  
sample. The  top portion  of the submitted MRI screening form documents the steps 
of our informed consent  process.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  15 of 35Our consent forms explain the nature of all procedures using lay terminology, and we stress that participation is voluntary. Our research assistants  and Co-PIs  are 
available to answer questions. One of the  study investigators (Dr. Damato  or Dr. 
Decker) is also available to answer  questions about the study at other times. All  
activities are compliant  with local IRB and HIPAA guidelines, such as destroying 
all pre-screening forms and obtaining  verbal  permission, as appropriate,  for phone  
interviews. At the  beginning of the study, and then  periodically, any  IRB, HIPAA 
or privacy  requirements that may  be in effect  at that time also  will be checked  to 
assure that study procedures are compliant with current rules.  With permission from 
the parent, the health care provider for consented  eligible children are  contacted  to 
identify/clarify any exclusionary criteria.
Additional Considerations for Consent Process with Adults
Non English Speakers
If research participants who do not speak  English will  be enrolled, describe the 
process to ensure  that the  oral and written information  provided to those research 
participants will  be in that language during initial  consent as well as throughout 
the study.  Indicate  the language that will be used  by those  obtaining  consent. 
List the language(s) other than English that will be included.
Eligible study participants (children or their parent) who are  not fluent in  English will 
not be excluded. We will submit a  translated  version  of the informed consent form to  
the IRB for  approval prior  to use. Only a  UH-based  certified professional  translator 
who is fluent  in both English and the  child's/parent's language will conduct the 
informed consent. Other study related  documents and procedures that  need  to be 
completed by  the child or  parent will be translated into  the participant's native 
language. We  will include any languages for which a UH-based certified  professional  
translator is available.
Adults Unable  to Consent
Describe the process to determine whether an individual  is capable of consent.
List the individuals from whom permission  will be obtained in order  of priority 
(e.g. durable power of attorney for health care, court appointed guardian for health care decisions, spouse, and adult child). 
oFor research conducted outside of the  state, provide  information that 
describes which individuals are authorized under applicable  law to 
consent on behalf  of a prospective subject  to their participation in the 
procedure(s) involved  in the research.
Describe the process for assent of the research participants. Indicate whether:
oWhich subjects  that are unable to consent will be required to give assent? 
If not all, explain why. 
oDescribe whether assent of the research  participants will  be documented 
and the process to document assent. 
N/A
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  16 of 35Research Participants Who Are Not Yet  Adults (infants, children, teenagers)
1.Will parental permission be obtained  from :
☒  One  parent even  if the other parent is alive, known, competent, reasonably 
available, and shares legal responsibility for  the care and custody of the child  or
☐  Both parents unless one parent is deceased,  unknown, incompetent, or not 
reasonably available,  or when only one parent has legal responsibility for the care  
and custody of the  child
☐  Waiver of parental permission
2.Describe whether permission will  be obtained from individuals other than parents, 
and if so,  who  will be allowed to provide  permission. Describe the process used to 
determine these  individuals’ authority to consent  to each child’s participation in  
research. 
3.Indicate whether assent will be obtained from all, some, or  none  of the children.  If 
assent will be obtained  from  some children,  indicate which children will be required  to 
assent. 
4.When assent of children is obtained describe  how  it will be documented.
Written child assent and  parent consent  (from  one parent) will be obtained for all 
participants in  this study. Permission will only be obtained from parents. The consent form 
will be presented in person or by telephone to the child/parent. Child participants will range in  age from 9-17 years old; thus all child participants will sign a written  assent form 
to document their willingness to participate  in the  study. Based on parent preference,  
consent forms may be mailed  in advance to the parent prior to  a mutually scheduled 
telephone call to conduct the consent  process. The parent will sign the paper consent 
form(s) and return the  signed documents to the investigative team in a  provided stamped 
return envelope.
Sharing of Results with Research Participants
Describe whether results  (study results or individual subject results such as  results  of 
investigational diagnostic tests,  genetic tests, or incidental findings) will be shared  with the 
research participants or  others (e.g.  the subject’s primary care  physicians)  and if so, describe 
how the results will  be shared. 
☐  Results  will not be shared with research participants
Research scans  are not designed with the validity and vigor required for identification of 
any potential incidental  findings. It is standard practice at other institutes, as well in  all 
other ongoing studies within the  Case Center  for Imaging  Research  at UHCMC, that the 
IRB protocols and  consent  forms state that "no diagnostic review will be conducted." 
However, it is possible that abnormalities may  be noted. Less than 3% of research  MRI 
scans performed  on healthy children will show clinically significant abnormalities (Gur  et 
al., 2013). Abnormal waveforms  on the  EEG may be detected  in approximately 2-3% of 
healthy children without neurological symptoms (Grant et al.,  2016). If incidental health 
issues are noted, Dr. Wilson-Costello will discuss this with the  parent  and advise them to  
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  17 of 35seek further evaluation from the child's  healthcare  provider. Otherwise, research  subjects 
will not be given the  results of the tests. 
Grant AC, Chau L, Arya K, Schneider, M. Prevalence of epileptiform  discharges  in 
healthy 11- and 12-year-old children.  Epilepsy  & Behavior 2016;  62:53-56. 
Gur RE,  Kaltman  D, Melhem ER, Ruparel  K, Prabhakaran K,  Riley M, Yodh  E, 
Hakonarson H, Satterthwaite T, Gur RC. Incidental findings in  youths volunteering  for 
brain MRI research. Am J  Neuroradiol 2013; 10.3174/ajnr.A3525.
Study Design, Procedures and Timeline
1.Describe and explain the study design . 
2.Provide a description  of all study-related research procedures  being performed  
including procedures being performed to monitor research participants  for safety  or 
minimize risks. 
3.Describe:
☐  Procedures performed  to lessen the probability or  magnitude of  risks
☐  List all drugs and devices  used in the research and the purpose of  their use and 
their regulatory approval status (more detailed information is requested in the section on Drugs and Devices  at the end of this document.)
☐  The source records,  including medical  or educational records,  which will  be 
used to collect data about subjects
4.Describe when research procedures will  take place and the duration of  an individual  
subject’s participation in  the study. Use of the descriptive table listing the study 
procedures that indicates  the visit/week of the interventions below is encouraged. 
DESIGN & DESCRIPTION: The investigators  will conduct an observational  study 
comparing two groups of  children to determine  whether differences in  birth events and 
oxygen levels during the newborn period  lead to structural and functional  impairment 
within the brain's dopaminergic pathways  and the cortical regions innervated by those  
pathways. The dopaminergic  system is involved in modulating motor control  and 
cognitive function.
Our goal is  to characterize  structure  and function  of dopaminergic  pathways and the 
cortical regions innervated by those pathways  in post-hypoxic former  preterm children. 
We will accomplish this through the use of  neuroimaging analysis techniques,  such as Pre-Screening Visit 1 Visit 2 Visit 3 Six week Follow up
Estimated time requirement
Data Collection X
Study Procedure 1 X X X
Study Procedure 2 X X
Study Procedure 3 X X
Phone Call Questionnaire x
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  18 of 35diffusion tensor  imaging  with subtraction analyses  and fMRI  coupled with high-density  
electroencephalographic (EEG). We  hypothesize  that dopaminergic projections, 
originating in  the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) and  ventral  tegmental  area  
(VTA), projecting primarily  to the striatum and prefrontal cortex (PFC) to modulate 
motor control and  cognitive function,  will be structurally and functionally impaired. The 
primary sample for  our proposed study  is derived from a cohort of preterm infants  
admitted to Rainbow Babies & Children’s Hospital between 2004 and 2009 at a gestational age of 23 to 28 weeks.  The purpose for  developing the original cohort  was to 
establish the effects of maintaining  oxygen  saturation levels  between 85%-95%  to 
decrease the development of retinopathy  of prematurity. Oxygen saturation levels and  
desaturation events were recorded continuously from  the first day of life  to 8 weeks’ 
postnatal age. If  recruitment targets  for study group children cannot be  achieved,  we will 
engage the assistance of  Co-Investigator Dr. Wilson-Costello  to recruit additional  former 
preterm children  currently 9 to 17 years  old with birth  gestational  age between 23-30 
weeks and birth weight appropriate  for gestational  age (AGA for comparison,  we plan to  
recruit healthy control  children within the age range of  the eligible former preterm 
children. Our  findings will  provide  new insight into the neural basis of cognitive  
dysfunction reported in many former  preterm children who experienced mild  to moderate 
hypoxic insults. 
APPROACH: Eligible  and interested former  preterm children  will be  identified  by 
Deanne Wilson-Costello,  MD and  Juliann Di Fiore. These children are prematurely born 
survivors from  Rainbow Babies & Children's Neonatal Intensive Care Unit,  and have  
been followed since birth. Children in this  cohort  have already  participated in  research, 
and remain  willing to participate  in future  projects. Dr. Wilson-Costello and/or  Juliann Di 
Fiore will provide our research team  with names/contact information  of interested 
individuals. We will contact those individuals by telephone  to describe the study and 
conduct a prescreening.  
Healthy control children will  respond  to study flyers. The study flyers will be  (1) given to  
the parents of the prematurely  born cohort children to  pass along to parents  of other 
children with ages similar to their  own child; (2) posted in the Rainbow  Primary Care  
Pediatric Clinics; (3) distributed by professional  colleagues/pediatric physicians to  
potential candidate children/families  meeting  study inclusion criteria. Study  flyers will 
instruct interested parents of eligible children  to contact us if they would be  interested in  
learning more about the  study; and  (4) posted in libraries, coffee  shops,  and 
community/recreational centers.
Following a telephone  pre-screening process, the consent form will be presented in  
person to the child  and parent. The principal investigator or one  of the listed staff will be  
present during the presentation of the informed consent, the signing of  the consent, and 
initiation of  the research study. We  will use the child assent/parent consent form 
submitted with this application and the UH MRI safety screening form, which has also  
been submitted. 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  19 of 35In rare instances that parents  or legal  guardians cannot be  present  at the consent process 
or study visit, parents/legal guardians  can be consented via telephone. Parents will also  
provide permission to the  study  team to allow the study  team to contact the child first via 
phone to assess  willingness to participate  and subsequently provide permission, for  their  
child to be assented in person (as  usual) and come to the  study visit with a  trusted parent 
proxy. This will happen before child assent visit. At the day  of the  consent, we will ask 
child to bring a  student ID  or report  card  to verify  their own identity.
No study procedures will take place before we receive the signed consent form from the parent.
If children  come to either the consent  process  visit or the study visit  (with their parent 
proxy who  has been verbally approved by parent/guardian) and declines participation, the 
study team  will cease  all study related activities. We will then call the  parent/guardian to  
inform them of the circumstances.  
The study team  will confirm with parent/guardian before the consent phone call that  child 
is under the supervision of  a caregiver and ask for  caregiver’s full name. The study team 
will verify the  caregiver’s  identity using state-issued  ID or credit card  bearing the same 
name given by  parent  at consent. During the study visit, the study personnel will have  the 
caregiver present  a photo ID before beginning any study-related procedures.
Compensation is given  to the parent  or parent proxy who completes the necessary 
questionnaires about child behavior or sleep.  We  will inform the  parent  that this is our 
process in these rare and  special circumstances.
Consented study participants (child and one  parent) will  be asked to  come to the Case  
Western Reserve University Magnetic Resonance (MR) Facility  located within 
University Hospitals on 11100 Euclid  Ave, Cleveland OH 44106 at a  scheduled 
date/time. A research staff member will contact participants by phone 1 and 3 days prior  
to the scheduled data collection visits to complete  a COVID-19  screening  form  (see 
COVID-19 screening form).
The child should  have washed their  hair on the day  of the study visit and  not used any 
hair oils, conditioners,  or hair products after  shampoo. Data  collection will involve  1 visit 
lasting approximately 2-3 hours  in length. Participants who  volunteer for re-study will 
have a second data collection visit lasting approximately 2-3 hours  in length.  
Dr. Damato,  Dr. Decker or  a member  of the  research  team will review  the procedures to  
participants and confirm that written informed consent has been obtained.  A research 
team member will assess the participant’s  temperature using a  no-touch infrared  
thermometer at  the start of  the study  visit. We will supply clean disposable facemasks to 
participants for use during  the study.  Research  staff will wear facemasks at all times  
during the study visit. Prior to the neuroimaging session,  a magnetic resonance  imaging 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  20 of 35(MRI) screening will be  repeated to ensure study eligibility for MR scanning  and that it is 
safe for the child  to take part in the study. 
A qualified physician or nurse practitioner  will perform a  focused neurological history 
and physical examination.  All females will be asked  to provide a urine specimen for 
pregnancy testing. If pregnancy test is positive, the child will be removed from  the study  
due to exclusionary criteria. 
The child will be acclimated to  the MRI/mock scanner and then be  instructed  on the 
verbal n-back memory  task that will be administered during a  portion of the MRI  scan 
and during the  EEG recording. 
Once positioned on the MRI scan table, an MRI scan is performed. We will provide 
earplugs or  headphones that the child will be required to  wear. A  structural scan, DTI, 
and fMRI will be  performed (total acquisition  scan time = 30 minutes).  During the  fMRI, 
the child will perform the  n-back memory task by pressing a  button in response to  
alphabet letters presented  on a  screen in the scanner.  
While the MRI scan acquisition is occurring, one  parent will complete questionnaire 
items regarding their  child's typical  behavior (estimated time 25-30 minutes). 
Following the MRI scan,  a stretchy cap  with  holes  in it will be  placed  over  the top of the 
child’s head. Some  gel will be put through the  holes and some wires will be  attached to 
the cap that will record brain  activity across the  scalp. Placement of the cap takes  
approximately 40 minutes including  proper  programming of the HD-EEG equipment.  
We will obtain  15 minutes  of baseline EEG recording. During the baseline EEG 
recording, Dr. Damato, Dr. Decker or a member of the team will administer a neurobehavioral assessment, which will include  the Grooved Pegboard  test, where the 
child is timed  while  placing pegs into a board.  Following completion of the EEG 
recording, child is assisted to remove gel from  scalp and hair. 
Study incentive is provided for study completion  ($50 gift card to child  plus $50 gift card 
to parent or  caregiver present). 
NOTE: A positive  pregnancy test in girls under the age of 13 will be reported to the 
parent and to the child  as well as to the Cuyahoga  County Department of Children and 
Family Services (216-696-KIDS) as required by law.  If the  child  is age 14 or older,  we 
will report a positive pregnancy  test to the  child and will tell  the parent about the 
pregnancy test results only  if the parent asks for that information. We will also notify 
University Hospitals Social Work  (216-844-8965) about any positive pregnancy  tests  so 
they can provide support to the child.  If we become aware of abuse or neglect of a child  
in this  study,  we will notify the appropriate  county social services  agency as required by 
law (216-696-KIDS).
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  21 of 35Procedure Responsible Party
Confirmation of signed informed child assent / 
parent consent & repeat MRI safety screen  Dr. Damato or member  of research team 
approved to obtain consent
Confirm that child has washed hair that day and 
not used any hair products after the shampooResearch assistant
Perform brief  neurologic history and physical  
exam Nurse Practitioner (Dr. Damato) or Physician  (Dr. 
Wilson-Costello) 
Acclimate child to MRI / mock  scanner Research assistant
Instruct child on verbal n-back  memory task (5 
minutes)Research assistant
Transfer child to MRI scanning room Dr. Flask or MR technician
MRI scan (structural, DTI, fMRI) performed. n-
back memory test is administered during fMRI  
scan (30 minutes)Dr. Flask or MR technician
While child is in the MRI scanner, parent 
completes Child  Behavior Checklist, Vanderbilt 
Assessment Scale, and Child Sleep Assessment 
(25-30 minutes).Research assistant
Following MRI scan, apply HD-EEG head  cap on 
child’s scalp, apply  EEG gel, and program  EEG 
acquisition software,  check impedances (40 
minutes)Research assistant
Obtain 15 minutes of baseline EEG recording Research assistant
While EEG is being recorded, administer grooved  
pegboard task and n-back memory test (5 
minutes)Research assistant
Following completion of EEG data collection, 
child is assisted  to remove gel from scalp and hairResearch assistant
Study incentive payment is provided Research technician/Dr. Damato/Dr. Decker
Radiation and Radioactive Substances
1.Does  the research involve the  use of radiation  or radioactive substances?
☐  Yes     ☒  No – leave rest of the section  blank
If yes, answer the following questions.
Please note that  you must receive  Radiation  Safety  Committee (RSC) prior to  IRB 
submission.
2.Is the radiation use only for the  purposes of the research study (e.g. over and  above  
standard of  care )
☐  Yes     ☐  No
3.Does  the protocol use radionuclides ?
☐  Yes     ☐  No
4.Provide justification for the additional  risk associated with the research radiation use.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  22 of 35ClinicalTrials.gov Information
Has this study been registered on ClinicalTrials.gov ? 
☒  Yes. Provide the  following : 
i.The ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
ii.Investigator/sponsor responsible for registering : Michael J.  Decker,  PhD
☐  No. Explain  if there are plans to register  or why registration is not  required 
(i.e., the study is not NIH  funded, registration  is in process, or does not meet the 
definition of a  clinical  trial)
List of Data to  be Collected
1.Indicate what identifiers you will collect
☒ Name
☒ Address
☒ Dates related to  an individual (e.g.,  Date of admission, birth, surgery, etc.)
☒ Telephone  number
☐ Fax number
☒ Email  address
☐ Social security number
☐ Medical record number
☐ Health plan  beneficiary  number
☐ Account number
☐ Certificate/license number
☐ Any vehicle or other device serial
☐ Device  identifiers or serial numbers
☐ Web URL
☐ Internet protocol (IP) address
☐ Finger or  voice prints
☐ Photographic  images
☐ Other: Any characteristic  that would uniquely  identify  the individual
2.List all other data to be collected for the research study (e.g. laboratory  values, physician 
notes, length of stay, etc.). 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, specifically  T1 structural scan, Diffusion Tensor 
Imaging (DTI), and functional  Magnetic  Resonance Imaging-Blood Oxygen 
Level Dependent (fMRI-BOLD)
High density electroencephalography (HD-EEG)
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  23 of 35Neurobehavioral Assessments of child: Verbal n-back; Grooved Pegboard task  
Parent report of child  behavior (parent-report): Child Behavior Checklist, 
Vanderbilt Assessment Test, Child’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire  (for children 
ages 9-12), Pediatric Sleep Questionnaire  (for children ages  9-17).
Urine collection (to determine  pregnancy exclusion for female child participants)
Data Analysis  Plan
1.Describe the data analysis plan, including any statistical  procedures. Provide  a power 
analysis if applicable.  
2.If applicable, describe the primary and secondary study endpoints including safety  
endpoints.  
Our intent  in this exploratory cross-sectional  two-arm pilot study is to develop  sufficient  
Scientific Rigor to support a future study appropriately powered to account  for our proposed 
primary outcome measures and co-variates. Our sample will include 20 prematurely  born  
children who  experienced hypoxic insults  during  postnatal life. To  allow comparison to 
“normative” expectations, we will compare these 20 former preterm  children with 10 healthy  
term-born controls without exposure  to hypoxia  and of similar age, sex, race  distribution as 
the preterm group. Data from these 30 children will be used to develop appropriate sample sizes, using actual rather than predictive  data, for future  studies  characterizing neural  
structure and function  following postnatal  hypoxic insults.
Specific structural and  functional characteristics used in our analyses will include
apparent diffusion coefficients and fractional  anisotropy generated from  DTI  data
fMRI-BOLD, measured during  the pediatric verbal n-back,  and HD-EEG 
sLORETA
neurobehavioral assessment results (grooved pegboard test, verbal n-back, Child Behavior Checklist,  Vanderbilt Assessment test, Child’s Sleep Habits 
Questionnaire, Pediatric Sleep  Questionnaire)
Covariates include 1) age,  2) sex, 3) race,  4) preterm vs. term birth, and 5) frequency of 
hypoxic insults (< 5000 versus ≥  5000)  during the first 8 weeks of life within the preterm 
group. The continuous outcome measure variables will be summarized using  descriptive 
statistics (mean,  standard deviation, median, interquartile range).  Frequency  analyses and 
stem-n-leaf graphs will  characterize data distributions. Skewed continuous variables  will be  
transformed to satisfy  normality assumptions  of hypothesis testing.  Outcome measures for  
the two groups  will be compared graphically using box plots. We will perform  hypothesis 
tests for equality  of data distribution for  the two groups using t-tests or Wilcoxon sign rank 
test, as appropriate,  with a significance level  of 10%.
As we are  interested in the differences of above mentioned outcome measures in  two groups,  
we will focus on effect size estimation  for the differences  of our measures. To detect  
significant effect size, we  will perform  regression analysis on the outcomes of interest with 
the primary covariate  of interest being group membership (preterm vs.  term  birth). In the  
regression analyses, we will control  only for significant confounding effects  of age, sex, race, 
and frequency of hypoxic insults. Using regression  analyses, we will determine point 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  24 of 35estimates, regression coefficients  (beta), as well as 90% confidence interval of betas. The 
confidence intervals will be main  estimated effect size or the differences in outcomes  in two 
groups due to  preterm and  term birth.
Confidentiality of Specimens and Banking
☒  I am not storing specimens in this research  project – please  leave the rest of this section 
blank
Describe:
☐  The source of the  specimens      
☐  Where the  specimens will be stored     
☐  How long the specimens will  be stored     
☐  How the specimens will be  labeled       
☐  How the specimens will be  accessed      
☐  Who will have  access to the specimens      
☐  When and  how  will the specimens be destroyed      
☐  How will the specimens  be transported  (Please note if transporting specimens, 
a Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) is required).      
Describe:
☐  The procedures to release specimens  including :
i.The process to request  a release      
ii.Approvals required  for a release      
iii.Who can  obtain specimens     
iv.The data to be  provided with specimens,  including if the data  will be 
identifiable to others     
☐  For genomic data, please include an attestation of no master list and no attempt  will 
be made to re-identify the  specimens.     
Are you storing the  specimen for  future  use for  other research projects?
☐  Yes
☐  No
Confidentiality of Data
1.To maintain the confidentiality of the data:☒ I will use a  unique study identifier  (not derived  from  the participants  personal
            identifiers)  to code individuals’ data   and I will store this ID log separate from 
            study data.
☐ Other (please  explain)
2.How are you  storing your electronic data?
☒ UH Redcap
☐ CWRU Redcap 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  25 of 35☐ Secure  Research Environment  (SRE)
☐ CWRU Box
☐ OnCore
☒ UH Secure  Network Drive
☐ CWRU Secure  Network Drive
☐ Other - List storage method and  provide  justification:
3.☒ I acknowledge  that paper research  data and documents  will be stored  in a double-
            locked secure environment in the  following location: 
            Location: PI Michael  Decker’s  laboratory office; CWRU School of Medicine 
4.If sharing data, describe:  
The exact data  elements that will be shared     
How data will  be sent     
(Please note if sharing  data, a Data Use Agreement (DUA) is required.
        N/A
HIPAA Authorization 
If you are going to be accessing PHI (Protected Health Information),  indicate how  HIPAA 
authorization will be  obtained (check all  that apply):
☒  HIPAA authorization is in the consent form
☒  Requesting a  full or partial  waiver of HIPAA for prescreening
☐  Requesting a  full or partial  waiver of HIPAA
1.Describe why the study cannot be  completed  without  the specified  identifiable  
information. 
2.If the  identifiable  information  will be used or disclosed  by anyone other than  the research  
team, please  state  who those individuals/entities  are and provide justification  for the 
disclosure. 
3.Describe how long identifiers will  be kept  for in relation to  study length  and data 
collection and  analysis. 
The purpose  of requesting identifiable  information  is to reduce research participant  burden.  
We intend to first speak  to potential  research  candidates by phone,  at which  time we will 
describe the study and  establish their interest  in participating.  During  the call, we will also 
establish the presence of inclusion criteria  and any overt exclusionary criteria that may exist, 
before inviting the  study candidate to meet in person with us  to provide informed consent and 
obtain signatures.  We appreciate that these  steps increase the workload of the investigative 
team. However, they  will reduce research  participant  burden by identifying non-eligible 
study participants before they take the time to meet  with us  in person for further  evaluation of 
inclusion and  exclusion  criteria. We will destroy all pre-screening documents and  records as 
soon as the child is determined either  (1) study-ineligible or (2) parent has signed a  written 
consent form and the child  has signed a written assent form  to participate or (3) child  and/or  
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  26 of 35parent has opted to not participate in the study. No persons  outside the  research team will 
have access to identifiable information. Research data will be  stored by the PI  for 5 years  
after closure of the study.
☒  I assure that  protected health  information collected for purposes of this research  study 
will not be reused  or disclosed to any other  person or entity, except as required by law, 
for authorized oversight of the research study, or for other research  for which  the use of 
disclosure of protected health  information  for which an authorization or opportunity  to 
agree or object is not required by 45 CFR  164.512
Risks to  Research Participants
1.List the reasonably foreseeable risks such as breach of confidentiality, discomforts, hazards, or inconveniences to the  research participants  related to  their participation  in 
the research. Include  a description  of the probability, magnitude,  duration, and 
reversibility of the risks.  Include the  physical psychological, social, legal,  and economic  
risks. 
2.If applicable, indicate which experimental procedures may  have risks to the research 
participants that are currently  unforeseeable . 
3.If applicable, indicate which procedures  may have risks to an embryo or fetus should the 
research participant or  their  partner be  or become pregnant. 
4.If applicable, describe the risks to others who are not  research participants . 
5.Describe the availability of medical  or psychological resources  that research 
participants might need. 
Potential Breach of Confidentiality: Accessing of  PHI involves the risk of  potential breach of 
confidentiality. Participant's names will not be used  in any written or oral report of the study. 
A number will be  used  to identify all information  supplied.  Participant  identity  will be known 
only to the study staff. 
Potential Time Burden:  Participation may  require the children to  miss school  and their 
parents to miss work,  although we will preferentially schedule evening  and weekend 
appointments. We will also schedule data collection during  school holidays and summer 
vacation whenever possible. 
Telephone screening/In-person interviews of child/parents:  The procedures used in  
evaluating children  and families for the  study  are similar to those used in  clinical follow-up 
of children.  There may  be some minimal risks associated with initial telephone screening. 
There are also minimal risks that the  children  or their  caregivers will become  anxious about 
the testing, or will experience  some distress in being  questioned about their  personal  lives. 
Neurobehavioral Assessments: Risks  related  to the neurobehavioral assessments, i.e. the 
pediatric verbal n-back,  grooved pegboard task, parent-reported behavioral  questionnaires, 
are minimal.  These  may  include frustration with remembering the appearance of letters  on a  
screen or the time burden of  completing the tasks. 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  27 of 35Electroencephalography (EEG): This non-invasive  procedure is associated with minimal risk, 
or at the most, minor risk. Those include  skin sensitivity  to the gel or to  the adhesive tape 
which is sometimes  used to secure  a recording electrode or wire.
Neuroimaging (MRI)  
Collision Hazard: The subject's participation in this study involves minimal risk. Because 
the MRI machine exposes the body to a  very strong magnetic force, loose  magnetic or  
metallic objects can fly into the magnet with great force if brought  into the environment 
of the MRI scanner. The participant is asked to remove  the following before  entering  the 
magnet room: hearing aids, beeper, cell phone, keys,  eyeglasses, hair pins, barrettes, 
jewelry, body  piercing  jewelry, watch, safety  pins, paperclips, money clip, credit cards, 
bank cards, magnetic strip cards, coins, pens, pocket  knife, nail  clipper,  steel-toed  
boots/shoes, hair bands,  eye shadow, and tools. We  have established a  security zone  to 
prevent objects containing iron  from coming into proximity of the magnet. To prevent the 
likelihood of  wearable metallic substances  in the scanning room, we will routinely ask 
subjects to change into a  hospital gown or other suitable garment. Some  persons  should 
not participate in an MRI  study  and we will exclude these persons: people with metallic  
implants such as  aneurysm clips or some types of prostheses (fake body parts),  or with 
electronic implants such  as cardiac pacemakers,  intravascular shunts, stents, or filters; 
hearing aids,  dental  devices such as braces or  dentures. 
Claustrophobia: The  confining conditions of the  MRI scanner  can precipitate  
claustrophobia (feelings  of being “closed  in”) in some people. The radiology suite offers 
facilities that promote  comfort and reduce anxiety. The mock scanner can assist in  
acclimating the  child to the MR scanning procedure.  If a child has feelings of 
claustrophobia during  the study, the study will be terminated. 
Hearing: The MRI scanner produces tapping sounds during operation which may reach 
objectionable levels. To minimize  any discomfort, subjects are provided  with  disposable 
earplugs or  headphones. Children may discontinue their participation if  the noise  of the 
MRI scanner  becomes too loud to tolerate. 
Radio Wave  Exposure:  There have been no ill effects reported from  exposure to the 
magnetism or radio waves used for  these studies, however that  it is possible  that harmful 
effects could be recognized in the future. The  child will be able  to communicate with  the 
scanner staff  using an intercom  and/or  signaling device. The staff will try  to help the 
subject feel as comfortable  as possible in the scanner. The subject can ask to  stop the scan 
and be removed from  the scanner at any time  by using the intercom or signaling  device.
Health/Sexual Activity: The effect of MRI on pregnancy and  a fetus is  not known. For  that 
reason, if  a female  child  is pregnant, or is planning to become pregnant, the child may not 
participate in this study.  We will perform  a urine pregnancy test on pubertal  females and if  the 
result is positive, we will inform the parent of the result and the child  will be removed from 
study participation. We will also notify University Hospitals Social Work.  The Cuyahoga County 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  28 of 35Department of Children  and Family Services will be  notified of positive pregnancy test results  
for females under the  age of 14 as  required by law.
Provisions to Protect  the Privacy  Interests of Research Participan ts
Describe the steps that  will be taken  to protect  research participants’ privacy  interests.  
(consider issues such as physical space, proximity to other, and participant preferences) 
Subjects and their parent/  guardian will be given adequate time  and space  to sit down and 
comfortably and privately review the  consent forms and screening forms. Consent  forms 
presented in person will be reviewed  and signed  in a private room; data collection 
(grooved pegboard task,  completion of questionnaires by parents)  will be  occur  in a 
private room. Based on parent preference, consent forms may be mailed in  advance to the  
parent prior to a mutually  scheduled telephone call to conduct  the consent  process. The 
parent will sign the  paper  consent form(s)  and return  the signed  documents to the 
investigative team in a  provided stamped return  envelope.
Subjects are provided with individual lockers in the MR scanning facility for  storing their 
personal belongings during the scan. Subjects may  use a locked  room for changing their  
clothes and cleaning  the gel off the scalp  after the EEG. The scanner suite is secure  and 
populated by the  members of the  research  team and clinical staff only.  
Paper documents  that can identify subjects will be kept in a  locked cabinet in the faculty 
office of Dr.  Michael Decker, Robbins  Building, office E510. Only the Research 
Principal Investigators Drs. Elizabeth Damato and Michael Decker and  the site principal 
investigator Dr. Wilson-Costello will have access  to the  locked file cabinet. Subject  
privacy during study  procedures will be ensured  by anonymizing the data through the use 
of a unique  identifier number. These  data  will be stored on the UH REDCap system to  
ensure that the data is maintained behind institutional  firewalls  with access available only 
to Elizabeth Damato, Michael  Decker,  Deanne Wilson-Costello,  and their certified staff  
associated with  the study. 
Raw imaging data will be stored on the  UH data only storage system  using a unique 
identifier number. Imaging data using the unique identifier,  as well as HD-EEG data,  will 
be stored on REDCap, or  a UH-approved encrypted flash drive, to be processed using 
specialized software  with access available  only to the primary  investigator and certified  
staff. Results  will be  reported in an aggregate fashion with no individual identifying 
demographic information available.
Dr. Elizabeth Damato will be responsible  for providing and documenting appropriate user 
access to the study database in REDCap and will prevent potential  security  concerns such 
as unauthorized access to data or malicious  intent to destroy data and  systems. Dr. Decker 
and Dr. Damato will oversee data  audit software (REDCap)  that is used to  document user 
access, document data modification and backups.  Dr. Decker and Dr.  Damato will 
provide appropriate investigative team  members with user accounts to  enter data. Subject  
information and  results  will be stored by study ID numbers. REDCap  software will be  
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  29 of 35used to de-identify PHI in  the database.  The paper  data linking  sheet  holding identifiable  
information will be  stored in the locked  cabinet  in faculty office of Dr. Michael Decker, 
Robbins Building, office E510. The linking sheet  will be  destroyed  at the end of the 
study. Signed paper consent forms will be stored  separately from  the linking  sheet in a 
different locked cabinet  in Dr. Decker’s  office. Only Dr. Damato, Dr. Decker  and Dr. 
Wilson-Costello will have access to the locked cabinets. The data linking  sheet is 
attached to this submission.
Potential Benefit to Research Participants
1.Describe the potential benefits that individual research participants may experience from taking part in the  research. Include  the probability, magnitude,  and duration  of the 
potential benefits. Indicate if there is no direct  benefit. 
2.If no direct benefit, state the potential benefit  to society or  others. Do  not list 
compensation. 
There is no direct benefit  to the  child by their participation in  this research study. Information  
derived from this  study may enable us  to determine  the underlying neuropathology causing 
the cognitive dysfunction that can occur  following mild-moderate intermittent hypoxic 
insults in the postnatal period.
Withdrawal of Research Participants
1.Describe the anticipated circumstances  under which research participants  will be 
withdrawn from the  research without their consent. 
2.Describe the procedures that will be followed when research participants  withdraw  or 
are withdrawn from the research, including partial withdrawal from procedures  with  
continued data collection.  
A child participant would be removed  from  this study by the investigators if they cannot  
cooperate with  study procedures or if previously undetected exclusionary criteria become 
evident during the data collection. These circumstances may include, but  may  not be limited 
to: (1) children who cannot  cooperate with study procedures such as the ability to perform  
neurobehavioral tests;  (2) if their hairstyle  does not permit adequate EEG signal conduction 
(e.g. dreadlocks are  a known  problem);  (3) if  they meet exclusionary criteria such as 
claustrophobic behavior  during the MRI scan or a positive pregnancy test. Data collection 
will occur in one visit;  thus  partial  withdrawal with continued data collection does not  apply 
to this  protocol.
A subject’s participation  in this  research study is voluntary. Refusing  to participate, 
withdrawing or being withdrawn by study staff will not alter their usual health care or involve any penalty or loss of benefits  to which  they are otherwise  entitled. The images 
collected are  for research purposes only and  do not  form part of the subject’s routine health 
care or offer interventions.  The images are not a benefit of  being in  this research study. In the 
event new information becomes available  that may affect the risks  or benefits associated with 
this study or  a subject's willingness  to participate in it, they  will be  notified so  that they  can 
decide whether or not to continue participating.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  30 of 35Alternatives to Participation
1.Please list other available clinical treatments . 
2.Please state if a subject could continue on standard of  care  therapy  and what that might 
include. 
3.If not a clinical trial  you may state that the alternative is not to  participate. If  there  is a 
viable alternative you  must list it in the consent . 
This is  an observational  study and clinical treatment is not  provided. This  study is  being  
performed for  research  purposes only. The alternative to the study is simply not  to 
participate.
Costs to  Research  Participants
☒  There are no costs to research participants  or their insurance  companies – please leave the  
rest of this section blank
1.If applicable, describe what costs the research  participants will be responsible for 
because of participation  in the research including but not  limited to: transportation to 
study visits, parking for study visits, costs of procedures, lost,  broken  or stolen devices, 
costs of drugs  or therapy, etc. 
2.You must clearly state  if insurance  will be charged and who  will be responsible if 
insurance does  not pay. 
3.List what research procedures  and research interventions will be covered by  this study . 
Research Participant  Compensation
☐  There is no compensation for research participants – please leave rest of  this section blank
 
1.Describe the schedule,  payment method and payment total of  any incentives or  
compensation that research participants will  receive for participation in  the research 
(e.g., gift  cards  or cash with amounts, t-shirts, devices, bags,  swag, etc.)       
2.Describe the schedule,  payment method and payment total of  any reimbursements that 
research participants will receive for participation in research  (e.g.,  parking,  mileage, 
meals, etc.)     
As a token of appreciation of the  time and effort made by the parent and child  to participate 
in this  study,  we will compensate each  child who completes the protocol with a $50 Amazon 
gift card. Each parent whose child completes the protocol and  completes the parent 
questionnaires will also be compensated with a  $50 gift card [note: only  one parent per  
participating child is eligible]. In special circumstances that  require a parent proxy to  come 
with the child to the  study visit, the  study  team, parent, and  caregiver  will make a  decision as 
to who can best respond to the questionnaires about the child’s activities and behaviors. The parent or the caregiver who completes  the questionnaire will be  compensated $50. The  total 
compensation for the child/parent unit is $100 value. If two children participate from the same family (e.g. one  healthy child and one  former  preterm  child  OR two healthy OR two 
former preterm children), they will be  eligible for $100 for each participating child/parent 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  31 of 35unit. If a child/parent completes  the protocol a second time, the child will receive a $50 
Amazon gift card  and the parent  will receive a $50 gift card  for completing the re-study.
The $50 parent/caregiver incentive is  also meant to cover expenses of parking during  the 
time of  data collection. Both the  child and the parent/caregiver will receive  their  incentives 
on the day of  the data collection visit.
Compensation for Research Related Injury
Describe who  will pay  for the costs of medical treatment and/or compensation in  the event of a 
research related injury:
☐  Funding  agency is providing some/all payment for injury
☒  Funding  agency is providing no payment for  injury
☐  Not applicable
Provisions to Monitor the  Data to Ensure the  Safety  of Research  Participants
1.Describe the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan for the proposed  study.  Describe how 
often the data will be  monitored for  completeness, accuracy and adherence to the 
protocol.
2.Is there a formal  Data and Safety Monitoring Board/Committee? If yes,  provide 
information about the DSMB/C including the  contact  information  of the committee 
member(s) (as applicable); whether  it is independent from the study sponsor; how often it 
meets; the type of data  that will be used;  written  reports,  etc. 
Given the minimal  risk of  the procedures  involved  in the study the likelihood of adverse  
events is  very low. Overall risk to participants should be similar to  that of a clinical MRI 
scan. Collection of  EEG data  is non-invasive. The unblinded study coordinator will monitor  
records and debrief data collection personnel  each week to  detect adverse  events.  Data will 
be reviewed and monitored to ensure that its accuracy, completeness, and collection is in  
compliance with the  protocol. All adverse events  will be  classified  by severity and  will be 
reported to the IRB in accordance  with the  rules regulating each severity class (expected vs.  
unexpected; serious  vs. other; related vs. unrelated). With  consultation of the physician 
involved in the project (Dr. Wilson-Costello), criteria for urgent medical referrals  will also  be 
established. Per NIH policy, we have  developed a detailed Data and Safety Monitoring Plan, 
which has been approved  by NINR/NIH. The approved 7-page  document is attached. A 
DSMB has  been assembled  with 4 members  outside the study team in addition to 3 members 
of the study team  (Dr. Decker,  Dr. Damato, and biostatistician Dr.  Sattar). Data and 
procedures will be  monitored weekly by the study team to  ensure  compliance  with the 
protocol and integrity of the data. Quarterly written reports to  outside DSMB members 
summarizing study progress and adverse events  will be  provided  by Drs. Decker  and 
Damato. The DSMB will be included in all formal procedures that  report adverse events to 
the oversight University  Hospital  IRB and identify any need for premature termination of the 
protocol.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  32 of 35DSMB members will include (1)  Carolyn Landis, PhD: Licensed Clinical Psychologist  & 
Professor of  Pediatrics, Division of Developmental/Behavioral Pediatrics  & Psychology, 
Rainbow Babies  & Children's Hospital, Carolyn.Landis@uhhospitals.org. Dr. Landis will 
serve as  DSMB chairperson; (2) Asim Shahid, MD: Assistant Professor of Pediatric 
Neurology/Staff Pediatric Epileptologist, Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital, Asim.Shahid@uhhospitals.org; (3) Richard  J. Martin, MD:  Director, Neonatal Research 
Programs, UH Cleveland  Medical Center, Professor of Pediatrics, CWRU School of 
Medicine, Richard.Martin@uhhospitals.org:  (4) Ian  Vannix, Lead Teaching Assistant, 
CWRU School of Medicine, Department of Physiology &  Biophysics,  isv@case.edu. Mr. 
Vannix will serve as the DSMB Executive Secretary. Dr. Wilson-Costello, UH-based site PI,  
will be invited to attend any meetings and  be provided with interim written DSMB report 
updates.
Drugs or Devices
☒  There are no drugs or devices being utilized in this research project  – please leave rest of  this 
section blank
1.If the  research involves drugs or device(s), describe your plans to store, handle, and 
administer those drugs or  device(s) so that they  will be  used only  on research 
participants and be used only  by authorized investigators. 
2.How will the drug(s) be dispensed (i.e.,  indicate the pharmacy that will  be used )?
3.If the  drug is investigational  (has an IND)  or the device has an IDE or  a claim of  
abbreviated IDE (non-significant risk device), identify the holder  of the 
IND/IDE/Abbreviated IDE       
Additional Information
If you have any additional information regarding your study not covered in  the template, please 
include it here.
Community-Based Participatory Research
☒  This is not a community-based participatory research project  – please leave rest of this 
section blank
If applicable, describe the  involvement  of the community in  the design  and conduct of  the 
research. 
Note: Community  based research is research that is conducted as  an equal partnership between 
academic investigators  and members  of a community. In Community  Based Participatory 
Research (CBPR) protects, the  community  participates fully in all aspects of the research  
process.  
International information
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  33 of 35☒  This is not an international study – please  leave rest of  the section blank
☐  We will be  conducting this research at the following international sites:
1.
☐  We are recruiting participants outside of the US from the following locations:
1.
☐  We are sending  data outside of the US to the following  locations :
1.
☐  We are receiving  data from outside of  the US from the following locations :
1.
MULTI-SITE RESEARCH (when  UH or CWRU is the IRB of  Record)
Does this project have multiple sites?
☐  Yes
☒  No
Non-Local Site Information for  Multi-Site Studies
If this is  a multi-site study where you  are the lead investigator, list the following information  for 
each relying  site:
1.Name of  site:  
2.PI of relying  site: 
3.Name of  IRB contact : 
4.Phone number of IRB contact: 
5.Email address  of IRB  contact: 
Non-Local Recruitment Methods for  Multi-Site Studies
If this is  a multi-site study and research participants  will be recruited by methods not under  the 
control of the local site  (e.g. call centers, national advertisements) describe those methods. 
Local recruitment methods are described  above. 
1.Describe when, where, and how potential research participants will  be recruited. 
2.Describe the methods that will be used to identify  potential  research  participants . 
3.Describe the materials that will be used to recruit research participants. 
Multi-Site Research Communication Plan (when you are the lead  investigator)
If this is  a multi-site study where you  are the lead investigator, describe the processes to ensure 
communication among sites including:
All sites will have the  most current  version of the protocol, consent document,  and 
HIPAA authorization     
All required  approvals (initial, continuing  review  and modifications) have been obtained 
at each site (including approval by the  site’s IRB of record)     
All modifications have been communicated to sites, and approved (including approval  of 
the site’s  IRB of record) before  the modification is implemented      
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  34 of 35All engaged participating  sites will  safeguard data, including secure transmission  of 
data, as  required by  local information  security  policies     
All local site investigators  conduct  the study in accordance with applicable  federal 
regulations and local laws     
All non-compliance with the study  protocol or applicable requirements will be reported  
in accordance with local policy      
If this is  a multi-site study where you  are the lead investigator, describe the method for 
communicating to engaged participant sites: 
Problems     
Interim results     
The closure  of the study     
References   
 
1. Rocha-Ferreira E, Hristova M. Plasticity in the neonatal brain following hypoxic-ischaemic injury. Neural Plast. 2016;2016:4901014. 
2. Boog  G. [Cerebral palsy and perinatal asphyxia (I--diagnosis)]. Gynecol  Obstet  Fertil. 
2010;38(4):261-277. 
3. Volpe JJ, Kinney  HC,  Jensen FE, Rosenberg  PA. The developing  oligodendrocyte: key  
cellular target in brain injury  in the  premature  infant. Int J  Dev Neurosci.  2011;29(4):423-440. 
4. Towbin A.  Organic causes of  minimal brain dysfunction. Perinatal  origin of  minimal cerebral 
lesions. JAMA. 1971;217(9):1207-1214. 
5. Zhu T,  Gan J, Huang  J, Li Y, Qu Y, Mu D. Association between perinatal hypoxic-ischemic 
conditions and  attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A meta-analysis.  J Child Neurol. 
2016;31(10):1235-1244. 
6. Kurinczuk JJ, White-Koning M, Badawi N. Epidemiology of neonatal encephalopathy and 
hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy. Early  Hum Dev. 2010;86(6):329-338. 
7. Piermichele  P, Picone  S. Apnea of prematurity.  Journal of  Pediatric and Neonatal  
Individualized Medicine. 2013;2(2):1-7. 
8. Poets  CF, Samuels MP, Southall DP. Epidemiology and  pathophysiology  of apnoea of 
prematurity. Biology of the Neonate . 1994;65(3-4):211-219. 
9. Huppi PS, Murphy B, Maier SE, Zientara GP, Inder TE, Barnes PD,  Kikinis  R, Jolesz  FA, 
Volpe JJ. Microstructural brain development  after  perinatal cerebral white  matter  injury assessed 
by diffusion tensor  magnetic resonance imaging. Pediatrics. 2001;107(3):455-460. 
10. Inder TE, Volpe JJ. Mechanisms  of perinatal  brain injury. Semin  Neonatol. 2000;5(1):3-16. 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 05/11/2018 Prior Version: 1/23/2018
Page  35 of 3511. Poets  CF, Roberts RS, Schmidt B, Whyte RK, Asztalos EV, Bader  D, Bairam A,  
Moddemann D, Peliowski A, Rabi Y, Solimano A, Nelson H  & the Canadian  Oxygen Trial 
Investigators. Association  between intermittent hypoxemia or bradycardia and late death or 
disability in extremely  preterm infants. JAMA. 2015;314(6):595-603. 
12. Azra Haider B,  Bhutta  ZA. Birth asphyxia in developing countries: current status  and public 
health implications.  Curr  Probl Pediatr  Adolesc  Health Care. 2006;36(5):178-188. 
13. Phelps ME. PET: A biological  imaging technique.  Neurochem  Res. 1991;16(9):929-940. 
14. Janvier A, Khairy M, Kokkotis A, Cormier C, Messmer D,  Barrington  KJ. Apnea is 
associated with  neurodevelopmental  impairment in very low birth weight infants.  J Perinatol. 
2004;24(12):763-768. 
15. Perna R,  Cooper D. Perinatal cyanosis: long-term cognitive sequelae  and behavioral 
consequences. Appl Neuropsychol Child. 2012;1(1):48-52. 
16. Smith  TF, Schmidt-Kastner R, McGeary JE, Kaczorowski JA, Knopik VS. Pre- and perinatal 
ischemia-hypoxia, the  ischemia-hypoxia response pathway, and ADHD risk. Behav Genet. 
2016;46(3):467-477. 
17. Decker MJ, Hue  GE, Caudle WM, Miller GW,  Keating GL, Rye DB. Episodic neonatal 
hypoxia evokes  executive dysfunction and  regionally specific alterations  in markers  of dopamine 
signaling. Neuroscience. 2003;117(2):417-425.
18. Decker MJ, Jones KA,  Solomon IG, Keating GL, Rye  DB.  Reduced extracellular dopamine 
and increased responsiveness  to novelty: neurochemical and behavioral sequelae of intermittent  
hypoxia. Sleep . 2005;28(2):169-176. 
19. Hack M, Taylor HG, Schluchter  M, Andreias  L, Drotar D, Klein N. Behavioral outcomes of 
extremely low  birth weight children at  age 8 years.  J Dev Behav Pediatr . 2009;30(2):122-130.
Please reference the Investigator Manual for local  institutional  requirements.