 
 
 
Protocol Title: A Phase 3, Multicenter, Open -Label Study to Assess the Long -
Term Safety of  REL -1017 as a Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder 
(RELIANCE -OLS)  
Protocol Number: REL -1017 -310 
NCT Number  NCT 04855760  
Name of Investigational Product:  REL -1017  
Phase of Development:  3 
Indication:  Major Depressive Disorder  
Sponsor:  Relmada Therapeutics Inc.  
Protocol Date:  March  04 2022  
 
 
Certain information within this protocol has been redacted to protect either personally 
identifiable information or company confidential information.  
This may include, but is not limited to, redaction of the following:  
• Names, addresses, and other personally identifiable information  
• Proprietary information, such as scales or coding systems, which are considered 
confidential  
• information.  
• Other information as needed to protect the trade secret and/or confidential information of 
Relmada Therapeutics  
 

CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
 
 
A Phase 3, Multicenter, Open -Label Study to Assess the Long -Term Safety  of 
REL -1017 as a Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder (RELIANCE -OLS)  
 
Protocol Number: REL -1017 -310 
  
Name of Investigational Product:  REL -1017  
Phase of Development:  3 
Indication:  Major Depressive Disorder  
Sponsor:   
 
Relmada Therapeutics, Inc.  
 
2222 Ponce de Leon Blv d, Floor 3  
Coral Gables, FL 33134  
 
 
Protocol Version:  
Amendment Version:   4.0 
3.0 
Protocol Date:  04-Mar-2022  
 
-CONFIDENTIAL - 
This document and its contents are the property of and confidential to Relmada Therapeutics, Inc.  Any 
unauthorized copying or use of this document is prohibited.  
  

PROTOCOL APPROVAL SIGNATURES  
Protocol Title:  A Phase 3, Multicenter, Open -Label Study to Assess the Long -Term 
Safety of REL -1017 as a Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder 
(RELIANCE -OLS)  
Protocol Number:  REL -1017 -310  
 
This study will be conducted in compliance with the clinical study protocol (and amendments), 
International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines for current Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP ), and applicable regulatory requirements . 
 
Sponsor Signatory   
 
 
Relmada Therapeutics , Inc.   
  
Signature  
 
Date  (DD-Mmm -YYYY)  

INVESTIGATOR SIGNATURE PAGE  
Protocol Title:  A Phase 3, Multicenter, Open -Label Study to Assess the Long -Term 
Safety of REL -1017 as a Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder 
(RELIANCE -OLS)  
Protocol Number:  REL -1017 -310 
Confidentiality  and Current Good Clinical Practice ( GCP )/E6(R2) : 
I agree, as an Investigator conducting this study:  
• To assume responsibility for the proper conduct of the study at this  site. 
• To conduct the study in compliance with this protocol, with any future amendments, and 
with any other written study conduct procedures provided, reviewed, and approved by 
Relmada Therapeutics,  Inc. 
• Not to implement any deviations from or changes to this protocol without agreement 
from the Sponsor and prior review and written approval from the Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) /Independent Ethics Committee (IEC) , except where necessary to eliminate 
an immediate hazard to the study participant s or for administrative aspects of the study 
(where permitted by all applicable regulatory requirements).  
• That I am thoroughly familiar with the appropriate use of the investigational drug, as 
described in this protocol, and any other information provided by the Sponsor including,  
but not limited to, the current Investigator’s Brochure or equivalent document provided 
by Relmada Therapeutics,  Inc. 
• That I am aware of, and will comply with, GCP and all  applicable regulatory 
requirements, including the regulations governing the use of controlled substances.  
• To ensure that all persons assisting me with the study are adequately informed about the 
investigational drug and that they are qualified to perform their study -related duties and 
functions as described in this  protocol.  
• That I have been informed that certain regulatory authorities require the Sponsor to 
obtain and supply details about the qualified Investigator’s ownership interest in the 
Sponsor or  the study drug and more generally about his/her financial ties with the 
Sponsor. Relmada Therapeutics, Inc., will obtain and disclose any relevant information in 
this regard solely for complying with regulatory  requirements.  
 
 
 
 
Hence, I:  
• Agree to supply Relmada Therapeutics, Inc., with all information regarding ownership 
interest and financial ties with Relmada Therapeutics, Inc. (including those of my spouse  
and dependent  children);  
• Agree to promptly update this information if any relevant changes occur during the study 
and for 1 year following completion of the study; and  
• Agree that Relmada Therapeutics, Inc. may disclose this information about such  
ownership interests and financial ties to regulatory  authorities.  
 
<Name>   
<Title>  Investigator Signature  
  
 
 
 Date (DD -Mmm -YYYY)  
  
Institution   
 
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
Pharmacokinetic s (De novo  participants only)  
To evaluate pharmacokinetics (PK) 
of REL -1017 and potential 
metabolites  • REL -1017 concentration at 2.5 hours after first dose and  at 
subsequent timepoints  
 
Study Design  This is a 1-year open -label study (OLS ) following the randomized 
double -blind placebo -controlled  Phase 3 studies . De novo  participants 
(adjunctive ADT or monotherapy) who have not been part of prior Phase 
3 studies with REL -1017 may also be enrolled. Participant s in the OLS 
from REL -1017 -301 or REL -1017 -302 will continue to take their 
prescribed ADT plus REL -1017.  Participants from REL -1017 -303 will 
continue to refrain from use of concomitant ADT.  
All participants who complete the REL -1017 Phase 3 studie s without any 
safety issues that would preclude participation in this OLS (according to 
the Investigator ) are eligible.  
Investigational 
Product/Reference 
Product  REL -1017  25 mg tablet s 
Study Drug, Dose 
Schedule, and Mode of 
Administration  REL -1017 25  mg tablet s once daily ( QD) for oral administration (PO)  
for up to 1  year.  
Participant s enrolling from REL -1017 -301 or REL -1017 -302 will be 
asked to stay on a stable dosing regimen of their current ADT for the 
duration of the ir participation in the study while exposed to REL -1017. 
Participants enrolling from REL -1017 -303 will be asked to continue 
refraining from use of concomitant ADT. Dosing  of REL -1017  will take 
place once daily, preferably at the same time as the first-line ADT is 
taken  for adjunct therapy participants . 
The following loading dose schedule will be used for de novo  participants 
only:   

Day 1 – loading dose:   
• Three REL -1017 25 mg  tablets  (75 mg  total)  administered at the 
clinical  study  site  
Day 2 to Day  365 – maintenance dose:   
• One REL -1017 25 mg tablet QD   
 
Study Population and 
Duration of Participation  All participant s who complete the  REL -1017 Phase 3 studies without any 
safety issues that would preclude participation in th is OLS (according to 
the Investigator ) are eligible. To achieve an adequate number of 
participant s who will complete 6 months and 12 months of the study, 
respectively , REL -1017 -310 may enroll de nov o participants  who have 
not been part of prior Phase 3 studies with REL -1017 .  De novo  
participants will undergo Screening assessments for eligibility  to 
participate  in this study . All participants will be enrolled for up to 13 
months consisting of  12 months of treatment and a 1 -month  post-
treatment  follow -up visit . 
Planned Sample Size  To evaluate  overall safety of REL -1017 , the sample size for the OLS  
aims  to achieve at least 300 participants  completing 6 months and at least 
100 participants  completing 12 months of the study.    
 
 
Inclusion Criteria  
(de novo  participants 
only)  REL -1017 -310 de novo  participants will undergo Screening assessments 
and must meet all the following inclusion criteria to participate in this 
study.  
1. Must be able to read, speak, and understand English or Spanish 
and must provide written informed consent prior to the initiation 
of any protocol -specific procedures.  
2. Male or female participant, age 18 to 65 years, inclusive.  
3.   
.  
4. Participant is willing and able to commit to meet all study 
requirements, adhere to both approved ADT (as applicable) and 
study drug regimen, and complete all assessments and all 
scheduled visits, per Investigator judgment.  
5. Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) and men whose 
sexual partners are WOCBP must use at least 1 highly effective 
method of contraception from Screening and for at least 2  months 
after the last study drug administration. For men with female 
sexual partn ers of childbearing potential, examples of medically 
acceptable forms of contraception include vasectomy or male 
condom for participants, plus an additional method of 
contraception for their female partners. Highly effective methods 
of contraception are th ose which have a failure rate of <1% (when 
implemented consistently and correctly) and include:  
o Intrauterine device (IUD)  
o Bilateral tubal ligation, bilateral salpingectomy, or 
bilateral tubal occlusive procedure  
o Hormonal contraceptives (e .g., oral, patch, or injectable)  

o A double -barrier protection method (e .g., condom, 
sponge, or vaginal diaphragm with spermicide cream, 
foam, or gel)  
o Abstinence from heterosexual intercourse is accepted if 
this is the participant’s usual lifestyle and must be 
continued until at least 2 months after the last dose of 
study drug.  
Women who are not of childbearing potential must be 
congenitally or surgically sterile (hysterectomy and/or bilateral 
oophorectomy/salpingo -oophorectomy, as determined by the 
participant’s medical history) or must be post-menopausal. Post -
menopausal is defined as being amenorrheic for at least 1 year 
without another cause and a follicle -stimulating hormone (FSH) 
level ≥40 mIU/mL as confirmation.  
6. Diagnosed with MDD as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual, Fifth Edition (DSM -5), and confirmed by the Structured 
Clinical Interview for DSM -5 Disorders ( SCID -5). 
7. Hamilton Depression Rating Scale -17 (HAMD17)  at 
Screening and independently confirmed by State versus trait; 
Assessability; Face validity; Ecological validity; and Rule of three 
Ps [pervasive, persistent, and pathological] (SAFER) assessment.  
8. At Baseline, before definitive admission and randomization of the 
participant, the MADRS10 scale will be administered and the 
participant must show a MADRS10  
9. Diagnosed with a current major depressive episode (MDE) lasting 
from 8 weeks to 36 months as defined by the DSM -5 and 
confirmed by the SCID -5 for MDD, as well as independent 
confirmation of the HAMD17 score,  
 
 
 
 
For de novo participants enrolling for REL -1017 adjunctive therapy:  
10. Treated for at least 6 weeks prior to Screening and stabilized for 
at least 6 weeks prior to Baseline on an approved dosing regimen 
of ADT  medications  (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
[SSRI], serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor [SNRI], 
bupropion (a norepinephrine –dopamine reuptake inhibitor 
[NDRI] and nicotinic receptor antagonist) during the current 
MDE, and committed to remain ing on the same stable dosing 
regimen during  the Screening period and for the entire study  
duration ,  
 
 
 
 
Note: Discontinuation of any of the listed ADT must occur at 

least 6 weeks prior to Baseline.  
 
 
Note: A n electronic dosing diary (eDiary) will be used beginning 
at Screening to document the stability of background 
antidepressant(s); only participants reporting a minimum of 80% 
adherence during Screening will be randomized.  
11.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
For de novo  participants enrolling for REL -1017 monotherapy:  
12.  
 
 
 
 
 
Exclusion Criteria  
(de novo  participants  
only)   REL -1017 -310 de novo  participants will undergo Screening assessments.  
Individuals meeting any of the following criteria are ineligible to 
participate in this study.  
1. History or presence of clinically significant abnormality as 
assessed by physical examination, medical history, 12 -lead ECG, 
vital signs, or laboratory values, which in the opinion of the 
Investigator , Medical Monitor, or Sponsor  designee would 
jeopardize the safety of the participant or the validity of the study 
results, including established QT prolongation, long QT 
syndrome, torsades de pointes, bradyarrhythmia, ventricular 
tachycardia , uncompensated heart failure (greater than New York 
Heart Association [NYHA ] Class 1 congestive heart failure 
[CHF ]), uncontrolled hypokalemia, or uncontrolled 
hypomagnesemia.  
2. More than class 2 angina pectoris or a myocardial infarction (MI) or 
acute coronary syndrome within the past 3 months.  
3. Any medical, psychiatric condition, or social context that, in the 
opinion of the Investigator, Medical Monitor, or Sponsor  designee 
is likely to unfavorably alter the risk-benefit of subject 
participation, to interfere with protocol compliance, or to 
confound safety or efficacy assessments . 
4. Have any significant illness, of any nature, including possible 
severe acute respiratory syndrome c oronavirus  2 (SARS -CoV -2) 
related fever or other  symptoms, requiring hospitalization, 

emergency treatment, or isolation (quarantine) within 4 weeks 
prior to Screening or during the Screening period, and as 
determined by the Investigator.  
5. History or first degree relative with history of unexplained sudden 
death or long QT syndrome.  
6. Triplicate 12 -lead ECG with average QTcF ≥450 msec, and/or a 
QRS interval ≥120 msec at Screening.  
7. Current or recent uncontrolled orthostasis or orthostatic 
hypotension necessitating treatment.  
8. Poorly controlled diabetes as defined by a glycosylated 
hemoglobin (HbA1c) >7.5%, despite standard care.  
9. 
 
 
10.  
 
 
12.  
 
 
 
 
13.   
 
 
15. History of allergy or hypersensitivity to methadone or related 
drugs.  
16.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. Participants who, in the Investigator’s judgment, are at significant 
risk for suicide. A participant with a C -SSRS ideation score of 4 
or 5 within the last 6 months or any suicide attempt within the 
past year of either Screening or Baseline must be exclude d. 
18. Any lifetime history of bipolar I or II disorder, psychosis and/or 
mania as defined by the DSM -5 and confirmed by psychiatric 
history and/or examination by the Investigator.  
19. Comorbid moderate to heavy alcohol or substance use disorder, as 
defined by DSM -5, at Screening or within the 12 months prior to 
Screening. Heavy drinking is defined as an average of 3 or more 
drinks per day, in the last month.  
20. A positive result on the urine drug/alcohol screen within 30 days 
prior to Baseline (Day 1). At Investigator discretion , in 
consultation with the Medical Monitor , a retest is permitted.  
21.  

Statistical Data Analysis  Study analysis populations , defined as follows : 
Screened /Enrolled  Set: The Screened /Enrolled  Set will include all 
participant s who sign ed an informed consent.  
Full Analysis Set  (FAS) : All participant s who received at least 1 
dose of study drug in the OLS and had at least 1 post -Baseline 
efficacy assessment , irrespective of any deviation from the protocol 
or premature discontinuation . The FAS will be used for analysis of 
efficacy.  
Safety Set : All participant s who received at least 1 dose of study 
drug in the OLS.  This population will be used for the analysis of 
safety.  
Safety data analysis  
Descriptive statistics  of the safety and efficacy of the participant s in the 
OLS will be presented based on the prior double -blind treatment groups: 
Double -blind place bo, double -blind REL -1017, de novo .  In general, the 
Baseline for each assessment will be the last value collected prior to the 
first open -label dose.  
Summaries of efficacy results will be presented for the FAS, and 
summaries of safety results will be presented for the Safety Set ; all will be 
summarized  by the treatment groups “REL -1017 in double -blind study, ” 
“placebo in double -blind study, ” “de novo ,” “pooled placebo and de 
novo ,” and “overall ”. 
Continuous safety and tolerability assessments (e .g., vital signs, weight,  
BMI,  body temperature, ECG parameters, and laboratory parameters) will 
be summarized using descriptive statistics for values for each visit, and 
additionally for change from Baseline of OLS.  
The time course of absolute values and change from Baseline  will be 
presented in descriptive statistics and figures.   
Categorical safety data (e .g., categorical laboratory parameters, ECG 
overall evaluation, QT/QTcF categories) and central tendency effects will 
be presented by number and percentage of participant s in the respective 
category for each visit.  
The number and percentage of participant s with TEAEs , serious adverse 
events (SAEs) , AEs associated with discontinuation, and TEAEs by 
severity and relationship to study treatment will be summarized by system 
organ  class and preferred term, using the Common Terminology Criteria 
for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v5.0 . 
All summaries of TEAEs will be provided for the TEAEs in OLS ( i.e., 
AEs that started or worsened in severity after first dose in the OLS ). 
Comorbidities and comedications will be summarized in count and 
frequency tables . 
Exploratory Efficacy variables  
Continuous efficacy variables will be reported using descriptive statistics 
for values for each visit, and additionally for change from Baseline  of 
OLS . The time course of absolute values and change from Baseline  will 
be presented in figures.   
Categorical efficacy data will be presented by number and percentage of 
participant s in the respective category for each visit.  
 
 
 
 