Official Title: Bronx Mindfulness -Based Cognitive Therapy for Migraine Trial  
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: 1 /3/2019   
1) Objective  
The current phase 2b study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of Mindfulness -Based Cognitive 
Therapy for Migraine (MBCT -M) to reduce migraine -related disability in people with migraine 
compared to wait list/treatment as usual (WL/TAU).  
 
2) Study Design  
This is  a randomized clinical trial (RCT) testing  an 8-week, MBCT -M intervention  (involving 8 weekly, 
75-90 minute individual sessions)  vs waitlist/treatment as usual (WL/TAU)  in people with migraine 
(N=60), with  follow -up assessments at 1 and 6  months post -treatment  (the latter will be for the treatment 
group  only). This is a Phase IIb trial (ORBIT Model).  
 
3) Study Population  
We recruited 60  participants, and randomized 31 participants to MBCT -M and 29 to WL/TAU . 
Recruitment and randomization was stratified by episodic migraine (< 15 headache days/month) and 
chronic migraine (>=15 headache days/month).  Inclu sion criteria were a) currently meeting 
International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD) -3 beta headache diagnosis for 
migraine using a semi -structured clinical interview and the validated American Migraine 
Study/American Migraine Prevalence and P revention Study migraine diagnostic screener36, b) 
self-reported and prospective diary -confirmed ≥ 6 headache days per month, c) aged 18 -65, d) 
ability to read English, and e) capacity to consent. Exclusion criteria were a)  continuous 
headache over the course of 30 days, b)  initiation of a  preventative migraine treatment  within 
four weeks of the baseline assessment or a plan to initiate  preventive migraine  treatment  during 
the duration of the study, c) severe psychiatric ill ness that would interfere with participation in 
the treatment  such as active suicidality, active psychosis, or failing a cognitive screen, or d) 
inability to adhere to headache diary during baseline period (recorded fewer than 26/30 days).   
 
4) Participant  Recruitment  
Participants  were recruited from neurology office referrals and local and online advertisements in 
the broader New York City area including New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.  Participants 
were  provided with the MBCT web page information, ou r team email and office phone number. All 
potential subjects were  screened by study staff online or via a telephone call prior to the intake 
appointment.  
 
5) Informed Consent  
After screening, participants attend ed a baseline assessment visit where they wil l again be  
screened for eligibility. If eligible, participants were given the opportunity to provide w ritten informed 
consent .   
 
5) Procedure:  
Those who consent ed to participation in this study completed a  baseline assessment with a  
study coordinator. At the baseline assessment, participants completed  a self -report questionnaire  
for demographic information and symptom severity, and complete d baseline psychosocial  surveys  
using the REDCap electronic data cap ture system, a secure data capture program available through  
Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Participants were given access to  the REDCap Headache Diary 
Application for the duration of the four -week  baseline assessment. If the participant did not have  an 
iPhone or iPod touch, an iPod Touch w as provided. The study coordinator provided  education and 
orientation to the use of the headache  diary application as well as the reminder system that will guide 
participants to optimal completion.  At the conclusion  of the 4 -week baseline assessment  
period, all participants will complete psychosocial measures again via REDcap through an  
email reminder.  
 
Study participants receive d up to $70 for participating in the study.  
 
Participants who continue to meet study inclusion/exclusion criteria will be randomized to  
either the MBCT -M or WL/TAU group. We will use a randomization procedure  stratified by episodic vs. 
chronic migraine based on headache days/month recorded in the daily headache  diary . A statistician 
otherwise unrelated to the study useda  computerized random number generator to randomize participants 
in random  blocks of 2, 4, and 6 participants stratified by headache days/month (cut off score of 15) . 
 
During the 8 -week treatment phase, participants randomized  to the MBCT -M intervention group  
attended  8 weekly individual 75 -90 minute sessions using a treatment protocol adapted from the MBCT 
for Chronic Headache Pain manual by Melissa Day,  Ph.D., and Beverly Thorn, Ph.D . Each session 
included education, cognitive exercises designed to demonstrate how to think mindfully, and in -vivo 
mindfulness meditation practice designed to help participants systematically gain mindfulness skills 
throughout the course of treatment. Participants were given  “homework,” including formal mindfulness 
meditation and informal mindful awareness exercises, labeling thoughts, identifying warning signs for 
stress and migraine, and planning nourishing activities, in between sessions. Homework  was assigned 
each week, a nd participants were  expected to develop a daily formal mindfulness practice  (body scan 
meditation, seated meditation, breathing meditation ). Participants were  provided with a  course manual, 
reading materials, and audio recordings to facilitate meditation practice.  The weekly sessions were  be 
conducted by  a clinical psychology student who had completed  his or her master’s level training in the 
clinical psychology, health emphasis Ph.D. program at  Ferkauf  Graduate School of Psychology.  All 
therapists complete d training conducted by Dr. Melissa  Day, who developed the MBCT for Chronic 
Headache Pain manualized treatment. The doctoral level  students received  clinical supervision from 
licensed and credentialed clinical psychologist s. During the eight weeks of intervention, participants 
randomized to the MBCT intervention  group continue d to complete daily headache diary and record daily 
formal  mindfulness practice for eight weeks.  All sessions were audio -recorded  and coded for treatment 
fidelity by two independent raters.  Participants randomized to the WL/TAU group did not take the 
headache diary for the 8 week treatment period.  
 
At the conclusion of the 8 -week treatment period, all participants (in both the MBCT -M group  
and the WL/TAU group) complete d headache diaries for 4 weeks. At the conclusion of the four  
weeks, participants complete d one final set of psychosocial measures through the REDCap  
electronic data capture system. At this point, participants in the WL/TAU group were  offered  
participation in MBCT -M. 
 
Participants randomized to the MBCT group were  asked to complete the psychosocial  
measures 6 months after completion of MBCT through the REDCap electronic data capture system.  
 
Measures  
Measures include the following:  
Baseline Survey  
We will ask demographics questions pertaining to  age, gender, race and ethnicity, as well as validated 
questions about headache symptoms  (AMPP diagnostic module). The latter will help investigators 
determine an International Classification of Headache Disorders – 3 beta headache diagnosis for each 
participant.   
Headache Diary  
Via the iPod Touch/Diary REDCap  application, a daily headache diary  will assess : 
▪ Headache Day: Number of days on which headache was reported in a month.  
▪ Headache Severity: Day -level headache severity with response options including 0 (None), 1 
(Mild), 2 (Moderate), 3 (Severe). Average headache severity will be aggregated by month.  
▪ Migraine Disability Index: (MIDI)  a four -item scale that assesses disability  related to four 
domains (Family and Home, Recreation, Social Activity,  Job/Occ upation).  For each domain, an 
11-point Likert scale allows for possible  ratings of 0 (not a t all) to 10 (totally).The four ratings are 
averaged; the final score is  in the 0 -10 range  with higher scores indicating higher disability . 
Average day -level migraine disability (MIDI) score will be aggregated by month.  
Psychosocial Surveys  
▪ The Migrain e Disability Assessment  (MIDAS ; primary outcome ) is a 5 -item, self -report 
instrument measuring disruption experienced due to  migraine. Items target role functioning and 
ask about lost days of house -work, job -work, and  non-work activities. Each item is an open 
question, allowing entry of number of days lost  over 90 days . Total scores  range from 0 -450, and  
are categorized as <21 ( Low Disability) and >=21 (Severe Disability) .  
▪ The Headache -Related Disability Index  (HDI; primary outcome) is a 25 -item, self -report 
questionnaire of the emotional and functional impact of  headache on daily activities. The items 
require a “yes,” “no,” or “sometimes,” response to  assess participants’ perceived headache -related 
disability.  Total scores range from 0 -100; higher scores indicate higher disability.   
▪ The Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS)  is a 13 -item self -report  measure that conveys a 
participant’s level of pain -related, catastrophic thinking during  painful experiences. The measure 
has three subscales: Rumination (4 items),  Magnification (3 items) and Helplessness (6 items). 
Ratings are made on a 5 -point scale from 0  (not at all ) to 4 (all the time). Total scores range from 
0 to 52; higher scores indicate higher catastrophizing.   
▪ The Chronic Pai n Acceptance Questionnaire (CPAQ)  is a 20-item, self -report measure of pain -
related acceptance, developed among chronic pain  populations. Each item is rated on a Likert 
scale ranging from 0 -7, with total scores ranging from 0 -140, with higher scores indicating higher 
levels of accepta nce.  
▪ The Headache Specific Locus of Control (HSLC ) is a 33-item measure designed to assess the 
extent to which individuals with recurrent  headaches expect that the occurrence, worsening, and 
improvement of their headaches ar e influenced primarily by their own behavior  (Internal ), by 
chance or fate  (Chance) , or by the actions of medical  professionals  (Medical Professionals) . Items 
are coded on a 5 -point Likert -type scale ranging from  1 (strongly  agree) to 5 (strongly disagree) ; 
total HSLC ranges from 33 -165, with high er scores indicating more external locus of control.  
▪ The Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ) is a 39 -item self -report  instrument containing 
five subscales: observing, describing, acting with awareness,  non-judging of inner experience, 
and non -reactivity to inner experience. Each item has a 5-point response scale  ranging  from 1 
(never or very rarely  true) to 5 (very often or always true). Total scores range from 39 -195 with 
higher score s indicating higher levels of mindfulness.  
▪ The Headache Management Self -efficacy Scale (HMSE) is 25 -item self  report  scale designed to 
capture the confidence a patient believes they have in their own  abilities t o prevent headache 
episodes and manage their pain. Each item is rated on a Likert  scale ranging from 1 -7, ranging 
from 1 (strong disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).  Total scores range from 25  to 175 with higher 
scores indicatin g a higher degree of self -efficacy .  
▪ The NIH PROMIS depression Short Form is an 8 -item self -report measure  developed by the 
National Institutes of Health that as sesses emotional distress “in the past 7  days,” focusing on 
negative mood and negative self -views. Ratings are made on a 6 -point  scale, from 1 (Never) to 5 
(Always). Scores are calibrated to a T score metric  (M = 50, SD = 10)  normed to U.S.  population 
demographic means.  Higher scores represent more severe depressive  symptomology.  
▪ The NIH PROMIS Anxiety Short Form is an 8 -item self -report measure  developed by the 
National Institutes of Health that assesses emotional distress “in the past 7  days,” focusing on 
fear, worry and hyper -arousal. Ratings are made on a 6 -point scale, from  1 (Never) to 5 (Always). 
Scores are calibrated to a T score metric  (M = 50, SD = 10)  normed to U.S. population  
demographic means. Higher sc ores represent more sever anxiety symptoms.  
 
6) Data Analysis  
Distributions of all study variables were evaluated for normality, skewness and kurtosis . Day-level 
imputation was used to impute missing diary data points (15.5%) fo r headache diary measures. Variables 
at baseline were  described using mean and standard deviation for normally distributed variables, and 
number and percent for nominal variables. Differences between treatment groups for  primary and 
secondary outcomes at b aseline were evaluated using t -tests and chi-squar es. 
Intent -to-treat analysis used linear ( continuous variables ) and logistic ( dichotomous variables ) 
mixed models for repeated measures to estimate missing values and evaluate changes in outcomes. For  
surve y variables, t ime was a 4 -level variable (Month 0, 1, 2, and 4); for diary data, time was a two -level 
variable (baseline monitoring period vs. post -treatment evaluation period). Fixed effects were group, time, 
and their interaction. A significant interacti on indicated the slope of the MBCT -M group differed from the 
slope of the WL/TAU group. Random effects were intercept and time. Akaike’s information criterion 
indicated a first -order autoregressive covariance structure  was appropriate for modeling month .  
 