Study Title : SWAP -MEAT: Study with Appetizing Plant Food - Meat Eating Alternatives Trial  
NCT # : 03718988  
Document date : 12/23/19  
 
  
Statistical Analysis Plan for SWAP -MEAT: Study with Appetizing Plant  Food – Meat 
Eating Alternative Trial  
Background:  
Many  national and global health organizations recommend limiting or reducing intake of red 
meat (e.g., American Heart Association, Dietary Guidelines for Americans, American Cancer 
Society, World Health Organization). As is always the case, reducing intake of any habitually 
consumed food item involves additional co ncomitant changes. If red meat is reduced without 
replacement, daily calorie intake decreases. If red meat is reduced and replaced with other food 
items, the health implications involve not only the c omponents of red meat that decrease, but 
also the components of the replacement food item(s) that increase.  
 
Red meat is a source of saturated fat  and protein  in the diet, as well as several micronutrients 
(e.g., choline, iron and vitamins B6 and B12); the re is no fiber in meats. A replacement for red 
meat that has recently become more broadly available and increasingly acceptable from both a 
palatability  and a public interest  perspective is alternative meat  (Alt-Meat) . One of those Alt-
Meats is made by the  Beyond Meat company. The Beyond Meat analogues are made from pea 
protein and other ingredients, including coconut fat and sodium.  
 
In comparison to red meat, plausible relative health benefits  could include:  
 Lower tri -methyl amine oxide (TMAO) due to low er amounts of choline  
 Lower insulin -like growth factor (IGF -1) due to lower amounts of animal foods  
 Lower LDL -cholesterol levels due to modestly lower amounts of saturated fat  and higher 
amounts of fiber.  
 
In comparison to red meat, plausible relative he alth risks  could include:  
 Higher blood pressure due to higher amounts of sodium  
 Higher intake of calories (and potential subsequent weight and waist circumference) due 
to the ultraprocessed composition of the Beyond Meat products  
 
Another possible benefi t of Alt-Meat  products involves environmental issues such as greenhouse  
gas emissions  (GHG)  or water usage. These will not be addressed in the current study.  
 
The objective of the current study  is to contrast the potential beneficial and adverse health 
consequences of Alt-Meat vs. Red Meat  products after consuming at least 2 servings/day 
(approximately 25% of kcal) for 8 weeks, in a crossover design, among generally healthy adults.  
 
Study Design:  
This cross -over study aims to investigate the impact of replacing meat  consumption with plant -
based meat  alternative consumption on cardiovascular health, the gut microbiome, and metabolic 
status.  Participants are recruited using media advertisements and e mail lists from previous 
recruitment for nutrition  studies conducted by our laboratory group.   Thirty -eight  participant s are 
planned to be randomized between the two arms: (1) start with  8 week  Red Meat product  and 
switch to 8 week Alt-Meat product; (2) start with  8 week  Alt-Meat product  and switch to  8 week  
Red Meat product .  Clinical and metabolic measurements are taken at baseline, and week s 2, 4, 8 
(Phase I , weeks 1 -8), 10, 12, and 16  (Phase II , weeks 9 -16).   
 
Primary Hypothesis:  TMAO values will be lower  for Alt-Meat vs. Red Meat   
 
Our primary  hypothesis is based on the fact that there is higher choline  and carnitine  in red meat, 
which are precursor s to TMAO . We acknowledge that the sample size used was not based on a 
power calculation beforehand, but rather on available resources.  We have performed an ad -hoc 
power analysis for a paired t -test, which assumes no effect of our covariates for the primary 
analys is described below.  With 38 patients, the trial has 80% power to detect a -2.5 mean 
difference in TMAO values for Alt -Meat compared with Red Meat, assuming a standard 
deviation of 5.4 [1] at a 5% significance level  (i.e., modest effect size of ~0.5) .  
 
Primary Outcome : 
Difference in TMAO values for Alt-Meat after 8 weeks  versus  Red Meat  after 8 weeks   
 
Secondary Outcomes : 
Difference in  IGF1 values for Alt-Meat after 8 weeks versus Red Meat after 8 weeks  
Hypothesis 2a: IGF1 values will be lower for Alt -Meat  vs. Red Meat  (rationale – IGF1 
reported to be lower in vegetarians than non -vegetarians)  
 
Difference in  LDL cholesterol  values for Alt -Meat after 8 weeks versus Red Meat after 8 weeks  
Hypothesis 2 b: LDL-C values will be lower for Alt -Meat vs. Red Meat  (rationale, Alt -
meat has slightly less saturated fat, and more fiber, relative to Red Meat ) 
 
Difference in  blood pressure ( SBP and DBP ) values for Alt-Meat after 8 weeks versus Red Meat 
after 8 weeks  
 Hypothesis 2c: BP values will be higher for Alt -Meat v s. Red Meat (rationale  - Alt-Meat 
has moderately  higher sodium content than Red Meat)  
 
Difference in f asting insulin, fasting glucose, fasting non -LDL lipids (HDL -C, triglycerides)  
values for Alt -Meat after 8 weeks versus Red Meat after 8 weeks  
 Note: No s pecific hypotheses for these ; including as part of a set of standard clinical 
measures.  
 
Exploratory Outcome : 
We will compare  outcomes  after 8 weeks on Alt -Meat and after 8 -weeks on Red Meat : 
 
No difference expected:  satisfaction  consuming products (Likert scale), amount of products 
consumed (ave servings/day), GI symptoms (Survey), Perceived stress (PSS -10), Perceived 
cognitive function , fatigue and  overall health (PROMIS) , and perceived well -being (WHO well -
being index)  [2 – 5] 
  
Expected to improve  with Alt -Meat:  Microbiota composition ( 16S)  
 
Expected to worsen  with Alt -Meat:  body weight, waist circumference  (rationale – due to 
ultraprocessed composition of the Beyond Meat products ) 
 
Primary analysis:  
Patient demographic s and baseline clinical characteristics will be summarized and compared 
between the arms with appropriate statistical methods.  We will also compare rate of adherence  
for Alt-Meat  after 8 weeks versus Red Meat  after 8 weeks using a Fisher’s Exact  test with 
weekly  NDSR (and Cronometer ) data.  A participant is determined to be adherent  if the 
participant consumed an average of at least 2 servings per day of each product over the 8 week 
diet.  
 
Characteristics found to be statistically  different will be adjusted for in the sensitivity analysis 
described below.  For our primary outcome , we will use linear regression to evaluate  TMAO 
values for Alt-Meat  versus Red M eat (‘meat  type’) , adjusting for baseline values and the order of 
diet (e. g. study arm).  The primary analysis will be a complete case analysis and use patients’ last 
available lab values in each phase; patients who did not complete both phases ( i.e. crossover) 
will be excluded from the primary analysis and will be accounted for  in the exploratory  analysis.  
To investigate no difference in TM AO values between diet types we will use a two -sided Wald 
test.  We set a significance level of 0.05 for all analyses .  
 
Similarly  for our secondary outcomes , we will use separate linear regr ession models to evaluate 
IGF1, LDL cholesterol, systolic blood pressure , diastolic blood pressure , fasting insulin, fasting 
glucose , and fasting non -LDL lipids (HDL -C, triglycerides)  for Alt-Meat versus Red M eat, 
adjusting for baseline values and the order of diet.  A two -sided Wald test will be used to assess 
no difference between diet types.   
 
For our exploratory outcomes , we will use separate linear regression models to evaluate  
microbiota composition, weight change , change in waist circumference , satisfaction consuming 
products, amount of products consumed, GI symptoms, perceived stress, perceived cognitive 
perceived function, perceived fatigue, perceived overall health, and perceived well -being  for Alt-
Meat  versus Red M eat, adjusting for baseline v alues and the order of diet.  Our primary 
microbiota composition metric will be the proportion of observed sequence variants (or species) 
as measured by standard 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing.   
 
In an exploratory analysi s, we will fit  mixed effect  regressi on models with TMAO values as the 
outcome, using all longitudinal data by incorporating an additional ‘time’ variable  and a random 
effect for the correlated observations from a single participant . We will also investigate the 
regression models described above with additional covariates to account for differential intake of 
foods other than the meat products .  In this analysis, we will adjust for the average number of 
calories , grams of fiber, grams of added sugars  and grams of saturated fat,  over each 8 week diet.  
 
Sensitivity Analysis:  
Given the limited sample size we have elected to limit the number of variable adjustments in our 
primary analysis. In a sensitivity analysis, we will assess the impac t of including additional 
potentially important covariates in our models.  Using the previously described models, we will 
assess the sensitivity of our results for each individual addition of the following covariates: 
gender, age, baseline weight, weight c hange, household (couple versus single), type of meat -
product (red meat v ersus white meat), and dose. For dose, we will measure the proportion of 
calorie intake that can be attributed to the assigned meat type .   
 
 
 
REFERENCES:  
[1] Wang, Zeneng, Nathalie B ergeron, Bruce S. Levison, Xinmin S. Li, Sally Chiu, Xun Jia, 
Robert A. Koeth et al. "Impact of chronic dietary red meat, white meat, or non -meat protein on 
trimethylamine N -oxide metabolism and renal excretion in healthy men and women." European 
heart jou rnal 40, no. 7 (2018): 583 -594. 
 [2] Revicki, Dennis A., Martha Wood, Ingela Wiklund, and Joseph Crawley. "Reliability and 
validity of the Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale in patients with gastroesophageal reflux 
disease." Quality of life research  7, no. 1 (1997): 75 -83. 
[3] Cohen, Sheldon, Tom Kamarck, and Robin Mermelstein. "A global measure of perceived 
stress." Journal of health and social behavior  (1983): 385 -396. 
[4] Cella, David, William Riley, Arthur Stone, Nan Rothrock, Bryce Reeve, Susan Yount, 
Dagmar Amtmann et al. "The Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
(PROMIS) developed and tested its first wave of adult self -reported health outcome item banks: 
2005 –2008." Journal of clinical epidemiology  63, no. 11 (2010): 1179 -1194. 
[5] Topp, Christian Winther, Søren Dinesen Østergaard, Susan Søndergaard, and Per Bech. 
"The WHO -5 Well -Being Index: a systematic review of the literature." Psychotherapy and 
psychosomatics  84, no. 3 (2015): 167 -176. 
 
 
 
  
Database Management Plan : SWAP MEAT Study  
Stanford Quantitative Sciences Unit (QSU)  
 
 
Automated data checks to be done at data entry (to be verified by Stanford QSU) prior to 
unblinding:  
 All date values restricted to certain ranges, and all dates entered that are outside of the 
designated range will be flagged  
 Restrictions put in place for anthropomorphic values, such as height and weight, and 
clinical values, such as blood pressure and insulin, in order to ensure that they are valid  
 Calculations directly programmed so that fields su ch as BMI are automatically computed 
to prevent errors  
 Whenever possible, dropdown menus and radio buttons are provided  
 Prompts to require important fields be filled (for example, to determine 
inclusion/exclusion criteria) or alerts to verify that a missi ng field is intentionally not 
completed  
 Branching logic properly set up to conditionally display a field based on the selection of 
a previous response  
 Each subject can be linked across data sources (Redcap, NDSR, etc.)  
 
Quality checks implemented after data is collected (to be performed by Stanford QSU) prior to 
unblinding:  
 Multiple data sources will be merged into Redcap for a central database  
 After a sample is entered, completeness of fields will be checked  
o % of fields completed  
o relevant fields complet ed 
 Check for common inconsistencies in data including missing values, missing expected 
visits, values that are out of range, hidden fields that contain values, and incorrect data 
type.  
 For numerical data, data will be reviewed for possible outliers  
o Visual plots (scatterplots, boxplots) will be generated  
o Cross -sectional outliers  
 outli ers > +/ - 1.5 IQR beyond q1/q3  
 extreme outliers +/ - 3 IQR beyond q1/q3  
o Longitudinal outliers (change scores between each pair of time points)   
 outliers > +/ - 1.5 IQR beyond q1/q3  
 extreme outliers +/ - 3 IQR beyond q1/q3  
o All outliers will be flagged and reviewed  
 Check for concordance between measurements within a particular subject for 
consistency (e.g. consecutive waist measurements with weight change)  
 
 
 
 
Possible methods for troubleshooting:  
 For data collected longitudinally, are patterns similar across time points?  
 Possibility that data could have been entered incorrectly (pounds instead of kg, feet 
instead of inches)  
 
 
We will maintain a record of all data quality checks  in a study repository including dates of when 
QC was performed and completed.   
 
 