

$5DQGRPL]HG'RXEOH%OLQG3OD FHER&RQWUROOHG3DUDOOHO*URXS 6WXG\WR
$VVHVVWKH6DIHW\DQG(IILFDF\RI8;LQ6XEMHFWVZLWK
*OXFRVH7UDQVSRUWHU7\SH 'HILFLHQF\6\QGURPH

3URWRFRO1XPEHU  8;*&/ 
2ULJLQDO3URWRFRO  $XJ
$PHQGPHQW  2FW
$PHQGPHQW  0D\
$PHQGPHQW  'HF
$PHQGPHQW  1RY

,QYHVWLJDWLRQDO3URGXFW  8;WULKHSWDQRLQ 
,QGLFDWLRQ  *OXFRVH7UDQVSRUWHU7\SH'HI LFLHQF\6\QGURPH*OXW'6
,1'1XPEHU  
(XGUD&71XPEHU   
6SRQVRU 8OWUDJHQ\[3KDUPDFHXWLFDO,QF
/HYHURQL&RXUW1RYDWR&$86$
6SRQVRU¶V5HVSRQVLEOH
0HGLFDO2IILFHU  0HODQLH%UDQGDEXU0'
0HGLFDO'LUHFWRU8OWUDJHQ\[3KDUPDFHXWLFDO,QF/HYHURQL&RXUW1RYDWR&$86$

&RRUGLQDWLQJ,QYHVWLJDWRU  3DVTXDOH6WULDQR0'

7KLVVWXG\LVWREHSHUIRUPHGLQFRPSOLDQFHZLWKWKHSURWRFRO *RRG&OLQLFDO3UDFWLFHV*&3
DQGDSSOLFDEOHUHJXODWRU\UHTXLUHPHQWV 
&RQILGHQWLDOLW\6WDWHPHQW 7KLVGRFXPHQWDQGWKHLQIRUPDWLRQLWFRQWDLQVLVFRQILGHQWLDO DQGSURSULHWDU\
DQGLVWKHSURSHUW\RI8OWUDJHQ\[3KDUPDFHXWLFDO,QF8OWUDJHQ \[8QDXWKRUL]HGGLVFORVXUHUHSURGXFWLRQ
WUDQVPLVVLRQRUXVHRIWKLVGRFXPHQWRULQIRUPDWLRQLVVWULFWO \SURKLELWHG%\DFFHSWLQJWKLVGRFXPHQWWKH
UHFLSLHQWDJUHHVWKDWWKHLQIRUP DWLRQLWFRQWDLQVZLOOQRWEHG LVFORVHGZLWKRXWZULWWHQDXWKRUL]DWLRQIURP
8OWUDJHQ\[H[FHSWWRWKHH[WHQW UHTXLUHGWRVDWLVI\,QVWLWXWLR QDO5HYLHZ%RDUG(WKLFV&RPPLWWHHSURFHGXUHVWR
REWDLQZULWWHQLQIRUPHGFRQVHQWIURPSRWHQWLDOVXEMHFWVRUDV UHTXLUHGE\ODZ
PPD
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 1 – 04 OCT 2013  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 2 of 83 
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL AMENDMENT  
SUMMARY OF CHANGES AND RATIONALE  
UX007G-CL201 Amendment 1 
04 October 2013  
 
 
The Original Protocol version of Protocol UX007G- CL201 (dat ed 07 August 2013) has been 
modified by Amendment 1 to incorporate a number of changes based on additional 
information acquired since the beginning of the study, feedback from clinical investigators involved in the study, and review by the United States Fo od and Drug Administration ( US 
FDA) .  The major changes to the protocol are summarized below; additional minor changes 
have also been made for consistency and clarity but are not included in this summary. 
1. Sponsor’s Responsible Medical Officer and associated contact information have been 
updated to:  Emil Kakkis , MD PhD,  Chief Executive Officer, Ultragenyx.   
2. Study Sites .  The number of study sites has increased from 8 to 10 sites globally .  
3. Number of Subjects Planned.  If the interim analysis criteria have been met, the 
additional enrollment has been changed to  30-90 subjects, for a total of 
80-140 subjects.  
4. Study Procedures and Assessments .  The following modifications have been made to 
the Schedule of Events ( Table 2.1) and Study Procedures and Assessments 
(Section  7.5): 
• The visit to the site previously indicated at Week 2 will now be conducted by 
telephone.  The Week 4 visit (originally a telephone visit) will now be conducted 
at the clinic and include clinical assessments of secondary efficacy variables (i.e. 
CANTAB, 6MW T, and GMFM -88). 
• In lieu of the Borg Scale referenced in the ATS guideline, the Borg Rating of 
Perceived Exertion (RPE) will be used to assess PED occurring during the test. 
• The 24-hour EEG has been changed to an overnight EEG.   
• At Week 26, a Population PK assessment has been added which requires a total of 3 blood samples (pre-dose for all subjects and 2 additional specimens 30-180 
minutes post-dose).   
• Table 2.1 has been modified to list efficacy assessments in order of administration 
and reflect the ran ge allowed to collect the sample for the Erythrocyte Glucose 
Uptake Assay (i.e. once during Week 26, 39, or 52 Visits). 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 1 – 04 OCT 2013  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 3 of 83 
• The requirement to complete a 3 -day diet diary following dose adjustment was 
removed. 
Rationale :  During the 8- week placebo -controlled T reatment Period, visits to the 
clinic will now be conducted at 4- week intervals.  A telephone assessment of seizure 
incidence and safety/tolerability will take place at the end of the 2 -week dose titration  
period.  At Week 4, all subjects will be stable at the maximum dose of study drug, 
providing for additional assessment of safety and efficacy during the placebo -
controlled phase of the study. 
Changes in the conduct of the 6MWT and associated PED assessment provide clarification of proper study procedures. 
The duration of EEG monitoring has been shortened to minimize discomfort and 
inconvenience to the subject.  A minimum of 12 hours EEG monitoring is believed to provide sufficient data to assess the frequency of EEG seizures and interictal epileptiform dis charges.  
The changes to PK and Bioassays are consistent with the study objectives and provide 
for a population PK assessment (as requested by the FDA) in addition to peak PK and 
metabolites.  Modifying the range of visits for the Erythrocyte Glucose Uptak e Assay 
provides greater flexibility and opportunity to obtain the sample in conjunction with other blood draws, thereby minimizing additional procedures for the subject. 
A 3-day diet diary is used solely for the purposes of establishing caloric intake, and 
not necessary following dose adjustment during the Titration Period. 
5. Primary Efficacy Hypothesis .  The primary efficacy hypothesis as stated in Section 
5.5 has been modified as follows: 
“The primary efficacy hypothesis for the study is that UX007 is superior to more 
effective than  placebo for the treatment reduction  of seizures in patients with Glut1 
DS…”  
Rationale :  The revised language provides a more accurate description of the 
statistical methodology planned for the study. 
6. Study Objectives , Efficacy Measures  and Endpoints.  There is no change to the 
primary efficacy measure; the primary objective language has been modified as 
follows: 
“Evaluate the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo between Weeks 2 and 8 of 
treatment as measured by the median pe rcent reduction from baseline in frequency of 
generalized or partial- onset seizures” 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 1 – 04 OCT 2013  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 4 of 83 
Secondary and exploratory objectives and associated efficacy measures /endpoints of 
the study have been modified as outlined below: 
Modifications to Study Objectives, Efficacy Assessments  and Endpoints  
Objective/Efficacy Measure 
Related To:  Original Protocol 
Designation  Amended Protocol 
Designation  Description of Change  
Seizure response 
rate/frequency & EEG 
abnormalities  Secondary  Secondary  Seizure response rate is now 
defined as the percentage of subjects with ≥50% 
reduction from baseline in generalized or partial -onset 
seizures . 
Frequency of EEG 
abnormalities is now a 
separate objective.  
6MWT  Secondary  Secondary  Modified objective to 
specify distance walked and 
combine with PED  
GMFM -88 Secondary  Secondary  No change  
CNS  Secondary  Exploratory  Moved  
CANTAB  Secondary  Secondary  Generalized objective to 
“cognitive function”  
CGI-S/CGI -I Secondary  Exploratory  Moved  
Time to event assessment of 
seizures  Exploratory  Secondary  analysis of 
primary endpoint  To be defined in the SAP  
Within cohort analysis  Exploratory  N/A Deleted  
PED  Exploratory  Secondary  Moved and combined with 
6MWT as above  
Gait analysis  Exploratory  Exploratory  Modified to include base of support  
Removed requirement for GAITRite walkway  
Beery -VMI, RCPM  Exploratory  Optional Exploratory  Site-specific assessments 
only 
PPVT, SF -10, PEDI -CAT, PK Exploratory  Exploratory  No change  
EEG: degree of background 
slowing  Exploratory  N/A Deleted  
Long- term safety, persistence 
of effect, suicidal 
ideation/behavior  Exploratory  Removed from 
objectives  Not a specific study objective; conducted as safety analyses  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 1 – 04 OCT 2013  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 5 of 83 
Rationale :  Upon further consideration of pre-specified endpoints and the potential 
implications for statistical analysis and interpretation of the data, the primary 
objective language has been modified, and a number of secondary endpoints have now been designated as exploratory endpoints. The secondary endpoints are focused 
on independent domains of disease: 1) motor dysfunction, 2) cognitive dysfunction, and 3) absence and unrecognized seizure activity by EEG count.  We will also assess the fraction of patients achieving a clinically large response of 50% reduction in seizures.  The secondary objectives and associated efficacy endpoints will now focus 
on the following: 
• Seizure response rate, defined as the percentage of subjects with at least 50% 
reduction from baseli ne in generalized or partial -onset seizures  
• Change from baseline in frequency of seizure activity as measured by electroencephalography (EEG) abnormalities  
• Change from baseline in cognitive function using the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB)  
• Change from baseline in distance walked as measured by 6MWT  
• Time to onset of paroxysmal exertional dyskinesia (PED) as measured during 6MWT.  
• Change from baseline in gross motor function using the Gross Motor Function 
Measure -88 (GMFM-88)  
 
7. Inclusion Criteria .  The inclusion criteria ha ve been modified as follows: 
1) “Confirmed diagnosis of Glut1 DS Diagnosis of Glut1 DS confirmed by SLC2A1 
mutation” 
7)  “Not on, or not fully  compliant with a prescribed diet plan (e.g. ketogenic diet) 
comprised of at least 50% total daily caloric intake from fat during previous 60 days (confirmed by 3-day diet diary at Screening), or at any time during the course of the trial” 
Rationale.  The change to inclusion criterion #1 specifies all subjects must have the 
diagnosis of Glut1 DS confirmed by genetic analysis of SLC2A1 mutations, thereby providing added assurance that the study population is consistent with the proposed indication.  The mutation analysis must be completed prior to study entry; Ultragenyx 
will not collect additional blood samples for SLC2A1 mutation anal ysis as previously 
indicated in Section 7.5.4.1 Medical History.  The change to inclusion criterion #7 provides a degree of guidance to the investigator in assessing a potential subject’s level of compliance with a prescribed diet plan. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 1 – 04 OCT 2013  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 6 of 83 
8. Treatment Administration .   
A recommended dose titration schedule has been inserted ( Table 7.4.1).  In addition, 
dose administration guidelines have been modified as follows: 
“Treatment will be mixed with food and administered PO with food or by 
gastronomy tube at least four times per day (breakfast, lunch, dinner, and before 
bed).  The dose should be divided into smaller more frequent doses with food as needed.  The dose should always  be mixed with small amounts of food or drink as 
indicated in the administration guideline, and never administered as the oil directly.” 
Rationale :  The original protocol specified initiation of dosing using a 2- week fixed 
titration schedule until the subject has reached a target of 35% of total daily calories by the end of the period.  The table provides recommended guidelines for the titration, while providing for some degree of discretion by the investigator for individual subject needs.  
By removing the provision to administer study drug by mixing with drink, and assuring the oil is never directly administered will provide more consistent dosing 
across the study population and reduce the potential risk of GI- associated adverse 
reactions.  
9. Drug Concentration Measurements.  As described in Section 7.5.3
, a population PK 
assessment will replace the planned PK sampling for peak UX007 and metabolites at Week 26.  Samples will be obtained pre- and post-dose as specified in the Schedule of Events.  The assessment will take place irrespective of the study adaptation decision. 
Rationale : The additional population PK assessment will further characterize the PK 
properties of UX007 at steady- state, including trough levels, following 6 months of 
continuous treatment. 
10. Pregnancy Testing .  A provision to perform a serum pregnancy test if pregnancy test 
by urine is not feasible has been added to the protocol ( Section 7.5.4.6). 
Rationale : The addition of the serum pregnancy test option provides flexibility for the 
site and the subject, as both methods will provide an accurate assessment of 
pregnancy status. 
11. Suicidal Ideation and Behavior Assessments.  The Ask Suicide Screening Questions 
(ASQ) has been replaced by the Columbia Classification Algorithm of Suicide 
Assessm ent (C -CASA) to assess suicidal ideation and behavior in this study.  
The timing and age range for the assessment remain as specified in the original 
protocol. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 1 – 04 OCT 2013  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 7 of 83 
Rationale :  The Columbia algorithm has been used to classify suicidal adverse events 
in an antidepressant safety analysis by the US FDA.  The US FDA has recommended 
the use of the C- CASA as a standardized suicidal rating system for anticonvulsant 
trials and other cent rally acting a gents and nonpsychotropic drugs. 
12. Statistical Methods .  Populations for data analyses have been defined ( Section 7.6.2 ).  
The description of the primary efficacy endpoint analysis has been generalized to 
state an appropriate rank -based analysis will be applied, instead of pre- specifying the 
2-sided Wilcoxon Rank Sum test ( Section 7.6.3).  The secondary efficacy analyses 
will compare the secondary efficacy variables scores after treatment to before treatment between the treated and placebo groups ( Section 7.6.4).  An alpha-
spending function will be used to adjust the type- I error significance level for the 
interim and final analysis ( Section 7.6.6).  The sample size assumptions for  the 
maximum of  140 subjects have been provided in Section 7.6.8.  
Rationale : While full- details of planned statistical analyses will be presented in a 
formal Statistical Analysis Plan, the revise d information provides transparency as 
pre-specified changes from the original protocol.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 2 – 20 May 2014  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 2 of 93 
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL  AMENDMENT  
SUMMARY OF CHANGES AND RATIONALE  
UX007G-CL201 Amendment 2 
20 May  2014 
 
 
The amended  version of Protocol UX007G-CL201 (Amendment 1, dated 0 4 October  2013) 
has been modified by Amendment 2 to incorporate a number of changes based on additional 
information acquired since the beginning of the study, feedback from clinical investigators involved in the study, and review by Health Authorities .  The major changes to the protocol 
are summarized below; additional minor changes have also been made for consistency and clarity but are not included in this summary.  
1. Sponsor’s Responsible Medical Officer and associated Medical Monitor contact 
information ( Section 8.5.6) have been updated to: 
Javier San Martin, MD, Vic e President, Clinical Development , Ultragenyx. 
2. Number of Subjects Planned.  Section 7.8.6 has been revised to reflect statistical 
assumptions for the interim analysis used to determine enrollment and sample size re-estimation.  An interim analysis will now  be conducted after approximately 
16 subjects have completed the double-blind Treatment Period.  If the interim 
analysis criteria have been met, the total number of subjects has been changed from 
80 - 140 to now be 40-100 subjects.   If the interim analysis  criteria are not met, 
the study will continue as a Phase 2 study until ~40 subjects have been enrolled.  The previous protocol stated subjects may be replaced after receiving study drug and 
prior to Week 8.  This has been amended such that subjects who wi thdraw or are 
removed from the study prior to randomization may be replaced on a case- by-case 
basis, at the discretion of Ultragenyx (Section 7.3.3).  
Rationale :  As described in Section 7.6.10 , for the study to be adequately powered as 
a pivotal study, a sample of approximately 40 completed subjects was estimated to be 
adequate to detect a 50% between -group difference in seizure rate per 4 weeks with 
power of 80% and population standard deviation of 55% using Wilcoxon’s rank sum test.  
3. Primary Efficacy Hypothesis .  Section  5.5 has been modified as follows to clarify 
specific seizure types to be investigated as part of the primary efficacy hypothesis.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 2 – 20 May 2014  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 3 of 93 
UX007 is more effectiv e than placebo for the reduction of seizures in patients with 
Glut1 DS, as measured by the reduction from baseline in frequency of generalized or 
partial- onse t seizures, including: Generalized Tonic -Clonic, Generalized Tonic, 
Generalized Clonic, Generaliz ed Atonic, Partial/Focal with Secondary 
Generalization, Myoclonic, Myoclonic Atonic, Myoclonic Tonic, Complex 
Partial/Focal, and Simple Partial/Focal Motor seizures, between Weeks 2 and 8 of 
treatment .   
4. Study Objectives .  The following objectives have been modified or added to Section 6  
to align study objectives with modifications to study design and endpoints: 
Modified Primary Objectives: 
• Evaluate the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo, between Weeks 2 and 
8 of treatment, as measured by the reduction from the Baseline  Period in  
frequency of generalized or partial- onset seizures  
Modified Secondary, Exploratory, and Optional Exploratory Objectives:  
The periods during which the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo will be 
evaluated have been modified from “change from baseline” to specify either 
change from Randomization or the Baseline Period  
Additional Secondary Objectives: 
• Evaluate long term efficacy as measured by changes from baseline in 
frequency of generalized or partial- onset seizures over time through week 52  
• Evaluate the optimal dose to control seizures and impact on other clinical 
manifestations during the Dose Exploration Period  
Additional Exploratory Objective: 
• Evaluate the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo, between Weeks 2 and 8 of treatment, as measured by the reduction from the Baseline Period 
frequency of absence seizures 
5. Overall Study Design and Plan .  Section 7.1
 has been modified to include a Dose 
Exploration Period which will be conducted in a subset of approximately 40 subjects.  
The remaining subjects enrolled will continue with the optimal dose achieved during 
the previous 26 weeks. The study schematic ( Figure  7.1.1) has been modified to 
reflect the design change.  Specific rationale for the selection of 20 and 40% dose  
levels is provided in Section 7.4.4.1.  The Dose Exploration Period is described as follows: 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 2 – 20 May 2014  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 4 of 93 
Following the Week 26 visit, approximately the first 40 subjects will participate in a  
10-week Dose Exploration Period to assess the impact of UX007 dose level on 
seizure control, other clinical manifestations  such as movement disorders and 
cognitive deficits , and tolerability. For subjects participating in the Dose Exploration 
Period, the dose will be titrated over 1 week down to 20% of total daily caloric 
intake.  After 4 weeks at the 20% dose level, the subject will be evaluated for safety and efficacy measures of seizure control, motor and cognitive function. 
If there are breakthrough seizures during the down titration period, as defined by an 
increase in frequency of 1 seizure in a 4 week period [ except absence ], relative to the 
previous 4 w eek period on a stable UX007 dose, or in the opinion of the investigator 
there has been a worsening of symptoms prior to completion of the 4 week period, 
the subject may begin the up-titration phase early. 
After 4 weeks at the 20% dose level, the UX007 dose will then be titrated up over 
1 week to 40% of total daily caloric intake and maintained at that level for 4 weeks. If a subject cannot tolerate titrating up to the 40% dose level, the dose should be 
titrated to the maximum tolerated dose as determined by the Investigator.  After 4 weeks at the 40% (or maximum tolerated) dose level, the subject will be evaluated for 
safety , and efficacy measures of seizure control, motor and cognitive function. 
At the end of the Dose Exploration Period, the subject will continue in the open-label 
Extension period, and maintained on the UX007 dose (as determined by the 
Investigator) that provided the maximum improvement in clinical status with acceptable tolerability, and continued on this dose for the duration of the study. 
If marked improvements in clinical status were not observed at a higher dose level 
and/or tolerability was unacceptable, the subjec t will return to the UX007 dose level  
where maximal benefit  was achieved as defined by seizure control and improvement s 
in motor and/or cognitive symptoms .  As determined by the Investigator, this may be 
the pre-titration UX007 dose from Week 26 or the 20% dose given during the down 
titration phase. 
Rationale (also provided in Section 7.2
):  A dose exploration evaluation in 
approximately  40 subjects has been added to the protocol to determine whether the 
proposed dose is the optimal and necessary dose for UX007 to control seizures and 
impact other clinical manifestations . The demonstration of a withdrawal effect 
(with  an exit clause that would allow the subject to more  quickly move to the up 
titration phase if there is a marked change in clinical status  during the down titration 
phase), and a return to control afterward would demonstrate both that a higher dose was necessary and that UX007 had a sustained effect.  
6. Inclus ion Criteria:  Section 7.3.1  has been modified as follows: 
2)  Males and females, aged 3 - 17  1 – 35 years (inclusive) at the time of informed 
consent 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 2 – 20 May 2014  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 5 of 93 
3) Average of at least 5 4 observable seizures (generalized [except absence ] or 
partial-onset [simple partial motor, complex partial, or secondarily generalized] 
seizures) per month in 4 weeks over the last 6 months 24 weeks , by subject or 
caregiver report  
4) At least 4 observable seizures (generalized [except absence] or partial-onset 
[simple partial motor, complex partial, or secondarily generalized] seizures) per 
month in 4 weeks  during the Baseline Period, with no 3- week seizure- free period 
during the Baseline Period 
7) Not on, or not fully compliant with a prescribed diet plan (e.g. ketogenic diet) 
comprised of at least 60%  50% total daily caloric intake from fat during previous 
60 14 days (confirmed by 3-day diet diary at Screening), or at any time during the 
course of the trial) 
12) Females who have reached menarche of child bearing potential  must have a 
negative pregnancy test at Screening, be willing to use acceptable method of contraception and have additional pregnancy tests during the study. Females 
considered not of childbearing potential include those who have not reach ed 
menarche, had total hysterectomy, have been in menopause for at least two 
years, or have had tubal ligation at least one year prior to Screening.  
Rationale :  The U nited States  Food and D rug Administration (FDA)  has 
recommended expanding recruitment to include patients younger than 3 years.  
Clinical experience with triheptanoin and nonclinical data with UX007 support dosing of children as young as 6 months of age.  A GLP 3 -month interim toxicology 
study in juvenile Yucatan Mini-Pigs which ran concurrently as part of the 9 month chronic toxicity study to allow dosing in younger age groups, has been completed; interim results have been inserted in Section 
5.2.2. 
The patient population was further expanded to also include adult subjects up to 35 years  of age .  The trial investigators have noted there are adult Glut1 DS patien ts 
who continue to have a similar phenotype of breakthrough seizures into their thirties, significant movement disorders (estimated at 90% by De Vivo), and ha ve a more 
difficult time maintaining the ketogenic diet. The expanded age range of the 
population will strengthen the ability to evaluate a possible impact on seizures and movement disorders. 
Modifications to inclusion criteria #3 and 4 provide alignment w ith study endpoints 
used to capture seizure frequency. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 2 – 20 May 2014  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 6 of 93 
Based on feedback from investigators and experts  in the field , inclusion criterion 
#7 was modified to increase the percent of calories from fat to 60% in a prescribed 
diet.  The change aligns with standard practices.  In addition, these i nvestigators and 
experts in the field  noted the potential for carryover effects from ketogenic or other 
high-fat prescribed diets are minimal, and a 7-14 day washout period would be more 
than adequate for patients who wish to discontinue or are non -compliant with current 
diet plans.  The refore, the  duration required to demonstrate non-compliance (or no 
treatment) with a prescribed diet plan has been reduced to 14 days to minimize the time a potential subject would be without adequate dietary control of their condition, and thereby minimize burden and possible risk to the individual.  In addition, guidance was added to Section 7.5.4.11 that subjects should be below 25% dietary fat 
(not including the oil) on the day of randomization and throughout the trial.  The rationale is that if patients are on a diet with >25% dietary fat, then they could 
possibly become ketotic with the addition of placebo  oil at 35% of caloric intake. 
Modifications to inclusion criterion #12 provide alignment with the expanded age range for eligible patients.  
7. Investigational Product.  To ensure adequate blinding of the investigational product 
during the double-blind Treatment Period, 1000 mL UX007 and placebo will be provided in 1 L round amber-colored glass bottles. During the open- label Extension 
Period  of the study, UX007 will be dispensed in 1 L round, translucent high-density 
polyethylene (HDPE) bottles  (Section 
7.4.1).  A provision to allow mixing of 
UX007  (or placebo) with formula has been included given the revised age range of 
the study population. 
8. Prohibited Medications .  Barbituates and prescribed high- fat diets (e.g. ketogenic 
diet) have been added to the list of medications prohibited throughout the study 
(Section 7.4.6.1).  
Rationale : Barbituates may inhibit the Glut1 transporter, thereby confounding 
efficacy and interpretation of study results.   As required for study inclusion, 
the subject must not be on, or compliant with a prescribed high-fat diet plan, and should not participate in such a plan throughout the course of the study. 
9. Study Procedures and Assessments . The following modifications have been made to 
the Schedule of Events ( Table 2.1) and Study Procedures and Assessments 
(Section  7.5):  
• Subjects participating in the Dose Exploration Period will return for 2 additional visits to assess efficacy,  pharmacokinetic/ metabolites , and safety following 
1 week titration and 4- weeks treatment at each dose level (i.e. Weeks 31 and 36 , 
within a 3  day visit window ). 
• The visit previously scheduled at Week 39 has been changed to Week 44. 
• Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test will be ad ministered at select sites only.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 2 – 20 May 2014  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 7 of 93 
Rationale :  Several components of efficacy and safety will be measured before and 
after each titration during the Dose Exploration Period to assess change in efficacy, 
safety and tolerability.  These will include change in seizure frequency, cognition 
(i.e. CANTAB , PPVT ), motor function (i.e. 6MWT, GMFM-88), EEG  abnormalities  
(Week 31 only), levels of triheptanoin metabolites, AE rate, and changes in 
assessment s of how the subject is doing (i.e. PEDI -CAT, CGI) .  Given the 
2 additional visit requirements at Weeks 31 and 36, the Week 39 visit was moved out to Week 44.    
10. Efficacy Measures .  The following changes have been made to Section 7.5: 
• The description of the primary efficacy measure (Section 7.5.2.1) has been 
modified to clarify seizure types defined and recorded in the study diary.   
• The Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) has been removed as an assessment 
during the 6- minute walk test (6MWT).   
• The severity of paroxysmal exertional dyskinesia (PED) will be assessed by the physical therapist, not the subject as previously indicated. 
• The frequency of absence (and other) seizures as captured in the study diary has 
been defined as an exploratory  measure (Section 7.5.2.2).  
• The Short-Form 12 (SF-12) Health Survey for adults will be administered to adult subjects as an exploratory measure.   
Rationale :  The listing of specific seizure types provides alignment with the study 
diary.  Following review of the study protocol, the US FDA requested the daily diary 
be used in addition to electroencephalography to document absence and myoclonic seizures.    
The Borg RPE scale was removed as it is not possible to capture perceived exertion in the middle of the 6MWT.  In addition the scale is difficult for children to comprehend and many subjects have cognitive impairment.  The physical therapist is trained to 
assess the severity of PED events, as such PED severity will not be assessed by the subject.  
Since the age range of the popu lation has expanded to include young children and 
adults, age-appropriate modifications have been made to the secondary and exploratory efficacy measures.  The SF -12 was included to assess functional health 
and well -being in adult subjects (as a parallel assessment to the SF -10 in children). 
11. Drug Concentration Measurements.  Based on feedback received from the FDA, 
Section 7.5.3 has been modified to specify the trough (pre-dose) population 
PK sample will be obtained within 15 minutes of dosing.  Additional PK samples 
will also be obtained should potentially related serious adverse events occur, if feasible.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 2 – 20 May 2014  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 8 of 93 
12. Pregnancy Testing.  The language in Section 7.5.4.6  has been modified to specify 
unknown risks and detail acceptable methods of contraception, including abstinence, 
for females and males of childbearing potential.  
13. Suicidal Ideation & Behavior Assessments.  Section 7.5.4.7  has been corrected to 
describe the Columbia- Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS) as the instrument 
used to prospectively assess suicidal ideation and behavior. 
14. Statistical Analysis & Determination of Sample Size .  Section 7.6  has been updated to 
mention the handling of mi ssing, unused, or spurious data, and include the 
aforementioned clarifications, additional endpoints, interim analyses, and 
determination of sample size.  The analysis populations have been further defined. 
The FDA also requested a secondary analysis for the potential of tachyphylaxis  
(i.e., long term efficacy) . 
  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 3 – 09 Dec 2014   
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 2 of 83 
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL AMENDMENT  
SUMMARY OF CHANGES AND RATIONALE  
UX007G-CL201 Amendment 3 
09 Dec 2014 
 
 The amended  version of Protocol UX007G-CL201 (Amendment 2, dated 20 May 2014 ) has 
been modified by Amendment 3 to incorporate a number of changes based on additional information acquired since the beginning of the study, from feedback provided by clinical 
investigato rs involved in the study, and review by Health Authorities .  The major changes to 
the protocol are summarized below; additional minor changes have also been made for consistency and clarity but are not included in this summary. 
1. Sponsor’s Responsible Medica l Officer and associated Medical Monitor contact 
information (Section 8.5.6) have been updated to: 
Sunil Agarwal , MD, Chief Medical Officer . 
2. The adaptive study design component of the protocol was eliminated. This change 
was carried throughout the protocol and the title of the study was updated to reflect 
this change.   
Rationale :  An interim analysis to adapt this study design is no longer planned. The 
plan is to look at the totality of the data from this Phase 2 study to determine what 
additional studies will be needed to better characterize the safety and efficacy of UX007 in patients with G lut1 DS. 
3. Inclusion criteria 3 and 4 were updated to include subjects with treatment- resistant 
absence seizures . This change was also updated in multiple sections of the protocol; 
the term absence seizure includes both typical and/or atypical absence seizures .  
Rationale : The inclusion crite ria are being updated to also include subject s that have 
only absence seizures (based on medical history and Screening EEG). This change is 
secondary to recently published data by Pascual et al., which demonstrated clinical activity of triheptanoin in patients with Glut1 DS with absence seizures. In this study 
patients receiving  triheptanoin demonstrated a reduction in their rate of absence 
seizures and improvements in their  neuropsychological performance ( Pascual et al. 
2014). 
 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 3 – 09 Dec 2014   
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 3 of 83 
4. Inclusion criterion #3 was updated to allow for fewer observable seizures in 4 weeks  
over the last 24 weeks; originally set at 4, this amendment reduces the observable 
seizures to 2 . 
Rationale: This will allow potentially for the inclusion of more subject s into the study 
without compromising the ability to detect a signal with UX007, assuming UX007 meaningfully reduces seizure activity.  
5. Inclusion criterion #9 was removed ; subjects no longer are required to be naïve to 
UX007. 
Rationale: Taking into account the short-lived pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamics profile of UX007, there sh ould be no residual effect of UX007 if 
subjects have not been exposed in the past 30 days prior to screening. Additionally, 
taking into account the Screening  period, the time off of drug would be even longer 
than 30 days.   
6. Inclusion criterion #6 was updated to clarify that “up to” 3 concomitant AEDs are 
allowed for inclusion into the study. 
  Rationale: This change was made for clarification. 
7. The primary and secondary objectives of the study w ere updated  (refer to the 
synopsis and Section 6). Similarly, the criteria for evaluation  (synopsis and Section 
7.5) and the primary and secondary endpoints (Section 7.6) w ere updated to reflect 
the changes to the objectives  to include a more robust evaluation of triheptanoin in 
patients with absence seizures .   
Rationale: This change was made for clarification  since we are now including 
patients who can qualify based on absence seizures only. This change was made secondary to the recent publication by Pascual et al. as referenced earlier.   
8. The randomization was changed from 1:1 to 3:1 (UX007: placebo).  
Rationale: This change was based on discussions with caregivers  of patients with 
Glut1 DS. The caregivers have stated that in a disease for which seizures are a 
primary manifestation, a 50% chance of receiving placebo has not been acceptable to the majority of potential patients and their families . Also, appreciating that this is a 
Phase 2 study and the fact that this change to the randomization schema will also enable the collection of a dditional safety data on subject s who receive UX007  during 
the study, the sponsor believes this change is clinically appropriate.  
  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 3 – 09 Dec 2014   
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 4 of 83 
9. An EEG assessment was added at the Screening Visit.  
Rationale: The decision to add an EEG assessment at the Screening  Visit is to 
confirm the diagnosis of absence seizures for patients who potentially qualify for the 
study based on a history of absence seizures. EEG is well recognized as the most reliable method to capture absence seizures, whereas for other seizure types a patient history is considered clinically acceptable.  
10. Study drug accountability in Section 8.3 was clarified to indicate that study drug will 
be properly packaged for transport by the subject or for shipment by the clinical site . 
Rationale: This text w as clarified to ensure a clear process for chain of custody of 
study drug. 
11. Selection of Study Population in Section 7.3 was updated to clarify that enrollment 
may include subjects from neighboring countries within the European Union, Canada, 
and South America.  
Rationale: There are limited investigative sites participating in this study and 
because Glut1 DS is a rare disease,  there may be subjects from neighboring countries 
who may be considered for study participation. 
12. Exclusion criterion #5 was changed to read “pregnant and/or breastfeeding an  infant 
at Screening ” from “breastfeeding an infant at Screening. ” 
Rationale: This change was made for clarification that both pregnant and 
breastfeeding subjects will be excluded from participation in the study.    
13. Section 7.3.3 (Removal of Subjects from Therapy or Assessment) was updated to 
clarify the conditions under which subjects either will be removed or may be removed 
from study participation.  
Rationale: It was important to clarify that subjects will be removed when an 
unacceptable AE occurs or if an illness occurs that (in the judgment of the investigator 
or Ultragenyx) might invalidate the study or place the subject at risk . Alternatively, 
subjects may be removed if requested  (by subject, investigator, or Ultragenyx) for 
administrative /other reasons or if the subject has a protocol deviation or exhibits 
unreliable behavior. 
 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 2 
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL AMENDMENT  
SUMMARY OF CHANGES AND RATIONALE  
UX007G-CL201 Amendment 4 
30 Nov 2015 
 
The amended  version of Protocol UX007G-CL201 (Amendment 3, dated 09 December  2014) 
has been modified by Amendment 4 to incorporate a number of changes based on additional information acquired since the beginning of the study, and from feedback provided by 
clinical in vestigators involved in the study and other experts in the field.  The major changes 
to the protocol are summarized below; additional minor changes have also been made for consistency and clarity but are not included in this summary. 
1. Sponsor’s Responsible Medical Officer and associated Medical Monitor contact  
information (Section 8.5.5) have been updated to Melanie Brandabur, MD, Medical 
Director . In addition, the safety contact information in Section 8.5.5 has been 
updated. 
2. Edited Inclusion Criterion #2 to state that all subjects at least 1  year of age are eligible 
for participation in this study. There is no longer an age limit of 35 years in the study. This change affected the synopsis and Section 7.3.1 of the protocol.  
Rationale: This change was made to allow inclusion of subjects regardless of age. 
3. Edited Inclusion Criterion #7 by removing specific instructions regarding percent of daily fat intake.  
Rationale: This change was made for clarity. 
4. Updated Exclusion Criterion #1 to allow for subjects to have serum alanine  
aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels exceeding 3X (previously 2X) the upper limit of normal at Screening.  
Rationale: This change was made to be more consistent with agency guidelines for 
industry regarding drug-induced liver injury. USDHHS FDA, CDER, CBER, 2009.  
5. Updated Section 7.4.6.1 of the protocol to remove valproate as a prohibited medication  and include pancreatic lipase inhibitors in the list of excluded 
medications . A li st of these medications was added to Exclusion Criterion 6. 
Rationale:   After a review of the literature on valproate, triheptanoin, and Glut1 DS, 
it did not appear that the addition of triheptanoin to valproate posed significant risk to those patients, due to the low concentrations of VPA in brain tissue; therefore, the Sponsor is allowing subjects sta ble on valproate into the study (
Adkison et al. 1995) . 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 3 
Pancreatic lipase inhibitors were included in the list of prohibited medications 
because  in vitro studies have shown that pancreatic lipases hydrolyze triheptanoin 
into free fatty acids and glycerol; therefore inhibitors of pancreatic lipases (e.g., orlistat) should be avoided while taking UX007. 
6. Updated Section 8.5.1 (De finition of Adverse Events) with the following text: “Note  
that hospitalizations planned prior to study enrollment (e.g., for elective surgeries) are not considered SAEs. Hospitalizations that occur for pre- existing conditions that are 
scheduled after study enrollment are considered SAEs.” 
Rationale : Updated for clarification of the SAE definition. 
7. Updated Section 8.5.4  (Adverse Event Reporting to Ultragenyx) 
Rationale : Updated to match the current Ultragenyx template.  
8. Primary objective changed to ‘Evaluate the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo 
as measured by the reduction from randomization to week 8 in frequency of seizures’. This change affects multiple sections  of the protocol related to statistical evaluations 
and analyses.   
Rationale: To correctly reflect that the primary endpoint is to measure change in 
seizure frequency for all seizure types, including absence seizures, as was the intent with the previous amendment. 
9. The text “at select sites” is now used consistently for the Pediatric Evaluation of  
Disability Inventory – Computer Adapti ve Test ( PEDI -CAT ) and  Gross Motor Function 
Measure-88 (GMFM -88) assessments in the schedule of events and body of protocol.   
Rationale: This change was made for clarification . 
10. The EEG at Screening for patients with absence seizures only is required for ~3 hours, not overnight
.   
Rationale: This change was made for patient convenience.  
11. The Erythrocyte Glucose Uptake Assay has been removed from the protocol. This  
change affects the schedule of events ( Table 2.1) and Section 7.5.3.   
Rationale: This change was made to reduce patient burden. 
12. Plasma level sample collection range for the population PK study at Week 26 was 
changed from 30 – 180 minutes to 60 and  180 minutes.    
Rationale: In consultation with a PK expert/advisor, sampling timepoints have been 
defined as 60 and 180 minutes post-dose.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 4 
2 SYNOPSIS  
TITLE OF STUDY:  
A randomized, double-blind, placebo -controlled, p arallel -group study to a ssess the safety and efficacy 
of UX007 in s ubjec ts with g lucose transporter type 1 deficiency syndrome 
PROTOCOL NUMBE R: 
UX00 7G-CL20 1 
STUDY SITES: 
Approximately 15 sites globally 
PHASE OF DEVELOPMENT:  
Phase 2  
RATIONALE:  
Glucose Transporter Type 1 Deficiency Syndrome ( Glut1  DS) is a rare, severely debilitating disease 
characterized by seizures, developmental delay and movement disorder.  Glut1  DS is caused by a 
mutation in SLC2A1 , encoding the Glut1 protein responsible for transporting glucose across the 
blood- brain barrier .  Because glucose is the primary source of energy for the brain, this disorder 
results in a chronic state of energy deficiency in the brain.  Current treatment consists of ketogenic diet  
(KD)  and antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for the treatment of seizures .  Because of the difficulties in 
maintaining the KD , some patients are not able to fully comply with or tolerate the diet.  These 
patients represent the subgroup of Glut1 DS patients who are most in need of an alternative therapy to 
the KD .  Given the significant unmet medical need in Glut1  DS patients not on KD, UX007 will be 
studied in this subgroup.  
UX007 (triheptanoin) is a triglyceride of medium, odd- carbon chain (C7) fatty acids .  The rationale for 
UX007 in Glut1  DS is that: (1) triheptanoin is metabolized to heptanoate and C4 and C5 ketone 
bodies, providing an alternative energy source to the brain , (2) triheptanoin provides anaplerotic 
substrates to resupply intermediates of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, and (3) triheptanoin can 
support g luconeogenesis in the brain.  
The seizures due to Glut1  DS are most prominent in the pediatric population and are typically 
refractory to AEDs .  For these reasons, the proposed Phase 2 study is designed to assess the safety and 
efficacy of UX007 in reduc ing the frequency of seizures in the pediatric population (and older patients 
who are still having seizures) that are not able to comply with or tolerate the KD. The study will also 
evaluate the pharmacokinetics (PK) of energy -containing metabolites and  correlate  these to the 
potential treatment effects .   
OBJECTIVES:  
The p rimary objectives of the study are to:  
• Evaluate the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo as measured by the reduction from 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 5 
randomization  to week 8 in  frequency of seizures . Observab le generalized and partial -onset 
seizures measured for 6 weeks by diary and absence seizures measured overnight by 
electroencephalography (EEG). 
• Evaluate the safety of UX007 via adverse event (AE) rates, laboratory values, and 
electrocardiogram  (ECG)  
The secondary objectives of the study are to : 
• Evaluate the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo, as measured by:  
- Seizure response rate, defined as the percentage of subjects with at least 50%  reduction 
from randomization to week 8  in frequency of seizures  
- Change from randomization to Wee k 8 in cognitive function using the Cambridge 
Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB)  
- Change from randomization to Wee k 8 in distance walked  as measured by 6MWT  
- Time to onset of paroxysmal exertional dyskinesia (PED) as measured during 6MWT  
from randomization to Week  8 
- Change from randomization to Week 8  in gross motor function using the Gross Motor 
Function Measure -88 (GMFM-88) 
• Evaluate long -term efficacy as measured by changes from randomization  in frequency of 
seizures over time through Week 52  
• Evaluate the optimal dose to control seizures and impact on other clinical manifestations during 
the Do se Exploration Period   
Exploratory objectives are to :  
• Evaluate the effects of UX007, from randomization through Weeks 8 and 52 on: 
- Neurological function using the Columbia Neurological Score (CNS) 
- Physician global impression of change in clinical status using the Clinical Global 
Impression - Severity scale (CGI -S) and Clinical Global Impression - Improvement scale 
(CGI-I) 
- Receptive vocabulary using the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT)  
- Subject or caregiver -reported quality of life using Short Form-10™ (SF-10) Health Survey 
for Children  or SF- 12 for adults  
- Functional disability by caregiver report using the Pediatric Evaluation of Disability 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 6 
Inventory – Computer Adaptive Test (PEDI -CAT)  
- Gait, using gait analysis by computerized mat  
- PK properties of UX007 and its metabolites 
Exploratory objectives are to evalu ate the effects of UX007, from randomization through Weeks 8 
and 52 on (to be administered at select  sites) : 
• Visual motor integration using the Beery- Buktenica Developmental Test of Visua l Motor 
Integration (Beery -VMI)  
• Spatial understanding and abstract reasoning using the Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices 
(RCPM)  
PRIMARY EFFICACY HYPOTHESIS:  
UX007 is more effective than placebo for the reduction of seizures in patients with Glut1  DS, 
as measured by the reduction from randomization in frequency of  generalized  or partial -onset s eizures , 
including: Generalized Tonic- Clonic, Generalized Tonic, Generalized Clonic, Generalized Atonic, 
Partial/Focal with Secondary Generalization, Myoclonic, Myoclonic Atonic, Myoclonic Tonic, Complex Partial/Focal, Absence, and Simple Partial/Focal Motor  seizures . 
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY:  
UX007G-CL201 is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel- group study to assess the 
safety and efficacy of UX007 in Glut1  DS.  The study will enroll approximately 40 pediatric , 
adolescent, and adult  subjects who are currently not on, or not compliant with a  KD or other high fat 
diet.  Enrolled subjects are otherwise able to maintain standard of care treatment with up to 3 AEDs  
throughout the duration of the study.  
Beginning with the Screening visit, subjects will record seizure frequency during the 6-week Baseline 
Period.  If the subject does not meet the seizure count criteria, the subject will be considered a screen 
failure and will not be randomized.  At the end of the B aseline Period, eligible subjects will be 
randomized in a 3:1 ratio to either UX007 or placebo.  Dosing will be initiated using a 2- week titration 
schedule until the subject has reached 35% of total daily calories from study drug (~1 -4 g/kg/day 
depending on age).  If a subject has not reached the target of 35% of total daily calories by the end of 
the 2- week titration period, dose titration should continue until the maximum tolerated dose is 
reached .  
After the initial 8-week double-blind Treatment P eriod, the open- label Extension P eriod will begin, 
wherein all subjects will be treated with UX007 through Week 52 of the study.  A population- PK 
analysis at Week 26 will provide data on metabolite levels with all subjects on UX007.  Following the 
Week 26 visit, all 40 subjects will participate in a 10 -week Dose Exploration Period to assess the 
impact of UX007 dose level on seizure control, other clinical manifestations such as movement 
disorders and cognitive deficits, and t olerability .  At the end of the Dose Exploration Period, the 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 7 
subject will continue in the open -label Extension period, maintained on t he UX007 dose (as 
determined by the Investigator) that provided the maximum improvement in clinical status with acceptable tolerability, and continued on this dose for the duration of the study.  Long term safety and 
maintenance of effect of UX007 will be assessed during th e Extension Period.   
Figure  2.1 provides a schematic of the study design.  Subjects  who complete treatment through 
Week  52 may have the option to continue UX007 treatment, if warranted,  in a separate open -label 
extension st udy.   
Figure 2.1:  UX007G -CL201 Study Schema  
 
NUMBER OF SUBJECTS PLANNED : 
The study will enroll approximately 40 pediatric , adolescent, and  adult  subjects who are currently not 
on, or not compliant with a KD or other high fat diet.  Subjects who withdraw or are removed from the 
study prior to randomization may be replaced on a case- by-case basis, at the discretion of Ultragenyx.  
DIAGNOSIS AND CRIT ERIA FOR INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION:  
Individuals eligible to participate in this study must meet all of the following criteria:  
1) Diagnosis of Glut1 DS confirmed by SLC2A1  mutation   
2) Males and females at least 1 year of age  at the time of informed consent  
3) Average of at least 2 observable seizures (generalized or partial -onset [simple partial motor, 
complex partial, absence, or secondarily generalized seizures) in 4 weeks over the last 
24 weeks, by subject or caregiver report  
4) At least 2 observable seizures (generalized or partial -onset [simple partial motor, complex 
partial, or secondarily generalized seizures) in 4 weeks  during the Baseline Period , with no 
3-week seizure -free period during the Baseline Period  OR absence seiz ures documen ted on ScreeningBaseline on SOC*
(6 wks)
3:1 RandomizationDouble -Blind, Placebo- Controlled 
Treatment Period (8 wks)2 wks
Titration
Placebo (safflower oil) + SOC*Open -Label 
Extension Period
(18 wks)
UX007 + SOC*
*SOC: Standard of Care 
(up to 3 stable AEDs)UX007 (triheptanoin) + SOC*
Target Dose 20%
Caloric Intake
(4wks)Target Dose 40%
Caloric Intake
(4wks)
Target Dose 35%
Caloric IntakeIndividualized
Target Dose (16 wks)
Dose Exploration (~40 subjects)1 wkTitration
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 8 
Screening  EEG   
5) Continuing to have seizures despite a prior or current use of at least 1  AED 
6) Allowed to be on up to 3 concomitant AEDs that must have been stable in dose at least 
2 weeks prior to the beginning of screening and anticipated to remain stable in dose through 
the end of the 8- week, placebo -controlled Treatment Period  
7) Not on, or not fully compliant with a prescribed diet plan (e.g. KD)   
8) Plasma level of beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) ≤ 1 mmol/L (non- fasting) at Screening  
9) Provide written or verbal  assent (if possible) and written informed consent by a legally 
authorized representative after the nature of the study has been explained, and prior to any research -related procedures  
10) Must, in the opinion of the investigator, be willing and able to complete all aspects of the 
study, comply with accurate completion of the seizures diary, and likely to complete the 
8-week, placebo -controlled, T reatment Period  
11) Females of childbearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test  at Screening, 
be willing to use an acceptable method of contraception, and have additional pregnancy tests 
during the study. Females considered not of childbearing potential include those who have 
not reached menarche, had total hysterectomy, have been in menopause for at least two 
years, or have had tubal ligation at least one year prior to Screening. 
Individuals who meet any of the following exclusion criteria will not be eligible to participate in the 
study: 
1) Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels exceeding 3X the upper limit of normal at Screening  
2) Any known hypersensitivity to triheptanoin or safflower  oil that, in the judgment of the 
investigator, places the subject at increased risk for adverse effects  
3) Prior use of triheptanoin within 30 days prior to Screening 
4) History of, or current suicidal ideation, behavior and/or attempts  
5) Pregnant and/or breastfeeding an infant at Screening  
6) Participants unwilling or unable to discontinue use of a prohibited medication 
(Section  7.4.6.1  [MCT oil, barbiturates, pancreatic lipase inhibitors , KetoCal or other KD 
supplements , and/or KD])  or other substance that may confound study objectives  
7) Use of any investigational product (drug or supplement, including medium chain 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 9 
triglyceride  [MCT ] oil) within 30 days prior to Screening, or at any time during the study  
8) Has a condition of such severity and acuity, in the opinion of the i nvestigator, that it 
warrants immediate surgical intervention or other treatment  
9) Has a concurrent disease or condition, or laboratory abnormality that, in the view of the investigator, places the subject at high risk of poor treatment compliance or of not  
completing the study, or would interfere with study participation or introduces additional 
safety concerns (e.g., diabetes mellitus, other concurrent neurolog ical or psychiatric 
disorders)
  
INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT, DOSE AND MODE OF ADMINISTRATION:  
UX007 (triheptanoin) is a colorless to yellow oil .  During the 8 week double blind period of the study 
1000 mL  UX007 will be provided in 1 L round amber colored glass bottles. During the open label 
Extension Period of the study, UX007 will be dispensed in 1 L round, translucent high-density 
polyethylene  (HDPE).  
UX007 is titrated over 2 weeks to a dose of 35% of total daily caloric intake.  During the Dose 
Exploration Period, the dose will be titrated down over 1 week to 20% of total daily caloric intake.  If there are breakthrough seizures during the down titration period, as defined by an increase in 
frequency of 1 seizure in a 4 week period, relative to the previous 4 week period on a stable UX007 
dose, or in the opinion of the investigator there has been a worsening of symptoms prior to completion 
of the 4 week period, the subject may begin the up- titration phase early.  The UX007 dose will then be 
titrated up over 1 week to 40% of total daily caloric intake and maintained at that level for 4 weeks. If 
a subject cannot tolerate titrating up to the 40% dose level, the dose should be titrated to the maximum 
tolerated dose as d etermined by the Investigator. 
At the end of the Dose Exploration Period, the subject will be maintained on the UX007 dose that provided the maximum improvement in clinical status with acceptable tolerability, and continued on this dose for the duration of the study. If marked improvements in cl inical status were not observed at 
a higher dose level and/or tolerability was unacceptable, the subject will return to the UX007 dose where maximal benefit was achieved as defined by seizures control and improvem ents in motor and/or 
cognitive symptoms. 
UX007 is a liquid, intended for oral (PO) administration.  UX007 will be mixed  with food (or formula, 
as appropriate) and administered PO or by gastronomy tube at least four times per day (breakfast, 
lunch, dinner, and before bed).  The dose may be divided into smaller more frequent doses with food 
as needed.  The dose should always be mixed with small amounts of food as indicated in the 
administration guidelines and never administered as the oil directly. 
REFERENCE  THERAPY, DOSE AND MODE OF ADMINISTRATION:  
Placebo will consist of safflower oil matching the appearance of UX007.  Dose level and mode of 
administration will be identical to that of UX007  during the double- blind Treatment Period . 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 10 
DURATION OF TREATMENT:  
The planned duration of treatment in this study is 52 weeks, consisting of an 8- week placebo -
controlled, double-blind Treatment Period, followed by a 44- week open -label Extension Period.  
Within the open-label Extension Period, up to 40 subjects will parti cipate in a 10- week Dose 
Exploration Period, beginning after the Week 26 visit.  All s ubjects who have completed the 8- week 
Treatment Period will be eligible for the Extension Period, during which a ll subjects will receive 
UX007; no placebo will be administered during the Extension Period.   
CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION:  
Efficacy:  
Primary Efficacy Variable:     
• Seizure  frequency reduction: P ercent  reduction from randomization to week 8 in frequency  of 
seizures.  Observable generalized and partial- onset seizures measured for 6 weeks by diary 
and absence seizures measured overnight by electroencephalography (EEG).  S eizure types 
include: Generalized Tonic -Clonic, Generalized Tonic, Generalized Clonic, Generalized 
Atonic, Partial/Focal with Secondary Generalization, Myoclonic, Myoclonic Atonic, 
Myoclonic Tonic, Complex Partial/Focal, and Simple Partial/Focal Motor and Absence.  
Secondary Efficacy Variables*: 
• Seizure response rate : Percentage of subjects with at least 50%  reduction from randomization to 
week 8  in frequency of seizures 
• Observable seizures via diary : Observable seizure frequency reduction and  observable seizure 
response rate as measured by diary  
• Absence seizures via EEG : Absence seizure  frequency  reduction and absence  seizure response 
rate as measured by EEG    
• Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery :  Neuropsychological function measured 
using a standardized, computerized battery of tests designed to assess visual memory, working 
memory, new learning and reaction time  
• Six Minute Walk Test :  Walking ability measured by the total distance walked (meters) in a 
6-minute period.  The percent of predicted normal dista nce walked will be determined.  
• Paroxysmal Exertional Dyskinesia: Time to onset of PED as observed during the 6MWT   
• Gross Motor Function Measure -88:  Gross motor function evaluated using a standardized 
observational measure of abilities in the following 5 domains: lying/rolling, sitting, 
crawling/kneeling, standing, and walking/running/jumping (at selec t sites)  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 11 
Exploratory Efficacy Variables *: 
• Columbia Neurological Score:  Neurological findings in 12 domains quantitated to produce a total 
score ranging from 0-76 
• Clinical Global Impression - Severity scale and Clinical Global Impression - Improvement scale :  
The global impression of disease severity at baseline (CGI -S) and the degree of change in clinical 
status (CGI -I) as assessed by a physician  
• Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test :  Receptive vocabulary measured using picture tests 
administered by a clini cian (at select sites)  
• Short- Form Health Survey s (SF-10 for Children OR SF-12) :  Quality of life as measured by 
subject or caregiver -reported physical and mental health status 
• Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory – Computer Adaptive Test :  Function al disability as 
measured by caregiver- reported ability to perform activities of daily living in the following 
functional domains: Daily Activities, Mobility, Social/Cognitive and Responsibility  (at select 
sites)  
• Gait analysis :  Stride length, cadence, vel ocity, base of support and percentage of cycle time spent 
in double support performed and evaluated by a physical therapist during the 6MWT (at select 
sites)  
• Beery -Buktenica Developmental Test of Visual Motor Integration :  Visual -motor integration 
measured  using a design copy test administered by a clinician (at select sites)  
• Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices :  Spatial understanding and abstract reasoning using 
picture tests administered by a clinician (at select sites)  
* The Investigator may use clinical judgment in deciding whether to administer certain assessments to 
subjects based on age, development, and cognitive ability, as appropriate. 
Pharmacokinetics of UX007 and Metabolites: 
• Plasma peak levels of UX007  and metab olites at specific times during the T reatment and 
Extension P eriod s 
• Population PK study at W eek 26: Plasma levels a t trough (pre-dose [within 15 minutes] ) and at 60 
and 180 minutes after administration of UX007 
Safety Assessments:  
Safety will be evaluated by the incidence, frequency and severity of AEs and serious adverse events 
(SAEs), including clinically significant changes from baseline to scheduled time points in: 
• Vital signs and weight 
• Physical examination and ECG findings  
• Clinical laboratory evaluati ons 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  Page 12 
• Pregnancy testing/pregnancy of partner 
• Suicidal ideation and behavior assessments  
• Concomitant medications 
Data Monitoring Committee  
An independent DMC with appropriate expertise in the conduct of clinical trials in children will act in 
an advisory cap acity to monitor subject safety on a routi ne basis throughout the trial.  
STATISTICAL METHODS:  
A full description of the statistical evaluations will be provided in the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).  
Sample size estimate:  
For the study to be adequately powered, a sample of approximately 40 completed subjects was 
estimated to be adequate to detect a 50% between -group difference in seizure rate per 4 weeks  with 
power of approximately 8 0% and population standard deviation of 55% using two -sample t test at 
one-sided  alpha level of 0.05.    
Primary Efficacy Analysis:  
The primary efficacy evaluation is the percent reduction  from randomization to week 8 in frequency, 
normalized to a 4 week rate,  of seizures   The primary efficacy comparison will be made using an  
appropriate analysis as defined in the SAP.   
Secondary Efficacy Analyses  
The secondary efficacy analyses will compare the secondary efficacy variables scores after treatment 
to before treatment between the treated and placebo groups.  The specific tests a nd analyses will be 
defined in the SAP. 
Included in these analyses will be a predefined per protocol analysis of those subjects that achieve at 
least 30% of calorie intake or higher as the tolerated dose level , in addition to receiving at least 80% of 
expe cted doses, to assess whether a subpopulation of the highest dose subjec ts have a larger difference 
in efficacy.  
Adverse Events Analysis:  
The original terms used in the CRFs by investigators to identify AEs will be coded using the Medical 
Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA). All reported AEs with onset during treatment 
(i.e., treatment -emergent AE) will be included in the analysis. For each AE, the percentage of subjects 
who experienced at least 1 occurrence of the given event will be summarized b y treatment group using 
the safety population.  Special attention will be given to those subjects who died, discontinued 
treatment due to an AE, or experienced a SAE.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 13 
Table 2.1:  Schedule of Events  
VISIT NUMBER * 1 2 3 (Phone)  4 5 6 7 DE
1# DE
2# 8 9 
VISIT NAME  Screening  Randomization  End of 
Titration  Treatment Period  Extension Period  
WEEK 1 -6 0 2 4 8 14 26 31 36 44 52/
ET 
Informed Consent  X           
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X X          
Medical History 2 X           
EFFICACY MEASURES 
Seizure incidence (diary review)  3 X X X X X X X X X X X 
Computerized Neuropsychological Test - 
Cambridge Neuropsychological Test 
Automated Battery (CANTAB) 4 X X  X X  X X X  X 
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) 4 X    X  X X X  X 
Short Form -10 (SF -10) or SF -12 Health Survey 
(age-appropriate instrument)   X   X  X    X 
Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory 
Computer Adaptive Test (PEDI -CAT)4  X   X  X X X  X 
6-minute Walk Test (6MWT)5 
PED Observation  
Gait Analysis [select sites]  X X  X X  X X X  X 
Gross Motor Function Measure -88 
(GMFM -88)4, 5  X  X X  X X X  X 
Columbia Neurological Score (CNS)   X   X  X    X 
Clinical Global Impression:  
Improvement (CGI -I) & Severity (CGI -S)6  X   X  X X X  X 
Overnight Electroencephalogram (EEG)7 X X   X  X X    
Beery -Buktenica Developmental Test of  Visual 
Motor Integration  (Beery -VMI) 4 X    X  X    X 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 14 
VISIT NUMBER * 1 2 3 (Phone)  4 5 6 7 DE
1# DE
2# 8 9 
VISIT NAME  Screening  Randomization  End of 
Titration  Treatment Period  Extension Period  
WEEK 1 -6 0 2 4 8 14 26 31 36 44 52/
ET 
Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices  
(RCPM)4 X    X  X    X 
PHARMACOKINETICS /BIOASSAYS  
Peak Plasma UX007 and Metabolites8 X7 X   X   X X  X 
Population PK assessment8       X     
SAFETY ASSESSMENTS  
Vital Signs & Weight9 X X  X X X X X X X X 
Electrocardiogram (ECG)10 X    X      X 
Physical Examination11 X    X  X    X 
Clinical Laboratory Tests12  X X   X  X X X  X 
Urine Pregnancy Test (if applicable)  X X   X  X    X 
Suicida l Ideation & Behavior Assessment  X X  X X X X X X X X 
Concomitant Medications  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Adverse Ev ents X X X X X X X X X X X 
Interim Monitoring Calls13 X X X X X X X   X X 
TREATMENT & DIETARY ASSESSMENTS  
Dispense Study Drug14  X  X X X X14   X  
Treatment Compliance & Accountability15   X X X X X X X X X 
Dietitian  Consultation & Diet Diary16 X X 16 X X X X X X X X X 
*The Study Reference Manual will outline and describe a recommended schedule of the assessments during the 1 -day and 2 -day visits.  
# DE = Dose Exploration Period.  Visits DE -1 (Week 31) and DE -2 (Week 3 6) (± 3 days) apply only to subjects  who participate in the Dose Exploration Period.  
1 Assessments at Week 2 will be completed via telephone call; no visit to the study site will be required.  Subjects will return to the clinic at Week 4 and at the 
end of the double -blind Treatment Period for Week 8 (± 3 days).  Visits during the Extension period will occur at 6 -13 week intervals (± 2 weeks). 
2 Medical history includes subject demographics  and Glut1  DS diagnosis  confirmed by SLC2A1 mutation analysis . 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201  
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 15 
3 The s eizure diary should be completed each study day, even on study days without seizures. Site personnel should help ensure that participants 
(parents/caregivers) are not leaving any blank pages in the seizure diaries.  
4 All neurops ychological tests and assessments should be performed after the consumption of food and, as indicated, study drug.  PPVT, Beery -VMI , RCPM , 
PEDI -CAT, and GMFM -88 will be administered at select sites only.  
 5 The 6MWT will include assessments of PED; a subse t of sites may also perform gait analysis using a computerized portable walkway .  Portions of the  6MWT, 
gait analysis and the GMFM -88 tests may be videotaped to monitor administration technique and assess qualitative changes in function.  Subject identity will be 
protected by blurring out the facial area in the video .  
6 CGI-S will be assessed at Baseline (Week 0); CGI -I will be assessed at W eeks 8, 26, 31, 36 and 52 (or Early Termination).  
7 Confirmatory EEG at Screening for patients with absence seizures only is required for ~ 3 hours.  For Week 0 EEG, begin EEG PRIOR TO Randomization date 
(requires 2 -day visit); Week 8 , 26, and 31  visits req uire a 2 -day overnight visit to complete EEG. Monitoring periods of less than 1 2 hours in duration for Week 
8, 26, and 31 visits will be considered a protocol violation.  
8 At the Screening and Randomization Visit s, a non -fasting blood sample  will be drawn  to assess non-fasting BHB. At subsequent post-randomization visits, 
blood samples for UX007 and metabolites will be drawn  approximately 90 min  following consumption of food and study drug .  At Week 26 , 3 blood samples 
will be drawn : pre-dose (within 15 min), and 2 additional timepoints  at 60 and 180 min  following consumption of food and study drug.   
9 Vital sign measurements consist of seated systolic/diastolic blood pressure (millimeters of mercury), heart rate (beats per minute), respiration rate (breaths per 
minute), and temperature in degrees Celsius (°C).  Vitals to be obtained at the beginning of each visit before any additional  assessments are completed.   
10 Perform ECG prior to , or at least 15 min after administration of any motor function tests  (if indicated  at visit) so that the ECG  is performed  at resting heart rate. 
11 Physical examinations to include assessments of general appearance; head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat; the cardiovascular, d ermatologic, lymphatic, 
respiratory, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, musculos keletal, and neurologic systems . 
12 Clinical laboratory tests include standard serum chemistry, hematology, and urinalysis .  Fasting is not required.  
13 The study coordinator will telephone the subject/caregiver between each Extension Period visit  to assess AE, discuss any problems or difficulties with 
treatment, assess protocol compliance, and inquire about study drug consumption and remaining supply .  Additional telephone contact s may be made as needed.  
A follow -up call is recommended within 4 weeks following early termination or study completion.  
14 Following Randomization, study drug will be titrated over a 2 -week period to achieve up to 35% of total daily calories from study drug. Subjects in the Dose 
Exploration Period will titrate study drug as outlined in the Administration Guideline  in the Study Reference Manual . The manual randomization process will be 
followed at Randomization and Week 4 visits only.  
15 Instruct subjects to return all empty and opened study drug bottles to the next visit.  
16 Subjects and/or caregivers are required to maintain record of daily diet in the study diary  for at least 3 days prior to each visit (except Screening) .  The diet 
diary will be reviewed with the dietitian  or study staff upon each visit. The dietitian  may telephone subjects and/or caregivers, as needed, to provide dietary 
advice and support . The 3-day diet history is recorded during the Screening (Baseline) Period and will be used to qualify subjects for the study. A 3-day diet 
diary is not required at the time of the Screening Visit, only a dietitian  consultation. The 3 -day diet history recorded prior to randomization will be reviewed by 
the site dietitian  to establish daily caloric intake  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 16 
3 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1 TITLE PAGE  .......................................................................................................................1 
2 SYNOPSIS  ...........................................................................................................................4  
Figure  2.1:  UX007G-CL201 Study Schema .......................................................................7  
Table 2.1:  Schedule of Events ..........................................................................................13  
3 TABLE OF CONTENTS  ...................................................................................................16  
4 LIST OF ABBREVIATION S AND DEFINITION OF TERMS  ......................................21  
5 INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................................................24  
5.1 Overview of Glucose Transporter Type 1 Deficiency Syndrome .............................24  
5.2 Brief Overview of UX007 Development ..................................................................25  
5.2.1  Brief Description of the Investigational Product .........................................25  
5.2.1.1  Mechanism of Action in Glut1 DS ..............................................26  
5.2.2  Nonclinical Studies  ......................................................................................26  
5.2.3  Previous Clinical Studies  .............................................................................27  
5.3 Summary of Overall Risks and Potential Benefits  ....................................................28  
5.4 Study Rationale  .........................................................................................................29  
5.5 Primary Efficacy Hypothesis  ....................................................................................30  
6 STUDY OBJECTIVES  ......................................................................................................31  
7 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  ............................................................................................33  
7.1 Overall Study Design and Plan  .................................................................................33  
7.2 Discussion of Study Design, Including Choice of Control Group ............................34  
7.3 Selection of Study Population ...................................................................................35  
7.3.1  Inclusion Cri teria .........................................................................................37  
7.3.2  Exclusion Criteria  ........................................................................................38  
7.3.3  Removal of Subjects from Therapy or Assessment  ....................................38  
7.3.3.1  Stopping Rules .............................................................................39  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 17 
7.4 Treatments  .................................................................................................................40  
7.4.1  Investigational Product ................................................................................41  
7.4.2  Reference Therapy  ......................................................................................41  
7.4.3  Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups ..................................41  
7.4.4  Selection of Doses and Study Duration .......................................................42  
Table 7.4.4.1:  Demographics and Treatment Duration in Clinical 
Trials  ............................................................................................42  
7.4.4.1  Dose Exploration Period ..............................................................43  
7.4.4.2  Study Duration  .............................................................................43  
7.4.5  Blinding .......................................................................................................44  
7.4.6  Prior and Concomitant Therapy ..................................................................45  
7.4.6.1  Prohibited Medications ................................................................45  
7.4.6.2  Permitted Medications  .................................................................45  
7.4.7  Treatment Compliance  ................................................................................45  
7.5 Study Procedures and Assessments  ..........................................................................46  
7.5.1  Schedule of Events ......................................................................................46  
7.5.2  Efficacy Measures  .......................................................................................46  
7.5.2.1  Primary Efficacy Variable  ...........................................................47  
7.5.2.2  Secondary Efficacy Variables  ......................................................48  
7.5.2.3  Exploratory Efficacy Measures ....................................................50  
7.5.3  Drug Concentration Measurements and Bioassays .....................................53  
7.5.4  Safety Measures & General Assessments  ...................................................53  
7.5.4.1  Medical History  ...........................................................................53  
7.5.4.2  Vital Signs and Weight  ................................................................54  
7.5.4.3  Electrocardiogram  ........................................................................54  
7.5.4.4  Physical Examination ...................................................................54  
7.5.4.5  Clinical Laboratory Tests  .............................................................54  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 18 
7.5.4.6  Pregnancy Testing  ........................................................................55  
7.5.4.7  Suicidal Ideation and Behavior Assessments ..............................56  
7.5.4.8  Concomitant Medications ............................................................56  
7.5.4.9  Adverse Events  ............................................................................57  
7.5.4.10  Interim Monitoring Calls  .............................................................57  
7.5.4.11  Dietitian Consultation and Diet Assessment ................................57  
7.5.5  Appropriateness of Measures  ......................................................................57  
7.6 Statistical Methods and Determination of Sample Size  ............................................58  
7.6.1  Subject Information  .....................................................................................59  
7.6.2  Analysis Populations ...................................................................................59  
7.6.3  Primary Effic acy Analysis  ...........................................................................59  
7.6.4  Secondary Efficacy Analyses  ......................................................................60  
7.6.5  Exploratory Efficacy Analyses  ....................................................................60  
7.6.6  Pharmacokinetic Analyses  ..........................................................................61  
7.6.7  Safety Analyses  ...........................................................................................61  
7.6.8  Data Monitoring Committee  .......................................................................62  
7.6.9  Determination of Sample Size  .....................................................................63  
8 STUDY CONDUCT  ..........................................................................................................64  
8.1 Ethics  .........................................................................................................................64  
8.1.1  Institutional Review Board or Ethics Committee  ........................................64  
8.1.2  Ethical Conduct of Study ............................................................................64  
8.1.3  Subject Information and Consent ................................................................64  
8.2 Investigators and Study Administrative Structure  ....................................................65  
8.3 Investigational Product Accountability .....................................................................65  
8.4 Data Handling and Record Keeping  .........................................................................66  
8.4.1  Case Report  Forms and Source Documents ................................................66  
8.4.2  Data Quality Assurance  ...............................................................................66  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 19 
8.4.3  Record Retention  .........................................................................................67  
8.5 Reporting and Follow-up of Adverse Events ............................................................67  
8.5.1  Definition of Adverse Events ......................................................................67  
8.5.2  Severity of Adverse Events .........................................................................68  
8.5.3  Relationship of Adverse Events to Study Drug ...........................................69  
8.5.4  Adverse Event Reporting to Ultragenyx .....................................................70  
8.5.4.1  General  .........................................................................................70  
8.5.4.2  Serious Adverse Events, Serious Adverse Drug Reactions, 
and Requirements for Immediate Reporting ................................71  
8.5.4.3  Urgent Safety Reporting  ..............................................................71  
8.5.4.4  Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting ...............................................72  
8.5.4.5  Pregnancy in Subject or Partner  ...................................................72  
8.5.5  Safety Contact Information .........................................................................73  
8.6 Financing and Insurance ...........................................................................................73  
8.7 Publication Policy  .....................................................................................................73  
9 REFERENCES  ..................................................................................................................74  
10 SIGNATURE PAGE  .........................................................................................................79  
 
 
LIST OF TABLES  
Table 2.1:  Schedule of Events ................................................................................................13  
Table 7.4.1:  Dose Titration Recommendation  .........................................................40  
Table 7.4.4.1:  Demographics and Treatment Duration in Clinical Trials ..............................42  
Table 7.5.4.5.1:  Clinical Laboratory Assessments .................................................................55  
  
 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 20 
LIST OF FIGURES  
Figure  2.1:  UX007G-CL201 Study Schema .............................................................................7  
Figure  5.2.1.1.1:  Proposed mechanism of UX007 action in Glut1 DS ...........................26  
Figure  7.1.1:  UX007G-CL201 Study Schema ..........................................................34  
 
 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 21 
4 LIST OF ABBREVIA TIONS AND DEFINITION OF TE RMS 
Abbreviations 
6MWT  Six Minute Walk Test  
AE adverse event  
AED  antiepileptic drug  
ALT  alanine aminotransferase  
APBD  adult polyglucosan body disease  
AST  aspartate aminotransferase  
Beery -VMI  Beery -Buktenica Developmental Test of Visual Motor Integration  
BHB  beta-hydroxybutyrate 
BHP  beta-hydroxypentanoic acid 
BKP  beta-ketopentanoic acid 
BUN  blood urea nitrogen  
CANTAB  Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery  
CFR  Code of Federal Regulations  
CGI-I Clinical Global Impression – Improvement scale  
CGI-S Clinical Global Impression – Severity scale  
CNS  Columbia Neurological Score  
CRF  Case Report Form  
C-SSRS  Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale  
DMC  Data Monitoring Committee  
ECG  electrocardiogram  
EC Ethics Committee  
EDC  electronic data capture  
EEG  electroencephalogram  
EudraCT  European Union Drug Regulating Authorities Clinical Trials  
FAOD  fatty acid oxidation disorders  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  (United States)  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GGT  gamma glutamyl transpeptidase  
GMFM -88 Gross Motor Function Measure -88 
Glut1  glucose transporter type 1  
Glut1 DS  glucose transporter type 1 deficiency syndrome  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 22 
GMP  Good Manufacturing Practice  
GSD II  glycogen storage disease type II  
HDPE  high-density polyethylene  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
IB Investigator’s Brochure  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
ICH International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for 
Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use  
IND Investigational New Drug (application)  
IRB 
ISG Institutional Review Board  
Independent Statistical Group  
KD ketogenic diet  
LC-FAOD  long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders  
L Litre  
MCS  Mental health component score  
MCT  medium chain triglyceride  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MOT  Motor Screening Test  
NCI CTCAE  National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse 
Events  
NOAEL  no observed adverse effect level  
PAL  Paired Associates Learning Test  
PCS Physical health component score  
PED  paroxysmal exertional dyskinesia  
PEDI -CAT  Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory - Computer Adaptive Test  
PHS-10 physical summary score  
PK pharmacokinetic  
PO oral, by mouth , per os 
PPVT  Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test  
PSS-10 psychosocial summary score  
PT Preferred Term  
RBC  red blood cell  
RCPM  Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices  
RPE Rating of Perceived  Exertion  
RTI Reaction Time  
SAE  serious adverse event  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 23 
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan  
SF-10 Short Form 10 Health Survey for Children  
SF-12 Medical Outcomes Study 12 -item Short -Form Health Survey  for Adults  
SOC  System Organ Class  
SSP Spatial Span  
SWM  Spatial Working Memory  
TCA  tricarboxylic acid  
US United States  
UX007  Investigational Product/study drug, triheptanoin  
WBC  white blood cell  
 
Definition of Terms  
Investigational Product is defined as, “A pharmaceutical form of an active ingredient or 
placebo being tested or used as a reference in a clinical trial, including a product with a marketing authorization when used or assembled (formulated or packaged) in a way different from th e approved form, or when used for an unapproved indication, or when used to gain 
further information about an approved use” (from International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use [ICH] Ha rmonised Tripartite Guideline  E6: Guideline for Good Clinical Practice ). 
The terms  “Investigational Product” and “study drug” may be used interchangeably in the 
protocol. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 24 
5 INTRODUCTION 
Glucose Transporter Type 1 Deficiency Syndrome ( Glut1  DS) is a rare, severely 
debilitating  disease characterized by seizures, developmental delay , and movement disorder 
(Pearson et al. 2013 ).  Glut1  DS is caused by a mutation in SLC2A1, encoding the Glut1 
protein responsible for transporting glucose across the blood- brain barrier.  Because glucose 
is the primary source of energy for the brain, this disorder results in a chronic state of energy 
deficiency in the brain.  Current treatment  consists of a ketogenic diet (KD) to provide an 
alternative energy source to glucose (Pong et al. 2012) , (Pearson et al. 2013) and antiepileptic 
drugs (AEDs).  Because of the difficulties in maintaining a KD, some patients are not able to 
comply with or tolerate the diet.  These patients represent the subgroup of Glut1  DS patients 
who are most in need of an alternative therapy to ketogenic diet.  
UX007 (triheptanoin) is a triglyceride of medium, odd- carbon cha in (C7) fatty acid.  
The rationale for UX007 in Glut1  DS is that: (1) triheptanoin is metabolized to heptanoate 
and C4 and C5 ketone bodies, providing an alternative energy source to the brain, (2) triheptanoin provides anaplerotic substrates to resupply i ntermediates of the tricarboxylic 
acid (TCA) cycle , and (3) triheptanoin can support gluconeogenesis in the brain  
(Deng et al. 2009 ), (Kinman et al. 2006) , (Marin -Valencia et al. 2013 ). 
The seizures d ue to Glut1  DS are typically refractory to antiepileptic drugs  (AEDs)  and are 
most prominent in the pediatric population.  In addition, a subset of Glut1 DS patients is  
either not on, or unable to comply with or tolerate the KD. For these reasons, the proposed Phase 2 study is designed to assess the safety and efficacy of UX007 in reducing the frequency of seizures in this pediatric , adolescent, and adult population. 
5.1 Overview of Glucose Transporter Type 1 Deficiency Syndrome  
Glut1  DS is a rare, severely  debilitating disease characterized by seizures, developmental 
delay , and movement disorder ( Pearson et al. 2013) .  It is caused by a mutation in solute 
carrier family 2, member 1 gene ( SLC2A1), which encodes Glut1 .  This protein transports 
glucose from blood into the brain.  Because glucose is the primary source of energy for the brain, this disorder results in a chronic state of energy defi ciency in the brain.  
Neurological symptoms in Glut1  DS fall into 3 domains: (1) epilepsy, 
(2) cognitive/behavioral disturbances, and (3) movement disorders.  The classic phenotype is a developmental encephalopathy encompassing all 3 domains.  Seizures are present in 
approximately 90% of Glut1  DS patients and usually present in early infancy.  
The laboratory hallmark of Glut1  DS is a low cerebrospinal fluid glucose concentration 
(<60  mg/dL or 3.3 mmol/L in all cases reported to date; <40 mg/dL or 2.2 mmol/L in the 
majority of cases). The majority of reported patients (~90 %) have a de novo  heterozygous 
mutation in SLC2A1. About 10 % of affected individuals ha ve an affected parent (autosomal 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 25 
dominant inheritance pattern). Autosomal recessive transmission has also been described in 
rare cases.  
Glut1  DS is a rare disease with an estimated birth incidence of 1:90,000 (Coman et al. 2006) .  
This birth incidence translates to an estimate d prevalence of ~ 8,500 in the US and Europe.  
There are currently no approved treatments specific to Glut1  DS.  Seizures are refractory to 
conventional AED treatment (Pong et al. 2012 ).   Reports suggest a KD is effective for the 
seizures of Glut1  DS by generating ketone bodies that provide an alternative energy source to 
glucose (Pong et al. 2012 ), (Pearson et al. 2013) .  However, KD is difficult to tolerate and 
some patients are not compliant with or are otherwise not on the diet.  There exists a significant unmet medical need in the subset of patients who are not on KD, and the proposed clinical development plan targets this specific subset of patients.  
5.2 Brief Overview of UX007 Development  
A brief overview of existing information on UX007 ( triheptanoin) is provided below; 
a comprehensive review of the data is contained in the Investigator’s Brochure (IB) provided by Ultragenyx  Pharmaceutical Inc. (Ultragenyx) , which should be reviewed prior to initiating 
the study. 
5.2.1 Brief Description of the Investigational Product  
Triheptanoin is a triglyceride  composed of three heptanoate (C7 fatty acid)  esters . UX007 is 
manufactured by chemical synthesis from glycerol and heptanoic acid. The molecular 
formula and structure are as follows: 
Molecular Formula:   C
24H44O6  
Structure:   
 
UX007 (triheptanoin) is a liquid, intended for oral (PO) administration.  One thousand grams 
(1025 ± 25 g) of neat triheptanoin drug substance is filled into 1 Litre (L), high density polyethylene (HDPE) or round, amber- colored glass bottles.   UX007 is manufactured, 
packaged, and labeled according to Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) regulations. 

Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 26 
5.2.1.1 Mechanism of Action  in Glut1 DS 
UX007 is highly purified triheptanoin, a triglyceride of 3 fatty acids with 7 carbons each.  
Triheptanoin is metabolized to heptanoate, which in turn is further metabolized to 4- and 5-carbon ketone bodies.  These metabolites bypass the Glut1  transporter to cross the 
blood- brain -barrier via the monocarboxylate transporter or potentially by mass action 
diffusion for heptanoate, and provide an alternative energy source to the brain 
(Figure  5.2.1.1.1 ). Once in the brain, the metabolites may be further metabolized by both glia 
and neurons to generate effective compounds to deliver energy.  These metabolites also have the ability to provide propionyl-CoA in order to resupply intermediates of the TCA cycle (i.e., anaplerosis) within the brain as well as support gluconeogenesis and glycogen 
production. 
Figure 5.2.1.1.1: Proposed mechanism of UX007 action in Glut1 DS 
 
5.2.2 Nonclinical Studies  
Studies of potential clinical significance and relevance to this protocol are summarized below.  
Nonclinical studies evaluating triheptanoin and its metabolites in mice and rats have been 
published and further support the safety of UX007.  These studies provide data on the absorption, and metabolism of triheptanoin when administered intravenously and PO at doses up to 40% the recommended caloric intake.  Furthermore, triheptanoin has been  found to be effective in 4 animal models of epilepsy,  similar to that of other AEDs 
(Borges et al. 2012) , (Willis et al. 2010 ), (Thomas et al. 2012) , (Kim et al. 2013) . 

Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 27 
Nonclinical studies in rats have demonstrated that triheptanoin is hydrolyzed to heptanoa te 
and glycerol, which are efficiently absorbed by the liver ( Kinman et al. 2006) .  Studies have 
demonstrated that triheptanoin is metabolized rapidly in the gut to form a ser ies of energy 
containing metabolites, including heptanoate, C4- and C5-ketone bodies ( Kinman et al. 
2006), ( Deng et al. 2009) .  In the mouse model of Glut1 DS, triheptanoin administration led 
to the delivery of heptanoate to the brain which was metabolized into glucose and 
neurotransmitter intermediates, consistent with an important role of the odd -chain length 
C7 structure in restoring CNS metabolism (Marin -Valencia et al. 2013 )  
The acute oral toxicity of triheptanoin was performed in rats at four dose levels ranging from 
0.5 ml/kg (n= 2) to 5 ml/kg (n=5M/5F). There were no deaths or signs of toxicity at any time throughout the duration of the study and up to 7 days post dose ( IND-59303 )  
A 9 month oral toxicity study in rats was performed with an experimental  oil containing 
64% triheptanoin to determine the effects of a diet containing triheptanoin on animal 
growth,  lipid  digestibility, clinical chemistry, and toxicity in liver, kidney, and small intestine 
(Ataide et al. 2009 ). After 9 months of consumption of a standard diet containing doses up to 
1.14 g triheptanoin per kg of body weight per day, no toxic effects attributed to triheptanoin were found in rats.  Liver, kidney and small intestine were collected for histological analysis. Significantly, from the limited histopathology data available, there were no target organs of toxicity identified in this study.  Microscopic examination of the liver demonstrated that all diet groups showed macrovesicular hepatic steatosis, but this finding was not considered a hepatotoxic effect since the control group also contained the lesion.  This is likely to be due to the high fat in the diet. The severity of hepatic steatosis was determined to be less in the rats fed 30% and 50% experimental oil compared to the control group fed the soybean oil-based diet.  There was also no significant difference in the clinical chemistries that would indicate hepatic damage or adverse effect on renal function compared to control animals fed a standard diet supplemented with soybean oil as the lipid source.  No  major systemic 
toxicities were observed in either general toxicity study. 
A GLP 9 month chronic toxicity study in juvenile mini-pigs was performed with UX007. The study demonstrated that there is no evidence of accumulation of triheptanoin or metabolites 
in plasma after daily PO dosing as high as 50% of the animal’s daily caloric intake. UX007 was well -tolerated at up to 50% of the daily caloric intake and did not result in any evidence 
of systemic toxicity; therefore, the dose of 50% caloric replacement was considered the NOAEL for UX007 following 9 -months of treatment. 
The standard battery of genotoxicity tests did not result in any evidence of genotoxic, clastogenic or mutagenic effects.  
5.2.3 Previous Clinical St udies 
Approximately 200 subjects with various diseases have been treated with triheptanoin for periods of up to 15 years.  Of these subjects, approximately 50 were pediatric patients as 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 28 
young as neonates; a significant portion of pediatric patients had treatment duration of over 
5 years.  The clinical experience supports the safety of triheptanoin when administered at 
approximately 35% of daily caloric intake in pediatric patients as young as neonates. 
Triheptanoin has been studied for over a decade in a large cohort of patients with 
fatty-acid oxidation disorders (FAOD) as part of a compassionate use program  
(Roe et al. 2002) , (Roe et al. 2006) , (Roe et al. 2008) , (Barone et al. 2012) .  Patients with 
other disorders have also been treated with triheptanoin, including those with pyruvate 
carboxylase deficiency (Mochel et al. 2005) , Huntington’s disease (Mochel et al. 2010) , 
adult polyglucosan body di sease ( APBD ) (Roe et al. 2010) , glycogen storage disease 
type II (GSD- II; Pompe dise ase) ( Roe et al. 2006) and congestive heart failure (IND-65827) .  
Triheptanoin treatment has been generally safe and well tolerated in subjects with these disorders. 
Triheptanoin was  studied in 14 Glut1  DS subjects in a clinical trial sponsored by Dr. Juan 
Pascual at the Univ ersity of Texas, Southwestern.  The results of this open- label study 
suggest clinical activity with triheptanoin in reducing the frequency of absence seizures  
(Pascual et al. 2014 ). 
Ultragenyx is currently developing UX007 as a substrate replacement therapy for long- chain 
FAOD ( LC-FAOD).  A prospective open- label  Phase 2 study to assess safety and clinical 
effects of UX007 in subjects with LC- FAOD (UX007 -CL201) is currently underway . 
5.3 Summary of Overall Risks and Potential Benefits 
UX007 is intended as a substrate replacement therapy to restore the full process of energy 
metabolism in patients with Glut1  DS.  UX007  was developed to address the needs of 
Glut1  DS patients who continue to have disease crises despite the best available treatment. 
The current standard of care, KD  and AEDs , for these patients is not sufficient to prevent all 
seizure events.  The KD is difficult to tolerate and some patients are not compliant with or 
are otherwise not on the diet.  There exists a significant unmet medical need in the subset of pediatric patients who are not on, or not compliant with a KD; the proposed Phase 2 study 
targets this  specific subset of patients. 
Triheptanoin has been used clinically for over 15 years in approximately 200 subjects in human studies of a variety of different diseases, including Glut1  DS (Roe et al. 2002) ,  
(Roe et al. 2006) , (Mochel et al. 2010 ). Of these subjects , approximately 50 were pediatric 
subjects with some as young as neonates ; a significant portion of pediatric subjects  received 
over 5 years of treatment duration with triheptanoin  (Table 7.4.4.1).  These data support the 
safety of triheptanoin when administered at approximately 35% of daily caloric intake in pediatric patients as young as neonates.  
Nonclinical studies evaluating triheptanoin and its metabolites in mice and rats have been 
published and further support the safety of triheptanoin in the Glut1  DS population. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 29 
Data from the animal pharmacokinetic (PK) and toxicity studies indicates that trihe ptanoin is 
well absorbed after oral dosing and is well -tolerated without overt toxicities at doses as high 
as 1.14 g/kg in mice for 9 months with no signs of hepatic or renal injury. 
Data from nonclinical and clinical studies to date suggest triheptanoin d oes not pose any 
serious safety risks that can be identified at this time.  Triheptanoin has been well tolerated in 
humans with no significant safety issues and toxicology or adverse pharmacology findings were not observed in triheptanoin- treated animals.  Studies in animals and humans suggest 
triheptanoin consumed orally has side effects that are similar to those of orally consumed medium chain triglycerides  (MCT oil) .  The most commonly reported adverse effects are 
gastrointestinal distress and excessive weight gain at high doses.  Both of these issues appear 
to resolve when subjects consume triheptanoin in small doses mixed with foods throughout the day and when total caloric intake is appropriately managed . 
Overall the risk -benefit ratio of UX007 is sufficient to support clinical development for the 
treatment of seizures associated with Glut1 DS . 
5.4 Study Rationale 
Glut1  DS is a rare, severely  debilitating disease characterized by seizures, developmental 
delay , and movement disorder ( Pearson et al. 2013) .  It is caused by a mutation in SLC2A1, 
which encodes for Glut 1.  This protein transports glucose from blood into the brain.  
Because glucose is the primary source of energy for the brain, this disorder results in a chronic state of energy deficiency in the brain.  Current treatment consists of  KD and 
AEDs . KD generates ketone bodies that provide an alternative energy source to glucose 
(Pong et al. 2012) , (Pearson et al. 2013).  However, KD is difficult to tolerate and some 
patients are not compliant with or are otherwise not on the diet. 
UX007, triheptanoin, is a triglyceride of medium, odd- carbon chain (C7) fatty acid s.  
The rationale for UX007 in Glut1  DS is that:  
1. Triheptanoin is metabolized to heptanoate and C4 and C5 ketone bodies.  
These metabolites provide an alterna tive energy source to the brain.  
2. Triheptanoin has the ability to provide succinyl-CoA via propionyl-CoA to resupply intermediates of the TCA cycle  (i.e., anaplerosis).  
3. Triheptanoin can support gluconeogenesis in the brain . 
Because of the difficulties in maintaining a KD, some patients are not able to fully comply 
with or tolerate the diet.  These patients represent the subgroup of Gl ut1 DS patients who are 
most in need of an alternative therapy to KD.  Given the significant unmet medical need in 
Glut1  DS patients not on KD, UX007  will be studied in this subgroup.  The seizures due to 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 30 
Glut1  DS are most prominent in the pediatric population and are typically refractory to AED s 
(Pearson et al. 2013 ).  For these reasons, the proposed Phase 2 study is designed to assess the 
safety and efficacy of UX007 in reducing the frequency of seizures in the pediatric , 
adolescent, and adult population.  The study will also evaluate the PK of energy -containing 
metabolites and correlate the achieved concentrations of different metabolites to the potential 
treatment effect s. 
5.5 Primary Efficacy Hypothesis  
UX007 is more effective than placebo for the reduction of seizures in patients with Glut1 DS, 
as measured by the reduction from randomization in frequency of seizures , including: 
Generalized Tonic-Clonic, Generalized Tonic, Generalized Clonic, Generalized Atonic, Partial/Focal with Secondary Generalization, Myoclonic, Myoclonic Atonic, Myoclonic 
Tonic, Complex Partial/Focal, Absence, and Simple Partial/Focal Motor  seizures .   
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 31 
6 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
The primary objectives of the study are to: 
• Evaluate the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo as measured by the reduction from 
randomization to week 8 in frequency of seizures . Observable generalized and partial -
onset seizures measured for 6 weeks by diary and absence seizures measured overnight 
by electroencephalography (EEG).   
• Evaluate the safety of UX007 via adverse event (AE) rates, laboratory values, and electrocardiogram (ECG)  
The secondary objectives of the study are to:  
• Evaluate the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo, as measured by: 
- Seizure response rate, defined as the percentage of subjects with at least 50% reduction from randomization to week 8 in frequency of seizures  
- Change from randomization to Week 8 in cognitive function using the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB) 
- Change from randomization to Week 8 in distance walked as measured by 6MWT 
- Time to onset of paroxysmal exertional dyskinesia (PED) as measured during 6MWT from randomization to Week 8 
- Change from randomization to Week 8 in gross motor function using the Gross Motor Function Measure-88 (GMFM-88)  
• Evaluate long -term efficacy as measured by changes from randomization in frequency of 
seizures over time through week 52  
• Evaluate the optimal dose to control seizures and impact on other clinical manifestations 
during the Dose Exploration Period  
Exploratory objectives are to:  
• Evaluate the effects of UX007, from randomization through Weeks 8 and 52 on: 
- Neurological function  using the Columbia Neurological Score (CNS) 
- Physician global impression of change in clinical status using the Clinical Global 
Impression - Severity scale (CGI -S) and Clinical Global Impression - 
Improvement scale (CGI -I) 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 32 
- Receptive vocabulary using the Pe abody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT)  
- Subject or caregiver -reported quality of life using Short Form-10™ (SF- 10) Health 
Survey for Children or SF-12 for adults 
- Functional disability by caregiver report using the Pediatric Evaluation of 
Disability Inventory  – Computer Adaptive Test (PEDI- CAT)  
- Gait, using gait analysis by computerized mat 
- PK properties of UX007 and its metabolites  
Exploratory objectives are to evaluate the effects of UX007, from randomization through Weeks 8 and 52 on (to be administered at  select  sites) : 
• Visual motor integration using the Beery -Buktenica Developmental Test of Visual Motor 
Integration (Beery- VMI)  
• Spatial understanding and abstract reasoning using the Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices (RCPM ) 
 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 33 
7 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
7.1 Overall Study Design and Plan 
UX007G-CL201 is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study to 
assess the safety and efficacy of UX007 in Glut1  DS.  The study will enroll approximately 
40 pediatric , adolescent, and adult subjects who are cu rrently not on, or not fully compliant 
with a ketogenic or other prescribed high- fat diet .  Enrolled subjects are otherwise able to 
maintain standard of care treatment with  up to 3 AEDs throughout the duration of the study. 
Beginning with the Screening visit, subjects will record seizure frequency during the 6- week 
Baseline Period.  At the end of the B aseline Period, eligible subjects will be randomized in a 
3:1 ratio to either UX007 or placebo .  Dosing will be initiated using a 2 -week titration 
schedule until the subject has reached 35% of total daily calories from study drug (~1-4 g/kg/day depending on age) (Section 7.4).  If a subject has not r eached the target of 
35% of total daily calories by the end of the 2-week titration period, dose titration should continue until the maximum tolerated dose is reached. 
After an 8 -week double-blind T reatment Period, the open- label E xtension Period will begin, 
wherein all subjects will be treated with UX007 through Week 52 of the study.  
A population- PK analysis at Week 26 will provide data on metabolite levels  with all subjects 
on UX007. 
Following the Week 26 visit, all  40 subjects will partic ipate in a 10 -week Dose Exploration 
Period to assess the impact of UX007 dose level on seizure control, other clinical 
manifestations such as movement disorders and cognitive deficits, and tolerability. For subjects participating in the Dose Exploration Pe riod, the dose will be titrated over 1 week 
down to 20% of total daily caloric intake.  After 4 weeks at the 20% dose level, the subject will be evaluated for safety and efficacy measures of seizure control,  motor and cognitive 
function. 
If there are break through seizures during the down titration period, as defined by an increase 
in frequency of 1 seizure in a 4 week period, relative to the previous 4-week period on a 
stable UX007 dose, or in the opinion of the investigator there has been a worsening of sympto ms prior to completion of the 4-week period, the subject may begin the up- titration 
phase early . 
After 4 weeks at the 20% dose level, the UX007 dose will then be titrated up over 1 week to 40% of total daily caloric intake and maintained at that level for 4 weeks. If a subject cannot 
tolerate titrating up to the 40% dose level, the dose should be titrated to the maximum tolerated dose as determined by the Investigator.  After 4 weeks at the 40% (or maximum tolerated) dose level, the subject will be evaluated for safety, and efficacy measures of seizure control, motor and cognitive function.   
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 34 
At the end of the Dose Exploration Period, the subject will continue in the open- label 
Extension period, and maintained on the UX007 dose (as determined by the Inve stigator) that 
provided the maximum improvement in clinical status with acceptable tolerability, and 
continued on this dose for the duration of the study.  If marked improvements in clinical 
status were not observed at a higher dose level and/or tolerabili ty was unacceptable, the 
subject will return to the UX007 dose level where maximal benefit was achieved as defined by seizure control and improvements in motor and/or cognitive symptoms.  As determined by the Investigator, this may be the pre- titration UX0 07 dose from Week 26 or the 20% dose 
given during the down titration phase. 
Forty  subjects will participate in the Dose E xploration Period ; the remaining subjects 
enrolled will continue with the optimal dose achieved during the previous 26 weeks. Long 
term safety  and maintena nce of effect of UX007 will be assessed during the Extension 
Period.  Subjects who complete treatment through Week 52 may have the option to continue 
UX007 treatment , if warranted,  in a separate open -label extension study.  Figure  7.1.1 
provides a schematic of the study design . 
Figure 7.1.1: UX007G-CL201 Study Schema  
 
7.2 Discussion of Study Design, Including Choice of Control Group 
The study is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel- group study to assess 
the safety and efficacy of UX007 in Glut1  DS.  Beginning with the Screening visit, subjects 
will record their seizu re frequency during the 6- week Baseline Period.  At the end of the 
Baseline Period, eligible subjects will be randomized to either UX007 or placebo ( 3:1 ratio) 
and begin a 2-week titration schedule to increase dosing until they have reached 35% of total daily calories (~1 -4 g/kg/day depending on age).  The dose will then be maintained for an 
additional 6 weeks (total 8 -week Treatment Period).  ScreeningBaseline on SOC*
(6 wks)
3:1 RandomizationDouble -Blind, Placebo- Controlled 
Treatment Period (8 wks)2 wks
Titration
Placebo (safflower oil) + SOC*Open -Label 
Extension Period
(18 wks)
UX007 + SOC*
*SOC: Standard of Care 
(up to 3 stable AEDs)UX007 (triheptanoin) + SOC*
Target Dose 20%
Caloric Intake
(4wks)Target Dose 40%
Caloric Intake
(4wks)
Target Dose 35%
Caloric IntakeIndividualized
Target Dose (16 wks)
Dose Exploration (~40 subjects)1 wkTitration
3URWRFRO1XPEHU8;*&/
$PHQGPHQW±1RY


3URSULHWDU\DQG&RQILGHQWLDO 3DJH
7KHGXUDWLRQRIWKH%DVHOLQH3H ULRGDQGWKH7UHDWPHQW3HULRGZH UHGHVLJQHGWRPLQLPL]H
WKHOLNHOLKRRGRIFKDQJHVWRFRQF RPLWDQW$('UHJ LPHQVPLQLP L]HVXEMHFW
GLVFRQWLQXDWLRQVGXHWRODFNRIHIIL FDF\VLQFHVXEMHFWVFRPSOHW LQJWKH%DVHOLQH3HULRGDQGRU
UDQGRPL]HGWRSODFHERZLOOQRWEHQHI LWIURPVWXG\GUXJDQG EHRIVXIILFLHQWOHQJWKWR
DOORZIRUDFFXUDWHGHWHUPLQDWL RQRIWKHVHL]XUHIUHTXHQFLHVGXU LQJWKRVHSHULRGV
8OWUDJHQ\[KDVGLVFXVVHGWKH EDVHOLQHDQGWUHDWPHQWSHULRGGXUD WLRQVZLWKSK\VLFLDQ
H[SHUWV 
7KHXQDQLPRXVDGYLFHLVWKDWWK HEDVHOLQHDQGW UHDWPHQWSHULRG VPXVW
EHNHSWWRDPLQLPXPEHFDXVHWKH VWXG\ZLOOHQUROODSUHGRPLQDQ WO\\RXQJSHGLDWULFSDWLHQW
SRSXODWLRQWKHPDMRULW\RIZKRPZ LOOOLNHO\EHXQGHUWKHDJHR I\HDUV7KLV\RXQJ
SHGLDWULFSRSXODWLRQLV HVSHFLDOO\YXOQHUDEO HWRWKHHIIHFWVRI VHL]XUHV7KHSURSRVHGEDVHOLQH
DQGWUHDWPHQWGXUDWLRQVWRWDO ZHHNVDQGLQWKHLURSLQLRQLV GHHPHGWKHPD[LPXP
DFFHSWDEOHGXUDWLRQWRWKHPWKH LUSDWLHQWVDQGWKHLU,QVWLWXW LRQDO5HYLHZ%RDUGV,5%V
$QRWKHUIDFWRUFRQVLGHUHGLQG HFLGLQJRQWKHGXUDWLRQRIWKH7U HDWPHQW3HULRGLVH[WHQWRI
HIILFDF\RYHUWKHORQJWHUP$ IWHUWKHLQLWLDOZHHNGRXEOHE OLQG7UHDWPHQW3HULRGWKH
RSHQODEHO([WHQVL RQ3HULRGZLOOEHJLQZKH UHLQDOOVXEMHFWVZL OOEHWUHDWHGZLWK8;
WKURXJK:HHNRIWKHVWXG\([W HQGLQJWKHSODFHERFRQWUROOHG WUHDWPHQWSHULRGLVQRW
ZDUUDQWHGLQWKLVSRSXODWLRQ/RQJ WHUPVDIHW\DQGPDLQWHQDQFH RIHIIHFWRI8;ZLOOEH
DVVHVVHGGXULQJWKLV([WHQVLRQ3 HULRG6HL]XUHFRXQWVZLOOFRQ WLQXHGXULQJWKH([WHQVLRQ
3HULRGVXFKWKDWWKHVHL]XUHIU HTXHQF\ZLOOEH GHWHUPLQHGRYHU DRQH\HDUSHULRGDQGLI
ZDUUDQWHGLQDQDGGLWLRQDOH[WHQVLRQVWXG\
$GRVHH[SORUDWLRQLQVXEMHFWVKD VEHHQDGGHGWRWKHSURWRFR OWRGHWHUPLQHZKHWKHUWKH
SURSRVHGGRVHLVWKHRSWLPDOD QGQHFHVVDU\GRVHIRU8;WRFR QWUROVHL]XUHVDQGLPSDFW
RWKHUFOLQLFDOPDQLIHVWDWLRQV7 KHGHPRQVWUDWL RQRIDZLWKGUDZ DOHIIHFWZLWKDQH[LWFODXVH
WKDWZRXOGDOORZWKHVXEMHFWW RPRUHTXLFNO\PRYHWRWKHXSWLW UDWLRQSKDVHLIWKHUHLVD
VLJQLILFDQWORVVRIHIILFDF\GXU LQJWKHGRZQWLWUDWLRQSKDVH DQGDUHWXUQWRFRQWURODIWHUZDUG
ZRXOGGHPRQVWUDWHERWKWKDWDKL JKHUGRVHZDVQHFHVVDU\DQGWKD W8;KDGDVXVWDLQHG
HIIHFW
6HOHFWLRQRI6WXG\3RSXODWLRQ
7KHVWXG\ZLOOEHFRQGXFWHGLQSHGLDWULF DWOHDVW\HDURIDJHDWWLPHRIFRQVHQW DGROHVFHQW
DQGDGXOWVXEMHFWVZLWKDFRQILU PHGGLDJQRVLVRI*OXW'6ZKRD UHFXUUHQWO\QRWRQRUQRW
FRPSOLDQWZLWKDSUHVFULEHG.'RU RWKHUKLJKIDWGLHW(QUROOP HQWPD\LQFOXGHVXEMHFWVIURP
QHLJKERULQJFRXQWULHVZLWKLQWKH (XURSHDQ8QLRQ&DQDGDDQG6R XWK$PHULFD$SSURSULDWH
ORFDORUFRXQWU\UHTXLUHPH QWVZLOOEHIROORZHG
&KLOGUHQZLWK*OXW'6KDYHEHH QLQFOXGHGLQWKHVWXG\SRSXODWL RQVLQFHWKH\KDYHWKH
JUHDWHVWPHGLFDOQHHGDQGDQLQF UHDVHGQXPEHURIFOLQLFDOHYHQW V7KHPDQLIHVWDWLRQRI
VHL]XUHVLQ*OXW'6RFFXUVSUHGR PLQDQWO\LQWKHSHGLDWULFDJH UDQJHHVSHFLDOO\XQGHUWKH
DJHRI3RQJHWDO DQGDGXOWSDWLHQWVPD\DOV RFRQWLQXHWRKDYHDVLPLODUPPD
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 36 
phenotype of breakthrough seizures into their thirties, significant movement disorders 
(estimated at 90%; De Vivo  personal communication), and have a more difficult time 
maintaining the KD.  The expanded age range of the population will strengthen the ability to 
evaluate a possible impact on seizures and movement disorders.  In addition, the seizures are typically refractory to AEDs (Pearson et al. 2013 ), (Pong et al. 2012)  and thus represent a 
significant unmet medical need that justifies the study of UX007 for the treatment of Glut1  DS. 
The goal of the study is to assess whether UX007 is more effective than  placebo for the 
reduction of seizures in patients with Glut1  DS.  Therefore, s pecific criteria were included to 
define a study population experiencing a quantifiable number of events despite current treatment.  The inclusion criteria are structured to enr oll subjects currently experiencing 
observable seizures despite a prior or current use of at least 1 AED, with an average frequency of at least 2 seizures in 4 weeks  over the last 24 weeks.  To confirm seizure 
activity and establish an accurate baseline fr equency for treatment comparison, only subjects 
with at least 2 observable seizures per 4 weeks during the B aseline Period  will be 
randomized. 
Glut1  DS patients currently on  or fully compliant with  a KD or other prescribed high-fat diet 
of at least  60% calories from fat will be excluded from the study population.  Reports suggest 
that KD is effective for the treatment of the seizures  of Glut1  DS, although controlled trials 
have not been performed  (Pong et al. 2012) , (Pearson et al. 2013) .  Nevertheless, KD is 
prescribed in most Glut1  DS patients.  There exists a subset of patients who are not on KD 
because it is difficult to tolerate and some patients are not compliant with or are otherwise 
not on the diet.  In addition, some subjects continue to experience breakthrough seizures while on KD.  Because the seizures of Glut1  DS are typically refractory to AEDs, the subset 
of patients who are not on KD represents those most in need of an alter native therapy to KD.  
Thus, a significant unmet medical need exists in this subgroup that justifies the study of UX007 in subjects not on KD. 
Additional exclusion criteria were incorporated to protect the study population from possible 
contraindicated treatments  or unnecessary safety risks .  Although triheptanoin is not known 
to adversely affect the liver, many of the commonly prescribed AEDs are.  In order to minimize confounding factors on interpreting the safety of UX007, subjects with greater than 3 times the upper limit of normal of either alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) will be excluded from the study. In vitro studies have shown that 
pancreatic lipases hydrolyze triheptanoin into free fatty acids and glycerol; the refore 
inhibitors of pancreatic lipases (e.g., orlistat) should be avoided while taking UX007. 
Many Glut1 DS  patients are severely impacted by their disorder from early infancy .  
Triheptanoin has been administered previously to newborns, infants, children, and adults.  
The previous clinical experience and nonclinical data suggests a favorable risk/benefit profile 
for the target study population.  The sponsor has taken all reasonable measures to ensure the protection and safety of this population.  Appropria te pediatric expertise will be available at 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 37 
all trial sites  with children enrolled, and efforts will be focused on minimizing risk, fear, pain 
and distress during conduct of the study. 
7.3.1 Inclusion Criteria  
Individuals eligible to participate in this study must meet all of the following criteria:  
1) Diagnosis of Glut1 DS confirmed by SLC2A1 mutation  
2)    Males and females  at least 1 year of age at the time of informed consent 
3) Average of at least 2 observable seizures (generalized  or partial -onset [simple 
partial motor, complex partial,  absence,  or secondarily generalized] seizures) in 
4 weeks  over the last 24 weeks , by subject or caregiver report 
4) At least 2 observable seizures (generalized  or partial -onset [simple  partial motor, 
complex partial, or secondarily generalized] seizures) in 4 weeks  during the 
baseline period, with no 3- week seizure-free period during the Baseline Period  OR 
absence sei zures documented on Screening EEG 
5) Continuing to have seizures despite a prior or current use of at least 1 AED  
6) Allowed t o be on up to 3 concomitant AEDs that must have been stable in dose at 
least 2 weeks prior to the beginning of screening and anticipated to remain stable in 
dose through the end of the 8-week, placebo-controlled Treatment Period  
7) Not on, or not fully compliant with a prescribed diet plan (e.g. KD )  
8) Plasma level of beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) ≤ 1 mmol/L (non- fasting) at Screening  
9) Provide written or verbal assent (if possible) and written informed consent by a legally authorized representative after the nature of the study has been explained, 
and prior to any research -related procedures  
10) Must, in the opinion of the investigator, be willing and able to complete all aspects of the study, comply with accurate completion of the seizures diary, and likely to complete the 8 -week, placebo -controlled, T reatment Period  
11) Females of childbearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test at Screening, be willing to use an acceptable method of contraception, and have additional 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 38 
pregnancy tests during the study.  Females con sidered not of childbearing potential 
include those who have not reached menarche, had total hysterectomy, have been in 
menopause for at least two years, or have had tubal ligation at least one year prior to Screening . 
7.3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
Individuals who me et any of the following exclusion criteria will not be eligible to participate 
in the study:  
1) Serum ALT or AST levels exceeding 3X the upper limit of normal at Screening  
2) Any known hypersensitivity to triheptanoin or safflower oil that, in the judgment of the investigator, places the subject at increased risk for adverse effects  
3) Prior use of triheptanoin with 30 days prior to Screening 
4) History of, or current suicidal ideation, behavior and/or attempts 
5) Pregnant and/or breastfeeding an infant at Screening  
6) Participants unwilling or unable to discontinue use of a prohibited medication (Section 7.4.6.1 [MCT oil, barbiturates, pancreatic lipase inhibitors , KetoCal or other 
KD supplements, and/or KD ]) or other substance that may confound study objectives  
7) Use of any investigational product (drug or supplement, including MCT oil) within 30 days prior to Screening, or at any time during the study 
8) Has a condition of such severity and acuity, in the opinion of the investigator, that it warrants immediate surgical intervention or other treatment  
9) Has a concurrent disease or condition, or laboratory abnormality that, in the view of the investigator, places the subject at high risk of poor treatment compliance or of not completing the study, or would interfere with study participation or introduces additional safety concerns (e.g., diabetes mellitus, other concurrent neurological or psychiatric disorders)  
7.3.3 Removal of Subjects from T herapy or Assessment  
In accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, subjects have the right to withdraw from the 
study at any time for any reason.  The investigator and Ultragenyx also have the right to 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 39 
remove subjects from the study.  Ultragenyx must be notified of all subject withdrawals as 
soon as possible.  Ultragenyx also reserves the right to discontinue the study at any time for 
either clinical or administrative reasons and to discontinue participation of an individual subject or Investigator due to poor enrollment or noncompliance, as applicable.  
Subjects will be removed from the study for the following reasons: 
• Occurrence of an unacceptable AE  
• An illness that, in the judgment of the investigator or Ultragenyx, might invalidate the study or place the subject at risk  
Subjects may be removed from the study for the following reasons: 
• At the request of the subject, investigator, or Ultragenyx, for administrative or other 
reasons  
• Protocol deviation or unreliable behavior 
If the reason for removal of a subject from the study is an A E, the AE and any related test or 
procedure results will be recorded in the source documents and transcribed onto the 
Case Report Form (CRF).  Each clinically significant abnormal laboratory value or other clinically meaningful abnormality should be followed until the abnormality resolves or until a decision is made that it is not likely to resolve.  If such abnormalities do not return to normal within 30 days after the last dose given, their etiology should be identified and Ultragenyx should be notified.  All unscheduled tests must be reported to Ultragenyx immediately.  
If a subject discontinues from the study prematurely, every reasonable effort should be made to perform the Early  Termination Visit procedures within four weeks of discontinuation. 
Subject s who withdraw or are removed from the study prior to randomization may be 
replaced on a case- by-case basis, at the discretion of Ultragenyx.  
7.3.3.1 Stopping Rules  
A DMC will be constituted for Study UX007G- CL20 1 and will act in an advisory capacity to 
monitor the safety of UX007 on a routine basis throughout the trial ( Section  7.6.8).  
The DMC may provide advice to Ultragenyx in any determination of whether study 
enrollment should be paused or if the study should be halted. 
Individual subjects who experience any unexpected and possibly, probably , or definitely  
drug- related SAEs ( Section 8.5.2) that represent a change in the nature or an increase in 
frequency of the serious event from their prior medical history will be assessed as to whether 
the subject will continue on the study. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 40 
Regulatory Authorities, as well as the IRBs/ECs, will be informed should unexpected and 
possibly, probably, or definitely study drug- related SAEs occur . A full evaluation of the 
event will be performed in order to make a decision regarding what actions to take, including 
whether to recommend stopping the study. Regulatory Authorities, as well as IRBs/ECs, will 
be informed if the study is paused or stopped. If the Sponsor deems it appropriate to restart the trial following an internal safety review, this will be done only following approval by Regulatory Authorities.  
7.4 Treatments  
Subjects will be randomized to receive either investigational product ( UX007 ) or reference 
therapy (matched placebo ) and begin a 2-week dose titration period to achieve study drug 
treatment  comprising up to 35% of total daily calories or to the maximum tolerated dose 
level (Table 7.4.1 ). If a subject has not reached the target of 35% of total daily calories by the 
end of the 2- week titration period, dose titration should continue until the maximum tolerated 
dose is reached.  
Table 7.4.1: Dose Titration Recommendation  
The table is an example for how to titrate subject to 35% of caloric intake or the maximum tolerated dose if it is < 35%  within two weeks.  D iscretion  and flexibility may be used by the 
Investigator for each subject.  
Days of Dosing  Caloric Intake  If Tolerability Issues Arise:  
Days 1-2 ~10% N/A 
Days 3-5 ~15% N/A 
Days 6-8 ~20% N/A 
Days 9-11 ~25% Down -titrate to 20% for 3 more days, 
then continue to titrate up if possible 
Days 12-14 ~30% Down -titrate to 25% for 3 more days, 
then continue to titrate up if possible  
Day 15 - study duration ~35%* Down -titrate to 30% for 3 more days, , 
then continue to titrate up if possible  
*Some subjects may not be able to tolerate up to 35% of daily caloric intake, despite down titration and re -
titrating up.  For those subjects, their individual maximum tolerated dose, as determined by the Investigator, 
will be administered for the duration of the study.  
Treatment w ill always be  mixed with food (or formula, if appropriate) and administered 
PO or by gastronomy tube at least four times per day (breakfast, lunch, dinner, and before 
bed).  The dose should be divided into smaller more frequent doses with food as needed.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 41 
The dose should always be mixed with small amounts of food as indicated in the 
administration guideline and never administered as the oil directly . 
Subjects will maintain treatment at the 35% total daily calorie dose level for a 6 -week 
Treatment Period (Weeks 2 -8).  Following completion of the Week 8 study visit, all subjects 
will continue treatment with open -label UX007 at the 35% dose level for an additional 
44 weeks (Weeks 8 -52). 
For subjects participating in the Dose Exploration Period, the dose will be titrated down over 
1 week to 20% of total daily caloric intake.  Provided there is no significant loss of efficacy during the down-titration phase, the subject will remain at the 20% dose level for 4 weeks.  The dose will then be titrated up over 1 week to 40% of total daily caloric intake.  Following 4 weeks at the 40% dose level, the subject will be maintained on the minimum dose of drug that provided the maximum achievable efficacy and tolerability, and continued on this dos e 
for the duration of the study .  Refer to the Dose Administration Guidelines in the Study 
Reference Manual for additional information on dosing and dose titration. 
7.4.1 Investigational Product 
UX007 (triheptanoin) is a colorless to yellow oil.  UX007 is a liquid, intended for oral (PO) administration.   One thousand grams (1025 ± 25 g) of neat triheptanoin drug substance is 
filled into 1 L  bottles.  During the 8 week double blind period of the study 1000 mL UX007 
will be provided in 1 L round amber colored glass bottles.  During the open l abel Extension 
Period  of the study, UX007 will be dispensed in 1 L round, translucent HDPE  bottles . 
UX007 is manufactured, packaged, and labeled according to GMP regulations. 
7.4.2 Reference Therapy  
Placebo will consist of safflower oil and will match the appear ance of UX007.  Dose level, 
titration,  and mode of administration will be identical to that of UX007 during the 
double- blind Treatment Period .   
7.4.3 Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups  
Eligible subjects will be enrolled in the study and sequentially assigned an identification 
number.  Subjects will be assigned  to investigational product or placebo treatment groups 
based on a manual randomization process  developed by the Sponsor. Patients with a broad 
spectrum of seizure types and frequency will be eligible for enrollment in the study.  The 
frequency of s eizures varies among individuals affected with Glut1  DS; some experience 
daily events, while others experience occasional seizures separated by days, weeks , or 
months ( Pascual et al. 2004 ).  Seizure frequency does not cor relate with phenotypic severity  
(Wang et al. 2012) .  Randomization will seek to stratify subjects based on seizure frequency 
reported during the 6-week baseline period.  At  the end of the Baseline Period , eligible 
subjects will be randomized in a 3:1 ratio to either UX007 or placebo.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 42 
7.4.4 Selection of Doses and Study Duration  
The UX007 dose and regimen for this study was selected based on the extensive clinical 
information derived from over 13 years of clinical experience in a variety of diseases.  Approximately 200 subjects have recei ved triheptanoin treatment, 51 of which involved 
pediatric patients as young as neonates, with 23 of these 51 with over 5 years of treatment duration ( Table 7.4.4.1 ), (Roe et al. 2002) , (Roe et al. 2006) , (Mochel et al. 2010) . 
The data support the safety of triheptanoin when administered at approximately 35% of daily caloric intake in pediatric patients as young as neonates.  Previous clinical data also suggest an age -dependent dose that relates to the relatively higher energy requirements for young 
children versus older children versus adults. 
Table 7.4.4.1:  Demographics and Treatment Duration in Clinical Trials  
Age at Start of 
Treatment  Duration of Treatment 
0-6 
months 6 months - 
1 year  1-2 years 2-5 years >5 years  Total  
N (%)  
0-1 month (Neonates)    1     2 3 (3.7%)  
1 month -2 years (Children)    3 1 3 3 10 (12.2%)  
2-12 years (Children)  5 2 4 4 18 33 (40.2%)  
12-16 years (Adolescents)    1 2 2   5 (6.1%)  
>16 years (Other)  11 5 11 2 2 31 (37.8%)  
Total  
N (%)  16 
(19.5%) 12 
(14.6%) 18 
(22.0%) 11 
(13.4%) 25 
(30.5%) 82 (100%) 
Source:  Summary of Clinical Trials of Triheptanoin Therapy for Metabolic Disorders Done at the Institute of 
Metabolic Disease from Dec. 28, 1999 to Aug. 7, 2009 at Baylor Research Institute, and Personal 
Communication, Dr. Vockley, U. Pittsburgh 2013.  
N (%) is defined as the total from each column or row divided by the total number of study subjects (82).  
The target dose of 35% of calories by UX007 will be administered PO with food (or formula, 
as appropriate) divided into at least 4 doses per day, as tolerated (breakfast, lunch, dinner, 
and before bed).  The dose may be divided into smaller more frequent doses with food as needed.  The daily  dose is consistent with prior clinical use in other diseases and is 
equivalent to approximately 2-4 g/kg in infants and young children, decreasing to 1- 2 g/kg 
for older children and adolescents.  Triheptanoin treatment has been generally safe and well tolerated at the aforementioned dose levels.   Higher doses are poorly tolerated due to 
gastrointestinal disturbance, such as diarrhea; lower doses would likely provide suboptimal 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 43 
efficacy.   The planned D ose Exploration Period is intended to evaluate the effect of 
UX007  dose level on safety and effica cy. 
7.4.4.1 Dose Exploration Period 
Based on the historical use of triheptanoin, it is expected that sufficient energy substrate 
replacement will be obtained with dosing of 35% of calories (roughly equivalent to 2-4 grams per kg for small children and 1-2 grams per kg for teenagers and adults ).  
The Dose Exploration Period will also explore doses above and below the anticipated clinical 
dose of 35% in a subset of approximately 40 subjects and assess for maintenance of effect .  
In addition to seizures, e fficacy in o ther parameters should be considered before making the 
assessment of dose adequacy  in Glut1 DS, and may necessitate  individualized dosing.  
Therefore it is important to integrate the response in seizures  frequency , developmental 
testing and motor dysfunction to establish the impact of  dose level and to test a series of 
doses in the same individuals to allow for proper individualization of dose.  This is also best done after a period of stable treatment to assure that a steady state has been reached in energy metabolism.  This proposed design has been successfully used in a prior development 
program for sapropterin dihydrochloride for the treatment of phenylketonuria ( Lee et al. 
2008) . 
The Dose Exploration Period will look at forced dose titration establishment of efficacy as an 
approach to verify the benefit of the proposed dose range across all domains of disease. At the same time it should verify that there is maintenance of treatment effect after all 
patients have been on active treatment for at least 18 weeks, by titrating patients downward 
to observe for recurrence  of symptoms. 
The lower dose of 20% was chosen for the down titration phase based on anecdotal reports of a significant loss of efficacy when triheptanoin is dosed below 25%. The upper dose of 40% was chosen based on anecdotal reports that tolerability becomes an issue above 25% in some patients and above 35% in most patients.  If there are breakthrough seizures during the down titration period, as defined by an increase in frequency of 1 seizure in a 4 week period, relative to the previous 4 week period on a stable UX007 dose, or in the opinion of the investigator there has been a worsening of symptoms prior to completion of the 4 week period, the subject may begin the up- titration phase early .  The demonstration of a 
withdrawal effect and a return to control afterward would demonstrate both that a higher dose was necessary and that UX007 had a sustained effect.  
7.4.4.2 Study Duration  
Subject participation will be up to 58 weeks  in duration, including screening, the Baseline 
Period, titration/T reatment Period, and Extension P eriod .  Following completion of the 
double-blind T reatment Period (8 weeks), subjects may continue open-label UX007 
treatment for an additional 44 weeks within  the Extension Period, if indicated by the 
investigator .  The total treatment duration of up to one year  enables a long -term assessment 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 44 
of the safety and  efficacy of UX007  in subjects with Glut1  DS.  Beyond this period, 
subjects  may  be eligible for an extensi on study , if warranted,  through a separate protocol . 
7.4.5 Blinding 
The titration and Treatment Period ( Weeks 0 -8) will be conducted as a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled study.  Double-blind conditions will be established so that 
neither the sponsor, subject or site personnel involved in study conduct will know the identity 
of a subject’s treatment.   Following completion of the double-blind period, all eligible 
subjects will receive open -label UX007 for a 44-week Extension Period (Weeks 8-52) to 
assess long -term safety and duration of effect.  
Study par ameters to achieve and maintain the double-blind status of the study include: 
• Sequential assignment of subject numbers 
• A randomization schedule developed by an independent third-party vendor so that 
Ultragenyx and site personnel receive no knowledge of treatment assignment during the study 
• Management of subject treatment assignment via manual randomization 
• Labeling of study drug with the study number and a unique kit number 
• Packaging and delivery of study drug supplies to sites in a manner that maintains blinding 
of site personnel 
• Matched appearance of i nvestigational product and placebo 
The investigator and site personnel will remain blinded to the randomization code during the 
study.  Treatment assignment for an individual subject should be unblinded by the Investigator only in an emergency, and only if when knowledge of the treatment assignment is urgently needed for the clinical management or welfare of the subject.  Treatment should 
be provided in accordance with the medical condition and with regard to the information provided in the IB.  The Investigator should contact the medical monitor or project manager before unblinding, when possible, but priority should be given to treatment of the subjec t. 
The Investigator must record the date and reason for revealing the blinded treatment assignment for that subject on the CRF.  Treatment assignment may be unblinded by the 
sponsor to satisfy expedited reporting requirements of regulatory authorities.  If a subject’s  
treatment assignment is unblinded prior to completion of the study, the subject will be discontinued from the double-blind portion of the study (but may still be eligible to complete the open-label Extension Period). 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 45 
7.4.6 Prior and Concomitant Therapy  
7.4.6.1 Prohibited Medications  
Subject s may not be enrolled if they have used any investigational product within the last 
30 days  prior to screening , or are unwilling to discontinue use of a substance that may 
confound study objectives.  The following medications are prohibited throughout the study: 
• MCT oil  
• KetoCal or other KD  supplements 
• Barbitu rates 
• Pancreatic lipase inhibitors  (e.g. , Orlistat) due to possible inhibition of metabolism of 
triheptanoin 
• A prescribed diet plan (e.g. KD ) comprised of at least 60%  total daily caloric intake from 
fat 
7.4.6.2 Permitted Medications  
Other than the medications specificall y prohibited in this protocol, s ubjects may receive 
concomitant medications as required.  Medications (investigational, prescription, 
over-the-counter, and herbal) and nutritional supplements taken during the 30 days prior to Screening visit  will be reviewed and recorded .  Some medications, such as AEDs, must not 
be changed or discontinued, and must be kept at the same dose for the Baseline and double-blind Treatment Periods.  
7.4.7 Treatment Complian ce 
At the Randomization visit and each subsequent visit through Week 36, e ach subject will be 
dispensed a n adequate supply of study drug to comprise 35% total daily caloric intake  
(or appropriate dose level if participating in the Dose Exploration Period).  Subjects and/or caregivers will record consumption of study drug in a study diary .  The diary will also be 
used to maintain a daily diet record for the 3 days prior to each visit.  Th e diary will be 
reviewed by a dietitian  or site personnel upon each vi sit.  Subjects will be instructed to return 
all used (empty study drug containers) and open/partially used study drug to the site at the 
next visit for administration during the day(s) of the visit.  Site personnel will maintain a record of all medication dispensed to each subject.  The remaining volume of unused 
medication returned to the site  upon early termination or study completion will be estimated 
for study drug accountability. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 46 
7.5 Study Procedures  and Assessments  
7.5.1 Schedule of Events  
Following the signing of informed consent at the Screening visit , each subject will 
complete  a 6-week Baseline P eriod  to establish a clinical baseline  and confirm eligibility .  
The Randomization visit (Week 0 ± 3 days ) will be 2 days in duration to complete all 
assessments and the overnight EEG (prior to randomization).  Subjects will be randomized to 
treatment after inclusion/exclusion criteria have been confirmed.  Assessments at Week 2 
will be completed during a telephone call, including the dietitian  consultation; no visit to the 
study site will be required.  Subjects will return to the clinic at Week 4 (± 3 days)  and at the 
end of the double-blind Treatment Period for a 2-day study visit ( Week 8 ± 3 days ).  
If deemed feasible by the investigator, subjects will continue on open- label UX007  treatment 
and return for study visits at 6-13 week intervals (± 2 week s) to assess long- term safety and 
efficacy  during the Extension Period.  Subjects participating in the Dose Exploration Period 
will return for additional visits following 1 week titration and 4 -weeks treatment at each dose 
level (i.e. Weeks 31 and 36 ± 3 days).  The study coordinator will telephone the subject/caregiver as needed  throughout the study for additional monitoring .  For subjects who 
discontinue prior to completing the study, eve ry reasonable effort should be made to perform 
the Early T ermination visit procedures within 4 weeks of discontinuation. 
The parameters to be assessed  in Study UX007G- CL20 1, along with timing of assessments, 
are provided in the Schedule of Events ( Table 2.1) . Where caregiver assessments are 
required, the same individual should complete the assessment for consistency of reporting, when possible.  Refer to the Study Reference Manual for additional de tails on specific 
assessments.  
7.5.2 Efficacy Measures  
The concept for evaluation is to study the effects of UX007 treatment on seizures, movement disorders, and neurological development in Glut1  DS subjects through clinical assessments 
within the double-blind T reatment Period and the open- label Extension P eriod . 
The primary efficacy endpoint is the reduction from Randomization in seizure frequency.  This endpoint is the most commonly used primary endpoint in AED trials for refractory epilepsy and w ould be able to similarly determine the clinically relevant effects of UX007 on 
the seizure due to Glut1  DS. Secondary efficacy endpoints related to the effects of UX007 on 
seizures will help further understand the effects of UX007 on seizure activity from different methodologies.  The long term effects will be examined using the same endpoints.  
The effect of UX007 treatment on Glut1  DS will be assessed by evaluating additional critical 
variables of disease impacting motor and neurological function, along w ith relevant 
biomarkers and metabolites.  Secondary and exploratory efficacy endpoints related to the 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 47 
effects of UX007 on parameters other than seizures will help to define whether UX007 has 
effects on the developmental delay and motor abnormalities due to Glut1  DS. 
The effects  on Glut1 DS clinical features  will be studied over the Treatment and Extension 
Period s of the study (52 weeks  total).  While changes in seizure frequency  can occur within 
6 week s, a longer treatment period is needed to observe maintena nce of effect and long -term 
safety . 
7.5.2.1 Primary Efficacy Variable 
Seizure Frequency Reduction : Percent reduction from randomization to week 8 in 
frequency of seizures.   Observable generalized and partial -onset seizures measured for 
6 weeks by diary and  absence seizures measured  overnight by  electroencephalography  
(EEG ). 
Seizures are a hallmark of Glut1  DS in approximately 90% of affected individuals  ( Wang et 
al. 2012) .  The frequency of seizures varies among individuals; some experience daily events 
while others may have seizures separated by days, weeks, or even months.  The number of observable seizures will be recorded by the subject or caregiver via diary throughout the 
study. 
The frequency of different seizure types will be recorded.  Seizure types will be defined and 
standardized according to the ILAE Commission on Classification and Terminology  (Berg et al. 2010) .  Indicated seizure types are consistent with those observed in a large 
Glut1  DS cohort study designed to define epilepsy phenotypes in this population  
(Pong et al. 2012) . 
Observable seizures for the primary efficacy measure are defined as : 
• Generalized  Tonic-Clonic, Generalized Tonic, Generalized Clonic, Generalized Atonic 
• Partial/Focal with Secondary Generalization  
• Myoclonic, Myoclonic (Astatic) Atonic, Myoclonic Tonic 
• Complex Partial/Focal  
• Simple Partial/Focal Motor 
Electroencephalography :  Case- report studies in limited groups of Glut1 DS patients 
suggest a normal interictal background is the most common finding on both routine and prolonged EEG recordings.  Both absence and myoclonic seizures have been observed in pediatric Glut1 DS patients during overnight continuous monitoring (
Leary et al. 2003) .  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 48 
Several studies have examined electrophysiologic characterist ics in Glut1 DS patients on 
KDs (Kessler et al. 2011) . 
Abnormalities on EEG (including absence seizures) will be recorded with an overnight 
EEG  conducted at the Week 0, 8, 26, and 31 visits. Confirmatory EEG at Screening for 
patients with absence seizures only is required for ~3 hours.  For Week 0  EEG, begin EEG 
PRIO R TO Randomization date.  Monitoring periods of less than 12 hours in duration for 
Week 0, 8, 26, and 31 vi sits will be considered a protocol violation. Key measures will 
include: (1) frequency of EEG seizures, including absence; and (2) frequency of interictal 
epileptiform discharges. 
7.5.2.2 Secondary Efficacy Variables 
The secondary clinical efficacy variables  in this study will evaluate additional measures of 
seizure frequency and response, movement disorders, and neurological  function using the 
evaluations detailed below. Portions of physical therapy assessments  may be videotaped to 
monitor assessment  administration and assess for qualitative changes in function (e.g. gait).  
Subject identity will be protected by blurring the facial area in the video(s).  The Investigator 
may use clinical judgment in deciding whether to administer certain assessments to  subjects 
based on age, development, and cognitive ability, as appropriate. 
Refer to the Study Reference Manual for additional details on secondary clinical efficacy 
measures.  
Seizure Response Rate:  The seizure response rate is defined as the percentage of subjects 
with at least a 50% reduction  from randomization to week 8 in seizures  
Observable seizures via diary: Observable seizure frequency reduction  and observable 
seizure response rate as measured by diary  
Absence seizures via EEG : Absence seizure fre quency reduction  and absence seizure 
response rate as measured by EEG   
Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery :  Cognitive impairment is 
common in Glut1 DS patients and can range from learning disabilities to severe intellectual disability  (
Wang et al. 2012) .  Neuropsychological function will be measured using 
CANTAB tests, which have been applied to many age groups, including evaluation in children as young as 4 years of age ( Luciana et al. 2002) .  A standardized, computerized 
battery of the following 5 nonverbal tests: 1) Motor Scr eening Test (MOT), 2)  Paired 
Associates Learning Test (PAL), 3) Reaction Time (RTI), 4) Spatial Span (SSP) and 5) Spatial Working Memory (SWM) will be administered.   Completion time is approximately 
20 minutes. The MOT will be used as a screening tool to identify visual, motor and comprehension difficulties that could impact the reliability of the test.  The  remaining 4 tests 
will not be administered to subjects who are not able to complete the MOT.  The PAL is a 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 49 
visual memory test that assesses episodic me mory and new learning and is most sensitive to 
changes in medial temporal lobe function.  The RTI is an attention test that measures 
movement and speed of response to a visual target.  The SSP is a test of executive function, working memory and planning te st that evaluates working memory capacity and is most 
sensitive to changes in frontal lobe function.  The SWM is also a test of working memory that evaluates the ability to retain visual information and manipulate it in working memory using heuristic strategy. The CANTAB tests will be administered by a trained clinician in a standardized order to minimize variability.  CANTAB tests will be administered to age-appropriate subjects during the Screening visit (Week - 6), Randomization visit (Week 0), 
and Weeks 4, 8, 26 and 52 (or Early Termination).  CANTAB  test will also be performed on 
subjects participating in the Dose Exploration Period at Weeks 31 and 36.CANTAB tests should be performed within 90 minutes of food consumption and, as indicated, study drug administration.  
Six Minute Walk Test :  Glut1 DS patients often develop complex movement disorders and 
gait disturbances characterized by ataxia, dystonia, and chorea (Pons et al. 2010) .  As s ome 
subjects may be too young, cognitively impaired, or physically impaired to reliably perform the test, a practice administration will be performed at the Screening visit to determine feasibility.  The 6MWT will not be performed at subsequent study visits if the subject is unable to reliably or safely perform the test at Screening. The 6MWT will be administered to 
appropriate subjects during the Randomization visit (Week 0), and Weeks 4, 8, 26 and 52 (or Early Termination).  The 6MWT will also be conducted at Weeks 31 and 36 for subjects participating in the Dose Exploration Period. 
The 6MWT will be administered by a physical therapist in accordance with  American 
Thoracic Society (ATS) guidelines  (ATS 2002) .  Subjects will be observed by trained study 
staff throughout the duration of the 6MWT, and the test will be terminated if there are any 
concerns as to whether the subjects can reliably and safely complete the test.  Pre -existing 
gait or balance disturbances, or PED induced by the testi ng may have the p otential to 
compromise safety.
 
Subjects will be instructed to walk the length of a pre -measured 20-30 meter course in a 
hallway for 6 consecutive minutes.  Instructions and encouragement will be given according to the script provided in the ATS guidelines. The total distance walked (meters) in a six minute period will be recorded.  The percent of predicted normal distance walked will also be determined based on published normative data.  PED occurring during the 6MWT will be assessed as an exploratory variable; a subset of sites may also perform gait analysis 
(Section  7.5.2.3).  
Time of Onset of Paroxysmal Exertional Dyskinesia:  PED i s characterized by transient 
abnormal, involuntary movements primarily affecting the legs and feet, and typically precipitated by prolonged exertion.  PED and co- occurring epilepsy have been associated 
with Glut1 deficiency (
Suls et al. 2008) .  The presence, time of onset (i.e. time elapsed from 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 50 
start of 6MWT), and severity of PED events during the 6MWT will be recorded on the CRF.  
Severity will be assessed  as mild, moderate, or severe.  
Gross Motor Function Measure:   The GMFM -88 was initially designed and validated to 
evaluate change in gross motor function in children with disabilities ( Russell et al. 1989) .  
The original validation sample included children 5 months to 16 years of age.  Gross motor function in Glut1 DS subjects will be evaluated using this standardized observational measure of abilities that includes the following 5 domains: lying/rolling, sitting, crawling/kneeling, standing, and walking/running/jumping.  Completion time is typically 30-45 minutes. The assessment will be administered at select sites by a trained physical 
therapist at the Randomization visit and Weeks 4, 8, 26, and 52 (or Early Termination) visits. GMFM -88 will also be conducted at Weeks 31 and 36 for subjects participating in the 
Dose  Exploration Period. 
7.5.2.3 Exploratory Efficacy Measures  
The Investigat or may use clinical judgment in deciding whether to administer certain 
assessments to subjects based on age, development, and cognitive ability, as appropriate. 
Columbia Neurological Score :  The classic phenotype of Glut1 DS is also characterized by 
delayed neurologic development, acquired microcephaly, and complex movement disorders (
Pascual et al. 2004 ).  The CNS is a quantitative tool developed to summarize neurological 
exam findings ( Kaufmann et al. 2004) .  The tool focuses on phy sical findings, capturing the 
following domains: 1) height, weight, and head circumference; 2) general medical examination; 3) general neurologic examination; 4) cranial nerves; 5) stance and gait; 6) involuntary movements; 7) sensation; 8) cerebellar function; 9) muscle bulk, tone, and strength; 10) myotatic reflexes; 11) Babinski signs; and 12) other findings.  The CNS 
total score ranges from 0 to 76; higher scores are associated with higher neurological function.  The CNS will be administered at the Randomization visit and at Weeks 8, 26, and 52 (or Early Termination).  
Clinical Global Impression -Severity scale and Clinical Global Impression -Improvement 
scale:  The CGI -S and CGI- I scales evaluate global impression of disease severity (CGI -S) 
at baseline and the degree of change in clinical status (CGI -I) at subsequent study visits as 
assessed by a physician.  Both assessments utilize 7 -point scales to rate the degree of severity 
and improvement, respectively ( Guy 1976 ).  The CGI-S will be administered during the 
Randomization visit (Week 0).  The CGI- I will be administered at Weeks 8, 26  and 
52 (or Early Termination).   The CGI -I will also be assessed at Weeks 31 and 36 for subjects 
participating in the Dose Exploration Period 
Neuropsychological Assessments :   
The majority of Glut1 DS patients experience some degree of developmental delay and 
cognitive impairment.  The broad spectrum of neuropsychological features in Glut1 DS 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 51 
includes effects on general intellectual function (ranging from mild learning disability to 
severe intellectual impairment), language development, adaptive behavior, b ehavior and 
sustained attention.  Therefore, a panel of neuropsychological assessments will be administered (some at select sites  only) to provide additional characterization of the cognitive 
and behavioral features in the Glut1 DS population.  All neurops ychological tests and 
assessments should be performed within 90 minutes of food consumption and, as indicated,  
study drug administration.  
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test:  Individuals with Glut1 DS commonly have receptive 
language deficits that affect their  vocabulary and ability to communicate.  The PPVT is a test 
of receptive vocabulary achievement and verbal ability that is normed for children as young as 2 years of age (Dunn et al. 2007) .  Administration time is typically 20 -30 minutes.  The 
PPVT will be administered at select sites to subjects 2 years of age and older  by a trained 
clinician during the Screening visit (Week -6), and Weeks 8, 26 and 52 (or Early 
Termination).   The  PPVT will also be conducted at Weeks 31 and 36 for subjects 
participating in the Dose  Exploration Period. 
Beery-Buktenica Developmental Test o f Visual Motor Integration: Individuals with 
Glut1 DS have verbal and motor deficits that limit the ability to complete tasks that require visual and motor coordination.  The Beery-VMI measures the extent to which individuals can integrate their visual and  motor abilities  (Beery et al. 2 004).  The test is normed for children 
2-18 years of age.  Administration time is typically 10 -15 minutes.  The Beery- VMI will be 
administered to subjects at select sites by a trained clinician during the Screening  visit 
(Week  -6), and Weeks 8, 26 and 52 (or Early Ter mination).  
Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices:  Spatial reasoning deficits are a key feature of the 
cognitive deficits observed in individuals with Glut1 DS.  The RCPM is a test of spatial understanding and abstract reasoning developed for individuals 5 years of age and older  (Raven et al. 1998) .  Administration time is typically 15 -30 minutes.  At select sites, the 
RCPM will be administered to all subjects , at the clinical judgment of the test administrator,  
during the Screening  visit (Week -6), and Weeks 8, 26 and 52 (or Early Termination). 
Short Form Health Survey s: Individuals with Glut1 DS are affected by a broad spectrum of 
clinical symptoms, including seizures, cognitive and speech impairment and movement disorders which may impact physical and mental health status. Short- Form (SF) health 
surveys capture practical, reliable, and valid information about functional health and well-being from the patient's perspective.  Depending on the age of the subject, the SF -10 or 
SF-12 will be administered during the Randomization visit (Week 0), and Weeks 8, 
26 and  52 (or Early Termination) . 
The SF -10 Health Survey for Children is a 10 -item caregiver -completed questionnaire for 
pediatric subjects designed to assess physical  and psychosocial health -related quality of life 
in healthy and ill individuals (Saris -Baglama et al. 2006 ).  The 10 items were adapted from 
the Child Health Questionnaire and utilize a 4 -week recall period.   Responses are used to 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 52 
generate 2 component summary scores: physical summary score (PHS -10) and psychosocial 
summary score (PSS -10).  Higher global scor es are associated with better quality of 
life.  The  SF-10 will be administered to caregivers of subjects aged 5 to  17 years at the time 
of informed consent.  Every attempt will be made to ensure that the responder completing the 
first administration completes subsequent administrations to minimize variability.  Completion time is approximately 10 minutes.  
The Medical Outcomes Study 12 -Item Short Form (SF -12) is a 12- item interview and self -
administered questionnaire designed to assess generic health -related  quality of life in healthy 
and ill adult populations (Ware et al. 1996 ).  The 12 items in the SF-12 are a subset of the 
items in the SF -36 and measure physical functioning, role limitations due to physical health 
problems, bodily pain, general health, vitality (energy/fatigue), social functioning, role limitations due to emotional problems, and mental health.  Responses are used to generate 2 component summary scores: physical health (PCS) and mental health (MCS). Higher  global scores are associated with better quality of life. The standard version of the 
instrument with a 4 -week recall period will be used in this study.  The SF- 12 will be 
administered to subjects 18 years of age and older at the time of informed consent. 
Pediatric Eval uation of Disability Inventory- Computer Adaptive Test : The constellation 
of clinical signs and symptoms of Glut1 DS can impact a patient’s ability to independently perform activities of daily living.  The PEDI -CAT is a measure of functional capabilities an d 
performance designed for use in children and youth from birth to 20 years of age with a variety of physical conditions (
Haley et al. 2011) .  The PEDI -CAT measures abilities in the 
three functional domains of Daily Activities, Mobility and Social/Cognitive.  The PEDI -CAT 
also includes a Responsibility domain to measure the extent to which a child takes responsibility for the managing multi- step activities of daily living. The PEDI -CAT will be 
completed for all subjects , as deemed appropriate . Caregivers will be asked to complete the 
questionnaire for subjects less than 14 years of age at the time of informed consent.  Subjects  who are 14 years of age or older at the time of informed consent may be asked to 
complete the questionnaire by self -report.  The PEDI- CAT will be administered at select sites 
during the Randomization visit (Week 0), and Weeks 8, 26 and 52 (or Early Termination).  The PEDI -CAT  will also be assessed at Weeks  31 and 36 for subjects participating in the 
Dose Exploration Period. 
Gait Analysis :  Most Glut1 DS patients present with a spectrum of movement disorders.  
A study characterizing the spectrum of movement disorders in Glut1 DS observed gait disturbances in 89% of Glut1 DS subjects (
Pons et al. 2010) .  A computerized walkway mat 
is an electronic walkway providing objective spatial and temporal measurements of gait, with demonstrated test -retest reliability (van Uden et al. 2004) .  Gait parameters include 
stride length, velocity, cadence, base of support, and percentage of cycle time spent in double support.  The computerized mat will be placed between meters 11 and 15 on the 20- 30 meter 
walking course used for the 6MWT.  At select sites, the computerized mat may be used to assess gait during the 6MWT as the subject walks across the mat.  Gait assessments will be performed and evaluated by a physical  therapist at select sites during the Screening visit, 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 53 
Randomization visit (Week 0), and Weeks 4, 8, 26 and 52 (or Early Termination).  Gait will 
also be assessed at Weeks 31 and 36 for subjects participating in the Dose Exploration Period. 
7.5.3 Drug Concentration Measurements and Bioassays 
To assess the peak PK of UX007 and UX007 metabolites, blood samples will be collected 
approximately 90 minutes following consumption of food and study drug at Weeks 8 and 
52 (or Early Termination), and at Weeks 31 and 36 for subjects participating in the Dose  Exploration Period.  For each sample collection, the time elapsed since last study drug 
administration will be recorded on the CRF.  The following analytes will be assessed: 
• Plasma peak levels of UX007 
• Plasma le vels of UX007 metabolites:  C4 ketone (BHB), C5 ketones 
(beta-hydroxypentanoate [ BHP ] and beta- ketopentanoate [BKP ]), and heptanoate  
At the Screening and Randomization (Week 0) study visits, the blood samples will be 
collected in the non- fasting state in o rder to assess  a non- fasting BHB.  
All subjects are on study drug a t Week 26, at which time a population PK study  will be 
conducted.  S amples for trough (pre-dose [within 15 minutes] ) UX007 and metabolites 
(same as above) will be obtained  from all subjects, and 2 additional time points  will be drawn 
for each subject  at 60 and  180 minutes following consumption of food and study drug.   
If feasible, additional PK samples will be collected whenever a potentially related 
SAE  occurs . 
7.5.4 Safety Measures  & General Assessments 
General assessments include medical history  and demographics.  Safety will be evaluated by 
the incidence, frequency , severity , and relatedness  of AEs and serious adverse events (SAEs), 
including clinically significant changes from baseline to scheduled time points in  vital signs , 
weight, physical examination  and ECG findings, c linical laboratory evaluations , pregnancy 
testing  (or pregna ncy of pa rtner ), suicidal  ideation and behavior assessments, and 
concomitant medications .  Refer to the Study Reference Manual for additional details.  
7.5.4.1 Medical History  
General medical information includes subject demographics (date of birth, ethnicity, and sex) 
and a history of major medical illnesses, diagnoses, and surgeries.  The review will also include an assessment of phenotypic characteristics asso ciated with Glut1 DS , including 
seizures, cognitive impairment, movement disorders, and microcephaly.  The specific history 
of Glut1 DS  will be recorded, along with date of onset, clinical presentation, and date and 
method of confirmed laboratory diagnosis.  D iagnosis must be confirmed by SLC2A1 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 54 
mutation analysis.  Any available family  history of Glut1 DS  will be noted including 
diagnosis, disease course, treatment and outcome. 
Glut1 DS  maintenance treatment history and relevant concomitant medications will be 
recorded (start date, stop date, dose, dose regimen).  Treatments include prescribed diets , 
other s tandard of care treatments, and all other relevant concomitant medicati ons 
(e.g., seizure medications, L- carnitine, vitamin supplements, etc.).  Medications include 
prescription, over-the-counter, herbal and nutritional supplements.  Any relevant concomitant 
therapy, including physical/occupational therapy will be recorded. 
7.5.4.2 Vital Signs  and Weight 
Vital signs will include seated systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure measured 
in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), heart rate in beats per minute, re spiration rate in breaths 
per minute, and temperature in degrees Celsius (°C).  Vital signs measurements will be 
performed at every clinic visit before any additional assessments are completed .  At each 
visit, weight (in kilograms) w ill be obtained using a scale.  
7.5.4.3 Electrocardiogram  
At the Screening visit and Weeks 8 and 52 (or Early Termination), a standard 12- lead 
ECG  will be performed prior to or at least 15 minutes after administration of any motor 
function tests (where indicated)  so that the ECG is performed at a resting heart rate .  
The Screening  ECG should be within normal limits or have abnormalities that clearly reflect 
a stable condition that would not pose a risk to an individual participating in this trial.  Abnormal findings and clinically signifi cant changes from baseline will be recorded as AE . 
7.5.4.4 Physical Examination 
Complete physical examinations  will be performed at Screening and the Week 8, 26  and 
52 study visits  (or Early  Termination Visit).  Physical examinations will include assessments 
of general appearance; head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat; the cardiovascular, dermatologic, 
lymphatic, respiratory, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, musculoskeletal, and neurologic 
systems.   Clinically significant changes from Baseline  will be recorded as AE s. 
7.5.4.5 Clinical Laboratory Tests 
The clinical laboratory evaluations to be perfo rmed in this study  are listed in  Table 7.5.4.5.1.  
Clinical laboratory testing will be performed at the Screening, Randomization  (Week 0) , 
and Week 8, 26, 31, 36, and 52 study visits (or Early Termination  visit).  Blood and urine 
samples will be collected ; fasting is not required .  At the Screening and Randomization 
(Week 0) study visits, the blood samples should be collected in the non- fasting state in order 
to collect a non -fasting BHB.  Refer to the Study Reference Manual for additional details.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 55 
Table 7.5.4.5.1:  Clinical Laboratory Assessments 
Chemistry Hematology Urinalysis 
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)  Hematocrit  Appearance  
Alkaline phosphatase  Hemoglobin  Color  
Aspartate  aminotransferase (AST)  Platelet count  pH 
Bilirubin (total)  Red blood cell (RBC) count  Specific gravity  
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)  White blood cell (WBC) count  Ketones  
Calcium   Protein  
Chloride   Glucose  
Serum creatinine    
Gamma -glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)  Beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB)  (at 
Screening)  Pregnancy test  
(if applicable)  
Serum glucose    
Potassium    
Protein (albumin and total)    
Sodium    
Subjects who experience a SAE possibly or probably related to study drug or other AE of 
concern may,  at the discretion of the investigator (an d/or medical monitor) , have additional 
blood samples taken for safety laboratory tests . 
7.5.4.6 Pregnancy Testing  
Female subjects of childbearing potential will have urine pregnancy tests at the 
Screening  and Randomization visits and at Weeks 8, 26, and 52 (or Early Termination).  
Females considered not of childbearing potential include those who have not reached 
menarche, had  total hysterectomy, or have been in menopause for at least one year prior to 
Screening.  
Female subjects with a positive pregnancy test at the Screening visit will not be enrolled in the study; female subjects who become pregnant during the study will be removed from the study. Additional pregnancy tes ts may be performed at any time in which pregnancy status is 
in question. A serum pregnancy test will be performed in the event of a positive or equivocal urine pregnancy test result, or can be performed if pregnancy test by urine is not feasible. 
Experien ce with UX007 (triheptanoin) in pregnant women is limited. The study drug may 
involve risks to a pregnant female or unborn baby which are currently unknown.  
Sexually  active males or females of childbearing potential must use two forms of highly 
effective methods of contraception during heterosexual intercourse throughout the study 
period and for 30 days after stopping the study drug. Examples of highly effective methods include: 
• Established use of hormonal contraceptives, such as the birth control pill, injection or 
implant 
• Barrier method, such as a condom with spermicide, or cervical cap 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 56 
• Intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS), a small device with hormones that 
goes inside the uterus 
• Male sterilization, also called vasectomy  
• True abstinence which means not having sex because subject chooses not to (when this is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject) 
7.5.4.6.1 Pregnancy  in Subject or Partner  
Pregnancies in subjects or partners must be reported within 24 hours of knowledge of the 
event to Ultragenyx or its designee.  The investigator must make every effort to follow the 
pregnancy of either subject or partner through resolution of the pregnancy (delivery or termination) and report the resolution to Ultragenyx or its designee. In the event of a pregnancy in the partner of a subject, the investigator should make every effort to obtain the female partner’s consent for release of protected health information.  Refer to the Study 
Reference Manual for details on the reporting procedures t o follow in the event of pregnancy. 
7.5.4.7 Suicidal Ideation and Behavior Assessments  
Assessment of suicidal ideation and behavior is a regular part of development prog rams  
involving AEDs and other neurologic drugs with central nervous system activity (FDA Dr aft 
Guidance 2012 ).  The Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale ( C-SSRS) is a standardized 
suicidal rating instrument used to assess the suicidal ideation and behavior in an at- risk 
pediatric population ( Posner et al. 2011) .  To prospectively assess suicidal ideation and 
behavior, the C-SSRS will be administered by a clinician.  Depending on the cognitive state 
of the subject, some questions within the C- SSRS  may be deemed by the investigator to be 
inappropriate to ask the subject and can be omitted.  Suicidal ideation and behavior will be assessed in  subjects ≥ 10 years of age at each  visit.  The Baseline questionnaire will be 
administered on the initial visit; the Since Last Visit questionnaire will be administered at all subsequent visits. The responses to the questionnaire will be reviewed by site personnel during the study visit; if emergent suicidal ideation or behavior is indicated, the investigator should promptly evaluate the subject to ensure proper management and protection of subject safety . Determination of whether the subject should continue on study will be made by the 
investigator based on the severity of symptoms and follow- up needed , and the Sponsor will 
be informed. 
7.5.4.8 Concomitant Medications  
Concomitant medications will be reviewed and recorded in the subject’s CRF at each 
study visit, beginning at the Screening visit.  Medications (investigational, prescription, over-the-counter, and herbal) and nutritional supplements taken during the 30 days prior to Screening will be reviewed and recorded. At each subsequent visit, change in m edications 
since the previous visit will be recorded.  A discussion of concomitant medications is provided in Section 7.4.6. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 57 
7.5.4.9 Adverse Events  
All AEs will be recorded from the time the subject signs the informed consent through 
30 days following the last administration of study drug. The  determination, evaluation, 
reporting, and follow-up of AEs will be performed as outlined in Section 8.5.  At each visit 
subjects will be asked about any new or ongoing AEs since the previous visit.  Assessments 
of AEs will occur at each study visit. 
Clinically significant changes from Baseline in physical examination findings, vital signs, 
clinical laboratory parameters , suicidal ideation and behavior, and ECGs  will be recorded as 
AEs or SAEs, if appropriate.  If feasible, additional PK samples will be collected whenever a 
potentially related SAE occurs.  
7.5.4.10 Interim Monitoring Calls 
For additional safety monitoring, the study coordinator will telephone the subject/caregiver between each Extension Period s tudy visit through Week 52.  Additional telephone contacts 
may be made during the Baseline and Treatment Periods as needed.  A follow -up call is 
recommended within 4 weeks following early termination or study completion.  The  calls 
will be used to assess AE, discuss any problems or di fficulties with treatment, and assess 
protocol compliance.  Study staff will ask about potential adverse effects of study drug 
including presence of gastrointestinal upset, steatorrhea or frequent loose stools, and weight gain.  Staff will inquire about study drug consumption and remaining supply. 
7.5.4.11 Dietitian Consultation and Diet Assessment  
Subjects and/or caregivers are required to  maintain a record of the subject’s daily diet in  a 
diary for th e 3 days prior to each  visit.  The initial 3 -day diet history obtained during 
screening will be used to confirm the subject is not currently on a KD or other high- fat diet , 
and thereby satisfies requisite inclusion/exclusion criteria.  The 3 -day diet history recorded 
prior to r andomization will be reviewed by the site dietit ian to establish daily caloric intake  
The diet diary will b e reviewed by study personnel at each visit  to the clinic .  The dietitian  
may telephone subjects and/or caregivers, as needed, to provide dietary advice and support. 
A dietit ian consultation will also take place during the Week 2 telephone assessment.  Refer 
to the Study Reference Manual for details on the dietary assessment .  
7.5.5 Appropriateness of Measures  
The efficacy parameters to be evaluated in this study encompass the characteristic phenotype 
observed in Glut1  DS affected individuals, including seizures, delayed neurologic 
development, and complex movement disorders.  The clinical assessments in the study employ standard measures used in other diseases and conditions that impact the central 
nervous and skeletal muscle systems .  EEG and  ECG  are routine, non-invasive procedures 
inflicting minimal pain/distress for the subject, while providing relevant indicators of seizure 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 58 
events and cardiac safety, respectively.   The incorporation of overnight EEGs may introduce 
a level of inconvenience for the subject, however a higher proportion of abnormalities in 
pediatric Glut1  DS patients were observed in 24-h EEG data compared with routine EEGs 
(Leary et al. 2003 ). 
Performance measures such as the 6MWT and GMFM-88 have been successfully used in 
clinical development programs.  The 6 MWT and GMFM -88 w ere incorporated into the study 
design as a performance measure of muscle function to evaluate movement disorders 
charact eristic in Glut1  DS patients .  The CNS and CANTAB were included as measures of 
neurological involvement and cognitive function. 
Diaries will be used by subjects and/or caregivers to capture seizure events on a daily basis, 
thereby minimizing recall bias at site visits.  Where possible, additional validated , 
age-appropriate patient -reported outcomes were included to assess health -related quality of 
life and activities of daily living  (SF-10/SF -12 and PEDI -CAT ). 
Additional measurements of UX007 and known triheptanoin metabolites will be assessed 
using blood samples.  The panel has been included in this Phase 2 study to provide information on relevant PK parameters  following a single- dose and at steady -state.  
Where possible, timing of assessments has been coordinated with standard safety laboratory tests to minimize risk and discomfort and avoid unnecessary sampling . 
The safety parameters to be evaluated in this study include standard assessments such as recording of medical history, AEs and SAEs, physical examination, ECGs, vital signs  and 
weight , serum chemistry, concomitant medications, and other routine clinical and laboratory 
procedures.  Suicidal ideation and behavior will be assessed as an additional safety measure given the central nervous system involvement with Glut1  DS and the likelihood for most if 
not all subjects to be prescribed at least 1 AED as concomitant treatment.  
Since the study will be conducted in a pediatric, adolescent, and adult population, 
age-appropriate efficacy measures and additional safety measures including interim 
telephone calls and a DMC have been incorporated into the study design. 
7.6 Statistical Methods and Determination of Sample Size  
The completeness of the data affects the integrity and accuracy of the final study analysi s.  
Therefore , every effort will be made to ensure complete, accurate and timely data collection, 
and to avoid missing data. 
The procedures for handling missing, unused, or spurious data, along with t he detailed 
method for analyses will be presented in the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP); in general, 
missing data will be treated as missing.  T he information below is intended as a guide to 
planned analyses.   Planned analyses will occur at the end of the double-blind T reatment  
Period, and at the end of the st udy ( Extension P eriod).  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 59 
The statistical analyses will be reported using summary tables, figures, and data listings.  
Statistical tests will be  at one -sided alpha level of 0.05.  All analyses and tabulations will be 
performed using SAS®.  Continuous variabl es will be summarized with means, standard 
deviations, medians, minimums, and maximums.  Categorical variables will be summarized by counts and by percentages of subjects in corresponding categories.  All raw data obtained from the CRF s as well as any deri ved data will be included in data listings.  
Each secondary endpoint will be tested independently.  No adjustments for multiple comparisons on secondary and exploratory analyses will be performed.  The statistical method employed for the analysis of each as sessment will be defined in more detail in the 
SAP. 
7.6.1 Subject Information  
Summaries and listings will be provided for all subjects who received at least 1 dose of study drug and provided at least 1 safety or efficacy evaluation.  Subject disposition summarie s 
will include the number of randomized subjects, the number of subjects receiving study medication, the number of subjects completing the study, and the reasons for discontinuation.  Demographic variables include age, sex, and race.  
7.6.2 Analysis Populations 
The efficacy  analysis set  will include all randomized subjects  who received at least one dose 
of investigational product. Subjects will be analyzed as randomized. 
The safety analys is set  will include all subjects who receive at le ast one dose of 
investigational product, and subjects will be included in the treatment corresponding to the study treatment actually received for the safety analysis.  
7.6.3 Primary Efficacy Analysis 
The primary efficacy analys is will be based on the efficacy  analysis set.  The UX007 
treatment group will be compared with placebo.  The primary efficacy evaluation is the 
percent reduction from randomization to week 8 in frequency , normalized to a 4 week rate,  
of seizures   Observable generalized and partial -onset seizures measured for 6 week s by diary 
and absence seizures measured overnight by e lectroencephalography  (EEG).   Seizure types 
include: Generalized Tonic- Clonic, Generalized Tonic, Generalized Clonic, Generalized 
Atonic, Partial/Focal with Secondary Generalization, Myoclonic, Myoclonic Atonic, Myoclonic Tonic, Complex Partial/Focal, Simple Partial/Focal Motor and Absence seizures.  Summaries using descriptive statistics: n , mean, SE, median, minimum and maximum will be 
provided.  The primary efficacy comparison will be made using an a ppropriate analysis as 
defined in the SAP. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 60 
7.6.4 Secondary Efficacy Analyses 
The secondary efficacy analyses are primarily focused on alternative domains of Glut1 DS 
disease to assess the breadth of treatment effect of UX007 .  The secondary analyses will 
compare the secondary efficacy variables scores after treatment to before treatment between 
the treated and placebo groups.  The specific tests and analyses will be defined in the SAP . 
Included in these analyses will be a predefined  per protocol anal ysis of those subjects that 
achieve at least 30% of calorie intake or higher as the tolerated dose level  and have received 
at least 80% of the expected doses,  to assess whether a subpopulation of the highest dose 
subjects have a larger difference in effic acy. 
In general, e ach of the efficacy variables assessed at Week 52 (or Week 26 for EEG only) 
will be compared to the value obtained during the Baseline Period or Randomization (i.e., Screeni ng visit if not performed at the Baseline visit) utilizing the same statistical test as 
conducted at the Week 8 analysis, but adjusted for the difference that the analyses for the Week 52 data will only utilize a within -cohort comparison and not a between -cohort 
comparison. 
Secondary endpoints evaluating the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo  will include: 
• Seizure response rate, defined as the percentage of subjects with at least 50% reduction 
from  randomization to week 8 in frequency of seizures  
• Observable seizure frequency  reduction  and observable seizure response rate as measured 
by diary  
• Absence seizure frequency  reduction and absence  seizure response rate as measured by 
EEG  
• Change from randomization to Week 8  in cognitive function using the CANTAB 
• Change from randomization to Week 8  in distance walked as measured by 6MWT 
• Time to onset of PED as measured during 6MWT from randomization to Week 8 
• Change from randomization to Week 8  in gross motor function using the GMFM-88 
• Long term efficacy as measured by changes from randomization in frequency of 
generalized or partial -onset seizures over time through week 52 
• Optimal dose to control seizures and impact on other clinical manifestations during the 
Dose Exploration Period
 
7.6.5 Exploratory Efficacy Analyses 
Exploratory endpoints, evaluating the efficacy of UX007 compared to placebo, will include: 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 61 
• The effects of UX007, from randomization through Weeks 8 and 52 on: 
o Neurological function using the CNS 
o Physician global impression of change in clinical status using the CGI -S and CGI -I 
o Receptive vocabulary using the PPVT  
o Subjec t or caregiver -reported quality of life using SF -10 Health Survey for 
Children or SF-12 for adults 
o Functional disability by caregiver report using the PEDI- CAT  
o Gait, using gait analysis by computerized mat 
o PK properties of UX007 and its metabolites  
Optional exploratory endpoints evaluating the efficacy of UX007, from randomization 
through Weeks 8 and 52, will include: 
• Visual motor integration using the Beery- VMI  
• Spatial understanding and abstract reasoning using the RCPM 
7.6.6 Pharmacokinetic Analyses  
Descriptive statistics, including mean, standard deviation, coefficient of variation, 
geometric mean, median, minimum, and maximum will be calculated for the plasma 
UX007  concentrations and its metabolites (including plasma BHB, BHP, BKP, and 
heptanoate) at ea ch sampling time point for peak levels.  Data will be listed for all subjects 
with available plasma concentrations.  All concentrations below the lowest quantifiable 
concentration of the assay or missing data will be labeled as such in the concentration da ta 
listings.  Concentrations below the lowest quantifiable concentration of the assay will be 
treated as zero in the summary statistics.  All subjects and samples excluded from the analysis will be clearly documented in the study report.  Individual plasma  UX007 
concentrations and its metabolites (including plasma BHB, BHP, BKP, and heptanoate ) will 
be provided.  Additional details of the peak PK and population PK analyses will be provided in the SAP. 
7.6.7 Safety Analyses 
Safety will be evaluated by the incidence, frequency and severity of AEs and SAEs, 
including clinically significant changes from baseline to scheduled time points in:  
• Vital signs  and weight 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 62 
• Physical examination and ECG findings  
• Clinical laboratory evaluations  
• Pregnancy testing/pregnancy of partn er 
• Suicidal  ideation and behavior assessments  
• Concomitant medications  
The analyses of safety will include all subject s in the safety analysis set .  Safety data will be 
periodically reviewed by the DMC . 
All AEs will be coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA).  
The incidence and frequency of AEs will be summarized by System Organ Class (SOC), Preferred Term (PT), relationship to study drug, and severity.  All reported AEs with  onset 
during treatment (i.e., treatment-emergent AEs) will be included in the analysis. For each AE, the percentage of subjects who experienced at least 1 occurrence of the given event will be summarized by treatment group.  The numbers (frequency) and incidence rates of AEs and SAEs will be summarized during exposure to UX007 throughout the study 
including the continuation period.  Special attention will be given to those subjects who died, discontinued treatment due to an AE, or experienced a SAE (e.g., summaries, listings, and narrative preparation may  be provided, as appropriate). 
Clinical laboratory data will be summarized by the type of laboratory test.   Reference ranges 
and markedly abnormal results (specified in the SAP) will be used in the summary of laboratory data.  Descriptive statistics will be calculated for each laboratory analyte at baseline and at each scheduled time point.  Changes from baseline results will be presented in pre- versus post- treatment cross tabulations (with classes for belo w, within, and above 
normal ranges).  A listing of subjects with any markedly abnormal laboratory results will be provided.  The f requency and percentage of subject s who experience abnormal  clinical 
laboratory results ( i.e., outside of reference ranges) an d/or clinically significant abnormalities 
will be presented for each clinical laboratory  measurement.  
Descriptive statistics of temperature, pulse, respiratory rate, and blood pressure (systolic and diastolic) values and changes from baseline will be summa rized.  The percentage of subjects 
with values beyond clinically important limits will be summarized.  
The SAP will provide additional details on the planned safety  analys es. 
7.6.8 Data Monitoring Committee  
A DMC with appropriate expertise in the conduct of clinical trials in children will act in an 
advisory capacity to monitor subject safety on a routine basis throughout the trial.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 63 
The DMC  will also monitor individual subject tolerability and implement individual subject 
stopping criteria based o n the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events ( NCI-CTCAE), Version 4.0. The DMC will be consulted for the 
management of individual subjects who experience unacceptable tolerability issues (such as 
significant gastrointestin al distress) . 
The DMC may:  
• Review the study protocol and informed consent documents, and plans for data 
monitoring 
• Evaluate the progress of the trial, study data quality, timeliness, subject  recruitment, 
accrual and retention, subjects ’ risk versus potential benefit,  and other factors that could 
affect the study outcome 
• Consider relevant information that may have an impact on the safety of the participants or the ethics of the study 
• Make other recommendations to Ultragenyx concerning continuation, termination or 
other modifications of the study based on their observations of the study 
7.6.9 Determination of Sample Size  
The proposed Phase 2 study will have a sample size that would likely detect a 50% reduction 
from randomization in seizure fre quency compared to placebo.  Such a treatment effect 
would be greater than or equal to that demonstrated by many of the approved AEDs for 
refractory epilepsy, such as lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine and levetiracetam (Glauser et al. 
2000) , (Glauser et al. 2006) , (Trevathan et al. 2006) .  A theoretical treatment effect of this 
magnitude, in light of the benign safety profile of UX007 shown to date, is considered to be clinically meaningful by physician experts.  From the perspective of accurately determining seizure frequency, the proposed durations are deemed sufficient and are accounted for in the standard deviation (55%) used in the power calculation.  
For the study to be adequately powered, a sample of approximately 40 completed subjects was estimated to be adequate to detect a 50%  between -group difference in seizure rate per 
4 weeks with power of approximately 80% and population standard deviation of 55% using two-sample t test at one-sided  alpha level  of 0.05. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 64 
8 STUDY CONDUCT  
8.1 Ethics 
8.1.1 Institutional Review Board or Ethics C ommittee  
The IRB/ Ethics Committee ( EC) must be a properly constituted board or committee 
operating in accordance with 21  CFR Part 56, "Institutional Review Boards."  This protocol, 
any protocol amendments, and the associated informed consent forms (ICFs) must be 
submitted to the IRB/EC for rev iew and must be approved before screening of any subject 
into the study.  Study drug may not be shipped to the investigator until Ultragenyx or its designee has received a copy of the letter or certificate of approval from the IRB/EC for the protocol and any protocol amendments, as applicable. 
All subject recruitment and/or advertising information must be submitted to the IRB/EC and 
Ultragenyx or its designee for review and approval prior to implementation.  IRB/EC  approval of any protocol amendments must be received before any of the changes 
outlined in the amendments are put into effect, except when the amendment has been enacted to protect subject safety.  In such cases, the chair of the IRB/EC should be notified immediately and the amendment forwarded to the IRB/EC for review and approval. 
8.1.2 Ethical Conduct of Study  
This protocol is written in accordance with the principles established by the 18th World 
Medical Association  General Assembly (Helsinki, 1964) and subsequent amendments and 
clarifications adopte d by the General Assemblies.  The investigator will make every effort to 
assure  the study described in this protocol is conducted in full conformance with those 
principles, current Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) regulations, ICH Good Clinical 
Practices  (GCP) guidelines, and local ethical and regulatory requirements.  Should a conflict 
arise, the investigator will follow whichever law or guideline affords the greater protection to the individual subject.  The investigator will also make sure he or she is  thoroughly familiar 
with the appropriate administration and potential risks of administration of the study drug, as described in this protocol and the IB, prior to the initiation of the study.  
8.1.3 Subject Information and Consent  
Appropriate forms for documenting written informed consent will be provided by the investigator and reviewed and approved by Ultragenyx or its designee before submission to the IRB/EC.  Ultragenyx or its designee must receive a copy of the IRB/EC's approval of the ICF before the shipme nt of study drug to the study site.  
It is the investigator's responsibility to obtain signed written informed consent from each potential study subject prior to the conduct of any study procedures.  This written informed consent will be obtained after the methods, objectives, requirements, and potential risks of 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 65 
the study have been fully explained to each potential subject.  The investigator must explain 
to each subject that the subject is completely free to refuse to enter the study or to withdraw from it at any time.   Subjects  under the age of 18 years (or 16 years, depending on the region) 
will provide written assent (if possible), and his/her legally authorized representative 
(parent  or legal guardian) will provide written informed consent for such subje cts. 
The method of obtaining and documenting informed consent and the contents of the ICF will comply with ICH GCP guidelines, the requirements of 21 CFR Part 50, “Protection of Human Subjects,” the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPA A) 
regulations, and all other applicable regulatory requirements.  Subjects will be given a copy of the signed ICF and will be provided any new information during the course of the study that might affect their continued participation in the study.  The in vestigator or a qualified 
designee will be available to answer each subject's questions throughout the study, and all of the subject's questions must be answered to the subject's satisfaction.  If the protocol is amended and the ICF is revised, each subject will be required to provide written informed consent again using the revised ICF. 
Receipt of written informed consent will be documented in each potential subject’s CRF.  
The signed ICF will remain in each subject's study file and must be available to th e study 
monitor(s) at all times.  
8.2 Investigators and Study Administrative Structure   
Each investigator must provide Ultragenyx and/or its designee a completed and signed Form  FDA 1572 and a Financial Disclosure Form.  All sub-investigators must be listed on 
Form FDA 1572 and Financial Disclosure Forms must be completed for all sub- investigators 
listed on Form FDA 1572. 
Ultragenyx and/or its designee will be responsible for managing and monitoring the clinical 
trial to ensure compliance with FDA and ICH GCP guidelines.  Ultragenyx's trained designated representative (the monitor) will conduct regular visits to the clinical site, to perform source document verification.  The monitor will verify the investigator's ongoing 
qualifications, inspect clinical site fac ilities, and inspect study records, including proof of 
IRB/EC  review, with the stipulation that subject  confidentiality will be maintained in 
accordance with local and federal regulations, including HIPAA requirements. 
8.3 Investigational Product Accountability  
While at the clinical site, study drug must be stored in a secure limited access location at 
controlled temperature as described in the IB and according to product packaging.  
The storage facility must be available for inspection by the study monitor at any time during 
the study.  Subjects will be given instructions on the proper storage of study drug  when 
initially dispensed and reminded of storage requirements at all subsequent visits. Study d rug 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 66 
will be properly packaged for transport by the subject or for shipment by the clinical  site.  
Refer to the Pharmacy Manual for further details on packaging and shipping. 
A drug accountability record must be maintained for all study drug received, dispensed, 
returned, and/or lost during the study.  This record must be kept current and made available to the study monitor for inspection.  Following the close-out of the study, all unused study drug must be returned to Ultragenyx and/or its designee unless other instructions have been provided for final disposition of the study drug.  
8.4 Data Handling and Record Keeping  
8.4.1 Case Report Forms and Source Documents  
The investigator is required to initiate and maintain, for each subject, an adequate and 
accurate case history that records all observations and other data related to the study for that subject.  A validated electronic data capture (EDC) system will be used for entry of the data into electronic CRFs.  Data must be recorded on CRFs approved by Ultragenyx or its designee.  All information recorded on CRFs for this study must be consistent with the subject's source documentation. 
Initial data entry and any changes to the data will be made only by Ultragenyx-authorized 
users, and data entries and changes will be captured in an electronic audit trail.  An explanation of any data change should be recorded in the CRF.  All data entered in to the 
CRF must be verifia ble; therefore, CRFs will be routinely checked for accuracy, 
completeness, and clarity and will be cross -checked for consistency with source documents, 
including laboratory test reports and other subject records by Ultragenyx or its designee.  The investig ator must allow direct access to all source documents.  
8.4.2 Data Quality Assurance 
Monitoring and auditing procedures developed by Ultragenyx and/or its designee will be implemented to ensure compliance with FDA and ICH GCP guidelines.  Ultragenyx's designated representative (the monitor) will contact the investigator and conduct regular 
visits to the study site.  The monitor will be expected and allowed to verify the investigator's qualifications, to inspect clinical site facilities, and to inspect study record s, including proof 
of IRB/EC review, with the stipulation that subject confidentiality will be maintained in accordance with local and federal regulations, including HIPAA requirements.  The monitor will also be responsible for confirming adherence to the study protocol, inspecting CRFs and source documents, and ensuring the integrity of the data.  CRFs will be checked for accuracy, completeness, and clarity and will be cross -checked for co nsistency with source documents 
including progress notes, laboratory test reports and other subject records.  Instances of missing or uninterruptable data will be resolved in coordination with the investigator. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 67 
The monitor will also investigate any questions concerning adherence to regulatory 
requirements.  Any administrative concerns will be clarified and followed.  The monitor will maintain contact with the site through frequent direct communications with the study site by e-mail, telephone, facsimile, and/or mail.  The investigator and all other site personnel agree to cooperate fully with the monitor and will work in good faith with the monitor to resolve any and all questions raised and any and all issues identified by the monitor. 
The investigator understands that regulatory authorities, the IRB/EC, and/or Ultragenyx o r its 
designees have the right to access all CRFs, source documents, and other study 
documentation for on- site audit or inspection and will retain this right from the start of the 
study to at least two years after the last approval of a marketing applicati on or for at least two  
years after clinical development of the study drug for the indication being studied has been discontinued.  The investigator is required to guaranty access to these documents and to cooperate with and support such audits and inspections. 
8.4.3 Record Retention  
All study records must be retained for at least two years after the last approval of a marketing 
application in the US or an ICH region and until :  1) there are no pending or contemplated 
marketing applications  in the US or an ICH region, or 2) at least two years have elapsed since 
the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product under study.  
The investigator /institution should retain subject identifiers for at least 15 years after the 
completion or discontinuation of the study.  Subject files and other source data must be kept for the maximum period of time permitted by the hospital, institution or private practice, but not less than 15 years.  These documents should be retained for a longer period, however, if required by the applicable regulatory requirements or by an Ultragenyx agreement.  Ultragenyx must be notified and will assist with retention should the investigator /institution 
be unable to continue maintenance of subject files for the full 15 years.  All study records must be stored in a secure and safe facility.  
8.5 Reporting and Follow- up of Adverse Events  
8.5.1 Definition of Adverse Events  
An AE  is defined as any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in 
humans, whether or not considered drug related.  An AE  can therefore be any unfavorable 
and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding, for example), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether  or not related to the medicinal (investigational) products. 
A suspected adverse reaction is any AE for which there is a reasonable possibility that the 
drug caused the AE.  For the purposes of expedited safety reporting, “reasonable possibility” 
means there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the AE. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 68 
Suspected adverse reaction implies a lesser degree of certainty about causality than adverse 
reaction, which means any AE caused by a drug.  
Life-threatening  AE or life -threatening suspected adverse reaction is an AE or suspected 
adverse reaction that, in the view of either the investigator or Ultragenyx , places the patient 
or subject at immediate risk of death.  It does not include an AE  or suspected adverse 
reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death. 
An SAE or serious suspected adverse reaction is an AE  or suspected adverse reaction that at 
any dose, in the view of either the investigator or Ultragenyx , results in  any of the following 
outcomes: 
• Death  
• A life -threatening AE 
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• Persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct 
normal life functions 
• A congenital anomaly/birth  defect  
Note that hospitalizations planned prior to study enrollment (e.g. for elective surgeries) are 
not considered SAEs. Hospitalizations that occur for pre- existing conditions that are 
scheduled after study enrollment are considered SAEs.  
Important medical events that may not result in death, be immediately life -threatening, 
or require hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon appropriate medical 
judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the definition. 
8.5.2 Severity of Adverse Events  
Wherever possible, t he severity of all AEs will be graded using the NCI  CTCAE.   
The majority of AEs can be graded using this system. 
If an AE cannot be graded using the CTCAE criteria, it should be graded as mild, moderate, 
severe, life-threatening, or death using the following definitions. 
• Mild (Grade 1): Awareness of signs or symptoms, but easily tolerated and of a minor 
irritant type, causing no loss of time from normal activities.  Symptoms do not require 
therapy or a medical evaluation; signs and symptoms are transient. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 69 
• Moderate (Grade 2): Events introduce a low level of inconvenience or concern to the 
participant and may interfere with daily activities, bu t are usually improved by simple 
therapeutic measures; moderate experiences may cause some interference with 
functioning. 
• Severe (Grade 3): Events interrupt the participant’s normal daily activities and generally require systemic drug therapy or other treatment; they are usually incapacitating.  
• Life-threatening (Grade 4): Events that place the participant at immediate risk of death or 
are disabling.  
• Death (Grade 5): Events that result in death.  
To make sure there is no confusion or misunderstanding of the difference between the terms "serious" and "severe," which are not synonymous, the following note of clarification is provided.  The term "severe" is often used to describe the intensity (severity) of a specific event (as in mild, moderate, or severe myocardial infarction); the event itself, however, may be of relatively minor medical significance (such as severe headache).  This is not the same as "serious" which is based on subject/event outcome or action criteria usually associated with events that pose a threat to a subject's life or functioning.  Seriousness (not severity) serves as a guide for defining regulatory reporting obligations. 
8.5.3 Relationship of Adverse Events to Study Drug  
The investigator will assess the potential relationship of the AE to stud y drug using the 
following descriptions. Categories of attributions for “Not Related” events: 
• Definitely Not Related:  This category applies to an AE that is clearly not related  to the 
investigational agent/procedure, beyond a reasonable doubt. That is, another cause of the 
event is most plausible; and/or a clinically plausible temporal sequence is inconsistent with the onset of the event and the exposure to study drug and/or a causal relationship is considered biologically implausible. 
• Probably Not Related:  This category applied to an AE that is doubtfully related  to the 
investigational agent/procedure. That is, an alternative explanation is more likely, e.g. , 
concomitant drug(s), concomitant disease(s), known consequences of the disease under investigatio n or the relationship in time suggest that a causal relationship is unlikely. 
Categories of attributions for “Related” events: 
• Possibly Related:  This category applies to an AE that may be related  to the 
investigational agent/procedure. That is the AE follows a reasonable temporal sequence 
from administration of the study drug and that follows a known or expected response 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 70 
pattern to the suspected study drug, but that could readily have been produced by a 
number of other factors. 
• Probably Related:  This catego ry applies to an AE that is likely related  to the 
investigational agent/procedure. That is, the AE has a temporal relationship to the administration of the investigational agent(s) or research intervention, follows a known or suspected pattern of response,  and is strongly associated with study drug exposure. An 
alternative explanation is less likely, e.g., concomitant drugs(s), concomitant 
medication(s).  
• Definitely Related:  This category applies to an AE that is clearly related  to the 
investigational agent/procedure. That is, the AE is listed as a possible adverse reaction and cannot be reasonably explained by an alternative explanation, e.g. , concomitant 
drug(s), concomitant disease(s), known consequences of the disease under investigation or the relationship in time is very suggestive ( e.g., it is confirmed by dechallenge and 
rechallenge).  
For the purposes of reporting to regulatory agencies, AEs  deemed as Definitely, Probably or 
Possibly Related will be considered Related and those deemed Definitely Not or Probably 
Not Related  will be considered Unrelated.  
8.5.4 Adverse Event Reporting to Ultragenyx  
8.5.4.1 General 
All AEs (i.e. any new or worsening in severity or frequency of a preexisting condition) with onset after the subject signs consent for study participation must be promptly documented on the AE eCRF via the EDC system. The Principal Investigator is responsible for evaluating all AEs, obtaining supporting documents, and ensuring documentation of the event is adequate. Details of the AE must include severity, re lationship to study drug, duration, and outcome.  
All AEs will be collected from the time the subject signs informed consent through 30 days 
following the last dose of study drug. In addition, the Investigator should report any AE that occurs after this time period that is believed to have a reasonable possibility of being associated with study drug.  
AEs ongoing at 30 days following the last dose of study drug should have a comment in the 
source document by the Investigator whether the event has recovered, recovered with sequelae, or stabilized.  
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 71 
8.5.4.2 Serious Adverse Events, Serious Adverse Drug Reactions, and Requirements 
for Immediate Reporting  
Any SAE that occurs at any time during the study, including a clinically significantly abnormal laboratory test result that is considered serious, must be reported within 24 hours of knowledge of the event to Ultragenyx or its designee. These requirements apply equally to all subjects, regardless of the study phase or the at -risk subject's treatment assignment or dosage. 
The reporting requirement for SAEs is from the time of signing of the ICF through 30 days following the last study drug administration.  
SAEs will be reported by completing and submit ting SAE report forms to Ultragenyx or its 
designee. Initial SAE reports must be followed by detailed descriptions. These should include copies of hospital case records and other documents when requested. Follow-up SAE information must be submitted in a timely manner as additional information becomes available. All SAEs regardless of relationship to study drug must be followed to resolution or stabilization if improvement is not expected.  
A death occurring during the study, during the per-protocol follow-up period, or within 30 days  after stopping treatment with the study drug must be reported to Ultragenyx or its 
designee within 24 hours of knowledge of the death whether or not it is considered treatment -related.  
The investigator also must notify the IRB/E C of the occurrence of the SAE, in writing, as 
soon as is practicable and in accordance with IRB/EC requirements and local law. A copy of this notification must be provided to Ultragenyx or its designee.  
8.5.4.3 Urgent Safety Reporting  
The regulations governing clinical studies state that the sponsor and investigator are required to take appropriate urgent safety measures to protect subjects against any immediate hazards that may affect the safety of subjects, and that the appropriate regulatory bodies should be notified according to their respective regulations. According to the European Union (EU) Clinical Trial Directive 2001/20/EC, “…in the light of the circumstances, notably the occurrence of any new event relating to the conduct of the trial or the development of the investigational medicinal product where that new event is likely to affect the safety of the subjects, the sponsor and the investigator shall take appropriate urgent safety measures to protect the subjects against any immediate hazard. The sponsor shall forthwith inform the 
competent authorities of those new events and the measures taken and shall ensure that the Ethics Committee (EC) is notified at the same time.”  The reporting period for urgent safety issues is the period from the signing of the ICF through 30 days following the last dose of study drug. Investigators are required to report any urgent safety measures to Ultragenyx within 24 hours. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 72 
8.5.4.4 Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting  
Ultragenyx or its designee will submit suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions 
(SUSAR) to appropriate Regulatory Authorities (including Competent Authorities in all Member States concerned), Ethics Committees, and Investigators as per local laws and regulations. Fatal and life- threatening SUSARs will be submitted no later than 7 -calendar 
days of first knowledge of the event and follow-up information submitted within an additional eight (8) days. All other SUSARs will be submitted within 15 -calendar days of 
first knowledge of the event.  
Principal Investigators are requ ired to report any urgent safety matters to Ultragenyx or its 
designee within 24 hours. Ultragenyx or its designee will inform the Regulatory Authorities, 
Ethics Committees, and Investigators of any events (e.g. change to the safety profile of UX007 , major safety findings) that may occur during the clinical trial that do not fall within 
the definition of a SUSAR but may affect the safety of subjects participating in the clinical trials, as required, in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The reporting period for urgent safety issues is the period from the signing of the ICF through 30 days  following 
the last dose of study drug. 
The investigator will notify the IRBs/Research Ethics Boards (REB)/ECs of SAEs and urgent 
safety matters, in accordance with IRB/REB/EC requirements and local laws and regulations. A copy of this notification must be provided to Ultragenyx or its designee.  
Non-SUSARs will be maintained in the Ultragenyx safety database and provided in annual 
and/or periodic reports as per local laws and regulations. Ultragenyx or its designee will 
prepare and submit annual safety reports and/or other aggregate periodic summary reports to Regulatory Authorities and Ethics Committees, as per local laws and regulations.  
8.5.4.5 Pregnancy in Subject o r Partner  
Pregnancies in subjects or partners must be reported within 24 hours of knowledge of the event to Ultragenyx or its designee. The reporting period for pregnancies is the period from the signing of the ICF through 30 days following the last dose of study drug. Reported  pregnancy of a subject or a subject’s partner, while participating in the study, will 
be monitored for the full duration and/or followed until the outcome of the pregnancy is known. In the event of a pregnancy in the partner of a subject, the Investigator should make every effort to obtain the female partner’s consent for release of protected health information. Refer  to the Study Reference Manual for details on the reporting procedures to follow in the 
event of pregnancy. Pregnancy-a ssociated SAEs will be processed and submitted, as 
necessary, as per the SUSAR reporting process (Section  8.5.4.4).    
 
3URWRFRO1XPEHU8;*&/
$PHQGPHQW±1RY


3URSULHWDU\DQG&RQILGHQWLDO 3DJH
6DIHW\&RQWDFW,QIRUPDWLRQ
'UXJ6DIHW\ 0HGLFDO0RQLWRU
3ULPH9LJLODQFH
)D[ 
HPDLO 
0HODQLH%UDQGDEXU0'
7HOHSKRQH 
HPDLO 

)LQDQFLQJDQG,QVXUDQFH
)LQDQFLQJDQGLQVXUDQFHIRUWKL VFOLQLFDOWULDOZLOOEHDGGUHVV HGLQFOLQLFDOWULDODJUHHPHQWV
ZLWKWKHVWXG\VLWH
3XEOLFDWLRQ3ROLF\
$Q\SXEOLFDWLRQRUSUHVHQWDWLRQE\ WKHLQYHVWLJDWRUDQGRUWKH ,QVWLWXWLRQEDVHGRQGDWDRU
UHVXOWVUHVXOWLQJIURPWKH8OWUDJHQ\[VWXG\VKDOORQO\EHGRQH LQVWULFWDFFRUGDQFHZLWKWKH
3XEOLFDWLRQVHFWLRQLQWKH&OLQL FDO7ULDO$JUHHPHQWH[HFXWHGEH WZHHQ8OWUDJHQ\[DQGWKH
,QVWLWXWLRQDQGRUWKHLQYHVWLJDWRUPPDPPD
PPDPPD
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 74 
9 REFERENCES  
Adkison, KD, Ojemann, GA, Rapport, RL, Dills, RL, and Shen, DD. 1995. "Distribution of 
unsaturated metabolites of valproate in human and rat brain-- pharmacologic 
relevance?" Epilepsia  36 (8):772-82. 
Ataide, TR, de Oliveira, SL, da Silva, FM, Vitorino, LGC, Tavares, MCN, and Sant'Ana, 
AEG. 2009. "Toxicological analysis of the chronic consumption of diheptanoin and 
triheptanoin in rats." Int.J.Food Sci.Tech 44:484-492. 
ATS. 2002. "American Thoracic Society Statement:  Guidelines for the six- minute walk test." 
Am.J.Respir, Crit.Care Med 166 (1):111-117. 
Barone, A, DeWard, S, Payne, N, Goldstein, A, and Vockley, J. 2012. "Triheptanoin therapy 
for inherited disorders of fatty acid oxidation.  Poster presentation. ." Socie ty for 
Inherited Metabolic Disorders Annual Meeting, Charlotte, NC, Mar 31 – Apr 3, 2012. 
Beery, K, and Beery, N. 2004. The Beery -Buktenica Developmental Test of Visual-Motor 
Integration (Manual) . Bloomington, MN: Pearson Assessments. 
Berg, AT, Berkovic, SF, Brodie, MJ, Buchhalter, J, Cross, JH, van Emde, BW, Engel, J, 
French, J, Glauser, TA, Mathern, GW, Moshe, SL, Nordli, D, Plouin, P, and Scheffer, IE. 2010. "Revised terminology and concepts for organization of seizures and epilepsies: report of the ILAE Commission on Classification and Terminology, 2005-2009." Epilepsia  51 (4):676-685. 
Borges, K, and Sonnewald, U. 2012. "Triheptanoin--a medium chain triglyceride with odd 
chain fatty acids: a new anaplerotic anticonvulsant treatment?" Epilepsy Res.  100 
(3):239-244. 
Coman, DJ, Sinclair, KG, Burke, CJ, Appleton, DB, Pelekanos, JT, O'Neil, CM, Wallace, 
GB, Bowling, FG, Wang, D, De Vivo, DC, and McGill, JJ. 2006. "Seizures, ataxia, developmental delay and the general paediatrician: glucose transporter 1 defici ency 
syndrome." J.Paediatr.Child Health 42 (5):263-267. 
Deng, S, Zhang, GF, Kasumov, T, Roe, CR, and Brunengraber, H. 2009. "Interrelations 
between C4 ketogenesis, C5 ketogenesis, and anaplerosis in the perfused rat liver." J.Biol.Chem. 284 (41):27799-27807. 
Dunn, L, and Dunn, D. 2007. PPVT -4 Manual . Bloomington, MN: NCS Pearson, Inc. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 75 
FDA. Draft Guidance 2012. Guidance for Industry: Suicidal Ideation and Behavior:  
Prospective Assessment of Occurrence in Clinical Trials (Draft) , Available at: 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidances/UCM225130.pdf .  Accessed 07 Jul 
2013. 
Glauser, TA, Ayala, R, Elterman, RD, Mitchell, WG, Van Orman, CB, Gauer, LJ, and Lu, Z. 
2006. "Double-blind placebo- controlled trial of adjunctive levetiracetam in pediatric  
partial seizures." Neurology  66 (11):1654-1660. 
Glauser, TA, Nigro, M, Sachdeo, R, Pasteris, LA, Weinstein, S, Abou-Khalil, B, Frank, LM, 
Grinspan, A, Guarino, T, Bettis, D, Kerrigan, J, Geoffroy, G, Mandelbaum, D, 
Jacobs, T, Mesenbrink, P, Kramer, L, and D'Souza, J. 2000. "Adjunctive therapy with oxcarbazepine in children with partial seizures. The Oxcarbazepine Pediatric Study Group." Neurology  54 (12):2237-2244. 
Guy, W. 1976. "The Clinical Global Impression Scale." In Handbook of Psychiatric 
Measures, 2008, edited by A. John Rush Jr, M.B First and D Blacker, 90-92. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. 
Haley, SM, Coster, WJ, Dumas, HM, Fragala-Pinkham, MA, Kramer, J, Ni, P, Tian, F, Kao, 
YC, Moed, R, and Ludlow, LH. 2011. "Accuracy and pr ecision of the Pediatric 
Evaluation of Disability Inventory computer- adaptive tests (PEDI -CAT)." 
Dev.Med.Child Neurol. 53 (12):1100-1106. 
IND-59303. Triheptanoin Therapy for Metabolic Disorders under Charles Roe MD, Baylor 
Research Institute. In   
IND-65827. "One Time Emergency Use of Anaplerotic Dietary Therapy (Triheptanoin) for 
Congestive Heart Failure & Cardiomyopathy under Charles Roe MD, Baylor Research Institute."  
Johannessen, CU, Petersen, D, Fonnum, F, and Hassel, B. 2001. "The acute effect of 
valpr oate on cerebral energy metabolism in mice." Epilepsy Res.  47 (3):247-256. 
Kaufmann, P, Shungu, DC, Sano, MC, Jhung, S, Engelstad, K, Mitsis, E, Mao, X, Shanske, 
S, Hirano, M, Dimauro, S, and De Vivo, DC. 2004. "Cerebral lactic acidosis correlates with neu rological impairment in MELAS." Neurology  62 (8):1297-1302. 
Kessler, SK, Gallagher, PR, Shellhaas, RA, Clancy, RR, and Bergqvist, AG. 2011. "Early 
EEG improvement after ketogenic diet initiation." Epilepsy Res  94 (1- 2):94 -101. 
Kim, TH, Borges, K, Petrou, S, and Reid, CA. 2013. "Triheptanoin reduces seizure 
susceptibility in a syndrome -specific mouse model of generalized epilepsy." Epilepsy 
Res. 103 (1):101-105. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 76 
Kinman, RP, Kasumov, T, Jobbins, KA, Thomas, KR, Adams, JE, Brunengraber, LN, Kutz, 
G, Brewer, WU, Roe, CR, and Brunengraber, H. 2006. "Parenteral and enteral 
metabolism of anaplerotic triheptanoin in normal rats." Am.J.Physiol Endocrinol.Metab 291 (4):E860-E866. 
Leary, LD, Wang, D, Nordli, DR, Jr., Engelstad, K, and De Vivo, DC. 2003. "Seizure 
characterization and electroencephalographic features in Glut -1 deficiency 
syndrome." Epilepsia  44 (5):701-707. 
Lee, P, Treacy, EP, Crombez, E, Wasserstein, M, Waber, L, Wolff, J, Wendel, U, 
Dorenbaum, A, Bebchuk, J, Christ-Schmidt, H, Seashore, M, Giovannini, M, Burton, BK, Morris, AA, and Sapropterin Research, G. 2008. "Safety and efficacy of 22 weeks of treatment with sapropterin dihydrochloride in patients with phenylketo nuria." Am J Med Genet A  146A (22):2851-9. 
Luciana, M, and Nelson, CA. 2002. "Assessment of neuropsychological function through use 
of the Cambridge Neuropsychological Testing Automated Battery: performance in 4 - 
to 12- year-old children." Dev.Neuropsychol. 22 (3):595-624. 
Marin -Valencia, I, Good, LB, Ma, Q, Malloy, CR, and Pascual, JM. 2013. "Heptanoate as a 
neural fuel: energetic and neurotransmitter precursors in normal and glucose transporter I -deficient (G1D) brain." J Cereb.Blood Flow Metab 33 (2):175-182. 
Mochel, F, DeLonlay, P, Touati, G, Brunengraber, H, Kinman, RP, Rabier, D, Roe, CR, and 
Saudubray, JM. 2005. "Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency: clinical and biochemical response to anaplerotic diet therapy." Mol.Genet.Metab  84 (4):305-312. 
Mochel, F, Duteil, S, Marelli, C, Jauffret, C, Barles, A, Holm, J, Sweetman, L, Benoist, JF, 
Rabier, D, Carlier, PG, and Durr, A. 2010. "Dietary anaplerotic therapy improves peripheral tissue energy metabolism in patients with Huntington's disease." Eur.J.Hum.Genet. 18 (9):1057-1060. 
Pascual, JM, Liu, P, Mao, D, Kelly, DI, Hernandez, A, Sheng, M, Good, LB, Ma, Q, Marin-
Valencia, I, Zhang, X, Park, JY, Hynan, LS, Stavinoha, P, Roe, CR, and Lu, H. 2014. "Triheptanoin for Glucose Transporter Type I Deficiency (G1D): Modulation of Human Ictogenesis, Cerebral Metabolic Rate, and Cognitive Indices by a Food Supplement." JAMA Neurol . 
Pascual, JM, Wang, D, Lecumberri, B, Yang, H, Mao, X, Yang, R, and De Vivo, DC. 2004. 
"GLUT1 deficiency and other glucose transporter diseases." Eur J Endocrinol  150 
(5):627-33. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 77 
Pearson, TS, Akman, C, Hinton, VJ, Engelstad, K, and De Vivo, DC. 2013. "Phenotypic 
spectrum of glucose transporter type 1 deficiency syndrome (Glut1 DS)." 
Curr.Neurol.Neurosci.Rep. 13 (4):342. 
Pong, AW, Geary, BR, Engelstad, KM, Natarajan, A, Yang, H, and De Vivo, DC. 2012. 
"Glucose transporter type I deficiency syndrome: epilepsy phenotypes and outcomes." Epilepsia  53 (9):1503-1510. 
Pons, R, Collins, A, Rotstein, M, Engelstad, K, and De Vivo, DC. 2010. "The spectrum of 
movement disorders in Glut- 1 deficiency." Mov Disord  25 (3):275-281. 
Posner, K, Brown, GK, Stanley, B, Brent, DA, Yershova, KV, Oquendo, MA, Currier, GW, 
Melvin, GA, Greenhill, L, Shen, S, and Mann, JJ. 2011. "The Columbia- Suicide 
Severity Rating Scale: initial validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults." Am J Psychiatry 168 (12):1266-77. 
Raven, J, Raven, J, and Court, J. 1998. Manual for Raven's Progressive Matrices and 
Vocabulary Scales.  Section 2: The Coloured Progressive Matrices . San Antonio, TX: 
Harcourt Assessment.  
Roe, CR, Bottiglieri, T, Wallace, M, Arning, E, and Martin, A. 2010. "Adult Polyglucosan 
Body Disease (APBD): Anaplerotic diet therapy (Triheptanoin) and demonstration of defective meth ylation pathways." Mol.Genet.Metab  101 (2-3):246-252. 
Roe, CR, and Mochel, F. 2006. "Anaplerotic diet therapy in inherited metabolic disease: 
therapeutic potential." J.Inherit.Metab Dis. 29 (2-3):332-340. 
Roe, CR, Sweetman, L, Roe, DS, David, F, and Brunengraber, H. 2002. "Treatment of 
cardiomyopathy and rhabdomyolysis in long-chain fat oxidation disorders using an anaplerotic odd- chain triglyceride." J.Clin.Invest  110 (2):259-269. 
Roe, CR, Yang, BZ, Brunengraber, H, Roe, DS, Wallace, M, and Garritson, BK. 2008. 
"Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency: successful anaplerotic diet therapy." Neurology  71 (4):260-264. 
Russell, DJ, Rosenbaum, PL, Cadman, DT, Gowland, C, Hardy, S, and Jarvis, S. 1989. "The 
gross motor function measure: a means to evaluate the effects of physical therapy." Dev.Med Child Neurol  31 (3):341-352. 
Saris -Baglama, RN, DeRosa, MA, Raczek, AE, Bjorner, JB, and Ware, JE. 2006. 
"Development, validation, and norming of the SF-10 for Children Health Survey." Quality of Life Research  15 (S1):A-145. 
Protocol Number:  UX007G-CL201 
Amendment 4 – 30 Nov 2015  
 
 
Proprietary and Confidential Page 78 
Suls, A, Dedeken, P, Goffin, K, Van Esch, H, Dupont, P, Cassiman, D, Kempfle, J, Wuttke, 
TV, Weber, Y, Lerche, H, Afawi, Z, Vandenberghe, W, Korczyn, AD, Berkovic, SF, 
Ekstein, D, Kivity, S, Ryvlin, P, Claes, LR, Deprez, L, Maljevic, S, Vargas, A, Van Dyck, T, Goossens, D, Del-Favero, J, Van Laere, K, De Jonghe, P, and Van Paesschen, W. 2008. "Paroxysmal exercise-induced dyskinesia and epilepsy is due to mutations in SLC2A1, encoding the glucose t ransporter GLUT1." Brain  131 (Pt 
7):1831-44. 
Thomas, NK, Willis, S, Sweetman, L, and Borges, K. 2012. "Triheptanoin in acute mouse 
seizure models." Epilepsy Res.  99 (3):312-317. 
Trevathan, E, Kerls, SP, Hammer, AE, Vuong, A, and Messenheimer, JA. 2006. 
"Lamotrigine adjunctive therapy among children and adolescents with primary 
generalized tonic- clonic seizures." Pediatrics  118 (2):e371-e378. 
van Uden, CJ, and Besser, MP. 2004. "Test- retest reliability of temporal and spatial gait 
characteristics measured wi th an instrumented walkway system (GAITRite)." 
BMC.Musculoskelet.Disord 5:13. 
Wang, D, Pascual, JM, and De Vivo, D. 2012. "Glucose Transporter Type 1 Deficiency 
Syndrome." In GeneReviews , edited by R. A. Pagon, M. P. Adam, T. D. Bird, C. R. 
Dolan, C. T. Fong and K. Stephens. Seattle (WA).  
Ware, J, Jr., Kosinski, M, and Keller, SD. 1996. "A 12-Item Short- Form Health Survey: 
construction of scales and preliminary tests of reliability and validity." Med Care  34 
(3):220-33. 
Willis, S, Stoll, J, Sweetman, L, and Borges, K. 2010. "Anticonvulsant effects of a 
triheptanoin diet in two mouse chronic seizure models." Neurobiol.Dis. 40 (3):565-572. 
  
PPD