IBUD Withd rawal  Protocol  
Version 4, 05/10/18  
 
 
Withdrawal -Related Dysphoria as a Moderator of Ibudilast for  
Alcohol Use Disorder  
NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol version 4 
May 10 , 2018  
  
IBUD Withd rawal  Protocol  
Version 4, 05/10/18  
Ibudilast Withdrawal  Protocol  
Study Design  
 
Specific Aims   
Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a prevalent and disabling psychiatric disorder with few, and only 
moderately efficacious, treatment options. Consequently, the identification of novel treatment targets 
and the development of rigorous laboratory paradigms to s creen and optimize novel therapeutics 
represents a research priority. Ibudilast (IBUD) is a neuroimmune modulator that inhibits 
phosphodiesterase -4 and -10 and macrophage migration inhibitory factor. Recently in an AUD sample, 
IBUD was shown to decrease re activity to a psychological stressor. Furthermore, IBUD was effective in 
blunting alcohol reward among participants with greater depressive symptoms, a hallmark symptom of 
protracted withdrawal. It is still unknown how neuroimmune modulation impacts brain processes that 
underlie alcohol reward processing . Recently, preclinical research in opiates has demonstrated that drug 
withdrawal is necessary for microglia activation and neuroinflammation in reward networks, suggesting 
that IBUD may be most effective am ong patients who experience withdrawal -related dysphoria. 
Therefore, this proposed study aims to examine withdrawal -related dysphoria as a moderator of IBUD 
efficacy in the natural environment measured using Daily Diary  Assessment (DDA ) approaches. To 
accomplish this aim, participants meeting criteria for AUD and balanced on the presence of withdrawal -
related dysphoria will be enrolled in a double -blinded IBUD trial including consisting of two weeks 
randomized to medic ation , DDA assessment , and fMRI . The proposed research aims are:  
Aim 1:  Test whether IBUD reduces basal negative affect in abstinence  and blunts alcohol -related 
negative reinforcement. It is hypothesized that IBUD will reduce basal levels of negati ve affect during 
alcohol abstinence, and in so doing will interfere with alcohol -induced blunting of negative affectivity as 
captured during naturalistic drinking episodes.  
Aim 2:  Test whether IBUD attenuates neural alcohol cue -reactivity. It is hypothesiz ed that IBUD will 
reduce  BOLD activation to alcohol cues in mesocorticolimbic reward circuitry.  
Aim 3: Test whether withdrawal -related dysphoria moderates the effects of IBUD. It is hypothesized that 
IBUD will alleviate basal negative affect , interfe re with alcohol -induced negative reinforcement and 
attenuate BOLD activation to alcohol cues only among participants who experience dysphoria in 
withdrawal.  
Aim 4:  Test whether neural activation to alcohol cues is predictive of drinking outcomes. It is 
hypothesized that individuals with higher mesocorticolimbic activation to alcohol cues will report more 
drinking in the week following the neuroimaging session.  
 
Participants  
Participants (N = 50) will be men and women ages 21 to 45 recruited in Los Angeles. Participants will be 
screened for inclusion and exclusion criteria by online and telephone screens which will also assess for 
withdrawal -related dysphoria. Eligib le participants will then complete an in -person behavioral screen 
where they will complete self -report assessments of demographics, psychological state/history, and 
alcohol and drug use. A Masters level clinician will complete a structured diagnostic inter view (SCID) and 
assess for physiological withdrawal  (CIWA) .  
 
Inclusion  Criteria  
(1) Age between 21 and 45   
IBUD Withd rawal  Protocol  
Version 4, 05/10/18  
(2) Meet DSM -5 criteria for current Moderate -to-Severe AUD  
(3) Current Heavy Drinking (> 14 drinks per week for men; > 7 drinks per week for women) , as 
indicated by self -reported drinking for the 30 days prior to screening  
(4) Have reliable internet access  
 
Exclusion C riteria  
(1) Currently r eceivin g or seeking treatment for AUD * 
(2) Past year DSM -5 diagnosis of any substance use disorder other than alcohol or nicotine  
(3) A lifetime diagnosis of schizophrenia, bipolar disor der, or any psychotic disorder  
(4) Current use of drugs, other than marijuana, verifi ed by a urine toxicology screen * 
(5) Pregnant , nursing, or refusal to use reli able birth control (if female) * 
(6) A medical condition that may interfere with safe participation (e.g., unstable cardiac, renal, or 
liver disease, uncontrolled hypertension, diabetes, or AST, ALT, or GGT  ≥ 3 times upper norma l 
limit)  
(7) Self-reported recent (i.e. past 30 day) use of medications that are contraindicated with 
ibudilast*  
(8) Non -removable ferromagnetic objects in body  
(9) Claustrophobia  
(10)  Serious head injury or prolonged period of unconsciousness (>30 minutes)  
 
* Participants who meet these criteria at any point during the course of the study (i.e. after 
randomization) will be withdrawn from the study for safety purposes.  
 
Stratification  
To test the role of withdrawal -related dysphoria, participants will be balance d on their yes/no response 
to the item “I drink because when I stop, I feel bad (I am nervous, irritable, and I sleep poorly)" taken 
from the Reasons for He avy Drinking Questionnaire (RHDQ ). 
 
Medication Administration  
Study medication and matched placebo will be provided by Medicinova Inc. and dispensed by the UCLA 
Health Pharmacy Investigational Drug Section who will also maintain the blind. After establishing 
eligibility, participants will be provided with their first medication dosage in a blister -pack.  IBUD will be 
provided in 10 mg capsules and participants will be titrated as follows: 20 mg BID during days 1 -2, 50 mg 
BID during days 3 -14, or matched placebo. All capsules will contain a riboflavin (50 mg) tracer to verify 
compliance. EMA assessment wil l begin on Medication Day 1 and will continue through Day 15 (one day 
post medication termination).  
 
Measures  
Behavioral Screen Measures  
1. Breathalyzer  
2. Urine toxicology screen  and pregnancy test (if female)  
3. The Structured Clinical Interview for DS M-5 (SCID)   
4. Drink Years Assessment (DYA)  
5. The Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for A lcohol Scale – Revised (CIWA -Ar).   
IBUD Withd rawal  Protocol  
Version 4, 05/10/18  
6. A 30 -day alcohol, cigarette, and marijuana timeline follow -back (TLFB)  
7. Reasons for Heavy Drinking Questionnaire (RHDQ)   
8. Reward -Relief Drinking Scale (RRDS)  
9. The Alcohol Dependency Scale  (ADS)  
10. The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT)  
11. Family Tree Questionnaire (FTQ)  
12. Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND)  
13. Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI -II) 
14. Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS)  
15. Graded Chronic Pain Scale (GCPS)  
16. RTC Ladder  
17. Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure S cale (SHAPS)  
18. Penn Alcohol Craving Scale (PACS)  
19. Obsessive Compulsive Drinking Scale  (OCDS)  
20. Concomitant Medications Assessment  
21. Center for Cognitive Neuroscience MRI Safety Screening Form  
 
Physical Exam Measures  
1. Breathalyzer  
2. Urine toxicology screen  and pregnancy test (if female)  
3. The Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol Scale – Revised (CIWA -Ar).   
4. Timeline follow -back (TLFB)  
5. Concomitant Medications Assessment   
 
Baseline Visit Measures  
1. Breathalyzer  
2. Urine toxicology screen  and pregnancy test (if female)  
3. The Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for A lcohol Scale – Revised (CIWA -Ar).   
4. Timeline follow -back (TLFB)  
5. Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI -II) 
6. Graded Chronic Pain Scale (GCPS)  
7. Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure S cale (SHAPS)  
8. Penn Alcohol Craving Scale (PACS)  
9. Obsessive Compulsive Drinking Scale (OCDS)  
10. Side Effects Checklist (SAFTEE)  
11. Open Ended Side Effects Interview  
12. Concomitant Medications Assessment  
 
Midpoint Measures  
1. Breathalyzer  
2. Urine toxicology screen  and pregnancy test (if female)  
3. The Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for A lcohol Scale – Revised (CIWA -Ar).   
4. Timeline follow -back (TLFB)  
5. Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI -II) 
IBUD Withd rawal  Protocol  
Version 4, 05/10/18  
6. Graded Chronic Pain Scale (GCPS)  
7. Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure S cale (SHAPS)  
8. Penn Alcohol Cra ving Scale (PACS)  
9. Obsessive Compulsive Drinking Scale (OCDS)  
10. Side Effects Checklist (SAFTEE)  
11. Open Ended Side Effects Interview  
12. Concomitant Medications Assessment  
13. Center for Cognitive Neuroscience MRI Safety Screening Form  
 
Midpoint Functional Brain Imaging  
After the midpoint measures (above) are collected , participants will complete a brain functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan . The scanning will be performed at the Brain Mapping Center 
or at the Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, both located on the UCLA campus. They will be asked to lie 
down on a padded table, with their head placed in the center of a large, metal doughnut -shaped 
magnet.  While the machine is running, the participant will hear loud banging noises and will be offered 
earplugs to reduce the noise made by the magnet.  Head and back support will also be provided to 
minimize discomfort.   
 
Participants will be asked  to have a normal night’s sleep the night before the scan, have no more than 
one alcoholic drink, and abstain from drinking coffee within 2 hours prior to the scan. Breath alcohol 
concentration must be zero and for female participants the pregnancy test mu st be negative 
immediately prior to the scanning session. Prior to scanning, subjects will practice the task in front of a 
computer monitor with headphones and a button response box using the same stimulus delivery 
software as for fMRI scanning. The subjec ts will practice until it can be ascertained that they understand 
the task.  
 
During the imaging session we will utilize several structural and functional scans. T he structural protocol 
will consist  of a high -resolution, matched -bandwidth (MBW) scan and a s tructural magnetization -
prepared rapid -acquisition gradient echo (MPRAGE) scan. The functional scan will include a fMRI 
alcohol -cue reactivity paradigm previously reported to elicit blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) 
response in mesocorticolimbic regions (Schacht et al., 2011).  
 
The visual alcohol cue reactivity paradigm is a well -validated, with strong reliability and within -
participant stability (1). The alcohol cues task consists of viewing alcohol and neutral cues, developed 
based on work by Schacht and colleagues (2011). There are five types of visual cues: a lcoholic 
beverages, non -alcoholic (neutral) beverages, blurred alcoholic beverages, blurred non -alcoholic 
beverages, and a fixation cross. Stimuli are presented in six 120 -s epochs (total scan duration: 12 
minutes), with each epoch consisting of four 24 -s blocks (one block of alcohol cues, one block of neutral 
cues, one block of blurred images, and one block of fixation). During each 24 -s block, 5 individual 
pictures will be displayed for ~4.8 seconds each. Alcohol blocks will be specific to beverage type ( beer, 
wine, or liquor), with two blocks of each beverage type. Each block will be followed by a 6 -s washout 
period, which allows the hemodynamic response from the previous block to decline.  
IBUD Withd rawal  Protocol  
Version 4, 05/10/18  
Prior to scanning, participants will be shown how to provide rati ngs of their cravings using an optically 
isolated universal serial bus (USB) interface, which consists of a four -button (1= low to 4= high) response 
box. Subjects will provide ratings of their craving immediately following each cue block.  
 
Example Epoch o f Alcohol Cue Reactivity Paradigm  
 
Final  Measures  
1. Breathalyzer  
2. Urine toxicology screen, ETG test, and pregnancy test (if female)  
3. The Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for A lcohol Scale – Revised (CIWA -Ar).   
4. Timeline follow -back (TLFB)  
5. Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI -II) 
6. Graded Chronic Pain Scale (GCPS)  
7. Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure S cale (SHAPS)  
8. Penn Alcohol Craving Scale (PACS)  
9. Obsessive Compulsive Drinking Scale (OCDS)  
10. Side Effects Checklist (SAFTEE)  
11. Open  Ended Side Effects Interview  
12. Concomitant Medications Assessment  
 
DDA Measures   
• See attached IBUD DDA Codebook  
 
 
 
  

IBUD Withd rawal  Protocol  
Version 4, 05/10/18  
Study Design and Flow Chart  
 
 
