 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PET/CT Quantitative Assessment of Myocardial Blood Flow Changes in 
Oncologic Patients Receiving Checkpoint Inhibi tor Therapy  
 
 
NCT#: NCT0453895 0 
 
Protocol Version: 4.0 
Date: 10 November 2021   
 
Protocol Version: 4.0 
Date: 10 November 2021   
 
1 
  
 
PET/CT Quantitative Assessment of Myocardial Blood Flow Changes in 
Oncologic Patients Receiving Checkpoint Inhibi tor Therapy  
 
 
Abstract  (150 words or less with hypothesis)  
 Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) are novel chemotherapeutic agents which disinh ibit 
T-cell activ ity, thereby enhancing autoimmune  response1 and ushering in a new era of treatment  
for patients  with both solid and hematologic  malignancies.2 Unfortunately, resultant  side effects 
of ICI use, termed  immune -related adverse events (IRAE), are difficult to both diagnose and treat 
result ing in high fatal ity rates .3 The ability to accurately detect  subclinical  decline in myocardial 
performance and the resultant initiation  of targeted  therapy has markedly improved the outcomes  
of patients prescribed the more traditional cardiotoxic chemotherapeutic agents such as 
anthracyclines.4 Consequently, means by which to detect subclinical  myocardial injury  is 
garnering increasing interest  and now includes the assessment of endothelial  function .5-7 
Quantitative positron emission tomography computed tomography (PET -CT) is a highly 
accurate, reproducible and repeatable technique by which to a ssess myocardial blood flow 
(MBF ) and endothelial function . 8, 9 For instance, r ecent s tudies have demonstrated a decrease  in 
myocardial flow reserve  (MFR)  in patients receiving doxorubicin.7 We hypothesize  that PET/CT 
MFR will decrease in some patients  receiving  ICI thereby representing  early, subclinical  
myocardial  injury  and potentially serving  as an early  indicator  of patients w ho might be 
predisposed  to IRAEs.  
 
 
Principal Investigador : John P. B ois MD   
 
Co-investigators : Joerg Herrmann MD, Martin Rodriguez -Porcel MD,  Amir Lerman MD, 
Geoffrey B. Johnson MD, PhD, and Panithaya Chareonthaitawee  MD 
IRB # 19 -009189  
 
 - 2 -  
 
A. Rationale: Brief paragraph establishing rationale  
 
 Established chemotherapeutic agents such as anthracyclines , trastuzumab and 
bevacizumab have proven cardiotoxic effects .10 Historically, some of these sequelae  have been 
severe enough to render a patient ’s prognosis poor er than that of a patient  with ischemic  heart 
failure .11 Consequently  monitoring  protocols  designed to detect decline  in cardiovascular  
function were initiated  in the 1970s and have continued to evolve to include  mutligated 
acquisition scan (MUGA), strain echocardiography  and high sensitivity  troponin .12, 13 Early 
detection of chemotherapeutic cardiotoxicity  paired with institution  of therapy has markedly 
improved  the prognosis  of oncologic patients .4, 14 
 Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) disinhibit T -cell acti vity thereby all owing for a 
heightened  antitumor immunologic  response .1,15 Resultant  outcomes for patients wit h both sol id 
and hematologic  malignancies  have  been promising .2, 16, 17 However, immune -related  adverse 
events (IRAE) have been reported secondary to administration  of these agents including  
myocarditis (odds ratio of 11.21), cardiomyopat hy and conduction abnormalities .18, 19  
Furthermore, a fatality rate as high as 39 percent has been reported for patients who develop 
IRAE myocarditis . 3 Approximately 75 percent of patients  who develop  myocarditis have normal 
myocardial function prior to therapy and no known preexisting  cardiovascular  conditions .3 When 
myocarditis does occur as an IRAE it typically  does so in the first month .3 Unfortunately  IRAEs 
have th us far been difficult to diagnose and  to tre at with leaders  in the field calling for 
“development of guidelines for early diagnosis.”3 
 Endothelial dysfunction has been  demonstrated  with the use of other multiple 
chemotherapeutic a gents 3, 5, 20 and is likely due either to endothelial cell death  or reduced  nitric 
oxide availability . Quantitative positron emission tomography computed tomography (PET -CT) 
is an emerging modality which provides a highly accurate, reproducible, repeatability, 
noninvasive means by which to assess total myocardial blood  flow, specifica lly myocardial flow 
reserve (MFR,) including assessment of the endothelium.8, 9 Recentl y, PET -CT MFR wa s 
utilized to demonstrated a decrease in MFR in some patients after expose to doxorubicin but not 
others thereby labeling them as more likely to develop  cardiotoxi city.3 The current propo sal 
seeks to utilized  PET-CT MFR to assess dynamic changes in MFR that occur pre and post 
 - 3 - initiation  of ICI and thereby pot entially identify early cardiotoxicity  in patients  who might  be 
more prone to more devastating  IRAEs such as myocardi tis.   
 There is  also considerable  interest in identifying unique immune cell phenotype s in the 
peripheral blood that c an predict which patients are mo st at risk  for developing  checkpoint 
inhibitor -mediated IRAE s.21  iIn the long -term, t his would serve as a less invasive means of 
monitoring patients both before and during treatment.  Thus, this proposal will also collect and 
analyze peripheral blood from the patients who undergo PET -CT MFR to determine if a 
particular T cell phenotype prior to therapy may correlate with imaging changes an d 
cardiotoxicity of ICI.       
 
B. Hypothesis:   
 
 PET-CT MFR will identify a certain proportion of oncologic  patients being prescribed  
ICIs who develop microvascular  damage/endothelial dysfunction . This initial study could se rve 
as the found ation for larger evaluations of this population in determining whether or not routine  
surveillance can identify patients early who are at higher risk  of IRAE and potentially improve  
outcomes.  
 
C. Aims:  
 The aims of the current study are t wo-fold. First is  to determine i f ICI administration 
causes microvascular damage/endothelial function . If so, the second aim is to serve as a pilot 
study for larger trials to determine the prevalence of ICI -induced  microvascular  
damage/endothelial dysfuncti on and specifica lly if it identifies patients  who are at increased risk 
of IRAEs.  
 
 
D. Innovation:  
What is known:  
1) Traditional chemotherapeutic  agents can cause microvascular damage/endothelial 
dysfunction3, 5, 20 
2) Early detection of chemotherapeutic  toxicity can improve outcomes4 
3) PET-CT MFR can be used to detect chemotherapeutic reduction in MFR in patients 
receiving  traditional agents such as doxorubicin3 
4) ICI induced IRAE can  cause significant morbidity and mortality  
 - 4 - 5) Increased lymphocyte counts and clonal expansion of CD8+ T cells in the peripheral 
blood can precede development of ICI -induced IRAE . 22,23   
 
What remains to be discovered : 
1) Do ICIs cause microvascu lar disease/endo thelial dysfunction?  
2) If ICIs do cause microvascular disease/endothelial dysfunction how common is this 
occurrence and what is its bearing on patient prognosis?  
3) Is there  any correlation between T cell phenotypes in the peripheral blood and 
microvascular dis ease/endothelial dysfunction that occurs on ICI therapy?  
 
E. Significance: How will this change our practice, increase our national standing, attract 
patients or advance our knowledge about CV disease. What is Mayo unique? (numbered list).  
 
1) Cardio -oncology  is a rapidly expanding field and Mayo Clinic has several clinicians at 
the forefront10 
2) Oncologic patients are attracted to Mayo Clinic already for our expertise and this will 
further enhance the practice  
3) Mayo Clinic is a leading center for cardiac PET and specific ally PET -CT MFR6 
 
E. Brief Synopsis of Methods: Very brief summary – numbered list acceptable – of what will 
actually be done.  
1) Collaboration  between Cardiology, Oncology and Car diac PET to recruit 6 consecutive 
patients beginning ICI therapy  
2) Screening labs, including troponin, high sensitivity CRP, and NT-proBNP ; peripheral blood  
draw  sent to research lab  (Dr. Haidong Dong)  for T cell phenotyping.   
3) Complete  PET-CT MFR6 immediately  before and 4 -6 weeks after initiation  of ICIs  
4) Assess change in MFR (per literature  20% or more decreased indicates significant  change )7 
5) Continue long -term follow -up of the patients in charts to  determine if any develop IRAEs  
6) For patients who develop myocarditis a FDG  PET-CT would be performed  to assess for 
inflammation  
 
E.1 Detailed Methods  
 - 5 - 1) Recruitment: Investigator JPB has met with hematology team (Konstantinos Leventakos MD 
PhD) who will work with his PA team to identify eligible patients for recruitment. Those deemed 
eligible will be app roached during t heir initial visits with oncology (prior to initiation of ICI. 
2): PET -CT MFR methodology (performed during two sessions -one before and one 4 -6 weeks 
after administration of ICI):  
A GE Discovery 690XT, Discovery Molecular Insights (DMI) or 710 PET/CT syste m (GE 
Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) will be utilized in performing the studies. The imaging system 
consists of full ring Cerium -doped Lutetium Yttrium Orthosilicate (LYSO) crystals. 128x128 
PET matrix size with zoomed 41.9 cm field of view cent ered over the he art will be used to obtain 
the PET images. Furthermore, three -dimensional list mode acquisition will be employed. Three -
dimensional iterative reconstruction algorithm with time -of-flight correction, CT attenuation, 
scatter, randoms, normali zation, decay an d dead time correction will be utilized. Three -
dimensional Hanning post -filter with a 10 mm cut -off will also be used.  
 
A 64 slice -spiral CT will be employed with auto exposure control with modulated current in 
order to maintain consistent  noise index (no ise index set at 33 with mA range 10 -180). For our 
CT attenuation imaging tube ration is 0.5 s, kV is 120 and pitch is 0.98. Slice thickness is 3.75 
mm and slice increment is 3.27 mm. Matrix size is 512 x 21.  
 
13NH 3 will be administered at rest to allow qu alitative and quantitative (rest myocardial blood 
flow) assessment of myocardial perfusion. Regadenoson will be administered as a stress agent 
followed by a 13NH 3 with subsequent qualitative and quantitative (myocardial blood flow) 
assessme nt of myocardial  perfusion. MFR will then be determined by assessing the ratio of stress  
to rest myocardial blood f low.  
 
For those patients who are suspected to have developed myocarditis they will undergo a FDG -
PET CT inflammatory protocol. PET/CT parame ters will be sim ilar as noted above. However, no 
stress agent will be used. Furthermore, FDG will be administered per the inflammatory 
myocardial protocol for assessment of inflammation.  
 
3)  Analysis of T lymphocytes in peripheral blood for phenotypic ma rkers  via flow c ytometry :   
 
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC’s) will be isolated from whole blood using a Ficoll 
gradient, counted, and frozen in liquid nitrogen .  For analysis, PBMC’s will be thawed and 
plated overnight in complete RPMI media wit h IL-2 (10u/mL).   The following day, cells will be 
counted and stained with fluorophore -labeled antibodies suitable for flow cytometry, which may 
include (but are not limited to):  CD45 (clone HI30, catalog 304006), CD3 (clone OKT3, catalog 
317344), CX3CR1  (clone 2A9 -1, catalog 341616), CD11a (clone HI111, catalog 301212), and 
PD-1 (clone EH12.2H7, catalog 329904)  antibodies from BioLegend; CD8 (clone RPA -T8, 
catalog 557746) and Ki67(clone B56, catalog 562899) antibod ies from BD Biosciences; and 
anti–human granzyme B (clon e GB11, catalog NBP1 -50071PCP) from Novus .  Cells will then 
be assayed using a Beckman Coulter Cytoflex LX flow cytometer and data analyzed using 
FlowJo software (BD Biosciences).  
 
 
 
 - 6 -  
3): Statistical Analysis  
General Considerations  
Continuo us data  (e.g., a ge) will be summarized using the following descriptive summary 
statistics: the number of subjects (n), mean, SD, median, minimum value (min), and maximum 
value (max). For each continuous variable, the corresponding mean, median, minimum and  
maximum will be  presented to 1 decimal place and the SD to 2 decimal places, unless otherwise 
specified.  
Categorical variables  (e.g., qualitative presence or absence of perfusion defecit) will be 
summarized using counts and percentages. Percentages will be presented to 1 decimal place. 
Summaries of continuous and categorical data will be presented, as appropriate.  
Incomplete/Missing data : Missing data (e.g., dates, post -baseline values) will not be imputed, 
unless otherwise specified; i.e., all missing va lues and missing  post-baseline values will remain 
as missing in all statistical analyses and listings, unless otherwise specified.  
Outliers:  No formal statistical analyses will be performed to detect and/or remedy the presence 
of statistical outliers.  
Addi tionally, all su bject data, including derived variables, will be presented in subject data 
listings; listings will display all subjects who were randomized or enrolled in the study.   
Background Characteristics  
Demographics and Baseline Characteristics  
Demographics and b aseline characteristics (age, sex, race, ethnicity, weight, height and body 
mass index [BMI] ) will be summarized.  
Efficacy Analysis  
Analysis of Primary Efficacy Endpoint  
Nominal continuous variables will be represented as the mean +/ - SD a nd categorical v ariables 
will be noted as the number and percentage of total. Pearson chi -square test will be utilized to 
determine statistical significance for continuous variables whereas a S tudent’s two -sample t -test 
will be implemented to determine sta tistical signifi cance for continuous variables. Univariate and 
multivariate analyses will be performed when relevant. Statistical significance will be set a priori 
as a p -value less than 0.05. Given that this is a pilot study no power calculation will be 
performed. All st atistical analyses will be performed using JMP Pro 9 (SAS Institute INC. Cary, 
North Carolina).  
 
Adverse Events  Collection :  
Adverse Events will be collected only for activities done for research.    
 
 
The selection of study subjects will b e based upon the following inclusion and exclusion 
criteria :   
 
 
 
Inclusion  
 - 7 - 1. First time administration of ICI  
2. Willing an d able to return in 4 -6 weeks for follow -up study  
3. Patients with previous heart conditions included (while this may impact MFR the delta 
MFR is what we are assessing)  
 
Exclusion  
1. Age < 18 years  
2. Women who are pregnant, or breast -feeding.  
3. Unable or unwilling t o give consent to undergo PET/CT.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References  
 - 8 -  
1. Eigentler TK, Hassel JC, Berking  C, Aberle J, Bachmann O, Grunwald V, Kahler KC, 
Loquai C, Reinmuth N, Steins M, Zimmer L, Sendl A and Gutzmer R. Diagn osis, monitoring 
and management of immune -related adverse drug reactions of anti -PD-1 antibody therapy. 
Cancer Treat Rev . 2016;45:7 -18. 
2. Fehrenbacher L, Spira A, Ballinger M, Kowanetz M, Vansteenkiste J, Mazieres J, Park 
K, Smith D, Artal -Cortes A, Lewan ski C, Braiteh F, Waterkamp D, He P, Zou W, Chen DS, Yi 
J, Sandler A, Rittmeyer A and Group PS. Atezolizumab versus docetaxel for patient s with 
previously treated non -small -cell lung cancer (POPLAR): a multicentre, open -label, phase 2 
randomised controlled  trial. Lancet . 2016;387:1837 -46. 
3. Upadhrasta S, Elias H, Patel K and Zheng L. Managing cardiotoxicity associated with 
immune checkpoin t inhibitors. Chronic Dis Transl Med . 2019;5:6 -14. 
4. Cardinale D, Colombo A, Lamantia G, Colombo N, Civelli M, De Giac omi G, Rubino 
M, Veglia F, Fiorentini C and Cipolla CM. Anthracycline -induced cardiomyopathy: clinical 
relevance and response to pharmaco logic therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2010;55:213 -20. 
5. Ky B, Vejpongsa P, Yeh ET, Force T and Moslehi JJ. Emerging paradi gms in 
cardiomyopathies associated with cancer therapies. Circ Res . 2013;113:754 -64. 
6. Murthy VL, Bateman TM, Beanlands RS, Berman DS, B orges -Neto S, Chareonthaitawee 
P, Cerqueira MD, deKemp RA, DePuey EG, Dilsizian V, Dorbala S, Ficaro EP, Garcia EV, 
Gew irtz H, Heller GV, Lewin HC, Malhotra S, Mann A, Ruddy TD, Schindler TH, Schwartz 
RG, Slomka PJ, Soman P, Di Carli MF, Directors SCCBo an d Directors ABo. Clinical 
Quantification of Myocardial Blood Flow Using PET: Joint Position Paper of the SNMMI 
Cardiova scular Council and the ASNC. J Nucl Med . 2018;59:273 -293. 
7. Laursen AH, Elming MB, Ripa RS, Hasbak P, Kjaer A, Kober L, Marott JL, Thune  JJ 
and Hutchings M. Rubidium -82 positron emission tomography for detection of acute 
doxorubicin -induced cardiac effect s in lymphoma patients. J Nucl Cardiol . 2018.  
8. Chareonthaitawee P, Christenson SD, Anderson JL, Kemp BJ, Hodge DO, Ritman EL 
and Gibbon s RJ. Reproducibility of measurements of regional myocardial blood flow in a model 
of coronary artery disease: Comparis on of H215O and 13NH3 PET techniques. J Nucl Med . 
2006;47:1193 -201. 
9. Murthy VL, Naya M, Taqueti VR, Foster CR, Gaber M, Hainer J, Dorba la S, Blankstein 
R, Rimoldi O, Camici PG and Di Carli MF. Effects of sex on coronary microvascular 
dysfunction and card iac outcomes. Circulation . 2014;129:2518 -27. 
10. Herrmann J, Lerman A, Sandhu NP, Villarraga HR, Mulvagh SL and Kohli M. 
Evaluation and m anagement of patients with heart disease and cancer: cardio -oncology. Mayo 
Clin Proc . 2014;89:1287 -306. 
11. Felker GM, Thompson RE, Hare JM, Hruban RH, Clemetson DE, Howard DL, 
Baughman KL and Kasper EK. Underlying causes and long -term survival in patients  with 
initially unexplained cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med . 2000;342:1077 -84. 
12. Choi BW, Berger HJ, Schwartz PE, Alexan der J, Wackers FJ, Gottschalk A and Zaret 
BL. Serial radionuclide assessment of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in cancer patients with 
abnorm al baseline resting left ventricular performance. Am Heart J . 1983;106:638 -43. 
13. Sawaya H, Sebag IA, Plana JC, Januzz i JL, Ky B, Tan TC, Cohen V, Banchs J, Carver 
JR, Wiegers SE, Martin RP, Picard MH, Gerszten RE, Halpern EF, Passeri J, Kuter I and 
Scher rer-Crosbie M. Assessment of echocardiography and biomarkers for the extended 
 - 9 - prediction of cardiotoxicity in patients treated with anthracyclines, taxanes, and trastuzumab. 
Circ Cardiovasc Imaging . 2012;5:596 -603. 
14. Schwartz RG, McKenzie WB, Alexander J , Sager P, D'Souza A, Manatunga A, Schwartz 
PE, Berger HJ, Setaro J, Surkin L and et al. Congestive heart failure and l eft ventricular 
dysfunction complicating doxorubicin therapy. Seven -year experience using serial radionuclide 
angiocardiography. Am J Med . 1987;82:1109 -18. 
15. Hurst JH. Cancer immunotherapy innovator James Allison receives the 2015 
Lasker~DeBakey Clinical  Medical Research Award. J Clin Invest . 2015;125:3732 -6. 
16. Herbst RS, Soria JC, Kowanetz M, Fine GD, Hamid O, Gordon MS, Sosman JA, 
McD ermott DF, Powderly JD, Gettinger SN, Kohrt HE, Horn L, Lawrence DP, Rost S, Leabman 
M, Xiao Y, Mokatrin A, Koeppen H, Hegde PS, Mellman I, Chen DS and Hodi FS. Predictive 
correlates of response to the anti -PD-L1 antibody MPDL3280A in cancer patients. Natu re. 
2014;515:563 -7. 
17. Nayak L, Iwamoto FM, LaCasce A, Mukundan S, Roemer MGM, Chapuy B, Armand P, 
Rodig SJ and Shipp MA. PD -1 blockade with nivolumab in relapsed/refractory primary central 
nervous system and testicular lymphoma. Blood . 2017;129:3071 -3073 . 
18. Della Vittoria Scarpati G, Fusciello C, Perri F, Sabbatino F, Ferrone S, Carlomagno C 
and Pepe S. Ipilimumab in t he treatment of metastatic melanoma: management of adverse 
events. Onco Targets Ther . 2014;7:203 -9. 
19. Varricchi G, Galdiero MR, Mercuri o V, Bonaduce D, Marone G and Tocchetti CG. 
Pharmacovigilating cardiotoxicity of immune checkpoint inhibitors. Lancet O ncol. 
2018;19:1545 -1546.  
20. Chow AY, Chin C, Dahl G and Rosenthal DN. Anthracyclines cause endothelial injury in 
pediatric cancer patien ts: a pilot study. J Clin Oncol . 2006;24:925 -8. 
21.  Farmer JR. Testing Immune -Related Adverse Events in Cancer Immuno therapy. Clin 
Lab Med. 2019 Dec;39(4):669 -683. doi: 10.1016/j.cll.2019.07.012. Epub 2019 Oct 4. PMID: 
31668277.  
 
22. Diehl A, Yarchoan M, Hopkins A,  Jaffee E, Grossman SA. Relationships between 
lymphocyte counts and treatment -related toxicities and clinical responses in patients with so lid 
tumors treated with PD -1 checkpoint inhibitors. Oncotarget. 2017 Dec 14;8(69):114268 -114280. 
doi: 10.18632/oncota rget.23217. PMID: 29371985; PMCID: PMC5768402.  
 