Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
Study Title:  Pilot RCT  of Remote Mental  Health and Substance Use Screening, Brief Intervention and Referral 
to Treatment (SBIRT), Compared to In-Person SBIRT for Peripartum Women.  
Principal Investigator: Constance Guille,  MD, MSCR 
 
1.0 Objectives / Specific Aims  
 
Specific  Aim 1 
 
The goal of Specific Aim  1 is to develop an effective remote mental  health and substance use Screening, Brief 
Intervention and Referral  to Treatment (SBIRT) program  for pregnant and postpartum  women. The objectives 
of this current application for Specific Aim 1 are to conduct a pilot RCT of a text-message based SBIRT and 
home-based telemedicine services for pregnant and postpartum women – called Listening to Women (LTW), 
compared to treatment as usual (TAU) with the primary objective to provide effect size estimates for a larger RCT.  
 
Specific Aim 1: Conduct a pilot, small -scale randomized controlled trial to examine feasibility and preliminary 
efficacy of LTW, compared to TAU. Outcomes related to feasibility include percentage of eligible patients recruited, study attrition, study retention, and mental health and substance use treatment appointment 
attendance. Outcomes related to preliminary efficacy will include participation in screening, referral and treatment at baseline, compared to TAU.  
 
The central hypotheses for Specific Aim 1 are that the study is feasible and women assigned to LTW will be 
more likely to screen positive and successfully obtain treatment in less time, compared to those that are 
assigned to TAU.  
 
Specific  Aim 2 
Upon completion of Specific  Aim 1, the goal of Specific  Aim 2 is to evaluate the effectiveness  of a remote mental 
health and substance use Screening, Brief Intervention and Referral  to Treatment (SBIRT) program  for pregnant 
and postpartum women. The objectives of this current application for Specific Aim 2 are to conduct an RCT of 
a text-message based SBIRT and home-based telemedicine services for pregnant and postpartum women – 
called Listening to Women (LTW), compared to treatment as usual (TAU) with the primary objective to include attendance to treatment at baseline, compared to TAU.  
 
Specific Aim 2: Conduct a randomized controlled trial to examine the effectiveness  of LTW, compared to TAU. 
Outcomes related to effectiveness include attendance to treatment at baseline , compared to TAU.  
 
The central  hypotheses  are that a greater  proportion of women assigned  to LTW will attend treatment following 
a referral, compared to TAU.  
 
Specific  Aim 3 
 
The goal of Specific  Aim 3 is to gather data related to maternal  and newborn diagnosis  codes, health care 
utilization, and costs for our study participants with Medicaid.  
 
Specific Aim 3: We will compare Medicaid data among those assigned  to LTW vs. TAU.  
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
 
The central  hypothesis  is that those assigned  to LTW will have lower health care utilization and costs  during 
the postpartum year, compared to TAU.  
 
 
2.0 Background  
During pregnancy and the year postpartum (perinatal period), mental health problems are common such as 
mood, anxiety and substance use disorders. Perinatal mood and anxiety disorders are the most common 
complication  of pregnancy  and childbirth affecting at least  1 in 7 perinatal  women [1]. Perinatal  substance use is 
also common, and the prevalence is increasing. Perinatal opioid use disorder alone has increased 4-fold over 
the past decade [2]. Perinatal mental health and substance use are associated with significant maternal, obstetric, infant and child morbidity [3-9], and mortality [10-14]. 
Given the prevalence and impact of perinatal mood, anxiety and substance use disorders, and evidence 
demonstrating mitigation of its effects on maternal and child health through psychotherapy and psychopharmacotherapy [16,17], a multitude of professional societies recommend universal screening of pregnant and/or postpartum women using validated screening tools and provision of adequate mental health treatment and/or treatment referrals [18-22]. Unfortunately, however, the vast majority of women with mood, anxiety or substance use problems will remain under -diagnosed and under -treated [23-24]. Less than 50% of 
peripartum women with a mental illness, and less than 20% of women with a substance use problem are identified in clinical  settings  [6]. Among these women, less than 15% receive treatment, fewer than 10% receive 
adequate treatment and less than 5% achieve remission [4]. 
While mental health screening is widely accepted by perinatal women and Ob/Gyn providers [25,26], further 
work is needed to facilitate implementation of screenings in Ob/Gyn practices that translate to treatment 
participation. However, key provider and systems -level barriers to treatment exist and include: 1) lack of 
screening in obstetric  settings  and lack of provider training in technical  aspects  of mental  health and substance 
use disorder care [26-28] and relevant communication skills [29]; 2) absence of standardized processes and procedures for integrated obstetric and mental health and substance use disorder treatment [29,30]; 3) lack of 
mental health providers willing to treat pregnant women [30]; 4) lack of referral networks [29-33]; and, 5) 
inadequate capacity and resources to ensure mental health evaluation, treatment, follow -up, and care 
coordination [29- 35]. 
To address  these barriers we designed, implemented and piloted LTW in routine perinatal  care in one obstetric 
practice (see 3.0 Intervention to be Studied) as part of a quality improvement project. Our pilot demonstrates high rates of participation with 87.78% (273/311) of women approached agreeing to take part in LTW and 
completing the text-message screening. Preliminary data comparing LTW (N=273) to a historical dataset 
extracted from the EHR including peripartum women receiving in-person SBIRT in the same clinic (N=2,988) found a significantly greater proportion of women enrolled in LTW screened positive (81.15% vs. 33.33%; 
X
2=169.50, p<0.0001), were referred for treatment (76.12% vs. 57.63%; X2=18.03, p<0.0001), and received 
treatment (94.91% vs. 16.04%; X2=245.41, p<0.0001), compared to women receiving in-person SBIRT.  
 
While  these preliminary  data are exciting, a randomized control  trial will be necessary  to determine the feasibility 
and efficacy of LTW. The goal of Specific Aim 1 is to examine the feasibility and preliminary efficacy of the 
proposed RCT methodology. Specific Aim 1 will inform Specific Aim 2 to then conduct a larger -scale RCT that 
examines  LTW,  compared to a control  condition.  This will allow  us to identify  and address  barriers in recruitment, 
retention, use of LTW, and other procedures essential to successful conduct of the RCT. This approach is consistent with expert recommendations  to use pilot mechanisms  to test the feasibility  of doing a full-scale  RCT, 
use data yielded by the pilot study to “de-bug” the methodology, and to assess optimal strategies to executing the RCT [51- R34]. 
 
3.0 Intervention to be studied  
LTW is a mobile phone -based program designed to enhance delivery of Screening, Brief Intervention, and 
Referral  to Treatment (SBIRT), an evidence-based approach for mental  health and substance  use screening 
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
and treatment for perinatal  women [36-38]. This program  was created as a result of key informant interviews  with 
obstetric  providers  and pregnant and postpartum  women with opioid use disorders. Feedback  from these groups 
informed the development of LTW. 
 
The program utilizes mobile phone text message-based screenings with immediate automated feedback, 
paired with remote care coordination and, if appropriate, home-based telemedicine mental health and 
substance use disorder treatment services. Women coming into routine prenatal care (see Recruitment) are 
eligible to take part in the study. Those agreeing to take part are sent a text message with routine mental health and substance use screening questions  (see LTW protocol  for screening questions)  currently employed 
as part of standard of care. These screening questions are the SBIRT which is a survey with 9 questions related to depression, anxiety, substance abuse (alcohol, cigarettes, other drugs including prescription 
medication), and domestic violence (see LTW protocol). However, LTW uses text-message based screening 
with phone based assessment and referral to treatment, and TAU is an in-person screening and referral to treatment assessment. The same screening tools are used to assess substance abuse and mental health problems in LTW and TAU. Once they complete these screenings via text message, they are provided immediate feedback about their scores, and recommendations (see LTW protocol for automated messages). Contact information for the study’s care coordinator is also provided along with her availability i.e., Monday – 
Friday 8am -5pm. In addition, while specific questions about suicidal ideation are not asked via the text 
message screening, all participants receive a text message: “If you are ever experiencing a mental health 
emergency, such  as a desire  to harm  yourself or others, please go to your nearest emergency  room. If you are 
feeling suicidal you can call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline 1-800 -273-8255 anytime” (see LTW 
protocol for automated messages). 
Information about the screening is stored in a REDCap database. A care coordinator is reviewing this 
information Monday through Friday 8am -5pm and texts or calls any patient that screens positive for mental 
health or substance use that requires  further assessment as  would be done in-person  during routine clinical 
care (see LTW protocol describing branching logic from screens and clinical risk categories). The care coordinator  contacts  the patient and  further assesses  their mental  health and substance use symptoms  and 
needs for resources and/or treatment. If the participant would benefit from further mental health and/or substance use evaluation and treatment, the care coordinator schedules the patient for a home-based telemedicine visit. The care coordinator communicates all screening information in the Electronic Health Record (EHR) for all providers to review, and if applicable includes information about the scheduled appointment or resources provided.  
4.0 Study Endpoints  
Specific  Aim 1: 
 
Primary  pilot  efficacy outcome variables include:  
Completion of SBIRT: We will compare the proportion of participants  that complete a screen for mental 
health and substance use, the proportion of those screening positive that are referred to treatment, and the proportion of those referred to treatment that had at least one mental health and/or substance use disorder treatment appointment among those assigned to LTW, compared to TAU. 
Time to Treatment: We will measure the time from completion of screening positive to time of first 
mental  health or substance use treatment appointment (if a referral  to treatment was appropriate) among those 
assigned to LTW, compared to TAU. 
Reduction in Mental Health Symptoms: A mong women referred for treatment, we will compare the 
mean change in the Edinburgh Postnatal  Depression Scale (EPDS) among those assigned to LTW,  compared 
to TAU. Of note, the suicidal ideation question (item #10) will be omitted from this questionnaire.  
Reduction in Substance Use: Among women referred for treatment, we will compare change in 
substance  use frequency  and amount as measured by the NIDA-Modified Assist  (see LTW protocol)  among 
those assigned to LTW, compared to TAU. 
Improved M aternal  Functioning: Among women referred for treatment, we will compare the change in 
maternal functioning measured by the Medical Outcomes Study Short Form 36 (SF-36v2) among those assigned to LTW, compared to TAU. 
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
 
Secondary pilot  feasibility and acceptability outcome variables include:  
Recruitment: We will determine the proportion of patients  who agree to participate  as compared to the 
total number solicited to enroll for each recruitment approach. 
Attrition: W e will examine the proportion of study  participants  that prematurely  terminate i.e., do not 
complete screenings, or are unable to be contacted for referral and/or treatment. 
Study  r etention: We will determine the proportion of study  participants  that complete all assessment 
points associated with the protocol.  
Treatment A ttendance: We will collect  data from the EHR to determine the proportion of participants 
that attended a mental health or substance use treatment appointment. 
Improved H ealth-Related Social  Needs: Among women referred for treatment, we will compare the 
change in health-related social needs measured by the Accountable Health Communities (AHC) Health- 
Related Social Needs (HRSN) Screening Tool among those assigned to LTW, compared to TAU. 
Voice Bi omarkers: Voice  analysis  will be completed using an online platform  SurveyLex  (owned by 
NeuroLex, Inc.). Among women  referred for treatment, we will analyze voice  recordings  for characteristics 
(acoustic, linguistic, or meta feature) which may be compared between those assigned to LTW and those 
assigned to TAU, and compared to other measures  collected in either LTW  or TAU including EPDS, NIDA 
Modified Assist, and/or AHC HRSN.  
 
Specific  Aim 2: 
Primary  Outcome:  
 
Attendance to Treatment: treatment attendance (defined as attending at least 1 or more visits with a 
mental  health and/or  substance use disorder  (SUD)  treatment provider  during pregnancy  and the postpartum 
year) 
Secondary Outcomes  
Reduction in Mental Health Symptoms: Among women referred for treatment, we will compare the 
mean change in the Edinburgh Postnatal  Depression Scale (EPDS), GAD -7 Anxiety  and CSSRS  among those 
assigned to LTW, compared to TAU. Of note, the suicidal ideation question (item #10) will be omitted from the 
EPDS questionnaire.  
Reduction in Substance Use: A mong women referred for treatment, we will compare change in 
substance  use frequency  and amount as measured by the NIDA -Modified Assist  (see LTW protocol) and TLFB 
among those assigned to LTW, compared to TAU. 
Improved M aternal  Functioning: Among women referred for treatment, we will compare the change in 
maternal functioning measured by the Medical Outcomes Study Short Form 36 (SF-36v2) among those assigned to LTW, compared to TAU. 
Improved H
 ealth-Related Social  Needs: Among women referred for treatment, we will compare the 
change in health-related social needs measured by the Accountable Health Communities (AHC) Health- 
Related Social Needs (HRSN) Screening Tool among those assigned to LTW, compared to TAU. 
For the outcome variables for specific aims 1 and 2 we will collect data from the EHR including SBIRT data, if 
the participant was referred to treatment, where they were referred to treatment, if they attended a mental health or substance use treatment appointment and where they attended the appointment, how many appointments  they attended, and the numbers  of days  from date of SBIRT completion to date of mental  health 
or substance use treatment appointment. 
 
Specific  Aim 3: 
The data that will be collected on study  participants  with Medicaid include: 
Number and costs of prenatal care visits 
Number and costs  of postpartum  care visits  
Number and costs  of hospitalizations  during pregnancy  and the postpartum  year 
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
Number and costs of ED visits during  pregnancy  and the postpartum  year 
Number and costs of newborn care visits  (outpatient, inpatient and ED) in the first year of life 
Maternal  diagnosis  codes  for prenatal  care visits,  postpartum  care visits,  hospitalizations  and ED visits 
Newborn diagnosis codes for outpatient, inpatient and ED visits  
 
 
 
5.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria/ Study Population  
Inclusion criteria include: 1) age 18-41; 2) currently pregnant or postpartum; 3) if pregnant, receiving prenatal 
care; 4) English fluency; 5) owner of a cell phone with SMS text-message based capability; 6) access to WIFI 
and a device to allow  audio and video  teleconferencing; 7)  able to provide informed consent. Exclusion  criteria: 
None  
 
6.0 Number  of Subjects  
A total of 450 participants will be randomized in Specific Aim 1 (n=100) and Specific Aim 2 (n=350). To randomize 450 participants  we will need to approach about 1,500 participants  in order to get to 450 total 
participants.  
 
7.0 Setting  
Recruitment will occur  remotely, in person and via the EHR.  Potential  participants  will be pregnant women 
receiving prenatal care and postpartum women.  
 
8.0 Recruitment Methods  
Recruitment will occur remotely, in person and via the EHR. A Research Data Request will be submitted to obtain a recruitment report of MUSC patients  who potentially  meet eligibility  criteria. The recruitment report will 
include a search for pregnant and postpartum women. The report will include mrn, age, race, ethnicity, date of 
prenatal care visit, date of postpartum visit, delivery date, ob/gyn provider name, MyChart account (Yes/No), cell phone number, email  address  and current ICD-9 or 10 diagnoses. The purpose of the ICD codes will  be to 
ensure we are approaching enough women with substance use disorders, and/or a mood or anxiety disorder diagnoses, and therefore likely to screen positive on either an in-person or text-message SBIRT screening. In addition, ICD  codes will  be used for urn stratification at randomization. Any patients who have not opted out of 
being contacted for research will be contacted by phone call or text message and invited to participate. If a cell 
phone number is not available, the message with a link to a RedCap eligibility survey will be sent via email or MyChart message. The study team will not cold- contact any patients who have chosen to opt-out of receiving 
contact about research or who have met the maximum number of contact attempts at the time of recruitment. Our PI’s clinic policy is to ask all patients if they would like to be contacted for research opportunities and if they prefer to be contacted by phone or text message. The vast majority of women prefer to be contacted 
through a text message. Therefore, we believe cold-contacting patients via text is acceptable for this study.  
All other patients will be contacted through their providers to be informed of the study if the provider feels it is 
appropriate. If the potential participant’s provider has agreed to have the study team contact their patient, a phone call or text message will be sent to the potential participant inviting them to take part in the study. If a cell phone number is  not available, the message  with a link to a RedCap eligibility survey  will be sent via email. 
If the potential participant does not respond to the phone call, text or email, the study team may also notify 
potential participants that a message was sent to them via MyChart. The text message (or email/MyChart 
message) will include a link to a brief RedCap eligibility survey. For those meeting the eligibility screening 
criteria, the RA/RC will schedule a time to verify eligibility criteria and review the informed consent either remotely or in-person.  
Another method of recruitment will include Women’s  Health Services clinics,  where after women are identified 
as pregnant or postpartum by  the patient’s nurse or provider, they will be approached by  the study  team, with 
the provider’s permission, to take part in the study. Additionally, research staff may do a review of Women’s Health Services provider schedules and patient charts in EPIC to identify potentially eligible women for inclusion. Research staff will approach patients when they arrive for their regularly scheduled appointment. 
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
We will also recruit  from the MUSC  antepartum  unit and the mother -baby  unit. Patients  will be approached by 
the study team, with the provider’s permission, to take part in the study. Additionally, research staff may do a 
review of the antepartum and mother -baby unit schedules and patient charts in EPIC to identify potentially 
eligible women for inclusion. Research staff will approach patients while they are staying on the antepartum 
and mother -baby units. If the patient agrees  to taking part in the study  the RA will consent the participant and 
complete baseline procedures. 
Another way to recruit is the potentially eligible patients in the PI and Co-Is practices will be informed and 
approached about the study  as the PI and Co-Is feel is appropriate. Participants  will also be recruited via study 
advertisement (e.g., flyers) and online postings (e.g., social media, linkedin). 
 
9.0 Consent  Process  
Signed informed consent will be obtained from study  participants. The consent process  will take place via one 
of the following modalities: 1) Remote or in person electronic consent (e-consent) via REDCap (if remote, e- consent will be facilitated with a discussion over the phone or via video), 2) Remote consent via doxy.me 
facilitated with either  a discussion over  the phone or video connection via doxy.me, 3)  Mailed (paper) consent 
facilitated with a discussion over the phone, or 4) in person consent (e.g., in clinic).  
 
All participants  will be provided with a hard copy  and/or  an electronic  copy  of the consent form. Participants  will 
be informed that participation in this research is strictly voluntary. Informed consent will include a detailed 
description of the purpose and the procedures of the study emphasizing our policy regarding privacy and 
confidentiality and an opportunity for the individual to ask any questions or voice concerns. Signatures on the consent form may be obtained with paper  and pen OR electronically  via REDCap  or doxy.me. Participants  who 
do not have access to the required technology to complete consent remotely via REDCap or doxy.me will be given the option to complete consent via mail facilitated with a discussion over the phone. 
10.0 Study  Design / Methods 
 
Specific aim 1: A two arm pilot RCT (N=100) with 2:1 allocation will examine feasibility and preliminary efficacy 
of LTW, compared to TAU. Specific aim 2: A RCT (N=350) with 2:1 allocation will examine effectiveness of 
LTW, compared to TAU. As of the approval of amendment #12 the allocation will switch to 1(LTW):2(TAU) for 
specific aim  2. Recruitment will  primarily occur  proactively and remotely  via the EHR.  We will conduct a weekly 
EHR search via a recruitment report for all new  pregnant and postpartum patients in the past week. The report 
will include mrn, age, race, ethnicity, date of prenatal care visit, date of postpartum visit, delivery date, ob/gyn 
provider name, MyChart account (Yes/No), cell phone number, email address and current ICD -9 or 10 
diagnoses. Any patients who have not opted out of being contacted for research will be contacted and invited 
to participate. The study team will not cold-contact any patients who have chosen to opt-out of receiving 
contact about research or who have met the maximum number  of contact attempts  at the time of recruitment. If 
the potential participant has not opted out of being contacted, or  the potential participant’s  provider  has agreed 
to have the study team contact their patient, a phone call will be made or message will be sent via text, email or MyChart message to the potential participant inviting them to take part in the study. This invitation will 
include clear opt out procedures  should the patient not wish to be contacted in the future for the purpose of this 
study. If interested, participants will complete a screening online via REDCap to determine study  eligibility (see 
above for inclusion criteria). After completing preliminary determination of eligibility, if eligible and interested in 
participating in the study, participants will be scheduled for a time to complete informed consent (see 9.0 
Consent Process).  
 
Following consent, all participants will subsequently be text messaged and/or emailed a REDCap link, accessible via smartphone, tablet, or computer to complete study assessments. Assessments that need to be 
completed by interview  will be scheduled with study  staff and completed via doxy.me  or telephone. For specific 
aim 1 participants only, participants will also complete voice analysis through Surveylex. Participants will be presented with a questionnaire consisting of one task to complete through the Surveylex online form. One task 
to be answered and entered as text, and three tasks involving voice recordings in response to prompts. The 
tasks in the online form include the following: Text question (one task): 1) What is your participant ID?; Voice 
recording (three tasks): During voice recording tasks, the participant will be reminded that there is no right or  
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
wrong answer  for these tasks and that they may choose to skip the question or  stop their answer  at any time 1) 
Please repeat this phrase: “The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dogs.” (10 seconds) 2) Please describe 
yesterday from start to finish (30 seconds) and 3) Please describe what brings you happiness (30 seconds).  
Assessments will occur  at baseline (following consent). Participants will be randomized to LTW or TAU, 
respectively.  
Survey assessments are estimated to take 30 minutes to complete and will be administered remotely via 
REDCap through our established procedures and via doxy.me or telephone for interview assessments. Voice 
analysis for specific aim 1 participants only takes less than 10 minutes to complete and can be completed 
remotely. Participants will be compensated via electronic gift cards which will be emailed or texted to 
participants. Participants will receive $25 for completion of the baseline assessments. To encourage 
participants  to complete all 3 surveys,  participants  will be paid an additional  $20 if they complete all 3 surveys 
(baseline).  
Assessments include  
 
Measures  Baseline  
Consent  X 
Randomization  X 
Demographics 
Questionnaire  X 
EPDS  Survey  X 
NIDA  Modified  Assist  X 
Accountable Health 
Communities (AHC) 
Health-Related Social  
Needs  (HRSN) 
Screening  Tool X 
The Medical  Outcomes  
Study  Short  Form  Survey 
36 (SF -36v2)  X 
*Voice  Biomarkers  X 
**GAD -7 Anxiety  X 
+**Columbia Suicide 
Severity  Rating Scale  
(CSSRS)  X 
+**Timeline  Follow -Back 
(TLFB)  X 
***Usability  Scale  Survey  X 
*Only  the 100 participants  in specific  aim 1 complete voice  biomarkers  
**Only  participants  in specific  aim 2 complete the GAD -7, CSSRS  and TLFB  
***Only  participants  assigned to LTW  will complete the usability  scale  
+ As of the approval of amendment 10 newly enrolled participants will not complete CSSRS and TLFB. 
Participants  consented prior to the approval  of amendment 10 will complete CSSRS  and TLFB  at baseline.  
 
Specific aim 3: We will gather healthcare utilization data on our study participants who have Medicaid 
insurance. The MUSC study team will extract the maternal Medicaid IDs from our study participants with 
Medicaid insurance from the EHR.  We will share a list of these maternal  Medicaid IDs with Medicaid, and they 
will return data related to maternal and newborn diagnosis codes, health care utilization and costs for these 
participants i.e., prenatal care visits, postpartum care visits, hospitalizations and ED visits during pregnancy 
and the postpartum year. The MUSC study team will send the maternal Medicaid ID’s of study participants to 
Medicaid in a password protected spreadsheet. Medicaid will send the MUSC study team a password 
protected spreadsheet of  data. The spreadsheet of data Medicaid will send  back  to MUSC will be coded since  
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
it will contain the Medicaid ID's of participants.  
 
The Medicaid ID is the only link to subjects in the study. The document linking Medicaid ID’s and our study 
participants  will be stored on a University  secure  network  drive  or in MUSC  BOX.  The linking document will be 
stored separately from the study data and only trained study personnel will have access to the linking document.  
 
Study  data will be stored on a University  secure network  drive  or in MUSC  BOX. The  spreadsheet of data that 
Medicaid will send the MUSC study team will be password protected. Only trained study personnel will have access to the password protected data spreadsheet. 
 
The MUSC study  team  will have access to the Medicaid ID’s as well as Medicaid.  
 
11.0 Data  Management  
 
Data Management  
 
Regarding questionnaire data, data will be obtained for research purposes only. All data will be collected, stored, and managed via REDCap, which is a secure, web-based application designed exclusively to support 
data capture for research studies. REDCap provides secure, web-based flexible applications, including real 
time validation rules  with automated data type and range checks at the time of entry. The underlying database 
is hosted in a secure data center at MUSC, a secure environment for data systems and servers on campus, and includes redundancy, failover capability, backups and extensive security checks. The system has several layers of protection including user/group account management, "Data Access Groups" which allow data to be entered by multiple groups in one database with segmented user rights for entered data, audit trails for all 
changes, queries and reports, and Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) encryption. The recruitment report project will 
be housed in RedCap and will only be accessible to the research team. The research team will only have 
access to the RedCap recruitment project while actively enrolling for the study. The recruitment report will be stored in a separate RedCap project from the project containing our research data.  
Name and relevant contact information will be obtained to provide compensation and every effort will be made 
to maintain subject confidentiality, in accordance with HIPAA. All data will be identified only by code numbers 
(participant IDs). Participant IDs will be linked to participants’ names in a password-protected file that is accessible only to the PI and trained research staff. Voice sample data gathered through SurveyLex for the participants  in specific  aim 1  only, is  stored by default on NeuroLex’s  HIPAA compliant Microsoft Azure servers 
managed by NeuroLex. Access to this data is limited to research staff by a single unique username and password. Voice features collected through Surveylex will be download and stored on an MUSC Box account, 
accessible only to study staff.  
 
For specific  aim 3, the Medicaid ID is the only link to subjects  in the study. The document linking  Medicaid ID’s 
and our study participants will be stored on a University secure network drive or in MUSC BOX. The linking 
document will be stored separately from the study data and only trained study personnel will have access to the linking document. Study data will be stored on a University secure network drive or in MUSC BOX. The spreadsheet of data that Medicaid will send the MUSC study team will be password protected. Only trained study personnel will have access to the password protected data spreadsheet. The MUSC study team will 
have access to the Medicaid ID’s as well as Medicaid.  
 
 
12.0 Provisions to Monitor  the Data  to Ensure the Safety of Subjects (if applicable)  
This plan is based on the recommendations in NIDA’s “Guidelines for Developing a Data and Safety 
Monitoring Plan” (https://www.drugabuse.gov/funding/clinical -research/guidelines -developing-data-safety - 
monitoring -plan).  
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
Summary of the Protocol  
The goal of this work is to develop an effective remote mental health and substance use Screening, Brief 
Intervention and Referral  to Treatment (SBIRT) program  for pregnant and postpartum  women. The  objectives 
of this current application are 1.) to conduct a pilot RCT of a text-message based SBIRT and home-based telemedicine services for pregnant and postpartum women – called Listening to Women (LTW), compared to 
treatment as  usual  (TAU) with  the primary objective to provide effect size estimates  for a larger RCT and 2.) to 
conduct a larger scale RCT to examine the effectiveness of LTW, compared to TAU. 
Trial Management  
The study will be managed from the Women’s Reproductive Behavioral Health Division within the Department 
of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC). Recruitment, data 
collection, data management, and treatment provision will be coordinated  and centrally  managed at our research 
lab at MUSC and will be implemented within local MUSC clinics.  
Data  Management  and Analysis  
Participants will enter data in REDCap, a secure, web-based application designed exclusively to support data 
capture for research studies. REDCap provides: 1) an intuitive interface for data entry (with data validation); 2) audit trails  for tracking data manipulation and export procedures; 3)  automated export procedures  for seamless 
data downloads to common statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R); 4) procedures for importing data from 
external sources; and 5) advanced features, such as branching logic and calculated fields. These procedures 
are effective in minimizing data entry errors (e.g., missing or errant data). The data analysis plan is outlined above.  
 
Quality Assurance  
Accuracy and completeness of the data collected will be ensured by  weekly review. The REDCap system does 
not accept  outliers, illogical response patterns, etc. The PI and research assistants  will have weekly  meetings  to 
discuss any qualitative comments received during data collection and any problems in data collection. The PI will examine the database for potential irregularities monthly. Initial data analyses will examine distributions of variable scores and comparability of baseline characteristics across conditions in case analyses need to be adjusted for these. Confidentiality procedures are outlined above.  
Regulatory Issues  
All serious AEs will be reported to the MUSC Committee on Human Research within 48 hrs. Follow -up of all 
unexpected and serious AEs will also be reported. All AEs will be reviewed weekly by the PI and yearly by the IRB. Any  significant actions  taken by the local IRB, and protocol changes  will be relayed to the funding agency. 
We estimate the significant AE rate to be 5% or less. Potential conflicts of interest (COI) will be reported using the SRNT rules for disclosure as well as the rules of MUSC’s COI committee. 
 
Trial Safety  
Process of AE/SAE collection, assessing  by PI and/or  medical  monitor and reporting 
AEs and SAEs occurring during the course of the study will be collected, documented, and reported in 
accordance with protocol and IRB reporting requirements. All research staff involved with adverse event 
reporting will receive general and protocol specific AE/SAE training including identification, assessment and evaluation, and documentation and reporting training. The PI and study team will identify any potential AEs during the course of the study from subject self- report. This information will be provided to the PI, who will be 
responsible for AE/SAE assessment and evaluation including a determination of seriousness and study relatedness.  
Definition of AE and SAE 
Adverse events  are defined as any untoward medical  occurrence that may present itself during  treatment or 
administration of an intervention, and which may or may not have a causal relationship with the treatment. Serious adverse events are defined as any medical occurrence that:  
1. Results  in death,  
2. Is life-threatening,  
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
3. Requires  inpatient hospitalization or prolongation  of existing hospitalization,  
4. Results  in persistent  or significant disability/incapacity,  
5. Is a congenital  anomaly/birth defect.  
OR 
6. Requires  intervention to prevent one of the above  outcomes  
 
Documentation and Reporting  
AEs/SAEs are documented and reported as per protocol and IRB requirements. Research staff will identify 
adverse events and obtain all available information to assess severity, seriousness, study relatedness, 
expectedness, outcome and the need for change or discontinuation in the study intervention. Adverse events 
are generally documented on AE Logs  and AE Case Report Forms  (CRFs). Additional  relevant AE information, 
if available, will be documented in a progress  note in the research record as appropriate to allow  monitoring  and 
evaluation of the AE. If the AE meets  the definition for serious, appropriate SAE protocol  specific  reporting forms 
are completed and disseminated to the appropriate persons and within the designated timeframes. For each AE/SAE recorded, the research staff will follow  the AE/SAE until resolution, stabilization or until the subject is no 
longer in the study as stated in the protocol.  
When a reportable SAE is identified, the research coordinator will initiate an SAE form, and the following 
individuals will be notified by facsimile transmission within 24 hours of the site’s initial notification of the SAE: 
i. The PI will provide oversight, consultation, assessment and documentation as appropriate of the 
SAE.  
ii. The PI will notify the MUSC institutional review board (IRB) and complete the AE 
report form in conjunction with the study  coordinator. The MUSC  IRB meets  monthly  and 
communication with the IRB is through email, memos, official IRB forms, and online reporting.  
iii. The NIDA  program  officer. Any adverse event  will be reported to NIDA  in an individual 
adverse event report. 
iv. The data safety  monitoring board members  
If complete information is not available when the initial 24-hour SAE report is disseminated, follow -up 
information will be gathered to enable a complete assessment and outcome of the event. This information may 
include hospital discharge records, autopsy reports, clinic records, etc.  The research coordinator will attach 
copies  of source  documents  to the SAE report for review  by the PI and for forward to the NIH program  officer  as 
appropriate within 2 weeks  of the initial  SAE report. In addition, the PI will provide a signed, dated SAE summary 
report, which will be sent to the NIDA Medical Safety Officer within two weeks of the initial SAE report. 
We will report adverse events to the MUSC IRB online as soon as possible, but no later than 10 working 
day
s after the PI first learns of the event. The MUSC IRB AE reporting requirements are as follows: All deaths 
that occur during the study or 30 days post termination from the study are required to be reported as adverse events even if they are expected or unrelated. Other adverse events are reportable to the MUSC IRB if the AE is unexpected AND related or possibly related AND serious or more prevalent than expected. All three criteria must be met for an AE to be reported to the MUSC IRB. The IRB definition of unexpected is that the AE is not 
identified in nature, severity  or frequency  in the current protocol, informed consent, investigator  brochure or with 
other current risk information. The definition of related is that there is a reasonable possibility that the adverse 
event may have been caused by the drug, device  or intervention. Reportable AEs are reviewed by the IRB Chair 
and reported to the IRB Board at the next meeting. 
AE/SAE follow  up plan 
All unexpected AE and SAEs will be monitored until resolved.  A detailed summary  of all AEs will be prepared 
weekly by the research coordinator. The candidate and the mentorship/consultation team will evaluate the progress of the study at biweekly study team meetings, including periodic assessments of data quality and timeliness, participant recruitment and retention,  participant risk versus  benefit, and other factors  that can affect 
study  outcome. We will also consider  factors  external  to the study, such  as scientific  or therapeutic  developments 
that may have an impact on the safety of participants or the ethics of the study. All AEs are reviewed annually by the Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) and yearly by the IRB. Any significant actions taken by the local IRB and protocol changes will be relayed to NIDA. 
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
Data  and Safety Monitoring Plan Administration  
The PI will be responsible for monitoring the trial. The PI will examine monthly  the outcomes  database for missing 
data, unexpected distributions or responses, and outliers. The PI will check weekly with the research assistant 
about any AEs/SAEs. A DSM report will be filed with the IRB and funding agency on a yearly basis, unless greater than expected problems occur. The report will include participant characteristics, retention and 
disposition of study participants, quality assurance issues and reports of AEs, significant/unexpected AEs and 
serious AEs. We will report efficacy at the end of the trial.  
13.0 Risks to Subjects  
 
This is considered a minimal  risk study. Minimal  risk means  the probability  and magnitude of harm  or discomfort 
anticipated in the research are not greater  in and of themselves  other than those ordinarily  encountered in daily 
life or during  performance of routine physical  or psychological  examinations  or tests.  The LTW screening tool is 
the same  tool that is used  in clinical  practice, the only difference is in its delivery. The potential  risks in this study 
include those related to: a) confidentiality; b) frustration; and c) emotional distress.  
 
a) Confidentiality: Participants  will be made aware  of limits  to confidentiality  at the beginning of screening 
and when reviewing study procedures/during informed consent which include report of suicidal or 
homicidal intent or report of abuse or neglect. If the participant reports substance use during pregnancy 
or suicidal or homicidal intent or abuse/neglect, Dr. Guille will take appropriate action by completing a psychiatric assessment  and facilitating appropriate treatment. Additional  appropriate  actions as outlined 
by the MUSC  IRB, NIH,  and the State of South Carolina, may also  include contacting the department of 
social  services,  authorities  and/or  pursuing involuntary  commitment at a mental  health or substance use 
disorder treatment facility. If participants present no imminent danger but also need more extensive treatment of mental health or substance use concerns, appropriate care will be facilitated. 
b) Frustration: Participants may become frustrated while completing study assessments. Participants will 
be informed that they may refuse  to answer any question(s) that they do not wish to answer and that they 
may discontinue study participation at any time. 
c) Emotional Distress: Participants will be asked questions that may be sensitive in nature. Participants 
may find the questions distressing or find the questions make them feel uncomfortable. Participants will be informed that they may refuse to answer any question(s) that they do not wish to answer and that they 
may discontinue study participation at any time. 
 
Si
nce patients  will all currently  be receiving prenatal  care or will be currently postpartum, there are no additional 
risks associated with participation in this study.  
Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Study  participants  will be recruited from local MUSC  clinics.  Pregnant and postpartum  patients  identified via the 
EMR through a recruitment report (research data request) will be sent a message inviting them to participate in 
a research study. Interested patients will complete determination of eligibility via MUSC’s REDCap system, a secure, HIPAA -compliant data management system. All participants will review consent documents and will 
provide informed consent consistent with procedures outlined above. Participants will be given the opportunity to ask questions  about their participation throughout the course  of the study. A copy  of the informed consent will 
be kept centrally  at our study  office within locked filing cabinets, and a copy  will be given  to each study  participant 
as well. Participants will be given a study phone number and e-mail address to contact for questions. 
 
Protections  Against Loss  of Confidentiality  
All screening information will be kept in a password protected REDCap  database. Only key study  personnel  will 
have access to the database. If an individual is not eligible to participate based on her answers to the eligibility 
survey, her screener will not include her name or contact information. Only people who meet eligibility criteria based on the answers  to the eligibility survey will  be asked if they would like to be contacted about participation 
in the study and for their name and contact information. Eligible participants’ full name, telephone number and 
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
e-mail address will be recorded in the study enrollment log located on a secure MUSC drive or in MUSC Box. 
The REDCap  database and the study  enrollment log are the only places  where participants’  names  and subject 
identification numbers appear together. Eligible participants will be assigned a subject number, will complete 
informed consent, will be randomized, will complete baseline assessments, and subsequently will receive their 
randomized intervention.  
 
Upon completing eligibility  screening, if study  eligible,  individuals  will be provided with an overview  of the study, 
asked to review  study  procedures  via a consent form, and asked to provide signed consent. Participants  will be 
informed of limitations of confidentiality (i.e., abuse or neglect, intention to harm self or someone else) both 
verbally and/or in writing during the informed consent process. The consent form will include the participant’s 
name, but not his/her subject number. Consent forms will be provided in English.  
Regarding questionnaire  data, data will be obtained for research purposes  only. All data will be collected,  stored, 
and managed via REDCap, which is a secure, web-based application designed exclusively to support data capture for research studies. REDCap provides secure, web-based flexible applications, including real time 
validation rules with automated data type and range checks at the time of entry. The underlying database is 
hosted in a secure data center at MUSC, a secure environment for data systems and servers on campus, and 
includes  redundancy, failover  capability, backups  and extensive security  checks.  The system  has several  layers 
of protection including user/group account management, "Data Access  Groups" which allow  data to be entered 
by multiple groups in one database with segmented user rights for entered data, audit trails for all changes, 
queries  and reports, and Secure  Sockets  Layer  (SSL) encryption. Name  and relevant  contact information will be 
obtained to provide compensation and every  effort will be made to maintain subject  confidentiality, in accordance 
with HIPAA. All data will be identified only by code numbers (participant IDs). Participant IDs will be linked to 
participants’  names  in a password-protected file that is accessible  only to the PI and trained research staff.  Voice 
sample data gathered through Surveylex  for specific aim  1 participants  only, will  be stored on HIPAA  compliant 
Microsoft Azure  servers  managed by NeuroLex. MUSC  has a BAA in place with Neurolex. MUSC  currently  pays 
NeuroLex $100/month for access to their software. MUSC may collect 5000 surveys per month. The data will 
consist of data tables containing the coded participant ID, date of the recording, voice features, and separates 
raw voice  recording files. Data tables  of voice  features  extracted from the recordings  will have  only the subject’s 
coded participant ID, and no other identifying information. Access to the SurveyLex account will be limited to 
research study staff. Staff at NeuroLex will not access this data. 
Voice  features  collected through SurveyLex  will be downloaded and stored on an MUSC  Box account, accessible 
only to study staff.  
 
14.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects or Others  
There is no direct benefit for subjects  from participating in the study.  
 
15.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
 
Study  enrollment and study  outcomes  will not be shared with medical  staff, including the participant’s 
physician.  
 
References  
 
1. Luca DL, Margiotta C, Staatz C, Garlow E, Christensen A, Zivin K. Financial Toll of Untreated Perinatal 
Mood and Anxiety  Disorders  Among  2017 Births  in the United States. Am J Public  Health.  2020;110(6):888- 
896. 
2. Haight SC, Ko JY, Tong VT, Bohm MK, Callaghan WM. Opioid Use Disorder Documented at Delivery 
Hospitalization - United States, 1999-2014. MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep. 2018;67(31):845-849. Published 
2018 Aug 10. 
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
3. Weissman MM. Postpartum  Depression and Its Long-term  Impact on Children: Many  New Questions. JAMA 
Psychiatry . 2018;75(3):227-228. 
4. Gentile S. Untreated depression during pregnancy: Short - and long-term  effects  in offspring. A systematic 
review. Neuroscience. 2017;342:154 -166. 
 
5. Grote NK, Bridge JA, Gavin  AR, Melville  JL, Iyengar  S, Katon  WJ. A meta-analysis  of depression during 
pregnancy and the risk of preterm birth, low birth weight, and intrauterine growth restriction. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry . 2010;67(10):1012-1024. 
6. Vesga-López  O, Blanco C, Keyes  K, Olfson M, Grant BF, Hasin  DS. Psychiatric  disorders  in pregnant and 
postpartum women in the United States. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2008;65(7):805-815. 
 
7. Britton HL, Gronwaldt V, Britton JR. Maternal  postpartum  behaviors  and mother -infant relationship during 
the first year of life. J Pediatr . 2001;138(6):905-909. 
 
8. Deave T, Heron J, Evans  J, Emond A. The impact of maternal  depression in pregnancy  on early  child 
development. BJOG. 2008;115(8):1043-1051. 
 
9. Paulson JF, Keefe HA, Leiferman JA. Early  parental  depression and child language development. J Child 
Psychol Psychiatry . 2009;50(3):254-262. 
10. Goldman- Mellor  S, Margerison CE. Maternal  drug-related death and suicide are leading causes  of 
postpartum death in California. Am J Obstet Gynecol . 2019;221(5):489.e1-489.e9. 
11. Mangla K, Hoffman MC, Trumpff C, O'Grady  S, Monk  C. Maternal  self-harm  deaths: An unrecognized and 
preventable outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol . 2019; 221(4):295-303. 
 
12. Mehta PK, Bachhuber  MA, Hoffman R, Srinivas  SK. Deaths  from unintentional  injury,  homicide, and suicide 
during or within 1 year of pregnancy in Philadelphia. Am J Public Health. 2016; 106(12):2208-2210. Accessed 
11 June 2020. 
13. Metz TD, Rovner P, Hoffman MC, Allshouse AA, Beckwith KM, Binswanger IA. Maternal deaths from 
suicide and overdose in Colorado, 2004-2012. Obstet Gynecol . 2016; 128(6):1233-1240. Accessed  11 June 
2020  
 
14. Wallace  ME, Hoyert D, Williams  C, Mendola P. Pregnancy -associated homicide and suicide in 37 US 
states with enhanced pregnancy surveillance. Am J Obstet Gynecol . 2016; 215(3): 364.e1-364.e10. 
15. Weissman MM, Pilowsky DJ, Wickramaratne PJ, et al. Remissions in maternal depression and child 
psychopathology: a STAR*D-child  report [published correction appears  in JAMA.  2006 Sep 13;296(10):1234]. 
JAMA . 2006;295(12):1389-1398. 
 
16. Beeber LS, Holditch-Davis D, Perreira K, Schwartz TA, Lewis V, Blanchard H, et al. Short-term in-home 
intervention  reduces  depressive symptoms  in early  head start Latina mothers  of infants  and toddlers. Res  Nurs 
Health. 2010;33(1):60– 76. 
17. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists The American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists  Committee Opinion no. 630. Screening for perinatal  depression. Obstetrics  and gynecology. 
2015;125(5):1268– 1271.  
 
18. Kendig S, Keats JP, Hoffman MC, et al. Consensus Bundle on Maternal Mental Health: Perinatal 
Depression and Anxiety  [published correction appears  in Obstet Gynecol. 2019 Jun;133(6):1287]. Obstet 
Gynecol . 2017;129(3):422-430. 
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
 
19. O’Connor  E, Rossom  RC, Henniger  M, Groom HC, Burda  BU. Primary  care screening for and treatment of 
depression in pregnant and postpartum women: evidence report and systematic review for the US Preventive 
Services Task Force. JAMA 2016; 315:388– 406. 
20. A Report from the California Task  Force  on the Status  of Maternal  Mental  Health Care. April 2017; 1-66. 
 
21. Report of the Task  Force to Study  Maternal  Mental  Health, Maryland Senate Bill 74/Chapter 6 (2015). 
December 2016; 1-78. 
22. Smith  MV, Shao L, Howell  H, Wang H, Poschman K, Yonkers  KA. Success of mental  health referral  among 
pregnant and postpartum women with psychiatric distress. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2009;31(2):155– 162. 
 
23. Byatt N, Levin LL, Ziedonis  D, Moore Simas  TA, Allison  J. Enhancing participation in depression Care  in 
Outpatient Perinatal Care Settings: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol. 2015;126(5):1048– 1058.  
 
24. Bauman BL, Ko JY, Cox S, et al. Vital Signs: Postpartum  Depressive Symptoms  and Provider  Discussions 
About Perinatal Depression - United States, 2018. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69(19):575-581. 
Published 2020 May 15. 
25. LaRocco-Cockburn A, Melville  J, Bell M, Katon  W. Depression screening attitudes  and practices  among 
obstetrician-gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol . 2003;101(5 Pt 1):892-898. 
 
26. Byatt N, Simas  TA, Lundquist RS, Johnson JV, Ziedonis  DM. Strategies  for improving perinatal  depression 
treatment in north American  outpatient obstetric  settings.  J Psychosom  Obstet Gynaecol. 2012;33(4):143– 161. 
27. Byatt N, Biebel K, Friedman L, Debordes -Jackson G, Ziedonis D, Pbert L. Patient's views on depression 
care in obstetric  settings: how do they compare to the views  of perinatal  health care professionals? Gen Hosp 
Psychiatry. 2013;35(6):598– 604. 
28. Byatt N, Biebel  K, Lundquist R, Moore  Simas  T, Debourdes -Jackson  G, Ziedonis  D. Patient, provider  and 
system -level barriers and facilitators to addressing perinatal depression. J Reprod. Infant Psychol. 
2012;30(5):436– 439. 
29. Edge D. Falling through the net - black  and minority  ethnic  women  and perinatal  mental  healthcare:  health 
professionals' views. Gen Hosp Psychiatry . 2010;32(1):17-25. 
30. Palladino CL, Fedock GL, Forman JH, Davis  MM, Henshaw  E, Flynn HA. OB  CARES--the obstetric clinics 
and resources  study: providers'  perceptions  of addressing perinatal  depression--a  qualitative study. Gen Hosp 
Psychiatry. 2011;33(3):267– 278. 
31. Price  SK, Corder -Mabe J, Austin K. Perinatal  depression screening and intervention: enhancing health 
provider involvement. J Women's Health (Larchmt) 2012;21(4):447– 455. 
 
32. Kim JJ, La Porte  LM, Adams  MG, Gordon TE, Kuendig JM, Silver  RK. Obstetric  care provider engagement 
in a perinatal depression screening program. Arch Womens Ment Health. 2009;12(3):167– 172. 
33. Mancini  F, Carlson C, Albers  L. Use of the postpartum  depression screening scale  in a collaborative 
obstetric practice. J Midwifery Womens Health. 2007;52(5):429– 434. 
34. Byatt N, Biebel  K, Debordes -Jackson  G, et al. Community  mental  health provider  reluctance to provide 
pharmacotherapy may be a barrier to addressing perinatal depression: a preliminary study. Psychiatr Q . 
2013;84(2):169- 174. 
Version  #11 07/29/202 4  
35. Gjerdingen DK, Yawn  BP. Postpartum  depression screening:  importance, methods, barriers,  and 
recommendations for practice. J Am Board Fam Med. 2007;20(3):280-288. 
36. Substance Abuse and Mental  Health Services  Administration (SAMHSA).  Screening, brief intervention and 
referral to treatment (SBIRT) in behavioral healthcare. 2011:1 -30. 
 
37. Committee on Obstetric  Practice. Committee opinion no. 711: Opioid use and opioid use disorder  in 
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol . 2017; 130(2):e81‐ e94. 
38. National  Council  for Behavioral  Health. Center  of Excellence  for Integrated Health Solutions  Web site. 
https://www.thenationalcouncil.org/integrated-health-coe/. Updated 2020. Accessed June 10, 2020. 
39. Sim J, Lewis  M. The size of a pilot study  for a clinical  trial should be calculated in relation to considerations 
of precision and efficiency. J Clin Epidemiol. 2012;65(3):301-308. 