Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  1 of 26 PROTOCOL  TITLE : Effects of Pioglitazone  on Exogenous Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady- State  
Exercise at High  Altitude         
 
SECTION  A:  RESEARCH TEAM  AND LOCATIONS  
 
A1.  RESEARCH TEAM  
 
Study  Role  Institution/Company  and Contact  Information   
Sponsor  N/A      
Principal  Investigator   Name,  Rank,  and Degree:  Lee M. Margolis,  PhD  
Title:   Nutritional Physiologist  
Institution:   MND,  USARIEM  
Address:   10 General  Greene Ave Bldg.  42, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:  508-206-2335  
Email:   lee.m.margolis.civ@health.mil   
Associate  Investigator(s)  Name  and Degree:  Stefan  M. Pasiakos,  PhD 
Title:   Division  Chief  
Institution:   MPD,  USARIEM  
Address:   10 General  Greene Ave Bldg.  42, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:  508-206-2250  
Email:  stefan.m.pasiakos.civ@health.mil       
 Name  and Degree:  Roy M. Salgado,  PhD 
Title:  Research Physiologist   
Institution:   TMM D, USARIEM  
Address:   10 General  Greene Ave Bldg.  42, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:  508-206-2375  
Email:  roy.m.salgado.civ@ health.mil     
 Name  and Degree:  Benjamin  J. Ryan.  PhD 
Title:  Research Physiologist   
Institution:   TMM D, USARIEM  
Address:   10 General  Greene Ave Bldg.  42, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:  508-206-2408  
Email:  benjamin.j.ryan.14civ@ health.mil    
 Name  and Degree:  Emily  E. Howard,  PhD 
Title:  Nutritional  Physiologist   
Institution:   MND,  USARIEM  
Address:   10 General  Greene Ave Bldg.  42, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:  508-206-2309  
Email:
 emily.e.howard14.civ@ health.mil    
 
Name  and Degree:  Jessica  A. Gwin,  PhD 
Title:  Research Physiologist   
Institution:   MND,  USARIEM  
Addres s:  10 General  Greene Ave Bldg.  42, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:  508-206-2300  
Email:  jessica.a.gwin.civ@ health.mil    
  
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  2 of 26 Name  and Degree:  Devin  Drummer , PhD 
Title: ORISE  Post-Doctoral  Research Fellow   
Institution:   MND, USARIEM  
Address:   10 General  Greene Ave Bldg.  42, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:  508-206-2461  
Email:   devin.j.dummer.ctr@health.mil   
 
Name  and Degree:  Michael  A. Dawson,  MAJ,  PhD,  RD, CSSD,  
LD 
Title:  Research Dietician   
Institution:   MND, USARIEM  
Address:   10 General  Greene Ave Bldg.  42, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:  508-206-2278 
Email:   michael.a.dawson62.mil @health.mil   
 
   
Study  Consultant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Coordinator                                          Name  and Degree:  Andrew  J. Young,  PhD 
Title:  Senior  Nutritional Physiologist  
Institution:  MND,  USARIEM  
Address:  10 General  Greene Ave Bldg.  42, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:  508-353-4160  
Email:  andrew.j.young60@gmail.com      
 
 
Name,  Rank,  and Degree:   Marques  A. Wilson , MS 
Title:   Research  Physiologist  
Institution/Company:   MND,  USARIEM  
Address:   10 General  Greene Ave, Bldg 2, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:   508-206-2411  
Email:   marques.wilson .civ@health.mil   
 
Research Monitor  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ombudsman   
Name,  Rank,  and Degree:  Sarah  L. Hanson,  MAJ,  DO 
Title:  Physician  
Institution/Company:  OMSO,  USARIEM  
Address:  10 General  Greene Ave Bldg.  42a, Natick,  MA 
Phone Number:  508-206-2460  
Email:  sarah.l.hanson3.mil@health.mil  
 Name,  Rank,  and Degree:   Adam  Luippold,  BS 
Title:   Research  Physiologist  
Institution/Company:   TMMD,  USARIEM  
Address:   10 General  Greene Ave, Bldg 2, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:   508-206-2330  
Email:   adam.j.luippold.civ@health.mil   
 Name,  Rank,  and Degree:  Andrew  Greenfield,  MS 
Title: ORISE  Research Fellow  
Institution/Company:  TMMD,  USARIEM  
Address:  10 General  Greene Ave, Bldg 2, Natick,  MA 01760  
Phone Number:  508-206-2474  
Email:  andrew.m.greenfield.ctr@ health .mil 
 
 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  3 of 26 A2.  ROLES  AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
      
       A2.1  Principal  Investigator    
 
Name:   Lee  M. Margolis  
Study  Responsibilities:  Dr. Margolis  is responsible for the safe and scientifically  sound conduct  of the 
study.   He will oversee all aspects  of the study,  ensure safety  and ethical  treatment  of volunteers;  
maintain required documentation for the study  and obtain required approvals;  and will have primary  
responsibility  for data analysis,  interpretation,  and publication.  Dr. Margolis  will also be actively  involved 
in the volunteer  brief,  obtaining consent,  and data collection.  Dr. Margolis  will be responsible for the 
conduct  of the study  in accordance  with the protocol.   Maintenance  of a list of appropriately  qualified 
persons  to whom  significant  study -related  responsibilities  have been delegated.    
 
        A2.2  Associate  Investigator  
 
Name(s):   Stefan  M. Pasiakos , Roy M. Salgado,  Benjamin J. Ryan,  Emily  E. Howard,  and Jessica  A. 
Gwin , Devin  Drummer , Michael  Dawson       
Study  Responsibilities:   Protocol  development,  formulation of protocol  questions,  hypotheses,  
experimental  approach,  and design.  Assist  PI with volunteer  briefing,  obtaining informed  consent,  data 
collection,  and sample processing.  Associate  investigators  will also ensure  safety  and ethical  treatment  
of participants  and will contribute  to the analysis,  interpretation,  and publication of the data.         
 
       A2.3  Study Coordinator  
         Name:   Marques  Wilson  
Study  Responsibilities:   Primary  responsibilities  include assistin g with volunteer  briefing,  obtaining 
informed  consent,  data collection,  preparing and administering study  diets,  preparing and maintaining 
data collection  forms,  and biological  sample processing.  Will contribute  to the analysis,  interpretation,  
and publication  of the data.   She  may conduct  procedures  for which  she is qualified and credentialed as 
outlined in the DOA  log.   
 
        A2.4  Ombudsperson   
             Name(s):  Adam  Luippold and Andrew  Greenfield      
Study  Responsibilities:  The ombudsman  shall protect  the interests  of the research volunteers.  The 
ombudsman will do the following:  read the consent  form,  observe the recruitment  briefing  and the 
signing of consent  documents,  make  sure supervisory  and command  staff are not present,  make  sure 
the description of the study  and all risks and discomforts  are correct,  complete,  and understandable to 
the audience,  and make  sure that the volunteers  are not threatened or pressured  to participate.   They  
will observe briefings  for military  participants  in the Human  Research  Volunteer  (HRV)  program.       
 
A2.5  Study  Consultant  
 
Name(s):  Andrew  J. Young 
Study  Responsibilities:   Study  consultant  will provide insight  and feedback  on study  design and data 
interpretation.  Activities  may include protocol  development,  formulation of protocol  questions,  
hypotheses,  experimental  approach,  and design.  They  will not engage with participants  or assist  with 
data collection  tasks.   
 
A2.6  Research  Monitor  
Name(s):  Sarah  L. Hanson 
Study  Responsibilities:  The research monitor  will review  reports  of SAEs/UPIRTSOs  and provide  an 
unbiased written  report  of the events.  The research monitor  should periodically  observe  the conduct  of 
the study  with subjects.   The research monitor  should provide concurrence that subjects  met all 
protocol  eligibility  criteria  for the study.   
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  4 of 26  
 A3.  RESEARCH LOCATIONS     
 
USARIEM,  Natick  MA: The U.S. Army  Research  Institute  of Environmental  Medicine (USARIEM)  is a 
DoD research  facility  within  the U.S. Army  Medical  Research and Development  Command.   It is the 
Institute  responsible for conducting basic  and applied research to determine the effects  of exposure  to 
environmental  extremes,  occupational  tasks,  physical  training,  deployment,  operational  stress  and 
nutritional  factors  on the health and performance of military  personnel.  The facility  contains  
environmental  chambers  for controlling  temperature  and humidity,  an environmentally  controlled 
hypobaric  chamber,  a water  immersion  laboratory,  as well as several  dry and wet laboratories  for 
animal  and human experimentation.  The dry laboratories  are capable of a broad range of experiments,  
including biomechanical  analysis,  body  composition,  energy  expenditure,  muscle  strength and 
endurance.  The wet laboratories  include general  clinical chemistry  analyzers,  as well as equipment  for 
ELISA,  RIA, histology,  and molecular  biology  assays.   Each  investigator  at the facility  has a personal  
computer  with software  for data management,  analysis,  presentation and report  generation.  Their  
computers  are interfaced  with a network  server  for easy,  secure  data handling and transfer.  All testing 
procedures  will take place at USARIEM.  
 
Metabolic  Solutions,  Nashua,  NH: Metabolic  Solutions  is a state -of-the art stable isotope  analytical  
laboratory  that has the basic  laboratory  facilities  and equipment  to analyze stable isotope in breath and 
blood.   Equipment  onsite  includes  an Agilent  6110 LC-Tandem  Mass  Spectrometer  (LC-MS/MS)  Triple  
Quad with Agilent  1100  LC, Thermo  Finnigan Delta  XP Isotope  Ratio  Mass  Spectrometer  (IRMS)  with 
GC Isolink  for 13C, 15N and 2H GC-IRMS  and Conflow IV interface,  and a Thermo  Finnigan Delta  V 
Advantage IRMS  with trace  GC-Combustion III unit for 13C, 15N and D GC-C-IRMS  and Conflow IV 
interface  and elemental  Analyzer  EA112HT 13C, 15N and D sample  combustion  unit. Metabolic  
Solutions  has been  an industry  leader  in developing new stable isotope  tracer  applications.   Metabolic  
Solutions  will analyze samples  on a fee for service  basis.  
 
Pennington Biomedical  Research Center  (PBRC),  Baton Rouge,  LA: The laboratory  is accredited  by 
the College  of American  Pathologists  (CAP)  and participates  in proficiency  testing progra ms 
administered  by the CAP.  Biochemical  analyses  will be conducted at PBRC  on a fee for service  basis.   
                 
A4.  MULTISITE  RESEARCH    
 
Lead Site: N/A  
Performance Site: N/A 
  
 
SECTION  B:  RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  
 
B1.  ABSTRACT
   
Two recent  investigations  from our laboratory  have consistently  observed  a reduction (30-50%)  in the rate of 
exogenous  glucose  oxidation in native  lowlanders  performing metabolically -matched,  steady -state  exercise  at 
high altitude (HA) compared  to sea level (SL).  Accompanying lower  rates  of exogenous  glucose  oxidation at 
HA were  increases  in circulating  glucose and insulin  concentrations,  and reduced glucose  rate of 
disappearance and metabolic  clearance rate. Apparent  hypoxia- induced insulin  insensitivity  along with 
alterations  in glucose kinetics  suggests  reduction in glucose uptake  by the peripheral  tissue  is a primary  factor  
contributing  to reductions  in exogenous  glucose oxidation at HA. As such,  the primary  objective  of this study  is 
to determine the ability  of an insulin  sensitizer  (Pioglitazone,  PIO) to enhance exogenous  glucose oxidation 
and metabolic  clearance  rate during metabolically -matched,  steady -state  exercise  during acute  HA exposure 
compared  to placebo (PLA)  in native  lowlanders.  Secondary  objective  of this study  will be to assess  the impact  
of PIO on markers  of inflammation and iron status  compared  to PLA.  This randomized crossover  placebo 
control  double  blinded study  will examine substrate oxidation  and glucose  kinetic  responses  to ingesting 
supplemental  carbohydrate (glucose)  during metabolically -matched,  steady -state  exercise  with acute (~5 h) 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  5 of 26 exposure to HA (460 mmHg , or 4300m,  barometric  pressure  similar  to Pike’s  Peak ) after receiving PIO 
(HA+PIO),  or after receiving a matche d placebo (HA+PLA).  Eight  healthy,  recreationally  active  males  between  
the ages  of 18-39 yrs will be required to complete  this study.  Following  a 4 day glycogen normalization period 
receiving PIO or PLA daily,  volunteers  will complete two 80-min trials,  performing metabolically -matched,  
steady -state  aerobic  (same  absolute workload corresponding to ~55  ±5% of V̇O2peak  at HA) exercise  on a 
treadmill,  and consuming  145 g of glucose (1.8 g/min);  one trial with HA+PIO  and the other  with HA+PLA.  A 
dual glucose tracer  (13C-glucose oral ingestion and [6,6-2H2]-glucose  primed,  continuous  infusion)  technique 
and indirect  calorimetry  will be used to selectively  analyze endogenous  and exogenous  glucose oxidation,  as 
well as glucose rate of appearance (Ra),  disappearanc e (Rd) and metabolic  clearance rate (MCR).  Serial  
blood samples  will be collected during  each trial to assess  endocrine  and circulating  substrate responses  to 
exercise,  carbohydrate,  and hypoxia with or without  PIO. All trials  will occur  at the same time of day in the 
USARIEM  hypobaric/hypoxic  chamber  and be separated  by a minimum  10-d washout  period.  The primary  
risks associated with this study  include those associated with acute hypobaric  hypoxia,  exercise,  and blood 
sampling.  
  
B2.  BACKGROUND AND SIGNIF ICANCE    
Acute High  Altitude  Exposure and Glucose Metabolism  
Deployments  to austere and remote  mountainous  regions  will occur  during  Multi- Domain  Operations  (MDO).  
Rapid  ascent  to high altitude (i.e., hypobaric  hypoxia;  HA) elicits  physiologic  and metabolic  adjustments  that 
collectively  degrade physical  performance and augment  dietary  requirements.  In particular,  HA exposure 
increases  reliance on carbohydrate  for fuel to sustain physical  activity,  resulting  in rapid declines  in muscle  
glycogen content  which,  in part, contributes  to decreased performance (1-3). To combat  declines  in physical  
performance,  the Modular  Ration  Enhancement  Operations  HA 
(MORE -HA) was created  to provide additional  dietary  carbohydrate  
to fuel sustained physical  activity.  However,  recent  studies  from our 
laboratory  have  consistently  demonstrated  a 30-50% reduction in 
oxidation of exogenous  glucose consumed by unacclimatized 
lowlanders  performing  steady -state  exercise  during acute  (< 8 hrs) 
high altitude (HA) exposure compared  to metabolically -matched  
exercise  performed  at sea level (SL; Figure 1) (3, 4). Reduced  
exogenous  glucose  oxidation during acute (< 8 hrs) HA exposure  
has also been  demonstrated by others  (5-7). Across  studies,  
reductions  in exogenous  glucose oxidation occurred whether  
exercise  at SL and HA were  matched  for absolute  (3-5) or relative  
(6, 7) intensity.  Consistent  results  between  investigations  from 
multiple  laboratories,  matching for different  exercise  intensities,  
indicates  a true physiological  dysregulation in use of exogenous  
carbohydrate for fuel use during aerboic  exercise  after initial arrival  
to HA from SL.       

Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  6 of 26 Accomp anying lower  rates  of exogenous  
glucose oxidation at HA are increases  in 
circulating  glucose and insulin  concentrations  
(Figure  2A,B) , and reductions  in glucose  rate of 
disappearance and metabolic  clearance rate 
(MCR;  Figure 2C,D ) during steady -state  
exercise  compared to SL (3). These data are 
characteristic  of insulin  resistance (8) and 
suggest  that reductions  in peripheral  glucose  
uptake may be a primary  factor  contributing to 
lower  rates  of exogenous  glucose oxidation at 
HA. The inability  to effectively  use dietary  
carbohydrate as a metabolic  fuel source and the 
likelihood  that peripheral  insulin  resistance 
modulates  those  effects,  suggests  that a more  
aggressive solution  than carbohydrate 
supplementation alone is required  to optimize 
fuel utilization  during hypoxia and enhance  
physical  performance during future  HA MDO.   
 
One possible solution is to employ  short -term use of insulin  sensitizing  drugs,  such  as biguanides  (Metformin)  
and thiazolidinediones  (Pioglitazone;  PIO),  which  are commonly  prescribed to maintain  glucose homeostasis  in 
type II diabetics.  In the context  of acute  HA exposure,  there  is evidence that Metformin may improve  hypoxia-
induced insulin  sensitivity  and increase muscle  glycogen synthesis at rest (9). Though  Metformin  enhances  
insulin  sensitivity  and peripheral  glucose uptake,  it also reduces  intestinal  glucose absorption and hepatic  
gluconeogenesis.  The latter  effects  may limit the amount  of exogenous  and endogenous  glucose  available to 
fuel performance.  Conversely,  PIO’s  primary  mechanism  of action is to target  peripheral  tissue  (e.g.,  muscle  
and lipid),  as well as the liver to improve  insulin  sensitivity  and glucose uptake without  affecting  intestinal  
glucose absorption.  The mechanism  of action for PIO suggests  it is more  appropriate  than Metformin  as an 
insulin  sensitizer  to enhance glucose uptake  and oxidation to sustain physical  performance  during  
unacclimatized  HA exposure.  To date,  no study  has assessed  the effectiveness  of PIO on improving insulin  
sensitivity  at HA to enhance exogenous  glucose oxidation or glucose turnover.  
 
Acute High  Altitude  Exposure,  Inflammation and Iron Status   
Recently,  Hill et al.(10, 11) reported  that following  prolonged exercise  (60 minutes  at 65% sea level V̇O2peak)  
in normobaric  hypoxia (FIO2  = 0.135  or ~3,500 m) there  is an increase in gastrointestinal  permeability,  
decrease inflammatory  response of peripheral  blood mononuclear  cells (PBMC ), and reduction  in the ratio of 
pro- to anti-inflammatory  circulatory  biomarkers  when compared to sea level.  From  their findings,  the authors  
concluded that a short  bout of exercise  in normobaric  hypoxia caused acute immune -disruption.  An intriguing 
finding from their study (10) was a decrease in phosphorylated  AMP- activated  protein kinase  (p-AMPK)  one 
hour post exercise  and a decrease  in sirtuin  1 (SIRT1)  one and four hours post exercise  while  simultaneously  
having greater  reduction in nuclear  factor  kappaB  (NF-κΒ) one hour post exercise  in hypoxic  conditions.  Both 
p-AMPK and SIRT1  inhibit  NF-κΒ inflammatory  pathway  (12, 13). Thus,  the finding of reduced PBMC  
inflammatory  response post exercise  in normobaric  hypoxia seems  contradictory.   
 
In addition to its insulin  sensiti zing effects, PIO has been shown  to have  anti-inflammatory  and antioxidative 
effects.  Zhang  et al.(14) reported that PIO lowered  circulating inflammatory  markers  in individuals  with 
impaired glucose  tolerance.  PIO has been shown  to increase  p-AMPK (15) and SIRT1 (16) and thus reduce  
inflammation.  However,  no studies  have investigated the effects  of PIO on inflammatory  responses  during 
acute exercise  in hypobaric  hypoxia particularly  when normal  health  individuals  have higher  blood glucose 
levels.   
 An accumulating body  of evidence indicates  key interactions  between hypoxia,  insulin  resistance,  and systemic  
iron homeostasis  (17, 18). A secondary  effect  of improving hypoxia- induced insulin  resistance  may also be an 
improvement  in iron status.  Indeed,  several  cellular  mechanisms  regulating iron homeostasis  are influenced by 

Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  7 of 26 PIO-targeted  signaling pathways  (19, 20). These data may suggest  that alleviation  of hypoxia- induced insulin  
resistance  may also improve iron status.  As iron is vital to the oxygen carrying  capacity  of the blood,  improved  
iron status  under  hypoxic  conditions  may facilitate  improve  performance  during unacclimatized  military  
operations.  However,  the influence of PIO on systemic iron regulation  during acute  HA exposu re has not been 
determined.  
       
B3.  MILITARY  RELEVANCE     
Rapid  deployment  to remote  mountainous  regions  will occur  during MDO.  Unacclimatized  Service  members  
experience altered carbohydrate  metabolism,  causing an increased  reliance on glycogen  for fuel, concomitant  
with a blunted  ability  to take up and oxidize  exogenous  carbohydrate.  These negative  physiological  effects  
likely  exacerbate  declines  in physical  performance  at HA. This proposal  directly  supports  the Military  
Operational  Medicine Research Program’s  Physiological  Health  and Performance Program  Area  under  the 
Biomedical  Performance  Enhancement  (BPE)  Work  Unit. Specifically,  the proposed  work  aligns  to BPE 
Strategic  Plan’s  Technical  Objective  1.1.3:  Material  solutions  (pharmacological)  that enhance  Soldier  
resistance  to environmental  stressors.  
This proposal  will provide guidance for use of PIO to enhance exogenous  carbohydrate oxidation at HA 
operations,  and will provide the opportunity  to determine if carbohydrate supplementation  can indeed enhance 
performance  if substrate metabolic  dysregulation is avoided during HA exposure.  Information  from this 
proposal  would  be valuable to operational  partners  such  as USSOCOM  and the 10th Mountain Division  who 
engage in HA MDO.   
 
B4.  OBJECTIVES/SPECIFIC  AIMS/RESEARCH QUESTIONS   
 Objective:  
1. Determine  the effects  of PIO on exogenous  glucose oxidation and glucose  turnover  during exercise  under  
acute HA exposur e compared to PLA.  
2. Determine  the effects  of PIO on inflammation  during acute  HA exposure compared  to PLA.  
3. Determine  the effects  of PIO on markers  of iron status  during acute  HA exposure compared  to PLA. 
 
Hypotheses:  
1. Exogenous  glucose oxidation,  Rd, and MCR during metabolically -matched,  steady -state  exercise  at HA 
will be greater  after PIO administration  compared  to PLA.  
2. Inflammation will be lower  during acute  HA exposure after PIO administration compared to PLA.  
3. Markers  of iron status  will be altered  during  acute  HA exposure  after PIO administration  compared  to PLA.  
 
B5.  RESEARCH PLAN    . 
 
       B5.1   Research  Design   
This study  will be a randomized crossover  double  blind  placebo control  trial. 
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  8 of 26 Table  1: Study  Timeline 
 Baseline  Trial  1 Washout  Trial  2 
Study  Day SV 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10-19 20 21 22 23 24 
Medical  Screening  X                
Body  Composition   X               
Height   X               
Weight   X        X      X 
VO 2peak  X X              
High  Altitude  Exposure    X       X      X 
Practice Exercise     X X            
Glycogen  Normalization       X      X     
PIO/PLA       X X X X X  X X X X X 
Study  Diet      X X X X   X X X X  
Steady- State  Exercise           X      X 
Carbohydrate  Tracer  Study           X      X 
Blood  Sampling           X      X 
Breath  Sampling           X      X 
 
Timeline  may shift based  on participant  availability,  weekend,  and holiday  schedules.  
 
      B5.2   Research Subjects/Population(s)     
 
                B5.2.1   Subject  Population(s)    
 
Subject  population will be representative of active  duty male  service  members,  being in good  health 
and recreationally  active.  Previous  studies  at USARIEM  (Protocol# 16-02HC  and 18-09H)  which  have 
evaluated metaboli cally-matched  exercise  at HA compared  to SL have only been performed  in male  
volunteers.  It is apparent  that sex-based  differences  exist during low-to-moderate  intensity  endurance 
exercise  at sea level.  Sex-based differences  in substrate  oxidation during  exercise  at SL may result  in 
differences  in response  to change in substrate  oxidation at HA between men and women.  Therefore,  
this study  will recruit  male  volunteers  only as sex difference s in glucose  metabolism  at HA are not 
known.   Based on findings  from this and our previous  studies , a similar  series  of investigations  will be 
conducted in the future  to assess  the impact  that unacclimatized HA exposure  on females.  
 
                B5.2.2   Number  of Subjects,  Records,  and/or  Specimens    
To complete testing  on the 8 volunteers  necessary  to reach statistical  power,  we estimate  we will 
need to enroll  24 individuals.  All screening  will stop once complete  data has been collected  on 8 
volunteers.  Records  and specimen collection  are described in the Research Procedures  and Data  
Collection  sections.  During briefings  and consenting potential  participants  will be informed  that even  
though they may be eligible  and want  to participate,  if we are able to obtain enough data from 
preceding subjects,  they may not ultimately  be tested.  These individuals  may be recruited from the 
HRV  population,  civilians,  and active  duty military  personnel  (on and off the installation).    
 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  9 of 26                B5.2.3   Inclusion Criteria  
• Men aged  18 – 39 years  
• Born  at altitudes  less than 2,100  m 
• Physically  active  (exercise minimum  2 days  per week)  
• Have  supervisor  approval  (permanent  party  military  and civilians)  
• Willing  to refrain  from alcohol,  smokeless  nicotine  products  and dietary  supplement  use during 
study  periods  
               B5.2.4   Exclusion Criteria  
• Born  at altitudes  greater  than 2,100 m 
• Musculoskeletal  injuries  that compromise  exercise  capability  
• Metabolic  or cardiovascular  abnormalities,  or gastrointestinal  disorders  
• Taking medication  that affects  macronutrient  metabolism  and/or  the ability  to participate in 
strenuous  exercise  
• Living  in areas  that are more  than 1,200  m, or traveled to areas  that are more  than 1,200  m for 
five days  or more  within  2 months  of data collection  
• Evidence of apnea or other  sleeping disorders  
• Prior  diagnosis  of high altitude pulmonary  edema  or high altitude cerebral  edema  
• Presence of asthma  or respiratory  tract infections  
• Smoking or vaping  
• Taking medications  that interfere  with oxygen  delivery  and transport  
• Anemia (HCT  <38%  and HBG  <12.5  g/dL)  and Sickle  Cell Anemia/Trait  
• Blood donation within  8 weeks  of beginning the study  
• Unwilling  or unable to consume study  diets  or foods  provided  due to personal  preference,  dietary  
restrictions,  and/or  food allergies  
• Unwilling  or unable to adhere to study  physical  restrictions  
 
      B5.3   Research Procedures   
Research procedures  conducted by investigators  and support  personnel  will be in accordance  with the 
Delegation of Authority  (DOA)  Log for Key Research Personnel  as described below.   
 
COVID -19 risk mitigation:  Study  staff and participants  will comply  with all COVID -19 risk mitigation  
procedures  in place at USARIEM  during the time of data collection.   As such,  participants  may be asked  to 
wear  face masks  and use hand sanitizer  during data collection  activities  (in accord  with prevailing  
recommendations  at the time of data collection)  and may be asked  to wear  gloves  (i.e., nitrile  gloves)  
during data collection  activities.  Study  staff and participants  also may be asked to undergo  COVID -19 
testing (via nose  swab  performed  at USARIEM)  before conducting  data collection  activities  and study  
participation in the HA chamber . Participants  will be asked if they are experiencing symptoms  of COVID -19 
each day. If a volunteer  is experiencing or reports  symptoms,  they will be restricted from study  activity,  
including entering the altitude chamber  and sent to Office  of Medical  Support  and Oversight  (OMSO ) for 
further  evaluation.  Depending on the timing  of symptom  onset/positive COVID -19 results , the participant  
may be allowed  to repeat  study  activities  when  symptoms/illness  subside.   
 
This randomized crossover  placebo controlled double blinded study  will examine substrate oxidation and 
glucose kinetic  responses  to ingesting supplemental  carbohydrate  (glucose)  during metabolically -matched,  
steady -state  exercise  with acute  (~5 h) exposure  to HA (460 mmHg) after short -term (5 days)  use of 
Pioglitazone (HA+PIO),  or matched  placebo (HA+PLA).  Eight  healthy,  recreationally  active  males  between 
the ages  of 18-39 yrs will be enrolled.  Following  a muscle  glycogen  normalization period,  volunteers  will 
complete  80-min of metab olically -matched,  steady -state  (same  absolute workload corresponding to ~55  ±
5% of V̇O2peak  at HA) exercise  on a treadmill,  and consum e 145 g of glucose (1.8 g/min)  with HA+PIO  and 
HA+PLA.  A dual glucose  tracer  (13C-glucose oral ingestion and [6,6-2H2]-glucose primed,  continuous  
infusion)  technique and indirect  calorimetry  will be used to analyze  endogenous  and exogenous  glucose 
oxidation,  as well as glucose rate of appearance  (Ra),  disappearance (Rd),  and MCR.  Serial  blood 
samples  will be collected  during each  trial to assess endocrine and circulating substrate  responses  to 
exercise,  carbohydrate,  and hypoxia,  with or without  PIO. Isotop e methodology  and aerobic  exercise  
protocols  will be identical  to our previous  work  (3, 4), allowing  comparison of outcomes  across  studies.  All 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  10 of 26 trials  will be conducted in the USARIEM  hypobaric/hypoxic  chamber  and be separated by a minimum  10-d 
washout  period.  
 
A member  of the research team  will generate a randomization scheme  using a random  number  generator  
(http://randomization.com  or similar).  Treatment  type (PIO/PLA)  will be coded to de-identify  treatment  
(Example:  treatment  A and treatment  B or similar)  to blinded staff.  Assigned unblinded staff, responsible for 
administering the treatment  to volunteers,  will be responsible for creating  treatment  codes  to match 
treatment.  They  will maintain record  of randomization scheme  and treatment.     
 
Body Composition : Body  composition will be determined using dual energy  x-ray absorptiometry  (DEXA,  
DPX-IQ, GE Lunar  Corporation,  Madison,  WI). The DEXA technique allows  for the non-invasive  
assessment  of soft tissue  composition by region with a precision  of 1-3% (21). The volunteer  will lay face-
up on the DEXA densitometer  table in shorts,  t-shirts,  and stocking  feet. Volunteers  will be asked  to remain 
motionless  for the 8-10 min scan.  These  data will be used to calculate total body  mass,  fat-free mass,  and 
fat mass.  Calibration  to external  standards will be performed  before actual  data collection.   Measurements  
of body  composition will be used for participant  characterization and to assess  if fat mass  and fat-free mass  
are confounding variables  for substrate  oxidation.   
 
Height  and Weights : Anthropometrics,  performed using standardized  techniques  and equipment,  will be 
used to determine  volunteer  eligibility  and characterize study  volunteers.  Height  will be measured to the 
nearest  0.1 cm using  a stadiometer  at screening.  Body  mass  will be measured after an overnight  fast (10 
hr), using a calibrated  digital  scale  to the nearest  0.1 kg at screening.   Body  mass  will be measured  at 
baseline and the morning of experimental  trial days.  
 
Determination of Peak  Oxygen Uptake:  Following a minimum  of a 10 hour fast, volunteers  will complete 
two separate  maximal  aerobic  exercise  sessions  to determine peak  oxygen uptake  (V̇O2peak)  on a 
treadmill.  Two treadmill V̇O2peak  assessments  will be conducted because  HA exposure of 4,300 m 
produces  a decrease in V̇O2peak  of ~27%  compared to SL (22).  As such,  volunteers  will complete one 
treadmill V̇O2peak  at SL and one at HA so V̇O2peak  is known under  both conditions.   V̇O2peak  will be 
determined using an indirect,  open  circuit  respirator  system  (True  Max 2400,  Parvomedics,  Sandy,  Utah,  
USA).  Volunteers  will be clothed in appropriate  athletic  attire  and perform  this assessment  at standard 
ambient  indoor  temperature (20-22°C) and humidity  conditions  (20-30%).  Volunteers  will be given 
adequate time to become familiar  with the testing  procedures  and allowed  a 3-min self-paced  warm -up on 
the treadmill.  At the start of testing,  the volun teer will put on a mask  connected to a 2-way respiratory  valve.  
The volunteers  will begin by running for 4 min at a pace predetermined  as comfortable  at a 0% grade.  At 4-
min, the grade will be increased to 4% followed  by an additional  2% every  2 min thereafter  until volitional  
exhaustion.   
 
Heart  rate will be monitored using a heart -rate monitor  (Polar  Electro  Inc, Oulu,  Finland)  the last 30 
seconds  of each  workload  during all testing.  The test will be stopped immediately  if the subject  reports  
angina- like symptoms,  exertional  syncope,  shows  signs  of poor perfusion  (i.e., light-headedness,  
confusion,  ataxia,  pallor,  cyanosis,  nausea,  or cold and clammy  skin),  or if testing equipment  fails. Staff 
conducting this test are trained and certified  in basic  life support.   
 
Glycogen  Normalization : Following  an overnight  (10 hour)  fast, volunteers  will complete  a glycogen 
normalization protocol  on a cycle  ergometer.  The intensity  will be based on V̇O2peak.  Volunteers  will begin 
with a 5-min warm -up before  beginning the protocol.  After  a warm- up period,  the cycle  ergometer  protocol  
is comprised of repeated  periods  of 2 min of work  at 80 ±5% V̇O2peak  followed  by 2 min of recovery  at 50 
 ±5% V̇O2peak.  The protocol  will last approximately  50-min (12 work:rest  cycles).  To ensure familiarity  with 
the testing  procedures,  volunteers  will perform  one practice session during  the baseline pre-study  period.   
If volunteers  are unable to maintain  rotations  per minutes  (rpm) above  50 for 15 seconds  during the work  
stage,  watts  will be lowered to ensure  that the volunteers  can complete all 12 work:rest  cycles.  Volunteers  
will be permitted to consume water  ad libitum  during the protocol.    
 Study Diet: After  completing the glycogen normalization protocol,  volunteers  will be fed a controlled diet 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  11 of 26 prescribed  to maintain  energy  balance  for 4 days.  The diet will provide 6.0 g carbohydrate/kg/d,  1.2 g 
protein/kg/d, and 1.0 g fat/kg/d.  All food and beverages  (except  water) will be prepared and provided by 
study  dietitians  and consist  largely  of military  combat  ration and supplemental  food items  (ex. Frozen 
prepared  dinners,  breakfast  sandwiches,  commercial  granola bars,  etc.). The same  diet will be consumed 
for both arms of the study.  Volunteers  will thus consume the study  diet for 8 days  total. Corn -derived 
sugars  will be avoid  in the study  diets  to reduce high natural  abundance  of 13C. Caffeine will be restricted to 
no more  than one calorie -free caffeinated beverage per day (if the research  volunteer  chooses  to consume 
caffeine) . The caffeinated beverage  will be supplied by study  staff and must  not be consumed during 
fasting periods  or prior to exercise.  Volunteers  will be asked  to return  all wrappers  to study  dietitians  to 
ensure consumption of prescribed study  foods.    
 
Insulin Sensitizer : Pioglitazone (PIO)  will be administered  as a 15 mg oral dose per day for 5 days  during 
the HA+PIO  arm of the study.  A 15 mg dose  was chosen because  this is the minimal dose  required to 
induce a clinically  significant  improvement  in insulin  sensitivity  (23). Volunteers  will take the oral dose  in the 
morning while  they are consuming the glycogen  normalization diet (6.0 g carbohydrate/kg/d)  for 4 days  and 
once more  on the carbohydrate  tracer  study  day. Volunteers  will also table  a placebo (PLA)  during one arm 
of the study.  It will be administered  in the same  sequence as PIO to assure blindness  to study  participants  
and blinded study  staff.  The PLA used  will be a closely  matched tablet,  Zeebo® , composed of 100%  
microcrystalline  cellulose.  PIO/PLA  will be held and administered by OMSO  staff only.   
 
High  Altitude  Exposure : To simulate  ascension  to high altitude,  experime ntal trial testing will occur  in the 
hypobaric/hypoxic  (altitude)  chamber  at USARIEM  under  temperate  (20°C, 20-30% rh) ambient  conditions.   
The chamber  will reduce  barometric  pressure,  and thus ambient  oxygen pressure,  to a value similar  to that 
at the summit of Pike Peak,  CO (4,300  m). Volunteers  will be exposed  to hypobaric/hypoxic  conditions  for 
5-hrs before beginning steady -state  exercise  to mimic  our past investigations.  Total  time in the chamber  on 
the experimental  trial day will be ~7-hrs. No more  than two volunteers  will be tested in the chamber  at one 
time.  Study  personnel  who will conduct  data collection  in the altitude chamber  will be medically  cleared by 
OMSO.  Medical  staff (OMSO)  will be onsite  while  volunteers  and staff are in the simulated  altitude  
chamber.  Additionally  there  will be at least  three  chamber  operators  in communication with the PI who will 
be in the chamber  with volunteers  at all times.   
 
Steady- State  Treadmill  Exercise:  Results  from a V̇O2peak  assessment  under HA conditions  will be used 
to prescribe  intensities  for treadmill exercise  on experimental  trial days  utilizing  ACSM  equations  to 
estimate  the speed  and grade of the treadmill.  Volunteers  will complete 80-min of metabolically -matched,  
steady -state  exercise  at 55  ±5% of their V̇O2peak  determined at HA. A practice  session will be conducted 
during the baseline period to confirm  prescribed speed and grade are appropriate to induce  target  V̇O2 and 
allow the research  team  to make modifications  to prescribed  speed and grade if needed  to induce target  
VO 2. The practice session  will range ~40-80 minutes  in length.  The speed  and grade  determined  during the 
practice  session  will be used  to induce the same absolute intensity  between  study  arms.  The mode,  
duration,  and intensity  of steady -state  exercise  were  chosen  to mimic  our past investigations  (3, 4).  
 
Carbohydrate  Tracer  Studies:  After  a 10 hr overnight  fast, two catheters  will be placed into the lower  arm 
(one in each  arm).  One arm will be used for infusion of 6,6-[2H2] glucose  tracer  and the other  will be used 
for blood sampling.  Following  an initial blood and breath  sample  collection  to determine background  
enrichments,  a primed,  continuous  infusion of 6,6-[2H2] glucose  (Cambridge  Isotope Laboratory , Andover,  
MA, USA)  will begin (prime,  82.2 µmol∙kg-1; continuous  rate, 0.78 µmol∙kg-1∙min-1) (24, 25) for 2 hrs before 
and during exercise.  Volunteers  will complete  80-min of steady -state  exercise  on a treadmill,  with V̇O2, 
V̇CO 2, HR, and SaO 2 measured at approximately  5, 20, 40, 50, 60, and 75 min. During  exercise  volunteers  
will consume a glucose  beverage at 1.8 g/min.  Drinks  will contain 145 g glucose,  with a total volume  of 
1450 mL. The drink  will be consumed in four boluses  throughout  the 80-min of steady -state  exercise  (0, 20, 
40, and 60 min).  The first bolus  will be 550 mL, with the remaining three  being 300 mL. The glucose  
beverage consumed  during exercise  will be enriched with 200 mg 13C-glucose (Cambridge  Isotope  
Laboratory)  to increase  the isotopic  enrichment  well above natural  levels  and optimize  the measurement  of 
exogenous  glucose  oxidation.   
 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  12 of 26 Figure 3: Carbohydrate  Tracer  Studies  
 
 
Blood Sampling  (credentialed procedure) : Blood  samples  will be collected using an indwelling  catheter  
kept patent  using IV saline at approximately  at approximately  -300, -120, -30, 0, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 140 
min during  exerc ise by a USARIEM  credentialed phlebotomist.  Baseline blood sampling will occur  after a 
10-hr overnight  fast on experimental  trial days.  A total of 18 blood samples  will be completed  during  this 
study  taking ~340 mL of blood sampled from each  volunteer  over the experimental  trial days  (Table 3). 
Blood samples  will be used for isotope  analysis  assessment,  substrate and hormone responses , and iron 
markers  (Table 3).   
 
For glucose  kinetic  analysis,  the tracer/tracee ratio (6,6-[2H2] glucose/glucose)  using  gas-chromatography -
mass  spectrometry  (GCMS;  Metabolic  Solutions,  Inc., Nashua,  NH) (24), while  13C/12C in plasma glucose 
will be measured  using isotope- ratio mass  spectroscopy  (IRMS;  Metabolic  Solutions).   
 
Breath Sampling (non- credentialed procedure ):Breath  samples  will be collected at approximately  -300, 0, 
20, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 70, 75, and 80 min during exercise  to determine  exogenous  glucose oxidation 
using single -patient  breath collection  bags  (Quin -Tron Instrument  Company,  Milwauk ee, WI, USA).  
Baseline breath sample will also be collected prior to correct  for background of naturally  occurring 13C. The 
natural  enrichment  of the glucose ingested  and the 13C/12C in expired gas samples  will be analyzed  using 
isotope- ratio mass  spectros copy  (Metabolic  Solutions,  Inc., Nashua,  NH).   
 
      B5.4   Data  Collection    
 
Table  2.Outcome  Variables  
Data  Element/Variable  Source  Operational  Specification  
Anthropometric  data  Direct  measurement  Height,  weight,  body  composition  
Substrate  oxidation  Blood  and breath   Glucose  turnover,  carbohydrate,  
fat, and protein  oxidation  
Metabolic  response  Blood   Substrate  analytes,  hormones,  
inflammation,  iron status  
 

Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  13 of 26  
Table  3. Blood Analytes  
 Time  points  (min)  
Analyte  -300 -120 -30 0 20 40 60 80 1404 
Glucose1 x x x X x x x X  
Insulin2 x   X x x x X  
Free fatty acids2 x   X x x x X  
Lactate2 x   X x x x X  
Glycerol2 x   X x x x X  
Norepinephrine2 x   X x x x X  
Epinephrine2 x   X x x x X  
Hemoglobin1 x   X    x  
Hematocrit1 x   X    x  
13C-glucose3    X x x x x  
6,6-[2H2] glucose3  x x X x x x x  
PBMC1 x   X    x x 
TNFα1 x   X    x x 
IL-61 x   X    x x 
IL-101 x   X    x x 
Hemooxygenase  11 x   X    x x 
Adiponectin1 x   X    x x 
Erythropoietin1 x   X      
Hepcidin1 x   X      
Soluble  transferrin  receptor1 x   X      
Erythroferrone1 x   X      
Platelet  derived  growth  
factor -BB1 x   X      
Ferritin1 x   X      
Serum  Iron1 x   X      
Transferrin  Saturation1 x   X      
C-reactive  protein1 x   X      
Archive  x x x X x x x x x 
 
Samples  will be analyzed at 1USARIEM,  2Pennington Biomedical  Research Center  (Baton  Rouge,  LA), and 
3Metabolic  Solutions  (Nashua,  NH). 4Final  blood draw  at ~140 min will be taken under  normoxic  conditions  
in both trials.  All blood samples  will be separated  into plasma and serum  through centrifugation,  aliquoted,  
and stored  at –80˚C  until analysis  or shipment.  Study  samples  will be collected and aliquoted at USARIEM  
and specific  samples  will be shipped on dry ice to Pennington Biomedical  Research Center,  and Metabolic  
Solutions.  Serum  iron and transferrin  saturation will be measured  using an automated clinical chemistry  
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  14 of 26 and immunoassay  analyzer  (Dimension:  Siemens  Healthcare  Diagnostic,  Deerfield,  IL, USA).  Serum  
soluble transferrin receptor,  interleukin- 6, hepcidin,  platelet -derived  growth factor -BB, erythropoietin,  
erythroferrone,  and C-reactive  protein will be determined using  enzyme- linked  immunosorbent  assays.  
Blood sent out to other  laboratories  for analysis  will not have  any remaining  samples  after analysis  is 
completed.  USARIEM  will retain all archive  samples.  
 
Plasma  Glucose Turnover  Calculations  
For calculation of plasma  glucose turnover  the Steele  equation with modifications  for non-steady  state  will 
be used (26). Enrichment  (E) will be expressed  as mole  percent  excess  (MPE);  calculated  as (TTR)/(1  + 
TTR),  where  TTR is the tracer  to tracee ratio.  Appropriate  corrections  for skewed abundance distribution  
and overlapping spectra  will be made for the TTR of the glucose tracers,  6,6-[2H2] glucose and U-13C-
glucose (26). From  these  calculations,  total glucose Ra will be comprised of rates  of appearance of 
exogenous  (i.e., ingested)  glucose  and of endogenous  (i.e., hepatic  glucose production and negligible renal  
glucose production or splanchnic  glucose)  glucose (26): 
 
Total  glucose Ra (Total  Ra) = (F – ((pV x ((C 2 + C1)) / 2) x ((E 2 - E1) / (t2 - t1)))) / ((E 2 + E1) / 2) 
Glucose Rd = Total  Ra – (pV (C2 - C1) / (t2 - t1)) 
Exogenous  glucose Ra (Exo Ra) = ((Total  Ra + F ) x ( ( G2 + GE1)  / 2 ) + ( (pV x ( (C2 + C1) / 2) ) x ((G2 - 
G1) / (t2 - t1))) 
Endogenous  glucose Ra = Total  Ra - Exo Ra 
Metabolic  Clearance  Rate  (MCR)  = Glucose Rd / ((C 2 + C1) / 2)   
 
Where  F represents  the infusion rate of 6,6-[2H2] glucose;  pV is the effective volume  of distribution  for 
glucose,  C1 and C2 are plasma glucose  concentrations  at t1 and t2, respectively,  E1 and E2 are plasma 
enrichments  of 6,6-[2H2] glucose at t1 and t2, respectively,  and Ed and Ep are tracer  enrichments  of U-13C-
glucose from the test drink  and plasma,  respectively.   
 
Calculations  of Carbohydrate  and Fat Oxidation  
Carbohydrate and fat oxidation rates  will be calculated from V̇O2 (L/min) and V̇CO 2 (L/min) during the 80-
min exercise  bout as described by Jeukendrup  and Wallis  (27): 
 
Fat oxidation  (g/min)  = (1.695 x V̇O2) – (1.701 x V̇CO 2)  
Carbohydrate oxidation  (g glucose/min)  = (4.585  x V̇CO 2) – (3.226  x V̇O2)  
 
Calculations  of Exogenous  and Endogenous  Glucose Oxidation  
Exogenous  and plasma glucose oxidation will be calculated as (7): 
 
Exogenous  glucose (g/min)  = V̇CO 2 [(Rexp  - Rref)/(Rexo  - Rref)]/k  
Plasma  glucose (g/min)  = V̇CO 2 [(Rexp  - Rref)/(Rglu  - Rref)]/k  
 where V̇CO
2 is in L/min,  Rexp  is the observed isotopic  composition of expired CO 2, Rref is the isotopic  
composition of expired CO 2 at rest before ingestion of the first dose of 13C-glucose,  Rexo  is the isotopic  
composition of the exogenous  glucose ingested,  Rglu is the isotopic  compos ition of plasma  glucose,  and k 
(0.747  L/g) is the volume  of CO 2 provided by the complete oxidation of glucose.  Total  endogenous  glucose 
oxidation can be calculated by subtracting  exogenous  glucose oxidation from total CHO  oxidation.   
Endogenous  glucose oxidation derived  from muscle  and liver can be determined by subtracting plasma 
glucose oxidation from total carbohydrate oxidation (muscle),  and subtracting exogenous  carbohydrate 
oxidation (liver)  from plasma  glucose  oxidation (7).  The  first 40 min of steady -state  exercise  will allow  for 
equilibration between the 13C/12C in expired CO 2 and the 13C/12C in CO 2 produced in tissues (28). Thus,  
endogenous  glucose oxidation will only be calculated from samples  obtained in the last 40 min of steady -
state  exercise  (40 to 80 min).  
 
Blood Analytes   
Serum  glucose,  free-fatty acids,  glycerol,  and plasma lactate  concentrations  will be determined using  
enzymati c and colorimetric  assays  (Beckman Coulter  DXC 600 Pro, Beckman Coulter,  Brea,  CA, USA).  
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  15 of 26 Serum  insulin  concentrations  will be determined using  an advanced  automated immunoassay  instrument  
(ImmuliteR  2000:  Siemens  Healthcare  Diagnostic,  Deerfield,  IL, USA).  Serum  epinephrine  and 
norepinephrine will be determined using a BI-CAT®  Adrenaline and Noradrenaline ELISA assay  kit (Eagle 
Biosciences,  Nashua,  NH, USA).  Blood analytes  will be analyzed at Pennington Biomedical  Research 
Center  (PBRC)  under  an existing  fee for service  contract.  
 
Circulatory  and Intracellular  Inflammatory  Biomarkers   
Following  ~20 minutes  of seated  postural  control,  venous  blood (8-10 mls) will be collected at four time 
points  (-300, 0, 80, and 140 min) into EDTA  treated collection  tube.  PBMC  will be isolated using density  
gradation separation.  Briefly,  whole  blood  will be carefully  layered  on-top of a separating media 
(Histopaque 1077,  Sigma -aldrich)  at a 1:1 ratio then centrifuged  at 450 x g for 30 minutes  at 22°C.  Blood 
plasma will be aliquoted into cyrovials  and stored  at -80°C freezer  for batch  analysis  at a later time.  The 
buffy  coat containing the PBMC  will be collected and transferred  into a sterile  conical  tube and washed 
thrice  with 10 ml phosphate buffer  saline.  The PBMC  pellet  will then be stored  at -80°C for analysis  of 
intracellular  proteins  using  immunoblotting.  Circulating  (in blood  plasma)  and intracellular  (PBMC)  
biomarkers  will be assayed via molecular  assay techniques  (e.g.,  Western blot, enzymatic/colori metric,  
multiplex,  etc.) at the USARIEM  laboratories.  Intracellular  inflammatory  biomarkers  will include,  but not be 
limited  to AMPK,  SIRT1,  NF-KB, IKK-B, and IL1RA.        
  
B5.5   Managing Data  and/or  Human  Biological  Specimens  for this Research  
All data and medical  information  obtained  will be considered privileged  and held in confidence.  Study  
volunteers  will be assigned unique subject  identification (ID) numbers  that will not contain any personal  
identifiers  such  as name,  social  security number,  address , date of birth,  zip code,  etc. This study  subject  ID 
number  will be used on all data collection  instruments,  to include questionnaires,  data collection  forms,  
computer  records,  etc. A number  will be assigned  as each  volunteer  is medically  cleared for participation.   
A master  list linking  the volunteers’  names  and ID numbers  will be kept in a separate locked  file in the 
principal  investigator's  office,  or kept in a computer  file with password- protected access  restricted  to the 
principal  investigator  and study coordinator.  When  the results  of the research are published or discussed  in 
conferences,  no information will be included that would  reveal  identity.  All samples  will be stored  in -80ºC  
freezer  at USARIEM  in room  322 or 304 using  the subject  identificati on number.  De-identified  samples  for 
isotopic  analysis  will be shipped on dry ice to (blood)  and room  temperature (breath)  to Metabolic  
Solutions.  De-identified blood will be shipped on dry ice to Pennington Biomedical  Research  Center.  All 
samples  will be shipped via FedEx  and store d in these laboratories  until analyzed.  Once samples  have 
been analyzed,  there  will be no remaining sample  for storage  other  than the archived  sample  stored  at 
USARIEM.  Coded  data will be transmitted  between the above mentioned laboratories  via an encrypted 
email,  a secure  file transfer  site, or using  an approved removable media.  Only USARIEM  will maintain  
digital  copies  of these  data.  Body  composition  and V̇O2peak  data will be shared with volunteers.  No other  
data will be shared with volunteers.     
 
Only the principal  investigator  and study  coordinator  will have access  to personal  identifiable data.  No 
outside laboratory  will have access  to identifiable data.  Hard  copy  data records  will be stored  for a 
minimum  of three  years  from the time the study  is completed.  Electronic  data records  will be maintained for 
a period of at least  ten years  after the study  has been completed.  The master  list will be destroyed  upon 
the protocol’s  closure.  
 
      B5.6   Managing Data  and/or  Human  Biolog ical Specimens for Future Research    
 
De-identified study  samples  will be stored  in -80ºC  freezer  at USARIEM  in room  322 or 304 for potential  
future  use and maintained indefinitely.  Only personnel  assigned to the research study  by the principal  
investigator  will have access  to samples.  The de-identified data and samples  will remain under  the control  
of the PI and may be shared with outside collaborators  for future  research.  Any use of the samples  outside 
of this defined protocol  will be submitted as a proto col amendment  or a new protocol.    
   
      B5.7   Devices,  Drugs,  Dietary Supplements,  Nutritional  Supplements,  And Biologics    
 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  16 of 26                 B5.7.1   Devices  
 
5.7.1.1  FDA-approved device being used  in this research  according to the approved labeling  
DEXA,  DPX-IQ, Lunar  Corporation,  True Max 2400,  Parvomedics,  Sandy,  Utah,  USA,  Polar  Electro  
Inc, Oulu,  Finland  
 
5.7.1.2  FDA-approved device being used  in this research  in a manner  other  than  its approved 
labeling  
N/A 
 
5.7.1.3  Any device  not approved by the FDA 
      N/A 
 
                B5.7.2   Drugs  
 
B5.7.2.1  FDA-approved  and used  in accordance with the approved  labeling  
      
B5.7.2.2  FDA-approved  and used  in a manner  not in accordance  with its approved labeling  
Pioglitazone,  Thiazolidinedione,  Takeda  Pharmaceutical  Company  
 
  
B5.7.2.3  Any drug  not approved by the FDA 
N/A 
      
B8  Statistical  Analysis  
 
B5.8.1  Sample  Size Estimation  
Based on results  of exogenous  carbohydrate oxidation and MCR rate between SL and HA in our previous  
investigation (3, 4), a sample  size of 8 is required  to achieve 80% power  (Table  4). We will request  to 
enroll  up to 24 individuals  to account  for withdrawals  from the study.  
 
 Table  4: Previous  study  effect  sizes  
Study  Outcome  Delta  Effect  Size  Sample  Size  
Young  et al. (4) Exogenous  Glucose  
Oxidation  0.35 ± 0.21  1.11  7 
Margolis  et al. (3)   Exogenous  Glucose  
Oxidation  0.09 ± 0.06  0.95  8 
Margolis  et al. (3)  MCR  3.1 ± 2.0 0.98  7 
 
B5.8.2  Data  analysis  
Statistical  analyses  will be conducted  using either  SPSS (IBM  Corp.  Armonk,  NY), SAS 9.3 (SAS Institute  
Inc., Carey,  NC), or equivalent.  Shapiro  Wilks  will be used  to assess  all data for normality.  Data  that are not 
normally  distributed  will be log transfo rmed  for statistical  analysis.  Paired T tests  will be used  to assess  
effects  of study  arms  (HA+PIO  vs. HA+PLA)  on chamber  conditions  (barometric  pressure,  temperature,  
and humidity),  oxygen  saturation,  heart  rate, V̇O2, V̇CO 2, respiratory  exchange ratio,  ventilation  exchange,  
total glucose  and fat oxidation,  plasma glucose,  muscle,  and liver oxidation.  Mixed  Model  repeated  
measures  ANOVA  will be used to assess  the effects  of condition,  time,  and their interactions  for breath 13C-
enrichments,  exogenous  glucose  oxidation,  and blood analytes.  Bonferroni  adjustments  for multiple  
comparisons  will be performed  if significant  interactions  are observed.   
 
 
 
SECTION  C:  HUMAN RESEARCH  PROTECTIONS  
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  17 of 26  
C1.  RECRUITMENT  AND CONSENT    
 
       C1.1   Identification and Selection  of Subjects   
Volunteers  will be recruited from the federally  and non-federally  employed civilian  population,  the Natick  
Human Research Volunteer  (HRV)  Pool,  NSSC  active  duty military  personnel,  and the active  duty 
population located at other  military  organizations,  to include,  but not limited  to coordination  with the NSSC  
Soldier  and Squad Optimization and Integration Team  (SSO -IT). 
 
Civilian  volunteers  and other  active  duty personnel  will be recruited  by “word  of mouth”,  posted  flyers,  or 
electronic  distribution of the “off-site” flyer to include  a text-only,  approved  version of the flyer.  Recruiting  
materials  will be distributed around  NSSC,  surrounding community  and organizations,  and on bulletin  
boards  (physical  and virtual/ electronic)  at surrounding universities  or other  organizations.  The text-based 
flyer will be posted on various  USARIEM  social  media sites and may be used in distribution media requiring 
a text format  (e.g.,  electronic  newsletters).  Recruiting  may also be conducted through information  meetings  
presented  to college classes,  clubs,  sports  teams,  or other  organizations.  Approvals  from the requisite 
parties  will be obtained prior to any recruitment  activities.   
 
      C1.2   Recruitment  Process  
Consent  briefings  will be conducted either  in-person or virtually  using  a video  communication  platform  (i.e., 
Microsoft  Teams,  Zoom,  Facetime,  or similar).  
 
For Soldiers  in the U.S. Army  Natick  Soldier  System  Center  Human  Research Volunteer  (HRV)  Program,  
the Principal  Investigator  will furnish a copy  of the consent  form to the Human  Research Volunteer  
Program  Coordinator  or designee.  The HRV  Coordinator  will schedule the consent  briefing  for the HRV  
platoon.   
 
Volunteers  from other  military  organizations  (i.e., non-HRV  military)  may be recruited through  coordination 
with NSSC  SSOIT  or similar  avenues.  Non-HRV  military  may be recruited  around  NSSC.  The NSSC  SSO -
IT Coordinator,  or respective Unit Leadership,  may schedule the consent  briefing  for the non-HRV  military. 
Non-HRV  military  coming  to Natick  to participate in research on temporary  duty station  (TDY)  permissions,  
will receive transportation  and lodging paid for by the study.  Additionally,  compensation  for meals  will be 
provided at the local per diem  rate for days  that research volunteers  are not following  the controlled study  
diet.  
 
An ombudsperson will be present  during all group briefings  for military  personnel .  
 
Superiors  of Service  members  (e.g.,  unit officers,  senior  NCOs,  and equivalent  civilians)  / supervisors  of 
DoD civilians  (e.g.,  military  and civilian  supervisors  or anyone in the supervisory  structure)  shall not be 
present  at any recruitment  sessions  or during  the consent  process  in which  members  of units  under  their 
command  / personnel  under  their supervisions  are afforded  the opportunity  to participate as human  
subjects  of research.  
 
For civilian  volunteers,  the Principal  Investigator  will provide a copy  of the informed consent  document  to 
the individual.  The Study  Coordinator  will schedule the consent  briefing  for the civilian  volunteers.  An 
ombudsperson will not be present  during either  individual  or group  briefings.   
     
       C1.3   Eligibility    
Following  the completion  of written  consent,  volunteers  will also undergo the OMSO medical  clearance  
process  for participation in accordance with USARIEM  procedures  outlined for screening  volunteers  for 
research  involving  exercise.   This includes  completing a two part medical  clearance:  1) general  medical  
clearance to confirm  general  health status  and 2) specific  medical  clearance to confirm  specific  eligibility  for 
the current  study , to include an ECG . Screenings  will be conducted  and reviewed  by a licensed  physician 
or physician assistant  from OSMO.  OMSO  will travel  to the site of study  recruitment  to conduct  study -
specific  medical  clearances.  Final  eligibility  will be determined by the Principal  Investigator  using 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  18 of 26 information from the OMSO  medical  clearances.  All volunteers  will undergo the required  clearances  in 
order  to participate.  Volunteers  recruited  through NSSC  SSO -IT, or equivalent,  may undergo  medical  
clearance at their home duty station  prior to arrival  at USARIEM  (clearances  will be coordinated  between 
the Principal  Investigator,  OMSO,  and the unit’s  Brigade Surgeon  or similar).   
 
Volunteers  will be screened for anemia.  Final  classification  of anemia,  and therefore  eligibility  to participate,  
will be determined  by OMSO.   
 
All volunteers  must  be willing  to consume only the food and beverages  provided by study  staff during the 
control led feeding portions  of this research  study,  and they must  be willing  to adhere  to exercise  and 
physical  activity  prescriptions  and restrictions.  
 If the results  of all screening tools  reveal  the volunteer  fits the screening criteria,  they will be eligible  to 
participate  in the study.    
 
       C1.4   Consent  Process   
Prior  to providing informed consent,  discussions  with potential  volunteers  (such  as over the telephone)  will 
involve  answering general  questions,  but will not involve formal  screening nor the collection  of any 
personally  identifiable information besides  their name,  email,  and telephone number.  No study  procedures  
will occur  prior to any volunteer  giving  their informed consent.   
 
The Principal  Investigator,  an Associate  Investigator  or the Study  Coordinator  will brief potential  volunteers  
about  the nature,  purpose,  procedures  involved,  risks,  expectations  and requirements  for participation in 
the study.  Prospective  volunteers  will be familiarized  with the study  procedures  and informed  verbally  and 
in writing  of their rights  to withdraw  from any part of the study  without  penalty  or prejudice.  The Principal  
Investigator  or designee will answer  all group and private  questions.  Potential  volunteers  will have at least  
one hour after they are briefed to read and review  the Informed Consent  document.  Potential  volunteers  
who are ready  to provide  their written,  informed  consent  may be encouraged to do so after the briefing.  
Potential  volunteers  who would  like to take more  time to consider  whether  they wish to participate in the 
research  will be given the option of returning the consent  form at a later time (i.e., by early  the next morning 
or in the subsequent  days).  
 
 Documentation of informed consent  may be captured  in the form of an electronic  signature  (i.e. common  
access card signatures  for military  or federal  personnel).  A copy  of the informed  consent  document  will be 
provided to the volunteer  with the original  kept for study  documentation.  Volunteers  who have already  
consented will be informed  of any new information or changes  to the protocol  that may affect  their 
willingness  and ability  to continue participation in the study  using an approved consent  addendum.   
 
In the case  of COVID  risk mitigation  plans,  briefings  can be done  virtually  and consent  forms can be 
emailed and digitally  signed.  
 
 
C1.4.1  Research  involving subjects  with cognitive impairment  or who lack capacity to 
provide informed  consent  
 
     N/A 
 
                 C1.4.2   Research involving non-English  speaking  subjects  
 
     N/A 
  
C1.4.3  Research  involving a waiver  of the requirement  to obtain  informed  consent  OR 
alteration  of the elements  of informed consent  
 
     N/A 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  19 of 26  
C1.4.4  Research  involving a waiver  of the requirement  for investigator  to obtain a signed 
consent  form   
 
     N/A 
 
                 C1.4.5   Waivers  of assent  or parental  permission  when the research involves  children 
 
     N/A 
 
                 C1.4.6   Research involving data collection  for the USAMRDC Volunteer  Registry  Database  
  N/A 
 
C2.  COMPENSATION  FOR  PARTICIPATION    
 Volunteers  who participate in the study  will receive $50.00  per blood sample  (9 samples  per CHO  tracer  trial 
day; 2 CHO  tracer  trial days  per volunteer  equals  18 samples  for entire  study),  for a total of $900.00  for 
completing the study.  Volunteers  will not be compensated for blood draws  completed  during the 
screening/medical  clearance visit. Should volunteers  withdraw,  they will be compensated  for any blood 
samples  they complete  except  for the initial blood sample during the medical  screening.  Payments  will 
processed  when the volunteer  concludes  the study  (end of study  period or voluntary  withdrawal),  as a total 
lump -sum payment , received as a direct  deposit .   
 
Note:  Participants  who receive more  than $600  in a calendar  year will have this income  reported  to the Internal  
Revenue Service.  
      
C3.  WITHDRAWAL  FROM  RESEARCH PARTICIPATION    
 
Volunteers  may withdraw from the study  at any time without  penalty  or loss of benefits  to which  they would  
otherwise be entitled.  They  will do so by informing  the Principal  Investigator,  Associate  Investigator,  or a staff 
member  of their intent  to withdraw  verbally  or in writing  (electronic  or paper/pencil).  They  will then be asked to 
verbally  discuss their choice  to withdraw with the Principal  Investi gator  so that reasons  for withdrawal can be 
documented . However,  volunteers  will not be required to discuss  why they withdrew,  as the volunteer  may 
choose to discontinue participation without  providing reason . An Investigator  may stop an individual’s  
participation in the study  if the volunteer  is unwilling  or unable to complete study  procedures.  If an individual  
needs  or wants  to withdraw  when in the altitude  chamber,  the volunteer  will descend to SL in a separate  part of 
the chamber  with a study  staff memb er, and be released from the altitude  chamber  at the time of withdrawal.  
An Investigator  may also withdraw  a volunteer  if the individual  becomes  ill or injured or it would  not be in the 
volunteer’s  best interest  to continue.  If the participant  is withdrawn  by the Investigator  or decides  to voluntarily  
withdraw  him/herself,  all further  data collection  will discontinue.  Any de-identified data and biospecimens  
collected up until the point  of withdrawal will be retained for future  use and stored  with all other  study  data.  
Volunteers  will be compensated for any blood samples  they completed  up until that point,  and they will be 
asked to return  any remaining  food items  that were  provided,  in addition  to any wrappers  and diet/activity  logs 
that they had completed  up to the point  of withdrawal.  
     
C4.  PRIVACY FOR  SUBJECTS    
 
To protect  the volunteer ’s privacy,  all of their research- related records  will be labeled or “coded”  with an 
assigned research volunteer  number  that will not include their name  or any other  form of identifiable  
information.   The  principal  investigator  or study  coordinator  will keep the link between  volunteer  number  and 
the volunteer ’s research records  in a locked cabinet.   Any  documents  that will require the volunteer ’s name,  
such  as the consent  form,  will be kept in a locked  cabinet  separate from any research  documents  that contain 
the volunteer ’s ID number.   The  principal  investigator  and study  coordinator  are the only people who will be 
able to match  the research volunteer  number  with any of their personal  identifying  information.     
 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  20 of 26 When the results  of the research are published no information  will be included that would  reveal  the volunteer ’s 
identity  to others.  Photographs,  videos,  or audio- tape recordings  of volunteers  will only be used,  if the 
volunteer  grants  permission  through  the Audio/Visual  Image Release form.  Each  volunteer  will also be asked  
to grant  permission for his/her  name  to be included on his/her  photo  or video image or in writing  connected to 
his/her  image.   If a volunteer  does not grant  permission through  the Audio/Visual  Image  Release,  then no 
photos  or other  visual  recordings  will be taken  of him/her.  In the event  that it is discovered  that an individual  
has been inadvertently  photographed  or visually  recorded without  his/her permission,  the materials  will be 
immediately  destroyed.   Permission  through  the Audio Visual  Image  Release form will be confirmed before any 
photographs  or other  visual  recordings  are used.  
      
C5.  CONFIDENTIALITY  PROCEDURES  FOR  RESEARCH  RECORDS,  DATA,  HUMAN BIOLOGICAL  
SPECIMENS   
 
Complete confidentiality  cannot  be promised to military  participant  because information  bearing on the military  
participant  health may be required  to be reported  to appropriate medical  or command  authorities.    
 
All data and medical  information  obtained  will be considered privileged  and held in confidence.   A unique study  
ID number  will be assigned to each participant  that will not contain any personal  identifiers  such  as name,  
social  security  number,  address,  date of birth,  zip code,  etc. and that only this study  participant  ID number  will 
be used on all data collection  instruments,  to include questionnaires,  data collection  forms,  computer  records,  
etc.  A number  will be assigned as each  volunteer  is medically  cleared for participation.   The  master  key linking  
ID numbers  to individuals  will be destroyed when  the study  is closed.  When  the results  of the research are 
published or discussed  in conferences,  no information will be included that would  reveal  identity.  
      
C6.  RISKS  OF HARM,  MEASURES TO REDUCE  THE RISKS  OF HARM,  AND  BENEFITS  OF 
PARTICIPATION  
 
       C6.1  Risks of Harm    
Research Procedure  Name:   Dual  energy  X-ray absorptiometry  (DEXA)  scan  
Research Procedure  Description:  Volunteer  will lay face-up on the DEXA densitometer  table in 
shorts,  t-shirts,  and stocking  feet.  Volunteers  will be asked to remain  motionless  for the 8-10 min scan.  
Research- related  Risks:   Exposure  to less than 0.6 mrem Xirradiation in a slowspeed (up to 20 
minutes)  wholebody  scan  is possible.   This  dose  is equivalent  to approximately  1/500  of normal  annual  
background radiation (300 mrem/year),  1/6 of the radiation received in a transatlantic  flight  (3.825  
mrem),  or 1/3 of the radiation received  in a chest  X-ray (2 mrem). 
Measures  to Minimize  Risks of Harm:   A quality  assurance check will be completed on the DEXA 
each day prior to its use; the software  will not allow the use of the DEXA densitometer  if the quality  
assuranc e check  fails. Volunteers  must  be advised that the health  effects  of very low level exposures  to 
ionizing  radiation,  if any, are unknown  (thought  to be minimal).   
 Research Procedure  Name:   Indwelling  Catheters  
Research Procedure  Description:   A needle will be used to guide a catheter  into the antecubital  vein 
of the volunteer.  The catheter  will be attached to saline  to keep  the line patent  for multiple  blood 
samples.      
Research- related  Risks:  The risks of blood sampling  are small  and usually  limited  to local bruising  or 
swelling.   Also  sometimes  volunteers  feel faint or may faint.  If the volunteer  has had problems  with 
fainting during  blood sampling  in the past,  they may be more  prone  to them  during future  procedures.  If 
the catheter,  the tube that is left in the arm after the needle is removed,  becomes  clogged at any time 
during the protocol,  we will have to replace this to continue blood sampling.  This will require another  
needle to be inserted into your arm. In addition,  the catheter  can cause  irritation,  bruising,  swelling,  
infection,  or an allergic  reaction.  
Measures  to Minimize  Risks of Harm:  Trained technicians  will use sterile  techniques  to place the 
catheter;  however,  in spite  of being careful  there  is a chance that the site may become  infected.   
Subjects  will be briefed  on the signs  and symptoms  of potential  complications  and given  information on 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  21 of 26 who to contact  for medical  assessment  and/or  treatment.  Volunteers  should not donate  blood for eight  
weeks  before or after this study.   
 
Research Procedure  Name : 6,6-[2H2] glucose  infusions   
Research Procedure  Description:  6,6-[2H2] glucose will be infused using  a indwelling  catheter.  
Research- related  Risks:  The primary  risks associated with tracer  studies  are those  related to venous  
catheterization.  The catheter  can cause  irritation,  bruising,  or infection.  There are no known risks or 
reported side effects  associated with administration of 6,6-[2H2] glucose  infusions  to humans  during 
clinical or experimental  studies.  The risks associated with the infusion include volume  overload,  
infection,  and allergic  reaction to the infused  substance.  There have  been  no occurrences  of volume  
overload,  no occurrences  of infection or allergic  reaction attributable to iodine  used prior to 
venipuncture  in any of the 200 infusion  protocols  that the investigators  have been involved.  To minimize  
the likelihood  of these  events  occurring,  infusion  rate will be closely  monitored and maintained  at less 
than 30 ml/hr  throughout  the entire  infusion experimental  trial day. 
Measures  to Minimize  Risks of Harm:  All staff who directly  participate in the infusion studies  will be 
properly  trained  how to safely  monitor  (i.e., infusion  pumps  and IV lines)  infusion studies  from Dr. 
Margolis,  who has extensive  experience  with infusion  studies.  In addition,  infusates  will be prepared 
sterile,  pyrogen -free, and in the proper  dosages  by a licensed pharmacist.  If sign of allergic  reaction,  
rash or redness,  infusion  will be stopped  immediately.   
 Research Procedure  Name:   Venipuncture  
Research Procedure  Description:  A needle  will be used  to obtain  single  blood samples  of the 
antecubital  vein.    
Research- related  Risks:   Venipuncture  is a routine clinical procedure  the medical  community  
commonly  uses  to obtain  blood samples.  The immediate complications  may be slight  pain during the 
entry  of the needle into the skin, possible dizziness,  and syncope.  Dizziness  or syncope  constitutes  no 
long- term harm,  and immediate relief  is achieved by having  the subject  put their head  down between 
their knees  or lie down.  Additionally,  a hematoma  may result  from the venipuncture,  but this is more  
unsightly  than risk producing.  Late complications  might  include thrombosis  of the vein due to trauma or 
infection.  These complications  are extremely  rare. 
Measures  to Minimize  Risks of Harm:  Participant  monitoring,  aseptic  technique,  including sterile  
disposable blood collection  apparatus  and adherence to standard  medical  precautions  reduce  risk.  
Trained technicians  will perform  all venipuncture.   
 
Research Procedure  Name:   Exercise  
Research Procedure  Description:   Exercise  testing will occur  on a cycle  ergometer  or treadmill.   
Exercise  will be at various  levels  of intensity  based on exercise  protocol.  
Research- related  Risks:   Exercise  per se rarely  provokes  cardiovascular  events  in healthy  individuals  
with normal  cardiovascular  systems.   The  prevalence of fatal events  in the U.S. is approximately  
1:133,000  to 1: 185,000  for men and 1:769,000 to 1:1,500,000  for women  who are competitive  high 
school  and college athletes.  For middle -aged and older  adults  the relative  risk rises  to 1:15,000 to 
1:18,000  for individuals  without  a prior history  of cardiovascular  events.  Current  civilian  and military  
guidelines  state  that individuals  less than 40 years  of age who have no symptoms  of or known 
presence of heart  disease or major  coronary  risk factors  have  a low risk for cardiac  complications  
during vigorous  exercise.   All volunteers  in this study  fall into this low risk category.   Local  muscle  
discomfort  and fatigue  may occur  in active  muscles  during and shortly  after exercise.   Muscle  soreness,  
ranging in intensity  from mild to severe,  may persist  for 1 to 7 days.   
Measures  to Minimize  Risks of Harm:  (Precautions,  safeguards):   Studies  have confirmed the safety  
of maximal  exercise  testing,  particularly  among  apparently  healthy  persons  without  significant  
cardiovascular  risk factors.   As a precaution,  there will be at least  one spotter  during all exercise  
sessions,  and heart  rate will be monitored  in real time during  testing.   In addition,  exercise  monitors  and 
test administrators  will be CPR- certified.   
 
Research Procedure  Name : Oral Pioglitazone administration         
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  22 of 26 Research Procedure  Description:  Participants  will be administered 15 mg of PIO, an insulin  
sensitizin g agent,  for five days  during one arm of the research trial. Study  staff will observe  research  
volunteers  when PIO is administered.   
Research- related  Risks:   The most  common  side effects  of PIO include cold-like symptoms  (upper  
respiratory  tract infection) , headache,  sinus  infection,  muscle  pain,  and sore throat.  Rare  but possible  
side effects  can include hypoglycemia,  fluid retention  which  leads  to swelling  (edema),  and weight  gain.  
Chronic  use of PIO has been associated  with increased risk of bladder  canc er. 
Measures  to Minimize  Risks of Harm:  (Precautions,  safeguards):  To minimize  side effects  the 
study  will use a low dose  of PIO, 15 mg, which  is considered a starting  dose  when medication is initially  
prescribed.  PIO will be administered  for short -term use (5 days),  which  is significantly  less dose  
exposure time for side effects,  and particularly  more  rare side effects  to occur.  Additionally,  PIO will be 
administered  as a monotherapy,  without  presence of other  hypoglycemia agents  such  as insulin,  and 
diet and exercise  will be controlled which  will nearly  eliminate  risk of hypoglycemia.  The study  will 
recruit  healthy,  male  volunteers  who will be medically  screened to eliminate  volunteers  with known 
comorbidities  which  could exaggerate side effects.  OMSO will be responsible for administering  PIO to 
volunteers  and medical  oversight  of volunteers.           
 
Research Procedure  Name:   Altitude  Exposure  
Research Procedure  Description:  Participants  will exercise  at 4300 m simulated altitude.     
Research- related  Risks :  Hypoxemia,  lightheadedness,  AMS,  HAPE,  HACE,  ear pain/discomfort,  and 
peripheral/facial  edema.  
Measures  to Minimize  Risks of Harm : (Precautions,  safeguards):    
• During  hypobaric  exposures,  volunteers  will always  be accompanied by one or more  trained staff 
that will monitor  signs  and symptoms  of research- related risks.  To additionally  minimize  risk, 
volunteers  will be familiarized  with safety  procedures  and equipment  in the hypobaric  chamber.  
Additionally,  medical  staff (OMSO)  will be onsite while  volunteers  and staff are in the simulated  
altitude chamber.   
• Hypoxemia-  Exposure  to hypobaric  hypoxia introduces  the hazard of hypoxemia.   Depending upon  
the degree and duration of hypobaric  exposure,  hypoxemia may be well tolerated without  
consequences,  or may present  a full spectrum  of clinical entities  ranging from mild discomfort  to 
potentially  lethal  conditions.  Participants  will be monitored by study  staff and participants  will be 
allowed  to terminate  testing early  if they desire.  
• Lightheadedness - Exercising  at altitude can cause an increased risk of lightheadedness  which  
may occur  just after stopping heavy  exercise.  Lightheadedness  increases  the risk that the 
volunteer  could fall. This risk (rare) will be minimized  by having  at least  one staff member  in close  
proximity  to the volunteer  (as is done for all exercise tests  regardless  of location)  so that he/she  
will not fall off.  If a volunteer  becomes  lightheaded and feels  faint,  he/she will be assisted  off the 
treadmill and instructed  to lay down with feet up until fully recovered.  Volunteers  will be assisted  on 
and off exercise  and other  experimental  apparatus  as needed.   
• AMS - AMS is a self-limited  syndrome  that is common when  unacclimatized lowlanders  are 
exposed to higher  altitudes.  Symptoms  of AMS  include headache,  nausea,  anorexia,  lethargy,  
dizziness,  tiredness,  weakness,  insomnia,  and sometimes  vomiting.  The prevalence and severity  
of AMS  increase  directly  in proportion to ascent  rate and elevation.  With rapid  ascent,  and no 
benefici al treatment  (e.g.,  breathing supplemental  O2) symptoms  commonly  appear  within  four to 
six hours.  Symptoms  of AMS will reach their severity  within  18 to 24 hrs of altitude  exposure,  and 
be the most  severe  after awakening.  With rapid  ascent  to the altitudes  of 3000 m and 4000  m for a 
24-hr period,  more  than 30-90% of the untreated  volunteers  will likely  experience AMS,  with 
symptoms  ranging  from mild (10 to 40%),  to moderate  (20 to 40%)  to severe  (10 to 20%).  Due to 
the duration (~7-8 hrs) of the altitude  exposure  in the current  study,  AMS  may occur  but should not 
reach its most  severe  symptoms.   
• HAPE/  HACE - The incidence of clinical HAPE in unacclimatized sea-level residents  being exposed  
to high altitude for at least  a few days  appears  to be less than 1%. As a clinical condition,  the 
possibility  of HACE  occurring when  sea-level residents  are exposed to high altitude appears  to be 
even lower  than the incidence of HAPE.  If either  or both are recognized early  and treated by 
descent,  they are completely  reversib le. With regard to the proposed study,  the risk of any 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  23 of 26 volunteer  developing either  HAPE or HACE  is considered remote  and is not expected.  If a 
volunteer  shows  developing symptoms of HAPE or HACE  they will be removed from the simulated  
high altitude environ ment.   
• Ear Pain/Discomfort - Changes  in ambient  gas pressure during induction  of or return  from 
hypobaric  conditions  can cause untoward  effects  due to gas trapped  in the body.   At the relatively  
slow rates  of pressure  change during normal  operation (simulat ed ascent  and/or  descent)  of the 
hypobaric  chamber,  some  individuals  may experience discomfort  in their ears,  paranasal  sinuses,  
teeth,  or abdomen.   In healthy  individuals,  pressure in the middle  ear and sinuses  can be 
equalized with ambient  atmospheric  pressure  by swallowing,  yawning,  or tensing the muscles  of 
the throat,  procedures  that contract  the pharyngeal  muscles  and open  the Eustachian tubes,  
thereby  ventilating the middle ear and sinus.   Another  more  effective  means  of ventilating the 
middle  ear and sinuses  is forced  expiration against  a closed nose and mouth.   Adjunctive  therapy  
may also include the use of short -acting antihistamines  or decongestants  to reduce swollen  
Eustachian tubes  and sinus  openings  due to inflammation  or infection.   During  recompression  
(descent),  moderately  severe  ear pain may be experienced by volunteers  who cannot  maintain  
Eustachian tube patency.   If ear or sinus  pain occurs,  recompression will be stopped  and the 
affected volunteer  will be decompressed  until the pain resolv es; recompression  will then be 
restarted  at a slower  rate.  Damage  to eardrums  is likely  only under  the unusual  situation where  
deliberately  rapid recompression is necessitated by dire emergency.   
• Peripheral/Facial  Edema - Peripheral  and facial  edema occurs  in some  individuals  when initially  
exposed to high altitude.  It is characterized by pronounced edema  of the face and upper  
extremities,  decreased urine  output  and weight  gain.  Although uncomfortable,  it is a benign  
condition.  The peripheral  and facial  edema  resolves  with descent.  
 
      C6.2   Incidental  or Unexpected Findings   
All incidental  or unexpected health findings  identified by OMSO during the screening process  or throughout  
the research  process  will be documented and disclosed to the volunteer.  The volunteer  will be encouraged 
to make an appointment  with their primary  care provider  for a full evaluation of any identified  problems.  
Volunteers  with evidence  of any physical,  mental,  and/or  medical  conditions  that would  make  the proposed 
studies  relati vely more  hazardous  will be excluded.   
 Any results  perceived to be clinically  relevant  will not be shared  with participants,  as biological  samples  will 
not be analyzed until after participants  have finished data collection.  
 Body  composition,  exercise  performance  measures,  and baseline dietary  intake  data may be shared  upon 
request  at the individual  level once the requesting  individual  completes  all study  procedures.   
    
      C6.3   Potential  Benefits   
 
There are no direct  health or other  benefits  related to participation in this study.  Information  gathered from 
this research  may benefit  society in the future.    
 
C7.  DATA  AND SAFETY  MONITORING   
The Principal  Investigator  will be responsible for monitoring  the data collected.  The Principal  Investigator,  with 
the assistance of the Study  Coordinator,  will ensure that the data is being collected according to the methods  
described in the protocol.  Electronically  collected data will be downloaded daily and checked  for quality.  This 
also includes  continuous  evaluation of the following:  recruitment,  the informed consent  process,  adverse 
events,  protocol  adherence,  and protocol  deviations.  This will occur  continuously  in order  to identify  
unanticipated problems  or risks to the volunteers  associated  with the research.  The Principal  Investigator  will 
ensure that the number  of volunteers  recruited  for this study  complies  with the protocol.  If adverse  events  
occur,  the Principal  Investigator  will submit  a monthly  summary  of the related adverse events  to OMSO  to 
determine whether  the number  of adverse events  is excessive  for the risks outlined in the research protocol.  
The Principal  Investigator  and Study  Coordinator  will be responsible for ensuring that the appropriate 
regulatory  and IRB documentation is on file and up to date.  
 
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  24 of 26 C8.  REPORTABLE  EVENTS    
 
       C8.1   Expected adverse events   
 
An adverse  event  is defined as any untoward or unfavorable medical  occurrence  in a human  research 
participant,  including any abnormal  sign (e.g.,  abnormal  physical  exam  or laboratory  finding),  symptom,  or 
disease,  temporally  associated with the individual’ s participation in the research,  whether  or not considered 
related to the individual’s  participation in the research.  
 
Expected adverse  events  which  are not serious  are reported to the IRB at the time of continuing review  of 
the protocol.  These  events  include some level of AMS under  HA conditions,  local bruising  and soreness  
from blood sampling,  and muscle  soreness  or pain from exercise.  
 
All medical  events  that the USARIEM  Office  of Medical  Support  and Oversight  (OMSO)  evaluates  will be 
reported to the ORQ C. 
      
       C8.2   Unexpected  adverse events  and unanticipated  problems  
 
A serious  adverse  event  is any adverse event  temporally  associated  with the subject’s  participation  in 
research  that is fatal,  life-threatening,  permanently  disabling,  requires  inpatient  hospitalization,  or results  in 
congenital  anomalies/birth defect,  overdose or cancer,  or based on appropriate medical  judgment,  may 
jeopardize  the participant,  or may require medical  or surgical  intervention to prevent  one of the above 
outcomes.  
  
All medical  events  will be reported  to USARIEM’s  Office  of Medical  Support  and Oversight  (OMSO). OMSO 
staff will retain  a copy  of the report  in the subject’s  OMSO  medical  file as a means  of tracking  and 
analyzing trends  in medical  events.   
 
All unanticipated  problems  involving  risk to subjects  or others,  serious  adverse events  that are unexpected 
and determined to be at least  possibly  or definitely  related  to study  participation,  will be promptly  reported  
within  one working  day by phone (508- 206-2371/2200)  or email  (usarmy.natick.medcom -
usariem.mbx.usariem -rqc-protocol@ health.mil)  to the USARIEM  ORQC  and the Commander.  These 
events  will also be reported to the HQ USAMRDC IRB within  one working  day by phone (301- 619-6240),  or 
by e-mail (usarmy.detrick.medcom -usamrdc.other.irb -office@mail.mil)   
 
Adverse events  assessed  by the PI as not serious  and serious  adverse  events  that are deemed to be 
unrelated to participation  in the study  will be reported to the IRB at the time of continuing review  of the 
protocol.   
 
In the event  of a medical  emergency  at facilities  on the Natick  Soldier  Center,  the local Emergency  Medical  
Services  (EMS)  will be contacted  immediately  by dialing  5911.  The installation  security personnel  will direct  
the ambulance to the proper  location  on the installation.  While  awaiting  their arrival,  Basic  Life Support  will 
be rendered by study  personnel  or on-site medical  coverage.  EMS  response time to USARIEM  is 
approximately  5 minutes.  Transport  time to definitive  care is approximately  8 minutes.  
 
       C8.3   Adverse  device effects  
 
     N/A 
        C8.4   FDA -regulated research  under  IND and IDE 
The investigation is not intended to be reported  to the FDA as a well-controlled study  in support  of a 
new indication of use or any other  significant  labeling  or advertising for the drug.  The investigation  will 
be conducted  in compliance with the requirements  for institutional  review  per 21 CFR Part 56 and the 
requirements  for informed  consent  per 21 CFR Part 50. The drug will not be promoted  as safe or 
effective  and the study  will be conducted in compliance with 21 CFR Part 312.7.   
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  25 of 26  
 
  
SECTION  D:  REFERENCES
 
 
1. Bradbury  KE, Berryman CE, Wilson  MA, Luippold  AJ, Kenefick  RW, Young AJ, Pasiakos  SM. Effects  of 
carbohydrate  supplementation on aerobic  exercise  performance  during acute high altitude  exposur e and after 22 
days  of acclimatization  and energy  deficit.  J Int Soc Sports  Nutr 2020;17(1):4.  doi: 10.1186/s12970- 020-0335- 2. 
2. Pasiakos  SM, Karl JP, Margolis  LM. Challenging traditional  carbohydrate intake recommendations  for optimizing 
performance at high altitude.  Curr Opin  Clin Nutr Metab Care 2021;24(6):483- 9. doi: 
10.1097/MCO.0000000000000782.  
3. Margolis  LM, Wilson  MA, Whitney  CC, Carrigan CT, Murphy  NE, Radcliffe  PN, Gwin  JA, Church DD, Wolfe  RR, 
Ferrando AA, et al. Acute  hypoxia reduces  exogenous  glucose oxidation,  glucose turnover,  and metabolic  
clearance  rate during steady -state  aerobic  exercise.  Metabolism 2020;103:154030.  doi: 
10.1016/j.metabol.2019.154030.  
4. Young AJ, Berryman CE, Kenefick  RW, Derosier  AN, Margolis  LM, Wilson  MA, Carrigan  CT, Murphy  NE, 
Carbone JW, Rood JC, et al. Altitude  Acclimatization  Alleviates  the Hypoxia- Induced Suppression of Exogenous  
Glucose Oxidation During  Steady -State  Aerobic  Exercise.  Front  Physiol  2018;9:830.  doi: 
10.3389/fphys.2018.00830.  
5. Peronnet  F, Massic otte D, Folch  N, Melin  B, Koulmann N, Jimenez  C, Bourdon L, Launay  JC, Savourey  G. 
Substrate utilization  during prolonged exercise  with ingestion  of (13)C -glucose in acute hypobaric  hypoxia  (4,300 
m). Eur J Appl Physiol  2006;97(5):527- 34. doi: 10.1007/s004 21-006-0164- 2 [doi].  
6. O'Hara JP, Duckworth L, Black  A, Woods  DR, Mellor  A, Boos  C, Gallagher  L, Tsakirides  C, Arjomandkhah NC, 
Morrison DJ, et al. Fuel Use During Exercise  At Altitude  In Women With Glucose- Fructose Ingestion.  Med Sci 
Sports  Exerc  2019.  doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000002072.  
7. O'Hara JP, Woods  DR, Mellor  A, Boos  C, Gallagher  L, Tsakirides  C, Arjomandkhah NC, Holdsworth DA, Cooke 
CB, Morrison DJ, et al. A comparison of substrate oxidation during prolonged exercise in men at terrestrial  altitude  
and normobaric  normoxia following the coingestion of 13C glucose and 13C fructose.  Physiol  Rep 2017;5(1).  doi: 
10.14814/phy2.13101.  
8. Wajngot  A, Roovete A, Vranic  M, Luft R, Efendic  S. Insulin  resistance  and decreased insulin  response to glucose 
in lean type 2 diabetics.  Proc Natl Acad  Sci U S A 1982;79(14):4432- 6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.79.14.4432.  
9. Scalzo  RL, Paris  HL, Binns  SE, Davis  JL, Beals  JW, Melby  CL, Luckasen GJ, Hickey  MS, Miller  BF, Hamilton  KL, 
et al. Ergogenic  properties  of metformin in simulated high altitude.  Clin Exp Pharmacol  Physiol  2017;44(7):729-
38. doi: 10.1111/1440- 1681.12761.  
10. Hill GW, Gillum  TL, Lee BJ, Romano PA, Schall  ZJ, Kuennen MR. Reduced  inflammatory  and phagocytotic  
responses  following normobaric  hypoxia exercise  despite  evidence supporting  greater  immune challenge.  Applied  
Physiology,  Nutrition,  and Metabolism 2020;45(6):628 -40. doi: 10.1139/apnm- 2019 -0657.  
11. Hill GW, Gillum  TL, Lee BJ, Romano PA, Schall  ZJ, Hamilton AM, Kuennen  MR. Prolonged  treadmill  running in 
normobaric  hypoxia causes  gastrointestinal  barrier  permeability  and elevates  circulating  levels  of pro- and anti-
inflammatory  cytokines.  Appl Physiol  Nutr Metab 2020;45(4):376- 86. doi: 10.1139/apnm- 2019- 0378.  
12. Salminen  A, Hyttinen JM, Kaarni ranta K. AMP- activated  protein kinase  inhibits  NF-kappaB  signaling  and 
inflammation:  impact  on healthspan and lifespan.  J Mol Med (Berl) 2011;89(7):667 -76. doi: 10.1007/s00109- 011-
0748- 0. 
13. Yang  H, Zhang W, Pan H, Feldser  HG, Lainez  E, Miller  C, Leung S, Zhong  Z, Zhao H, Sweitzer  S, et al. SIRT1  
activators  suppress  inflammatory  responses  through promotion of p65 deacetylation  and inhibition of NF-kappaB  
activity.  PLoS One 2012;7(9):e46364.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046364.  
14. Zhang WY, Schwartz  EA, Permana PA, Reaven  PD. Pioglitazone inhibits  the expression of inflammatory  
cytokines  from both monocytes  and lymphocytes  in patients  with impaired glucose tolerance.  Arterioscler  Thromb 
Vasc  Biol 2008;28(12):2312- 8. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.175687.  
15. Colett a DK, Sriwijitkamol A, Wajcberg E, Tantiwong P, Li M, Prentki  M, Madiraju M, Jenkinson CP, Cersosimo  E, 
Musi  N, et al. Pioglitazone  stimulates  AMP- activated protein  kinase  signalling and increases  the expression of 
genes  involved  in adiponectin signalling,  mitochondrial  function and fat oxidation  in human skeletal  muscle in vivo: 
a randomised trial. Diabetologia 2009;52(4):723- 32. doi: 10.1007/s00125- 008-1256- 9. 
16. Zhang J, Zou Y, Cheng- Jing Y, Xiang -Heng L, Wang  XP, Yu XJ, Li GS, Wang  J. Pioglitazone alleviates  cisplatin  
nephrotoxicity  by suppressing mitochondria- mediated apoptosis  via SIRT1/p53 signalling.  J Cell Mol Med 
2020;24(20):11718- 28. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.15782.  
17. Fernandez -Real JM, McClain  D, Manco M. Mechanisms  Linking Glucose Homeostasis  and Iron Metabolism  
Toward the Onset  and Progression of Type 2 Diabetes.  Diabetes  Care 2015;38(11):2169- 76. doi: 10.2337/dc14-
3082.  
Protocol  Title:   Effects  off Pioglitazone on Exogenous  Carbohydrate Oxidation  during Steady -State  Exercise  at High Altitude  
Date:   24 April 2023 
 
HQ USAMRDC IRB Research Protocol  Template v_21 SEPTEMBER  2020                                                                                                                                              Page  26 of 26 18. Nam H, Jones  D, Cooksey  RC, Gao Y, Sink S, Cox J, McClain  DA. Synergistic  Inhibitory  Effects  of Hypoxia  and 
Iron Deficiency  on Hepatic  Glucose Response in Mouse Liver.  Diabetes  2016;65(6):1521- 33. doi: 10.2337/db15-
0580.  
19. Urakami -Takebayashi  Y, Kuroda Y, Murata T, Miyazaki  M, Nagai  J. Pioglitazone induces  hypoxia- inducible  factor  
1 activation  in human renal  proximal tubular  epithelial  cell line HK-2. Biochem Biophys  Res Commun 
2018;503(3):1682- 8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.07.099.  
20. Orasanu G, Ziouzenkova  O, Devchand PR, Nehra V, Hamdy  O, Horton ES, Plutzky  J. The peroxisome 
proliferator -activated receptor -gamma agonist  pioglitazone represses  inflammation  in a peroxisome proliferator -
activated receptor -alpha- dependent  manner  in vitro and in vivo in mice.  J Am Coll Cardiol  2008;52(10):869- 81. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.04.055.  
21. Lohman TG, Harris  M, Teixeira  PJ, Weiss L. Assessing  body  composition and changes  in body  composition.  
Another  look at dual-energy  X-ray absorptiometry.  Ann N Y Acad  Sci 2000;904:45- 54. 
22. Young AJ, Cymerman A, Burse RL. The influence  of cardiorespiratory  fitness  on the decrement  in maxima l 
aerobic  power  at high altitude.  Eur J Appl Physiol  Occup Physiol  1985;54(1):12- 5. 
23. Miyazaki  Y, Matsuda M, DeFronzo RA. Dose- response  effect  of pioglitazone on insulin  sensitivity  and insulin  
secretion in type 2 diabetes.  Diabetes  Care 2002;25(3):517- 23. doi: 10.2337/diacare.25.3.517.  
24. Kim IY, Schutzler  SE, Azhar  G, Wolfe  RR, Ferrando AA, Coker  RH. Short  term elevation in dietary  protein intake 
does  not worsen insulin resistance or lipids  in older  adults  with metabolic  syndrome:  a randomized- controll ed trial. 
BMC  Nutr 2017;3.  doi: 10.1186/s40795- 017-0152- 4. 
25. Kim IY, Williams  RH, Schutzler  SE, Lasley  CJ, Bodenner  DL, Wolfe  RR, Coker  RH. Acute  lysine  supplementation 
does  not improve hepatic  or peripheral  insulin sensitivity  in older,  overweight  individuals.  Nutr Metab (Lond)  
2014;11(1):49.  doi: 10.1186/1743- 7075- 11-49. 
26. Wolfe  RR, Chinkes  DL. Isotope tracers  in metabolic  research:  principles  and practice of kinetic  analysis:  John  
Wiley  & Sons,  2005.  
27. Jeukendrup AE, Wallis  GA. Measurement  of subst rate oxidation during  exercise  by means  of gas exchange 
measurements.  Int J Sports  Med 2005;26 Suppl  1:S28- 37. doi: 10.1055/s -2004- 830512.  
28. Pallikarakis  N, Sphiris  N, Lefebvre P. Influence of the bicarbonate pool and on the occurrence of 13CO2 in 
exhaled  air. Eur J Appl Physiol  Occup  Physiol  1991;63(3- 4):179- 83. 
 
 
      
 
 
SECTION  E:  ABBREVIATIONS  AND ACRONYMS  
 
U.S. Army  Research Institute  of Environmental  Medicine;  USARIEM,  LC-Tandem  Mass  Spectrometer;  LC-
MS/MS,  Isotope Ratio  Mass  Spectrometer;  IRMS,  Pennington  Biomedical  Research Center;  PBRC,  College  of 
American Pathologists;  CAP,  High Altitude;  HA, Sea Level;  SL, Placebo;  PLA,  Glucose  Rate  of Appearance;  
Ra, Glucose Rate  of Disappearance;  Rd. Metabolic  Clearance Rate;  MCR,  Multi- Domain  Operations;  MDO,  
Modular  Ration  Enhancement  Operations  HA; MORE -HA, Pioglitazone;  PIO, Biomedical  Performance  
Enhancement;  BPE,  Delegation of Authority;  DOA,  Dual Energy  X-ray Absorptiometry;  DEXA,  Peak  Oxygen 
Uptake;  VO 2peak, Identification;  ID, Human Research Volunteer;  HRV,  Solider  and Squad Optimization and 
Integration Team;  SSO -IT, Office  of Medical  Support  and Oversight;  OMSO,  Acute  Mountain Sickness;  AMS,  
High Altitude  Peripheral  Edema;  HAPE,  High Altitude  Cerebral  Edema;  HACE  
 
      
 
SECTION  F: DoD PRIVACY  RULE  AND PROTECTED  HEALTH  INFORMATION (HIPAA)  
  NA – will not use or disclose  protected  health  information
 