  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 SYNOPSIS 5
2 INTRODUCTION 8
2.1 BACKGROUND AND R ATIONALE 8
2.2 BENEFITS AND RISKS TO S UBJECTS 9
3 OBJECTIVES AND ENDPO INTS 10
3.1 OBJECTIVES , HYPOTHESES ,AND ESTIMANDS 10
3.2 PRIMARY ENDPOINT 10
3.3 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS 11
3.4 ADDITIONAL ENDPOINTS 11
3.5 SAFETY ENDPOINTS 12
3.6 PHARMACOKINETIC ENDPOINTS 12
3.7 BIOMARKER RESEARCH ENDPOINTS 12
3.8 EXPLORATORY AND /OR VALIDATION RESEARCH 12
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 13
4.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 13
4.2 DISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN 15
5 STUDY ACTIVITIES 16
5.1 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 16
5.2 CONTRACEPTION RECOMMENDATIONS 20
5.3 PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND T HERAPY 21
5.4 PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT T HERAPY 25
5.5 WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS AND DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY 26
5.6 FOLLOW -UP AFTER SUBJECT DISCONTINUATION 27
5.7 STUDY DRUG 27
5.8 RANDOMIZATION/D RUG ASSIGNMENT 28
5.9 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 29
6 SAFETY CONSIDERATION S 30
6.1 COMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 30
Page 2 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.2 TOXICITY MANAGEMENT 34
6.3 INDEPENDENT DATA MONITORING COMMITTEE 37
7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF S AMPLE SIZE 37
7.1 STATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 37
7.2 DEFINITION FOR ANALYSIS POPULATIONS 37
7.3 HANDLING POTENTIAL INTERCURRENT E VENTS FOR THE PRIMARY ENDPOINT 37
7.4 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 38
7.5 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 39
7.6 INTERIM ANALYSIS 39
7.7 OVERALL TYPE I ERROR CONTROL 39
7.8 SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION 39
8 ETHICS 39
8.1 INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE /INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD 39
8.2 ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE S TUDY 40
8.3 SUBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 40
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM COMPLETION 40
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURAN CE 40
11 COMPLETION OF THE ST UDY 41
12 REFERENCES 41
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. EXAMPLES OF COMMONLY USED STRONG CYP3A I NHIBITORS AND INDUCE RS 25
TABLE 2. DESCRIPTI ON OF STUDY DRUG 28
TABLE 3. SPECIFIC TOXICITY MA NAGEMENT GUIDELINES FOR ABNORMAL LABORAT ORY VALUES 35
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. STUDY SCHEMATIC 14
Page 3 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY -SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS 43
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 47
APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES 48
APPENDIX D. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE 49
APPENDIX E. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES 54
APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL 59
Page 4 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Why Is This Study Being Conducted?
Vitiligo is a common chronic autoimmune disorder of the skin characterized by depigmented skin lesions 
due to autoimmune -induced loss of melanocytes in the epidermis.1  The disease is associated with an 
impaired q uality of life (QoL).2  There is no approved medical therapy for vitiligo re -pigmentation and 
current unapproved therapies have limited efficacy, emphasizing the need for improved treatment 
options.
The disease most commonly presents as white macu les and patches of skin with equal impact on men 
and women.3  Vitiligo manifests as milky -white patches of pigment loss due to localized melanocyte 
destruction.  Early depigmentation typically occurs on the face and extremities.  In 2011, an 
international consensus classified vitiligo into segmental vitiligo and non -segmental vitiligo (NSV), with 
the majority of patients (> 90%) exhibiting the non -segmental variant.4  Segmental vitiligo refers to 
depigmented macules and pa tches distributed in a segmental or unilateral pattern, whereas NSV lesions 
are distributed bilaterally.4  In general, the term vitiligo is being used to describe all forms of NSV, which 
includes acrofacial, mucosal, generalized, universal, mixed, and rare variants.
The global prevalence of vitiligo is approximately 0.5% to 2%, and patients with vitiligo often have 
psychological and autoimmune comorbidities.2,5,6  Vitiligo has been associated with several 
auto -immune diseases such as thyroid disease (Hashimoto thyroiditis), psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), alopecia areata, pernici ous anemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, and diabetes mellitus.  It has 
also been associated with inflammatory bowel disease and sometimes ocular and audiological 
abnormalities.7,8  Although patients with vitiligo have a decreased risk of melanoma and non -melanoma 
skin cancer (NMSC),9,10clinical practice recommends constant use of sunscreen due to the risks of 
sunburn from direct sunlight on depigmented skin.  Overall, the effect of vitiligo o n QoL impairment 
seem to be associated with the distribution of vitiligo lesions (e.g., face, genital area) but also by the 
extent of the disease, highlighting the unmet need of effective systemic therapies.
There are few treatment options for vitiligo and these have limited efficacy.  Thus, there is a lack of 
options for patients with vitiligo, particularly those with severe manifestation of the disease, given the 
limited response to currently available topical and systemic therapies.
Impairment or death o f melanocytes is believed to be the direct cause of vitiligo.  Melanocytes produce 
the pigment melanin, which colors the skin and provides protection from UV radiation.  While several 
theories describe vitiligo pathogenesis, the exact etiology is unknown. The autoimmune theory 
hypothesizes that interferon (IFN) -y is an important cytokine expressed in lesional skin and is required 
for the recruitment of melanocyte -specific, autoreactive CD8+ T cells to the skin via the chemokines 
CXCL9/10 and CXCR3.11,12  Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells are both necessary and sufficient for melanocyte 
destruction in the skin of vitiligo patients and therefore serve as the effector arm driving the 
autoimmunity of vitiligo.  The Janus kinase (JAK)/Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription 
(STAT) pathway is therefore an attractive therapeutic target due to its direct effect on IFN -y and CXCL10 
levels.
Page 8 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Evidence suggests that inhibition of JAK -mediated pathwa ys may be a promising approach for the 
treatment of patients with vitiligo.13  Ruxoliti nib (a JAK1/2 inhibitor), in a topical formulation, has 
demonstrated efficacy in treating patients with vitiligo in a Phase 2 study14and is currently enrolling 
patients in two Phase 3 studies.15,16  AbbVie developed a J AK inhibitor, upadacitinib, which, when given 
systemically may address the current needs for patients with vitiligo.  Upadacitinib is a selective and 
reversible inhibitor of JAK1 that recently has received approval for the treatment of RA, psoriatic 
arthri tis (PsA), and ankylosing spondylitis (AS) in some countries and is also being developed for the 
treatment of other immune -mediated inflammatory diseases, including dermatologic conditions such as 
atopic dermatitis (AD) and hidradenitis suppurativa.
Clinic al Hypothesis
Vitiligo is a chronic autoimmune disorder of the skin characterized by an increase of proinflammatory 
cytokines involved in the JAK/STAT pathway.  Upadacitinib is predicted to provide better efficacy 
compared to placebo and to be well tolerat ed in vitiligo subjects.
2.2 Benefits and Risks to Subjects
Currently there are no approved medical therapies for skin re -pigmentation for patients with vitiligo and 
current unapproved therapies such as topical corticosteroids and calcineurin inhibitors have l imited 
efficacy, indicating that there is a high unmet need.  Phototherapy is one of the most common therapies 
used for vitiligo; nonetheless, treatment can be burdensome to patients as it requires multiple and 
frequent visits to the office or home therapy and is associated with a high relapse rate within the first 
year upon discontinuation (average 40%), highlighting the need for long -lasting therapies.17
At this time, patients with significant vitiligo, including patients with rapidly progressive disease, are 
commonly treated with oral steroids which are not suitable for long -term use.
The efficacy of upadacitinib has shown promising results in various immune -mediated diseases including 
dermatologic conditions such as AD.18
Adverse events (AEs) such as infections, herpes zoster reactivation, malignancies, and hematologic AEs 
have been observed in patients receiving JAK inhibitors including upadacitinib.  The available long -term 
safety data from the Phase 3 RA studies with upadac itinib showed an increased risk of infection 
including opportunistic infections (e.g., mucosal candida infections) and herpes zoster, as well as 
abnormal laboratory changes have been observed (e.g., elevations of serum transaminases, lipids, 
creatine phosp hokinase [CPK], and reductions in hemoglobin and white blood cells [WBCs]) with 
upadacitinib therapy.  The incidence rates of other clinically important AEs such as cardiovascular 
events, malignancies, and mortality reported during the RA studies were with in the expected range for 
the general population or for a population of patients with moderately to severely active RA.19  Events of 
deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism have been reported in patients receiving JAK 
inhibitors including upadacitinib.  Similar findings of these important AEs were also observed in the 
clinical studies for other indications including PsA and AD.  AEs of acne have been observed more 
frequently with upadacitinib treatment versus placebo in Phase 3 PsA and AD studies.
The results of genetic toxicology testing indicate that upadac itinib is not genotoxic; however, 
upadacitinib is teratogenic based on animal studies, which necessitates avoidance of pregnancy in 
Page 9 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.females of childbearing potential.  Based on the calculated safety margins for human fetal exposure with 
seminal fluid trans fer, there is judged to be no risk to the pregnancy of female partners of male subjects 
who are treated with upadacitinib.
A detailed discussion of the pre -clinical and clinical toxicology, metabolism, pharmacology, and safety 
experience with upadacitinib can be found in the current Investigator 's Brochure.19
Taken to gether, the safety and efficacy data from upadacitinib studies to date show a favorable 
benefit:risk profile for upadacitinib and support the continued investigation of upadacitinib in patients 
with various immune -mediated inflammatory conditions including vitiligo.
In view of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) pandemic, the benefit:risk profile of various 
immunomodulatory therapies on COVID -19 is being evaluated.  At this time, the effects of upadacitinib 
on the course of COVID -19 are not well defined .
3OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
3.1 Objectives, Hypotheses, and Estimands
Primary
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the safety and efficacy of upadacitinib for the 
treatment of adult subjects with NSV.
The primary efficacy objective is based on the percent change from Baseline in Facial Vitiligo Area 
Scoring Index (F -VASI) at Week 24 with upadacitinib treatment compared to placebo in the 
Intent -to-Treat (ITT) Population, which consists of all randomized subjects (Section 7.2).
The hypothesis corresponding to the primary endpoint (Section 3.2)is:
Percent change from Baseline in F -VASI with upadacitinib is greater than that with placebo at 
Week 24.
The estimand corresponding to the primary endpoint is defined as:
Difference in the percent change from Baseline in F -VASI at Week 24, regardless of treatment 
discontinuation, between each of the upadacitinib dose groups compared with placebo in the 
ITT Population.
3.2 Primary Endpoint
The primary endpoint is the percent change from Baseline in F -VASI at Week 24.
Page 10 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.3 Secondary Endpoints
Secondary Endpoints
1.Achievement of F -VASI 75 ( ≥ 75% improvement in F -VASI from Baseline) at Week 24;
2.Achievement of F -VASI 50 ( ≥ 50% improvement in F -VASI from Baseline) at Week 24;
3.Achievement of total Vitiligo Area Scoring Index (T -VASI) 50 (≥ 50% improvement in T -VASI from
Baseline) at Week 24;
4.Percent change from Baseline in T -VASI at Week 24;
5.Change from Baseline in the vitiligo quality -of-life (VitiQoL) instrument total score at Week 24.
3.4 Additional Endpoints
Additional Efficacy Endpoints include the primary and all seco ndary endpoints assessed at visits as noted 
in the Activity Schedule (Appendix D), other than Week 24.  Additional Efficacy Endpoints also include 
the following measurements assessed at visits as specified in the Activity Schedule :
Achievement of F -VASI 90 ( ≥ 90% improvement in F -VASI from Baseline);
Achievement of T -VASI 75 ( ≥ 75% improvement in T -VASI from Baseline);
Achievement of T -VASI 90 ( ≥ 90% i mprovement in T -VASI from Baseline);
Mean and percent change from Baseline in the vitiligo extent score (VES);
Achievement of vitiligo noticeability scale (VNS) score of "A lot less noticeable (4) "or "No longer 
noticeable (5) ";
Dermatology Life Quality In dex (DLQI) total score of "0"or "1";
Change from Baseline in the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) scores;
Proportion of subjects selecting each of the response categories of VitiQoL 16 questions;
Achievement of Physician 's Global Impression of Change -Vitiligo (PhGIC -V) of "Much better (1) "
or "A little better (2) ";
Achievement of Patient 's Global Impression of Change -Vitiligo (PaGIC -V) of "Much better (1) "or 
"A little better (2) ";
Achievement of Face –Physician Global Vi tiligo Assessment (F -PhGVA) of "No depigmentation 
(0)"or "Limited extent of depigmentation (1) ";
Achievement of Total –Physician Global Vitiligo Assessment (T -PhGVA) of "No depigmentation 
(0)"or "Limited extent of depigmentation (1) ";
Achievement of Face –Patient Global Vitiligo Assessment ( F-PaGVA) of "No depigmentation (0) "
or "Limited extent of depigmentation (1) ";
Achievement of Total –Patient Global Vitiligo Assessment (T-PaGVA) of "No depigmentation (0) "
or "Limited extent of depigmentation (1). "
Page 11 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Details on efficacy variables are provided in the operations manual (Appendix F).
3.5 Safety Endpoints
Safety evaluations include AEs, serious adverse events (SAEs), adverse events of special interest (AESIs), 
AEs leading to discontinuation, vital signs, laboratory tests (hem atology, chemistry, liver function tests), 
and physical examination.
3.6 Pharmacokinetic Endpoints
Pharmacokinetic (PK) samples will be obtained at specified clinic visits as noted in Appendix D.  
Upadacitinib plasma concentrations will be determined and summarized in the clinical study report.  In 
addition, a nonlinear mixed- effects modeling approach may be used to estimate the population central 
values a nd the empirical Bayesian estimates of the individual values of upadacitinib PK parameters (e.g., 
oral clearance [CL/F] and apparent volume of distribution [V/F]).  Data from this study may be combined 
with data from other studies for the population PK ana lyses.
3.7 Biomarker Research Endpoints
Optional samples for biomarker research (e.g., whole blood, plasma, serum, and skin biopsies) will be 
collected at specified time points (Activity Schedule, Appendix D) throughout the study to evaluate 
known and/or novel disease -related or drug -related biomarkers in circulation or at tissue sites.  Types of 
biomarkers may include nucleic acids, proteins, cell populati ons, lipids, and/or metabolites, either free 
or in association with particular cell types.  The analyses may include but are not limited to soluble 
proteins, genomic transcripts, blood leukocyte populations, and genetic analysis to evaluate biomarker 
endpo ints related to safety, disease state, and target pathway.  Results from this optional biomarker 
research may not be included in the clinical study report.  Further details regarding the biomarker 
research rationale and collection time points are located i n the operations manual, Appendix F, 
Section 3.12.
3.8 Exploratory and/or Validation Research
Digital Imaging
Validation of a 3 -D digital imaging tool will be explored at a subset of sites to objectively quantify the 
surface area of vitiligo lesions (depigmentation) on the face with precision. Approximately 5sites will be 
selected to participate in the digital imaging research. Once the digital imaging platform is available for 
implement ation at the selected sites, all subjects enrolled thereafter will be required to participate. The 
results from these analyses are exploratory in nature and may not be included with the clinical study 
report.
Individual Component Vitiligo Assessment (ICVA)
The ICVA will be used to collect exploratory information regarding vitiligo involvement on the genitals 
and individual components of the face using 2 assessments:  Physician Global Vitiligo Assessment 
Page 12 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.(PhGVA) and how mu ch vitiligo lesions are bothersome to subjects.  The results from these analyses are 
exploratory in nature and may not be included with the clinical study report.
4INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan
This is a Phase 2, multicenter, randomized , double -blinded, parallel -group, placebo -controlled 
dose -ranging study that will evaluate the safety and efficacy of upadacitinib in adult subjects ≥ 18 to 
65years of age with NSV.  The study is comprised of a 35 -day Screening Period, a 24 -week double -blind 
treatment period (Period 1), a 28 -week blinded long -term extension (Period 2), and a 30 -day Follow -up 
Period.
Subjects who meet eligibility criteria at Baseline will be randomized in a 2:2:2:1:1 ratio to one of five 
treatment groups:
Group 1:  upadacit inib 22 mg once daily (QD) (N = 40) (Period 1) → upadaci nib 22 mg QD 
(Period 2)
Group 2:  upadacitinib 11 mg QD (N = 40) (Period 1) → upadaci nib 11mg QD (Period 2)
Group 3:  upadacitinib 6 mg QD (N = 40) (Period 1) → upadaci nib 6 mg QD (Period 2)
Group 4:  placebo (N = 20) (Period 1) → upadaci nib 22 mg QD (Period 2)
Group 5:  placebo (N = 20) (Period 1) → upadaci nib 11 mg QD (Period 2)
At Week 24, subjects who were randomized to placebo at Baseline will be switched to either 22 mg 
(Group 4) or 11 mg (Group 5) upadacitinib in a blinded fashion per pre -specified randomization 
assignments.
The AbbVie study team will be unblinded to perform the Week 24 primary analysis.  The unblinding will 
take place after all subjects have completed the Week 24 visi t or have prematurely discontinued prior to 
Week 24.  Sites and subjects will remain blinded throughout the study.
Information on the Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) is described in Section 6.3.  Information on the 
Cardiovascular Adjudication Committee (CAC) and gastrointestinal (GI) perforation adjudication are 
described in Section 6.1.
See Section 5.1for information regarding eligibility criteria and Section 5.8for information on 
stratification.
The schematic of the study is shown in Figure 1.  Further details regarding study procedures are located 
in the operations manual (Appendix F).
Page 13 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Figure 1. Study Schematic
BL = Baseline; F -VASI = Facial Vitiligo Area Scoring Index; PBO = placebo; QD = once daily; UPA = upadacitinib
Page 14 of 125 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
   
            
          
          
            
      
          
   
      
  
      
   
 
    
 
  
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.4.2 Discussion of Study Design
Choice of Control Group
Placebo control will be used in this study.  Comparative studies utilizing a double -blind, 
placebo -controlled design provides an unbiased assessment of the efficacy and safety profile of 
upadacitinib.
Appropriateness of Measurements
Standard statisti cal, clinical, and laboratory procedures will be utilized in this study.  All efficacy 
measurements in this study are for assessing disease activity and patient -reported outcomes in subjects 
with vitiligo.  All safety -related clinical and laboratory procedures in this study are standard and 
generally accepted.
Care should be taken to minimize the pain and discomfort of laboratory procedures.  Use of a butterfly 
needle for venipuncture and/or a needle gauge appropriate for vein size may optimize the comfort for 
some individuals.  Attempts at venipuncture should be limited to the subject 's tolerance of the 
procedure; after more than 2 unsuccessful attempts for venipuncture, consider requesting the subject 
to return within the next 3 days if still within the vi sit window and after drinking plenty of fluids (1 L to 
2L over a 24 -hour period).
Suitability of Subject Population
The intended study population is adult subjects ≥ 18 to 65 years of age with NSV.  Subjects with 
documented clinical diagnosis of NSV and n o segmental or localized vitiligo are eligible for this study.  At 
study entry, eligible subjects must have at least 0.5F-VASI and at least 5 T -VASI.  Criteria relating to 
safety have been selected to allow subjects to be safely enrolled and treated with upadacitinib based on 
the current knowledge of this drug.
Selection of Doses in the Study
This study is designed as a dose -ranging study to evaluate upadacitinib doses of 6 mg, 11 mg, and 22 mg 
QD in adult subjects with vitiligo.  These doses were selected to provide comprehensive dose -ranging 
information in patients with vitiligo through evaluation of upadacitinib doses that have not been studied 
in other upadacitinib indications (e.g., RA, PsA, AS, and AD).
Patients with vitiligo generally present with a clinically (and biologically) different disease profile 
compared to previously studied indications for upadacitinib.  Although vitiligo significantly impairs QoL, 
it is generally considered an asymptomatic dermatosis (some patients may suffer from skin 
irritation/itching), and is usually associated with lower comorbidities, minimal background and 
concomitant therapies, and less heterogeneous signs and symptoms of the disease.  Hence, the 
upadacitinib dose(s) that may provide optimal benefit risk in patients with vitiligo are yet to be 
determined and may occur at dose levels that have not been previously explored for other indications.
Upadacitinib 15 mg QD and 30 mg QD doses showed significant clinical benefit for treatment of subjects 
with RA, PsA, AS, and AD in Phase 3 studies, with an added clinical benefit of 30 mg compared to 15 mg 
for some (e.g., AD) but not all (e.g., RA, PsA) indications.
Page 15 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Two case studies have reported partial re -pigmentation of vitiligo white patches after administration of 
tofacitin ib, a pan JAK -inhibitor, at a 5 mg twice a day dose together with narrowband UV -B therapy.20  
Although the observed response in these 2 case studies was achieved with a combination of tofacitinib 
and phototherapy, the findings suggest that JAK inhibition with dose levels comparable to efficacious 
doses in RA and PsA populations may provide clini cal efficacy in patients with vitiligo.  Whether lower or 
higher doses could provide similar or higher efficacy, respectively, remains unclear and requires more 
data from adequate dose -ranging studies in patients with vitiligo.
Hence, upadacitinib doses of 11 mg and 22 mg have been selected to allow evaluation of upadacitinib 
exposure levels below and above the 15 mg dose, respectively, that have not been evaluated in other 
indications.  The proposed 11 mg and 22 mg doses are expected to provide upadacitini b exposures that 
partially overlap with those achieved with the 15 mg dose, but at the same time provide enough 
separation between the doses to enable adequate characterization of the dose/exposure -response 
relationship.  The 6 mg dose was selected to ensure characterization of the minimally efficacious dose in 
the vitiligo patient population.
5STUDY ACTIVITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria in order to be included in the study.  Anything other than 
a positive response to the questions below will result in exclusion from study participation.
Consent
1.Subject must be able to understand and willing to adhere to all protocol requirements and 
voluntarily sign and date an informed consent , approved by an Inde pendent Ethics Committee 
(IEC)/Institutional Review Board (IRB), prior to the initiation of any screening or study -specific 
procedures.
Demographics
2.Adult (male or female ) ≥18 to 65 years of age.
Disease/Cond ition Activity
3.Documented clinical diagnosis of NSV.
4.At Screening and Baseline visits, subjects must have ≥ 0.5 F -VASI AND ≥ 5 T -VASI.
5.No segmental or localized vitiligo.
Laboratory Assessments
6.Laboratory values meeting the following criteria within the Screening Period prior to the 
first dose of s tudy drug:
Page 16 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Serum aspartate transaminase (AST) ≤ 2 × upper limit of normal (ULN); 
Serum alanine transaminase (ALT) ≤ 2 × ULN;
Estimated glomerular filtration rate ≥ 30 mL/min/1.73 m2by simplified 4 -variable 
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) for mula;
Total WBC count ≥ 2,500/ μL;
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1,200/ μL;
Platelet count ≥ 100,000/ μL;
Absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) ≥ 750/ μL;
Hemoglobin ≥ 9 g/dL.
Subject History
7.Subject sarejudged to be in good health as determined by the Principal Investigator, based 
upon the results of medical history, laboratory profile, physical examination, chest x -ray (CXR), 
and a 12- lead electrocardiogram (ECG) performed during Screening.
8.Subject smust not have a history of clinically significant (per investigator judgment) drug or 
alcohol abuse within the last 6 months.  (Note:  Do not perform urine drug screen at Baseline 
Visit).
9.Subject s must have no current or past history of the following:
Two or more episodes of herpes zoster, or one or more episodes of disseminated herpes 
zoster;
One or more episodes of disseminated herpes simplex ( including eczema herpeticum/Kaposi 
varicelliform eruption);
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, defined as confirmed positive anti -HIV 
antibody (HIV Ab) test; 
Active tuberculosis (TB) or meet TB exclusionary parameters (specific requirements for TB 
testing are provided in the operations manual);
Positive result of beta-D- glucan (screening for pneumocystis jirovecii infection) or 
2consecutive indeterminate results of beta -D-glucan during the Screening Period (for 
subjects in Japan only);
Active i nfection(s) requiring treatment with intravenous anti -infectives within 30 days, or 
oral/intramuscular (IM) anti -infectives within 14 days prior to the Baseline Visit;
Chronic recurring infection and/or active viral infection that, based on the investigato r's 
clinical assessment, makes the subject an unsuitable candidate for the study;
Confirmed COVID -19:  The Baseline Visit must be at least 14 days from onset of 
signs/symptoms or positive SARS- CoV-2 test; symptomatic subjects must have recovered, 
defined a s resolution of fever without use of antipyretics and improvement in symptoms;
Page 17 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Suspected COVID -19:  Subjects with signs/symptoms suggestive of COVID -19, known 
exposure, or high risk behavior should undergo molecular (e.g., polymerase chain reaction 
[PCR]) testing to rule out SARS- CoV-2 infection or must be asymptomatic for 14 days from a 
potential exposure.
10.Subjects must not have evidence of:
Hepatitis B virus (HBV):  hepatitis B surface antigen positive (+) test or detectable HBV DNA 
PCR qualitative test for subjects who are hepatitis B core antibody (HBc Ab) positive (+)(and 
for hepatitis B surface antibody [HBs Ab] positive [+] subjects where mandated by local 
requirements); 
Hepatitis C virus (HCV):  detectabl e HCV RNA in any subject with anti -HCV Ab.
11.Subjects must not have any of the following medical diseases or disorders:
Recent (within past 6 months) cerebrovascular accident, myocardial infarction, coronary 
stenting, and aorto -coronary bypass surgery;
History of an organ transplant which requires continued immunosuppression;
History of GI perforation (other than due to appendicitis or mechanical injury), diverticulitis, 
or significantly increased risk for GI perforation per investigator judgment;
Conditions that could interfere with drug absorption including but not limited to short 
bowel syndrome or gastric bypass surgery; subjects with a history of gastric 
banding/segmentation are not excluded;
History of malignancy except for successfully treated NMSC or localized carcinoma in situ of 
the cervix;
Uncontrolled thyroid disease;
Other skin conditions that would interfere with evaluation of vitiligo;
> 33% leukotrichia on the face or > 33% leukotrichia on the body (including face).
12.There must be no reason the investigator believes that the subject is an unsuitable 
candidate to participate in the study, receive study drug, or would be placed at risk by 
participating in the study.
Contraception
13.For all females of child -bearing potential:  must not have a positive serum pregnancy test at 
the Screening Visit and must have a negative urine pregnancy test at Baseline prior to th e first 
dose of study drug (local practices may require serum pregnancy testing at Baseline).  Subjects 
with a borderline serum pregnancy test at Screening must have absence of clinical suspicion of 
pregnancy or other pathological causes of borderline resu lts and a serum pregnancy 
test ≥ 3days later to document continued lack of a positive result (unless prohibited by local 
requirements).
Page 18 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.14.Female subjects of childbearing potential must practice at least 1 protoco l-specified method 
of birth control that is effective from Study Day 1 through at least 30 days after the last dose of 
study drug (local practices may require 2 methods of birth control) (refer to Section 5.2for more 
details on contraception) .  Female subjects of non- childbearing potential do not need to use 
birth control.
15.Female must not be pregnant, or breastfeeding, and is not considering becoming pregnant 
or donating eggs during the study and for 30 days after the last dose of study drug.
Prior and Concomitant Medications and Therapies
16.Subjects must not have previously been treated with any topical or systemic JAK inhibitor.
17.Subjects must not have previously been treated with any permanent skin bleaching agents
to treat vitiligo .
18.Subjects must not have been treated with any investigational drug of chemical or biologic 
nature within a minimum of 30 days or 5 half -lives (whichever is longer) prior to the first dose of 
study drug or is currently enrolled in ano ther interventional clinical study or was previously 
enrolled in this study . 
19.Subjects who have had prior exposure to immunomodulatory biologic therapy, for any 
indications, must have discontinued the biologic therapy prior to the first dose of study drug.  
Recommended washout periods are specified below.  If not specified below, biologic therapies 
must be discontinued at least 5 times the mean terminal elimination half -life of a drug or 
3months prior to Baseli ne, whichever is longer.
≥ 4 weeks for etanercept;
≥ 8 weeks for adalimumab, infliximab, certolizumab, golimumab, abatacept, tocilizumab, 
and ixekizumab;
≥ 16 weeks for secukinumab;
≥ 12 weeks for ustekinumab.
20.Subjects must not have been treated with any systemic vitiligo therapy (e.g., methotrexate 
[MTX], mycophenolate mofetil, corticosteroids) or supplemental vitiligo therapy 
(antioxidants/vitamins/herbal medicine/traditional Chinese medicine) within a minimum of 
30days prior to the first dose of study drug.
21.Subjects must not have been treated with any topical vitiligo therapy including permanent 
and temporary tattoos within a minimum of 30 days prior to the first dose of study drug. (Note:  
Camouflage and makeup may be used).
22.Subjects must not have been treated with any phototherapy, including excimer (or other 
forms of laser therapy), wit hin a minimum of 12 weeks prior to the first dose of study drug.
Page 19 of 125
 
           
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.23.Subjects must have no systemic use of known strong cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) inhibitors 
from Screening through the end of study drug administrati on or strong CYP3A inducers 30 days 
prior to study drug administration through the end of study drug administration (refer to Table 1
in Section 5.3for examples of commonly used strong CYP3A inhibitors and inducers).  Subjects 
may not use herbal therapies or other traditional medicines with unknown effects on CYP3A 
from Screening through the end of study drug administration.
24.Subjects must not have received a live vaccine with in 28 days (or longer if required locally) 
prior to the first dose of study drug, or have expected need of live vaccination during study 
participation including at least 30 days (or longer if required locally) after the last dose of study 
drug.
25.Subjects must not have a history of an allergic reaction or significant sensitivity to 
constituents of the study drug (and its excipients) and/or other products in the same class.
5.2 Contraception Recommendations
Contracepti on Requirements for Females
Subjects must follow the following contraceptive guidelines as specified:
Females, Non -Childbearing Potential
Females do not need to use birth control during or following study drug treatment if considered of 
non-childbearing potential due to meeting any of the following criteria:
1.Premenopausal female with permanent sterility or permanent infertility due to one of the 
following:
Permanent sterility due to a hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, bilateral oophorectomy.
Non -surgic al permanent infertility due to Mullerian agenesis, androgen insensitivity, or 
gonadal dysgenesis; investigator discretion should be applied to determining study entry for 
these individuals.
2.Postmenopausal female
Age > 55 years with no menses for 12 or mor e months without an alternative medical cause.
Age ≤ 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an alternative medical cause 
AND a follicle -stimulating hormone (FSH) level >30 IU/L.
Females of Childbearing Potential
Review and document pregnan cy avoidance recommendations with females of childbearing potential.
Females of childbearing potential must avoid pregnancy while taking study drug and for at least 30 days 
after the last dose of study drug.  Females must commit to one of the following methods of highly 
effective birth control:
Page 20 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Combined (estrogen -and progestogen -containing) hormonal birth control (oral, intravaginal, 
transdermal, injectable) associated with inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 30 days prior to 
study Baseline Day 1.
Progestogen -only hormonal birth control (oral, injectable, implan table) associated with 
inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 30 days prior to study Baseline Day 1.
Bilateral tubal occlusion/ligation (can be via hysteroscopy, provided a hysterosalpingogram 
confirms success of the procedure) (For Japan:  only bilate ral tubal ligation).
Intrauterine device (IUD).
Intrauterine hormone -releasing system (IUS).
Vasectomized sexual partner (the partner has received medical confirmation of the surgical 
success of the vasectomy and is the sole sexual partner of the trial sub ject).
Practice true abstinence (unless not acceptable per local practices), defined as:  refraining from 
heterosexual intercourse when this is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject 
(periodic abstinence [e.g., calendar, ovulation, s ymptothermal, post -ovulation methods] and 
withdrawal are not acceptable).
If required per local practices, females of childbearing potential must commit to using 2 methods of 
contraception (either 2 highly effective methods or 1 highly effective method co mbined with 1 effective 
method).  Effective methods of birth control are the following:
Progestogen -only oral hormonal contraception, where inhibition of ovulation is not the primary 
mode of action, initiated at least 30 days prior to Baseline Day 1.
Male or female condom with or without spermicide.
Cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicide.
A combination of male condom with a cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicide (double 
barrier method).
Contraception recommendations related to use of concomitant ther apies prescribed per standard of 
care should be based on the local label.
5.3 Prohibited Medications and Therapy
Corticosteroids
Systemic corticosteroids for treatment of vitiligo including, but not limited to, oral, intravenous, IM, and 
intralesional are proh ibited throughout the study.  For non -vitiligo reasons, use of systemic 
corticosteroids can be used but limited to prednisone or prednisolone for up to 1 mg/kg/day for no 
more than 2 consecutive weeks; any subject who receives systemic corticosteroids for more than 
2consecutive weeks, regardless of the dosage of corticosteroid, should permanently discontinue study 
drug.
Page 21 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Topical Therapy
Topical treatments for vitiligo (including, but not limited to topical calcineurin inhibitors, topical 
corticosteroids, to pical prostaglandin analogs) are prohibited until after Week 24 Visit assessments.  
Subjects are not permitted to receive permanent or temporary tattoos within 30 days prior to the first 
dose of study drug through the end of the study.
Phototherapy, Tannin g Booth, Extended Sun Exposure, and Surgical Grafting
Phototherapy (including, but not limited to, broadband UV -B, narrowband UV -B, psoralen and UV -A, 
excimer or other laser therapy, tanning booth use) is prohibited for at least 12 weeks prior to the 
Basel ine Visit and prohibited during the study.  However, subjects are allowed to receive natural daily 
light following a normal routine, but, for a prolonged exposure to sunlight, sunscreen is recommended.  
Surgical grafting for vitiligo is not allowed during the study.
Supplemental Vitiligo Therapy Including Over the Counter (Antioxidants/Vitamins/Herbal 
Medicine/Traditional Chinese Medicine)
Supplemental therapy for vitiligo (including, but not limited to, antioxidants, vitamins, herbal 
supplements, traditional Chinese medicine) is not permitted until after Week 24 Visit assessments .  
However, for any drugs that are considered strong CYP3A inhibitors or inducers, or any herbal 
supplements or traditional medicines with unknown effects on CYP3A are proh ibited throughout the 
entire the study.  Subjects must have discontinued supplemental therapies at least 30 days prior to the 
first dose of study drug.
JAK Inhibitors
Prior and concomitant oral and topical exposure to any other JAK inhibitors besides the i nvestigational 
drug, upadacitinib, in this study (including but not limited to ruxolitinib [Jakafi®], tofacitinib [Xeljanz®], 
baricitinib [Olumiant®], abrocitinib [PF -04965842], and filgotinib) is not allowed.
Targeted Biologic Therapies
Subjects must have discontinued immunomodulatory biologic therapies prior to the first dose of study 
drug as specified in the washout procedures (Eligibility Criterion 19, Protocol Section 5.1 ).  No minimum 
washout prior to Baseline is required for a biologic therapy if an undetectable drug level measured by a 
commercially available assay is documented.
Current and concomitant biologic therapies and biosimilar versions of biologic drugs are prohibited 
during the study.  Examples of biologic therapies include, but are not limited to, the following:
Humira® (adalimumab)
Dupixent® (dupilumab)
Zolair® (omalizumab)
Enbrel® (etanercept)
Remicade® (infliximab)
Orencia® (abatace pt)
Page 22 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Kineret® (anakinra)
Rituxan® (rituximab)
Cimzia® (certolizumab pegol)
Simponi® (golimumab)
Actemra® (tocilizumab)
Raptiva® (efalizumab)
Tysabri® (natalizumab)
Stelara® (ustekinumab)
Benlysta® (belimumab)
Taltz® (ixekizumab)
Cosentyx® (secukinumab)
Trem fya® (guselkumab)
SKYRIZI ®(risankizumab) or SKYRIZI® (risankizumab -rzaa)
Other Non -Biologic Systemic Therapy
Other systemic therapy for the treatment of vitiligo is prohibited during the study including, but not 
limited to:
MTX
cyclosporine
azathioprine
phosphodiesterase type 4 -inhibitors (e.g., apremilast)
mycophenolate mofetil
Investigational Drugs
Subjects who have been treated with any investigational drug within 30 days or 5 half -lives of the drug 
(whichever is longer) prior to the first dose of st udy drug are excluded from participation in this study.  
Investigational drugs are also prohibited during the study.
Vaccines
Live vaccines are prohibited during study participation and including at least 30 days (or longer if 
required locally) after the l ast dose of study drug.  If the subject and investigator choose to 
receive/administer live vaccines, these vaccinations must be completed at least 28 days (or longer if 
required locally) before first dose of study drug with appropriate precautions.  Althou gh not mandated 
by the protocol, vaccines recommended by local guidelines should be considered.  Examples of live 
vaccines include, but are not limited to, the following:
Page 23 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Monovalent live attenuated influenza A (H1N1) (intranasal)
Seasonal trivalent live at tenuated influenza (intranasal)
Zostavax (herpes zoster, live attenuated)
Rotavirus
Varicella (chicken pox)
Measles- mumps -rubella or measles -mumps- rubella -varicella
Oral polio vaccine
Smallpox
Yellow fever
Bacille Calmette -Guérin
Typhoid (oral)
Administration of inactivated (non- live) vaccines is permitted prior to or during the study according to 
local practice guidelines.  Examples of common vaccines that are inactivated, toxoid, or biosynthetic 
include, but are not limited to, injectable influ enza vaccine, pneumococcal, Shingrix (zoster vaccine, 
recombinant, adjuvanted), and pertussis (Tdap) vaccines.
COVID -19 Vaccine
Whenever possible, subjects should not have received a COVID -19 vaccination in the 7 days prior to 
randomization or plan to rece ive a COVID -19 vaccination within the first 7 days after initiation of study 
drug.
Strong CYP3A Inhibitors or Inducers
Systemic use of known strong CYP3A inhibitors (includes over -the-counter or prescription medicines, 
vitamins, and/or herbal supplements) is not permitted from Screening through the end of study drug 
administration and use of strong CYP3A inducers is not permitted from 30 days prior to study drug 
administration through the end of study drug administration.  Table 1includes examples of commonly 
used strong CYP3A inhibitors and inducers.  In addition, herbal therapies and other traditional medicines 
with unknown effects on CYP3A are not perm itted from Screening through the end of study drug 
administration.
Page 24 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 1. Examples of Commonly Used Strong CYP3A Inhibitors and Inducers
Strong CYP3A Inhibitors Strong CYP3A Inducers
Boceprevir Avasimibe
Clarithromycin Carbamazepine
Cobicistat Phenytoin
Conivaptan Rifampin (Rifampicin)
Grapefruit (fruit or juice) Rifapentine
Indinavir St. John 's Wort
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Lopinavir/Ritonavir
Mibefradil
Nefazodone
Nelfinavir
Posaconazole
Ritonavir
Saquinavir
Telaprevir
Telithromycin
Troleandomycin
Voriconazole
Elective and Emergency Surgeries:
Elective surgery will not be allowed during the study until the primary endpoint has been assessed 
(Week 24).  If the subject undergoes elective surgery, the study drug should be interrupted 1 week prior 
to the planned surgery.  Allow reintroduction of study drug once the physician has examined the surgical 
site and determined that it has healed and there is no sign of infection.
If the subject must undergo emergency surgery, the study drug should be interrupted at the time of the 
surgery.  After emergency surgery, allow reintroduction of study drug once the physician has examined 
the surgical site and determined that it h as healed and there is no sign of infection.
5.4 Prior and Concomitant Therapy
Any medication or vaccine (including over -the-counter or prescription medicines, vitamins, and/or 
herbal supplements) that the subject is receiving at the time of Screening and/or r eceives during the 
study must be recorded along with the reason for use, date(s) of administration including start and end 
Page 25 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.dates, and dosage information including dose, route, and frequency on the appropriate electronic case 
report form (eCRF).  Also, medi cations taken for vitiligo since date of diagnosis (based on subject 
recollection and available medical records) should be entered into the appropriate eCRF inclusive of the 
dates of first and last dose, maximum dosage taken, and route of administration.
5.5 W ithdrawal of Subjects and Discontinuation of Study
AbbVie may terminate this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site.  The study may be 
discontinued or terminated in case of an unacceptable risk, any relevant toxicity, or a negative change in 
the risk/benefit assessment.  This might include the occurrence of AEs with a character, severity, or 
frequency that is new in comparison to the existing risk profile.  In addition, data deriving from other 
clinical trials or toxicological studies whic h negatively influence the risk/benefit assessment might cause 
discontinuation or termination of the study.  The investigator may also stop the study at his/her site if 
he/she has safety concerns.  If AbbVie terminates the study for safety reasons, AbbVie will promptly 
notify the investigator.  Advance notice is not required by either party if the study is stopped due to 
safety concerns.
Subjects can request to be discontinued from participating in the study at any time for any reason.  The 
investigator may discontinue any subject 's participation at any time for any reason.  The AbbVie 
Therapeutic Area Medical Director (TA MD)/Scientific Director may mandate individual subject 
discontinuation from study drug in case of safety concern.
Subjects must have stud y drug discontinued immediately if any of the following occur:
The subject requests withdrawal from study drug or the study.
The investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject.
Abnormal laboratory results or AEs that either meet the criter ia for discontinuation of study 
drug, as stated in Section 6.2, or rule out safe continuation of the study drug, as determined by 
the investigator or the AbbVie TA MD.
Serious infections (e.g., sepsis) which cannot be adequately controlled by anti -infective 
treatment or would put the subject at risk with continuation of the study drug.
Confirmed diagnosis of DVT, pulmonary embolus or non -cardiac, non -neurologic arterial 
thrombosis.
Subject is non- compliant with TB prophylaxis (if applicable) or develops active TB at any time 
during the study.
Subject develops a malignancy, except for localized NMSC or carcinoma in- situ of the cervix.
Subject develops a GI perforation (defined as acute, spontaneous perforation of the GI tract that 
requires inpatient medical care or urgent surgical intervention other than appendicitis or 
mechanical injury).  See also Section 6.2Toxicity Management.
The subject becomes pregnant or plans to become pregnant while on study drug.
Eligibility criteria violation was noted after the subject started study drug, when continuat ion of 
the study drug would place the subject at risk.   Note:  intentional/prospective deviations from 
the protocol are NOT allowed , see Section 5.9Protocol Deviations.
Page 26 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Introduction of prohibited medications or dosages when continuation of the study drug would 
place the subject at risk.
Subject is significantly non -compliant with study procedures.
Worsening vitiligo as defined by an increase of 25% or higher in T -VASI from Baseline beginning 
at Week 8 .
Additional requirements related to abnormal laboratory values and selected AESIs are located in 
Section 6.2.
During the COVID -19 pandemic, it has been necessary to employ mitigation strategies to enable the 
investigator to ensure subject safety and continuity of care.  The investigator should contac t the sponsor 
medical contact before discontinuing a subject from the study for a reason other than "planned per 
protocol, "to ensure all acceptable mitigation steps have been explored.
5.6 Follow -Up After Subject Discontinuation
If a subject prematurely disco ntinues study drug, the procedures outlined for the Premature 
Discontinuation (PD) Visit should be completed as soon as possible, preferably within 2 weeks of study 
drug discontinuation, and preferably prior to initiation of another therapy.  In addition, a 30 -day 
Follow -up Visit or phone call should occur to determine the status of any ongoing AEs/SAEs or the 
occurrence of any new AEs/SAEs.
For subjects to be considered lost to follow -up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the subjec t's final status.  At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made and 1 certified 
letter must be sent and documented in the subject 's source documentation.
If a subject withdraws from study follow up or withdraws permission for the collection of their person al 
data, the study staff may still use available public records to obtain information about survival status 
only, as appropriate per local regulations.
In the event a subject withdraws consent from the clinical study, biomarker research will continue 
unles s the subject explicitly requests analysis to be stopped.  When AbbVie is informed the subject has 
withdrawn and no longer wishes biomarker research to continue , samples will not be analyzed, no new 
biomarker analysis data will be collected for the withdra wn subject or added to the existing data or 
database(s ), and the samples will be destroyed.   A subject may withdraw consent for optional biomarker 
research at any time and remain in the clinical study.  Data generated from clinical study and/or optional 
biomarker research, before subject withdrawal of consent, will remain part of the study results.
5.7 Study Drug
Study drug will be taken orally QD, beginning on Day 1 (Baseline), and should be taken at approximately 
the same time each day, with or without food. Subjects will be instructed to return all drug containers 
(even if empty) to the study site personnel at each study visit; study site personnel will document 
compliance.
Page 27 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.AbbVie will not supply any vitiligo disease -related concomitant medication therapy taken during the 
course of the study.  AbbVie will supply upadacitinib and matching upadacitinib placebo.
Study drug will be packaged in quantities sufficient to accommodate the study design.
Each kit will be labeled per local requirements and this label mus t remain affixed to the kit.  Upon 
receipt, study drug should be stored as specified on the label and kept in a secure location.  Each kit will 
contain a unique kit number.  This kit number is assigned to a subject via interactive response 
technology (IRT) and encodes the appropriate study drug to be dispensed at the subject 's corresponding 
study visit.  All blank spaces on the label will be completed by the site staff prior to dispensing to 
subjects.  Study drug will only be used for the conduct of the stu dy.
The individual study drug information is presented in Table 2.
Table 2. Description of Study Drug
Investigational 
ProductMode of 
Administration Dosage Form StrengthBlinded or 
Open Label Frequency Manufacturer
Upadacitinib 
(ABT -494)Oral Extended -release, 
film-coated 
tablets6 mg, 
11mg, or 
22 mgBlinded QD AbbVie
Placebo for 
upadacitinib 
(ABT -494)Oral Film -coated 
tabletsNot 
applicableBlinded QD AbbVie
During the COVID -19 pandemic, study drug shipment can be made from the study site to the subject if 
allowed by local regulations.  Refer to the operations manual for details on direct -to-patient shipment of 
study drug.
5.8 Randomization/Drug Assignment
All subjects will be assigned a unique identification number by the IRT at the Screening Visit.  For 
subjects who rescreen, the screening number assigned by the IRT at the initial screening visit should be 
used.  The IRT will assign a randomization number that will encode the subject 's treatment group 
assignment according to the randomization schedule.  Subjects who meet eligibility criteria at Baseline 
will be randomized in a 2:2:2:1:1 ratio to one of t he five treatment groups:
Group 1:  upadacitinib 22 mg QD (N = 40) (Period 1) → upadaci nib 22 mg QD (Period 2)
Group 2:  upadacitinib 11 mg QD (N = 40) (Period 1) → upadaci nib 11mg QD (Period 2)
Group 3:  upadacitinib 6 mg QD (N = 40) (Period 1) → upad acitinib 6 mg QD (Period 2)
Group 4:  placebo (N = 20) (Period 1) → upadaci nib 22 mg QD (Period 2)
Group 5:  placebo (N = 20) (Period 1) → upadaci nib 11 mg QD (Period 2)
Page 28 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Randomization will be stratified by the age group ( ≤ 50 and > 50), Baseline disea se severity (T -VASI <15 
and ≥ 15), and status of active vitiligo (Yes/No) defined as follows:
Active:  Showing new lesions or progression (enlargement) of existing lesions within the last 
6months and/or presenting clinical subtypes indicative of progress ing vitiligo (i.e., confetti -like 
depigmentation, trichrome pattern, or Koebner phenomenon).
At Week 24, subjects who were randomized to placebo at Baseline will be switched to either 22 mg 
(Group 4) or 11 mg (Group 5) upadacitinib in a blinded fashion per pre -specified randomization 
assignments.
All AbbVie personnel with direct oversight of the conduct and management of the trial (with the 
exception of AbbVie Drug Supply Management Team) will remain blinded to each sub ject's treatment 
until the Week 24 primary analysis for the study, while the investigator, study site personnel, and the 
subject will remain blinded to each subject 's treatment throughout the study.  To maintain the blind, the 
upadacitinib tablets and plac ebo tablets provided for the study will be identical in appearance.  The IRT 
will provide access to unblinded subject treatment information in the case of a medical emergency.
In the event of a medical emergency that requires unblinding of the study drug a ssignment, the 
investigator is requested to contact the AbbVie TA MD prior to breaking the blind.  However, if an 
urgent therapeutic intervention is necessary which warrants breaking the blind prior to contacting the 
AbbVie TA MD, the investigator can dire ctly access the IRT system to break the blind without AbbVie 
notification or agreement.  Unblinding is available in the IRT system via the Unblind Subject transaction, 
which is available only to the investigator.  If the IRT system is unavailable, unblindi ng may occur by 
contacting the technical support of the IRT vendor via either phone (preferred) or email 
(support@endpointclinical.com).  For country -specific phone numbers, please see the following website:  
http://www.endpointclinical.com/helpdesk/.
In the event that the blind is broken before notification to the AbbVie TA MD, we request that the 
AbbVie TA MD be notified within 24 hours of the blind being broken.  The date and reason that the blind 
was broken must be conveyed to AbbVie and recorded on appropriate eCRF.
5.9 Protocol Deviations
AbbVie does not allow intentional/prospective deviations from the protocol except when necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects.  The investigator is responsible for complying with all 
protocol require ments, written instructions, and applicable laws regarding protocol deviations.  If a 
protocol deviation occurs (or is identified, including those that may be due to the COVID -19 pandemic), 
the investigator is responsible for notifying IEC/IRB, regulatory authorities (as applicable), and AbbVie.
In Japan, the investigator will record all protocol deviations in the appropriate medical records at the 
site.
Page 29 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, o r oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the 
physical characteristics, identity, quality, purity, potency, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness, or 
performance of a product/device.  Complaints associated with any component of thi s investigational 
product must be reported to AbbVie.
Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the drug component of the product.
For a product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the 
labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, device damage or not 
working properly, or packaging issues.
Product complaint s concerning the investigational product and/or device must be reported to AbbVie 
within 24 hours of the study site 's knowledge of the event.  Product complaints occurring during the 
study will be followed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
Medical Complaint s/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject 
administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with 
this treatme nt.  An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal 
(investigational) product, whether or not the event is considered causally rel ated to the use of the 
product.
Such an event can result from use of the drug as stipulated in the protocol or labeling, as well as from 
"special situations "such as accidental or intentional overdose, medication error, occupational or 
accidental exposure, off-label use, drug abuse, drug misuse, or drug withdrawal, all which must be 
reported whether associated with an AE or not.  Any worsening of a pre -existing condition or illness is 
considered an AE.  Worsening in severity of a reported AE should be repor ted as a new AE.  Laboratory 
abnormalities and changes in vital signs are considered to be AEs only if they result in discontinuation 
from the study, necessitate therapeutic medical intervention, meets protocol -specific criteria (see 
Section 6.2regarding toxicity management), and/or if the investigator considers them to be AEs.
The investigators will monitor each subject for clinical and laboratory evi dence of AEs on a routine basis 
throughout the study.  All AEs will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion.
An elective surgery/procedure scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an AE if the 
surgery/procedure is being performed for a pre- existing condition and/or the surgery/procedure has 
been pre -planned prior to study entry.  However, if the pre -existing condition deteriorates unexpectedly 
Page 30 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.during the study (e.g., surgery performed earlier than planned), then the deterioration of the con dition 
for which the elective surgery/procedure is being done will be considered an AE.
If an AE, whether associated with study drug or not, meets any of the following criteria, it is to be 
reported to AbbVie clinical pharmacovigilance or contract research organization (as appropriate) as an 
SAE within 24 hours of the site being made aware of the SAE (refer to Section 4.3 of the operations 
manual for reporting details and contact information):
Death of Subject An event that results in the death of a subject .
Life-Threatening An event that, in the opinion of the investigator, would have 
resulted in immediate fatality if medical intervention had not been 
taken.  This does not include an event that would have been fatal if it 
had occurred in a more severe form.
Hospitalization or 
Prolongation of 
HospitalizationAn event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length 
of time or prolongs the subject 's hospital stay.  This does not include 
an emergency room visit or admission to an outpatient fac ility.
Congenital Anomaly An anomaly detected at or after birth, or any anomaly that results in 
fetal loss.
Persistent or Significant 
Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condition that substantially interferes with 
the activities of daily li ving (ADL) of a study subject.  Disability is not 
intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, 
and accidental trauma (e.g., sprained ankle).
Important Medical Event 
Requi ring Medical or Surgical 
Intervention to Prevent 
Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately 
life-threatening or result in death or hospitalization, but based on 
medical judgment may jeopardize the subject and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outcomes 
listed above (i.e., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, 
prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity).  Additionally, any e lective or 
spontaneous abortion or stillbirth is considered an important 
medical event.  Examples of such events include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room 
or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.
All AEs reported from the time of study drug administration until 30 days or 5 half -lives, whichever is 
longer, after discontinuation of study drug administration will be collected, whether solicited or 
spontaneously reported by the subject.  In addition, study procedure -related serious and nonserious AEs 
will be collected from the time the subject signs the study -specific informed consent.
Page 31 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The following definitions will be used for Serious Adverse Reactions (SARs) and Suspected Unexpected 
Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSARs):
SAR Defined as all noxious and unintended responses to an Investigational Medicinal 
Product (IMP) related to any dose administered that result in an S AE as defined 
above.
SUSAR Refers to individual SAE case reports from clinical trials where a causal 
relationship between the SAE and the IMP was suspected by either the sponsor 
or the investigator, is unexpected (not listed in the applicable Reference Sa fety 
Information), and meets one of the above serious criteria.
AbbVie will be responsible for SUSAR reporting for the Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) in 
accordance with global and local requirements.
AEs will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may indicate a trend 
or risk to subjects.
Adverse Events of Special Interest
The following AESIs will be monitored during each study:
Serious infections
Opportunistic infections (excluding TB and herpes zoster)
Herpes Zoster
Active TB
Adjudicated GI perforations
Malignancy (all types)
Anemia
Neutropenia
Lymphopenia
Renal dysfunction
Hepatic disorders
Adjudicated cardiovascular events (e.g., major adverse cardiovascular event)
Adjudicated embolic and thrombotic events (non -cardiac, non -central nervous system)
Cardiovascular Adjudication Committee
An independent, external committee of physician experts in cardiovascular adjudication will be utilized 
to assess potential cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, embolic, and throm botic AEs in a blinded manner as 
defined by the CAC charter.  The CAC charter will be prepared separate from the protocol and will 
describe the objective, scope, frequency, and triggers for data reviews.
Page 32 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.GI Perforation Adjudication
Two independent, blinded internal adjudicators along with a third potential tie -breaker adjudicator who 
are gastroenterologists or who have other highly relevant clinical experience will be utilized to assess 
potential AEs of acute spontaneous GI perforation.
Adverse Event Severi ty and Relationship to Study Drug
The investigator will rate the severity of each AE according to the NCI CTCAE version 5.0, which can be 
accessed at:  http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_application s.
If no grading criteria are provided for the reported event, then the event should be graded as follows:
Mild (Grade 1) Asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or diagnostic observations only; 
intervention not indicated
Moderate (Grade 2) Minimal, local, or noninvasive intervention indicated; limiting 
age-appropriate instrumental ADL (instrumental ADL refer to preparing 
meals, shopping for groceries or clothes, using the telephone, managing 
money, etc.)
Severe (Grade 3 –5)
Grade 3 Severe or medically significant but not immediat ely life -threatening; 
hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization indicated; disabling; 
limiting self care ADL (self care ADL refers to bathing, dressing and 
undressing, feeding self, using the toilet, taking medications, and not 
bedridden)
Grade 4 Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated
Grade 5 Death related to AE
The Investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of the AE to the use of study 
drug:
Reasonable 
PossibilityAfter consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is 
sufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
No Reasonable 
PossibilityAfter consideration of factors includ ing timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is 
insufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
Page 33 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Pregnancy
While not an AE, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 1 calendar day after 
the site becomes aware of the pregnancy.  If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject, information 
regarding the pregnancy and the outcome will be collected.
Female subjects should avoid pregnancy throughout the course of the study, starting with the 
Screening Visit through 30 days after the last study drug administration.  Results of a positive pregnancy 
test or confirmation of a pregnancy will be assessed starting with the Screening Visit through the final 
study visit.
Subjects who become pregnant during the study must be discontinued from study drug treatment 
(Protocol Section 5.5).
The pregnancy outcome of an electi ve or spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, or congenital anomaly is 
considered an SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours of the site becoming aware of the 
event.
6.2 Toxicity Management
The toxicity management of the AEs, including AESIs, consists of safety monitoring (review of AEs on an 
ongoing basis, and periodic/ad hoc review of safety issues by an independent DMC), and, if applicable, 
interruption of study drug dosing with appropriate clinical management and/or discontinuation of the 
subjects from study drug.  The management of specific AEs and laboratory parameters is described 
below.
Serious Infections:   Study drug should be interrupted if a subject develops a serious infection.  Study 
drug may be restarted once the infection has been successfully treated.  Subjects who develop active TB 
must be permanently discontinued from study drug.
Herpes zoster:   If a subject develops herpes zoster, consider temporarily interrupting study drug until 
the episode resolves.
GI Perforation:   Subjects presenting with the onset of signs or symptoms of a GI perforation should be 
evaluated promptly for early diagnosis and treatment.  Subjects with acute, spontaneous perforation of 
the GI tract that requires inpatient medical care or urgent surgical intervention (exce pt for appendicitis 
or mechanical injury) must be permanently discontinued from study drug.
Malignancy:   Subjects who develop malignancy other than NMSC or carcinoma in situ of the cervix must 
be permanently discontinued from study drug.  Information including histopathological results should be 
queried for confirmation of the diagnosis.  Periodic skin examination is recommended for subjects who 
are at increased risk for skin cancer.
Muscle -related symptoms:  If a subject experiences symptoms suggestive of myositis or 
rhabdomyolysis, consider checking CPK and aldolase with clinical management and/or study drug 
interruption as deemed appropriate by the treating physician.
Page 34 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Thrombosis Events:   Subjects who develop symptoms of thrombosis should be promptly evalu ated and 
treated appropriately.  If the diagnosis of DVT, pulmonary embolus, or non- neurologic arterial 
thrombosis is confirmed, the subject must be permanently discontinued from study drug.
COVID -19:  Interrupt study drug in subjects with a confirmed diag nosis of COVID -19. Consider 
interrupting study drug in subjects with signs and/or symptoms and suspicion of COVID -19.  The 
COVID -19 eCRF must be completed.
Management of Select Laboratory Abnormalities:   For any given laboratory abnormality, the 
investigator should assess the subject, apply the standard of care for medical evaluation and treatment 
following any local guidelines.  Specific toxicity management guidelines for abnormal laboratory values 
are described in Table 3and may require a supplemental eCRF to be completed.  For subjects with 
ongoing laboratory abnormalities which require data entry into an eCRF, an additional eCRF related to 
subsequent laboratory abnormalities is only required if the subject has relevant changes in history (e.g., 
new onset signs or symptoms) or laboratory values which have returned to normal reference range or 
its Baseline value followed by subsequent laboratory abnorma lities meeting toxicity guidelines 
(considered a new event).  All abnormal laboratory tests that are considered clinically significant by the 
investigator will be followed to a satisfactory resolution.  If a repeat test is required per Table 3, the 
repeat testing is to occur as soon as possible.  Further, repeat testing may be performed at a local 
laboratory if the subject is unable to use the central lab oratory.
Table 3. Specific Toxicity Management Guidelines for Abnormal Laboratory Values
Laboratory 
Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline
Hemoglobin  If hemoglobin < 8 g/dL, interrupt study drug dosing and confirm by repeat testing 
with a new sample.
 If hemoglobin decreases ≥ 3.0 g/dL from Baseline without an alternative etiology, 
interrupt study drug dosing and confirm by repeat testing with new sample.
 If hemoglobin decreases ≥ 3.0 g/dL from Baseline and an alternati ve etiology is 
known or the hemoglobin value remains in the normal reference range , the subject
may remain on study drug at the investigator 's discretion.
 If confirmed, continue to withhold study drug until hemoglobin value returns to 
normal reference range or its Baseline value.
ANC  If confirmed < 1000/µL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug 
dosing until ANC value returns to normal reference range or its Baseline value.
 Interrupt study drug if confirmed < 500/μL by repeat testing with new sample.  If 
value returns to normal reference range or its Baseline value, restarting study drug 
is allowed if there is an alternative etiology identified; documentation should 
include reason that rechallenge is expected to be safe for the subject .  Study drug 
should be discontinued if no alternative etiology can be found.
ALC  If confirmed < 500/µL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug 
dosing until ALC returns to normal reference range or its Baseline value.
Total WBC count  If confirmed < 2000/µL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug 
dosing until WBC count returns to normal reference range or its Baseline value.
Page 35 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Laboratory 
Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline
AST or ALT  Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 3 × ULN by repeat testing with new 
sample and either a total bilirubin > 2 × ULN or an international normalized ratio 
(INR) >1.5.
 A separate blood sample for INR testing will be needed to measure INR at the 
time of repeat testing for ALT or AST.  A repeat test o f INR is not needed for 
determination if above toxicity management criteria are met.
 Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 3 × ULN by repeat testing with new 
sample along with new appearance of fatigue, nausea, vomiting, right upper 
quadrant pain or tenderness, fever, rash, and/or eosinophilia (> 5% increase from 
Baseline). 
 Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 5 × ULN by repeat testing with new 
sample for more than 2 weeks.
 If ALT or AST > 8 × ULN, interrupt study drug immediately, confi rm by repeat testing 
with a new sample, and contact the TA MD. 
Subjects with HBc Ab+ (irrespective of HBs Ab status) and negative HBV DNA PCR testing at 
Screening who develop the following laboratory findings should have HBV DNA PCR testing 
performed with in 1 week (based on initial elevated value): 
 ALT > 5 × ULN OR 
 ALT or AST > 3 × ULN if an alternative cause is not readily identified.
 A separate blood sample for HBV DNA PCR testing will be needed at the time of 
repeat testing for ALT or AST.
A positive result for HBV DNA PCR testing will require immediate interruption of study drug 
(unless not acceptable by local practices) and a hepatologist consultation should occur 
within 1 week for recommendation regarding subsequent treatment.
Subjects who meet any of the above criteria should be evaluated for an alternative etiology 
of the ALT or AST elevation and managed as medically appropriate.  If applicable, the 
alternative etiology should be documented in the eCRF.  If ALT or AST values return to the 
normal re ference range or the Baseline value, study drug may be restarted.  If restarting 
study drug, documentation should include reason that rechallenge is expected to be safe.  If 
after clinically appropriate evaluation no alternative etiology for ALT or AST ele vation is 
found or the ALT or AST elevation has not resolved or is not trending down toward normal, 
the subject should be discontinued from study drug.
For any confirmed ALT or AST elevations > 3 ULN, complete the appropriate supplemental 
hepatic eCRF(s).
Serum 
Creatinine• If serum creatinine is > 1.5 × the Baseline value and > ULN, repeat the test for 
serum creatinine (with subject in an euvolemic state) to confirm the results.  If the 
results of the repeat testing still meet this criterion, then interrupt study drug and 
restart study drug once serum creatinine returns to ≤ 1.5 × Baseline value 
and ≤ULN.
For the above serum creatinine elevation scenarios, complete the supplemental renal eCRF.
Page 36 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.3 Independent Data Monitoring Committee
To ensure subject safety , an external, independent DMC will review unblinded safety data on a cohort 
level, at approximately 4 -month intervals throughout the course of the study, and alert AbbVie to 
possible safety concerns related to the conduct of the study.  The DMC will revie w safety data to 
determine if there are any significant safety concerns that would warrant any study action.  If necessary 
to assess benefit/risk, the DMC will also be given access to selected efficacy data.
The DMC charter will describe the roles and resp onsibilities of the DMC members, frequency of data 
reviews, and relevant data to be assessed.  Communications from the DMC to the Study Team will not 
contain information that could potentially unblind the team to subject treatment assignments.
7STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
The statistical methods provided in this protocol will be focused on primary and secondary analyses.  
Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis will be described in the Statistical Analysis Plan 
(SAP).
The primary analysis will be conducted after all subjects have completed Week 24, data pertaining to 
Period 1 have been cleaned, and a database lock has occurred for the purpose of efficacy and safety 
analysis in Period 1.   The efficacy analysis performed based on this database lock will be the only and 
final analysis for Period 1.
7.2 Definition for Analysis Populations
The ITT Population includes all randomized subjects.  Subjects will be included in the analysis based on 
treatment as randomized.  The ITT Population will be used for all efficacy analyses.
The following populations will be used for the safety analysis:
The Safety Population (Safety) is defined as all subjects who are randomized and received at 
least 1 dose of s tudy drug in the study.
The all upadacitinib treated (ALL_UPA) Population is defined as all subjects who received at least 
1 dose of upadacitinib in the study.  This population will be used to provide a comprehensive 
summary of safety.
7.3 Handling Potential Intercurrent Events for the Primary Endpoint
The primary endpoint (Section 3.2) will be analyzed in the ITT Population and no intercurrent events wil l 
be considered.  All data collected, regardless of premature discontinuation of study drug, will be used in 
the analysis.
Page 37 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.4 Statistical Analyses for Efficacy
The efficacy analysis will be based on the ITT Population and all statistical tests will be perform ed at a 
2-sided significance level of 0.1.  The 95% confidence interval of the treatment effect will be provided.
For continuous variables, comparisons of change and/or percent change from Baseline will be 
made between upadacitinib and placebo based on the Mixed Model Repeated Measures 
(MMRM) adjusting for treatment, visit, treatment -by-visit interaction, and stratification factor s 
derived by the actual value (age group [ ≤50 and > 50], Baseline disease severity [T- VASI < 15 
and ≥15], and status of active vitiligo [Yes/No]) as fixed factors, and Baseline value as a 
covariate.  The MMRM will be the primary approach to handle missing values for continuous 
endpoints.
For categorical variables, comparisons will be made between upadacitinib and placebo using the
Cochran- Mantel- Haenszel (CMH) test, adjusting for the stratification factors derived by the 
actual value :  age group ( ≤50 and > 50), Baseline disease severity (T -VASI < 15 and ≥ 15), and 
status of active vitiligo (Yes/No).  Non -Responder Imputation incor porating multiple imputation 
(MI) to handle missing data due to COVID -19 (NRI -MI) will be the primary approach to handle 
missing values for categorical endpoints.
Summary and Analysis of the Primary Endpoint
Analysis of the primary endpoint will be conduc ted on the ITT Population based on the treatment as 
randomized.  Comparison of the primary endpoint will be made between each upadacitinib dose and 
placebo using the MMRM adjusting for treatment, visit, treatment -by-visit interaction, stratification 
factor sderived by the actual value , and Baseline value ata 2-sided significance level of 0.1.
MMRM will be the primary approach to handle missing values .  A sensitivity analysis will also be 
performed for the primary efficacy endpoint, using MI to handle missi ng values.  Analysis details for 
MMRM, MI, and other sensitivity analyses (if applicable) will be provided in the SAP.
Summary and Analysis of Secondary Endpoints
Analysis of secondary efficacy endpoints will be conducted on the ITT Population based on the 
treatment as randomized.  The continuous endpoints will be analyzed using the same method as for the 
primary endpoint.  The categorical endpoints will be analyzed using the CMH test.  The null hypotheses 
for all secondary endpoints will be tested ata 2-sided significance level of 0.1.
Summary and Analysis of Additional Efficacy Endpoints
Additional endpoints, as described in Section 3.4, will also be analyzed.  Analysis details will be provided 
in the SAP.
Subgroup Analysis for Efficacy
To evaluate the consistency of the efficacy across demographic and other Baseline characteristics, 
summaries and analyses will be performed for selected subgroups for the primary efficacy endpoint.  
The subgroups will be defined in SAP.
Page 38 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.5 Statistical Analyses for Safety
All safety analyses will be performed for the Safety Populat ion and ALL_UPA Population.  Subjects will be 
analyzed based on the treatment actually received.  The number and percentage of subjects 
experiencing AEs will be tabulated using Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities system organ class 
and preferred term, as well as by severity and by relationship to the study drug as assessed by the 
investigator.  Summaries (including percentages and events per 100 patient -years) of SAEs, deaths, and 
AEs leading to discontinuation will be provided as well.
For selecte d laboratory parameters, a listing of all subjects with any laboratory value above Grade 3 of 
Common Toxicity Criteria will be provided.  Mean change from Baseline in laboratory and vital sign 
variables will be summarized.  Additional details for the safet y analysis will be provided in the SAP.
7.6 Interim Analysis
No formal interim analysis of efficacy is planned for this study.  Routine safety reviews will be performed 
by an external independent DMC (see details in Section 6.3).
7.7 Overall Type I Error Control
Multiplicity from multiple comparisons will not be adjusted in this Phase 2 study.
7.8 Sample Size Determination
Assuming a Week 24 percent change from Bas eline in F -VASI of 0% in the placebo arm, a conservative 
estimate based on a prior study in vitiligo,14the planned total sample size of 160 subjects (40 subjects in 
each upadacitinib group, 40 subjects total in the placebo groups) will provide more than 90% power to 
detect the treatment difference of 40% reduction (assuming a standard deviation of 54.8%) in at least 
1upadacitinib group versus placebo using a 2 -sided significance level of 0.1 based on the two -sample 
t-test.
8ETHICS
8.1 Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subject mater ials will be 
submitted to the IEC/IRB for review and approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the informed 
consent form(s) must be obtained before any subject is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will 
require review and approval by the IEC/IRB b efore the changes are implemented to the study.  In 
addition, all changes to the consent form(s) will be IEC/IRB approved.
Page 39 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, operations manual, International Council 
for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) guidelines, 
applicable regulations, and guidelines governing clinical study conduct and the ethical principles that 
have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  Respons ibilities of the investigator are specified in 
Appendix B.
In cases of COVID -19 pandemic situations leading to difficulties in performing protocol -specified 
procedures, AbbVie will engage with study site personnel in efforts to ensure the safety of subjects, 
maintain protocol compliance, and minimize risks to the integrity of the study while trying to best 
manage subject continuity of care.  This may include alternative methods for assessments (e.g., virtual 
site visits), alternative locations for data collection (e.g., use of a local lab instead of a central lab), and 
shipping investigational product and/or supplies direct to subjects to ensure conti nuity of treatment 
where allowed.  Refer to the operations manual for additional details.  In all cases, these alternative 
measures must be allowed by local regulations and permitted by IRB/IEC.  Investigators should notify 
AbbVie if any urgent safety measures are taken to protect the subjects against any immediate hazard.
8.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects 'confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical 
study identifiers or "codes. "  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie.
During the COVID -19 pandemic, remote monitoring of data may be employed if allowed by the local 
regulatory authority, IRB/IEC, and the study site.
9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the 
data reported.  All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, 
accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Clini cal site monitoring is conducted 
to ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data 
are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the 
currently approved p rotocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable local regulatory 
requirement(s).  During the COVID -19 pandemic, remote data review/verification may be employed if 
allowed by the local regulatory authority, IRB/IEC, and the study site.
10 DATA QUALI TY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial is conducted with a quality management system that will define 
quality tolerance limits in order to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results.  Data 
will be generated, documente d, and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable 
regulatory requirements.
Page 40 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end -of-study is defined as the date of the last subject 's last visit or the actual date of follow -up 
contact, whichever is later.
12 REFERENCES
1.Oiso N, Suzuki T, Fukai K, et al. Nonsegmental vitiligo and autoimmune mechanism. Dermatol Res 
Pract. 2011;2011:518090.
2.Morrison B, Burden -Teh E, Batchelor JM, et al. Quality of life in people with vitiligo: a systemati c 
review and meta -analysis. Br J Dermatol. 2017;177(6):e338 -e9.
3.Alikhan A, Felsten LM, Daly M, et al. Vitiligo: a comprehensive overview Part I. Introduction, 
epidemiology, quality of life, diagnosis, differential diagnosis, associations, histopathology , etiology, 
and work -up. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;65(3):473 -91.
4.Ezzedine K, Lim HW, Suzuki T, et al. Revised classification/nomenclature of vitiligo and related 
issues: the Vitiligo Global Issues Consensus Conference. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2012;25( 3):E1 -
13.
5.Patel KR, Singam V, Rastogi S, et al. Association of vitiligo with hospitalization for mental health 
disorders in US adults. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2019;33(1):191 -7.
6.Sheth VM, Guo Y, Qureshi AA. Comorbidities associated with vitiligo : a ten -year retrospective study. 
Dermatology. 2013;227(4):311 -5.
7.Elbuluk N, Ezzedine K. Quality of Life, Burden of Disease, Co -morbidities, and Systemic Effects in 
Vitiligo Patients. Dermatol Clin. 2017;35(2):117 -28.
8.Dahir AM, Thomsen SF. Comorbidit ies in vitiligo: comprehensive review. Int J Dermatol. 
2018;57(10):1157 -64.
9.Teulings HE, Overkamp M, Ceylan E, et al. Decreased risk of melanoma and nonmelanoma skin 
cancer in patients with vitiligo: a survey among 1307 patients and their partners. Br J Dermatol. 
2013;168(1):162 -71.
10.Rodrigues M. Skin Cancer Risk (Nonmelanoma Skin Cancers/Melanoma) in Vitiligo Patients. 
Dermatol Clin. 2017;35(2):129 -34.
11.Rodrigues M, Ezzedine K, Hamzavi I, et al. New discoveries in the pathogenesis and classificati on of 
vitiligo. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2017;77(1):1 -13.
12.Harris JE, Harris TH, Weninger W, et al. A mouse model of vitiligo with focused epidermal 
depigmentation requires IFN -γ for autoreactive CD8 ⁺ T-cell accumulation in the skin. J Invest 
Dermatol. 2012; 132(7):1869 -76.
Page 41 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.13.Relke N, Gooderham M. The Use of Janus Kinase Inhibitors in Vitiligo: A Review of the Literature. J 
Cutan Med Surg. 2019;23(3):298 -306.
14.Rosmarin D, Pandya AG, Lebwohl M, et al. Ruxolitinib cream for treatment of vitiligo: a randomis ed, 
controlled, phase 2 trial. Lancet. 2020;396(10244):110 -20.
15.Incyte. Topical Ruxolitinib Evaluation in Vitiligo Study 1 (TRuE -V1), CT.gov Identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]. 
Bethesda, MD: US National Library of Medicine; Mar 2020 [cited 2020 Sep 08]. Available from: 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED].
16.Incyte. Topical Ruxolitinib Evaluation in Vitiligo Study 2 (TRuE -V2), CT.gov Identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]. 
Bethesda, MD: US National Library of Medicine; Mar 2020 [cited 2020 Sep 08]. Available from: 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED].
17.Nicolaidou E, Antoniou C, Stratigos AJ, et al. Efficacy, predictors of response, and long -term follow -
up in patients with vitiligo treated with narrowband UVB phototherapy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2007;56(2):2 74-8.
18.Guttman -Yassky E, Thaçi D, Pangan AL, et al. Upadacitinib in adults with moderate to severe atopic 
dermatitis: 16 -week results from a randomized, placebo -controlled trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2020;145(3):877 -84.
19.AbbVie. Upadacitinib Inves tigator 's Brochure Edition 11. 18 August 2020.
20.Kim SR, Heaton H, Liu LY, et al. Rapid Repigmentation of Vitiligo Using Tofacitinib Plus Low -Dose, 
Narrowband UV -B Phototherapy. JAMA Dermatol. 2018;154(3):370 -1.
Page 42 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A.STUDY-SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
Ab antibody
AD atopic dermatitis
ADL activities of daily living
AE adverse event
AESI adverse event of special interest
ALC absolute lymphocyte count
ALL_UPA all upadacitinib treated
ALT alanine transaminase
ANC absolute neutrophil count
AS ankylosing spondylitis
AST aspartate transaminase
BSA body surface area
CAC Cardiovascular Adjudication Committee
CMH Cochran -Mantel -Haenszel
COVID -19 coronavirus disease 2019
CPK creatine phosphokinase
CRF case report form
CRP C-reactive protein
CXR chest x- ray
CYP3A cytochrome P450 3A
DLQI Dermatology Life Quality Index
DMC Data Monitoring Committee
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
DTP direct- to-patient
DVT deep vein thrombosis
ECG electrocardiogram
eCRF electronic case report form
EDC electronic data capture
F-PaGVA Face –Patient Global Vitiligo Assessment
F-PhGVA Face –Physician Global Vitiligo Assessment
FSH follicle -stimulating hormone
Page 43 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.F-VASI Facial Vitiligo Area Scoring Index
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GI gastrointestinal
HADS Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
HBc Ab hepatitis B core antibody
HBs Ab hepatitis B surface antibody
HBs Ag hepatitis B surface antigen
HBV hepatitis B virus
HCV hepatitis C virus
HIV human immunodeficiency virus
HIV Ab human immunodeficiency virus antibody
hsCRP high -sensitivity C -reactive protein
ICH International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals 
for Human Use
ICVA Individual Component Vitiligo Assessment
IEC Independent Ethics Committee
IFN interferon
IM intramuscular
IMP Investigational Medicinal Product
INR international normalized ratio
IRB Institutional Review Board
IRT interactive response technology
ITT Intent -to-Treat
IU International Unit
JAK Janus kinase
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MI multiple imputation
MMRM Mixed Model Repeated Measures
MTX methotrexate
NCI CTCAE National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
NMSC non-melanoma skin cancer
NSV non-segmental vitiligo
PaGIC -V Patient 's Global Impression of Change- Vitiligo
PBMC peripheral blood mononuclear cells
Page 44 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.PCR polymerase chain reaction
PD Premature Discontinuation
PhGIC -V Physician 's Global Impression of Change- Vitiligo
PhGVA Physician Global Vitiligo Assessment
PK pharmacokinetic
PPD purified protein derivative (tuberculin)
PRO patient -reported outcome
PsA psoriatic arthritis
PT preferred term
QD once daily
QoL quality of life
RA rheumatoid arthritis
RNA ribonucleic acid
RSI Reference Safety Information
SAE serious adverse event
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan
SAR Serious Adverse Reaction
SARS -CoV-2 Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
SOC system organ class
STAT Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription
SUSAR Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction
TA MD Therapeutic Area Medical Director
TB tuberculosis
TEAE treatment -emergent adverse event
T-PaGVA Total –Patient Global Vitiligo Assessment
T-PhGVA Total –Physician Global Vitiligo Assessment
TPO thyroid peroxidase
TSH thyroid -stimulating hormone
T-VASI total Vitiligo Area Scoring Index
T4 thyroxine
ULN upper limit of normal
UV ultraviolet
VASI Vitiligo Area Scoring Index
VES vitiligo extent score
VitiQoL vitiligo quality -of-life
Page 45 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.VNS vitiligo noticeability scale
WBC white blood cell
Page 46 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B.RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M19 -051:  A Multicenter, Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled Dose -Ranging Study 
to Evaluate the Safety and Efficacy of Upadacitinib in Subjects with Non -Segmental Vitiligo
Protocol Date:  07July 2021
Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the International Council for Harmonisation 
of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and 
local regulations and guidelines governing the study at the site location.  In signing the Investigator 
Agreement, the investigator is agreeing to the following:
1.Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GC P, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and operations manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying 
AbbVie and the appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee 
(IEC), except when necessary to protect the subject from immediate harm.
2.Personally conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3.Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being used for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requireme nts relating to informed consent and 
ethics committees (e.g., IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4.Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investigation(s) to AbbVie.
5.Reading the information in the Investigator 'sBrochure/safety material provided, including the 
instructions for use and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6.Informing all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
7.Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all stud y-related documents until notification from AbbVie.
8.Maintaining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and all of its amendments.
9.Reporting promptly, all changes in the research activity and all u nanticipated problems involving 
risks to human subjects or others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, 
institution director) and/or directly to the ethics committees and AbbVie.
10.Providing direct access to source data documents for study -related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed)
Page 47 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C.LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Study Project Manager II Clinical Program Development
Program Lead II Clinical Program Development
Senior Medical Writer Medical Writing
Senior Scientific Director Immunology Clinical Development
Director Data and Statistical Sciences
Senior Director & Statistics Therapeutic 
Area HeadData and Statistical Sciences
Director Clinical Pharmacology and 
Pharmacometrics
Page 48 of 125 

  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX D.ACTIVITY SCHEDULE
The following table shows the required activities across Screening and subsequent study visits.  The 
individual activities are described in detail in the operations manual (Appendix F).  Allowed 
modifications due to the COVID -19 pandemic are detailed within the operations manual.
Page 49 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E.PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Versions
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 15 March 2021
The purpose of this version is to address the following changes in addition to minor clerical corrections
for consistency throughout :
Protocol
Update Title Page to change sponsor/emergency medical contact from  MD, MS, 
DVM, FAAD to MD, PhD , and to update contact information accordingly .
Rationale:   To update due to personnel change .
Update Synopsis and Section 2.1toadd "in some countries "to clarify the approval status of 
upadacitinib for the treatment of RA, PsA, and AS .
Rationale:  To align with indicati on approvals outlined in the investigator brochure.  According to 
the current IB, upadacitinib is approved for RA and is being evaluated for other indications.
Update Synopsis and Section 5.1eligibility criterion #17 toindicate that subjects must not have 
been previously treated with any permanent skin bleaching agents to treat vitiligo.  
Rationale:   To clarify that previous tre atment with permanent skin bleaching agents to treat 
vitiligo is prohibited . 
Update Section 3.8to add wording for site and subject participation in the Digital Imaging 
Research .
Rationale:   To clarify the approximate number of sites that will be selected and that subjects at 
participating sites will be required to participate after digital imaging platfor mis available for 
implementation at the site.
Update Section 5.3to revise the dose for systemic corticosteroids from 1 mg/kg to 1 mg/kg/day.
Rationale:   To provide the correction needed regarding the maximum dose of systemic 
corticosteroids allowed.
Update Section 5.3to change the wording regarding natural daily light exposure from 
"encouraged "to "allowed. "
Rationale:   To provide clarification.  
Update Section 5.3toadd language prohibiting use throughout the study of any drugs 
considered to be strong CYP3A inhibitors or inducers, or herbal supplements or traditional 
medicines with unknown effects on CYP3A.
Rationale:   To provide additional language as topical and supplemental treatments may 
interfere with upadacitinib metabolism and exposure and may also impact efficacy and safety of 
upadacitinib treatment.
Page 54 of 125 

  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Update to Targeted Biologic Therapies in Section 5.3to include the U.S. marketed product name
and to update to the registered trademark for EU SKYRIZI.
Rationale:  To provide clarification.
Update Section 5.5toadd the following language in the event that an eligibility criteria violation 
was noted after the subject started study drug and continuation of study drug would place the 
subject at risk :  "Note: indicate that intentional/prospective deviations from the protocol are not 
permitted ."
Rationale:   Toprovide clarification in response to a request from Health Canada .  
Update Section 5.5to condense the wording regarding subject non-compliance with study 
procedures.
Rationale:   Tosimplify the wording assignificant non- compliance with study procedures would 
be sufficient caus e to consider discontinuation for a clinical trial, regardless of the perceived risk 
to the subject.  Also, significant non -compliance has the potential to have a negative impact on 
the scientific integrity of the study.   
Update Section 5.5toadd "beginning at Week 8 "to the discontinuation criterion regarding 
worsening vitiligo as defined by an increase of 25% or higher in T -VASI fr om Baseline .
Rationale:   To clarify that subjects with 25% increase in T -VASI will not be discontinued until 
Week 8 to allow sufficient time for upadacitinib to show some improvement, thus minimizing 
early premature discontinuation.
Update Section 7.4to clarify th at categorical stratification factors will be adjusted in the models .
Rationale: to clarify that categorical stratification factors are adjusted in the models instead of 
the continuous values of the variables.
Update Appendix Ato add abbreviations.
Rationale:   To keep abbreviation s list current.
Update Appendix Cto revise List of Protocol Signatories.
Rationale:   To update protocol signator iesto reflect current personnel.  
Update Appendix Dtoadd respiratory rate and body temperature to vital signs .
Rationale:   To provide consistency for vital signs in Operations Manual Section 3.1 4where vital 
signs are defined as "systolic and diastolic blood pressure in sitting position, heart rate, 
respiratory rate, and body temperature," and in Appendix D, Activity Schedule . 
Operations Manual
Update Section 1 and Section 4.3 to change sponsor/emergency medical contact from  
 MD, MS, DVM, FAAD to  MD, PhD, and to update contact 
information accordingly.
Rationale:   To update due to personnel change.
Update Section 2.1Baseline/Day 1 to add a footnote indicating that study drug dispensed at 
Baseline contains 35 tablets ;therefore, study drug will not be dispensed from IRT at Week 2.
Page 55 of 125 

  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Rationale:   To provide clarificat ion that no study drug dispensation from the IRT system will 
occur at the Week 2 visit.
Update Section 2.1 Week 2/Day 15 toadd a footnote that study drug dispensation from IRT at 
Baseline will be reviewed for compliance and returned to subject at this vis it. IRT dispensation 
at this visit is not available.
Rationale:   Toclarify that no study drug dispensation from the IRT system will occur at the 
Week 2 visit.
Update Section 2.1 Week 12/Day 85, Week 24/Day 169, Week 36/Day 253, Week 44/Day 309, 
and Premature Discontinuation Visit to add the following footnote regarding HBV post -Baseline 
tests for subjects from Japan only :HBV DNA PCR testing approximately every 12 weeks is not 
necessary when the subject has a history of HBV vaccination and HBs Ab+ a nd HBc Ab –.  If 
necessary, HBV DNA PCR may be tested at unscheduled visits.
Rationale: To clarify when additional testing is required.
Update Section 3.3 to add language that additional temporary verbal consent may be obtained 
in accordance with local reg ulations, followed by an appropriately signed and dated informed 
consent form obtained from the subject afterwards ,as soon as possible .
Rationale:   Toprovide updated guidance on informed consent from subjects due to protocol 
modifications that may become necessary during the COVID -19 pandemic .
Update Section 3.7 to clarify the description of the VNS and VitiQoL .
Rationale:   To provide clarification .
Update Section 3.7to correct the response option ranges from 0 =no depigmentation to 
4 =very extensive pigmentation.
Rationale:   To provide correction for T-PaGVA and F -PaGVA scale response options.
Update Section 3.8to add language regarding how the VES will initially be collected and how the 
final score will be calculated before upload into EDC by the site.
Rationale:   To clarify the steps necessary to collect the VES based on the way it was initially 
validated.
Update Section 3.9to replace the level of bother response option of "not applicable "to "area 
not affected by vitiligo. "
Rationale:   To clarify how some of the ICVA data is collected into EDC .
Update Section 3.11 to state that PK samples should be collected at 0.5 to 4 hours post -dosing
at Baseline and Week 4 .  At Weeks 8, 12, and 24 ,subjects should take the stud y drug dose at the 
clinic within 30 minutes after collecting the PK blood sample .
Rationale:   To add PK collection timepoint for Baseline and a 30 -minute window for taking study 
drug dose after PK sample collection at Weeks 8, 12, and 24 .
Update Section 3.11 to indicate that data and accurate time of dose administration will be 
recorded in the eCRF for doses administered at the clinic during a study visit.
Rationale:   To provide additional clarification regarding data and accurate time capt ureof study 
drug dose administration .
Page 56 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Update Section 3.13 to indicate that body weight will be measured at scheduled visits as 
specified in Section 2.1 and in Appendix D, Activity Schedule .
Rationale:   To clarify weight collection timepoints.
Update Section 3.14 to change "pulse rate "to "heart rate ."
Rationale:   Toprovide consistency with wording in Section 3.14 and Appendix D, Activity 
Schedule .
Update Section 3.1 8to remove the following sentence:  "AbbVie will not receive results from 
the testing and will not be made aware of any positive result. "
Rationale:   Although AbbVie does not require receiving HIV test results, AbbVie CRAs are 
required to verify all study eligibility criteria, including the lack of confirmed positive anti -HIV 
antibody test, therefore the statement was removed to accurately reflect the current AbbVie 
monitoring practice.
Update Section 3.19 toindicate that the first dose of study drug will be administered after all 
other Baseline (Day 1) procedures are completed, with the exception of the PK blood draw .
Rationale:   Toclarify that Baseline PK draw should be performed post -dose .
Update Section 3.19 to indicate that subjects should be instructed to administer their do se at 
the site during the study visit and not at home prior to the visit ; however, the subject should 
follow the regular dosing schedule if study drug administration is normally after the time ofthe 
scheduled study visit .
Rationale: To clarify that the dose on the study day visit should be administered at the site to 
allow appropriate collection of PK samples in relation to the dosing time.
Update Section 3.20 to add "unless performed at a local laboratory "to indicate when a lab re -
test will be considered an Unschedule d Visit.
Rationale:   To provide further clarification regarding on -study unscheduled visits .
Update Section 4. 1to add language regarding toxicity management for abnormal labs and that 
additional supplemental eCRFs (hepatic and renal) may need to be completed.
Rationale:   Toprovide clarification regarding additional supplemental eCRFs required for toxicity 
management for abnormal labs , as described in Protocol Section 6.2.
Update Section 7.1 to clarify the question in the PaGIC -VExample to "Since the start of the 
treatment you 've received in this study, your vitiligo is… ".
Rationale:   To clarify the question since this is a pill and therefore "your vitiligo in areas treated 
with the study "would not apply.
Update Section 7.1 to provide numerical score rate response options of 0 –4 for the T -PaGVA 
and F-PaGVA scales.
Rationale:   To co rrect the T -PaGVA and F -PaGVA scales as score rate (0 –4) was missing.
Update Section 7.2to update the Vitiligo History Form Exampl ewording from "any other family 
member "to "any other biological family member ."
Rationale:   Toprovide a necessary correction on the paper version of the form.
Page 57 of 125 
  
STUDY M19 -051  |  Version 2.0  |  EudraCT 2021 -000081 -15
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Update Section 7.2 and Section 7.3 to provide more recent versions of the T -VASI, F- VASI, VES, 
ICVA and Individual Components of Face Examples, and to provide explanation that additional 
information containing i nstructions will be provided to the sites .
Rationale:   To keep this section c urrent .
Page 58 of 125 