DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 1 
  
   
 
Protocol 
 
Improving Recovery and Outcome Every Day after the ICU  (IMPROVE)  
IRB #: 1608126693  
 
Grant Title:  Decreasing Alzheimer’s Di sease and Related Dementias after Delirium- Exercise 
and Cognitive Training (DDD-ECT) 
Grant #:  R01AG055391 
 
Babar Khan, MD, MS 
Research Scientist, IU Center for Aging Research 
Associate Professor of Medicine, IU School of Medicine 
Division of Pulmonary/Critical Care 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
    
 
 
 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 2 
  
 
Table of Contents 
 
1.0 Backgroun d and Rationale .......................................................................................... Page 3 
2.0 Specific Aims  .............................................................................................................. Page 4 
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ....................................................................................... Page 5 
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization  ......................................................................................... Page 6 
5.0 Study Procedures  ........................................................................................................ Page 6 
6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems  
involving Risk to Participants or Others  ..................................................................... Page 9 
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  ........................................................................... Page 12 
8.0 Statistical Considerations  .......................................................................................... Page 12 
9.0 Outcome Measures ................................................................................................... Page 14 
10.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  .................................................................................. Page 15 
11.0 Follow-up and Record Retention  .............................................................................. Page 16 
12.0 References  ................................................................................................................. Page 16 
 
 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 3 
 1.  Background 
 
The Aging Brain during and after Critical Illness:  Critical illness has deleterious consequences on both 
acute and chronic cognitive functions.4-12 Acute cognitive dysfunction manifests itself as delirium in the 
critically ill especially the elderly. Delirium is a complex neuropsychiatric syndrome characterized by 
acute and fluctuating changes in cognition and consciousness.37,38 60% to 80% of critically ill ventilated 
older patients and 30% to 50% of those with less il lness severity have delirium for at least one day of 
their ICU or hospital stay.39-43 Chronic cognitive dysfunction manifests as ICU acquired cognitive 
impairment and dementia after critical illness, affects multiple cognitive domains and persists years 
after hospital discharge.9-12 Up to 71% of critical illness survivors have cognitive impairment at one year 
after hospital discharge11 and close to 18% are diagnosed with new dementia including Alzheimer’s 
disease within three years post ICU hospitalization.12 
 
Relationship among Delirium, ICU acquire d cognitive impairment and dementia: The presence of ICU 
delirium predisposes ICU survivors to long-term cognitive impairment and dementia.9-12 Studies showed 
that delirium was associated with worse cognitive p erformance 3 and 12 months after an ICU stay even 
after adjusting for age, education, chronic dise ase burden, pre-existing  cognitive impairment, 
cerebrovascular disease, severity of acut e illness, and exposure to neuroleptics.10,11 Similar results were 
observed in a prospective cohort study of 52 delirious  patients evaluated locally with only 6 (11.5%) of 
the 52 ICU survivors having normal cognition on a standardized neuropsychological battery at 3 
months.9 Among ICU survivors with cognitive impairment , 70% had cognitive impairment in at least two 
cognitive domains such as memory, executive functi on, language, or constructional praxis; 16% had 
deficit in memory only; and 14% had deficit in a cognitive domain other than memory.9 Furthermore, a 
study performed by Guerra et al. found that acute neurological dysfunction defined as anoxia, encephalopathy or delirium in the ICU was associate d with a new diagnosis of dementia or Alzheimer’s 
disease with an adjusted hazard ratio of 2.06 (1.72-2.46) within three years of ICU discharge.
12 The 
cognitively impaired survivors frequently also have concomitant emotional and functional disabilities.
10,44,45 Whereas only 23% of ICU survivors without co gnitive impairment are disabled, 100% of 
ICU survivors with cognitive impairment ar e unable to return to work full-time.44 Despite the high 
prevalence rates of cognitive and functional disability among ICU survivors, the majority of this 
vulnerable growing segment of ICU survivors does not receive post-ICU recovery care.43  
 Systemic inflammation, astrocyte and microglial activation, and loss of neuroprotective growth factors, a connecting link between delirium and dementia:  
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 4Delirium can be considered as a cytokine mediated inflammatory syndrome with pro-inflammatory 
cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-1, 6, 8, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- α disrupting the blood brain 
barrier with recruitment and infiltration of peri pheral leukocytes into th e central nervous system 
(CNS).46-48 The resultant microglial activation produces local pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, TNF- α), 
reactive oxygen species, expansion of microglial population49 and activation of astrocytes.50 Astrocyte 
activation and glial dysfunction results in elevated S-100 β and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) 
levels.51-54The neuroinflammation also promotes cholinergic failure55culminating in the neurocognitive 
syndrome of delirium. This is compounded by lower leve ls of neurotrophic growth factors such as insulin 
like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).56,57IGF-1 and BDNF have 
neurotrophic properties and provide protection agai nst free radical damage and cytotoxic cytokines.58-60
Both inhibit neuronal apoptosis and promote main tenance, survival, and regeneration of neurons.58-62
Moreover, IGF-1 increases choline acetyltransferase levels and modulates acetylcholine release, the key 
neurotransmitter implicated in delirium.60Thus a combination of increased neuroinflammation with a 
state of cholinergic failure in the CNS and depleted ne urotrophic factors predispose  patients to delirium. 
The inflammatory cascade, microglial and astrocyte activation, and loss of neuroprotection could persist 
after surviving critical illness,63leading to a chronic, persistent state of neuroinflammation,
neurotoxicity, diminished neuroplasticity and choliner gic failure, manifesting as long-term ICU acquired 
cognitive impairment, dementia or Alzheimer’s di sease (Figure 1). An intervention modulating the 
aforementioned factors could provide cognitive re covery and may delay onset of Alzheimer’s disease 
and related dementias among ICU survivors.
Neurobiological Effects of Physical Exercise and Cognitive Training: Animal studies: Physical exercise 
induces neural proliferation while cognitive traini ng promotes functional integration of these new 
neural elements into adaptive networks, effe cts found to be additive in animal studies.64,65As shown in 
an animal study, combination of physical exercise an d enrichment (a surrogate for cognitive training in 
the human model) produced more neurons in adult mice than either intervention alone with each 
superior to a “standard” environment.66An integrative review of decades of animal research concludes 
that adult neurogenesis occurs in an activity-depen dent manner and that both physical and cognitive 
inputs generate plasticity i nducing signals to the brain.64Movement stimulates neural precursor cells to 
proliferate while environments conducive to learning  and thinking promote survival of the new cells. 
Physical activity enhances angiogenesis, neur ogenesis, release of neurotrophic factors and 
neuroplasticity.16Only 1 week of exercise resulted in increased vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) levels in rats by increasing precursors  of angiogenesis, leading to new vessel formation.67Physical 
activity promotes neuronal survival, cell proliferati on and raises BDNF and IG F-1 in the somatosensory 
cortex and hippocampus.68-71This translated to enhanced learning and memory in rats that were 
allowed to exercise freely.69Human studies: Physical exercise increases cerebral blood flow, oxygen 
extraction and glucose use,72and reduces inflammation.73Older patients who perform aerobic exercise 
Figure1:Proposed Pathophysiologic ModellinkingDelirium andDementia
(Number ofarrowsdepicting magnitude)
Neuroinflammation
(ÏÏCRP,IL-1,6,8,TNF-α)
Microglial &
astrocyte activation 
(ÏÏS100β,GFAP)
Decreased Neuroprotection
(ÐÐIGF-I,BDNF)
Neuroinflammation
(ÏCRP,IL-1,6,8,TNF-α)
Microglial &
astrocyte activation 
(ÏS100β,GFAP)
Decreased Neuroprotection
(ÐIGF-I,BDNF)
Cognitive
Impairmen t
&Dementia
ICU
Delirium
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 5 
 showed the greatest increase in blood volume in  frontal and parietal lobe white matter, larger 
hippocampal volumes and better memory, and better white matter integrity.74-78 Physical exercise 
appears to mitigate endothelial dysfunction and vascular wall inflammation, and enhances neural 
substrates BDNF and IGF-1 that maximize the effects of subsequent cognitive stimulation.79,80 Similarly, 
cognitive therapy may exert its favorable effect by increasing levels of BDNF. This was shown in a 
randomized trial of eight weeks of cognitive therapy versus health education among patients with heart 
failure.81 Patients randomized into the cognitive therapy ar m showed an increase in their BDNF levels at 
8 weeks compared to baseline levels as well as  improvement in working memory, whereas the BDNF 
levels decreased in the education control.81 
 Evidence that Cognitive Training improves cognition: Cognitive training has been shown to improve 
mental abilities
82-85 and functional status in healthy older adults,86 patients with traumatic brain injury 
and stroke,87 and patients suffering from mild cognitive impairment (MCI).88 The largest and most 
rigorous investigation of the efficacy of cognitive tr aining in improving cognition and delaying functional 
loss is the ACTIVE study.88 ACTIVE enrolled 2,802 community-dwe lling adults (65 years and older) 
without Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias, a nd randomly assigned them to one of four groups 
(Memory, Reasoning, Speed of Processing traini ng or a no-contact control group). Each ACTIVE 
intervention produced an immediate improvement in the trained ability with largest improvements observed for the Speed of Processing intervention followed by Reasoning and Memory. Treatment gains 
declined over time but remained significant at the 5- year follow-up. A recent meta-analysis is consistent 
with this notion showing that persons with MCI obtain mild to moderate cognitive benefits (effect size 
range from .27 for working memory to .50 for language  domain) from cognitive training that are durable 
through follow-up.
89 The moderator analysis suggested no effect of subject age or years of education on 
outcomes and no differences between training deli vered by computer versus in-person methods nor 
was there a difference between groups versus individual instruction. 
 
Evidence that Physical Exercise improves cognition: Physical exercise improves cognitive ability,90,91 
brain function,92 and brain structure of adults.91,93 A cross-sectional study of 2,736 older women showed 
that high daytime movement was associated with higher Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE) scores.
94 A meta-analysis of 18 studies examining the effect  of exercise interventions on cognition in well 
older adults found a net effect size of .31 in favor of exercise over control activities .89 Executive 
cognitive ability showed the largest response to exercise as  compared to other cognitive domains. Gains 
were also greater for training that lasted 30-45 mi nutes (versus longer or shorter) and older subjects 
(versus ones that were age 55-65). Favorable cognitiv e effects of physical activity have also been 
demonstrated for patients with mild cognitive im pairment, Alzheimer’s disease, stroke, COPD, and 
traumatic brain injury.95-101  
 Additive Effects of Combined Physical Exerci se and Cognitive Training among older adults: As 
postulated above, it stands to reason that combined physical and cognitive training could have additive 
effects.  Two studies conducted in Europe found large effect  sizes (0.9-1.3) on cognition from combined 
training versus mental or exercise training alone in well older adults.
102,103 One study evaluating 
combined training did not find an effect; however, it  had a very small sample size (< 20 subjects per 
group), a low dose of exercise (<60 min of exercise per week), and an intervention focused only on memory but not executive function.
104   
 Effects of Combined Physical Exercise an d Cognitive Training among ICU survivors: Investigators from 
Vanderbilt and Duke Universities conducted a feasib ility trial of combined physical exercise and 
cognitive training among 21 ICU survivors. These ICU su rvivors were randomized to usual care (n = 8) or 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 6 
 12 weeks of at-home combined physical exercise and cogn itive training intervention, consisting of six in-
person visits for cognitive training and six telemedicine visits for physical exercise.105 At 3-month follow-
up, the ICU survivors in the active treatment arm to lerated the combined program and had significantly 
better cognition as measured by the TOWER test, which is a timed objective measure of executive 
function (median score: 13.0 vs. 7.5, p<0.01) and functional score as measured by the Functional 
Assessment Questionnaire (median score: 1.0 vs. 8.0, p=0.04). The findings of this study are promising 
and provide rationale for our proposed trial. However,  the study did not control for attention, had a very 
small sample size with no power to investigate the impact of the intervention on physical performance 
and it neither measured the ICU survivors overall quality of life nor their depressive and anxiety 
symptoms. Also, the isolated effects of physical reha bilitation or cognitive therapy on neuropsychiatric 
outcomes cannot be evaluated, as both in terventions were concurrently administered.  
 
Based on the background above, physical exercise an d cognitive training hold promise for improving 
cognitive outcomes of ICU survivors although the curren t evidence is limited. We plan to further explore 
these findings through an efficacy, randomized, 2x2 fa ctorial design clinical trial with four treatment 
arms, a) physical exercise and cognitive training, b)  physical exercise, c) cognitive training, and d) 
attention control. The trial will not only be able to  answer the question whether combined physical and 
cognitive therapies are superior to either of them al one as compared to attention control, but will also 
shed light on mechanisms of action of the intervention through use of serum biomarkers. An advanced 
mechanistic understanding of cognitive recovery afte r delirium will lead to refined interventions to 
prevent progression to dementia  and Alzheimer’s disease.  
 
 
2. Rationale and Specific Aims 
 
Two million older Americans suffer from an episode of  delirium during their intensive care unit (ICU) 
stay.1-3 Presence of delirium predisposes the elderly to  immediate in-hospital co mplications including a 
longer length of ICU and hospital stay, increased risk  of in-patient mortality and elevated costs of care.4-8 
In addition, ICU delirium is associated with long-ter m post-discharge complications such as development 
of cognitive impairment and dementia.9-12 Current advances in the manageme nt of critical illness have 
notably improved the survival rates among this vulnerable segment of older adults.13 However, 
increased survival comes at a cost with as many as 70% of older ICU survivors who had an episode of 
delirium suffering from subsequent cognitive impairment and dementia.9-12 At present, there are no 
effective and scalable recovery models to reme diate ICU acquired cognitive impairment and its 
attendant elevated dementia or Alzheimer’s disease risk.   The inability to develop efficacious interventions to  reduce ICU acquired cognitive impairment may stem 
from a limited understanding of th e link between acute brain dysfunct ion (delirium) and chronic brain 
dysfunction (ICU acquired cognitive impairment, dementia or Alzheimer’s disease). We propose a 
recovery intervention guided by the pathophysiologic  mechanisms implicated in producing critical illness 
delirium and elevated risk of cognitive impairment.
14-18 The intervention targets inflammation, glial 
dysfunction and astrocyte activation along with res toration of neurotrophic factors while training 
function directly across multiple cognitive doma ins to reduce the burden of cognitive impairment 
among ICU survivors of delirium. 
 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 7 
 Over the past five years, Indiana University Center for Aging Research has developed a research 
infrastructure focused on delirium and delirium asso ciated cognitive impairment, encompassing the ICU 
and post-ICU periods. This includes developing a bi o-repository of serum delirium biomarkers, ICU based 
delirium trials, and post-ICU exercise and cognitive therapy recovery models.9,19-26 Building upon our 
prior work and based on the path ophysiologic mechanisms mentione d above, we now propose a novel 
home-based  combined  physical exercise and cognitive training program  for older ICU survivors to 
improve cognitive impairment.  Our team is proposing a 2x2 factorial design randomized controlled trial (RCT) called “ Decreasing 
Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias after Delirium- Exercise and Cognitive Training (DDD-ECT)” 
to evaluate the efficacy of 12 weeks of combined ph ysical exercise and cognitive training on the primary 
outcome of cognitive function am ong older ICU survivors who experienced delirium or subsyndromal 
delirium during their ICU stay. We propose to deliver these interventions via a facilitator-led, small 
group format using internet-enabled, multiparty-videoconference delivered directly into the 
participants’ homes to ac hieve the following aims: 
 Primary Specific Aim:  Determine the effect of the combined physic al exercise and cognitive training on 
the cognitive function of ICU survivors aged 50 and older . Hypothesis: In comparison to older ICU 
survivors randomized to attention control or either in tervention alone, those randomized to 12 weeks of 
combined physical exercise and cognitive training will have higher total index cognitive scores as 
assessed by the Repeatable Battery for the Asse ssment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS)27 at 3 and 
6 months post randomization.   
 Secondary Specific Aim 1: Determi ne the effect of the combined physical exercise and cognitive 
training on physical performance, anxiety and de pressive symptoms, and quality of life of ICU 
survivors aged 65 and older.  Hypotheses: In comparison to older ICU survivors randomized to attention 
control or either intervention alone, those randomiz ed to 12 weeks of combined physical exercise and 
cognitive training will have higher physical performance as measured by short physical performance battery (SPPB)
28 and two-minute step test,29 lower mood and anxiety symptoms as measured by Patient 
Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9)30,31 and Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD-7) scale,32,33 and higher quality 
of life as measured by the Medical Outcomes Study 36-item short form (SF-36)34-36 at 3 and 6-months 
post randomization. 
 
Exploratory Aim 1:  To examine the mechanisms of action of combined training. Hypothesis: At the 
completion of treatment, the combined intervention group will sh ow reduced serum levels of CRP, IL-1, 
IL-6, IL-8, TNF- α, S-100β, and GFAP and increased levels of BDNF, VEGF, and IGF-1 compared to the 
attention control, or either intervention alone groups.  Successful achievement of the aforementioned aims  will pave the way for a large effectiveness RCT 
testing the combined intervention to  delay time to a clinical diagnosi s of Alzheimer’s disease and related 
dementias. 
 
3. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
 
Inclusion Criteria:   
[1] Patients aged ≥ 50 years,  
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 8 
 [2] admitted to medical and/or surgical ICUs at IU Health locations (Methodist, University, North, West, 
Saxony), Eskenazi hospitals [3] discharged home, sub-acute rehabilitation, long -term acute care, or skilled nursing facility,  
[4] able to provide consent or has a legally au thorized representative to provide consent,  
[5] access to a telephone (study provides  computer and broadband) and finally  
[6] have at least one episod e of subsyndromal delirium or  delirium as determined by the Confusion 
Assessment Method for the ICU-7 (CAM-ICU).
109 The CAM-ICU-7 score is determined by examining the 
patient for (a) acute and fluctuating changes in mental status, (b) inatte ntion, (c) disorganized thinking, 
and (d) altered level of consciousness. A CAM-ICU-7 sc ore is considered to be positive for delirium if the 
patient displays a, b, and c, or a, b, and d, or a, b, c, and d. The CAM-ICU-7 score is considered to be 
positive for subsyndromal delirium if any one feature of  delirium (either a, b, c, or d) is positive. The 
CAM-ICU diagnosis of delirium was validated agains t the DSM-III-R delirium criteria determined by a 
psychiatrist and found to have a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity of 92%.109  
 
Exclusion Criteria:   
[1] diagnosis of cancer with short life expectancy;  [2] current chemotherapy or radiation therapy (confirmed by electronic medical record);  
[3] history of dementing illnesses and other neurodeg enerative disease such as Alzheimer’s disease, 
Parkinson disease, or vascular dementia (confirmed  by EMR), or current prescription of anti-dementia 
medication, or ruled out by Functional Activities  Questionnaire (FAQ) score defining dementia.   
[4] current alcohol consumption > 5 drinks per day (self reported or confirmed by EMR);  [5] vision < 20/80 via Snellen card or confirmed by EMR;  [6] low hearing or communicative ability (examiner rated) that would interfere with interventions and 
outcome assessments;  
  
[7] have any active and untreated American College of Sports Medicine
133 absolute contraindications to 
exercise (confirmed by EMR) including: acute myocar dial infarctions within the past 2 days, ongoing 
unstable angina, uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmia wi th hemodynamic compromise, active endocarditis, 
symptomatic severe aortic stenosis, decompensated heart failure, acute pulmonary embolism, pulmonary infarction, or deep venous thrombosis, acute myocarditis or pericarditis, acute aortic 
dissection, physical disability that precludes safe an d adequate testing, or are unable to obtain provider 
clearance for physical exercise for any contraindication where medical management is unclear;  [8] have any active and untreated American College of Sports Medicine
133 relative contraindications to 
exercise (confirmed by EMR) including: known obstructive left main coronary stenosis, moderate  to 
severe  aortic stenosis with uncertain relationship  to symptoms, tachydysrhyt hmias with uncontrolled 
ventricular rates, acquired advanced or complete heart block, recent stroke or transient ischemia attack, 
mental impairment with limited ability to cooperate, resting hypertension with systolic >200 mm Hg or 
diastolic >100 mm Hg, uncorrected medical conditions, such as significant anemia, important electrolyte 
imbalance, and hyperthyroidism, or are unable to obta in provider clearance for physical exercise for any 
contraindication where medical management is unclear; 
[9] recovering from a skeletal fracture (confirmed by EMR), unless cleared by their physician of record to 
safely participate in exercise,  
[10] Acquired neurol ogic injury (stroke,  traumatic brain injury, cerebral edema/swelling, anoxic brain 
injury, or any other acute/subacute severe neurologic  deficit) as the admitting diagnosis or a new event 
during the course of hospitalization (confirmed by EMR) or  
[11] history of drug abuse within the last 3 months  confirmed by EMR or self-report with Drug Abuse 
and Screening Test (DAST-10) score ≥ 3].110  
[12] Schizophrenia or bipolar disorder (confirmed by EMR) 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 9 
 [13] Have any spinal cord injury wi th persistent neurologic deficit at the time of study enrollment 
[14]Status post tracheostomy and not eligible for a speaking valve [15] Pregnant or nursing [16] Incarcerated or homeless at time of study 
[17] Lives outside the greater Indianapolis area 
[18] Illiterate  
 Study team will be using electronic medical records to verify eligibility status. The study team will make 
all efforts to contact the clinical team when a patient’s eligibility status is unclear.   
4. Enrollment/Randomization 
 
Recruitment Targets: 
344 older ICU survivors who experienced delirium or subsyndromal delirium in the ICU will be enrolled.  
 Clinical Settings and Study Population: The target population for our trial is adults aged 50 and older 
who have survived a critical illness in the ICU and had a delirium/subsyndromal episode during their ICU 
stay at Indiana University School of Medicine affili ated hospitals and IU Health hospitals as listed in 
performing organizations.   
 Screening and Enrollment: Study personnel will screen for eligible subjects each  day using the ICU census. Eligible individuals (those 
who meet inclusion criteria and do not meet any exclusion criteria) will be screened up to twice per day for delirium until ICU discharge using the CAM-ICU-7.  Patients who screened positive on the CAM-ICU-7 
(either with study personnel or patient’s care team) and survived the ICU stay will be approached for 
enrollment into the study. CAM-ICU-7 screenings will  continue until hospital discharge for patients who 
enroll in the study.   
Study approach and consent may take place post-disch arge if patient is released from the hospital 
before study personnel have the opportunity to meet  the patient. Study brochures may be used to aid 
recruitment. Surrogate consent may be required for patients who are unable to provide consent. All 
patients consented via surrogate will be  re-consented once deemed competent.
111  
 [During COVID-19 health crisis, CAM-ICU/CAM-ICU-7 screenings will be conducted by ICU healthcare personnel only. Screening outcomes will be obtained from EMR. Study approach will be completed by study personnel via phone. Informed consent will be obtained follo wing the IU IRB Flexible Consent 
Procedures:   https://research.iu.edu/compliance/human-subjects/guidance/informed-consent.html. 
No study procedures will be completed prior to re ceiving the signed consent and authorization forms 
from the subject.]  
Randomization: After obtaining an informed consent, study staff wi ll complete a baseline assessment consisting of 
measures of cognition, physical function, depression  and anxiety, and quality of life (see measures 
section 4.3.l. below). Blood samples will also be collected from the participants at the time of baseline assessment. Baseline may be completed at subject’s ho me after hospital discharge if unable to complete 
full assessment in the hospital. After initial assess ment, study subjects will be randomized to study 
groups. Randomization will be stratified by discharg e location (home, other facility) and managed by the 
IU site  
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 10 
  
[During COVID-19 health crisis, baseline assessments will be completed via phone; abbreviated 
measures of cognition, and no measur es of physical function will be obtained due to the limitations of 
phone administration. Blood sam ples will not be collected.] 
 
5. Study Procedures 
 
Enrolled subjects randomized to the experimental intervention will receive cognitive training via 
computer-accessed online training modules 45 minute s per session, 2 days per week for 3 months; and 
physical exercise delivered by trained facilitators to pa rticipants in their homes via internet-based single 
or multi-party (2-6 per group) videoconference 45 minutes per session, 3 times per week for 3 months 
(Figure 3). 
 
Cognitive Intervention: 
The cognitive portion of the combined intervention consists of a suite of 24 programs called Brain HQ developed by Posit Science, Inc. The 
modules are designed to 
improve time-order judgment, visual discrimination, spatial-
match, forward-span, 
instruction-following, and memory. The program systematically reduces stimulus presentation time to maintain an 85% accuracy rate and launches each new session based on the st opping point of the preceding session.  
 
Cognitive Control: This consists of up to 20 minutes of puzzles and games, 2 days per week for 3 months. 
We will use on-line Brain HQ Control Game s developed by Posit Science, Inc.  
 Physical Exercise Intervention: The physical exercise po rtion of the combined intervention consists of 45 
minutes of multi-modal physical exercise focused on seated aerobic and progressive resistance training 
designed to improve aerobic capacity, muscular strength and endurance consistent with current 
exercise recommendations.112,113 We will deliver 3 sessions per week for 3 months. Each physical 
exercise session will be divided as follows: 5 minutes of warm-up, 10 minutes of upper-body, 10 minutes 
of core, 10 minutes lower-body, 5 minutes of upper-body and lower-body, and 5 minutes of cool-down and flexibility exercises. All exercises  are conducted from a seated position in a solid backed chair. We 
will provide participants with a heart rate monitor wa tch or pulse oximeter and have participants report 
their heart rate and oxygen saturation. Their heart rate should be above 55% but not to exceed 70% of 
their age-adjusted maximum heart rate thus providin g moderate-intensity exercis e for each participant. 
Due to limited heart rate response for participants on beta-blocker medications, we will also use the 
Rating of Perceived Exertion scale (RPE). Participants will be advised to exercise at the RPE level of 5 to 6 
on a 10-point scale. Generally, for adults over the age of 40 years, moderate-intensity is 5 to 6 on a 10-

DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 11 
 point exertion scale.114 Participants will also be given Velcro weight bands specific for the wrists and 
ankles that are color-coded by weig ht to allow the Interventionist to check that the appropriate weight 
is used by each participant during video-conference  sessions. The initial wrist weights will be 1 pound 
and the ankle weights will be 2 pounds, although the pa rticipants will have the option of 1-pound weight 
or no weight. Although small group (e.g., 2 to 6) format is the goal, we will start with one-on-one 
training with escalation into a group. We will cont inue one-on-one in cases of difficult adherence or 
unique physical abilities.                                                                                                                                 
 Physical Exercise Control: This consists of up to  10 minutes of gentle stretching. We will deliver 3 
sessions per week for 3 months. This stretching modul e was designed specifically as a control condition 
for exercise trials and was used as such  in the NIH-funded LIFE exercise trial.115 Heart rate, oxygen 
saturation and RPE will be collected as in the Exercise Intervention.   
Intervention Delivery - Computer and Videoconference in the Home: This feature is common to all 
treatment arms. Study staff will initiate contact within 2 weeks post-ICU discharge to set up the 
computer and videoconference system in subjects ’ homes. Afterwards, the interaction between the 
interventionists and the subjects will happen remotely through a computer video interface. 
Communication via videoconference can be described as  live, interactive television. The participants can 
hear and see one another and the interventionist;  and the interventionist can hear and see the 
participants. We will use New Inspiron One 20" Al l-in-One Desktop Dell computers, which have the 
processor and webcam built-in to the 20” monitor. Int ernet access will be provided with 4G LTE air cards 
or jet packs will use Zoom for video conferencing provided by Indiana University. The videoconferences will be security protected with room access provided  on an individual level. Information technology 
support, including computer and software settings, will be reviewed and addressed remotely as needed 
during sessions using TeamVi ewer software. We have installation, training, and IT support manuals in 
place. At the initial installation, our staff will orie nt the subject and family caregiver to the operational 
features of the computer and Internet interface. Addi tional orientation visits can be scheduled at the 
request of the participant or if the Interventionist dete cts difficulties in a subject’s ability to operate the 
computer. In addition, we have the capability to run the interventions with smaller groups or even single 
participant groups as needed.   [During COVID-19 health crisis, co mputers will be delivered to subj ect’s homes following a no-contact 
drop-off protocol. Interventionists will provide instructions via phone on how to set up the computer. As long as in-person research ac tivities are restricted, “additional orientation visits” will not be 
conducted.]  
 Safety: We have incorporated exercise program elements  that are associated with lower risks of 
cardiovascular complications and muscular injury. These include wa rming up, flexibility exercise, 
moderate intensity exercise, and a gradual progression of exercise intensity and duration.
112-114 The 
Interventionist will educate subjects about the signs and symptoms of angina, myocardial infarction, and 
muscle/tendon related injuries and how to resp ond to them; a procedure recommended by the 
American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association as effective means of reducing complications to exercise.
112,116 The frequency, duration, and intensity of intervention delivery will be 
modified as necessary for enrolled subjects who are medically frail. We have outlined our Data and 
Safety Monitoring Plan including the identificati on and response to serious cardiac events and 
orthopedic injuries in the Protection of Human Subjec ts section. Cognitive training is relatively safe but 
anxiety and burden will be monitored. As subjects  recover from their ICU hospitalization, they may 
require additional resources to address a variety of ICU survivorship issues. A list of resources will be 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 12 
 provided to all subjects after enrollment. Subjects who express needs to the study team will be referred 
to resources on the list. If a participant indicates suic idal ideation on the PHQ-9, the patient’s care team 
will be notified.  Suicidal ideation of participants at IU affiliated institutions w ill also be reported to Dr. 
Khan and Dr. Sophia Wang (clinical psychiatrist working at IU Center for Aging Research) for additional 
follow up; suicidal ideation of part icipants at non-affiliated institutions will be reported to the site PI, Dr. 
Khan, and Dr. Wang.  
  Potential Problems and Alternative Strategies: We have measures in place to ensure retention 
including availability of make-up sessions and availabili ty of individual training sessions. We will request 
Cognitive Intervention adherence data from Posit Scie nce. If retention drops below 80%, we will have 
the study staff follow-up with the study participant to troubleshoot any technical issues and1 provide 
coaching. Physical training sessions will be offered  throughout the week on varying days and times, 
including the weekends to provide ample training o pportunities and make-up sessions. We will use fair 
subject payments contingent on the completion of the 3 and 6 months follow-up assessments to 
maximize participation. Loss of information could oc cur if subjects are unable to complete outcome 
assessments. To estimate the treatment effect in ke y domains, a “step-down” battery, consisting of a 
subset of outcome measures, will be administered wh en a participant is not ab le to tolerate the full 
outcome assessments. This “step-down” battery may also  be administered via phone if subject is unable 
to complete an in-person assessme nt for the 3 or 6 month outcomes. We also can provide assistive 
devices (glasses, headphones or pocket talker) if a pa rticipant’s visual or audi tory acuity declines and 
interferes with interventions or outcome assessments.  
 Outcomes Assessments:  Trained and blinded research assistan ts will complete 3 and 6 months 
outcomes assessments consisting of measures of cogn ition, physical function, depression and anxiety, 
and quality of life (see Outcome Measures section 9 and Figure 3). Data will be collected using Research 
Electronic Data Capture (REDCap). We will employ multiple techniques to ensure concealment of 
outcomes assessment.117,118 Our research assistants are trained not to inquire about study assignments. 
They will be conducting structured assessments that do not provide room for qualitative interviewing 
that should prevent unblinding. They will not be  involved in study assignments and training 
interventions. Subjects will be instructed not to di scuss their training intervention with the research 
assistants.   The following instruments will be used during outcome assessments: Repeatable Battery for the 
Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS)
27, Trail Making Test Part A and B, Stroop Color and 
Word Test, Short Physical Performance Battery (SPP B), Grip Strength, 2-minutes Step Test, Patient 
Health Questionnaire–9 (PHQ-9), Generalized Anxi ety Disorder Scale (GAD-7), Medical Outcome Study 
Short Form (SF-36), and the International Ph ysical Activity Questionnaire (modified). 
 
[During COVID-19 health crisis, outcomes assessments will be completed via phone; abbreviated 
measures of cognition, and no measur es of physical function will be obtained due to the limitations of 
phone administration. Blood sam ples will not be collected.] 
 
 
6. Reporting of Adverse Events  or Unanticipated Problems  
 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 13 
  
Risks to Human Subjects:  
Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics, and Design : As many as 50% of IC U survivors aged 65 and 
older who had an episode of delirium are left wi th newly acquired “Post-Intensive care Syndrome” 
(PICS) characterized by cognitive, physical, or psyc hological symptoms that have onset in the peri-ICU 
period and persist among ICU survivor s for a long period of time with  some patients never recovering 
from such devastating symptoms.  We are proposing a behavioral intervention targeting ICU older 
survivors who have experienced delirium as a means of improving cognitive and functional outcomes. 
ICU survivors with delirium constitute a growing segment of older American who are vulnerable to 
develop post ICU cognitive, physical, and psychologica l disability. The current system does not offer an 
effective recovery care for this population.   
 The target population is 344 English-speaking adults aged 50 and older who have been admitted to a 
critical care unit, have had at least one episode of delirium and are discharged home. This intervention 
targets cognitively impaired individuals suffering from delirium and will also include women and minorities who meet the inclusion criteria, as these vulnerable populations are at risk of Post-Intensive 
Care Syndrome.    
Sources of Materials : During the hospital stay, research assist ants will review the medical records and 
conduct delirium screening to assess the eligibility cr iteria for potential subjects. Furthermore, blinded 
assessors will complete the baseline assessment within  the hospital or within the subject’s home as 
necessary. The data obtained from subjects will include self-report of demographics, health history, current medications, anxiety and mo od symptoms, and quality of life questionnaire. The Assessors will 
also be collecting information on cognitive and phys ical performance via objective tests and physiologic 
status (blood pressure, height, weight, heart rate, ox ygen saturation). Finally, the assessors will also 
conduct a medical record review to assess subject’s chronic conditions (Charlson index) and severity of 
medical illness (APACHE index). In addition to re cording attendance, subject’s effort and use of 
modifications, the Trainers will be collecting information on RPE, hear t rate and oxygen saturation, while 
Brain HQ will monitor cognitive performance, for each subject at each training session.  Data will be linked to participants through the use of a unique identi fying number. Only persons on the 
research team will have access to the data. All data are collected for research purposes only. All data will be entered via a password-protected, study specif ic REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) 
database. Case Report Forms (CRFs) will be stored in locked filing cabinets at Regenstrief Institute.  CRFs 
completed at non-affiliated institutions will be stored locally at their facility and, once the subjects are 
off-study, transferred to their long-term storage facility, per their local policy.    
 
Potential Risks :  
 
(1) Fatigue, anxiety, stress, or embarrassment  from the training or testing sessions.  Emotional distress 
may result from answering health and behavior questi ons. Testing may also create anxiety, stress, or 
embarrassment at perceived performance. Participan ts may also become fatigued during the testing 
and/or training sessions.   (2) Falls and/or muscle stiffness and soreness from exercise.  The exercise intervention components 
proposed in this study are consistent with standa rd recommendations for ex ercise among older adults. 
Based on piloting and published st udies, the most common risk associated with increased exercise is 
mild muscle stiffness and soreness. Moderate-intensity physical activities are associated with a very low 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 14 
 risk of musculoskeletal complications. There is a lo w risk of fall given all exercises in the physical 
intervention are seated.  (3) Cardiovascular complica tions from exercise.  The risks of cardiovascular complications do increase 
transiently during periods of strenuous physical activity.  
 (4) Exposure of confidential information.  There is the potential for loss of privacy or confidentiality due 
to the data collection efforts of this study.  (5) Discomfort with biological samples collection . Two blood samples will be collected from each 
participant, one during their hospital stay and the other at 3-months follow-up. Drawing blood could be 
associated with pain, bruising, and anxiety.   
Adequacy of Protection Against Risks:  
Recruitment and Informed Consent : Eligible subjects will be identified through the intensive care units 
census to which they are admitted. Study personnel will consent the patient or their legally authorized 
representative (if the patient is unable to consent for themselves) during their ICU hospitalization. If LAR provides consent, study personnel will seek consent from subject when capacity is regained, either at 
hospital or home.    
Protections Against Risk :  
 
(1) Fatigue, anxiety, stress, or embarrassment  from the training or testing sessions.  All questions 
planned for this study are part of validated stan dardized instruments, and we are not asking any 
questions that do not directly relate to the study purp ose. Both Interventionists and Assessors will be 
trained in their proper use and in the importance of  privacy and sensitivity to the participant’s time. 
They will be trained to be alert and sensitive to  signs of fatigue and other symptoms and to take 
appropriate actions when they are present. Breaks from testing will be offered as needed; assessment 
sessions can also be split into two sessions if a pa rticipant is tired or ph ysically uncomfortable.  
 (2) Falls and/or muscle stiffness and soreness from exercise.  We have minimized the risk of a fall through 
the use of seated endurance exerc ise training; the stiffness and soreness from adoption of exercise 
training are minimized by the moderate nature of  the exercise program; any soreness that may occur 
early in the training will subside within a few da ys and be unlikely to occur again with adherence. 
Participants with persistent or very severe soreness will be encouraged to contact their primary care 
provider. In the ~2,000 in-home assessments that we  have done in the African-American Health study 
which has an extensive physical exam protocol, we ha ve not had a single fall or other adverse event. We 
attribute this to our very careful training and superv ision procedures, which we will also be using in the 
proposed trial. We will have an emergency plan in place to handle any emergencies that might occur.  
 
(3) Cardiovascular complica tions from exercise.  We have incorporated exercise program elements that 
are associated with lower risks of cardiovascular comp lications, such as employing a warm up, flexibility 
exercise, using moderate intensity exercise, and a grad ual progression of exercise  intensity and duration. 
Supervised exercise programs also have a low rate  of complications suggesting that the use of well-
trained exercise instructors will also provide a margin  of safety to the partic ipants. Participants and 
interventionists will be instructed in the signs and symptoms of cardiovascular  complications and how to 
respond to them both during the exercise sessions and at other times.  
 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 15 
 (4) Exposure of confidential information.  Indiana University requires certification of training in protection 
of human subjects in research. The investigators, interventionists, assessors, and all key personnel have or will have successfully completed training and certification in these courses. All research involving the use of these data must be reviewed an d approved by the IRB. We will assure the privacy of subjects and 
confidentiality of study data by assigning unique iden tifiers to track participan ts’ data (rather than using 
names or hospital or social security  numbers) and keep all records und er lock with access only by study 
personnel. These procedures have been dutifully adh ered to in prior studies. The final data files for this 
study will be merged, maintained, and analyzed on servers managed by the Division of Biostatistics, 
Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of  Medicine. This group has extensive experience in 
the handling and security of PHI. None of the individu al participant data will be identifiable in published 
reports or manuscripts and the anal yzable datasets will not contain th e participant’s unique identifier.  
 (5) Discomfort with biological samples collection . A small amount of blood will be required (maximum 44 
ml over the entire study course) for the specified labo ratory analyses. We will attempt to coordinate all 
blood sampling with that done for clinical purpos es or from indwelling catheters to avoid added 
venipuncture. Sample collection at 3-month’s follow-up will be performed by an experienced phlebotomist. We have collected blood samples at ho mes of our participants in  our other projects and 
have not encountered any serious adverse events. Blood wi ll be stored in de-identified tubes and will be 
transported by personnel who have obtained certificati on in specimen handling and transfer. In addition 
we are planning to have continuo us feedback from the patient, th e caregiver, the physician, and the 
nursing staff to discuss any problems en countered during the data collection.  
 Potential Benefits of Proposed Resear ch to Human Subjects and Others.  
The study participants will be enga ged in national health guideline-level physical activity with all its 
attendant positive results (e.g., decreased fall risk, improved cardiovascular function, improved 
strength, improved pulmonary capacity, potentially re duced insulin resistance). Participants will also 
receive small payments for participation. This research could also provide a non-pharmacological 
treatment for cognitive impairment in patients su ffering from ICU acquired cognitive impairment. 
Despite the high prevalence rates of cognitive and physical disability among ICU survivors, only ICU 
patients who survived major stroke, traumatic brain in jury, or cardiac surgery receive formal cognitive or 
physical rehabilitation leaving a large percentage of ICU survivors with no such rehabilitation and higher 
risk for hospital readmission or death.  
 The intervention proposed in this study builds on prior research and may hold promise for an effective 
and scalable recovery model for this population. This intervention does require additional resources that 
will cost additional money; howev er, it is possible that these short-term costs will be offset by 
reductions in overall costs to patients and the heal thcare system. Patients enrolled in our study and 
randomized to receive our proposed  intervention might have a reducti on in post-ICU symptoms and, 
subsequently, may experience improved cognitive and physical function, improved mood, and quality of 
life. Our intervention might also improve other heal th outcomes such as a lower rate of hospital 
acquired complications, a higher prob ability of survival, lower institut ionalization rates, and decreased 
length of hospital stay, thereby decreasing health care utilization and cost. The intervention may delay 
onset of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias among ICU survivors.  
Importance of Knowledge Gained.  
Up to 70% of ICU survivors aged 65 and older develop long-term cognitive impairment and other 
functional and psychological sequelae of critical illness. Currently there are no effective and scalable 
recovery models to remediate or treat ICU acquired cognitive impairment and its deleterious effects on 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 16 
 quality of life and independence of the growing segm ent of ICU survivors. Our proposed intervention 
may provide a conceptual and scalable recovery mo del to remediate or treat post-delirium cognitive 
impairment and its deleterious effects on quality of  life and independence of the growing segment of 
ICU survivors. 
 
  
7. Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation 
 
Participants who wish to withdraw from the study will notify the study team verbally or via letter as 
outlined in the HIPAA authorization document. 
 
8. Statistical Considerations 
 
To verify the comparability of th e randomized groups, patients’ baseline characteristics among the four 
groups will be compared using analysis of cova riance (ANCOVA) for cont inuous variables and the 
Cochran-Mantel-Hansel statistic for categorical variab les while adjusting for age group. We will examine 
the distributions of continuous variables and use al ternative approaches such as transformation or 
nonparametric methods in cases of violation to th e normal distribution assumption. We will also 
examine the frequency distribution of all categorica l variables and adopt exact inference procedures in 
cases of zero or small cell size. All analyses will be conducted using the SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Carey, North Carolina).   
Primary Specific Aim:  Mixed effects models will be used with repeated RBANS scores collected at 
baseline, 3 months and 6 months as the outcome meas ures, group, time and a group by time interaction 
as independent variables while adjusting for str atification variables and other potential baseline 
covariates found to be significantly different in univariate comparisons. A significant interaction 
between group and time would indicate differences in  changes of cognitive fu nctions over time among 
the four groups. Post-hoc comparisons will be co nducted following a significant interaction between 
group and time to compare the effect of the co mbined training group to the other three groups 
(attention control, cognitive training only, and exercise only groups) at 3 month for immediate training effect and at 6 month for sustained training effect. Separate mixed effect models will also be used for repeated, Trail Making A&B, and St roop Color and Word Test scores. 
 Secondary Specific Aim 1:  Separate mixed effects models will be used with repeated measures (SPPB, 2-
minutes step, PHQ-9, GAD-7, SF-36 PCS and MCS) as th e outcome variables, group, time and interactions 
between group and time as independent variables whil e adjusting for stratification variables and other 
baseline covariates that may be different among the four  groups. Significant inte ractions between group 
and time in these models would indicate difference s in changes of functional outcomes, depressive 
symptoms, and anxiety levels or quality of life over time among the four groups. Post-hoc analyses will 
also be conducted following significant interactio ns in the mixed effects models to compare the 
combined training group to the other three groups  and to determine how early a group difference can 
be detected and whether the effect extends beyond the training period.  Exploratory Aim 1:  Changes in the serum levels of CRP, IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, TNF- α, S-100β, GFAP, BDNF, 
VEGF, and IGF-1 will be calculated and used as the dependent variables in ANCOVA models with group 
as the independent variable and adjusting for strati fication variables and baseline covariates that are 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 17 
 found to be different among the groups in univariate  comparisons. Post-hoc comparisons will be used 
following a significant group effect to compare biomar ker levels in the combined training group to the 
other three groups.  
Missing Data:  Two types of missing data are anticipated in th is trial. The first is due to death during 
follow-up. Our previous studies on ICU survivors ha ve shown that most post-ICU deaths happen within 
the first 30 days of discharge. We do not expect rates of death to differ among the four randomized groups. The second type of missing data comes from  participant withdrawal during follow-up. There 
may be a potential for higher rate of withdrawal in th ose enrolled in the intervention groups than in the 
control group. The mixed effects model approach we  propose to use is robust under the missing at 
random assumption, i.e. the probab ility of missing is unrelated to the missing observations. We will 
compare baseline characteristics of subjects with  missing outcomes due to death or dropout during 
follow-up to detect potential violation to the missin g at random assumption. Intention to treat analysis 
will be used in all models. Further sensitivity an alyses will be performed using various methods of 
imputation or a full parametric likelihood approach assuming various patterns of missing data.
131  
 Sample Size and Power: Cognitive training had been found to have a moderate effect size of 
approximately 0.5 SD and the combined training was found to have a larger effect size of 0.9 SD when 
comparing to the control group in healthy elderly subjects.102,103,132 Assuming effect sizes of 0.4 SD in the 
cognitive training only group and the exercise only groups at 3 and 6 month post baseline compared to 
the attention control group and effect size of 0.8 SD  in the combined training group at 3 and 6 month 
post baseline compared to the attention group, a sample  size of 60 patients in each group will yield 83% 
power at detecting a significant group by time interaction in a mixed effect model adjusting for 
correlations of 0.2 for outcomes measured 3 mo nth apart and correlations of 0.1 for outcomes 
measured 6 month apart at α=0.05. The power estimation wa s conducted using the GLMPower 
procedure in SAS. To further assume that 30% pati ents may miss some post-baseline assessments, we 
will need to enroll a total of 344 patients into the study (86 patients per group). Outcomes in Secondary 
Aim 1 will also have 83% power to detect effect sizes similar to those described for the Primary Aim. For Secondary Aim 2, we will have 81.7% power to de tect an overall treatment effect in changes in 
biomarkers with effect sizes of 0.31 SD in the cogn itive training only and the exercise only groups and 
0.62 SD in the combined  training groups at α=0.05 using one-way ANOVA and the Power procedure in 
SAS. 
 
9. Outcome Measures 
 
[During COVID-19 health crisis, outcomes assessments will be completed via phone; abbreviated measures of cognition, and no measur es of physical function will be obtained due to the limitations of 
phone administration. Blood sam ples will not be collected.] 
 
Cognitive Outcome Measures:  The Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status 
(RBANS)27 total index score will provide the primary outcome for the trial. Secondary outcomes will be 
assessed using individual neuropsychological tests of processing speed, executive control, and new 
learning ability as follows: Trail Making Test Parts A and B (seconds to complete),120 and Stroop Color 
and Word Test (interference trial).121 These measures sample major domains of cognition affected in ICU 
survivors.10 
 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 18 
 Physical Performance and Cardiovascular fitness: Physical training effects on balance and strength will 
be assessed via the Short Phys ical Performance Battery (SPPB),28 a validated objective assessment. The 
SPPB yields a performance score of 0-12 (0-4 poor, 5-7 intermediate, 8-12 good). A difference of 1 point 
indicates a significant change in function. Physical training effects on cardiovascular fitness will be 
assessed via the 2-minute step test.29 We have selected the 2-minute st ep test for cardiovascular fitness 
because it is a validated measure of aerobic capacity , does not require equipment, and can be used in 
the home setting.29 Grip strength with dominant hand will also be measured. 
 Self-reported Mood and Anxiety symptoms: We will use the Patient Heal th Questionnaire–9 (PHQ-
9)30,31 and Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7)32,33 to determine the impact of the intervention 
on ICU’s survivors’ mood and anxiet y. The PHQ-9 is a nine-item depression scale with a total score from 
0 to 27 and the GAD-7 is a seven-item anxiety scale with a total score from 0 to 21. Both of these scales are derived from the Patient Health Questionnaire, have good internal consistency, and test–retest 
reliability as well as convergent, construct, criterion, procedural and factorial validity for the diagnosis of 
major depression and general anxiety disorder.
30-33 
 
Self-reported quality of life outcomes: ICU survivors’ health–related qual ity of life will be assessed using 
the Medical Outcome Study Short Form (SF-36).34-36 This scale has eight components (physical 
functioning, role-physical, bodily pain, general heal th, vitality, social functioning, role-emotional, and 
mental health) that are aggregated into a Physical  Component Summary (PCS) and a Mental Component 
Summary (MCS).34-36  We will use both the PCS and the MCS as  the quality of life outcomes. Changes that 
differ between groups by 2 or more points on a scale of 0 to 100 have been shown to be clinically or socially meaningful.
36   
 
Collection of Biological samples:  The blood will be collected and sto red according to biological samples 
protocol to maximize sample quality and decrease sample variability due to  sample collection and 
processing techniques. Blood samples will be collected at baseline and at 3 months. The 3-month time-
point is chosen because this marks the immediate post-training assessment phase, a point where we 
expect to see the maximum effect of interventions,  improvements in the neurobiology and concomitant 
biomarker profile. Two tubes (one lavender- and one re d- top) will be used to collect 20 ml of blood 
from each patient. These tubes will then be labeled wi th pre–printed labels with a de-identified code. To 
avoid biomarker degradation and platelet activation, these samples will be centrifuged immediately at 
3000 x g. The supernatants will be removed and stored in aliquots so that multiple episodes of freezing 
and thawing will be unnecessary during assay proc edures. An additional 4ml fresh blood will be 
collected at Baseline and/or 3 months for DNA extr action. The tubes will be placed on dry ice for 
transport. Once at the storage facility, the aliquots  will be placed in pre-labeled boxes and the boxes 
stored at -80 o C.  
 Biomarkers : The conceptual model holds that the cognitiv e benefit of combined physical exercise and 
cognitive training is achieved through modulation of physiologic process (Secondary specific aim 2). As a 
result, we will measure circulating levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, 6, 8, TNF- α); the acute-
phase reactant (CRP); neurotrophic factors (IGF-1, VE GF, BDNF); and markers of glial dysfunction and 
astrocyte activation (S-100 β, GFAP). Serum marker quantifications wi ll be performed in duplicates using 
pre-validated commercially available assay kits. Ea ch kit employs 1-2 positive control(s) of known 
concentration and a negative control in every run. We will follow manufacturer provided established 
protocols for these assays.  
 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 19 
 APOE Collection and Assay: Genomic DNA will be extracted from blood samples using the DNeasy Blood 
& Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Inc., Valencia, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Approximately 50ng 
of genomic DNA will be used for amplification. AP OE genotypes will be determined by restriction 
enzyme digestion of amplified DNA.123  
 
Plasma amyloid- β Aβ42/Aβ40: As number of recent studies have reported that a low ratio of plasma 
amyloid-β Aβ42 over A β40 is associated with increased Alzheimer’s disease risk and greater cognitive 
decline,124,125 we will explore the effect of a low ratio on our intervention. Samples will be analyzed using 
standard analysis techniques.124  
 Acute Health Care Utilization: In addition to patient reported emergency department and hospital 
admission data, we will use the lo cal data-warehouse to capture all of the data needed to determine 
utilization. Furthermore, we will also use the data fr om the Indiana Network for Patient Care (INPC) to 
complement any data use outside of our health system. INPC is the primary health information 
exchange in the state of Indiana and it provides data for acute care services from all of the health care 
systems within the state of Indiana. We will determ ine the number of emergency  department visits and 
the number of re-hospitalizations during follow-up as well as the diagnoses associated with each 
utilization episode.  Other data collection:  At hospital discharge and baseline we will measure subject’s age, race, gender, 
years of education, visual acuity, height, weight, bo dy mass index, heart rate, blood pressure, Charlson 
Comorbidity Index,
126 APACHE II score,127 activities and instrumental activities of daily living (ADL/IADL) 
prior to ICU admission thro ugh Katz and Lawton scales,128,129 cognitive status prior to admission through 
IQCODE,130 cognitive and physical activity levels prior to admission, admission and discharge diagnoses, 
duration of mechanical ventilation, duration of delirium, ICU/hospital  length of stay, and ICU and in-
home medications. These measures will be used to describe the ICU survivors characteristics and as 
potential confounders.  
 Study team will request physical therapy, occupation al therapy, and speech therapy records from rehab 
facilities to identify physical and cognitive tr aining received between ICU discharge and study 
intervention for subjects discharged to a facility.   
 
10. Privacy/Confidentiality Issues 
 
Loss of confidentiality  is a risk in this type of data collection. Our data management and quality 
assurance techniques have proven effective in past trials in maintaining confidentiality and all study 
personnel have completed training in Human Subjects Research and HIPAA standards. 
 
11. Follow-up and Record Retention 
 
This is a five-year study and study documents will be  destroyed seven years after the end date of the 
study. 
 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 20 
 12. References: 
 
1. Inouye SK. Predisposing and precipitating factor s for delirium in hospitalized older patients . 
Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 1999;10:393–400.  
2. Inouye SK. Delirium in hospitalized older patients: recognition and risk factors . J. Geriatr. 
Psychiatry Neurol.  1998;11:118–125.  
3. US Department of Health and Human Services. CMS statistics. Washington, DC: Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services; 2004. (publication no. 03445) 
4. Lin SM, Liu CY, Wang CH, et al. The impact of de lirium on the survival of mechanically ventilated 
patients. Critical care medicine. Nov 2004;32(11):2254-2259. 
5. Ely EW, Shintani A, Truman B, et al. Delirium as a predictor of mortality in mechanically 
ventilated patients in th e intensive care unit. JAMA : the Journal of the American Medical 
Association. Apr 14 2004;291(14):1753-1762. 
6. Ely EW, Gautam S, Margolin R, et al. The impact of delirium in the intensive care unit on hospital 
length of stay. Intensive care medicine. Dec 2001;27(12):1892-1900. 
7. Milbrandt EB, Deppen S, Harrison PL, et al. Co sts associated with delirium in mechanically 
ventilated patients. Critical care medicine. Apr 2004;32(4):955-962. 
8. van den Boogaard M, Schoonhoven L, Evers AW, van der Hoeven JG, van Achterberg T, Pickkers 
P. Delirium in critically ill patients: impact on  long-term health-related quality of life and 
cognitive functioning. Critical care medicine. Jan 2012;40(1):112-118.. 
9. Khan BA, Lasiter S, Boustani MA. Critical Care Recovery Center. Making the case for an 
innovative collaborative care model for ICU survivors. . American Journal of Nursing. 
2015 March; 115 (3); 24-31 
10. Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, Jackson JC, et al. Long-term cognitive impairment after critical 
illness. The New England journal of medicine. Oct 3 2013;369(14):1306-1316. 
11. Girard TD, Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP, et al. Delirium as a predictor of long-term cognitive 
impairment in survivors of critical illness. Crit Care Med  2010; 38: 1513-1520 
12. Guerra C, Linde-Zwirble WT, Wunsch H. Risk factors fro dementia after critical illness in elderly 
Medicare beneficiaries. Crit Care  201216: R233 
13. Needham DM, et al. Improving lo ng-term outcomes after discharge from intensive care unit: 
report from a stakeholders’ conference. Crit Care Med 2012; 40(2):502-9.  
14. Khan B, Zawahiri M, Campbell N, Boustani M. Biomarkers for Delirium- A Review. Journal of 
American Geriatrics Society. Nov 2011. 59:S256-S261 
15. Cerejeira J, Firmino H, Vaz-Serra A, Mukaetova- Ladinska EB. The neuroinflammatory hypothesis 
of delirium. Acta Neuropathol . 2010 Jun;119(6):737-54 
16. Hopkins RO, Suchyta MR, Farrer TJ, Needham D.  Improving post-intensive care unit 
neuropsychiatric outcomes . AJRCCM 2012. 186 (12) 1220-1228 
17. Girard TD. Dittus RS, Ely EW. Critical illness brain injury. Annu Rev Med  2016. 67: 497-513 
18. Wilcox ME, Brummel NE, Archer K et al. Cognitive dysfunction in ICU patients: risk factors, 
predictors, and rehabilitation interventions. Crit Care Med  2013; 41: S81-S98 
19. Campbell N, Khan B, Farber M, et al. Improving the care of delirium in the ICU: Design of a 
pragmatic study. Trials. 2011 Jun 6; 12:139. 
20. Khan BA, Guzman O, Campbell NL et al. Comparison and agreement between two sedation 
scales; Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale and Seda tion Agitation Scale in evaluating patients’ 
eligibility for Delirium assessment in the Intensive Care Unit. CHEST.  2012 Jul; 142(1):48-54. 
21. Khan BA, Farber MO, Campbell NL et al. S-100 calcium binding protein as a biomarker for 
delirium duration in the intensive care unit. An exploratory analysis. IJGM. 2013:2 (6) 855-861. 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 21 
 22. Khan BA, Calvo-Ayala E, Campbell NL, et al. Clinical Decision Support System and Incident 
Delirium among Cognitively Impaired Hospitaliz ed Older Adults Transferred to the Intensive 
Care Unit. Am J Crit Care.  2013 May; 22(3):257-62. 
23. Khan BA, Fadel WF, Tricker JL, et al. Effectiveness of Implementing a Wake Up and Breathe 
Program on Sedation and Delirium in the ICU. Critical care medicine. 2014 Dec;42(12):e791-
e795. 
24. Khan BA, Perkins A, Hi SL, et al. Relationship between African-American Race and Delirium in the 
Intensive Care Unit. CCMED 2016. In press. 
25. Wang S, Lasiter S, Zarzaur B, Campbell T, Boustan i M, Khan B. Critical Care Recovery Center 
(CCRC): Can a Geriatric Model of Care Guide Recovery of ICU Survivors? Best Practices in Mental 
Health . 2016; 12(2) (In press) 
26. Oles SK, Stephens N, Bubp CA, Shepard P, Cam pbell T, Boustani MA, Khan BA. Development and 
Implementation of a Novel Cognitive Rehabilitation  Protocol for Intensive Care Unit Survivors. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 191;2015:A4504 
27. Randolph C, Tierney MC, Mohr E, et al. Th e Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of 
Neuropsychological Status (RBANS):  Preliminary Clinical Validity. J Clin Exp Neuropsyc. 1998;Vol. 
20, No. 3:310-319. 
28. Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Pieper CF, et al. Lower extremity function and subsequent disability: 
Consistency across studies, predictive models, an d value of gait speed alone compared with the 
short physical performance battery. The Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological Sciences 
and Medical Sciences.  Apr 2000; 55(4):M221-231 
29. Rikli R, Jones CJ. American College of Sports Medici ne: Senior Fitn ess Test Manual.  Human 
Kinetics2001 
30. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression severity measure.  
Journal of general internal medicine. Sep 2001; 16(9):606-613, PMCID: PMC1495268. 
31. Lowe B, Unutzer J, Callahan CM, Perkins AJ, Kroenke K. Monitoring depression treatment 
outcomes with the patient health questionnaire-9. Medical care. Dec 2004; 42(12):1194-1201. 
32. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Monahan PO, Lowe B. Anxiety disorders in primary care: 
prevalence, impairment, como rbidity, and detection. Annals of internal medicine. Mar 6 2007; 
146(5):317-325. 
33. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, Lowe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety 
disorder: the GAD-7. Archives of internal medicine. May 22 2006; 166(10):1092-1097. 
34. Ware JE, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36 item Short-Form Health Survey. Med Care . 1992; 30(6): 
473-481. 
35. Ware JE, Kosinski M, Keller SD. SF-36 Physical and Mental Health Summary Scales: A User’s 
Manual. Boston MA: The Health Institute: New England Medical Center; 1994. 
36. Ware JE, Bayliss MS, Rogers WH et al. Difference s in 4–year health outcomes for elderly and 
poor, chronically ill patients treated in HMO an d fee-for-service systems; results from the 
medical outcomes study. JAMA , 1996; 276(13): 1039-1047 
37. American Psychiatric Association : Diagnostic an d statistical manual of mental disorders. text 
revision. 2000. 
38. Morandi A, Pandharipande PP, Jackson JC, Bell elli G, Trabucchi M, Ely EW. Understanding 
terminology of delirium and long-term cognitive impairment in critically ill patients. Best 
practice & research. Clinical anaesthesiology. Sep 2012;26(3):267-276. 
39. Pisani MA, Kong SY, Kasl SV, Murphy TE, Araujo KL , Van Ness PH. Days of delirium are associated 
with 1-year mortality in an older intensive care unit population. American journal of respiratory 
and critical care medicine. Dec 1 2009;180(11):1092-1097. 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 22 
 40. Pandharipande PP, Pun BT, Herr DL, et al. Effe ct of sedation with dexmedetomidine vs 
lorazepam on acute brain dysfunction in me chanically ventilated patients: the MENDS 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. Dec 12 
2007;298(22):2644-2653. 
41. Schweickert WD, Pohlman MC, Pohlman AS, et al. Early physical and occupational therapy in 
mechanically ventilated, critically ill pa tients: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. May 30 
2009;373(9678):1874-1882. 
42. Brummel NE, Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP, et al. Delirium in the ICU and subsequent long-term 
disability among survivors of mechanical ventilation. Critical care medicine. Feb 2014;42(2):369-
377. 
43. Gibson V. Update on NICE guidance CG83  Rehabilitation after Critical Illness. Nursing in critical 
care. Jul-Aug 2010;15(4):222-223. 
44. Rothenhausler HB, Ehrentraut S, Stoll C et al. The relationship between cognitive performance 
and employment and health status in long-t erm survivors of acute respiratory distress 
syndrome: results of an exploratory study. Gen Hosp Psychiatry  2001. 23:88-94 
45. Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP, Girard TD et al. Depression, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and 
Functional Disability in Survivors of Critical Illness: results from the BRAIN ICU (Bringing to light the Risk Factors And Incidence of Neuropsychologic al dysfunction in ICU survivors) Investigation: 
A Longitudinal Cohort Study.  Lancet Respir Med . 2014 May ; 2(5): 369–379  
46. Hofer S, Bopp C, Hoerner C, et al. Injury of the blood brain barrier and up-regulation of ICAM-1 
in polymicrobial sepsis. J Surg Res . 2008;146:276-281 
47. Nishioku T, Sohgu S, Takata F. et al. Detachmen t of brain pericytes from the basal lamina is 
involved in disruption of the blood-brain barrier caused by lipopolysaccharide-induced sepsis in 
mice. Cell Mol Neurobiol . 2009;29(3):309-316. 
48. Semmler A, Okulla T, Sastre M, Dumitrescu-Ozimek L. Heneka M. Systemic inflammation induces 
apoptosis with variable  vulnerability of different brain regions. J Chem Neuroanat . 2005;30:144-
157. 
49. Block ML, Zecca L, Hong JS. Microglia mediat ed neurotoxicity: uncovering the molecular 
mechanisms. Nat Rev Neuroscience . 2007; 8(1):57-69. 
50. Cardona AE, Li M, Liu L, Savarin C, Ransohoff RM . Chemokines in and out of the central nervous 
system: much more then chemotaxis and inflammation. J Leukoc Biol . 2008;84(3):587-94. 
51. Pinto SS, Gottfried C, Mendez A, et al. Immunocontent and secretion of S100B in astrocyte 
cultures from different brain regions in relation to morphology, FEBS Letters. 2000;486:203–7.  
52. Porter JT, McCarthy KD. Astrocytic neurotransmitter receptors in situ and in vivo.  Progress 
Neurobiol.  1997;51:439–455.  
53. Santamaria-Kisiel L, Rintala-Dempsey AC, Sh aw GS. Calcium-dependent and -independent 
interactions of the S100 protein family, Biochem. J.  2006;396:201–14.  
54. Korley FK, Diaz-Arrastia R, Wu AHB et al. Circulating Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor Has 
Diagnostic and Prognostic Value ͒in Traumatic Brain Injury. JOURNAL OF NEUROTRAUMA  
33:215–225 (January 15, 2016)  
55. Hshieh TT, Fong TG, Marcantonio ER, Inouye SK. Cholinergic deficiency hypothesis in delirium: a 
synthesis of current evidence. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . 2008;63(7):764-72  
56. Morandi A, Gunther ML, Pandharipande PP, et al. Insulin-like growth factor-1 and delirium in 
critically ill mechanically ventilated patients: a preliminary investigation. Int Psychogeriatri . 2011 
Sep;23(7):1175-81. 
57. Grandi C, Tomasi CD, Fernandes K, et al. Brain- derived neurtrophic factor and neuron-specific 
enolase, but not S100 β levels are associated to the occurrence of delirium in intensive care unit 
patients. J Crit Care . 2011;26:133-7 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 23 
 58. Broadhurst C, Wilson K. Immunology of deliriu m: new opportunities for treatment and research. 
British Journal of Psychiatry . 2001;179:288-89. 
59. Demarinis L, Mancini D, Valle A. Hypothalamic  derangement in traumatized patients: growth 
hormone and prolactin reponse to thyr otropin-releasing hormone and GHRH. Clinical 
Endocronology.  1999;50:741-47. 
60. Lackey BR, Gray SL, Hendricks DM.  Actions and interactions of  the IGF system in Alzheimer’s 
disease: review and hypothesis. Growth Horm IGF Res.  2000 Feb;10(1):1-13. 
61. Cohen-Cory, S., Kidane, A. H., Shirkey, N. J., an d Marshak, S. (2010). Brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor and the development of struct ural neuronal connectivity. Dev. Neurobiol . 70, 271–288.  
62. Huang, E. J. and Reichardt, L. F. (2001). Ne urotrophins: roles in neuronal development and 
function. Annu. Rev. Neurosci.  24, 677– 736.  
63. Van Gool WA, van de beek D, Eikelenboom P.  Systemic inflammation and delirium: When 
cytokine collide. Lancet 2010; 375: 773-775 
64. Kempermann G, Fabel K, Ehninger D, et al. Why and how physical activity promotes experience-
induced brain plasticity. Frontiers in neuroscience. 2010;4:189. 
65. Erickson KI, Kramer AF. Aerobic exercise effects on cognitive and neural plasticity in older adults. 
British journal of sports medicine. Jan 2009;43(1):22-24. 
66. Fabel K, Wolf SA, Ehninger D, Babu H, Leal-Galicia P, Kempermann G. Additive effects of physical 
exercise and environmental enrichment on adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice. Frontiers in 
neuroscience. 2009;3:50. 
67. Ding YH, Luan XD, Li J, Rafols JA, Guthinkonda M, Diaz FG, Ding Y. Exercise-induced 
overexpression of angiogenic factors and reduction of ischemia/reperfusion injury in stroke. Curr Neurovasc Res 2004;1: 411–420.  
68. Eadie BD, Redila VA, Christie BR. Voluntary exercise alters the cytoarchitecture of the adult 
dentate gyrus by increasing cellular proliferation, dendritic complexity, and spine density. J 
Comp Neurol  2005;486:39–47.  
69. van Praag H, Shubert T, Zhao C, Gage FH. Exercise enhances learning and hippocampal 
neurogenesis in aged mice. J Neurosci  2005;25:8680–8685.  
70. loughman M, Granter-Button S, Chernenko G, Tucker BA, Mearow KM, Corbett D. Endurance 
exercise regimens induce differential effects on brain-derived neurotrophic factor, synapsin-I 
and insulin- like growth factor I after focal ischemia. Neuroscience  2005;136:991– 1001.  
71. Vaynman S, Ying Z, Gomez-Pinilla F. Hippocampal BDNF mediates the efficacy of exercise on 
synaptic plasticity and cognition. Eur J Neurosci 2004;20:2580–2590.  
72. Churchill JD, Galvez R, Colcombe S, Swain RA , Kramer AF, Greenough WT. Exercise, experience 
and the aging brain. 
Neurobiol Aging  2002; 23:941–955.  
73. Michael Gleeson, Nicolette C. Bish op, David J. Stensel et al.Th e anti-inflammatory effects of 
exercise: mechanisms and implications for the prevention and treatment of disease.  Nature 
Reviews, Immunology  2011. 607-615 
74. Colcombe SJ, Erickson KI, Scalf PE, Kim JS, Prakas h R, McAuley E, Elavsky S, Marquez DX, Hu L, 
Kramer AF. Aerobic exercise training in creases brain volume in aging humans. J Gerontol A Biol 
Sci Med Sci 2006;61:1166–1170.  
75. Erickson KI, Prakash RS, Voss MW, Chaddock L, Hu  L, Morris KS, White SM, Wojcicki TR, McAuley 
E, Kramer AF. Aerobic fitness is associated with hippocampal volume in elderly humans. 
Hippocam- pus  2009;19:1030–1039.  
76. Erickson KI, Raji CA, Lopez OL, Becker JT, Rosano C, Newman AB, Gach HM, Thompson PM, Ho 
AJ, Kuller LH. Physical activity pre- dicts gray matter volume in late adulthood: the 
Cardiovascular Health Study. Neurology  2010;75:1415–1422.  
77. Marks BL, Katz LM, Styner M, Smith JK. Aerobic fitness and obesity: relationship to cerebral 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 24 
 white matter integrity in the brain of active and sedentary older adults. Br J Sports Med  
2011;45:1208–1215.  
78. Marks BL, Madden DJ, Bucur B, Provenzale JM, White LE, Cabeza R, Huettel SA. Role of aerobic 
fitness and aging on cerebral  white matter integrity. Ann N Y Acad Sci  2007;1097:171–174.  
79. Voss MW, Nagamatsu LS, Liu-Ambrose T, Kramer AF . Exercise, brain, and cognition across the 
life span. J Appl Physiol. Nov 2011;111(5):1505-1513. 
80. Ribeiro F, Alves AJ, Duarte JA, Oliveira J. Is exercise training an effective therapy targeting 
endothelial dysfunction and vascular wall inflammation? International journal of cardiology. Jun 
11 2010;141(3):214-221. 
81. Pressler SJ, Titler M,Koelling TM et al. Nurse-Enhanced Computerized Cognitive Training 
Increases Serum Brain-Derived Neurotropic Factor Levels and Improves Working Memory in Heart Failure.  Journal of Cardiac Failure  2015. Vol. 21 No. 8  
82. Ball K, Berch DB, Helmers KF, et al. Effects of cogn itive training interventions with older adults: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. Nov 13 
2002;288(18):2271-2281. 
83. Ball K, Edwards JD, Ross LA. The impact of spee d of processing training on cognitive and 
everyday functions. The journals of gerontology. Series B, Psychological sciences and social 
sciences. Jun 2007;62 Spec No 1:19-31. 
84. Ball KK, Beard BL, Roenker DL, Miller RL, Griggs DS. Age and visual search: expanding the useful 
field of view. Journal of the Optical Society of America. A, Optics and image science. Dec 
1988;5(12):2210-2219. 
85. Smith GE, Housen P, Yaffe K, et al. A cognitive training program based on  principles of brain 
plasticity: results from the Improvement in Memo ry with Plasticity-based Adaptive Cognitive 
Training (IMPACT) study. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. Apr 2009;57(4):594-603. 
86. Willis SL, Tennstedt SL, Marsiske M, et al. Long-term effects of cognitive training on everyday 
functional outcomes in older adults. JAMA : the journal of the Am erican Medical Association. 
Dec 20 2006;296(23):2805-2814 
87. Cicerone KD, Langenbahn DM, Braden C, et al. Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: updated 
review of the literature from 2003 through 2008. Archives of physical medicine and 
rehabilitation. Apr 2011;92(4):519-530. 
88. Unverzagt FW, Kasten L, Johnson KE, et al. Effect  of memory impairment on training outcomes 
in ACTIVE. Journal of the International Neur opsychological Society : JINS. Nov 2007;13(6):953-
960. 
89. Li, H.J., et al., Cognitive intervention for p ersons with mild cognitive impairment: A meta-
analysis . Ageing Research Reviews , 2011. 10(2): p. 285-296 
90. Colcombe S, Kramer AF. Fitness effects on the cogn itive function of older adults: a meta-analytic 
study. Psychological science. Mar 2003;14(2):125-130. 
91. Baker LD, Frank LL, Foster-Schubert K, et al. Effects of aerobic exercise on mild cognitive 
impairment: a controlled trial. Archives of neurology. Jan 2010;67(1):71-79. 
92. Colcombe SJ, Kramer AF, Erickson KI, et al. Cardiova scular fitness, cortical plasticity, and aging. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. Mar 2 
2004;101(9):3316-3321. 
93. Colcombe SJ, Erickson KI, Scalf PE, et al. Aerobic  exercise training increases brain volume in 
aging humans. The journals of gerontology. Series A, Bi ological sciences an d medical sciences. 
Nov 2006;61(11):1166-1170. 
94. Barnes DE, Blackwell T, Stone KL, Goldman SE, Hillier T, Yaffe K. Cognition in older women: the 
importance of daytime movement. J Am Geriatr Soc  2008;56:1658–1664.  
95. Laurin D, Verreault R, Lindsay J, MacPherson K,  Rockwood K. Physical activity and risk of 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 25 
 cognitive impairment and dementia in elderly persons. Arch Neurol  2001;58:498–504.  
96. Palleschi L, Vetta F, De Gennaro E, Idone G, Sottosanti G, Gianni W, Marigliano V. Effect of 
aerobic training on the cognitive performance of elderly patients with senile dementia of Alzheimer type. Arch Gerontol Geriatr  1996;22:47–50.  
97. Pyoria O, Talvitie U, Nyrkko H, Kautiainen H, Pohjolainen T, Kasper V. The effect of two 
physiotherapy approaches on physical and cog-  nitive functions and independent coping at 
home in stroke rehabili- tation.  A preliminary follow-up study. Disabil Rehabil  2007;29:503– 511.  
98. Quaney BM, Boyd LA, McDowd JM, Zahner LH, He J, Mayo MS, Macko RF. Aerobic exercise 
improves cognition and motor function poststroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair  2009;23:879–
885.  
99. Ozdemir F, Birtane M, Tabatabaei R, Kokino S,  Ekuklu G. Comparing stroke rehabilitation 
outcomes between acute inpatient and non- intense home settings. Arch Phys Med Rehabil  
2001;82:1375–1379.  
100. Etnier JL, Berry M. Fluid intelligence in an older COPD sample after short- or long-term exercise. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001;33:1620–1628.  
101. Grealy MA, Johnson DA, Rushton SK. Improving cognitive function after brain injury: the use of 
exercise and virtual reality. Arch Phys Med Rehabil  1999;80:661–667.  
102. Fabre, C., et al., Improvement of cognitive func tion by mental and/or individualized aerobic 
training in healthy elderly subjects . International Journal of Sports Medicine , 2002. 23(6): p. 415-
421. 
103. Oswald, W.D., et al., Differential effects of single versus combined cognitive and physical 
training with older adults: The Si mA study in a 5-year perspective . European Journal of Ageing , 
2006. 3: p. 179-1 
104. Legault, C., et al., Designing clinical trials for assessing the effects of cognitive training and 
physical activity interventions on cognitive outcomes: The Seniors Health and Activity Research 
Program Pilot (SHARP-P) Study, a randomized controlled trial . BMC Geriatrics , 2011. 11(1): p. 27. 
105. Jackson JC, Ely EW, Morey MC, et al. Cognitive an d physical rehabilitation of intensive care unit 
survivors: results of the RETURN rand omized controlled pilot investigation. Critical care 
medicine. Apr 2012;40(4):1088-1097 
106. Hall AK, Stellefson M, Bernhardt JM. Health y Aging 2.0: the potential of new media and 
technology. Preventing chronic disease. 2012;9:E67. 
107. Khan B, Perkins A, Gao S, Boustani M. Pharmacological management of delirium (PMD) trial. 
AJRCCM  2016: A7801 
108. Mosher C, Sheikh A, Gutteridge D, Gliroy G, Khan BA. Risk factors associated with post ICU 
psychiatric disorders in ICU delirium survivors. AJRCCM  2016: A5256 
109. Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J, et al. Evaluation of  delirium in critically ill patients: validation of 
the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). Critical care medicine. 
Jul 2001;29(7):1370-1379 
110. Skinner H. The Drug Abuse Screening Test. Addict Behav  1982. 7: 363-371 
111. Davis N, Pohlman A, Gehlbach B, et al. Improv ing the process of informed consent in the 
critically ill. JAMA  2003; 289:1963-1968. ͒ 
112. Garber, C.E., et al., Quantity and Quality of Exercise for Developing and Maintaining 
Cardiorespiratory, Musculoskeletal, and Neurom otor Fitness in Appa rently Healthy Adults: 
Guidance for Prescribing Exercise . Medicine and Science in  Sports and Exercise , 2011. 43(7): p. 
1334-1359. 
113. Nelson, M.E., et al., Physical Activity and Publ ic Health in Older Adults: Recommendation from 
the American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association . Medicine and 
Science in Sports and Exercise , 2007. 39(8): p. 1435-1445. 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 26 
 114. Seynnes, O., et al., Physiological and functional responses to low-moderate versus high-intensity 
progressive resistance training in frail elders . Journals of Gerontology Series a-Biological Sciences 
and Medical Sciences,  2004. 59(5): p. 503-509. 
115. Pahor, M., et al., Effects of a physical activity intervention on measures of physical performance: 
Results of the Lifestyle Interventions and Independence for Elders Pilot (LIFE-P) study . Journals 
of Gerontology Series a-Biological  Sciences and Medical Sciences,  2006. 61(11): p. 1157-1165. 
116. Thompson, P.D., et al., Exercise and acute ca rdiovascular events placing the risks into 
perspective - A scientific statement from the American Heart Association council on nutrition, physical activity, and metabolism - In collab oration with the American college of sports 
medicine. Circulation , 2007. 115(17): p. 2358-2368. 
117. Minns Lowe CJ, Wilson MS, Sackley CM, Barker KL. Blind outcome assessment: the development 
and use of procedures to maintain and descri be blinding in a pragmatic physiotherapy 
rehabilitation trial. Clin Rehabili . 2011. 25(3):264-74 
118. Boutron IS, Guittet L, Estellat C et al. Reportin g methods of blinding in randomized trials 
assessing nonpharmacological treatments. PLoS Med  2007. 4(2): e61 
119. Wechsler, D., Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale –Fourth Edition. 2008, San Antonio, TX: Pearson. 
120. Reitan, R.M. and D. Wolfson, The Halstead-Reitan  Neuropsychological Test Battery: theory, and 
clinical interpretation. 1993, South Tu cson, Arizona: Neuropsychology Press. 
121. Golden, C.J., Stroop Color and Word Test. 1978, Chicago, IL: Stoelting. 
122. Rey, A., L'examen psychologique dans les ca s d'encephalopathie traumatique. Archives de 
Psychologie, 1941. 28: p. 286-340. 
123. Hixson, J.E. and D.T. Vernier, Restriction isotyping of human apolipoprotein-e by gene 
amplification and cleavage with hhai. Journal of Lipid Research , 1990. 31(3): p. 545-548. 
124. Chouraki V, Beiser A, Younkin L, et al. Plasma amyloid-beta and risk of Alzheimer's disease in the 
Framingham Heart Study. Alzheimers Dement. Mar 2015;11(3):249-257 e241. ͒ 
125. Koyama A, Okereke OI, Yang T, Blacker D, Selk oe DJ, Grodstein F. Plasma amyloid-beta as a 
predictor of dementia and cognitive declin e: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch 
Neurol. Jul 2012;69(7):824-831. ͒ 
126. Charlson ME, Sax FL, MacKenzie CR, Fields SD, Braham RL, et al. Resuscitation: how do we 
decide?  A prospective study of physicians' prefer ences and the clinical course of hospitalized 
patients. J Am Med Assoc. 1986; 255:1316-1322. 
127. Knaus WA, Draper EA, Wagner DP, Zimmerma n JE. APACHE II: a severity of disease 
classification system. 
Crit Care Med . 1985; 13:818-829. 
128. Katz S, Ford AB, Moskowitz RW, Jackson BA, Jaffe MW. Studies of illness in the aged. The 
index of Adl: A standardized measure of  biological and psychosocial function. J Am Med 
Assoc. 1963;185:914-919. 
129. Lawton MP, Brody EM. Assessment of older people: self-maintaining and instrumental 
activities of daily living. Gerontologist. 1969; 9:179-186. 
130. Jorm AF, Jacomb PA. The Informant Questio nnaire on Cognitive De cline in the Elderly 
(IQCODE): socio-demographic correlates, reliability, validity and some norms. Psychol Med  
1989; 19:1015-1022. 
131. Little RJA, Rbin DB. Statistical Analysis with missing Data.  2002, 2nd Edition. New York: John 
Wiley 
132. Valenzuela M, Sachdev P. Can cognitive exercise prevent the onset of dementia? Systematic 
review of randomized clinical trials with longitudinal follow-up. The American journal of 
geriatric psychiatry: official journal of the Am erican Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Mar 
2009;17(3):179-187 
DDD-ECT Protocol 1Dec2022 27 
 133. American College of Sports Medicine. (2017) ACSM's guidelines for exercise testing and 
prescription 10th Edition . Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins Health. 
 