COGNITIVE TRAINING T O REDUCE IMPULSIVITY  IN HIV -INFECTED COC AINE USERS  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol with Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
VERSION DATE: April 13, 2018  
 
 
  
Pro00053630  1  Version 04/13/18  Specific Aims  
This study tests the feasibility and preliminary efficacy of a computerized cognitive training 
program to improve working memory and decrease impulsivity (delay discounting) among HIV -
infected individuals . The specific aims are to  
(1) Investigate the effects of the cognitive training intervention on working memory (primary 
outcome) and delay disc ounting (secondary outcome) in HIV -infected persons;  
(2) Establish the acceptability of computerized cognitive training among HIV -infected past or 
present cocaine users; and  
(3) Examine the effect of cognitive training on HIV risk behaviors, including cocaine  use, 
risky sex, and medication adherence (exploratory outcomes).  
We hypothesize that: (1) P articipants assigned to active cognitive train ing (ACT) , compared to 
those in the attention -matched control group  (CON) , will have greater improvements in working 
memory and reductions in delay discounting; (2) Participants assigned to ACT, compared to 
those in CON , will have greater reductions in HIV  risk behaviors, including improvements in 
medication adherence .  
Study design  
The proposed study will test the efficacy of a cognitive training program to improve working 
memory in a sample of HIV -infected  cocaine users . We will evaluate the effects of this cognitive 
training intervention on working memory, delay discounting, and HIV risk behaviors . We will first 
screen participants for eligibility . Eligible participants will be assigned to one of two groups ( ACT 
or CON)  and will complete 48 training sessions over 10 weeks. Participants assigned to ACT 
will complete computerized games designed to enhance working memory, while those assigned 
to the attention -matched CON  will complete games  that use other brain attributes . We will be 
using a web -based program, Lumosity (Lumos Labs, Inc.; http://www.lumosity.com ). Lumosity is 
available to the public and offers user-friendly cognitive training games targeting different brain 
areas. We h ave developed a contract with Lumosity tailoring the website to fit our study’s 
needs. All participants will complete assessments at baseline , post-training , and 1 -month follow -
up to evaluate the impact of the training program. Staff members conducting assessments will 
be blinded to treatment condition in order to ensure no biases occur during testing.  
Eligibility criteria  
The sample will  be open to HIV-infected men and women aged 18 -60 years of all 
racial/ethnic groups  who are  currently on antiretroviral medications  for >3 months  and are 
cocaine users . Cocaine use will be defined as lifetime regular crack/cocaine  use lasting >1 year , 
cocaine -type stimulant use disorder, and cocaine as the principal substance of abuse . Exclusion 
criteria  will include pregnancy; English non -fluency or illiteracy; ≤ 8th grade education; serious 
and unstable neurological disorders; unstable serious mental illness or acute psychiatric 
distress; and impaired mental status. Women who are pregnant  will be excluded because of  the 
known effects of pregnancy on neuropsychological functioning  (including deficits in memory and 
executive control).  To reduce potential attrition, individuals who state they are planning to move 
away from the area within the  next 3 months and individuals without stable housing will be 
excluded.    
Recruitment  
Both clinic - and community -based recruitment strategies will be used. Participants will learn 
about the study via flyers in clinics , community -based organizations  that se rve HIV -positive 
individuals , and participant referrals. Clinic recruitment will occur at local infectious diseases 
clinics . Patients may also self -refer in response to flyers and brochures displayed in the waiting 
Pro00053630  2  Version 04/13/18  area and exam rooms. We may also run advertisements in local newspapers and online. Finally, 
participants may be recruited through  our lab’s repository contact database (IRB Pro00047043).  
Prescreening   
Regardless of how potential participants are informed of the study, interested in dividuals will 
complete a pre -screening with a member of the research staff to determine preliminary 
eligibility. This pre -screening will occur in person or over the telephone .  
Cognitive Training Study  
Screening Visit. If potentially 
eligible after prescreening,  
participants will be invited to 
complete a 2 -3 hour screening visit 
in our laboratory to verify eligibility 
criteria. The informed consent 
process will occur at the beginning 
of this visit, followed by a 
breathalyzer to ensure that the 
participant is not acutely intoxicated . 
The initial part of the scr eening visit 
will include the urine drug testing 
and pregnancy testing if indicated. 
Participants will then complete 
questionnaires and clinical 
interviews to assess HIV and other 
medical history, substance use, and 
mental health  (Table 1 ). Trained 
research assistants will administer clinical interviews and neuropsychological tests  of working 
memory . Additional questionnaires will be administered using audio computer -assisted self -
interview (ACASI) technology.  The urine toxicology screen will be used  to verify self -reports of 
recent use of cannabis, cocaine, stimulants, opioids, and benzodiazepines.   
In-person Interview  and Testing . In-person interview  and testing (lasting approximately 90 
minutes ) will be conducte d by trained research personnel. Interviews will assess  substance use 
and impairment, psychiatric history, HIV testing, staging and treatment history, medication 
adherence,  substance use, sexual behaviors, and psychiatric history.  
ACASI.  Questionnaires will be programmed using QDSTM software. The computer will 
display one question at a time, and participants will respond using a mouse. For patients who 
prefer not to read, t he computer will read the questions and responses using prerecorded sound 
files. The ACASI will last approximately 30 minutes  will include items related to demographics, 
anxiety and depression, HIV symptoms, stimulant craving, and medical history.  
Baseline  Assessment . Eligible participants will be invited back on a separate day for a 3 -
hour baseline assessment. At the beginning of this visit, participants will complete  a 
breathalyzer , urine drug testing and pregnancy testing if indicated . Participants will then 
complete an assessment battery of standardized measures that includes face -to-face 
interviews, questionnaires, decision making tasks, and neuropsychological testing  (Table 2 ).  
Neurocognition.  A 60-minute  comprehensive neuropsychological battery will assess  
functioning across performance domains and estimates premorbid intellectual functioning. All 
tests have excellent clinical validity with large national norming samples and will be scored 
using standard procedures.  Table 1. Eligibility Screening Measures  
Construct  Instrument(s)  
In-person Interview  and Testing  
Substance Use & Impairment  Addiction Severity Index -LITE 1,2 
Substance Use Disorders  Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 
(SCID -5) Module E 3 
Psychiatric history  SCID -5 Modules A and B 3 
HIV Testing and Staging  HIV Cost and Services Utilization Study 4 
Literacy  Wide Range Achiecement Test-4 Word 
Reading Subtest 5 
ACASI  
Patient Characteristics  Demographics  
Anxiety/Depression  Brief Symptom Inventory 6 
HIV Symptoms  HIV Symptoms Index  7 
PTSD Symptoms  Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder  Checklist -5 8 
Craving  Stimulant Craving 9 
Medical History  Veteran’s Aging Cohort Study 10 
Trait Impulsivity  Barratt Impulsivity Scale Version 11 11 
Sensation Seeking  Sensation Seeking Survey Version V 12 
Pro00053630  3  Version 04/13/18  In-person interview.  Trained research personnel will conduct interviews lasting 
approximately 30 minutes . The interview will assess HIV medication adherence, substance use, 
and sexual behaviors .  
ACASI.  The ACASI will last approximately 40 minutes  and will include items related to  
psychiatric symptoms, food insecurity, stimulant craving, quality of life, smoking history,  and 
sexual and drug risk.  
Decision makin g. Several computerized tasks, lasting approximately 30 minutes, will 
assess distinct aspects of decision making. The Game of Dice Task (GDT)  assesses decision 
making. I n this task, a virtual die is rolled  and the participant is asked to select a single number 
or a combination of two, three, or four numbers. If the number rolled on the die equals any of the 
numbers in the participant’s choice, the participant will gain a specified amount of money in a 
fictitious bank. The participant will lose an equivalent amount from the fictitious bank if the 
number rolled is not equal to any of the numbers in their selection. The participant is tasked with 
accumulating as much money as possible in the bank, and each sele ction is associated with an 
explicit gain/loss of fictitious money. The amount of fictitious money that can be gained/lost 
increases as the probability of the selection occurring decreases. Risky decisions, defined as 
choices that have less than a 50% chan ce of occurring, and the frequency of alternative 
Table 2. Baseline Measures  
Construct  Instrument(s)  
In-person Interview  
Medication adherence  ARV Adherence 13,14 
Sex/drug risk  Timeline Follow -back for Substance Use and Sexual Behaviors 15 
HIV Risk Behaviors  HIV Risk Behavior Scale (HRBS) 16 
Neurocognition  
Attention  Conners Continuous Performance Test 3 (CPT 3)  17  
Executive Function  Stroop Color and Word Task 18 
Trail Making Test Part B (TMT B) 19 
Learning  Hopkins Verbal  Learning Test -Revised (HVLT -R) Immediate  20 
Brief Visuospatial Memory Test -Revised (BVMT -R) Immediate 21 
Memory  HVLT -R Delayed 20 
BVMT -R Delayed 21 
Processing Speed  Trail Making Test Part A (TMT A) 19 
WAIS -IV Coding 22 
Motor  Grooved Pegboard Test (GPT) 23 
Verbal Fluency  Controlled Oral Word Association Test (COWAT; FAS and Animals) 24 
Working Memory  Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test-100 25 
WAIS -IV Letter-Number Sequencing ,22 
WAIS-IV Digit Span 22 
Premorbid Functioning  Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR)  26 
Decision Making  
Decision Making  Game of Dice Task 27 
Delay discounting  Monetary Choice Questionnaire 28 
Abstract reasoning  Wisconsin Card Sorting Test -64 (WCST) 29 
ACASI  
Psychiatric Symptoms  Symptom Checklist 90 -Revised (SCL -90) 6 
Food Insecurity  Household Food Insecurity Access  Scale 30 
Craving  Stimulant Craving 9 
Quality of Life  World Health Organization Quality of Life -BREF (WHOQOL -BREF)  31 
Self-assessment  Patient’s Assessment of Own Functioning Inventory 32 
Sexual/Drug Ris k Risk Assessment Battery (RAB) 33 
Nicotine Dependence  Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND) 34 and smoking history  
Stimulant Dependence  Severity of Dependence Scale (SDS) 35 
Pro00053630  4  Version 04/13/18  selections will be analyzed. The Monetary -Choice Questionnaire (MCQ)  is a delay discounting 
task. Participants make 36 choices between smaller immediate rewards (ranging from $11 to 
$78) and larger delayed rewards (ranging from $25 to $85 and from 7 to 186 days). An 
individual’s point of indifference where the perceived value of a smaller immediate reward is 
equivalent to a larger delayed reward is computed using the following hyperbolic function: 
Vimmediate =  V delayed /(1 + kD), in which V is value in dollars, D is delay in days, and k is a free 
parameter that determines the discount rate.  The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test -64 (WCST)  is 
used to measure abstract reasoning, concept generation, and perseverative r esponding. In this 
computerized task, participants sort cards according to one of three principles of class 
membership, including categories completed, perseverative responses, perseverative errors, 
nonperseverative errors, failure to maintain set, and eff iciency of learning.   
Cognitive Training Sessions. At the end of the baseline assessment, enrolled participants 
will be randomly assigned to  either the experimental (Active Cognitive Training, or ACT) or 
control (or CON) conditions using simple random assignment. Participants will be trained to use  
Lumosity after the baseline assessment. Research staff will provide instructions and guide them 
through the first training session . Participants will then immediately begin completing  sessions 
at home the following day.  
Schedule of training sessions . All enrolled participants will be asked to complete 48 
training sessions over 10 weeks.  The sessions will  last approximately 20 -30 minutes and will  be 
completed at home or wherever the participant can obtain computer access . If the participant 
has no means of accessing a computer , session s can be completed  in-person  in the research 
laboratory.  Participants will be encouraged to complete 6 sessions a week, 1 per day, to reach a 
total of 48 by the end of the 10-week  period. While each group will complete the same number 
of sessions to control for possible dosage effects, the content of the sessions  will vary by study 
group.  Each condition will include 8 unique Lumosity games.  
Active Cognitive Training (ACT) . Sessions will include games from Lumosity that are 
designated as targeting working memory . One training session will be comprised o f a randomly 
generated subset of 4 of the 8 working memory games , each played twice back -to-back .  
Control Training (CON) . The sessions will be in the same format as the ACT group, b ut will 
utilize other  Lumosity games that do not  target  working memory . These games will be the same 
length as the working memory games and participants will complete the same number of 
randomly generated games per session  (4 of the 8 games, played twice back -to-back ).  
Post -training Assessment . After completing the 48th training session, or at the end of the 
10-week training window , participants will complete a post -training assessment. This 3 -hour visit 
will occur within 1 week of the final training session and will consist of a battery identical to the 
baseline assessme nt. Alternate forms of neuropsychological tests involving memory will be 
used to avoid effects related to repeated testing. Participants will also complete a process 
measure to describe their experiences of the intervention and provide feedback on pe rceived 
benefits, barriers to  completing sessions , and the length, number, and content of sessions. This 
assessment includes open -ended questions and ratings of satisfaction and helpfulness.  
One-month Follow -up Assessment . One month after the post -training  assessment , 
participants will complete a follow -up assessment . This 3 -hour visit will consist of a battery 
identical to the baseline assessment. Alternate forms of neuropsychological tests involving 
memory will be used to avoid any effects related to repe ated testing.   
Human Subjects Protections  
Rationale for participant selection.  The purpose of this study is to examine the impact of 
cognitive training on neurocognitive performance, including working memory and delay 
Pro00053630  5  Version 04/13/18  discounting, on persons with HIV infe ction and co -occurring cocaine abuse. Therefore, 
participants will be HIV -positive cocaine users.  
Evaluation of benefits, risks, and discomforts . A direct benefit for participants who 
complete the study may be improved cognitive function as a result of the  cognitive training 
exercises administered at each session. The risk/benefit ratio for this study is relatively low and 
there are few expected risks associated with participation in this study. All data collection 
procedures are minimally invasive. All pro cedures will be performed by research personnel who 
are trained in the study procedures to minimize risks, discomforts, and adverse events. We 
expect that the results of this study will inform new treatments for HIV -infected individuals by 
providing empiri cal support for a low -cost intervention to improve neuropsychological 
functioning . Given the minimal amount of risk associated with participation, coupled with the 
potential scientific gains, we believe that the risk to participants is reasonable.  
The pote ntial risks associated with this study fall into the following two categories: 
confidentiality  and emotional distress.  
1. Confidentiality . The following precautions will protect the privacy of participants and 
maintain confidentiality of research data: (1)  All staff will be well trained in confidentiality and 
data security procedures. (2) Privacy will be maintained by conducting all study procedures in 
closed and soundproof rooms. (3) Each participant will be assigned a unique study ID number, 
and all data will be de -identified and coded with ID numbers only. The key linking participant 
names and ID numbers will be stored in a separate password protected document on the 
secure server maintained by the Department Psychiatry & Behavioral Science, and only 
esse ntial study staff will have access to it. (4) Data will be securely stored in locked file cabinets 
in locked offices and in password protected documents on password protected computers and 
secure servers. Access to data storage areas and computers will be restricted. (5) Analysis will 
occur on de -identified data only. (6) Data will only be stored for as long as necessary to 
complete the study, and for adherence to university, hospital, and federal regulations. Thus, 
while we acknowledge that a breach of con fidentiality is possible, the likelihood is very low.  
In the event that a subject indicates potential harm to self or others during the research 
study, this will need to be addressed appropriately and with sensitivity. Any disclosures will be 
handled with in the framework of existing legal mandates, clinical practice, and social norms. 
Consistent with standard clinical practice, when possible, disclosures will be discussed with the 
participant to determine the best management alternatives. This may include notifying family 
members, referring to medical treatment, calling emergency services, or escorting the 
participant to the Emergency Department at Duke Hospital. When required by law, the Police 
Department and/or the Department of Social Services will be no tified. Dr. Meade (the PI) and 
Dr. Towe (co -I) are both licensed clinical psychologist s with experience managing such cases.  
2. Emotional distress . Some participants may experience discomfort or embarrassment 
related to providing urine samples and answering questions about substance use and other 
personal behaviors. Participants will be informed prior to the assessment that they may choose 
to skip an y question or procedure they find uncomfortable. All research staff will be extensively 
trained on study procedures, including the conduct of interviews that elicit personal information, 
and the importance of being sensitive to and respectful of all partic ipants. If distress does occur, 
research staff will be trained on how to identify and manage it, and when to terminate an 
interview. If necessary, the participant will be referred to mental health treatment. It is  import ant 
to note that, as part of the informed  consent  procedure,  all individua ls will be notified that if they 
expre ss direct  threats of harm  to self or others,  the study team  may exercise the  right to arrange  
care or intervention  for the individual  if the situation  is appraised  to constitute  an emergency.  
Pro00053630  6  Version 04/13/18  All project staff will be trained to immediately consult with the PI or back -up person in the 
event that any applicant or enrolled participant appears to be experiencing psychological or 
physical distress. Indications of the need for this mig ht include hearing the individual making 
comments or asking questions that suggest cognitive impairment; noting that the individual 
appears to be highly anxious, depressed, or withdrawn; or having a belief that the individual 
may be contemplating harming h imself/herself or another person. Responses on select 
questions (such as the suicide assessment on the SCID  assessment) that indicate potential risk 
of harm to self or others also require immediate consultation.  In the event that  cases such as 
this are brought to the PI or back -up person, she will assist the staff member in identifying 
appropriate community resources and will oversee the process of seeking outside assistance for 
this individual. Multiple levels of back -up support for research personnel will be developed. The 
research team includes two licensed clinical psychologists; they will be available to intervene 
and, when necessary, ensure that appropriate services are received. In the event of clinical 
deterioration, assess ors may perform an initial risk assessment, but any clinical intervention or 
actions will be conducted by Dr. Meade, Dr. Towe, or a designated back -up person.  
Consent processes and documents .  Prior to the initiation of any clinical research 
procedures, de signated research staff will describe the study’s purpose, all procedures, and 
risks/benefits and review the informed consent document with the participant. Participants will 
be provided ample time to read the consent, ask questions, and deliberate their d ecision. If they 
choose to participate they will then provide written informed consent . Participants will also sign a 
release of information form to allow study staff to review their medical record at any other facility 
where they have obtained HIV and/or other medical care, if applicable.  Participants will be given 
copies of these documents. Participants will provide informed written consent for each of the 
two parts of the study. These documents will be stored in locked file cabinets in locked offices 
separate from other data collected in this study.  
Compensation.   Participants will receive compensation  for each of the study visits. 
Participants may earn up to $ 441. Participants will be compensated $50 for the screening visit, 
$75 for the baseline assessment, $65 for the post -training assessment, and $85 for the 1 -month 
follow -up. For the 48 training sessions, participants will be compensated $ 2 for each completed 
session , and will earn a bonus after every 6 sessions . Participants  will earn a $5 bonus after 
completing 6, 12, 18, and 24 sessions; a $10 bonus after 30 and 36 sessions; and a $15 bonus 
after 42 and 48 sessions. Total potential earnings for completing all sessions are $ 166.  
Compensation will be  in the form of  a reloada ble debit card . In addition, we will offer bus 
tokens (worth $2 for round -trip) or parking passes (worth up to $6) to participants who require 
assistance.  
Safety assessment.  Our assessment batteries include several measures intended to 
assess for safety, including breathalyzer for alcohol intoxication and mental status exam. 
Adverse events (AEs) will be monitored throughout the study. Each AE will be classified as 
serious or non -serious, and appropriate reporting procedures will be followed.  
Statistical analyses  
Initial analyses will confirm the psychometric properties of the assessments, and scale 
scores will be constructed. Data distributions will be checked to determine if they meet the 
assumptions of the analytic models, and transformations will be pe rformed when necessary to 
improve distributional qualities. Preliminary analyses will compare study groups on demographic 
and other characteristics obtained in the screening and baseline assessments to identify 
possible failures in random assignment, which  would be statistically controlled for in subsequent 
analyses. We will also test for any differential attrition across groups at both follow -ups. All 
analyses will be repeated with other substance use added as a covariate.  
Pro00053630  7  Version 04/13/18  Hypothesis testing (Aim 1) . Usin g an intent -to-treat analysis, we will investigate the 
differential impact of condition (ACT vs. CON) at the post -training assessment by performing a 2 
(Condition) by 2 (Time) general linear model (GLM) analysis on the main outcome measures of 
working memo ry (mean T -score on the 3 -test battery) and delay discounting (natural log k -
value). Time will be a within subjects factor defined by baseline versus post -training 
assessment. The analysis will be repeated, adding the 1 -month follow -up in a 2 (Condition) b y 3 
(Time) GLM to detect differential effects of the two conditions on outcomes through the follow -
up period. Significant interactions of Condition and Time are predicted. To examine the 
specificity of the cognitive training intervention, we will use the s ame models to test for group 
differences on performance in other cognitive domains (e.g., verbal fluency, processing speed) 
and other measures of decision making (i.e., contingency learning, risk taking propensity).  
Additional analyses will be restricted t o participants who were randomized to ACT. First, we 
will examine predictors of treatment response (moderators) based on sample characteristics. 
We will use linear regression to predict change in the main outcome variables (working memory 
and delay discoun ting), with potential moderators entered separately as predictors. Second, we 
will use linear regression to evaluate the effect of treatment dosage (number of sessions 
completed) on change in the outcome variables. Finally, if intervention effects are iden tified on 
main outcomes, we will test whether effects were mediated by performance on the working 
memory training modules using bootstrap analyses.36-38 
Acceptability (Aim 2 ). We will examine participant ratings of satisfaction with the cognitive 
training intervention, as well as their perception of its benefits and barriers to  completing 
sessions . The intervention will be considered acceptable if participant ratings are high  (>3.5 on 
a 5-point scale). We will also calculate the average number of sessions completed and 
determine the proportion of participants who successfully completed the intervention ( defined as 
completing  ≥36 of the 48 total sessions ). The intervention will  be considered acceptable to the 
target population if ≥80% complete the intervention.  
Exploratory analyses (Aim 3) : To investigate the impact of the intervention on risk 
behaviors, we will use the same GLM models described above to test for differences by 
condition on cocaine use (number of days of use), sexual risk (HRBS sex risk score), and 
adherence to ARVs (percen t medication adherence).  
Clinical Trials Registration  
This study is registered at http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov  (Identifier: NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ).   
 
  
Pro00053630  8  Version 04/13/18  References  
1. McLellan AT, Kushner H, Metzger D, et al. The fifth edition of the Addiction Severity 
Index. J Subst Abuse Treat. 1992;9(3):199 -213. 
2. McGahan PL, Griffith JA, Parente R, McLellan AT. Addiction  Severity Index Composite 
Scores Manual Philadelphia: The University of Pennsylvania/Veterans Administration 
Center for Studies of Addiction; 1986.  
3. First MB, Williams JBW, Karg RS, Spitzer RL. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5-
Research Version (SC ID-5 for DSM -5, Research Version; SCID -5-RV). Arlington, VA: 
American Psychiatric Association; 2015.  
4. RAND Corporation. HIV Cost and Services Utilization Study (HCSUS) baseline 
questionnaire.  Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2007.  
5. Wilkinson GS, Rob ertson GJ. Wide Range Achievement Test –4 (WRAT -4). Lutz, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources.  
6. Derogatis LR. Brief Symptom Inventory: Administration, Scoring, and Procedures 
Manual.  3rd ed. Minneapolis, MN: National Computer Systems, Inc.; 1993.  
7. Justice AC, Holmes W, Gifford AL, et al. Development and validation of a self -completed 
HIV symptom index. J Clin Epidemiol. 2001;54(Suppl 1):S77 -S90. 
8. Blevins CA, Weathers FW, Davis MT, Witte TK, Domino JL. The Posttraumatic Stress 
Disorder Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5): Development and Initial Psychometric Evaluation. 
J Traum Stress. 2015;28(6):489 -498. 
9. Weiss RD, Griffin ML, Hufford C, et al. Early prediction of initiation of abstinence from 
cocaine: use of a craving questionnaire. American Journal of Ad dictions. 1997;6:224 -
231. 
10. Smola S, Justice AC, Wagner J, Rabeneck L, Weissman S, Rodriguez -Barradas M. 
Veterans aging cohort three -site study (VACS 3): overview and description. J Clin 
Epidemiol. 2001;54(Suppl 1):S61 -76. 
11. Patton JH, Stanford MS, Bar ratt ES. Factor structure of the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale. 
J Clin Psychol. 1995;51(6):768 -774. 
12. Zuckerman M. Behavioral Expressions and Biosocial Bases of Sensation Seeking.  
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1994.  
13. Giordano TP, Guzman D, Clar k R, Charlebois ED, Bangsberg DR. Measuring adherence 
to antiretroviral therapy in a diverse population using a visual analogue scale. HIV 
Clinical Trials. 2004;5(2):74 -79. 
14. Kalichman SC, Amaral CM, Swetzes C, et al. A simple single -item rating scale to  
measure medication adherence: further evidence for convergent validity. Journal of the 
International Association of Physicians in AIDS Care. 2009;8(6):367 -374. 
15. Sobell LC, Sobell MB. Timeline Follow -back User's Guide: A Calendar Method for 
Assessing Al cohol and Drug Use.  Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation; 1996.  
16. Darke S, Hall W, Heather N, Ward J, Wodak A. The reliability and validity of a scale to 
measure HIV risk -taking among intravenous drug users. AIDS. 1991;5(2):181 -185. 
17. Conners CK. Conners Continuous Performance Test 3rd Edition.  Toronto, Canada: 
Multi -Health Systems; 2014.  
18. Golden CJ. Stroop Color and Word Test.  Chicago, IL: Stoelting; 1978.  
19. Lezac MD. Neuropsychological assessment (3rd Edition).  New York: Oxford University 
Press ; 1995.  
20. Brandt J, Benedict RHB. Hopkins Verbal Learning Test -- Revised professional manual.  
Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc; 2001.  
21. Benedict RHB, Schretlen D, Groninger L, Dobraski M. Revision of the Brief Visuospatial 
Memory Test : studies of normal performance, reliability, and validity. Psychological 
Assessment. 1996;8(2):145 -153. 
Pro00053630  9  Version 04/13/18  22. Wechsler D. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale --Fourth Edition: Administration and 
Scoring Manual.  Bloomington, MN: Pearson; 2008.  
23. Heaton RK, Gr ant I, Matthews CG. Comprehensive Norms for an Expanded Halstead -
Reitan Battery: Demographic Corrections, Research Findings, and Clinical Applications.  
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources; 1991.  
24. Benton A, Hamsher K, Sivan A. Multilingual Aph asia Examination (3rd ed.).  Iowa City, 
IA: AJA Associates; 1983.  
25. Diehr MC, Cherner M, Wolfson TJ, Miller SW, Grant I, Heaton RK. The 50 and 100 -item 
short forms of the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Task (PASAT): Demographically 
corrected norms and com parisons with the full PASAT in normal and clinical samples. J 
Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2003;25(4):571 -585. 
26. Wechsler D. Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR) Manual.  San Antonio, TX: 
Harcourt Assessment; 2001.  
27. Brand M, Fujiwara E, Borsutzky S, Kalbe E, Kessler J, Markowitsch HJ. Decision -making 
deficits of korsakoff patients in a new gambling task with explicit rules: associations with 
executive functions. Neuropsychology. 2005:267 -277. 
28. Kirby KN, Petry NM, Bickel WK. Heroin addicts have higher dis count rates for delayed 
rewards than non -drug-using controls. J Exp Psychol Gen. 1999;128(1):78 -87. 
29. Kongs SK, Thompson LL, Iverson GL, Heaton RK. Wisconsin Card Sorting Test -64 
Computerized Version.  Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources; 2000.  
30. Kalichman SC, Cherry C, Amaral C, et al. Health and treatment implications of food 
insufficienc y among people living with HIV/AIDS, Atlanta, Georgia. J Urban Health. 
2010;87(4):631 -641. 
31. Skevington SM, Lotfy M, O'Connell KA. The World Health Organization's WHOQOL -
BREF quality of life assessment: psychometric properties and results of the internat ional 
field trial. A report from the WHOQOL group. Qual Life Res. 2004;13(2):299 -310. 
32. Chelune GJ, Heaton RK, Lehman RA. Neuropsychological and Personality Correlates of 
Patients Complaints of Disability.  New York: Plenum Press; 1986.  
33. Metzger DS, Na lvaline HA, Woody GE. Assessment of substance abuse: HIV risk 
assessment battery. In: Carson -Dewitt R, ed. Encyclopedia of Drugs, Alcohol, and 
Addictive Behavior.  1st ed. Framington Hills, MI: Macmillan Reference USA; 2001.  
34. Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT,  Frecker RC, Fagerstrom KO. The Fagerstrom Test for 
Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J 
Addict. 1991;86(9):1119 -1127.  
35. Churchill AC, Burgess PM, Pead J, Gill T. Measurement of the severity of amphetamine 
depen dence. Addiction. 1993;88(10):1335 -1340.  
36. Preacher KJ, Hayes AF. SPSS and SAS procedures for estimating indirect effects in 
simple mediation models. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers. 
2004;36(4):717 -731. 
37. MacKinnon DP, Lockwood CM, Williams J. Confidence limits for the indirect effect: 
distribution of the product and resampling methods. Multivariate Behavioral Research. 
2004;39(1):99.  
38. Baron RM, Kenny DA. The moderator -mediator variable distinction in social 
psychological rese arch: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. J Pers Soc 
Psychol. 1996;51(6):1173 -1182.  
 