 
 
 
 
 
COVID -19 Vaccinations With a Sweepstakes  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
6/7/2021  
 
  
COVID -19 Lottery Study Pre -Registration  
  
1) Have any data been collected for this study already?  
No. 
  
2) What's the main question being asked or hypothesis being tested in this study?  
We will measure the effectiveness of a COVID -19 vaccination sweepstakes by analyzing COVID -19 
vaccination data from the City of Philadelphia and neighboring regions. The sweepstakes will award 
multiple prizes every two weeks for at least six weeks. Half of the prizes will be awarded to Philadelphia 
residents in “selected” zip codes that are randomly selected from a list of 20 under -vaccinated zip codes 
in the city. selected zip codes will be announced two weeks prior to each drawing. The other  half of 
prizes will be awarded to Philadelphia residents in the remaining zip codes in Philadelphia. We will 
examine (1) the effect of the lotteries (and accompanying attention that they bring to the vaccination 
process) on Philadelphia resident vaccinati on rates relative to people living in neighboring counties and 
cities and (2) the effect on vaccination rates of selected zip code residents compared to residents from 
other Philadelphia zip codes that were eligible for this designation (“potentially selec ted”).  
  
3) Describe the key dependent variable(s) specifying how they will be measured.  
The primary outcome is the weekly vaccination rate for residents receiving a first dose of a COVID -19 
vaccination in each zip/county/city as measured by local health d epartments and, for residency, as 
measured by the Census or other official sources.   
 
(Rate = Total residents receiving a first dose that week / Total residents in that zip/county/city code as 
measured by the Census or other official sources, at the most r ecent data available for all geographies of 
interest. This source as of pre -registering is the American Community Survey 2019.)  
 
4) How many and which conditions will participants be assigned to?  
We will partner with the City of Philadelphia to launch a CO VID-19 vaccination sweepstakes that will be 
conducted for at least 6 weeks. The city will be included in the “treatment” condition. Within the city, 
we will include two pools: a “potentially selected” zip code pool (including the 20 zip codes with the 
lowe st per capita vaccination rates as of May 27, 2021) and a pool with the remaining zip codes. At the 
start of each two -week period, we will randomly draw one “selected” zip code from our list of 20 under -
vaccinated zip codes in the city. Half the prizes in each category will go to those in the “selected” zip 
code, and the other half of prizes will go to those in all zip codes that are not the “selected” zip code.  
 
Our differences -in-differences analysis will compare weekly first -dose COVID -19 vaccination rat es in 
each of the three “selected” zip codes (drawn from 20 “priority” zip codes) against the “potentially 
selected” zip codes that were not selected.  We will also compare COVID -19 vaccination rates in all of 
Philadelphia (Philadelphia county) with vaccin ation rates in neighboring Pennsylvania counties (Bucks 
County, Delaware County, and Montgomery County, as per Roberto et al. 2019) and in one comparison 
city (Baltimore, as a comparable and nearby city and as per Roberto et al. 2019) over the same time 
period.  
  
5) Specify exactly which analyses you will conduct to examine the main question/hypothesis.  
We will conduct 3 main analyses:  
 
1. Comparing across cities  
To analyze the effect of living in Philadelphia as compared with neighboring counties, we will run  a 
standard difference -in-differences model for weekly COVID -19 vaccination rates by county in the weeks 
leading up to, during, and after the intervention period. We will include data from May 2, 2021 through 
August 14, 2021 in this analysis (5 weeks of pr e-intervention, 6 weeks of intervention, and 4 weeks of 
post -intervention). The analysis will begin by showing a graphical event study representation of the 
results as follows (graph uses hypothetical data):  
 
 
Hypothetical Figure 1: (linked http://bit.ly/BCFGPhilVaxPreReg  ) 
 
 
 
The graph above is created by regressing the weekly first -dose COVID -19 vaccination rate for each 
county on county fixed effects, week fixed effects, and indicators for pre -treatment and post -treatment 
effects (as described, for example, in Cunningham 2021 ) with the week just before the treatment period 
serving as the comparison group. This plot allows us to see the timing/dynamics of the treatment effect 
and also provides evidence regarding the parallel -trends assumption that is always made in a diff -in-diff 
analysis by checking for pre -treatment differences in trends.  
 
In addition to the graphical analysis above, we will also produce the standard diff -in-diff 2x2 estimate by 
taking the average vaccination rate pre -treatment for each city and the average va ccination rate during 
the treatment period for each city and regressing these DVs on City Indicators, a Treatment Indicator, 
and a Philadelphia*Treatment indicator. The coefficient on the interaction term will be our preferred 
estimate of the overall effec t of the lotteries’ impact on Philadelphia relative to nearby cities.  
 
2. Comparing across counties  
We will do the exact same analysis as discussed above to test the lottery’s impact on Philadelphia 
relative to nearby Pennsylvania counties (Bucks County, Delaware County, and Montgomery County). 
We will simply replace the weekly city vaccination rates in the above regressions with the weekly county 
vaccination rates and include county indicators instead of city indicators.  
 
3. Comparing across zip cod es 
To analyze the impact of being chosen as a “selected” zip code, we will do a similar analysis to the one 
above for each of the three “selected” zip codes. Once again, we will begin by showing a graphical event 
study representation of the results, but th is time we will be comparing a “selected” zip code to the other 
“potentially selected” zip codes that did not win (“unselected zip codes”). The analysis for the first 
“selected” zip code may look something like the following (graph uses hypothetical data):  
 
Hypothetical Figure 2: (linked http://bit.ly/ BCFGPhilVaxPreReg ) 
 

 
The graph above is created by regressing the weekly first -dose COVID -19 vaccination r ate for each 
“potentially selected” zip code (20 total) on zip code fixed effects, week fixed effects, and indicators for 
pre-treatment and post -treatment effects (as described, for example, in Cunningham 2021). This plot 
allows us to see the timing/dynami cs of the treatment effect and also provides evidence regarding the 
parallel -trends assumption that is always made in a diff -in-diff analysis by checking for pre -treatment 
differences in trends.  
 
In addition to the graphical analysis above, we will also pr oduce the standard diff -in-diff 2x2 estimate by 
taking the average vaccination rate pre -treatment for each zip code and the average vaccination rate 
during the treatment period for each zip code and regressing these DVs on Zip Code Indicators, a 
Treatment Indicator, and a selected Zip Code*Treatment indicator. The coefficient on the interaction 
term will be our preferred estimate of the overall effect of each lottery’s impact on each of the 
“selected” zip codes relative to “unselected” zip codes (across the  full treatment period, this will be 17 
remaining zip codes).  
 
There will be three different figures above for each of the 2 -week lottery periods (one figure for each of 
the 3 “selected” zip codes). After showing the effects separately for each of the 3 “ selected” zip codes, 
we can also do a pooled analysis where we combine/average the results across the 3 “selected” zip code 
analyses. To do this, we can stack the data from the 3 studies and produce just one figure like the one 
above where we show the same  results relative to week 0 of the event window. To produce the final 
overall effect of the lotteries impact on the “selected” zip code, we will regress the weekly vaccination 
rate for each zip code on zip code fixed effects, week relative to treatment fix ed effects (1 week before 
treatment, 2 weeks before treatment, etc.), and a “selected” zipcode*treatment indicator that equals 
one when the “selected” zip code was in the treatment period.  
 
6) Describe exactly how outliers will be defined and handled, and  your precise rule(s) for excluding 
observations.  
No outliers will be excluded.  
  
7) How many observations will be collected or what will determine sample size?  
No need to justify the decision, but be precise about exactly  how the number will be determine d. 
Weekly vaccination totals by zip code in Philadelphia will be collected from the Philadelphia department 
of public health. Weekly vaccination totals by county will be collected from the CDC. For each region of 
interest we will include weekly vaccination  data from May 2nd through August 14th (for 5 weeks prior 
to the announcement of the sweepstakes, during the entire sweepstakes, and for 4 weeks after the 
conclusion of the sweepstakes.)  

 
8) Anything else you would like to pre -register?  
Assuming we find positive effects from the treatment, the increased vaccinations could be a result of 
persuading people who would not have otherwise been vaccinated to become vaccinated or a result of 
causing people who were eventually going to be vaccinat ed to move up their vaccination date. If the 
latter is true, we may see a reduction in vaccination rates in the post -treatment period. This is what in 
economics has been referred to as a “harvesting” effect where you are simply causing intertemporal 
substi tution for when people perform an action like vaccination. The graphs discussed above will allow 
us to look for this intertemporal substitution effect by seeing if the dots are less than 0% in the post -
treatment period and a similar analysis as listed abov e will allow us to estimate the magnitude of this 
substitution.  
 
Assuming we are able to collect data on awareness of the lottery through our partner research 
organizations we also intend to run a mediation analysis with “awareness” as a mediator.  