Page  1 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  Title : The Diagnostic  Accuracy  of Pocket  Size Ultrasound (PsUS)  in the Detection  of Pediatric  
Elbow  Fractures  
 
Study  Investigators :  
Alisa  Brennan, MD  
Lindsay Jaeger,  MD 
Bree Andrews,  MD 
Holly  Benjamin,  MD. 
 Protocol : IRB21 -0678  
 Keywords : Pocket -sized  ultrasound, elbow  fracture,  pediatric,  children  
             
                      
Protocol : IRB21 -0678 
Page  2 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021   
 
 
Background:  
 According to  the World  Health  Organization  (WHO),  between  66-75% of the world ’s 
population has  no or  limited  access  to diagnostic  imaging  (WHO,  2003, WHO,  2010 &  Morris  et al). 
Given this critical  need  for imaging, especially  in regards  to devices  that are reliable,  portable,  and 
easy to use, ultrasonography has  emerged  as a valuable,  non- invasive  imaging  option and  
increasingly  being used  in resource  limited  or restricted  areas.  Beyond its  growing use  in global  
health,  bedside  point -of-care ultrasound (POCUS)  is also a rapidly evolving imaging  modality  with  
multiple  well -established  and novel  applications. One example of  a promising direction  for POCUS  
is in the evaluation  of pediat ric upper  extremity  fractures.  
 
 Pediatric  fractures  are common  injuries  in childhood, with  between  25%  and 50%  of children  
sustaining a  fracture before  the age of  16 years  old (Rennie  et al, Merckaert  et al). Musculoskeletal  
injuries  often  present  to the pediatric  emergency  department  (ED) and  contribute  to at least  30%  of 
ED visits  in school -aged  children, of  which  28%  are fractures  (Alpern  et al, Poonai  et al, Lee A  et 
al). The most  frequ ent location  of pediatric  fractures  is in the upper  extremities,  with  the most  
common locations  being the  distal forearm,  fingers, and  distal humerus  (Rennie  et al, Naranje et  al, 
Lee A  et al, Merckaert  et al). Focusing specifically  on elbow  injuries,  abou t 5-10% of pediatrics  
fractures  are located  in the elbow, with  60-80% of injuries  involving the  supracondylar  humerus  
(SCH) (Crowther et al, Bellavia  et al, Merckaert  et al). Prompt  diagnosis  is critical  in cases  of SCH  
fractures  as the potential  for malun ion or  neurovascular  injury are serious  complications  that occur  at 
a high rate in  children  (Crowther et  al, Bellavia  et al,).  
  The standard  diagnostic  imaging of  choice for elbow  fractures  is radiography with  multiple  
views,  typically  anterior /posterior  and lateral  views  (Ackermann  et al 2010). However,  radiographs  
are associated  with  exposure  to ionizing radiation  and, although in  only small amounts, the  effects  of 
radiation  are cons idered  cumulative  with  repeated  imaging  increasing  a patient ’s health  risks  over  
their lifetime  (Charr -Alvarez 2011). Additionally, in  children  with  a clinical suspicion for a  fracture,  
an estimated  83%  of X-ray scans  performed  show  no fracture (Ackermann,  2020] . Besides  the 
majority  of X-rays which  do not  show  signs  of fracture,  initial radiographs  can also miss  occult  
supracondylar  fractures  in 2-18% of all fractures  seen  in subsequent  follow -up imaging  (Burnier et  al 
2016). Ultras ound offers  an alternative  imaging  option that  avoids  ionizing radiation  and an 
opportunity to  reduce a  child ’s lifetime  radiation  exposure. In addition to  the avoidance  of radiation, 
ultrasound also  has the benefits  of being portable  to the bedside, ra pid to  perform,  and noninvasive,  
which  all makes  it especially  well  suited  for use  with  children  (Barata 2012, Charr -Alvarez 2011, 
Chen  2007). According  to one study, ultrasound can  also cut down on the  time  to diagnosis  and even  
pain when  compared  to radiography (Charr- Alvarez 2011).  
  Ultrasonography is  able t o visualize  normal  bone  cortex  as bright  hyperechoic  lines  with  
shadowing posteriorly on  ultrasound, and  fractures  appear  as cortical disruptions  or discontinuities  
bone  contour  (Barata  2012, Eckert  2013). As for cartilaginous  portions  of bone, the  epiphysis  
appearance ranges  from  anechoic to  hypoechoic  with a hyperechoic  epiphyseal  core depending on 
the patient ’s age and stage of bone  maturation  (Eckert  2013). Fractures  can also appear  as indirect  
signs  including posterior  fat pad, lipohemarthrosis,  subperiosteal  hemorrhage,  articular  effusion, and  
Protocol : IRB21 -0678 
Page  3 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  accompanying peri -osseous  soft-tissue  injuries  (Ackermann,  2020, Cho 2010, B urnier  et al). 
Specifically  for visual  signs  of elbow  fractures,  both direct  signs  (e.g. cortical  disruptions  or 
discontinuities  in the bones ’ contour ) as well as indirect  signs  (e.g. posterior  fat pad with  or without  
lipohemarthrosis)  can indicate  a potential  fracture injury to  the elbow.  
 
 In terms  of the accuracy  and reliability  of bedside  POCUS,  several  decades  of research  has 
examined  the use of ultrasound in  the assessment  of pediatric  upper  extremity  fractures,  with  
encouraging results  with  high- end, hospital -grade ultrasound machines . According to  a meta -
analysis  from  2019, Lee et al showed summary  sensitivity  and specificity  of 96%  (95%  CI 88-99%)  
and 89%  (95%  CI 82-94%), respectively.  These findings  were comparable  to the findings  of a recent  
systematic  review  and meta -analysis  by Tsou  et al in 2020 where the  overall  sensitivity  and 
specificity  of ultrasound for pediatric  upper  extremity  fractures  was found to be 0.95 (95%  CI: 0.93 –
0.97)  and 0.95 (95%  CI: 0.91–0.98), with  a positive  likelihood ratio  of 21.1 (95%  CI: 10.8–41.5)  and 
negative  likelihood ratio  of 0.05 (95%  CI: 0.03–0.07). However,  in a specific  meta -regression  for 
analysis  of elbow  vs non- elbow  upper  extremity  ultrasound, there was a significantly  lower  
specificity  for elbow  fracture  when  compared  to other  upper  extremity  fractures.  This  finding may  
be explained  due to the complex anatomy  of the elbow  joint  which  makes  these scans  technically  
more challenging to  perform  and interpret.   
 
 As technology has  advanced  in the field  of ultrasonography, there have  been  exciting  
developments  in pocket -sized  ultrasound (PsUS)  units.  These smaller  hand- held devices  have been  
found t o have  overall  good agreement  with  high- end ultrasound machines,  with  specific limitations  
to distinct clinical  questions , acco rding to  a recent  systematic  review  comparing  handheld to  high-
end ultrasound systems (Rykkje  et al, 2019). However  these units  are often  a fraction  of the cost of 
the larger  hospital  grade  machines  and less cumbersome  to travel  with  (Lau  2017). As  a resul t of 
their smaller,  more  convenient  size and  affordable  price,  these pocket -sized  ultrasound devices  pose  
a particularly  interesting  question in  regards  to their  application  in more  remote  or resource- limited  
settings.  The current  research  of PsUS  is limited  with  only a  handful  studies  evaluating  fractures,  
typically  in older  adolescents  and adults. Lau  et al in 2017 investigated  the validity  and reliability  of 
PsUS  in the diagnosis  of distal radius  fractures  in adults  and assessment  of closed  reductions, f inding 
a sensitivity  of 100%  and specificity  that ranged  from  90%  to 95%  (Lau  et al). These results  
supported the  idea that  PsUS  may  serve as  a useful  screening  tool for the diagnosis  of distal radius  
fracture,  similar  to the findings  for larger  hospital  grade units. Another  study by McNeil  et al. found 
similar  findings  in the accuracy  of portable  US in diagnosing fractures  in austere environments  with  
an impressive  overall  sensitivity  of 100%  and a specificity  of 94%.  
  Despite  this growing area of  research,  limited  data exists  for the  evaluation  of pediatric  
fractures  with  portable  ultrasound and, to  our knowledge, no study has  been  performed  investigating  
the accuracy  of a PsUS  on the assessment  of pediatric  elbow  injuries.  The long- term goal  of this 
research  is to investigate  the use of a PsUS  device  in the assessment  of pediatric upper  extremity  
fractures  in resource -limited  or -restricted  areas.  To achieve this  goal, we  must  advance our  
understanding of  pocket -sized  ultrasonography and determine  the validity  as well  as the reliability  of 
these smaller  devices  in fracture assessments.  We propose  a study that  investigates  the use of PsUS  
in the evaluation  of pediatric  elbow  injuries  with  comparison to  the physical  exam  and standard 
radiography. The  main  purpose  of this prospective  study is  to determine  diagnostic  accuracy  of 
PsUS  in detecting  signs  of acute elbow  fractures.  If accurate and reliable,  these handheld ultrasound 
Protocol : IRB21 -0678 
Page  4 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  devices  could be  an impactful and  noninvasive  method for delivering imaging to  resource  limited  
areas,  improving the  diagnostic  capabilities  of remote regions  of the world.  
 
 
 
  
Objectives  
Aims  
1. Evaluate the  sensitivity  (SE),  specificity  (SP),  positive  predictive  value  (PPV),  and negative 
predictive  value  (NPV)  of pocket -sized  ultrasonography for the  assessment  of acute pediatric  
elbow  fractures.  
2. Evaluate the  inter -rater reliability  between  examiners  and blinded ultrasound expert.   
  
Hypothesis  
3. We hypothesize  that PsUS  will have  similar  SE, SP, PPV,  and NPV to  gold  standard  
radiographs  for pediatric elbow  fracture  evaluation.  
4. We hypothesize  that interpretation  of PsUS  imaging  will be  similar  between  bedside  
interpretation  and blinded expert  ultrasound interpretation.  
  
 
  
Methodology 
 Study  Design  
 This will be  a two part study involving first  a brief  feasi bility  portion followed by a  
prospective  non- inferiority  study conducted from  winter  2021 to  winter  2022 in  an urban pediatric 
level  1 trauma  center  and emergency  department  (Comer  Children’ s Hospital  in Chicago, IL). The 
duration of  the study will cont inue through to  2023 for biostatistical analysis  and data publication. 
This study will be  reviewed  and approved by the  University  of Chicago  Institutional Review  Board. 
 Part 1: Feasibility  Study  
 In order  to establish  that pocket -sound US  users  are able to  obtain accurate  and adequate 
imaging  for interpretation, the  study will first  start  with  a brief  1 month feasibi lity study. This  
portion of  the study will involve  each  of the study providers  and will consist  of the initial training, 
consent  of feasibility  participants,  and image  obtainment.  
 Study  Training:  
 Before  the start  of the study, all  participating  pediatric  emergency  medicine  attending 
physicians  and fellows  will be  trained  on how  to use a PsUS  and how  to perform  the elbow  exam  for 
Protocol : IRB21 -0678 
Page  5 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  a suspected  elbow  fractures.  Training will consist  of both didactic  and hands -on components  over  a 
brief  training  session  along  with  pre/post  survey for  bedside  sonographers. Standardized  views  will 
include  both longitudinal  and transverse views  of the posterior  and anterior  elbow, longitudinal  
lateral and medial  views  of elbow, and  finally  views  of the proximal  ends  of both radius  and ulna  for 
signs  of fracture.  This  specific group of  sonographers  is selected  to perform  the ultrasound exam  as 
they will all  have  at least  a basic knowledge  of how  to perform  ultrasound as well  as past general  
scanning experience  of at least  1-2 years.  Beyond this  initial training, an  education  reference tool  
with images  and instructions  will also  be present  in the ED for reference for study providers  during 
the duration of  the study.  
 
Feasibility  Protocol  
 Once trained,  each  study provider  will obtain 3 elbow  exams  of participants  between  the ages 
of 1-16 years  old over  1 month. Each  provider  will use the standardized  views  reviewed  in the 
ultrasound training  to perform  the exam.  Verbal  consent  will be  obtained from  each  participant ’s 
parent  for inclusion  in the feasibility  study. Images  will be  stored  on the  password protect,  user -
specific,  cloud storage  butterfly  image  database and  then  reviewed  by study staff  for accuracy  as 
well as for quality  of standardized  US views.  No identifiable  information  about  participants  will be  
saved  including no name,  initials,  DOB,  or MRN.  The study providers  performing the  exam  will 
initial their  studies  in order  to keep  track  each provider  has performed  3 elbow  exams.  These images  
will only be  reviewed  by study staff  to ensure  US examiners  are correctly  obtaining the  standardized  
views  needed  for a formal  interpretation  but will not  be reviewed  by an  expert  for interpretation  as 
these images  will be  used  only for feasibility,  not hypothesis  testing.  
 
Part 2: Non -inferiority  Study  
 Once the  feasibility  study is  complete,  the study team  will began  the recruitment and  protocol  
for non- inferiori ty study. See Appendix 1 for part  2 non- inferiority  study schematic.  
  
Recruitment  & Selection  of Participants:  
 A convenience sample  of pediatric  patients  with  isolated  acute elbow  pain  will be  recruited  
for this  study. Patients  will be  identified  after  initial emergency  room  triage  when  an acute isolated  
elbow  injury is  identified  as a primary  ED complaint.  Participants  and parents/guardians  will initially  
be approached by study- affiliated  providers  in order  to introduce  study and  determine  potential  
interest.  Study- affiliated  providers  will include  study trained  pediatric emergency  medicine  (PEM) 
attending physicians  and fellows.  As there is  often  only one  attending physician or  fellow  in the 
Comer  ED, this may  involve  the treating  physician for the  patient.  If interested,  participants  will be  
enrolled  when  a PEM  attending physician or  fellow  is available to  consent  patient  and/or  
parent/guardian, prior  to the completion  of additional  study steps  (i.e. completion  of PsUS  elbow  
exam).  Following signing of  consent, PsUS  exam  will be  performed  by study- affiliated  and -trained  
PEM  attending or  fellow.  Study recruitment  information  will be  posted in  primary  ED clinical  staff 
area to  spread  department  awareness  of this study and  facilitate  communication  to study providers  of 
a potential  participant  in the ED. In addition, electronic  study announcements  will also  be sent to 
department  staff  to introduce  and spread  awareness  of the study. Eligibility  criteria  will be  reviewed  
by study providers  prior  to introduction or  enrollment  of any subjects  into the study. Recruitment  
will be  complete  once  70 participants  have  been  recruited  and consented  into the  study. 
 
Protocol : IRB21 -0678 
Page  6 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  Inclusion criteria  will include  children  between  the ages  of 1-16 years  olds, with  isolated,  acute (less  
than 48 hrs) elbow  pain  in the setting  of adequate history of  trauma.  Suspected  elbow  fractures  will 
be defined  as pain, tenderness, swelling,  and/or  the inability  or unwillingness  to move  the elbow  
joint in the full range  of motion.  
 
Exclusion  criteria  will include  patients  <1 or >16 years  old, those  with  open fractures,  gross  
deformities , multiple  traumatic  injuries,  distal neurovascular  compromise, unstable  vital signs  or 
hemodynamic  instability,  altered  mental  status,  history of  skeletal  abnormalities,  or past elbow  
fracture as  well  as wards  of the state  or those  unable  to provide  conse nt. Patients  who  receive 
radiography or  a confirmed  diagnosis  of fracture at an outside  institutions  prior  to arrival  to the ED 
will also  be excluded.  
 
Consent  Process   
 Once a  potential  research  participant  is identified  by emergency  staff,  study will be  
introduced to  subjects  and parent  or guardian. If patient  and/or  parent/guardian is  interested  in study, 
informed  consent  will be  obtained by either  pediatric emergency  medicine  attending physicians  or 
fellows  in accordance to  IRB consenting process  at University  of Chicago.  Study procedures, risks,  
and benefits  will be  explained  in detail  to patient  and parents/guardians.  As  all patient ’s will not  be 
of age to  consent  independently, written  informed  consent  will be  obtained from  patient ’s parents  or 
guardians, with  informed  assent  obtained when  applicable for age per  assent  guidelines  by the  
University  of Chicago  IRB assent  guidelines. Subjects  will either  sign the  assent form  (7-12 yo when  
medically  able to  sign)  or the assent  line of the consent  form  (12-16 yo who  have  the cognitive  
capacity  to understand the  consent  form).  Study protocol  and purpose  will be  explained  in 
terminology appropriate  for age.  Consent  will be  obtained in  the emergency  room  after  initial triage  
of acute,  isolated  elbow  pain but before  ultrasound of  the extremity.  The consent  and assent  process  
will take place at  the subject ’s bedside. Once consented, an  ultrasound- trained  study staff  member  
will perform  the bedside  PsUS  exam.   
 
Risks  and Benefits:  
 This prospective  study does  not involve  any medications,  experimental  drugs  or invasive  
procedures. The  pocket -sized  ultrasound (PsUS)  exam  is a non- invasive  device  that uses  high 
frequency  sound waves  to visualize  underlying structures  with  no associated  radiation. The  
associated  risks  of bedside  PsUS  ultrasound exam  are minimal and  the exam  will be  limited  to 5-10 
minutes. The gel used  during the  ultrasound exam  may be cold  and the probe  may  apply light  
pressure  on the  elbow  during the  exam.  There  may  be mild  pain  during the  application  of this 
pressure  which  can be minimized  with  ample  gel application. Otherwise  there  are no additional  
physical  or psychological  risks  or side effects  associated  with  the PsUS  exam  and no financial,  social  
or legal  risks  have  been  identified  with  the study. Subjects  will continue  to received  gold standard  of 
care for elbow  injury evaluati on and  any disruption to  care with  be minimized  due to rapid  nature  of 
the exam  and preexisting  waiting  period in  emergency  room.  
 There is  also minimal risk  to loss of confidentially  as information  will be  coded and  de-
identified  whenever  possible. Ultrasound image  data will be  de-identified  and stored  on secure 
password- protected,  encrypted, HIPAA -compliant  web -based  database (for more  information  on 
encryption and  security  of Butterfly  ultrasound imaging  database see:  https://assets.website -
files.com/5a0cbe08f1138d000147a9d4/5f87cf6e54026165cc910baf_Butterfly%2BNetwork%2BTec
hnology%2Band%2BSecurity%2BWhite%2BPaper%2B950- 20009- 00%2Brev%2BE.pdf  ). Any  
Protocol : IRB21 -0678 
Page  7 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  additional  personal  health  information  will be  stored  on University  of Chicago RedCAP  database.  
Each  subject  will be  given unique  study number  with  no personal  health  information  that will be  
used in both the  web -based  ultrasound image  database and  in RedCAP.  The unique  study identifier  
will be  written  on the  study’ s copy of  the consent  form  in order  provide  study investigators  a method 
to link ultrasound imaging  back  to the medical  chart.  When  data is  reviewed  for blinded US  expert  
review  or for biostatistical analysis,  raw data will be  fully de-identified  with  no personal  health  
information. All  consents  will be  stored  in a locked cabinet  in a locked  office.  
 There are no direct  benefits  to the patients  participating  in this study. The  patients  will not  be 
informed  of the results  of the ultrasound exam  as these results  will be  used  for research  only. As  
standard  of care of  elbow  injury (i.e.  radiographs)  will still be  determined  and completed  as 
clinically  indicated,  ultrasound results  will not  contribute  to clinical  decision  making by primary  ED 
team.  Potential future  benefits  of this study include  validating  the use of bedside  PsUS  to evaluate 
acute elbow  fractures  in a pediatric  population. This  benefit  is especially  promising  in areas  without  
or limited  access  to more  advanced  imaging.  
 Study investigators  plan  to review  images  monthly  to ensure  standardized  sonography views  
of elbow  are being captured . Additionally  study investigators  also plan  to communicate  with  study 
sonographers  every  month to  check  in regarding  study logistics,  challenges,  or issues that  might  be 
encountered  during completion  of the study. This  will also  be an opportunity to  review  any safety  
concerns  or adverse  events.  Any  adverse events  or unanticipated  problems  will be  reported  
immediately  to University  of Chicago  IRB through the  online  Aura  IRB portal.  No data safety  
monitoring board (DSMB) will be  utilized  for this  study and  this study does  not have  sponsor  or 
FDA  involvement.  
 
Cost, Compensation  and Incentives   
 The subjects  will not  incur  any additional  costs  as a result  of their  participation  in this  study. 
There will be  no compensation  or incentives  offered  to subjects  for their  involvement  in this research  
study.   
  
Study  Protocol  
 Once consented, a  PsUS  elbow  exam  will be  performed  on every  participating  subject  using 
a single  handheld 2D  array  universal  probe  of the Butterfly  IQ pocket  sized  ultrasound machine 
(Butterfly  Network , Guilford, CT,  USA),  connected  to the study ultrasound examiner ’s smart  phone.  
The device will use  factory  standard  settings  and all images  will be  acquired  using room  temperature 
Aquasonic  100 Ultrasound Transmission  Gel (Parker  Laboratories,  Fairfield,  NJ, USA).  The exam  
will take approximately 5-10 minutes  to complete.  
 
Bedside  ultrasound examiners  will perform  the elbow  PsUS  exam  as follows:   
1) Place the  injured elbow  in the most  comfortable  position  for the  patient,  as ultrasound exam  
can be performed  in almost any  position. Apply copious  ultrasound gel  to probe  prior  to 
placemen t onto elbow  to reduce pressure  applied  to injury, minimizing  potential  pain  or 
discomfort  with  exam.  
2) Start  exam  in dorsal  aspect  of the distal humerus, obtaining both longitudinal  and transverse  
views  of the posterior  elbow. 
3) Next,  move  probe  to ventral  aspect  of distal humerus  and obtain both longitudinal  and 
transverse views  of the anterior  elbow  
Protocol : IRB21 -0678 
Page  8 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  4) Then, move  probe  to sides  of elbow  to obtain longitudinal  lateral  and medial views  of elbow  
5) Finally  include  views  of the proximal  ends  of both  radius and ulna  for signs  of fracture.  
 
 The contralateral  uninjured elbow  will be  imaged  for comparison immediately  following 
injured elbow. This  will result  in a set of standardized  views  of the elbow  being  obtained from  each  
patient,  with  both still and  video clips  of each  orientation  being recorded.  A positive  PsUS  will be  
defined  as the presence of  signs  of elbow  fracture,  either  as direct  signs  including cortical  disruptions  
or discont inuities  in the bones ’ contour  or indirect  signs  including posterior  fat pad with  or without  
lipohemarthrosis  on ultrasound exam.  
  After  performing  the ultrasound, all  relevant  ultras onographic  images  will be stored  on a  
password protected, cloud -based  imaging  database provide  by the  Butterfly  Network,  with  all 
identifying information  removed. Immediately  after  the exam,  a basic assessment  of the ultrasound 
images  will be  asked  of each of the bedside  ultrasound providers, as  positive, negative  or equivocal  
for signs  of elbow  fracture,  but before  reviewing any radiographic  imaging  studies. In  addition, the  
stored  images  will also  later  be reviewed  and interpreted  by a  blinded physician who  has extensive  
ultrasound experience and limited  clinical  knowledge  beyond patient ’s age, sex, and complaint  of 
elbow  pain  (blinded to  additional  clinical  knowledge, bedside  interpretation  and radiographic  
findings). Both the  bedside  and expert  ultrasound interpretation  will also  be compared  to the final  
fracture diagnosis. Additionally, quality  assurance of imaging  by bedside  examiners  will be  
reviewed  during the  first four months  of the study to  ensure  appropriate  acquisition  of standardized  
views  by different  ultrasound exams  by the  study investigator.  
 
 Following the  ultrasound  exam,  patients  will undergo standard  clinical care  for acute elbow  
injury per  primary  ED team,  which  could consist  of anterior/posterior  and lateral  radiographs  of the 
elbow  in accordance to  the standard  of care for suspected  elbow  fractures  or bedside  reduction  in 
cases  of suspected  radial  head  subluxations. Results  of the ultrasound exam  will be  blinded to  the 
radiology team  with  the final  readings  of the x-ray images  by the  blinded radiology team  obtained 
from  patient ’s chart  by study investigators  after  the patient  encounter. Preceding pain  management  
and subsequent  clinical  management  of patient  will be  based  on the  primary  ED teams ’ clinical  
assessment  and radiographic  findings. In  addition to  review  of initial radiographic  findings, in  cases  
of negative  fracture,  subsequent  follow  up imaging  when  applicable will also  be checked  and 
reviewed  for the  presence of  any occult  fractures.  Subsequent  radiographic  imaging  will be  at the 
discretion  of the primary  ED team  or orthope dic consultants. A  positive  diagnosis  of an elbow  
fracture will be  defined as  radiographic  evidence  of acute fracture  (or healing fracture if  during 
follow  up imaging)  or cortical  irregularity  on imaging  by final  clinical  report  by the  pediatric  
radiology attending on service.  In cases  where no  follow  up imaging  is obtained, the  clinical  
diagnosis  of no fracture  will be  confirmed  by assumed  resolution of  clinical symptoms. Additionally, 
research  staff  will also  attempt  to make 1 follow -up phone  call to participants  1 month after  their  ED 
visit for their  elbow  injury to  determine  if any additional  radiographic  imaging  or care was  obtained 
and if subsequent  occult  fractures  were  discovered  on later  imaging  that may  have  been  missed  on 
the initial evaluation. N o additional  direct  patient  interaction  will occur  with  subjects  after  this 
follow  up phone  call.    
  Data collection  for all  study subjects  will include  basic demographic  characteristics  (Age,  
Sex, MRN),  initial physical  exam  findings, radiographic  elbow  images,  and final  radiography reports  
Protocol : IRB21 -0678 
Page  9 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  of images.  All study data  will be  stored  in secure,  HIPAA -complaint  data collecting  system  called  
RedCAP.   De-identified  ultrasound image  and redcap  data will be  stored  for 5 years  on secure 
servers  after the study manuscript  is published. After  this period, all  study documents  linking subject  
PHI to the coded  dataset  will be  deleted  or destroyed  and a de-identified  dataset  including ultrasound 
images  will be  retained  for educational  purposes  indefinitely.  
 
Outcome  Measures &  Primary  Data  Analysis  
 We will evaluate the  diagnostic  accuracy  of the PsUS  findings  by comparing it to  reference 
standard  of radiography when  indicated  for suspected  elbow  fractures.  Both ultrasound and  
radiography will be  performed  and interpreted  indepe ndently to  the each  other, with  imaging  results  
blinded to  ultrasound examiner/radiologist  at the time  of imaging  review.  We will also  compare the  
findings  of both of  the expert  interpretation  and the bedside  assessment  of the PsUS  exam  to the 
radiographic  findings. We  will calculate sensitivity  (Sn),  specificity  (Sp),  positive  predictive  value  
(PPV),  and negative  predictive  value  (NPV).  In addition, inter -rater reliability  with  Cohen’ s kappa  
statistic  will also  be calculated  to compare the  agreement  between  the two ultrasound examiners.  
Data will be  analyzed  using statistical analysis  for a non- inferiority  study model, with  a significance  
level  defined  as p<0.05, with goal  power  of 0.8 (80%),  and confidence  interval  of 95%. We will be  
using a  one-sided  equivalence  test of correlated  proportions  with  the estimated  maximum allowable  
difference between  these proportions  that still results  in equivalence (the  range  of equivalence)  being  
0.06. The  estimated  sample size from  these calculations  is 70 children  for this  non- inferiority  study.  
 
 
 
 
Timeline  
Submit  to IRB    July 2021 
Estimate  approval    Winter  2021  
Begin  Study    Winter  2021 (pending approval)  
Enrollment  though  December  2022  
Review  Data    Winter  2022  
Publish/Present  Results   Spring 2023 (Goal:  2021 PAS  (Spr) vs  AAP  2023 (fall,  post  
fellowship))  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Protocol : IRB21 -0678 
Page  10 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  References:  
1. World  Health  Organization Report. Essential  Health  Technologies  Strategy  2004–2007;  2003. 
World  Health  Organization. Available  from:  http:// www.who.int/eht/en/EHT_strategy_2004-
2007.pdf. —>  3/4 world  without  dx imaging  access  
2. World  Health  Organization. Baseline country survey  on medical  devices  WHO global  health  
observatory. Geneva:  World  Health  Organization;  2010 
3. Morris  M.A., Saboury B.  (2019)  Access  to Imaging  Technology in  Global  Health.  In: Mollura  
D., Culp M., Lungren M.  (eds)  Radiology in  Global  Health.  Springer, Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3-319-98485- 8_3 
4. Rennie  L, Court -Brown  CM, Mok JY,  Beattie  TF. The epidemiology of  fractures  in children. 
Injury. 2007 Aug;38(8):913- 22. 
5. Merckaert  S, Chaibi  E, Meriem  S, Kwiatkowski  B, Divjak  N, Zambelli PY.  Epidemiology of  
pediatric  upper  extremity  fractures  in tertiary  care center  in switzerland.  Pediatr  Emerg  Care.  
2020 Feb  27 
6. Alpern  ER, Stanley  RM,  Gorelick  MH,  Donaldson A,  Knight  S, Teach  SJ, Singh T,  Mahajan  P, 
Goepp JG,  Kuppermann N, Dean  JM, Chamberlain  JM, Pediatric  Emergency  Care Applied 
Research  Netw ork. Epidemiology of  a pediatric  emergency  medicine research  network:  The 
PECARN  core data project.  Pediatr  Emerg  Care.  2006 Oct;22(10):689- 99. 
7. Poonai  N, Myslik  F, Joubert  G, Fan J, Misir  A, Istasy  V, Columbus  M, Soegtrop R,  Goldfarb  A, 
Thompson D,  Dubrovs ky AS. Point -of-care ultrasound for nonangulated distal  forearm  fractures  
in children:  Test  performance characteristics  and patient -centered  outcomes. Acad  Emerg  Med.  
2017 May;24(5):607- 16. 
8. Lee A,  Colen  DL, Fox JP, Chang B,  Lin IC. Pediatric hand and  upper  extremity  injuries  
presenting to  emergency  departments  in the united  states:  Epidemiology and  health  care-
associated  costs.  Hand  (N Y). 2019 Aug  23:1558944719866884. 
9. Naranje SM,  Erali  RA,  Warner  WC,Jr,  Sawyer  JR, Kelly  DM.  Epidemiology of  pediatric  
fractu res presenting to  emergency  departments  in the united states.  J Pediatr  Orthop. 2016 
Jun;36(4):e45- 8. 
10. Crowther  M. Elbow  pain  in pediatrics.  Curr Rev  Musculoskelet  Med.  2009 Jun;2(2):83- 7. 
11. Bellavia  MA,  Cambise  C, Coraci  D, Maccauro  G, Valassina A,  Padua  L. Ultrasound is  a useful  
tool to evaluate nerve involvement  in children  with  supracondylar  humerus  fractures.  Muscle  
Nerve.  2017 Sep;56(3):E18- 20. 
12. Ackermann  O, Liedgens  P, Eckert  K, Chelangattucherry  E, Ruelander  C, Emmanouilidis  I, 
Ruchholtz  S. Ultrasound diagnosis  of juvenile  forearm  fractures.  J Med  Ultrason  (2001). 2010 
Jul;37(3):123- 7. 
13. Chaar -Alvarez  FM,  Warkentine F,  Cross  K, Herr  S, Paul  RI. Bedside  ultrasound diagnosis  of 
nonangulated distal forearm  fractures  in the pediatric emergency  department.  Pedi atr Emerg  
Care.  2011 Nov;27(11):1027- 32. 
14. Burnier  M, Buisson G,  Ricard  A, et al. Diagnostic  value  of ultrasonography in  elbow  trauma  in 
children:  prospective  study of  34 cases.  Orthop Traumatol  Surg  Res.  2016;102:839- 843. 
15. Ackermann  O, Simanoski  J. Eckert  K. Fracture  Ultrasound of  the Extremities.  Ultrasound in  
Medicine (2020). 2020;41:12- 28. 
16. Chen  L, Baker  MD.  Novel  applications  of ultrasound in  pediatric  emergency  medicine.  Pediatr  
Emerg  Care 2007;(23 (February)):115 –23 (Review).  
Protocol : IRB21 -0678 
Page  11 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  17. Barata I, Spencer  R, Suppiah A,  Raio  C, Ward  MF,  Sama A.  Emergency  ultrasound in  the 
detection  of pediatric long- bone  fractures.  Pediatr  Emerg  Care.  2012 Nov;28(11):1154- 7. 
18. Eckert  K, Ackermann  O, Schweiger  B, Radeloff  E, Liedgens  P. Ultrasound evaluation  of elbow  
fractures  in childre n. J Med  Ultrason  (2001). 2013  Oct;40(4):443- 51. 
19. Cho KH,  Lee SM,  Lee YH, Suh KJ.  Ultrasound diagnosis  of either  an occult  or missed  fracture 
of an extremity  in pediatric -aged  children. Korean  J Radiol. 2010 Jan -Feb;11(1):84- 94. 
20. Lee SH,  Yun  SJ. Diagnostic  performance of  ultrasonography for detection  of pediatric  elbow  
fracture:  A meta -analysis.  Ann  Emerg  Med.  2019 Oct;74(4):493- 502. 
21. Tsou  PY, Ma YK,  Wang  YH, Gillon  JT, Rafael  J, Deanehan  JK. Diagnostic  accuracy  of 
ultrasound for upper  extremity  fractures  in children:  A systematic  review  and meta -analysis.  Am 
J Emerg  Med.  2020 Apr  2 
22. Rykkje  A, Carlsen  JF, Nielsen  MB.  Hand -Held  Ultrasound Devices  Compared  with  High -End 
Ultrasound Systems:  A Systematic  Review.  Diagnostics  (Basel).  2019 Jun 15;9(2):61. doi:  
10.3390/diagnostics9020061. PMID:  31208078;  PMCID:  PMC6628329. 
23. Lau BC, Robertson A,  Motamedi  D, Lee N.  The validity  and reliability  of a pocket -sized  
ultrasound to  diagnose  distal radius  fracture  and assess  quality  of closed  reduction. J  Hand  Surg  
Am. 2017 Jun;42(6):420- 7. 
24. McNeil  CR, McManus  J, Mehta S.  The accuracy  of portable  ultrasonography to  diagnose  
fractures  in an austere environment. Prehosp Emerg  Care.  2009 Jan -Mar;13(1):50 -2. 
 
 
 
  
Protocol : IRB21 -0678  
Page  12 of 12 Protocol  Ver3  10/29/2021  Appendix  1: Study Schematic   
