 
Dysphagia Following Anterior Cervical Spine Surgery; Single Dose Steroid Vs Saline (DysDexVSSal)  
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
04DEC2019  
Human Subject Researc h
Does the protocol meet the federal definition of research? For he lp determining the type of research you are conducting, see th e DHHR Human Subject 
Regulations Decision Charts at http://www.hhs.go v/ohrp/policy/checklists /decisioncharts.html.
Yes
Does the research involve living person(s)?
Yes
Will information from in dividual person(s) be collected  as part of this research?
Yes
Funding Source
Is there a secured funding source?
No
Locations of Research
Select the location(s) wh ere the research will be conducted. At least one location must be selected.
Ruby Memorial Hospital or Other WVU Healthcare Site
Select the location(s) wh ere the research will be conducted. At least one location must be selected.
WVU Campus
Will the research take pla ce at an off campus location?
No
Will this study require an  Inter-Institutional Author ization Agr eement (IAA)?
No
Design
Please provide a lay summary (written at 6th grade level) that includes a statement ab out the purpose and the general aims of t he research.
Dysphagia (difficulty swallowing) is common following anterior cervi cal spine surgery. Studies have documented persistent swall owing difficulty up to 
two years postoperatively. The long term objective is to change the treatment paradigm for cervical  spine surgery to minimize d ysphagia and associated 
complications. The specific aims are to identify the effect of a single dose of perioperative steroid on dysphagia and to devel op a treatment protocol for 
the frequency of perioperative steroids n eeded to reduce dysphagia. This is a pros pective, randomized, placebo-controlled study . Patients will be given a 
single dose of dexamethasone or normal salin e intratoperatively and then assessed at mu ltiple time points up to one year. The r esearch question is what is 
the effect of a single dose of perioperative steroid on dysphagia  after anterior cervical spine su rgery? The surv ey instruments  used to determine difficulty 
swallowing include the Bazaz, Dysphagia Short Questionnaire, and EAT 10. To administer the Bazaz instrument, the study coordina tor will ask the 
subject if he/she has difficulty swallowing liquid food and gi ve the options 'none', 'rare', 'p resent all the time'. The option s for solid food with are 'none', 
'rare', 'occasional only with specific foods', or 'frequent major ity of solids'. The options on th e left side of the questionna ire determine the level of 
difficulty. If a subject has no difficulty  swallowing both liquid and solid food, 'non e' will be chosen. The level of difficulty swallowing is determined by 
the highest difficulty, e.g. if a subject had no difficulty swallowing liquid food and has rare difficulty swallowing solid foo d, 'mild' will be chosen. If the 
subject has no difficulty swallowing liquid food but has frequent difficulty swallowi ng solid food, 'severe' will be chosen.
Fully describe all procedures to be perform ed, from start to finish, numbering your procedures 1,2,3 or A, B, C (e.g., 1. Recru iting, 2. Consent, 3. 
Collecting data, 4. How findings will be shared, etc.).
1.Potential subjects will see Drs. Daffner, France, Cui, Sedney or Emer y at their visit pr ior to elective ante rior cervical spi ne surgery at the Spine or 
Neurosurgery Clinic. 2. Su bjects will be told about the study at this visit, all questions will be answer ed by the surgeons and  the research coordinator, all 
surveys that need to be completed will be shown to the potential subjects an d they will be given the opportunity to consent. 3.  If consented, the subject 
will be asked to complete baseline surveys (Bazaz, EAT-10, and Dysphagia Short Questionnaire) at this visit. The subject will a lso complete Standard of 
Care Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS) at this visit. 4. The subject will be randomized to receive either single dose s teroid (dexamethasone) 
or saline (placebo) prior to surg ery. The dose is calculated based on body weight  group will receive 0.3 mg/kg of in travenous d examethasone 
(experimental group) 0.3 mg/kg saline (contr ol group). The subjec t will not be charged for dexame thasone or saline. 5. The subj ect will undergo anterior 
cervical spine surgery per standa rd of care. 6. After administration of the antib iotics in the operating room, the single dose of steroid or saline will be 
given by the anesthesia team, who are blinded to the group assignment, via an intravenous bag (study drug) prepared by the inve stigational pharmacist, 
the only person who knows the group assignment. 7. The surgeon, patient, and research team are blinded to the group assignment.  8. The subject will be 
administered the surveys by phone call or in  the hospital by the research coordinator on Day 1. 9. On Day 2, if the subject is still hospitalized, surveys 
w
ill be administered by the research coordinator in the hospital or via phone call. 10. Following Day one surveys, and if the s ubject has been discharged, 
the subject will be called to complete the an swers to the surveys via phone call at Day 2,  Week 1, Week 2, Month 1, Month 3, Mo nth 6 and Month 12. At 
Month 12, the subject will be asked to also complete standard of care PROMS. If the subject is in the clinic for follow up at t he designated time frame for 
survey administration, the surveys will be completed in the clinic. If the subject is not in  clinic at Month 12, the PROMS will  be completed via phone 
call. 10. At the end of the study, all su bjects will be called or mailed a letter indi cating the group assignment they had been  in. 11. Study Results will not 
be shared with the subjects.
Please describe the investigational procedures that will be performed throughout the dura tion of the study.
Randomization to steroids or no steroids for anterior spinal fusion subjects and completion of the Bazaz, Short Dysphagia Quest ionnaire and EAT-10 
survey.
Please describe the standard of care procedures that  will be performed throughout the duration of the study.Page 2 of 8 Protocol Questionnair e
12/4/2019 https://kc.wvu.edu/kc/p rotocolQuestionnairePrint.do?protocolId=262956 4
Everything outside of  the randomization.
Will you be assigning or randomizing participants to groups or conditions (e.g., control, placebo)?
Yes
Describe the group assignment.
Random assignment to receive either one dose of steroid or one dose of saline (Placebo) during the first hour of surgery.
Does the research involve surveys/interviews/questionnaires? If so, attach a copy  of the interview/surv ey questions on the Note s & Attachments page.
Yes
Will you be asking any questions that are likely to distress your subjects (e.g., questions about abuse, trauma, or suicide ide ation)? If so, attach 
counseling services referral list on the Notes & Attachments page.
NoDescribe what is known about this topic and why this study is needed. Please include at least two reference citations to suppor t your rationale.
See lit review and scientific rationale under Notes and Attachments.What method are you going to  use to analyze the data?
Swallowing symptoms will be measured using the patient reported Bazaz Dysphagia Scale, EAT-10 su rvey, and the Dysphagia Short Q uestionnaire. 
Swallowing data will be obtained pre-oper atively, one and two days post-operatively an d then one week, two weeks, four weeks, t hree months, six 
months, and one year post-operatively. Scor es from the Bazaz Dysphagia Scale and the Dysphagia Short Questionnaire from the two  groups will be 
compared at the various time points using th e Mann-Whitney U test. Powe r and sample size calculations are based on the presence  or absence of 
dysphagia at two weeks. Based on a literature review, we postulat ed that 50% of the patients in  the control group would experie nce mild, moderate, or 
severe dysphagia. If that figure can be improved to the point wh ere just 20% of the patients are similarly affected then that, in our opinion, would 
represent clinical success. Under the above scenario, 32 patients in each group would give us 81% power to reject the null hypo thesis. Assuming a 
dropout rate of 20% our total sample size for the study is 80. Statistical signif icance is set at p<0.05. We plan to analyze th e data in three ways. First, we 
will look at the time-to-event where the ev ent is "no dysphagia" in a discrete time su rvival model. Second, we will use a repea ted measures ordinal 
categorical model to assess the effect of steroid/control in a generalized linear model. Lastly , we will compare the data from this study with that of our 
previous three-dose model to assess any difference in  the degree of impact of the two dosing regimens.
Full Board Review Risk Assessment
Is this study more than minimal risk ? (If NO, then this stud y should be submitted as an expedited protocol)
Yes
Does the study involve intervention and/or manipulation of the subjects or the subjects'  environment (e.g., educational interve ntion or training, 
experimental or quasi- experimental design)?
YesIs the research categorized as interventional medical research?
YesWill monitoring for harms occur?
Yes
Describe monitoring for harm.
Please see the Data Safety Monitoring Plan under Notes and Attachments
Is there a Data and Safety Monito ring Plan (DSMP) for this study?
Yes
Is there a Data and Safety Monito ring Board (DSMB) for this study?
YesIs the DSMB independent?
No
Who will monitor the data?
The research team and Dr. Balc ik, who is outside the departme nt but serving on the DSMB.
What data will be monitored?Adverse reaction to dexamethasone.
How frequently will data be monitored?
The board will meet after the first five subjects have had surgery. If no unexpected harms have been found, the board will meet  every 3 months. Should 
an unexpected AE occur during the study, the board will be notified immediatel y and a decision will be made regarding continuin g or discontinuing the 
study.
Describe how information relevant to the pr otection of participants will be managed addressing unantic ipated problems involving risk to participants or 
others, interim results, a nd protocol modifications.
Should an unexpected AE occur during the st udy that is related to the research, the board will be notified immediately and a de cision will be made 
regarding continuing or discontinuing the study.Page 3 of 8 Protocol Questionnair e
12/4/2019 https://kc.wvu.edu/kc/p rotocolQuestionnairePrint.do?protocolId=262956 4
Describe how the monitoring of data ma y ensure the safety of pa rticipants (e.g., a drastic  blood pressure increase).
Dexamethasone may increase blood sugar in subjects with diabetes. All subjects with diabetes are carefully  monitored for any ri se in blood sugar per 
standard of care.
List all the standard medical, be havioral, and/or educational pr ocedures that will be utilized.
The surgeries are standard of care as well as completion of patient reported outcomes  at the time frames listed.
List the investigational interven tions that will be utilized, above and beyond the st andard of care.
Randomization to steroid or placebo; completion of Bazaz and the Short Dysphagia Questionnaire.
What decision rules (e.g., stop ping rules) will be considered?
The board will meet after the first five subjects have had surger y. If no unexpected harms have been found, the board will meet  every 3 months. Should 
an unexpected AE occur during the study, the board will be notified immediatel y and a decision will be made regarding continuin g or discontinuing the 
study.Will the protocol be stopped once harm s are proven to outweigh benefits?
YesWill clinical findings be shared with the subjects?
YesDescribe how findings will be shared with the subjects.
At the completion of the study all patients will be notified by phone call or letter th eir group assignment and results of the study.
Will incidental findings be shared with the subjects?
Yes
Will WVU's procedures on incide ntal findings be followed?
Yes
Describe how and where researchers will inte ract with participants, explaining how these interactions will be kept private.
Researchers will interact with pa rticipants in private rooms of the spine clinic and neurosurgery  clinic at the participant's h istory and physical visit prior 
to elective anterior spine surgery. They will see participants in their hospital room Day 1 after surgery and possibly Day 2 if  the participant remains in 
the hospital past day 1. They will ask pa rticipants to complete the Bazaz, EAT-10, and Dysphagia Sh ort Questionnaire on Day 1 a nd Day 2. They will 
call participants from a private room to co mplete questionnaires should the subject not return for regularly scheduled follow u p visits. They will interact 
with participants at their standard of care follow up visits in the clinic.
Describe any possibilities for risk or harm to the subjects as a result of their participation in the research (e.g., discomfor ts or hazards to the subjects). 
Please assess the severity of these risks.
The only inconvenience is answering questions on the surveys face to face or via a phone call.  The subjects will have a full un derstanding of the time 
frames by which they will be co ntacted to anser qu estions before consenting. Subjects will not be recruited if they don't want to answer the survey 
questions during the time frames. There should be no discomfort with administration of the study drug.
Will subjects intentionally be deceived as to the purpose of the study?
No
HIPAA
Does the research involve protected health  information  (PHI)?
Yes
Will the HIPAA and consent forms be combined? If not, attach a separate HIPAA Authorization to the Notes & Attachments page.
YesAre you requesting a HIPAA waiver? If yes, attach a HIPAA Waiver Form on the Notes & Attachments page.
NoWill the research being conducted at a covered entity require authorizati on from the subject? If yes, attach a HIPAA Form on th e Notes & Attachments 
page - only if a combined co nsent with HIPAA is not used.
NoAre you transferring identifiable data to or from another institution? If yes, attach a signed and WVU Lega l Counsel approved H IPAA Data Use 
Agreement Form on the Notes & Attachments page.
No
Will the research being conducted at a cove red entity involve data that is de-identif ied? If yes, attach a HIPAA De-Identificat ion Certification Form on 
the Notes & Attachments page. You can find the form here (this is only for NHSR studies).
NoWill the study include deceased individuals? If yes, attach a HIPAA Decedents Form  on the Notes & Attachments page.
NoPage 4 of 8 Protocol Questionnair e
12/4/2019 https://kc.wvu.edu/kc/p rotocolQuestionnairePrint.do?protocolId=262956 4
Will data/samples with identifiers  be received from another entity? If yes, attach  a signed, Legal Counsel approved HIPAA Data Use Agreement Form 
on the Notes & Attachments page.
No
Subjects
Indicate the maximum number of subjects to be enrolled or medical records to be review ed at all sites by the WVU or VAMC resear ch team.
80
Provide a rationale for choosing your sample size.
Scores from the Bazaz scale, the EAT-10, an d the Dysphagia Short Questionnaire from the two groups will be compared at the vari ous time points using 
the Mann-Whitney U test. Statistical signifi cance is set at p<0.05. With a power of 0. 80 and a clinical m eaningful difference o f 30% in scores, an 
estimated 32 patients per group is needed. Ho wever, based on a recent unpublished stu dy at our institution, we expect a dropout  rate of approximately 
20%, and therefore plan for a total samp le size for this study of 80 patients.
State the requirement(s) to become a par ticipant in the study (e.g., age range, sex, language spoken, class enrollment/ranking) .
Ages 18-80; undergoing elective ACDF, hybrid cons tructs, corpectomies, disc arthroplasty surgery
Explain why selection of participants will be equitabl e addressing gender, ethnicity, and/or race of subjects.
No one will be excluded based on gender, ethnicity or race. Exclus ion criteria include: < 18 years of age; major trauma or neop lastic or infectious 
conditions requiring surgery. Also  excluded will be patients undergoing anterior-p osterior operations, th ose with a history of previous anterior cervical 
spine surgery, any patient requiring a halo vest, patients on ch ronic steroids, and patients rema ining intubated post-operatively, and women who are 
pregnant.
In outline format and chrono logical order, describe what will be done to iden tify and recruit pa rticipants (e.g., A, B, C or 1,  2, 3).
1. Potential subjects will see Drs. Daffner, France, Cui, Emery or Sedney at their Hi story and Physical visit prior to elective  anterior cervical spine 
surgery at the Spine Center . 2. Subjects will be told about the study at this visit, all questions will be answered by the surgeons and the research 
coordinator, all surveys that n eed to be completed will be shown to the poten tial subjects and they will be given the opportuni ty to consen t. 3. If 
consented, the subject will be asked to co mplete baseline surveys (Bazaz, EAT-10 and Dysphagia Short Questionnaire) at this vis it. 4. The subject will 
be randomized to receive either si ngle dose steroid (dexamethasone) or  saline (placebo) prior to surgery.
Will any of the su bjects be less than 18 years old?
NoWill your study target populations such as pregnant women, fetuses, neonates, or any groups likely to be vu lnerable to coercion  or undue influence such 
as children, prisoners, individuals with im paired decision-making capability  or economically or educationally disadvantaged per sons?
NoDoes this research involv e participants who could be coerced or unduly influe nced, such as current stud ents/employees of resear ch team members?
NoDoes the protocol deal with cancer preventio n, treatment, or diagnosis (including surveys)?
NoHas this protocol been reviewed by Clinical Trials Working Gro up (CTWG)? If yes, please attach th e CTWG's correspondence on the  Notes & 
Attachments page.
No
Consent Procedures
Will SIGNED informed cons ent be obtained from s ubjects (all or in part)?
Yes
Will the informed consent form be translated into  any other language(s)?
No
Is a waiver of informed  consent being requested (i.e., there will be no consent process at all)?
NoIs a waiver of the requirement to obtain written documentation of  the consent process being reques ted (if yes, attach the infor mation to be provided to the 
participants)?
No
Are you requesting an alteration of co nsent (e.g., short form, braille consent or witn essed verbal consent)?
No
Describe the consent process (u sing 1, 2, 3 or A, B, C), a ddressing when, where, and how participants will be informed.
Potential participants will be to ld of the study in the Spine or  Neurosurgery Clinic in a priv ate room during their History and  Physical visit prior to 
surgery. A research t eam member will inform the subject about the study, an swer all their questions, sh ow them the surveys and the subject will be given 
the opportunity to consent.
Indicate who will be consenting subjects and describe the pro cess of training all personnel who will be obtaining consent.Page 5 of 8 Protocol Questionnair e
12/4/2019 https://kc.wvu.edu/kc/p rotocolQuestionnairePrint.do?protocolId=262956 4
Research team members including research coordinators who have been consenting patients for years.
Potential Benefits
Is there any known benefit to th e individual subject as a result of participa ting in the research? Paym ents to subjects should not be included in this 
section, but addressed in the Payments/Reimbursements section.
Potential benefit is less difficulty swallowing if  the subject is assigned to the steroid group.
Describe the potential benefit(s) to society and/or scientific / medical knowledge of the planned work.
The results of this study will provide evid ence for the use of steroids as a treatment  for reducing the incidence and severity of dysphagia among patients 
undergoing anterior cervical spin e surgery. A recently performed study at our institution ha s promising results from a three-do se regimen of steroids. 
Similarly, two recent clinical studies have also shown decreas ed dysphagia with a multi-dose ster oid regimen. If the hypothesis  of this proposal is 
supported, the use of a single dose of perioperative steroid sp ecifically lends itself well to ap plication in patients undergoi ng these procedures in 
outpatient surgery centers, improving the safety of such procedures.
Confidentiality
At any point during this study, will iden tifiable data be viewed or recorded?
Yes
Data must be kept for a minimu m of three (3) years afte r study completion. In addition to th e required 3 years, how much longer  will the data be kept?
Three years after study completion.Where will data be securely located?
In REDCAP, on the password protected computer of a rese arch team member in the Department of Orthopaedics.
How will data be destroyed?It will be erased from the password protected computer.
Will anyone other than the PI, re search team members, or IRB have access to the identifiable data (e.g.,  sponsor/funding source , other collaborators)?
No
Describe the steps that will be taken to maintain the privacy of subjects (e.g., wher e interaction takes place) and the confide ntiality of data (e.g., master 
code).
1.Potential subjects will see Drs. Daffner, France, Cui, Emery or Sedney at their Hi story and Physical visit prior to elective anterior cervical spine 
surgery in a private ro om at the Spine Center. 2. Subjects will be told abou t the study at this visit, all questions will be an swered by the surgeons and the 
research coordinator, all survey s that need to be completed wi ll be shown to the potential subj ects and they will be given the opportunity to consent. 3. If 
consented, the subject will be asked to co mplete baseline surveys (Bazaz, EAT-10 and Dysphagia Short Questionnaire) at this vis it. 4. The subject will 
be randomized to receive either single do se steroid (dexamethasone) or saline (placebo)  prior to surgery. 5. The subject will b e seen post-op day one by 
the research coordinator (and po st op Day 2 if the subject is still hospitalized ) who will administer the surveys in the hospit al room. 6. Following Day 
one surveys, and after discharge, the subjec t will be called from a private room of a research coordinator to complete the answ ers to the surveys via 
phone call at Day 2, Week 1, Week 2, Month 1, Month 3, Month 6 and Month 7. If the subject is in  the clinic for follow up at th e designated time frame 
for survey administration, the surveys will be completed in a private room in the clinic.
Does this study have a Federal Certificat e of Confidentiality? If yes, attach the cer tificate on the Notes & Attachments page.
No
Financial Considerations
Will the subjects incur any costs to partic ipate in this project (e.g., travel, physician fees, st udy procedures, study drugs)?
No
Will the subject be paid (money, gift  certificates, coupons, etc.) to participate in this research project?
No
Will WVU students receive extra credit for pa rticipating in this  research project?
No
Advertisements
Will there be advertisem ents for this study?
No
Drug/Substance/Nutrient/Biologic
Are there any drugs/substances/nutrients/biologics being used in this research study for inves tigational/research purposes ONLY ?
Yes
Enter the name of the first drug being used  for investigational/research purposes ONLY.
dexamethasonePage 6 of 8 Protocol Questionnair e
12/4/2019 https://kc.wvu.edu/kc/p rotocolQuestionnairePrint.do?protocolId=262956 4
Is this an Investigational New Drug (IND)  (if so, please attach the investigator brochure or applicable documentation)?
No
Is this drug/substance/nutrient/biologic being used off-label (if so, please attach the package insert or applicable documentat ion)?
NoDoes this drug/substance/nutrient/biologic meet the requirements of  an IND exemption? The clinical  investigation of a marketed drug or biologic does 
not require submission of an IND if all six (6) exemption conditions are met.
No
Is there a second drug/substance/nutrient/b iologic used in this resear ch study for investigational/research purposes ONLY?
No
Provide any other information regarding the dr ugs/substances/nutrients/biolo gics being used in this study that is relevant to t he IRB review.
Dexamethasone is a commonly used drug administered by anesthes iologists when patients are having  difficulty swallowing after su rgery or to reduce 
nausea and vomiting.
Will all drugs/substances/nutrients/b iologics being used in this st udy be provided free of charge?
YesWill all drugs/substances/nutrients/b iologics being used in this study be stored  at the WVU Healthcare Pharmacy (WVUHP)? All dr ug storage must be 
approved by the WVUHP.
Yes
Will there be any drugs/substances/nutrients/biologics used in this study NOT for in vestigational/research purposes?
No
Device Information
Are there investigational devices th at will be used in this study?
NoSample Collection
Will sample(s) be used?
No
Radiation Safety
Will there be any radioactive materials or ionizing radiation used solely for research in this study?
No
Biological Safety
Does the study involve the handling of any infectious and/or non-inf ectious agents or recombinant DNA?
NoData Protection for IRB
Does the project have da ta protection requirements?
No
Protocol Notes
DATE AUTHOR TOPIC NOTE
06/25/2019 
03:48 PMSherri DavisA003Removing Hanna Jiles from study personnel, and adding Olivia H ill and Skylar Braga to study 
personnel to assist with data entry.
06/19/2019 
11:43 AMSherri DavisResponse to Spec Min Rev R001*Please include clinicaltrials.gov language in the consent form. Please  find the requested 
language in the consent form on page three, the last paragrap h of the confidentiality section.
Renewal 001 Renewing protocol with 17 subjects to date. DSMB reports filed. No SAEs to report.Page 7 of 8 Protocol Questionnair e
12/4/2019 https://kc.wvu.edu/kc/p rotocolQuestionnairePrint.do?protocolId=262956 4
06/05/2019 
03:55 PMSherri DavisPage 8 of 8 Protocol Questionnair e
12/4/2019 https://kc.wvu.edu/kc/p rotocolQuestionnairePrint.do?protocolId=262956 4