 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The HOPE Trial and SMART Study (NCT 03022032 ) 
PI: Alexi A. Wright, MD, MPH  
Dana -Farber Cancer Institute  
IRB-Approved Protocol #16 -477 (version  8.0) 
April 23, 2021  
  
 
 Protocol Organization for DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477 
The protocol document  contains the study procedures  for the HOPE Trial and the SMART Study. 
The SMART Study is a sub -study of the HOPE Trial. B oth studies evaluate an almost identical 
intervention  using a F itbit device and smartphone app (s) with the goal of improving quality -of-life for 
women with gynecologic cancers.  However, the studies are designed to assess  different research 
questions , and there are slight variations in the interventions being administe red: the HOPE Trial i s a 
randomized controlled trial designed to test  changes in health -related quality of life at an NCI -
designated Comprehensive Cancer Center  (DFCI) , while the SMART Study is a single -arm study 
designed to test the feasibility and accept ability of a combined intervention (Fitbit device and two 
smartphone apps) in NCORP community oncology sites.   
Because the interventions tested are similar  and only minor variations exist  in study procedures 
(e.g., in timings of outcomes assessments), the studies are being reviewed under one IRB protocol  
at Dana -Farber  Cancer Institute .  
The HOPE Trial is being conducted only at Dana -Farber Cancer Institute. No outside sites are 
participating in the HOPE Trial. The HOPE Trial (Phase 2) is a four-arm randomi zed controlled trial  
testing Fitbits and a smartphone app.  The primary endpoint of Phase 2 of the HOPE Trial is health -
related quality of life.  
The SMART Study is being conducted only at outside community oncology sites. Dana -Farber 
Cancer Institute is not  enrolling patients in the SMART Study.  The SMART Study is a single -arm 
study testin g a Fitbit and two smartphone app s (Beiwe and SMART) . Primary endpoints for this 
study are feasibility and acceptability of the intervention in the community oncology sites . 
To facilitate protocol implementation and regulatory review  at both Dana -Farber and outside sites, 
this document is separated into two sections. Part 1 is the protocol for the HOPE Trial  conducted at 
Dana -Farber only ; Part 2 is the protocol for the SMART  Study  conducted at community oncology 
sites only. Lettered appendices (Appendices  A-Z and AA) correspond with the HOPE Trial; 
numbered appendices (Appendices  1-24) correspond with the SMART Study.   
The HOPE Trial section begins on p.2 of this document. Th e SMART Study section begins on p . 41 
of the document.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Part 1  
The HOPE Trial  
 
 
 
 
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
 DAYS  
 
 
 
Study Timeline  
 Interv ention 
Instructional  
Session  Data Collection:  
 
Participant Baseline In terview  
 
Data Collection:  
 
Participant Post-Baseline In terview  
Clinician Survey  
Debriefing Interviews  
Health/Tx Info  
Healthcare Utilization  
Call Log  
Consent &  
Registration  Post -
Base line 
Visit  Interventions:   
 
2 wearable accelerometers;  
App symptom mana gement;  
Summary of app survey 
responses at clinic visits  Data Collection :  
 
Daily symptom survey;  
Accelerometer data;  
Passive app data  Data Collection:  
 
Clinician Survey  
Health/Tx Info 
 
Baseline 
Visit  
0 1 
30 
+/- 14 SECTION 1: Protocol Schema  
First Phase : (n=10)  
Download and 
install the 
smartphone a pp 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
6 
 
 

DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
7 
 
 SECTION 2: Body of Protocol  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Overview ………………………………………………………………………………………………………….4  
1.2 Background and Rationale…………… …………………………………………………………………………5  
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  
2.1 Phase 1………………………………………………………………………………………………………....... 7 
2.2 Phase 2……………………………………………………………………………………………………….......7  
 
3.0 RESEARCH SUBJECT SELECTION  
3.1 Eligibility Criteria……………………………………………………………………………………………… ….8 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria………………………………………………………………………………………………... 8 
 
4.0 RESEARCH SUBJECT ENTRY  
4.1 Subject Recruitment and Enrollment…………………………………………………………………………..8  
4.2 Subject Registration and Randomization……………………………………………………………………...9  
 
5.0 STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS  
5.1 Design/Study Type…………… …………………………………………………………………………………10  
5.2 Selection of Instruments……………… ………………………………………………………………………...11  
5.3 Description of Interventions………… …………………………………………………………………………..18  
5.4 Data Collection………………………… ………………………………………………… ……………………...22  
5.5 Description of Study Process………… ………………………………………………………………………...23  
5.6 Adverse Reactions and Their Managem ent…………………………………………………………………..2 8 
 
6.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS……………… …………………………………………………………………………..29  
 
7.0 REFERENCES………………………… ……………………………… …………………………………………….33  
 
8.0 APPENDICES…………………………… …………………………………………………………………………..38  
 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
8 
 
 1.0 INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Overview  
The goal of palliative chemotherapy is to reduce cancer patients’ symptoms and extend survival. Yet, 
oncologists’ methods of monitoring patients’ sym ptoms are underdeveloped. Studies show that clinicians 
consistently miss more than half of cancer patients’ symptoms, even in clinical trials that mandate collection of 
treatment toxicities.1-3 This may be because clinicians see patients at fixed time points (e.g., every 3 weeks 
linked to chemotherapy infusions) when patients have already recovered from their last treatment. Additionally, 
patients may underreport symptoms in clinical settings or have difficulty estimating their activity le vels, 
hindering oncologists’ ability to accurately assess patients’ symptoms and/or performance statuses. The 
moments between visits —when patients are at the highest likelihood of experiencing toxicities —are more likely 
to contain meaningful information ab out patients’ symptoms and activity levels in the real world . Mobile health 
technologies (e.g., smartphones and accelerometers) offer novel methods for assessing patients’ symptoms 
and activity levels and opportunities to intervene to reduce suffering.  
The first goal of this study is to adapt and refine an existing smartphone app, paired with a wearable 
accelerometer, to assess patients’ symptoms in a population of patients with gynecologic cancers receiving 
palliative chemotherapy. An existing app will be  customized to collect patient -reported toxicities using the 
Patient Reported Outcome (PRO) version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO -
CTCAE) and offer patients feedback about how to manage their symptoms. Patient symptoms will be r isk-
stratified. Patients with low -risk toxicities (grades 1 & 2) will receive tailored educational information, while 
patients with serious toxicities (grades 3 & 4) will receive alerts to call their clinician. Patients will also receive a 
graphical summar y of their symptoms to share with clinicians during office visits. In first phase of the study we 
will conduct an initial assessment of the app with a diverse group of 10 patients to refine the app and test two 
different wearable accelerometers (i.e. Fitbi t Zip and Fitbit Charge 2) before pilot testing. The wearable 
accelerometers will be used as a quantitative measure of patient performance status, and to detect severe 
symptoms that may impact patients’ average daily steps (e.g., abdominal pain, nausea, di arrhea).4 Patients will 
also be provided with a graphical summary of their average daily steps to share with clinicians.  
The second goal of this study is to conduct a pilot randomized controlled trial (RCT) of the smartphone app 
and/or we arable accelerometer (i.e. Fitbit Zip or Fitbit Charge 2) to assess the feasibility, acceptability, and 
preliminary efficacy of our intervention. During the second phase of the study, we will conduct a 4 -arm pilot 
RCT in 100 patients with gynecologic cance rs receiving palliative chemotherapy to establish preliminary effect 
sizes. Participants will be randomized to: 1) Fitbit+active app, 2) Fitbit+passive app, 3) Active app, or 4) 
Passive app. We hypothesize that the use of a Fitbit and an active app designe d to assess PRO symptoms 
and deliver tailored advice to cancer patients receiving palliative chemotherapy will reduce the use of high -
intensity health care (i.e., unplanned infusion appointments, emergency room visits, and hospitalizations), 
compared with a Fitbit + passive app, Active app, or Passive app alone. We also hypothesize that patients 
randomized to the Fitbit + active app will have improved health -related quality of life (comparing the baseline 
and 6 -month EuroQol EQ -5D), compared with other grou ps. Additionally, we expect that data collected from 
the wearable accelerometers and smartphone accelerometers (via passive app) will be significantly correlated 
with each other, and will provide quantitative measures that are correlated with patients’ per formance status.  
We expect that the results of this pilot RCT, which is supported by the National Cancer Institute, National 
Palliative Care Research Center, and the Dana -Farber Cancer Institute Department of Medical Oncology, will 
provide a low -cost, scal able system to assess patients’ symptoms, address low -risk toxicities, and alert clinicians 
when patients have toxicities that require intervention with the goal of reducing patient suffering and the use of 
high-intensity, hospital -based health care. Upon completion of this project, we will be well positioned to test the 
efficacy of this intervention in a full scale RCT.  
 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
9 
 
  
1.2 Background and Rationale  
There is substantial evidence that oncologists’ miss up to half of cancer patients’ symptoms, even within t he 
context of clinical trials, which mandate structured reporting of symptoms and treatment toxicities.1-3 Evidence 
suggests that the integration of PROs into routine cancer care results in more efficient symptom assessment,5 
improved communication and continuity of care,6-8 better quality of life,3,9,10 lower health care utilization rates,10 
and superior quality -adjusted survival, compared with usual care.10,11 This is important because while prior 
studies have demonstrated that the early integration of palliative and oncologic care improves patients’ quality 
of life and survival,12-15 health systems are facing a serious workforce sh ortage of trained palliative care 
providers.16 Low-cost, scalable systems designed to assess patients’ symptoms, address low -risk toxicities, and 
alert clinicians when patients ar e in danger are urgently needed.  
Several studies have demonstrated that cancer patients with serious illnesses are willing to report their 
symptoms using technology, including tablets and web -based systems,10,17 -19 even close to the end o f life.20  
One large study of cancer patients found that nearly 70% of patients wanted to receive information and support 
about their disease through the internet.21 Another demonstrated that the use of a web -based syste m to 
assess PROs in patients with advanced cancer, combined with automated clinical alerts, resulted in better 
health -related quality of life, fewer emergency room visits and hospitalizations, and superior quality -adjusted 
survival, compared with usual car e.22 Recently Denis et al. reported that the use of a web -based system to 
assess PROs weekly in patients with high -risk, non -small cell lung cancer resulted in earlier detection of 
symptomatic disease recurrences, earlier institution of s upportive care, better patient quality of life, and 
improved overall survival, compared with routine clinical assessments.11 Researchers have not examined 
similar endpoints in patients with gynecologic malignancies, to our knowledge, but one small study found that 
chemotherapy toxicit y reporting was feasible in women with gynecologic cancers using a web -based system, 
and that use of this system improved patient recall of symptoms at follow -up visits, communication with 
physicians and nurses, and patients’ self -efficacy.17 
To date, however, most studies have focused on collecting patient -reported symptoms during clinic visits 
that are frequently tied to chemotherapy infusions. Two key limitations to this approach are: 1) patients have 
often already recovered from many t reatment -related toxicities and 2) it relies upon patients’ retrospective 
recall of events, which are often inaccurate. Few studies, to our knowledge, have performed real time  and real 
world  assessments of cancer patients’ symptoms and activity levels in d aily life.  
Smartphone -based interventions are a low -cost, scalable tool for measuring and modifying health 
behaviors. In 2015, 64% of Americans owned a smartphone23 and more than 33% reported relying upon it as 
their sole tool for accessing the Internet, particularly among low -income and racial/ethn ic minority 
populations.24 Mobile health interventions have demonstrated eff icacy in assessing 
pain,25 monitoring psychiatric diseases,26,27 increasing medication adherence28 and 
improving other important clinical outcomes (e.g., systolic blood pressure, and 
body mass index).29 
Smartphones are capable of collecting two types of information:  1) “active 
data” which require patients’ involvement (e.g., taking surveys; please see Figure) 
and 2) “passive data” which are collected without the patients’ involvement ( e.g., 
accelerometer data or spatial location).30 One of the advantages of using 
smartphones is that they can leverage sophisticated surveying techniques to 
generate personalized assessments, eliminating questions that have a high 
likelihood of b eing irrelevant and therefore reducing the survey burden upon 
participants.27 Smartphones can also be used to provide patients with real time 
active feedback for symptom management or to notify them that their symptoms are serious and require 
immediate attention.  
Figure 1 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
10 
 
 To date, few studies have examined the use of mobile phone -based interventions in patients with cancer. 
Similarly, few have collected quantitative measurements of cancer patients’ activity levels for extended time 
periods.31-34 This study is innovative  because it will harness a validated app, which is being piloted in 
psychiatric, neurological, and surgical patients in the Partners HealthCare system, to collect passive  data from 
patients (e.g. accelerometer, spatial location, and sleep data) and active  data, including patients’ symptoms 
and treatment toxicities. The app has been tailored to categorize patient symptoms as low or high -risk, based 
upon clinical algorithms, and provide them with tailored advice to help manage their symptoms in real time in 
the real world. It is also innovative because it will enable clinicians to better understand patients’ symptoms in 
the time between visits. We expect this study will increase the frequency of discussions about patients’ 
symptoms between patients and provide rs. We also expect that this formative development work and early 
feasibility trial will set the stage for launching a broad portfolio of mobile -health intervention studies to improve 
seriously -ill cancer patients’ symptoms, performance statuses, and clini cal outcomes.  
Like smartphones, wearable accelerometers (e.g. Fitbit Zip and Fitbit Charge 2) offer another novel means 
for collecting real world  data to objectively measure patients’ performance statuses. Patients’ retrospective 
reports of activity level s are often inaccurate or imprecise. Without accurate information, oncologists may have 
difficulty objectively assessing patients’ performance statuses, and may underestimate patients’ symptom 
burdens and chemotherapy -related toxicities. Indeed, oncologist  estimates of patients’ performance statuses 
are only moderately correlated with one another35,36 and weakly correlated with patient estimates,37-39 but 
improve when clinicians and patients participate in “shared” report ing of patients’ toxicities and performance 
statuses.40  
Wearable accelerometers are devices that track users’ energy expenditures, the amount and intensity of 
physical activity, and sedentary behavior. They offer cost -effective, user -friendly, and objective measurements 
of patients’ free living patterns. A few studies have piloted wearable accelerometers in adult cancer patients 
undergoing stem cell transplants (HCT) or treatment for colorectal, gastrointestinal, breast, and lung 
cancers.4,34,41,42 Results from one study of adult patients undergoing HCT who wore accelerometers over an 8 
week period found that patients’ reports of severe symptoms, impaired physical health, and restrictions in 
activities of daily living wer e associated with statistically significant decrements in objectively measured steps, 
suggesting that this may be an independent, quantitative measure of quality of life and patient performance 
status.4 In this study of 32 patients underg oing HCT over a 4 week period patients’ averaged 3,595 steps daily, 
and lower levels were significantly associated with an increased symptom burden.4 Although similar estimates 
are not available in patients with gynecologic cancers, to ou r knowledge, we expect that symptoms are likely to 
impact the amount of walking that patients can do and will therefore provide an independent measure of both 
patients’ performance status and symptom burden.  
In the second phase of this study all patients w ill have passive data collected via the app. We will compare 
the active version of the smartphone app (which collects passive data, surveys patients about their symptoms, 
and provides tailored symptom management advice) alone or paired with a wearable acce lerometer against a 
wearable accelerometer or control in a four arm RCT (see study schema). This will enable us to examine 
whether the active smartphone app and wearable accelerometer improve patients’ quality of life, compared 
with active smartphone app o r the wearable accelerometer, and determine whether their effects are 
independent or additive. In addition, it will help us determine whether wearable and smartphone -based 
accelerometers can provide valid and reliable measures of patient performance status  and treatment toxicities.  
 
 
 
 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
11 
 
 2.0 OBJECTIVES  
2.1 Phase 1  
Objective:  Adapt and refine an existing smartphone app to assess patients’ toxicities and activity levels in 10 
patients with metastatic gynecologic cancers receiving palliative chemotherapy and co mpare two wearable 
accelerometers (Fitbit Zip and Fitbit Charge 2) for use in the pilot RCT.  
• Hypothesis:  Patients will be able to successfully recharge the Fitbit Charge 2 every 3 -4 days, but will 
prefer the Fitbit Zip because it does not require rechargin g. 
• Hypothesis:  The use of a wearable accelerometer will provide a quantitative measure that is correlated 
with patient performance status, and decrements of >25% in average daily steps will be associated with 
worse patient -reported quality of life and phys ical health (measured by the PROMIS Global -10 items 2 
and 3).  
 
2.2 Phase 2  
Objective:  Conduct a four -arm pilot randomized controlled trial (RCT) comparing the Fitbit + active smartphone 
app, Fitbit + passive app, Active app, or passive app alone to assess the  feasibility, acceptability, and 
preliminary efficacy of the intervention.  
• Hypothesis:  Use of a monitored wearable accelerometer/passive smartphone app will improve patients’ 
health -related quality of life (comparing the baseline and 6 -month EuroQol EQ -5D), compared with 
passive smartphone app alone.  
• Hypothesis:  Use of both the active smartphone app and a monitored wearable accelerometer will 
improve patients’ health -related quality of life (comparing the baseline and 6 -month EuroQol EQ -5D), 
more than the a ctive smartphone app or wearable accelerometer/passive smartphone app alone.  
• Hypothesis:  Use of the active smartphone app  and a monitored wearable accelerometer  will reduce the 
use of high -intensity health care (i.e., unplanned infusion appointments, emerg ency room visits, and 
hospitalizations), compared with a monitored wearable accelerometer/passive app , active smartphone 
app, or passive app alone.  
• Hypothesis:  Use of the active smartphone app will decrease the number of patient phone calls and/or for 
symp toms, compared with a wearable accelerometer/passive app or passive app alone.  
• Hypothesis:  Patients’ and oncologists’ estimates of a patient’s performance status will be more closely 
correlated in patients randomized to the monitored wearable accelerometer s/passive app compared with 
the active smartphone app alone or the passive smartphone app alone.  
• Hypothesis:  Data collected from the wearable accelerometers and smartphone accelerometers (via 
passive app) will be significantly correlated with each other, a nd will provide quantitative measures that 
are correlated with patients’ performance status and will be predictive of clinically significant events 
(hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and chemotherapy appointments)  
• Hypothesis : The correlation b etween the wearable accelerometers and smartphone accelerometers (via 
passive app) will be higher in patients randomized to be encouraged to wear their smartphone at all 
times, and the predictive ability of the smartphone accelerometers for patients’ perfo rmance status and 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
12 
 
 clinically significant events will be greater in in patients randomized to be encouraged to wear their 
smartphone at all times.  
• Hypothesis:  Participants will express more negative affect and anxiety related to their cancer experience 
in the weeks preceding scans, compared with the weeks when scans are not performed. This 
association will be moderated by participants’ coping style (as measured by the brief COPE).  
 
3.0 RESEARCH SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
3.1 Eligibility Criteria  
Eligible patients i nclude women >20 years of age who plan to receive chemotherapy at DFCI to treat 
recurrent, incurable gynecologic cancers (i.e., ovarian, uterine, and cervical that has recurred despite ≥1 prior 
treatments), own a smart -phone (Android or iOS), are capable o f downloading and running the study app, can 
read and provide informed consent in English, and do not have cognitive or visual impairments that would 
preclude use of th e app.  
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
Patients will be ineligible if they are participating in an investigational drug treatment trial that requires 
structured symptom or toxicity reporting at the time of enrollment. Patients with severe cognitive impairments 
or who appear too weak, emotionally distraught, agitated or ill to participate, as judged by either the research 
study staff or an oncology provider, will be excluded. Patients who are unable to provide informed consent in 
English will be excluded because th e smartphone app intervention is only available in English at this time. 
Children and young adults up to age 20 will be excluded because the diagnosis of metastatic gynecologic 
cancers in this age group is rare and the proposed instruments are not designed  for people of those ages. In 
addition, patients with a life expectancy of ≤6 months, as determined by their oncology providers, will be 
excluded since they cannot participate in all of the required data collection. Patients who are currently actively 
tracking their steps using wearable technology or smartphone apps will also be excluded.  
 
4.0 RESEARCH SUBJECT ENTRY  
 
4.1 Subject Recruitment and Enrollment  
We will enroll patients from the DFCI Gynecologic Oncology Program. Study staff, gynecologic oncology 
providers, and members of the Gynecologic Medical Oncology Team will ide ntify patients who may be eligible 
for the study. Prior to initiating recruitment, we will meet with the clinical staff, including oncologists, embedded 
palliative care physicians, nurse practitioners, program nurses, clinical research study staff, and soc ial workers, 
to discuss and solicit feedback on the recruitment and enrollment procedures.  
 
4.11 Screening & Recruitment  
Prior to obtaining informed consent, study staff will review the electronic medical records of patients 
listed on the gynecologic oncol ogy providers’ clinic schedules to identify patients with metastatic, recurrent 
gynecologic cancers undergoing chemotherapy. These patients’ medical records will only be reviewed to 
confirm this protected health information (PHI), and it will only be share d with gynecologic oncology 
providers in the context of patients’ eligibility for the study.  
When an eligible patient is identified, study staff will contact the patient’s oncology provider to confirm 
she meets the eligibility criteria and to request perm ission to approach the patient at an upcoming clinic 
visit. If the patient is approved to approach for enrollment, the research assistant (RA) will coordinate with 
the oncology provider to meet with the patient to discuss the study at the time of her clini c visit. If the 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
13 
 
 oncology provider deems the patient ineligible or too distressed to participate in a clinical study at this time, 
the patient will not be approached for inclusion.  
PHI will not be shared with anyone outside of the study team and patients’ o ncology providers. All 
emails will be sent within the Partner's firewall. A HIPAA waiver requesting permission to review the PHI of 
these select patients prior to consent during screening and recruitment has been submitted to justify this 
process.  
 
4.12 In formed Consent  
If a patient agrees to learn more about the study, the RA will meet with the patient to describe the 
study, review the consent form, answer any questions, and provide her contact information. The RA will 
encourage patients to take their time  in deciding whether they want to participate in the study or not.  
If a patient is interested in participating, the RA will obtain written informed consent, which will include 
explaining how and why the current research study is being conducted, the study  risks and benefits, the 
potential time commitment involved , and the option to give permission to be contacted for future research 
studies . The RA will explain in explicit detail what type of information will be collected from the smartphone 
application an d wearable accelerometers and how these data are monitored. The RA will reiterate that the 
data collected are not a part of the patient’s standard treatment and will underscore the importance placed 
upon maintaining patient confidentiality and a patient’s rights while involved in the study, including the right 
to withdraw participation at any time for any reason during the study because participation is completely 
voluntary.  
The informed consent form will contain a section dedicated to explaining what cons titutes PHI and how 
this information will be protected as confidential per HIPAA guidelines. The consent form will also provide 
contact information for both the Principal Investigator (PI) as well as the Office for the Protection of 
Research Subjects. All informed consent processes will adhere to the policies set forth by the Institutional 
Review Board. Signed informed consent forms will be stored in a locked file cabinet to maintain the privacy 
of all study participants.   
If a patient is unsure if she wou ld like to participate in the study, she will be offered the consent form to 
review and a postage paid opt-out card  (Appendix A) to notify study staff that she is not interested. If no 
contact is made after a few days, the RA will call the patient. If the patient decides to participate, the RA will 
meet her at a subsequent appointment to obtain informed consent. If a patient is not interested, the RA will 
thank her for considering, reassure the patient that the process will have no impact on her care. No fu rther 
interactions will occur with patients who either decline or prove ineligible for the study. Patients will not be 
contacted after three unreturned voicemails.  
 
4.2 Subject Registration and Randomization  
During both phase I and phase II of the study, t he RA will register eligible participants in the Clinical 
Trials Management System (CTMS) OnCore. Registrations will occur prior to beginning study interventions. 
Any participant not registered to the protocol before study interventions have begun will be considered 
ineligible and registration will be denied. An investigator will confirm eligibility criteria and a member of the 
study team will complete the protocol -specific eligibility checklist.  
Following registration, participants may begin study interven tions. Issues that would cause delays in 
interventions should be discussed with the Overall Principal Investigator (PI). If a participant does not 
receive study interventions following registration, the participant’s registration on the study will be cance led. 
Registration cancellations will be made in OnCore as soon as possible. After obtaining informed consent, 
participants will be assigned a unique study ID and registered to the study in Redcap.  
The following information will be recorded for each partic ipant in the Registration Form  (Appendix B):  
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
14 
 
 • Name and telephone number of RA enrolling the participant  
• Date participant signed consent and RA who obtained consent  
• Participant’s study ID and first and last initials  
• Participant’s date of birth  
• Participant’ s primary oncology providers  
• Confirmation that participant meets eligibility criteria  
• Name of oncology provider who approved participant’s eligibility and date of approval  
• Participant’s contact preferences (phone call, text, or e -mail; collected post -consent)  
• Participant’s study arm (to be completed after randomization)  
In the second phase, the study team will randomize enrolled participants to one of the four arms: 1) 
Fitbit+active app, 2) Fitbit+passive app, 3) Active app, or 4) Passive app —using a 1: 1:1:1 ratio using a 
computer -generated random allocation sequence with blocks of 8 in order to maintain balance between study 
arms over time. Study staff will generate group assignments in sequentially numbered and sealed opaque 
envelopes. Please refer to the protocol schema for details.  
 
5.0 STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS  
 
5.1 Design/Study Type  
 
5.11 First Phase:  
Ten patients will be purposively sampled to enroll a diverse group based upon guidelines for the Phase 
Ia and Ib of the Obesity -Related Behavioral Inte rvention Trials (ORBIT) model for behavioral treatment 
development (Figure 2).43 In the first phase, we will enroll at least 3 patients who are ≥65 years of age, 3 
patients from racial/ethnic minority groups, and 2 patients who do not use  text messages to 
communicate >1x/week based upon evidence that patients with computer experience are  more receptive to 
electronic self -reporting than those without experience.44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We anticipate enrolling 10 patients to refine the HOPE App intervention and determine which 
accelerometer (Fitbit Zip and Fitbit Charge 2) will be used in phase II of the study. In this phase of the study all 
participants will receive the smartphone app, the Fitbit Zip, and the Fitbit Charge 2 so that we can: 1) identify 
which wearable accelerometer to use in the second phase, and 2) compare step cou nts between the 
accelerometers (the smartphone, a hip -worn device, and a device worn on the non -dominant arm).  
 
 
Figure 2 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
15 
 
  
 
5.12 Second Phase  
A feasibility and acceptability study will employ convenience sampling from 100 consecutive patients 
who meet inclusion cri teria in a pilot randomized trial of:  
Arm 1: Fitbit + active app  
Arm 2: Fitbit + passive app  
Arm 3: Active app  
Arm 4: Passive app  
  There are two versions of the HOPE smartphone app —“active” and “passive.” The “active” smartphone 
app refers to the version of the smartphone app in which active symptom collection is occurring (e.g, 
patients are receiving surveys and receiving tailored symptom management advice) in addition to passive 
data collection (accelerometer, GPS. Incoming calls and texts, etc.) The “pa ssive” smartphone app refers 
to the version of the smartphone app in which only passive data collection is occurring, and no surveys or 
active data collection are being sent to participants. In the passive app, participant interaction with the 
smartphone a pp consists of installing the app and keeping it running in the background of their phone; all 
data is collected in the background. The active and passive apps are built on the same underlying platform 
and the security protections for the active and passiv e smartphone apps are identical, detailed in Appendix 
L, HOPE App Data Privacy and Security.  
 All patients will be assigned to a separate, secondary randomization either to be encouraged to wear 
their smartphone on them at all times, or not to be encourage d to wear their smartphone at all times (refer 
to study schema for details.) We have no reason to believe that encouragement to wear a smartphone will 
impact  patients’ health -related quality of life, performance status, and use of high -intensity health 
care/phone calls; thus, the secondary randomization will not impact the comparison of the 4 study arms for 
these outcomes.  
 With a total sample size of 100 patients (25 patients per arm), this study design will yield 70% power to 
detect a 6 -point change in EQ-5D and 80% power to detect a 7 -point change in patients’ health -related 
quality of life (measured with the EQ -5D; see section 6.0). Our analyses will also provide preliminary 
estimates of feasibility, acceptability, safety outcomes, scale scores, missin g data, and participant and 
physician feedback.  
5.2 Selection of Instruments  
 
5.21 Interviews and Surveys  
The following measures will be used in the study interviews and surveys, including the Participant 
Baseline Interview (Appendix C), Participant Post -Baseline Interview (Appendix D), Clinician Survey 
(Appendix E), and Symptom Survey (Appendix F). Table 1 outlines their distribution across the study 
instruments.  
 
5.21a Global Health Status: EQ -5D-5L 
The EQ -5D is a standardized measurement of health statu s that has been used in a wide range of 
health conditions and treatments, including cancer patient populations.45 The EQ -5D-5L is the most 
recent 5 -level version that has proven validity and reliability in a range of patient groups with chronic 
diseases46 and cancer.47 It is a 5 -item questionnaire (measuring mobility, self -care, usual activities,  
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
16 
 
 pain/discomfort, and a nxiety/depression. Each dimension has three levels of perceived problems: 1) no 
problems, 2) slight problems, 3) moderate problems 4) severe problems, and 5) extreme problems. 
Patients check the statement level that best describes their current health stat us in each dimension, 
which are then scored to generate a patient’s unique health state. In the EQ -VAS, patients report a 
single index value of how good or bad their current health state is on a visual scale that ranges from 
worst imaginable at zero to bes t imaginable at one hundred. The EQ -5D-5L can be administered with 
little to no guidance and takes only a few minutes to complete. Upon scoring, the EQ -5D produces a 
composite score between 0 -1 (multiplied by 100 to generate a number between 0 -100), which 
represents general health status, normalized for the US population.48 Lower scores represent worse 
quality of life, and a change of ≥6 is clinically significant in US cancer populations.49 
 
5.21b PROMIS Global -10 and PRO MIS Physical Function short form 6b  
The PROMIS Global -10 is a brief measure of patient health status that is not disease specific.50,51 It 
consists of 10 questions; e.g. “In general, how would you rate your physical health?” Items are sco red 
on a Likert scale of 1 -5, where higher scores indicate better health, except for pain which is measured 
on a 10 point scale. Standardized T -scores (range 0 -100) are calculated for the global physical and 
mental health scales, and higher scores indicate  better health. The full scale takes approximately 2 -3 
minutes to complete and will be used at baseline, post -baseline survey and the single -item global 
quality of life and physical health questions will be used daily among those randomized to the 
smartpho ne app.  
The PROMIS Physical function (PF) 6b is a brief, 6 item measure used to characterize patients’ 
overall health, level of physical disability, and general well -being. The PROMIS PF 6b has been 
validated in 4,840 cancer patients across a range of ages , racial/ethnicity groups, stages and cancer 
types, and normalized for the US population. It has high reliability, minimal floor effects, and can 
precisely measure meaningful  differences in functional status, disease burden, and comorbidities . 
 
5.21c Perfo rmance Status: ECOG PS  
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status (PS) assessment is a 
standard measurement that oncologists often use to assess a patient’s current functional level and 
eligibility for clinical trials. The scale range s from 0 to 5 and the criteria for each grade is as follows: 0 = 
Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction; 1 = Restricted in physically 
strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or sedenta ry nature, e.g., light 
house work, office work; 2 = Ambulatory and capable of all self -care but unable to carry out any work 
activities; up and about more than 50% of waking hours; 3 = Capable of only limited self -care; confined 
to bed or chair more than 5 0% of waking hours; 4 = Completely disabled; cannot carry on any self -care; 
totally confined to bed or chair; 5 = Dead.52  
The ECOG PS will allow clinicians a nd participants to provide a standard evaluation of the 
participant’s performance status over time and with minimal burden. Participants will use the patient 
self-report version that has been used successfully in a study with cancer patients. We expect tha t it will 
take 1 -2 minutes to answer the question.53 
 
5.21d Depression: PHQ -9 
The Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9) is a validated self -report measure that assesses nine 
depressive symptoms using Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition 
(DSM -IV) diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder. It is used to screen, diagnose, and monitor 
depressive symptoms54 and has been administered/demonstrated validity in cancer patients,55,56 as well 
as smartphone apps.27 Respondents report if each symptom has bothered them “not at all,” “several 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
17 
 
 days,” “more than half the days,” or “nearly every day” during the previous two weeks.57 We expect that 
it will take participants no more than 3 -5 minutes to complete.  
 
5.21e Symptoms Assessment: CTCAE and PRO -CTCAE  
The Patient -Reported Outcomes Version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events 
(PRO -CTCAE) is a patient -centered, standardized self -report measure that enables patients to report 
symptoms and AEs. Clinicians will use the standard CTCAE items (used to rate and report toxicities in 
therapeutic drug trials) while participants will use the PRO -CTCAE items. Dr. Schrag, one of the study’s 
investigators, was one of the first researchers to identify, develop, test, refine and validate methods for 
collecting PROs.17-19,22 She was instrumental in the development of the primary study measure, the 
PRO -CTCAE, which demonstrated favorable validity, reliability, and responsiveness in a large 
heterogeneous United States sample of cancer patie nts undergoing treatment.19 Ten PRO -CTCAE 
items that are salient to gynecologic cancers will be collected, including: abdominal pain, nausea, 
vomiting, constipation, diarrhea, peripheral neuropathy, anxiety, depression, dizziness and fati gue.  
The PRO -CTCAE items use conditional branching for AEs that contain multiple attributes. For 
example, if a participant reports a symptom, she is asked to quantify the severity and the extent to 
which the symptom interfered with her daily activities; i f she does not report a symptom, these items are 
skipped. We anticipate that participants and oncology providers will complete their respective versions 
of the measure in about 3 -5 minutes. Participants enrolled in phase I, and intervention arms 3 and 4 in  
the second phase RCT will also report their symptoms weekly in the HOPE app intervention.  
 
5.21f Anxiety: GAD -7 
The Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7 -Item (GAD -7) is a reliable and validated self -report measure 
that assesses GAD. Respondents rate how often t hey have been bothered by 7 anxiety symptoms  over 
the past two weeks using the following scale: 0 = Not at all; 1 = Several Days; 2 = Over half the days; 
and 3 = Nearly every day. Respondents also answer a question to assess the duration of their anxiety 
symptoms. Responses are tallied and the total score indicates the presence and severity of GAD.58  
The measure has since been validated in the general population59 and was the recommended 
evaluative measure for anxiety in adult cancer patients in the 2014 American Society of Clinical 
Oncology (ASCO) Guideline Adaptation.60 We anticipate that it will take participants approximately 3 -5 
minutes to complete.  
 
5.21j Overall Quality of Life and Physical Health:  FACIT -PAL  
Patients’ quality of life (QoL) will be assessed with Functional Assessment of Chronic I llness 
Therapy – Palliative Care, which has demonstrated internal consistency, reliability and validity.68 The 
measure is divided into four primary QoL domains: physical well -being (7 -items), social/family well -
being (7 -items), emotional well -being (6 -items), and functional well -being (7 -items). It also includes 12 
additional items that are specific to palliative care priorities for patients with chronic illnesses such as 
cancer.  Participants will rate each symptom over the past 7 days as: 0) Not at all; 1 ) A little bit; 2) 
Somewhat, 3) Quite a bit, and 4) Very much. Subscales can be analyzed separately or aggregated to 
produce a total score.  
 
5.21k Literacy Measures: Health Literacy and Numeracy & Mobile Communication Competence  
Health literacy69 and numeracy70 and mobile communication competence71 will be collected for all 
participants at baseline. The “comfort with technology” and “mobile preference” subscales of the Mobile 
Communication Competence scale will be used because they assess factors directly impacting patients 
in our study, who will be asked to acclimate to and consistently use an accele rometer and/or 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
18 
 
 smartphone app. The mobile communication preference and comfort with technology subscales 
individually demonstrated internal reliability, consistency and validity. We  estimate that it will take 
participants approximately 5 minutes to complet e all of the literacy measures.  
 
5.21l Demographic Information  
Basic demographic information will be collected for all participants, including: age, marital status, 
race/ethnicity, education, household structure, income, and employment. The questions will only take a 
few minutes to complete.  
 
5.21m Smartphone Usage Questions  
Data on smartphone -specific usage habits will be collected for all participants. Participants will be 
asked a total of four questions: average daily time spent using smartphone, purpo se of using 
smartphone, comfort using smartphone apps, and frequency of using smartphone apps. We estimate 
that it will take participants approximately 2 minutes to complete these questions.  
 
5.21n  Cancer Experience Question  
 
About the cancer experience qu estion  
On a weekly basis, participants will be asked one qualitative question about their cancer 
experience. We hope that this open -ended question will give patients an opportunity within the study to 
express additional concerns, emotions and experiences r egarding their cancer that may not be 
adequately reflected in other study instruments.  A large body of previous work has successfully asked 
cancer patients to share open -ended, qualitative measures of their emotional experiences ( i.e. by 
writing in respon se to a prompt).87-91 However, to our knowledge, our study will be the first to examine 
whether these qualitative measures correspond with clinical outcomes measured in real time in the real 
world.  
  Using a question adapted from Stanton and colleagues’ e motional expression study with breast 
cancer survivors,72 participants will be asked to describe their experience with cancer over the course of 
the previous week. Participants will be presented with the cancer experience question as an audio 
survey within  the HOPE App once a week (see Appendix F for question text ) and  will record their 
answers into the microphone of their smartphone. The app reminds the participant to make a voice 
recording in the same way that it reminds the participant to take any other survey in the HOPE app: by 
making a notification appear in the phone. The participant does not need to make a voice recording 
immediately and  may wait until she is in private to do so.  The participant can make the audio recording 
in the app at any time af ter the notification appears, until the next audio recording reminder replaces it. 
Participants will spend up to 5 minutes on this question, depending on how much they wish to share. 
This question will be answered within the smartphone app at the baseline interview and symptom 
survey (once weekly).  
 
Audio recording data security  
Patients will be informed about the audio recording questions in the study in the consent form 
and during the informed consent process and will be encouraged to ask any questions th ey may have 
about the audio recording.  
In the weekly audio recording questions, the participant’s voice is recorded as an MP4 audio file 
so that researchers can analyze the audio file. The app’s voice recording feature does not ask for any 
identifiable in formation, but it is conceivable that, in the course of describing his/her day, a participant 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
19 
 
 could speak his/her own name or reveal other identifying details. As such, the voice recording data is 
encrypted.  
For all data except voice recording data, the ap p encrypts the data line -by-line as it writes data 
to the device’s disk. This means that the app never writes unencrypted data to disk for these files. For 
the voice recording file, it is not feasible to do on -the-fly asymmetric encryption (since most of t he 
established stream ciphers use symmetric encryption), so the voice recording file is encrypted once the 
recording is complete.  Because the phone cannot decrypt any of its own data, when the participant 
views his/her survey answers, the participant is a ctually logging in to the server, downloading the 
answers via an SSL connection, and effectively viewing them through an HTTPS site, not decrypting 
any data on the phone.  
The HOPE App will employ the same data privacy and security processes used in six IRB  
approved protocols across three Partners Institutions (BIDMC Protocol #: 2015P -000240; McLean 
Hospital Protocol #s: 2015P001303, 2015P001538, 2012P000890, 2015P002189; MGH Protocol #: 
2015P000666). This list includes IRB -approved research studies that hav e also used the voice 
recording component of the app with patients as research participants. Although the app collects a 
large amount of data, it was custom built to be used in a health care setting and includes robust 
security and privacy features to safe guard all data and protect participants’ privacy, including data 
anonymity, participant authentication, and data encryption.  
Recordings will be tied only to a study ID number, and the only document linking the patient’s 
study ID to identifiable information  is in a restricted -access, password -protected file stored securely on 
Dana -Farber servers. Audio recordings from the HOPE App will be transcribed for further analysis 
using a DFCI -approved, HIPAA -compliant transcription vendor. All patient identifiable in formation will 
be removed when the audio recordings are transcribed. Audio recordings will be destroyed when 
analyses are complete.  
 
Cancer experience question analysis plan  
We plan to analyze qualitative data from the cancer experience question using the Linguistic 
Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) program,92 developed by James Pennebaker and colleagues and used 
widely in emotional expression literature with cancer patients and other populations.87-90, 93 LIWC reads 
text and identifies which words are associat ed with psychologically -relevant categories, i.e. affect, 
cognitive processes, content dimensions, etc.94 Because the holistic nature of the responses may not 
be adequately captured by the word count approach of LIWC analyses, we also plan to perform a 
content analysis93, 96 -97 of the output from the cancer experience question with trained independent 
raters, examining categories of psychologically relevant content in the recordings.  For Phase I, due to 
the limited sample size, analyses will be descriptive  in nature. For Phase II, we plan to use multivariate 
analyses of covariance (MANCOVA) as primary statistical procedures, controlling for baseline values, 
on conceptually related groups of variables including physical health -related outcomes ( i.e., symptom s 
and healthcare utilization),  psychological adjustment as measured by other study instruments ( i.e., 
quality of life and emotional acceptance), and psychological properties of participants’ responses to the 
cancer experience question ( i.e. positive and n egative affect). We also plan to conduct preliminary 
multivariate analyses of variance for continuous variables and chi -squared analyses for categorical 
variables, on demographic variables, cancer -related parameters, and other relevant variables (e.g 
quali ty of life) at baseline. If relevant, we will use the baseline values on these measures as covariates 
to control for nonsignificant chance variation between groups at baseline.72 
 
 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
20 
 
  
 
5.21o Brief COPE  
The Brief COPE is a 28 -item measure developed to assess a broad range of coping 
responses.91 The Brief COPE has been validated in several populations including breast cancer 
patients and community samples.91 Subscales of the Brief COPE include use of emotional support, 
religion, and self -distraction, and indivi dual subscales can be used independently. We will use the 
denial, behavioral disengagement, self -distraction, active coping, use of emotional support, use of 
instrumental support, positive reframing, planning, acceptance, and religion subscales of the Brie f 
COPE. The Brief COPE will be administered to patients during the participant baseline interview 
(Appendix C).  
5.21p Note on Smartphone Surveys  
The PHQ -9 is not administered through the smartphone application —only during baseline and 
post-baseline surveys , which are administered by a research assistant —so the study team will become 
aware of any concerning responses to PHQ -9 items immediately. We will review the symptom surveys 
administered over Beiwe daily and  have developed an automated internal reporting  tool for this 
purpose. The audio recordings will be reviewed at the end of the study, and patients will be notified that 
the recordings will not be reviewed in real -time by a clinician when they are taught how to use the 
smartphone app. Additionally, afte r each symptom survey, patients are automatically reminded that a 
clinician will not see their responses in real -time and that they must contact their clinicians with 
concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
21 
 
  
 
 
Table 1. Distribution of measures during Phase 1 and Phase 2  
  INSTRUMENTS1 
 
 Participant Baseline 
Interview  Participant Post -
Baseline 
Interview  Clinician 
Survey  Symptom 
Survey  
   Phase 1  Phase 2  Phase 
1 Phase 
2 MEASURE  PRO -CTCAE  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓  ✓  
PROMIS Global -10 and 
Physical Function 6b  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓  ✓ 
CTCAE      ✓  
ECOG PS  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓  
PHQ -9 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓   
GAD -7 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓   
EQ-5D-5L ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓  
FACIT -PAL  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓   
Brief COPE   ✓     
Health Literacy & 
Numeracy  ✓ ✓     
Cancer Experience 
Question   ✓    ✓ 
Mobile Communication 
Competence  ✓ ✓     
Smartphone Usage 
Questions  ✓ ✓     
Demographic Info  ✓ ✓     
1 Measures were  refined during phase I, resulting in the addition or omission of instruments in response to 
patient or physician feedback  
 
5.22 Medical Chart Abstractions  and Patient -Reported Medical Resource Utilization  
 
5.22a Health/Treatment Information  
Participants’ medical charts will be reviewed to abstract health and treatment related information, 
including disease site, comorbid health conditions,73 number of prior chemotherapy regimens, and time 
since diagnosis. Data will be recorded in the Health/Tx Info form (Appendix G).  
 
5.22b Health Care Utilization  
Participants’ medical charts will be reviewed to abstract health care utilization data during 
enrollment, including chemotherapy regimen and treatments , palliative care visits, emergency 
department visits, hospitalizations, and hospice referrals. If a participant dies while enrolled in the 
study, the date of death will also be recorded. Data will be recorded in the Health Care Utilization  form 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
22 
 
 (Appendix H). Participants will also be given a patient diary to record all health care utilization that 
occurs during the study period, including hospitalizations, admissions to an intensive care unit, 
emergency room and urgent care visits, and oncology visits. Thi s form  was developed by the NRG 
Cancer Care Delivery Research Group because of a recognition that participants often receive care at 
outside hospitals that cannot be captured by abstracting the medical record. Clinical research 
coordinators will be asked t o verify medical care that happened within a site -affiliated medical center. 
Participants’ medical charts will be reviewed to abstract health care utilization data during enrollment, 
including chemotherapy regimen and treatments, palliative care visits, em ergency department visits, 
hospitalizations, and hospice referrals. If a participant dies while enrolled in the study, the date of death 
will also be recorded. Data will be recorded in the Medical Resource Utilization F orm (Appendix Z). 
Additionally, parti cipants will be asked about whether they (or their informal caregiver) needed to take 
time off from work, how far they traveled for treatment, and for a rough estimate of their out -of-pocket 
expenditures to capture some of the burden associated with cancer  care.  
 
5.22c Call Log  
Per usual care, program nurses in the Division of Gynecologic Oncology will document participants’ 
phone calls with clinical staff in participants’ electronic medical health records. Study staff will abstract 
information about these  phone calls during a participant’s enrollment and record data in the Call Log  
(Appendix I). Data collected for each call will include: date/time, incoming/outgoing, left message, 
duration in minutes, reason for the call, symptoms documented, and the outco me. 
 
5.23 Debriefing Interviews  
Debriefing i nterviews  will be conducted with participants enrolled in the first phase and their oncology 
providers. The purpose of these interviews is to obtain information about the acceptability of the 
interventions and re commendations for modifications to improve any aspect of recruitment, enrollment, 
education, timing of study assessments, and the graphical display of information, the wearable 
accelerometers, and the smartphone app. We will also conduct debriefing intervi ews with a purposively 
sampled subset of patients enrolled in Phase II  (see Appendix J: Debriefing Interviews for Phase 2) . We 
will administer interviews to 5 patients enrolled in each arm of the study. We will aim to sample a subset of 
patients with varyi ng backgrounds and experiences with the study in order to better understand how the 
HOPE trial interventions work across a diverse patient population.  
Additionally, debriefing interviews will be audiotaped in order to ensure that the interviewer adequatel y 
captures all feedback from patients and caregivers. The consent forms for the study include information 
that the debriefing interview will be audiotaped, and we will verbally request permission from patients to 
audiotape the debriefing interview before b eginning the interview. Verbal permission will be documented on 
RedCap in Appendix J: Debriefing Interviews for Phase 2. We will not administer a debriefing interview to 
any patient who does not consent to being audiotaped during the debriefing interview. All audio recordings 
of study sessions will be stored in secure locations in restricted -access, locked filing cabinets on Dana 10 
and 11, and in password -protected folders on Partners servers. Recordings will be tied only to a study ID 
number, and the only  document linking the patient’s study ID to identifiable information is in a restricted -
access, password -protected file stored securely on Dana -Farber servers. Audiotapes of debriefing 
interviews will be transcribed for further analysis using a DFCI -approv ed, HIPAA -compliant transcription 
vendor. All patient identifiable information will be removed when the audio recordings are transcribed. 
Audio recordings of debriefing interviews will be destroyed when analyses are complete.  
 
5.3 Description of Interventi ons  
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
23 
 
 Per the protocol schema, the first phase of the study will test the HOPE app with the Fitbit Zip or the Fitbit 
Charge 2. Based on the usability and acceptability data, the larger pilot RCT will test the HOPE app and the 
Fitbit model selected based upon  user feedback. Based upon participant feedback (70% preferred Charge 2) 
from the first phase of the study, Phase II will test the HOPE app with the Fitbit Charge 2.  
 
5.31 Monitored Wearable Accelerometer: Fitbit  
The Fitbit Zip is a commercially available  accelerometer that is worn on the hip and tracks users’ steps, 
distance, calories burned, and active minutes. The accuracy of the step counts reported by Fitbit’s hip -worn 
accelerometers have been validated against treadmill walking,74 other accelerometer s,75, 76 and an indirect 
calorimetry device.77 In addition, the Fitbit Zip was found to be the most valid device in a study that 
examined the validity and reliability of ten commercially available accelerometers for measuring step count 
against the gold st andard devices used in laboratory and free -living conditions.78  One of the advantages of 
the Fitbit Zip is it runs off of a watch battery which only needs replacing every 2 -3 months. One of the 
disadvantages to using the device in free -living conditions i s it may be difficult to distinguish between low 
activity levels and low adherence to the device.  
 The Fitbit Charge 2 is an accelerometer that is worn on the wrist and tracks users’ heart rate 
continuously in addition to steps, distance, calories, and act ive minutes. The addition of an optimal heart 
rate sensor enables monitoring of the time that the tracker is being worn (e.g., adherence).79, 80 Wrist -worn 
activity trackers have  been shown to accurately measure heart rate when compared with 
electrocardiog raphy,81, 82 have good test -retest reliability (intraclass correlations of 0.75 -0.95)78 but over 
count steps compared with the gold standard ActivPAL in free -living conditions due to the variability in limb -
specific activities.83 One of the advantages of t he Fitbit Charge 2 is it allows for close monitoring of 
adherence to the device over time because of its continuous measurement of heart rate. The 
disadvantages include: it is not as accurate as a hip -worn device, is  dependent upon the user to recharge it 
every 3 days, and may be less accurate if the participant is dependent upon a device for ambulating (e.g., 
cane or walker) or wears the device on her non -dominant arm.  
Fitbit data will be stored with Fitabase, (Small Steps Labs LLC), a third -party research  platform 
designed to collect data from the Fitbit ( https://www.fitabase.com ). It provides minute -by-minute measures  
(e.g. steps, heart rate)  for data monitoring and analysis.82 All data will be anonymized with the  use of 
participant codes, and the data will be stored a in high security data center. 82, 84  
 
5.32 Smartphone Application: HOPE App  
The other intervention is an iOS and Android smartphone application that runs on participants’ 
personal smartphones and collects information about their health and behaviors. Originally named “Beiwe,” 
the app was conceived and designed by one of the co -investigators, Dr. Jukka -Pekka Onnela, at the 
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. Zagaran, Inc., loc ated in Cambridge, Massachusetts, built the 
software.  
In a prior pilot study, Dr. Onnela tested the app in 13 patients with major depressive disorder. 
Participants installed the app on their personal smartphones and completed a self -report survey of PHQ -9 
items 3 times per day with >75% adherence to the app over a 30 -day period27. Participants scores were 
strongly correlated with paper -based surveys administered in clinic (Pearson linear correlation coefficient 
0.84) but were 3.0 points higher on average (i.e. indicating more d istress), and participants were much 
more likely to report significant suicidal ideation.  
Since this publication, Dr. Onnela’s lab has developed a more sophisticated system that features a 
web-based research study portal, a customizable Android and iOS sm artphone app, Amazon Web 
Services S3 database, and data modeling and analysis tools. The app collects many different types of 
sensor data and administers surveys. Although this platform has not yet been used in cancer patients, 
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
24 
 
 there are currently 8 IRB ap proved protocols across local centers that are utilizing the Beiwe application in 
research, including Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard University (Faculty of Arts and 
Sciences), McLean Hospital, and Massachusetts General Hospital. Three studie s have begun enrolling 
patients or healthy controls, and the user experience has been overwhelmingly positive. In addition, there 
are no signs that adherence is condition -specific to date.  
In this study, the active smartphone app is named the “Helping Our Patients Excel (HOPE)” app.   
 
5.32a. App Versions (Active vs. Passive)  
The HOPE Trial will employ two different versions of the customized smartphone app: an “active” app 
and a “passive” app.  
 
Active app : The “active” app collects both active and passive data from the participant’s phone 
usage. Active data is collected while a patient is using the app (e.g. responding to survey questions). 
Passive data is collected continuously without patient input. Patients using the active app will be asked 
to actively respond to survey questions including the symptom survey and cancer experience question.  
  
Passive app : The “passive” app collects passive data only  from the participant’s phone usage. It does 
NOT collect active data (e.g, the participant will not be asked  to respond to any survey questions.) The 
passive data collection will occur in the background of the phone.  
 
As noted above, both the active app and passive app collect passive data from the participant’s phone. 
Specifically, as detailed in the HOPE App D ata Privacy and Security  (Appendix L), passive data 
includes: mobility traces, consisting of flights (linear segments of movement) and pauses (times of no 
movement) which are constructed from GPS data; and summary statistics of phone communication 
(calls a nd text messages) patterns, simple examples being the total number of communication events 
in a time period (e.g., 1 week), the total number of communication partners, reciprocity of 
communication (defined as the difference between outgoing communication v olume and incoming 
communication volume).  
 
The active and passive app are built on the same underlying platform (Beiwe). As such, the active and 
passive app have identical data security protections, which are detailed in Appendix L, HOPE App Data 
Privacy and Security.  
 
5.32b Software and Data Collection Features  
The smartphone apps employ the original features and data collection methods used in the 
aforementioned studies and protocols. Consult HOPE App Features and Screenshots  (Appendix K) for 
descriptio ns of the app’s features, including: log -in screen, “Call My Clinician” button, “Forgot 
Password” button, notifications, surveys, “Call Research Assistant” button, and main menu.  
 
5.32c Symptom Management  
The active smartphone app is designed to collect a nd assess participants’ toxicities and symptoms 
on chemotherapy treatment in between visits with their clinician. Participants report the severity of their 
symptoms via a brief in -app survey of PRO -CTCAE items. The app then determines a symptom’s risk 
level and necessary response, which is either to provide no intervention, tailored symptom 
management advice, or an alert to call the clinician. Figure 3 provides a more detailed overview of this 
process.  
DF/HCC Protoco l 16-477: The HOPE Trial   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
25 
 
 The symptom response criteria and the Symptom Managemen t Content  (Appendix M) were 
developed by research staff in cooperation with the gynecologic oncology providers and staff nurses at 
Dana -Farber. The study PI, who is also a practicing gynecologic oncologist on the gynecologic 
oncology team, collated reputab le and trusted sources, such as ASCO, the National Cancer Institute, 
and Dana -Farber, to create the content for each symptom, which includes: symptom management 
advice and questions to ask the clinical team. The content and response criteria were then revi ewed 
and refined by study investigators, research staff, and gynecologic oncology clinicians to produce the 
final versions.  
 
5.33 HOPE Symptom Education Website  
In Phase II of the study, participants randomized to receive the Fitbit+active app, or active app 
arms will have access to a website ( www.hopetrial.org ) which will contain static patient education 
materials about the symptoms that are targeted in the HOPE app. This website will present evidence -
based inform ation on symptom education and symptom management. Some of the content on the 
website will mirror the content in the symptom management app, while other information will be housed 
only on the website. The purpose of the website is to provide a centralized location for patients to find 
symptom education and symptom management information at any time they might be experiencing low -
level symptoms. Content will be created by the study PI (a practicing gynecologic oncologist at DFCI) 
and the study team, and will  include information from trusted sources such as the NCI and ASCO.   
 
 5.34 Encouragement to Wear Smartphone  
 In Phase II of the study, participants will  be randomized both to a main study arm and a 
secondary randomization. The secondary randomization wil l randomize patients either to be 
encouraged to wear the smartphone at all times during the study (n=50), or not encouraged to wear the 
smartphone at all times during the study (n=50). Participants who are randomized to the “encouraged” 
arm will receive an  appliance (e.g belt clip/arm band) which will allow them to carry their smartphone 
with them throughout the day, including while they would not ordinarily carry their smartphones with 
them (such as when walking around inside the home.)  Participants who a re randomized to the “not 
encouraged” arm will not receive any instructions about keeping their smartphone with them, and will 
not be provided with an appliance to carry their phone throughout the day.
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
26 
 
 Figure 3. Symptom classification and response in the active smartphone app intervention  
 
 
The participant reports the severity of her sympto ms 
using PRO -CTCAE items with conditional branching  
No intervention  
No information is given  Symptom managemen t 
Presents advic e on how to manage 
the symptom at home; includes links 
to questions to ask the clinical team 
and additional diet recommendations  
when appropriate  Alert to call clinician  
Notifies the patient that her  symptom 
is severe and requires further 
management from her clinical team; 
Alert instructs the patient to hit the 
“Call My Clinician” button  
The patient hits the button 
and is directe d to the staff 
nurses for triage  The app displays a custom survey compl etion screen 
using the symptoms’ interve ntion classifica tion The active HOPE app  
The app prompts participants to complete daily surveys.  
For each symptom, the app classifies the int ervention 
needed based upon the reported severity:  
a) No intervention  
b) Symptom management  
c) Alert to call cl inician  
The pat ient reports her symptoms for all PRO -CTCAE 
survey items and clicks “submit”   In  In Phase II, participants 
randomized to rece ive the 
active HOPE app will have 
access to a website with 
static sympto m education 
advice.  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
27 
 
 5.4 Data Collection  
Tables 2 and 3 specify the instrument and intervention data collection timelines during each study 
phase. Intervention data will be collected continuously during enrollment; all synch automatically  over Wi -Fi. 
Table 2. First phase instrument data collection  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Second phase RCT instrument data collection per study arm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  DAY  
Visit  
0 1-29 Visit  
30 INSTRUMENT  Participant Baseline Interview  ✓   
Participant Post -Baseline 
Interview    ✓ 
Clinician Survey  ✓  ✓ 
Debriefing Interviews    ✓ 
Accelerometer Data   ✓ ✓ 
Daily QoL,PF, and Symptom 
Questions   ✓  
Weekly Symptom Survey   ✓  
Passive App Data   ✓ ✓ 
  DAY  
 Visit  
0 1-29 Visit  
30 31-89 Visit  
90 91-179 Visit  
180 INSTRUMENT  Participan t Baseline 
Interview  1,2,3,
4       
Participant Post -
Baseline Interview    1,2,3,4   1,2,3,4   1,2,3,4  
Clinician Survey  1,2,3,
4  1,2,3,4   1,2,3,4   1,2,3,4  
Health/Tx Info  1,2,3,
4  1,2,3,4   1,2,3,4   1,2,3,4  
Healthcare 
Utilization    1,2,3,4   1,2,3,4   1,2,3,4 
Call Log    1,2,3,4   1,2,3,4   1,2,3,4  
Accelerometer Data   1,2 1,2 1,2 1,2 1,2 1,2 
Daily Quality of Life, 
Physical Function, 
and Symptom 
Questions   1,3 1,3 1,3 1,3 1,3 1,3 
Weekly Cancer 
Experience 
Question  1,3 1,3  1,3  1,3  
Weekly Physical 
Function Survey   1,3 1,3 1,3 1,3 1,3 1,3 
1. Fitbit + active app  
2. Fitbit + passive app  
3. Active app  
4. Passive app  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
28 
 
 Data obtained via interviews, surveys and chart abstractions will be stored on the Harvard REDCap server. 
HOPE App w ill employ the same data privacy and security processes used in six IRB approved protocols 
across three Partners Institutions (BIDMC Protocol #:  2015P -000240; McLean Hospital Protocol #s: 
2015P001303, 2015P001538, 2012P000890, 2015P002189; MGH Protocol #: 2015P000666 ). Although the 
app collects a large amount of data, it was custom built to be used in a health care setting and includes robust 
security and privacy features to safeguard all data and protect participants’ privacy, including data anonymity, 
participant authentication, and data encryption. Hope App Data Privacy and Security  describes the processes 
in detail.  
Fitbit data will be stored with Fitabase, a research platform that collects and stores data from Internet 
connected devices, like Fitbit, fo r monitoring and analysis. It provides minute -by-minute measures  (e.g. steps, 
heart rate)  for data monitoring and analysis.82 All data will be anonymized with the use of participant codes, 
and the data will be stored a in high security data center., 82,84 
 
5.5 Description of Study Process  
Study procedures for the first phase are outlined below. Prior to opening the second phase, the study protocol 
and procedures will be amended based upon participant and clinician feedback. The RA will be primarily 
responsible for carrying out the following procedures; study staff will be trained accordingly so they can 
perform procedures as needed.  
 
Based on the study team’s experience conducting pilot studies, we understand that piloting minimal -risk 
interventions must be flexible in order to ensure that they can quickly adapt to patient needs as we learn more 
about them over the course of the study. The study activities currently outlined in the protocol therefore may be 
adapted without the submission of an amendment in cases where these modifications would pose no 
additional risk to patients, as determined by the study PI.  
5.51 Instrument Administration  
 
Participant Baseline Interview:  
• The RA will administer the survey to participants via an in -person i nterview on Day 0 before or after the 
participant’s visit with her oncology provider (Baseline Visit).  
• Participants will complete the interview on the same day informed consent is obtained; if this is not 
possible, the RA and participant will plan to compl ete it at a subsequent visit.  
• Participants will not be asked to come to Dana -Farber outside of their regularly scheduled visits.  
• Estimated time to completion: 45 minutes.  
 
Participant Post -Baseline Interview:  
• The RA will administer the interview to parti cipants via an in -person interview before or after a regularly 
scheduled visit that falls as close to the projected assessment date as possible (Post -Baseline Visit).  
• Every effort will be made to administer the interview in -person and on the date of the P ost-Baseline 
Visit. If this is not feasible, participants will complete it over the phone as close to the visit date as 
possible.  
• To encourage participation and reduce the number of incomplete interviews, participants will be 
contacted prior to their visit  to confirm the date of their upcoming visit and interview.  
• Estimated time to completion: 30 minutes.  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
29 
 
 Clinician Surveys:  
• The oncology provider(s) who met with the participant during the Baseline and Post -Baseline Visit will 
complete the survey.  
• To help en sure surveys are completed in a timely manner, study staff will highlight their importance 
during study training and elicit clinicians’ preferences for receiving and completing surveys, which will 
include: a HIPAA -compliant email, Redcap survey, hard copy,  or in-person interview.  
• The RA will administer the survey according to the provider’s personal preferences within 24 hours of 
the visit. If not completed within 48 hours of receipt, she will leave a hard copy in the clinician’s office or 
administer the su rvey during the weekly GYN research meeting.  
• Estimated time to completion: 5 minutes.  
Symptom Survey:  
• Participants will be prompted by the HOPE app to complete the survey.  
• The surveys will consist of single item measures of global quality of life and physi cal health, 
administered daily; the PROMIS PF 6b (6 -item questionnaire about physical function) administered 
weekly; PRO -CTCAE questions for 10 symptoms, administered weekly (2 symptoms per day over 5 
days); and a cancer experience question (audio recordin g), administered weekly.  
• Survey items will not interfere with participants’ use of their phone, but they will remain present until 
they are completed.  
• Estimated time to completion: 3 -5 minutes.  
• At each subsequent visit, participants and their oncology pro viders will be given a summary  of their 
survey responses since the last visit.  
 
Debriefing Interview:  
• The RA will conduct debriefing interviews with participants enrolled in the first phase and a subset of 
the patients enrolled in the second phase immedia tely following their completion of the final post -
baseline survey (either in -person or over the phone).  
• Study staff will discuss the debriefing interviews to identify opportunities for protocol improvement.  
• Estimated time to completion: 5 -10 minutes  
 
Healt h/Treatment Chart Abstraction:  
• The RA will review participants’ medical charts to complete the Health/Tx Information form at the time 
of participants’ baseline and post -baseline visits.  
• Chart abstractions will be completed within 10 days of participants’ study visits.  
Health Care Utilization Chart Abstraction:  
• The RA will review participants’ medical charts to complete the Health Care Utilization form at the time 
of participants’ baseline and post -baseline visits.  
• Chart abstractions will be completed withi n 10 days of participants’ study visits.  
 
 
 
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
30 
 
  
5.52 Intervention Administration  
 
5.52a Smartphone App  
Instructional Session ( passive and active app) : 
• Following the completion of the Participant Baseline Survey on Day 0, study staff will help 
participants d ownload, install, and run the HOPE App on their personal smartphones.  
• Participants will be prompted by Android or iOS to agree install the app and the software will review 
what the app will have access to on the phone (see the participant guide). This lang uage is  part of 
the Android and iOS operating systems and cannot be changed. There is no way to prevent this 
message, which is a basic security feature in Android and reflects the broadest possible access 
granted to an application.  
• To ensure that  subjects  are not misinformed, the study staff member will explain the app’s privacy 
and data security in the HOPE App Required Reading & Discussion  document (Appendix N). It 
should be noted that the discussion related to access on page 3 is specific to Android pho nes only.  
• When the app opens, participants will register using a unique User ID and temporary password and 
then choose a new password. The subject will be assigned a unique 8 -character Participant ID 
which consists of mixture of numbers and letters. The ap p does not ask the subject to enter any 
personal information (name, date of birth, phone number, etc.) and cannot be directly linked to their 
DFCI health records.  
• Participants will enter their oncology providers’ phone numbers for the “Call my Clinician” b utton 
and enter the RA’s contact number for the “Call Research Assistant” button.  
• At the end of the registration process, the participant will click a button to acknowledge she has 
reviewed the information with the RA and provide in -app consent.  
• The RA w ill then review how to use the app and participants will be given a copy of the HOPE App 
Participant Guide -Active App (Appendix O) or the HOPE App Participant Guide —Passive App 
(Appendix W) which describes the app and provides directions on how to use its features, 
frequently asked questions, as well a review of the data that is collected and privacy measures.  
 
Symptom Management ( Active app only) : 
• Participants will be prompted to answer single item global measures of their quality of life and 
physical hea lth daily; answer 6 questions about their physical function weekly; answer one question 
about their cancer experience weekly; and answer questions about 2 symptoms daily in between 
study visits via the HOPE App in the Symptom Survey (details in section 5.5 2).  
• If a participant reports one or more low -risk toxicities, the app will present tailored advice on how 
she can manage each symptom at home. If participants report high -risk toxicities, they will be 
instructed that they have reported a toxicity that req uires further management from their clinical 
team and to hit the “Call My Clinical Team” button. Please refer to the figure in section 5.53 for an 
overview of this process.  
• After completing each survey, the app will remind participants that the results wil l not be reviewed 
by a clinician, so the survey cannot be used to communicate with study staff or to request help. The 
reminder will also note that if the participant feels unsafe, she should contact the treating clinician 
directly.  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
31 
 
 • At each clinic visit, p articipants and their oncology providers will be given a graphical summary of 
the symptoms participants reported,  and/or the steps walked by participants (depending on study 
arm) in -between visits. The study team will provide a summary of symptoms and/or s teps either by 
providing a hard copy during clinic or through email, depending on feasibility and provider 
preference. If the patient is randomized to the active app -only study arm, she and her provider will 
only receive symptom reporting; if the patient i s randomized to the accelerometer+passive app  
study arm, she and her provider will only receive “step count” reporting; if the patient is randomized 
to the active app+accelerometer arm, she and her provider will receive both symptom and step 
count reportin g; and if the patient is randomized to the passive app only study arm, she and her 
provider will not receive a symptom summary. This is dependent on patient adherence –e.g if a 
patient is not wearing her Fitbit or using the smartphone application and we ar e unable to receive 
step or symptom data, we will not have data to share with patients or their clinicians and no 
summary sheet will be provided. See Appendix V: Sample Summary Sheet for an example of what 
the summary data will look like. We will not monit or whether clinicians use the summary sheets, 
since it is difficult to reliably capture what providers read and absorb during clinic visits.  
 
 
App Use and Compliance ( Active and passive app) :  
• Participants will be instructed to avoid adjusting the app sett ings to ensure data is collected. We will 
contact patients when we do not receive data from the app and/or Fitbit and aim to do so according 
to their contact preferences stated in the registration form.  
• If the app is not synching properly, the RA will cont act patients via text/phone/email to help resolve 
the issue remotely. If this is not possible, the RA will meet participants at a regularly scheduled 
clinic visit to download the data manually or help resolve the issue.  
 
5.52b Wearable Accelerometers:  
All participants will also receive a Fitbit Zip and Fitbit Charge 2. Participants in the Fitbit and 
Fitbit+HOPE App arms of Phase II of the study will receive only the Fitbit Charge 2.  
 
Instructional Session:  
• Following the completion of the Participant Bas eline Survey on Day 0, the RA will help participants’ 
download the Fitbit software and smartphone app, demonstrate how to use the Fitbit app and 
device, and teach patients how to synch the device to their smartphone. Participants will be 
assigned a unique study email that will be used to synch the device with the Fitbit app, as well as 
register the device in Fitabase (i.e., study’s data collection platform).  
• To reduce missing data, the RA will highlight the importance of wearing the accelerometer and 
review  how they will be contacted by the study team, ideally through their preferred method of 
communication (phone/text/email), to encourage compliance. In addition to the accelerometer, 
participants will receive a wireless sync connector, and the Fitbit  Partic ipant Guide  (Appendix Q), 
which describes proper wear and care, charging and battery life, troubleshooting instructions, 
uploading data, and compliance.  
• The RA will encourage participants to contact study staff at any time with questions or issues to 
help ensure proper wear and use of the Fitbit.  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
32 
 
  
Wear Time,  Compliance, and Monitoring Average Daily Steps :  
• Participants will be asked to wear the Fitbit Charge 2 on their non -dominant wrist. Study staff will 
continuously monitor participants wear time and dat a via Fitabase. We may contact patients when 
we do not receive data from the app and/or Fitbit and aim to contact patients according to their 
preferences stated in the registration form. If a Fitbit is not synching properly, the RA will contact 
patients vi a text/phone/email to help resolve the issue remotely. If this is not possible, the RA will 
meet the participants in person at a regularly scheduled clinic visit to download the data manually.  
 
Tracking Devices:  
• The accelerometers assigned to each partic ipant will be tracked according to the product serial 
number and assigned unique ID number.  
• Participants will be allowed to keep the accelerometers as a token of appreciation for their 
participation in the study, and to minimize potential transmission of skin infections (e.g. methicillin -
resistant Staphylococcus aureus) between participants.  
 
5.53 Special Concerns  
 
5.53a Troubleshooting the HOPE App  
The intervention’s participant guides outline common troubleshooting issues and how to solve them. 
Participa nts will be instructed to call study staff as soon as possible to report if they are having trouble 
using the app.  
 
5.53b Lost Accelerometers  
If a participant reports to study staff that she lost the accelerometer, study staff will provide a 
replacement, e ither in person or via mail, as soon as possible.  
 
5.53c Surveys  
Study staff will contact participants to complete their upcoming study survey. After three unreturned 
voicemails, participants will not be contacted again for additional surveys.  
 
5.53d Subs equent Enrollment in a Therapeutic Drug Trial  
Participants in this study may enroll in a therapeutic drug trial at any point after signing consent to 
participate in this study. However, if a patient enrolls in a therapeutic drug trial that requires structu red 
symptom or toxicity reporting we will record this and perform a sensitivity analysis, excluding any 
patients who participated in a therapeutic trial after enrollment, to determine whether this impacts our 
findings. Since this is a feasibility and accep tability trial, we do not want to censor participants.  
 
5.54 Compensation  
In the first phase, there will be no compensation for participants in this study. However, participants will 
be allowed to keep the wearable accelerometers (approximately $200 value ) and will be provided with 
phone chargers to compensate for battery drainage that may be caused by installing the HOPE App 
(approximately $15 value). In the second phase, participants who are randomized to the corresponding 
arms will be allowed to keep th e wearable accelerometer and/or receive a phone charger if requested. All 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
33 
 
 patients will be provided with a gift -card after the 1 -month, 3 -month, 6 -month interviews to minimize attrition 
and prevent differential drop -out by study arm. The incentives will be  $20 at 1 month, $30 at 3 months, and 
$50 at 6 months.  Subjects who are randomized to a rm 4 (passive app) will also receive a $20 gift card after 
the first study interview  at baseline .  
In addition, if subjects incur additional costs related to their phone s’ data plan use as a result of 
participating in the study, subjects will be asked to provide the study team with receipts, and study -related 
expenses will be reimbursed.  Subjects will be provided with an information sheet (Appendix AA: Patient 
Reimburseme nt Info Sheet) describing the reimbursement process.  
 
5.6 Adverse Reactions and Their Management  
 
5.61 Reporting Adverse or Unanticipated Events  
Potential adverse events (AE) for this project are expected to be all non -medical in nature. There is 
small ris k of physical injury. Participants could experience discomfort while wearing the Fitbit Charge 2 on 
their wrist.  There is also a chance participants could worsen repetitive use injuries (e.g., carpal tunnel 
syndrome) while using the smartphone app.  Subjec ts may experience mild anxiety when answering survey 
questions about emotional issues or questions about coping challenges or difficulties related to discussing 
the subject matter. The PI will report unanticipated and serious adverse events to the IRB in a  timely 
manner on an ongoing basis. For the purpose of this study a Serious Adverse Event (SAE) is defined as an 
event that, as a direct result of the study, causes serious harm to the subject (e.g., hospitalization).   
 
5.62 Anticipated Reactions & Reactio n Management  
Should participants become exceedingly upset, disoriented or fatigued or need to attend to matters of 
personal care during the surveys, study staff will ask the subject if they would like to take a break or 
reschedule the survey for another ti me. In the event that participants experience distress while completing 
surveys, we will follow standard procedures used in our behavioral health intervention studies for 
counseling and referral. The PI will be notified immediately,  and participants will b e provided with the pager 
numbers for both the study PI and the study psychiatrist included in the consent form. Dr. Ilana Braun, a 
DFCI psychiatrist, has agreed to serve as a psychiatrist on the study. Dr. Braun will evaluate any 
participants who are dist ressed for risk of imminent danger and refer them to appropriate services if they 
are needed.  
As noted in the study procedures, all clinical staff will be trained in the study protocol. A participants’ 
clinical care team will be notified of every incoming call to the triage nurses, per standard practice, and her 
physician will be paged in the case of an emergency.  
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
34 
 
 6.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
6.1 Primary and Secondary Endpoints  
 
Primary Endpoints: First Phase  
1) To assess the feasibility and acceptability of th e HOPE app and the two wearable accelerometers  
2) To compare two wearable accelerometers (Fitbit Zip and Fitbit Charge 2) with respect to correlations 
with clinical outcomes (ECOG PS and patient -reported quality of life and physical health as measured 
by the PROMIS Global -10 items 2 and 3), for use in pilot RCT.  
 
Secondary Endpoints: First Phase  
1) To describe correlations between data collected from the HOPE app and the wearable accelerometers 
with additional clinical outcomes: PRO -CTCAE, CTCAE, and EQ -5D-5L. 
   
Primary Endpoint: Second Phase  
1) Health -related quality of life, comparing the patient -reported baseline and 6 -month EuroQol EQ -5D.  
 
Secondary Outcomes: Second Phase  
1) Health care utilization (i.e. emergency room visits, hospitalizations, unplanned infusion appointments, 
and number of patient phone calls)  
2) Correlation betwe en patient and physician estimates of performance status  
3) Additional clinical outcomes (e.g. anxiety and depression).  
4) Correlation between data collected from the wearable and smartphone acce lerometers  
5) Predictive ability of wearable and smartphone accelerometers for patient’s performance status and 
clinically significant events  
6) Difference in correlation between data collected from the wearable and smartphone accelerometers, 
and difference in p redictive ability of smartphone accelerometers for patient’s performance status and 
clinically significant events, by whether patients are enco uraged to wear their smartphones  
 
6.2 Sample Size and Statistical Power or Precisions   
 
A convenience sample of 1 0 patients will be enrolled to the first phase of the study. Due to the limited 
sample size, statistical analysis will be descriptive in nature.  
100 patients will be enrolled to the second phase of this study, which will employ a 2x2 factorial design as 
depicted in the table below. Patients will be randomized 1:1:1:1 to one of the four arms.  
 
 
 
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
35 
 
  
Fitbit  App  Arm  Sample size  
+ Active  1 (Fitbit + active app)  25 
+ Passive  2 (Fitbit + passive app)  25 
- Active  3 (Active app)  25 
- Passive  4 (Passive app)  25 
  Total  100 
 
For the outcome of change in EQ -5D, we will use a one -sided type I error rate of 5% to conclude that an 
intervention is promising for further study. Based on prior literature,22 the standard deviation of the change in 
EQ-5D at 6 months compared to baseline is approximately 14 points. With a total sample size of 100 patients 
(25 patients per arm), the table below summarizes the power to conclude that the either or both of the 
interventions are promising for further study base d on a variety of effect sizes.  
 
Difference in EQ -5D versus Usual Care  Power to conclude that 
intervention is promising for 
further  study  
HOPE 
App Wearable 
accelerometer  HOPE App + 
Wearable 
accelerometer  HOPE App  Wearable 
accelerometer  
6 0 6 70%  -- 
7 0 7 80%  -- 
6 3 9 70%  28%  
7 3 10 80%  28%  
6 3 8 62%  23%  
7 3 8 68%  17%  
 
   
 
6.3 Intervention Allocation Plan  
In the second phase, enrolled participants will be randomized to one of the four arms: 1) Fitbit + active app, 
2) Fitbit + passive app, 3) Active  app, 4) Passive app —using a 1:1:1:1 ratio. Enrolled participants will undergo 
a secondary randomization to being encouraged to use a smartphone, or not encouraged to use a 
smartphone. Randomization to the main study arms will occur using a computer -genera ted random allocation 
sequence with blocks of 8 in order to maintain balance between study arms over time. Study staff will generate 
group assignments in sequentially numbered and sealed opaque envelopes.  
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
36 
 
 6.4 Analysis Plan  
 
First phase:  
 
Due to the limite d sample size, statistical analysis will be descriptive in nature. Refinement of the HOPE 
App and selection of the wearable accelerometer to use in the second phase will be based on a descriptive 
assessment of feasibility, acceptability, and correlations w ith clinical outcomes.  
 
Feasibility:  We will record the proportion of eligible patients who enroll in the study and basic reasons for 
refusal [i.e. “too busy,” “not interested,” “other (specify)”]. Among those who enroll, we will plot the 
proportion who co mplete daily (quality of life,  self-rated health, and PRO -CTCAE questions) and weekly 
(Promis PF 6b)  surveys from the HOPE App over time, and the average steps per day obtained from each 
of the accelerometers. We will also descriptively summarize the prop ortion of clinicians complete the 
CTCAE and performance status data for enrolled patients at baseline and post -baseline.  
 
Acceptability:  Upon completion of the study, participants will be asked several questions, including: 1) 
“Participating in this study placed a substantial burden on me” and 2) “I wish I had not agreed to participate 
in this study.” Responses to these items will be summarized descriptively.  
Refinement of the HOPE App:  
Participants will be asked about their experiences using the HOPE app, including: “Was the app helpful for 
managing your symptoms?” Participants will be asked about the frequency, format, and content of the app -
based surveys, and whether there were symptoms that were missing from the app. Participants will also be 
asked open -ended questions, including: “What did you like about the app?” “What was most frustrating 
[about the HOPE app]?”, “How could it [the HOPE app] have better met your needs?”, and “Would you 
recommend this to a friend going through treatment? Why?” Responses to these items will be summarized 
descriptively.  
 
Comparison between two wearable accelerometers:  
Participants will also be asked several questions about their experience using the Fitbit, including: “Which 
Fitbit did you like better?” Response options wil l include: “Fitbit Zip (worn on your waistband),” Fitbit Charge 
2 (worn on your wrist),” “No preference,” and “Neither.” Participants will be asked an open -ended question: 
“Why did you like the [FitbitZip/Fitbit Charge 2] better?” Participants will also be  asked to what extent they 
agree with the following questions: “The Fitbit Charge 2 was easy to use” and “The Fitbit Zip was easy to 
use.” We will also ask participants how many waking hours they wore each device daily (i.e. % waking 
hours), and how many t imes they forgot to wear the device or forgot to recharge it. Responses to these 
items will be summarized descriptively.  
Correlations with clinical outcomes:  
We will descriptively summarize correlations between data collected from the HOPE app (quality of life and 
physical function) and the wearable accelerometers (average daily steps) with clinical outcomes collected at 
baseline and post -baseline (i.e. performance status, quality of life, and symptoms assessment as obtained 
from the PRO -CTCAE and CTCAE).  
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
37 
 
 Second phase:  
In addition to descriptive analyses and estimating correlations between passive smartphone data and 
clinical outcomes, passive data may contain information that allows for the prediction of future clinically -
relevant events, such as visits t o the emergency department, urgent clinic encounter, or hospitalization. By 
testing for changes in activity, mobility, and social patterns over time as measured through smartphone use 
may be able to identify significant anomalies in patient behavior in the  days prior to relapse. In a study in a 
cohort with schizophrenia, behavioral anomalies detected in the two weeks prior to clinical relapse occurred at 
a rate 71% higher than anomalies detected on other days .92 The method is based on a modification of the 
Hotelling’s T test to detect changes in the distribution of previous passively -measured activity. In our proposed 
study, this method might be used to query patients in real time to detect if an unscheduled clinical event might 
occur in the near future.  Analyses will be repeated within secondary randomization arm to explore whether 
correlations and predictive ability of information from smartphone accelerometers are lower when participants 
are not encouraged to wear their smartphones.  
 
For the primary analys is, the EQ -5D index scores will be calculated in each study arm at both baseline and 
6 months and compared. The effect of the Fitbit on EQ -5D will be obtained by comparing the mean change in 
EQ-5D among all arms that consist of the Fitbit (i.e. arms 1 and 2) versus that obtained among all arms that do 
not consist of the Fitbit (i.e. arms 3 and 4). Similarly, the effect of the HOPE app on EQ -5D will be obtained by 
comparing the mean change in EQ -5D among all arms that consist of the HOPE app (i.e. arms 1 and  3) versus 
that obtained among all arms that do not consist of the HOPE app (i.e. arms 2 and 4). Additionally, pair -wise 
comparisons will be conducted of arms 2, 3, and 4 to arm 1 to examine which arms are driving or diluting any 
differences observed. Mean  score changes from baseline will be compared using t tests and multivariable 
linear regression. The multivariable linear regression model will consist of change score as the dependent 
variable, and will adjust for baseline covariates (age, sex, cancer typ e, race, education, and literacy and 
numeracy). Additional analyses will use Fisher’s exact test to compare the proportion of patients in each study 
arm who experience an improvement, no change, or a decrement in quality of life. This will be conducted bot h 
for any level of change from baseline and for a 6 -point change from baseline (the threshold for a clinically 
meaningful difference). Similar analyses will be conducted for the secondary outcomes, including anxiety, 
depression, and number of patient phone  calls, using the appropriate regression model (e.g. negative binomial 
regression may be used for the outcome of the number of patient phone calls).   
For the health care utilization endpoints of unplanned infusion appointments, emergency room visits, and 
hospitalizations, cumulative incidence functions will be calculated with death treated as a competing event. 
Competing risk regressions will be used to model risk with and without adjustment for baseline covariates.  
Agreement between patient -oncologist est imates of performance status will be estimated by Cohen’s 
Kappa statistic, and differences in agreement between the study groups will be tested by bootstrapping.   
6.5 Handling of Missing Data  
For the primary quality -of-life analysis, we will exclude from our analyses any patients who do not complete 
any post -baseline EQ -5D questionnaires and carry forward the last post -baseline observation available for 
patients without 6 -month data. If >10% of participants have missing data from the 6 -month survey, we wil l 
perform sensitivity imputation analyses including: 1) no observations carried forward, 2) minimum observation 
values carried forward, 3) average observation values carried forward, and 4) last observation carried forward, 
but with an EQ -5D value of 0 if death occurred before 6 months.  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
38 
 
 7.0 REFERENCES  
 1. Di Maio M, Gallo C, Leighl NB, et al: Symptomatic toxicities experienced during anticancer 
treatment: agreement between patient and physician reporting in three randomized trials. J Cli n Oncol 33:910 -
5, 2015  
 2. Fromme EK, Eilers KM, Mori M, et al: How accurate is clinician reporting of chemotherapy 
adverse effects? A comparison with patient -reported symptoms from the Quality -of-Life Questionnaire C30. J 
Clin Oncol 22:3485 -90, 2004  
 3. Montemurro F, Mittica G, Cagnazzo C, et al: Self -Evaluation of Adjuvant Chemotherapy -Related 
Adverse Effects by Patients With Breast Cancer. JAMA Oncol:1 -8, 2015  
 4. Bennett AV, Reeve BB, Basch EM, et al: Evaluation of pedometry as a patient -centered 
outcom e in patients undergoing hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT): a comparison of pedometry and patient 
reports of symptoms, health, and quality of life. Qual Life Res 25:535 -46, 2016  
 5. Santana MJ, Feeny D, Johnson JA, et al: Assessing the use of health -related quality of life 
measures in the routine clinical care of lung -transplant patients. Qual Life Res 19:371 -9, 2010  
 6. Detmar SB, Muller MJ, Schornagel JH, et al: Health -related quality -of-life assessments and 
patient -physician communication: a randomized  controlled trial. JAMA 288:3027 -34, 2002  
 7. Velikova G, Booth L, Smith AB, et al: Measuring quality of life in routine oncology practice 
improves communication and patient well -being: a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol 22:714 -24, 2004  
 8. Veliko va G, Keding A, Harley C, et al: Patients report improvements in continuity of care when 
quality of life assessments are used routinely in oncology practice: secondary outcomes of a randomised 
controlled trial. Eur J Cancer 46:2381 -8, 2010  
 9. Kotronoulas G, Kearney N, Maguire R, et al: What is the value of the routine use of patient -
reported outcome measures toward improvement of patient outcomes, processes of care, and health service 
outcomes in cancer care? A systematic review of controlled trials. J Cli n Oncol 32:1480 -501, 2014  
 10. Basch E, Deal AM, Kris MG, et al: Symptom Monitoring With Patient -Reported Outcomes 
During Routine Cancer Treatment: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Oncol, 2015  
 11. Denis F, C. L, Pourel N, et al: Overall survival in p atients with lung cancer using a web -
application -guided follow -up compared to standard modalities: Results of phase III randomized trial, J Clin 
Oncol 2016  
 12. Bakitas MA, Tosteson TD, Li Z, et al: Early Versus Delayed Initiation of Concurrent Palliative 
Oncology Care: Patient Outcomes in the ENABLE III Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Oncol 33:1438 -45, 
2015  
 13. Temel JS, Greer JA, Muzikansky A, et al: Early palliative care for patients with metastatic non -
small -cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 363:733 -42, 2010  
 14. Zimmermann C, Swami N, Krzyzanowska M, et al: Early palliative care for patients with 
advanced cancer: a cluster -randomised controlled trial. Lancet 383:1721 -30, 2014  
 15. Bakitas M, Lyons KD, Hegel MT, et al: Effects of a palliative care inte rvention on clinical 
outcomes in patients with advanced cancer: the Project ENABLE II randomized controlled trial. JAMA 302:741 -
9, 2009  
 16. Schenker Y, Arnold R: The Next Era of Palliative Care. JAMA 314:1565 -6, 2015  
 17. Basch E, Artz D, Dulko D, et al: Patient online self -reporting of toxicity symptoms during 
chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 23:3552 -61, 2005  
 18. Basch E, Jia X, Heller G, et al: Adverse symptom event reporting by patients vs clinicians: 
relationships with clinical outcomes. J Natl Cancer Inst 101:1624 -32, 2009  
 19. Dueck AC, Mendoza TR, Mitchell SA, et al: Validity and Reliability of the US National Cancer 
Institute's Patient -Reported Outcomes Version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO -
CTCAE). JAMA Oncol 1:1051 -9, 2015  
 20. Judson TJ, Bennett AV, Rogak LJ, et al: Feasibility of long -term patient self -reporting of 
toxicities from home via the Internet during routine chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 31:2580 -5, 2013  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
39 
 
  21. Girault A, Ferrua M, Lalloue B, et al: Internet -based techno logies to improve cancer care 
coordination: current use and attitudes among cancer patients. Eur J Cancer 51:551 -7, 2015  
 22. Basch E, Deal AM, Kris MG, et al: Symptom Monitoring With Patient -Reported Outcomes 
During Routine Cancer Treatment: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Oncol 34:557 -65, 2016  
 23. Smith A PD: U.S. Smartphone Use in 2015, Pew Research Center  
 24. "The Smartphone Difference", Pew Research Center, 2015  
 25. Guillory J, Chang P, Henderson CR, Jr., et al: Piloting a Text Message -based S ocial Support 
Intervention for Patients With Chronic Pain: Establishing Feasibility and Preliminary Efficacy. Clin J Pain 
31:548 -56, 2015  
 26. Gustafson DH, McTavish FM, Chih MY, et al: A smartphone application to support recovery 
from alcoholism: a random ized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry 71:566 -72, 2014  
 27. Torous J SP, Shanahan M, Lin C, Peck P, Keshavan M,  Onnela JP: Utilizing a personal 
smartphone custom app to assess the Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9) depressive symptoms in 
patients with m ajor depressive disorder. JMIR Mental Health 2:e8, 2015  
 28. Lester RT, Ritvo P, Mills EJ, et al: Effects of a mobile phone short message service on 
antiretroviral treatment adherence in Kenya (WelTel Kenya1): a randomised trial. Lancet 376:1838 -45, 2010  
 29. Chow CK, Redfern J, Hillis GS, et al: Effect of Lifestyle -Focused Text Messaging on Risk Factor 
Modification in Patients With Coronary Heart Disease: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 314:1255 -63, 2015  
 30. Torous J, Staples P, Onnela JP: Realizing the  potential of mobile mental health: new methods 
for new data in psychiatry. Curr Psychiatry Rep 17:602, 2015  
 31. Lowe SS, Danielson B, Beaumont C, et al: Associations between objectively measured physical 
activity and quality of life in cancer patients wi th brain metastases. J Pain Symptom Manage 48:322 -32, 2014  
 32. Lowe SS, Danielson B, Beaumont C, et al: Correlates of objectively measured sedentary 
behavior in cancer patients with brain metastases: an application of the theory of planned behavior. 
Psych ooncology 24:757 -62, 2015  
 33. Maddocks M, Byrne A, Johnson CD, et al: Physical activity level as an outcome measure for 
use in cancer cachexia trials: a feasibility study. Support Care Cancer 18:1539 -44, 2010  
 34. Maddocks M, Wilcock A: Exploring physical  activity level in patients with thoracic cancer: 
implications for use as an outcome measure. Support Care Cancer 20:1113 -6, 2012  
 35. Sorensen JB, Klee M, Palshof T, et al: Performance status assessment in cancer patients. An 
inter-observer variability st udy. Br J Cancer 67:773 -5, 1993  
 36. Hutchinson TA, Boyd NF, Feinstein AR, et al: Scientific problems in clinical scales, as 
demonstrated in the Karnofsky index of performance status. J Chronic Dis 32:661 -6, 1979  
 37. Blagden SP, Charman SC, Sharples LD, e t al: Performance status score: do patients and their 
oncologists agree? Br J Cancer 89:1022 -7, 2003  
 38. Dajczman E, Kasymjanova G, Kreisman H, et al: Should patient -rated performance status affect 
treatment decisions in advanced lung cancer? J Thorac Onc ol 3:1133 -6, 2008  
 39. Ando M, Ando Y, Hasegawa Y, et al: Prognostic value of performance status assessed by 
patients themselves, nurses, and oncologists in advanced non -small cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer 85:1634 -9, 
2001  
 40. Basch E, Wood WA, Schrag D, e t al: Feasibility and clinical impact of sharing patient -reported 
symptom toxicities and performance status with clinical investigators during a phase 2 cancer treatment trial. 
Clin Trials, 2015  
 41. Dahele M, Skipworth RJ, Wall L, et al: Objective physica l activity and self -reported quality of life 
in patients receiving palliative chemotherapy. J Pain Symptom Manage 33:676 -85, 2007  
 42. Skipworth RJ, Stene GB, Dahele M, et al: Patient -focused endpoints in advanced cancer: 
criterion -based validation of acce lerometer -based activity monitoring. Clin Nutr 30:812 -21, 2011  
 43. Czajkowski SM, Powell LH, Adler N, et al: From ideas to efficacy: The ORBIT model for 
developing behavioral treatments for chronic diseases. Health Psychol 34:971 -82, 2015  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
40 
 
  44. Basch EM, T haler HT, Shi W, et al: Use of information resources by patients with cancer and 
their companions. Cancer 100:2476 -83, 2004  
 45. EuroQol G: EuroQol --a new facility for the measurement of health -related quality of life. Health 
Policy 16:199 -208, 1990  
 46. Janssen MF, Pickard AS, Golicki D, et al: Measurement properties of the EQ -5D-5L compared 
to the EQ -5D-3L across eight patient groups: a multi -country study. Qual Life Res 22:1717 -27, 2013  
 47. Kim SH, Kim HJ, Lee SI, et al: Comparing the psychometric prope rties of the EQ -5D-3L and 
EQ-5D-5L in cancer patients in Korea. Qual Life Res 21:1065 -73, 2012  
 48. Sullivan PW, Ghushchyan V: Mapping the EQ -5D index from the SF -12: US general population 
preferences in a nationally representative sample. Med Decis Making  26:401 -9, 2006  
 49. Pickard AS, Neary MP, Cella D: Estimation of minimally important differences in EQ -5D utility 
and VAS scores in cancer. Health Qual Life Outcomes 5:70, 2007  
 50. Cella D, Riley W, Stone A, et al: The Patient -Reported Outcomes Measureme nt Information 
System (PROMIS) developed and tested its first wave of adult self -reported health outcome item banks: 2005 -
2008. J Clin Epidemiol 63:1179 -94, 2010  
 51. Hays RD, Bjorner JB, Revicki DA, et al: Development of physical and mental health summary  
scores from the patient -reported outcomes measurement information system (PROMIS) global items. Qual Life 
Res 18:873 -80, 2009  
 52. Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, et al: Toxicity and response criteria of the Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin On col 5:649 -55, 1982  
 53. Basch E, Iasonos A, Barz A, et al: Long -term toxicity monitoring via electronic patient -reported 
outcomes in patients receiving chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 25:5374 -80, 2007  
 54. Lowe B, Kroenke K, Herzog W, et al: Measuring depressio n outcome with a brief self -report 
instrument: sensitivity to change of the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9). J Affect Disord 81:61 -6, 2004  
 55. Thekkumpurath P, Walker J, Butcher I, et al: Screening for major depression in cancer 
outpatients: the diag nostic accuracy of the 9 -item patient health questionnaire. Cancer 117:218 -27, 2011  
 56. Johns SA, Kroenke K, Krebs EE, et al: Longitudinal comparison of three depression measures 
in adult cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 45:71 -82, 2013  
 57. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB: Validation and utility of a self -report version of PRIME -MD: 
the PHQ primary care study. Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders. Patient Health Questionnaire. 
JAMA 282:1737 -44, 1999  
 58. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, et al: A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety 
disorder: the GAD -7. Arch Intern Med 166:1092 -7, 2006  
 59. Lowe B, Decker O, Muller S, et al: Validation and standardization of the Generalized Anxiety 
Disorder Screener (GAD -7) in the general popula tion. Med Care 46:266 -74, 2008  
 60. Andersen BL, DeRubeis RJ, Berman BS, et al: Screening, assessment, and care of anxiety and 
depressive symptoms in adults with cancer: an American Society of Clinical Oncology guideline adaptation. J 
Clin Oncol 32:1605 -19, 2014  
 61. Wright AA, Mack JW, Kritek PA, et al: Influence of patients' preferences and treatment site on 
cancer patients' end -of-life care. Cancer 116:4656 -63, 2010  
 62. Prigerson HG: Socialization to dying: social determinants of death acknowledgement a nd 
treatment among terminally ill geriatric patients. J Health Soc Behav 33:378 -95, 1992  
 63. Wright AA, Zhang B, Ray A, et al: Associations between end -of-life discussions, patient mental 
health, medical care near death, and caregiver bereavement adjustme nt. JAMA 300:1665 -73, 2008  
 64. Fried TR, Bradley EH, Towle VR: Assessment of patient preferences: integrating treatments and 
outcomes. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 57:S348 -54, 2002  
 65. Chen JY, Tao ML, Tisnado D, et al: Impact of physician -patient di scussions on patient 
satisfaction. Med Care 46:1157 -62, 2008  
 66. Weeks JC, Catalano PJ, Cronin A, et al: Patients' expectations about effects of chemotherapy 
for advanced cancer. N Engl J Med 367:1616 -25, 2012  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
41 
 
  67. Mack JW, Nilsson M, Balboni T, et al: Pe ace, Equanimity, and Acceptance in the Cancer 
Experience (PEACE): validation of a scale to assess acceptance and struggle with terminal illness. Cancer 
112:2509 -17, 2008  
 68.  Lyons KD, Bakitas M, Hegel MT, et al: Reliability and validity of the Functional  Assessment of 
Chronic Illness Therapy - Palliative care (FACIT -Pal) scale. J Pain Symptom Manage 37(1): 23 -32, 2009  
 69. Wallace LS, Rogers ES, Roskos SE, et al: Brief report: screening items to identify patients with 
limited health literacy skills. J Gen  Intern Med 21:874 -7, 2006  
 70. Stagliano V, Wallace LS: Brief health literacy screening items predict newest vital sign scores. J 
Am Board Fam Med 26:558 -65, 2013  
 71. Bakke E: A Model and Measure of Mobile Communication Competence. Human 
Communication Re search 36:348 -371, 2010  
 72.  Stanton AL, Danoff -Burg S, Swarowski LA, et al: Randomized, controlled trial of written 
emotional expression and benefit finding in breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 20:4160 -4168, 2002  
 73. Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, et al: A new method of classifying prognostic comorbidity in 
longitudinal studies: development and validation. J Chronic Dis 40:373 -83, 1987  
 74. Takacs J, Pollock CL, Guenther JR, et al: Validation of the Fitbit One activity monitor device 
during treadmil l walking. J Sci Med Sport 17:496 -500, 2014  
 75. Lee JM, Kim Y, Welk GJ: Validity of consumer -based physical activity monitors. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc 46:1840 -8, 2014  
 76. Tully MA, McBride C, Heron L, et al: The validation of Fibit Zip physical activity mon itor as a 
measure of free -living physical activity. BMC Res Notes 7:952, 2014  
 77. Adam Noah J, Spierer DK, Gu J, et al: Comparison of steps and energy expenditure 
assessment in adults of Fitbit Tracker and Ultra to the Actical and indirect calorimetry. J Med Eng Technol 
37:456 -62, 2013  
 78. Kooiman TJ, Dontje ML, Sprenger SR, et al: Reliability and validity of ten consumer activity 
trackers. BMC Sports Sci Med Rehabil 7:24, 2015  
 79. Kurti AN, Dallery J: Internet -based contingency management increases walk ing in sedentary 
adults. J Appl Behav Anal 46:568 -81, 2013  
 80. Evenson KR, Goto MM, Furberg RD: Systematic review of the validity and reliability of 
consumer -wearable activity trackers. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 12:159, 2015  
 81. Wallen MP, Gomersall SR, Keating SE, et al: Accuracy of Heart Rate Watches: Implications for 
Weight Management. PLoS One 11:e0154420, 2016  
 82. de Zambotti M, Baker FC, Willoughby AR, et al: Measures of sleep and cardiac functioning 
during sleep using a multi -sensory commercially -available wristband in adolescents. Physiol Behav 158:143 -9, 
2016  
 83. Atallah L, Lo B, King R, et al: Sensor positioning for activity recognition using wearable 
accelerometers. IEEE Trans Biomed Circuits Syst 5:320 -9, 2011  
 84. Cadmus -Bertram L, Marcus BH , Patterson RE, et al: Use of the Fitbit to Measure Adherence to 
a Physical Activity Intervention Among Overweight or Obese, Postmenopausal Women: Self -Monitoring 
Trajectory During 16 Weeks. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 3:e96, 2015  
 85. Case MA, Burwick HA, Volpp KG, et al: Accuracy of smartphone applications and wearable 
devices for tracking physical activity data. JAMA 313:625 -6, 2015  
 86. Cadmus -Bertram LA, Marcus BH, Patterson RE, et al: Randomized Trial of a Fitbit -Based 
Physical Activity Intervention for Wome n. Am J Prev Med 49:414 -8, 2015  
87. Morgan NP, Graves KD, Poggi EA, et al: Implementing an expressive writing study in a cancer 
clinic. The Oncologist 13:196 -204, 2008  
 88. Smith S, Anderson -Hanley C, Langrock A, et al: The effects of journaling for women with newly 
diagnosed breast cancer. Psycho -Oncology 14:1075 -1082, 2005  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
42 
 
  89. Lepore DJ, Revenson TA, Roberts KJ, et al: Randomised controlled trial of expressive writing 
and quality of life in men and women treated for colon or rectal cancer. Psychology & H ealth, 30(3):284 -300, 
2015  
 90.  Lacetti M: Expressive Writing in Women with Advanced Breast Cancer. Oncology Nursing 
Forum 34(5), 2007  
91. Carver CS. You want to measure coping but your protocol’s too long: consider the brief COPE. Int J 
Behav Med. 1997;4 (1):92 -100. doi:10.1207/s15327558ijbm0401_6.  
92. Barnett I, Torous J, Staples P, Sandoval L. Relapse Prediction in Schizophrenia through Digital 
Phenotyping: A Pilot Study. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. Submitted.  
 
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The HOPE Trial   April 23,  2021 | v8 
 
43 
 
 8.0 APPENDIC ES 
 
Recruitment/Enrollment:  
Appendix A: Opt -out card  
Appendix B: Registration Form  
Appendix AA: Reimbursement Sheet  
 
Instruments:  
Appendix C: Participant Baseline Survey  
Appendix D: Participant Post -Baseline Survey  
Appendix E: Clinician Survey  
Appendix F:  Symptom Survey  
Appendix G: Health/Tx Information  
Appendix H: Health Care Utilization  
Appendix I: Call Log  
Appendix J: Debriefing Interviews  
Appendix Z: Medical Resource Utilization Form  
 
Interventions:  
Appendix K: HOPE App Features and Screenshots  
Appe ndix L: HOPE App Data Privacy and Security  
Appendix M: Symptom Management Content  
Appendix N: HOPE App Required Reading & Discussion  
Appendix O: HOPE App Participant Guide for Active App  
Appendix P: Summary Sheet for Participants  
Appendix Q: Fitbit Parti cipant Guide  
Appendix R: Summary Sheet for Participants, Fitbit + passive app  
Appendix S: Summary Sheet for Participants, Active app  
Appendix T: Summary Sheet for Participants, Fitbit + active app  
Appendix U: Common Fitbit problems  
Appendix V: Sample Summa ry Sheet  
Appendix W: HOPE App Participant Guide for Passive App  
Appendix X: Summary Sheet for Participants, Passive App  
Appendix Y: Encouraged to Wear Smartphone Reminder Sheet  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: T he SMART Study    April 23 , 2021 | v8 
44 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 2  
The SMART Study  
  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: T he SMART Study    April 23 , 2021 | v8 
45 
 
 SECTION 1: Study Schema for SMART (n= 30) 
 

DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
46 
 
  
SECTION 2: Body of Protocol  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1.0 Introduction, Background and Rationale………………….........…………………………………….….….….4 5 
2.0 Objectives………………….........……………………………………………….…………………….……….….4 6 
2.1 Primary Objectives………………….........…………………………….…………………….………. ….46 
2.2 Secondary Objectives………………….........……………………………………………….……… …..46 
3.0 Research Subject Selection………………….........………………………………………………….………….4 6 
3.1 Eligibility Criteria………………….........………………………………………………………….…… …46 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria………………….........……………………………………………… …….…………..4 7 
4.0 Research Subject Entry………………….........………………………………………………………….………4 7 
4.1 Subject Recruitment and Enrollment………………….........……………………………….………….4 7 
4.2 Subject Registration………………….........…………………………………………………….….… ....48 
5.0 Study Design and Methods…………………........ .…………………………………………….………………..4 8 
5.1 Design/Study Type………………….........………………………………………….…………………...4 8 
5.2 Selection of Instruments………………….........……………………………….………………………..4 8 
5.3 Description of Interventions………………………………….........…….………………………………5 3 
5.4 Data Collection…………………...... ...……………………………….………………………………….5 8 
5.5 Description of Study Process………………….........……………….………………………………….5 9 
5.6 Adverse Reactions and Management…………………........……….………………………………...6 2 
6.0 Statistical Analysis………………….........……………………………………….……………………………....6 4 
6.1 Primary and Seco ndary Endpoints………………….........……………….……………………………6 4 
6.2 Sample Size and Statistical Power………………….........……………….……………………………6 4 
6.3 Analysis Plan…….............................................................................................................. ......... ...64 
7.0 References................................................................................................................... .............................6 6 
8.0 Appendices................................................................................... .............................................................6 9 
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
47 
 
 1.0 INTRODUCTION , BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
The goal of chemotherapy is to reduce symptoms and extend survival. Yet, oncologists’ methods of 
monitoring patients’ symptoms are underdeveloped. S tudies show that clinicians consistently miss more than 
half of cancer patients’ symptoms, even in clinical trials that mandate collection of treatment toxicities.1,3  
Similarly, oncologists’ estimates of patients’ performance statuses are highly subjective, yet key determinants of 
patients’ eligibility for clinical trials, chemotherapy, and hospice. Oncologists’ performance status assessments 
are only moderately correlated with one another4,5 and are even less reliable when compared with patients’ 
estimates .6-8 This may be because clinicians see patients at fixed time points that are frequently tied to 
chemotherapy infusions, when patie nts have often already recovered from their last treatment. The moments 
between visits —when patients are at the highest likelihood of experiencing treatment toxicities —are far more 
likely to contain more meaningful data about patients’ symptoms and activit y levels.  
Integration of patient -reported outcomes (PROs) into clinical practice is an increasingly promising strategy 
for improving patients’ symptoms, communication, and clinical outcomes .9,10 Basch et al.  recentl y demonstrated 
that for patients with metastatic cancers, the use of a web -based system to assess PROs, combined with 
automated clinical alerts, resulted in better health -related quality of life, fewer emergency room visits and 
hospitalizations, and superi or quality -adjusted survival, compared with usual care .10 However, this study and 
others have predominantly assessed patients during clinic visits.11 A key limitation to this  approach is that it 
relies upon a patient’s retrospective recall of events. Our research will be among the first to produce  real time  
and real world  assessments of cancer patients’ symptoms and activity levels within their daily lives.  
Smartphones offer an accessible, low -cost method for conducting real time  and real world  assessments of 
patients' symptoms and activity levels. A study conducted by members of our team demonstrated that patients 
with major depressive disorder used a smartphone app to answer  questions from the Patient Health 
Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9) 3 times per day over a 30 -day period with >75% adherence.12 Patients’ scores were 
strongly correlated with standard paper -based surveys, but 3 points higher on average (reflecting more 
distress), and patients reported h igher rates of suicidal ideation. We subsequently adapted this platform to 
assess symptoms using the PRO -CTCAE; risk -stratify patient responses; provide tailored feedback to patients 
with low -risk symptoms; and notify patients and clinicians of high -risk s ymptoms.13 Preliminary data from a pilot 
in patients with gynecologic cancers at Dana -Farber Cancer Institute suggests that patients are able to use the 
app, have favorable impressions of it, and high adherence rates. Moreover, we have detected several clinically 
significant symptoms (e.g. severe vomiting, abdominal pain) which were not captured in routine clinical practice, 
and prevented emergency department visits by addressing them real -time.14 Smartphones offer new strategies 
for assessing patients’ symptoms, identifying toxicities, and intervening to reduce suffering.  
Additionally, smartphones have the functionality to monitor social and behavioral markers of health and 
illness remotely using passively collected data (without patient involvement) to detect temporal changes and 
behavioral anomalies that can indicate the onset of clinically significant symptoms. Recently, a study conducted 
by Barnett and Onnela demonstrated  the use of a smartphone platform, Beiwe, to detect relapses in patients 
with schizophrenia by identifying anomalies in their pre -relapse behaviors, including changes in their mobility 
and phone use patterns. This approach did not require active patient pa rticipation or the introduction of new 
technologies. Data were collected from participants’ personal smartphones, making these devices an ideal and 
scalable technology for long -term remote monitoring with minimal participant burden.  
Like smartphones, wear able accelerometers offer another novel means for collecting real world data to 
objectively measure patients’ performance statuses. Patients’ retrospective reports of activity levels are often 
inaccurate or imprecise. Without accurate information, oncologi sts may have difficulty objectively assessing 
patients’ performance statuses, and may underestimate patients’ symptom burdens and chemotherapy -related 
toxicities. Indeed, oncologist estimates of patients’ performance statuses are only moderat ely correlated  with 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
48 
 
 one another4,5 and weakly correlated with patient estimates,6-8 but improve when clinicians and patients 
participate in “shared” reporting of patients’ toxicities and p erformance statuses.15 
Wearable accelerometers are devices that track users’ energy expenditures, the amount and intensity of 
physical activity, and sedentary behavior. They offer cost -effective, user -friendly, and objective measurements 
of patients’ free living patterns. A few studies have piloted wearable accelerometers in adult cancer patients 
undergoing stem cell transplants (HCT) or treatment for colorectal, gastrointestinal, breast, and lung cancers.16-
19 Results from one study of adult patients undergoing HCT who wore accelerometers over an 8 week period 
found that patients’ reports of severe symptoms, impaired physical health, and restrictions in activities of daily 
living were associated with statistically significant decrements in objectively measured steps, suggesting that 
this may be an independent, quantitative measure of quality of life and patient performance status.16 In this 
study of 32 patients undergoing HCT over a 4 -week period patients’ steps were  significantly associated with an 
increased symptom burden.16 Similar results were observed in a population of patients receiving conc urrent 
chemoradiation.20 We expect that symptoms are likely to impact the amount of walking that patients can do and 
will therefore provide an independent measure of both patients’ performance status and symptom bur den. 
The overall goals of this study are to test the combination of two smartphone research platform s, the 
SMART app and the Beiwe app,  and a wearable accelerometer for use in NCI Community Oncology Research 
Program (NCORP) sites  to improve cancer patients ’ quality of life and symptom management. The SMART 
Study (Symptom Management and Reporting Toxicities) has a single -arm research design and aims to assess 
feasibility, acceptability and perceived  efficacy of a wearable accelerometer and two smartphone app s in 30 
patients receiving chemotherapy to treat recurrent gynecologic cancers. The SMART intervention refers to the 
combination of both smartphone apps (SMART app and Beiwe app) and the accelerometer (Fitbit). The SMART 
app is the technology that is activ ely collecting symptom reporting information from patients (e.g. patients are 
receiving surveys, recording their symptoms daily, and receiving tailored symptom management materials on 
their phone in response). The Beiwe app is the technology involved in th e passive data collection of 
participants’ symptoms (GPS and accelerometer data) without their involvement.  
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  
2.1 Primary Objectives  
To conduct a single -arm study to assess feasibility  and acceptability of two smartphone app s and a wearable 
accelerometer in 30 patients with gynecologic cancers  receiving chemotherapy . 
• Feasibility will be defined as: 1) ≥50% approach to enroll rate, and 2) ≥50% 3 -month adherence rates  to 
both smartphone app s and the wearable accelerometer . 
• Acceptability will be defined as: ≥ 60% of study participants would recommend  the intervention to other 
patients; and <30% of patients rate the study as burdensome or wish they had not participated.  
 
2.2 Secondary Objectives:  
Assess the perceived efficacy of the smartphone app s and wearable accelerometer and estimate outcome 
parameters for this population  
• Perceived  efficacy will be measur ed by  qualitative analysis : We will conduct debriefing interviews with a 
subset of participants and clinicians to obtain information about the acceptability of the intervention and 
recommendations for any modifications to improve any aspects of recruitment , enrollment, education, the 
timing of study assessments, graphical display s of information, fitness tracker use, and the app s that could 
be improved.  
• Outcome parameters will be estimated by quantitative analysis: We will descriptively summarize the 
distri bution of toxicities and clinical outcomes at baseline and at 3 -month follow -up.  
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
49 
 
 3.0 RESEARCH SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
3.1 Eligibility Criteria  
• Women ≥18 years of age  who p lan to receive chemotherapy to treat recurrent, incurable gynecologic 
cancer (i.e., ovarian, fallopian, primary peritoneal, uterine, or  cervical  cancer) that has recurred despite 
≥1 prior treatment . 
• Own a smart phone  (Andro id or iOS) . 
• Capable of downloading and running the study app s.  
• Can read and provide informed consent in English . 
• Does not have cognitive or visual impairments that would precl ude use of the app s.  
 
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
• Patients will be ineligible if they are part icipating in an investigational drug treatment trial that requires 
structured symptom or toxicity reporting at the time of enrollment.  
• Patients with seve re cognitiv e impairments or who appear too weak, emotionally distraught, agitated or 
ill to participat e, as judged by either the research study staff or an oncology provider, will be excluded.  
• Patients who are unable to provide informed consent in English will be exc luded because the 
smartphone app s are only available in English at this time.  
• Children and  young adults up to age 17 will be excluded because the diagnosis of metastatic 
gynecologic cancers in this age group is rare and the proposed instruments  are not de signed for people 
of those ages.  
• Patients with a life expectancy of ≤3 months, as determin ed by their oncology providers, will be 
excluded since they cannot participate in all of the required data collection.  
 
4.0 RESEARCH SUBJECT ENTRY  
 
4.1 S ubject Recr uitment and Enrollment  
We will enro ll patients from community oncology sites. Study staff, oncology providers, and clinic staff will 
identify patients who may be eligible for the study. Prior to initiating recruitment at each site, we will use a  
rigorous, stakeholder -driven process21 to ensure that the app s and fitness tracker can be integrated into 
practice without disrupting the workflow or causing patient distress. For example, for a similar study using  the 
adapte d smartphone app and wearable accel erometers in women with gynecologic cancers at DFCI, our 
recruitment protocol includes: 1) reviewing clinicians’ weekly schedules to identify potentially eligible patients 
for study enrollment, 2) contacting cl inicians fo r permission to approach potentiall y eligible patients, and 3) 
introducing the study to the patient at the next clinic visit (e.g., describing the study, reviewing the consent 
form, answering questions, and obtaining written informed consent) be fore we enr oll each patient. While this 
protoc ol has been successful at DFCI, we recognize that each clinical practice setting is unique and will work 
with practices to develop site -specific study recruitment and enrollment protocols.  
4.11 Screening & Recr uitment  
Prior to obtaining informed consent, s tudy staff will determine whether patients are eligible for the study. 
Study staff will identify patients with recurrent gynecologic cancers that have progressed through one or 
more treatments and who are plann ing to rece ive chemotherapy. Site -specific pro cedures will be 
developed to identify eligible patients, which may in volve review of medical records  and/or discussion with 
a patient’s oncology providers. A HIPAA waiver requesting permission to review the PHI  of potenti ally 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
50 
 
 eligible patients has been sub mitted to justify this process. If a patient’s oncology provider deems the 
patient ineligible or too distressed to participate in a clinical study at this time, the patient will not be 
approached for inclusion.  PHI obtain ed in the context of study recruitm ent will not be shared with anyone 
outside the study team and patients’ oncology providers.  For all enrolled participants, sites  will document 
confirmation of participant eligibility by their providers.  
   
4.12 Informed Consent  
If a patient agrees to lear n more about the study, study staff will describe the study, review the consent 
form, answer any questions, and provide contact information for the study team. The staff member will 
encourage patients to take t heir time i n deciding whether they want to par ticipate in the study or not.  
If a patient is interested in participating, she will enter the informed consent process , which will include 
explaining how and why the current research study is being conducted, the study r isks and benefits, the 
potential ti me commitment involved , and the option to g ive permission to be contacted for future research 
studies . The patient will learn  what type of information will be collected from the smartphone application s 
and acce lerometer  and how these data are monitored. Th e staff member will reiterate that the data 
collected are not a part of the patient’s standard treatment and will underscore the importance placed upon 
maintaining patient confidentiality and a patient’s rights  while invo lved in the study, including the ri ght to 
withdraw participation at any time for any reason during the study because participation is completely 
voluntary.  
The informed consent form will contain a section dedicated to explaining what constitute s PHI and h ow 
this information will be protect ed as confidential per HIPAA guidelines. The consent form will also provide 
contact information for both the Principal Investigator (PI) as well as the Office for the Protection of 
Research Subjects  (or analogo us body at local sites) . All informed consent processes will adhere to the 
policies set forth by the Institutional Review Board. Signed informed consent forms will be stored in locked 
file cabinet s to maintain the privacy of all study participants.   
If a patient is unsure if she would like to partici pate in the study, she will be offered the consent form to 
review and the contact information of study staff. If the patient does not contact staff after a few days and 
further contact is appropriate, study sta ff will contact the patient. If the patient de cides to participate, a staff 
member will engage in the  informed consent  process with the patient . If a patient is not interested, the staff 
member will thank her for considering, and reassure the patient that the process  will have no impact on her 
clinica l care. No further interactions will occur with patients who either decline or prove ineligible for the 
study.  
 
4.2 Subject Registration  
After informed consent is obtained, participants will be assigned a uniq ue study ID and registered to the study 
in Red Cap. Participants will be retrospectively registered in OnCore, the Clinical Trial Management System for 
Dana -Farber  in a de -centralized fashion . Registrations may occur up to 30 days after consent is signed pe r 
REGIST -101.  
5.0 STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS  
 
5.1 Design/Study Type  
In a single -arm study of patients at community oncology  sites in the United States, we will em ploy convenience 
sampling from 30 patients who meet inclusion criteria.  Our analyses involve es timations o f feasibility, 
acceptability, and p reliminary efficacy. In addition, we will assess safety outcomes, toxicity scale scores, 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
51 
 
 missing data, and patient/physician feedback. We will not conduct formal hypothesis testing in this small 
sample.  
5.2 Sel ection of I nstruments  
 
5.21 Interviews and Sur veys 
The following measures will be used in the study interviews and surveys, including the Participant 
Baseline Interview (Appendix 14), Participant Post -Baseline Interview (Appendix 15), and SMART App  
Survey s (Appendix 16). Table 1 outlines their distrib ution across the study instruments.  
 
5.21a Global Health Status: EQ -5D-5L 
The EQ -5D is a standardized measurement of health status that has been used in a wide range of 
health conditions and treatments, includi ng cancer p atient populations.23 The EQ -5D-5L is the most 
recent 5 -level version that has proven validity and reliability in a range of patient groups w ith chronic  
diseases24 and cancer.25 It is a 5 -item questionnaire (measuring mobility, self -care, usual activities,  
pain/discomfort, and anxiety/depression. Each dimension h as three le vels of perceived problems: 1) no 
problems, 2) slight problems, 3) moderate problems 4) severe problems, and 5) extreme problems. 
Patients check the statement level that best describes their current health status in each dimension, 
which are the n scored to  generate a patient’s unique health  state. In the EQ -VAS, patients report a 
single index value of how good or bad their current health state is on a visual scale that ranges from 
worst imaginable at zero to best imaginable at one hundred. The EQ -5D-5L can be administered with 
little to no g uidance and takes only a few minutes to complete. Upon scoring, the EQ -5D produces a 
composite score between 0 -1 (multiplied by 100 to generate a number between 0 -100), which 
represents general health status, n ormalized f or the US population.26 Lower scores represent worse 
quality of life, and a change of ≥6 is clinically significant in US cancer populations.27 
 
5.21b PROMIS Global -10 and PROMIS Physical Function short form 6b  
The PROMIS Global -10 is a br ief measure of patient health status that is not disease specific .28,29 It 
consists of 10 questions; e.g. “In general, how would you rate your physical health?” Items are scored 
on a Likert scale of 1 -5, where highe r scores indicate better health, except for  pain which is measured 
on a 10 -point scale. Standardized T -scores (range 0 -100) are calculated for the global physical and 
mental health scales, and higher scores indicate better health. The full scale takes appr oximately 2 -3 
minutes to complete and will be used in the baseline and post -baseline surve ys, and in the SMART 
app. 
The PROMIS Physical  function (PF) 6b is a brief, 6 -item measure used to characterize patients’ 
overall health, level of physical disability,  and general well -being. The PROMIS PF 6b has been 
validated in 4,840 cancer patients across a range of ages, racial/ethnicity groups, stages and cancer 
types, and normalized for the US population. It has high reliability, minimal floor effects, and can 
precisely measure meaningful differences in functional status, disease burden, and comorbidities.  The 
full scale takes approximately 1 -2 minutes to complete and will be used in the baseline and post -
baseline surveys, and in the SMART app. 
 
5.21c Performance Status: ECOG PS  
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status (PS) assessment is a 
standard measurement that oncologists often use to assess a patient’s current functional level and 
eligibility for clinical trials. The scale ranges from 0 to 5 and the criteria for each grade is as follows: 0 = 
Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction; 1 = Restricted in physically 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
52 
 
 strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or sedentary natu re, e.g., light 
house work, office work; 2 = Ambulatory and capable of all self -care but unable to carry out any work 
activities; up and about more than 50% of waking hours; 3 = Capable of only limited self -care; confined 
to bed or chair more than 50% of w aking hours; 4 = Completely disabled; cannot carry on any self -care; 
totally confined to bed or chair; 5 = Dead.30  
The ECOG PS will allow clinicians and part icipants to provide a standard evaluation of the 
participant’s performance status over time and with minimal burden. Participants will use the patient 
self-report version that has been used successfully in a study with cancer patients. We expect that it wi ll 
take 1 -2 minutes to answer the question .31 
 
5.21d Depression: modified PHQ -9 
The Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9) is a validated self -report measure that assesses nine 
depressive symptoms using Diagnostic a nd Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition 
(DSM -IV) diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder. It is used to screen, diagnose, and monitor 
depressive symptoms32 and has been administered/demon strated validity in cancer patients,33,34 as well 
as smartphone apps.12 Respondents report if each symptom has bothered them “not at all,” “several 
days,” “more than half the days,” or “nearly every day” during the previous two weeks.35 We will not 
include question 9, which assesses suicidal i deation, since access to 24 -hour psychiatry services may 
not be available at all sites. We expect that it will take participants no more than 3 -5 minutes to 
complete  the 8 questions .  
 
5.21e Symptoms Assessment: PRO -CTCAE  
The Patient -Reported Outcomes Ver sion of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events 
(PRO -CTCAE) is a patient -centered, standardized self -report measure that enables pati ents to report 
symptoms and AEs .10,11,36,37 The PRO -CTCAE  has demonstra ted validity, reliability, and 
responsiveness in a large heterogeneous United States sample of cancer patients undergoing 
treatment .37 Ten PRO -CTCAE items that are salient to gynecologic cancers will be collected, i ncluding: 
abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, constipation, diarrhea, peripheral neuropathy, anxiety, depression, 
dizziness and fatigue.  
The PRO -CTCAE items use conditional branching for AEs that contain multiple attributes. For 
example, if a participant re ports a symptom, she is asked to quantify the severity and the extent to 
which the symptom interfered with her daily activities; if she does not report a symptom, these items are 
skipped. We anticipate that participants will complete this measure in about 3-5 minutes  at baseline and 
the end of the study . Patients will also report their symptoms daily through the SMART app. 
 
5.21f Anxiety: GAD -7 
The Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7 -Item (GAD -7) is a reliable and validated self -report measure 
that assesses GAD.  Respondents rate how often they have been bothered by 7 anxiety symptoms over 
the past two weeks using the following scale: 0 = Not at all; 1 = Several Days; 2 = Over half the days; 
and 3 = Nearly every day. Respondents also answer a question to assess th e duration of their anxiety 
symptoms. Responses are tallied and the total score indicates the presence and severity of GAD.38  
The measure has since been validated in the general population39 and was the recommended 
evaluative measure for anxiety in adult cancer patients in the 2014 American Society of Clinical 
Oncology  (ASCO) Guideline Adaptation.40 We anticipate that it will take participants approximately 3 -5 
minutes to complete.  
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
53 
 
 5.21g Overall Quality of Life and Physical Health:  FACIT -PAL 
Patients’ quality of life (QoL) will  be assessed with Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness 
Therapy – Palliative Care, which has demonstrated internal consistency, reliability and validity.41 The 
measure is divided into four primary QoL domains: ph ysical well -being (7 -items), social/family well -
being (7 -items), emotional well -being (6 -items), and functional well -being (7 -items). It also includes 12 
additional items that are specific to palliative care priorities for patients with chronic illnesses s uch as 
cancer.  Participants will rate each symptom over the past 7 days as: 0) Not at all; 1) A little bit; 2) 
Somewhat, 3) Quite a bit, and 4) Very much. Subscales can be analyzed separately or aggregated to 
produce a total score. Patients will complete this at baseline and the end of the study.  Through the 
SMART app, patients will also answer a brief weekly survey, Functional Assessment of Cancer 
Therapy -General ( FACT -G7), which serves as a  rapid assessment of patients’ top -rated symptoms and 
concerns  regarding cancer treatment. This measure allows physicians to quickly identify and address a 
broad range of issues that may affect a patient’s quality of life .  
 
5.21h Literacy Measures: Health Literacy and Numeracy & Mobile Communication Competence  
Health l iterac y42 and numeracy  and mobile communication competence43 will be collected for all 
participants at baseline. The “comfort with technology” and “mobile pre ference” subscales of the Mobile 
Communication Competence scale will be used because they assess factors directly impacting patients 
in our study, who will be asked to acclimate to and consistently use an accelerometer and/or 
smartphone app s. The mobile co mmunication preference and comfort with technology subscales 
individually demonstrated internal reliability, consistency and validity. We estimate that it will take 
participants approximately 5 minutes to complete all of the literacy measures.  
 
5.21i Demog raphic Information  
Basic demographic information will be collected for all participants, including: age, marital status, 
race/ethnicity, education, household structure, income, and employment. The questions will only take a 
few minutes to complete.  
 
5.21j  Smartphone Usage Questions  
Data on smartphone -specific usage habits will be collected for all participants. Participants will be 
asked a total of four questions: average daily time spent using smartphone, purpose of using 
smartphone, comfort using smartp hone apps, and frequency of using smartphone apps. We estimate 
that it will take participants approximately 2 minutes to complete these questions.  
 
5.21k Brief COPE  
The Brief COPE is a 28 -item measure developed to assess a broad range of coping 
responses.46 The Brief COPE has been validated in several populations including breast cancer 
patients and community samples.46 Subscales of the Brief COPE include use of emotional support, 
religion, and self -distraction, and individual subscales can be used independ ently. We will use the 
denial, behavioral disengagement, self -distraction, active coping, use of emotional support, use of 
instrumental support, positive reframing, planning, acceptance, and religion subscales of the Brief 
COPE. The Brief COPE will be admi nistered to patients during the  participant baseline interview  
 
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
54 
 
  
Table 1. Distribution of measures during Baseline and Post -Baseline Interviews .  
 
 
 Baseline 
Interview  Post-
baseline 
Interview  SMART App  
Survey s MEASURE  PRO -CTCAE  
  
  
   
PROMIS Global -10 and 
Physical Function 6b  
 
  
  
ECOG PS  
  
   
PHQ -9 
  
   
GAD -7 
  
   
EQ-5D-5L 
  
   
FACIT -PAL 
  
   
Brief COPE  
    
Health Literacy & Numeracy  
    
Mobile Communication 
Competence  
   
Smartphone Usage Questions  
    
Demographic Info  
    
Healthcare Utilization   
   
 
5.22 Medical Chart Abstractions  and Patient -Reported Medical Resource Utilization  
 
5.22a Health/Treatment Information  
Participants’ medical charts will be reviewed to abstract health and treatment related information, 
including disease site, comorbid health conditions,47 number of prior chemotherapy regimens, and time 
since diagnosis. Data will be recorded in the Health/Tx Info form (Appendix 17). 
 
5.22b Health Care Utilization  
At baseline participants will be given a patient diary to record all health care utilization that occurs 
during the study period, including hospitalizations, admissions to an intensive care unit, emergency 
room and urgent care visits, and oncology visits. This form was developed by the NRG Cancer Care 
Delivery Research Group because of recognition that participants often receive care outside of NRG 
sites that cannot be captured by the medical record. Clinical  research coordinators will be asked to 
verify medical care that happened within a site -affiliated medical center. P articipants’ medical charts will 
be reviewed to abstract health care utilization data during enrollment, including chemotherapy regimen 
and treatments, palliative care visits, emergency department visits, hospitalizations, and hospice 
referrals. If a participant dies while enrolled in the study, the date of death will also be recorded. Data 
will be recorded in the Health Care Utilization form (Appendix 18). Additionally, participants will be 
asked about whether they (or their informal caregiver) needed to take time off from work, how far they 
traveled for treatment, and for a rough estimate of their out -of-pocket expenditures to capture some of  
the burden associated with cancer care.  
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
55 
 
  
5.22c Call Log  
If the data is available, study staff will abstract information about phone calls to their providers 
during a participant’s enrollment and record data in the Call Log  (Appendix 19). Data collected for each 
call will include: date/time, incoming/outgoing, left message, duration in minutes, reason for the call, 
symptoms documented, and the outcome.  
 
5.23 Debriefing Interviews  
Debriefing Interviews will be conducted with a purposively sampled subset of  participants , 
approximately 15 across all sites . The purpose of these interviews is to obtain information about the 
acceptability of the interventions and recommendations for modifications to improve any aspect of 
recruitment, enrollment, education, timin g of study assessments, the graphical display of information, and 
the smartphone app s. The interview guide can be found in Appendix 20. In accordance with qualitative 
interviewing procedures, additional themes and topics that arise over the course of the s tudy may be 
explored further in the debriefing interview, in addition to the list of questions in the interview guide. Study 
staff will aim to administer debriefing interviews to the first few patients enrolled at each site and a n 
additional  purposively sa mpled subset of patients; debriefing interviews will be conducted for approximately 
15 patients total.  Study staff will  also solicit debriefing feedback from  clinicians who are serving as co -
investigators on the study  and site research staff who are managi ng the clinician dashboard . If site policy 
permits, p articipating co -investigators and site staff will receive gift cards in appreciation of the time they 
have dedicated to study debriefing.  The feedback provided by co -investigators and site staff will be used to 
further refine integration of the study into clinical workflow and improve the effectiveness of the study.  
Additionally, debriefing interviews will be audiotaped in order to ensure that the interviewer adequately 
captures all feedback from patients , co-investigators , and site staff . The consent forms for the study include 
information that the debriefing interview will be audiotaped, and we will verbally request permission from 
patients , co-investigators , and site staff  to audiotape the debriefing in terview before beginning the 
interview. Verbal permission will be documented on RedCap. We will not administe r a debriefing interview 
to any person  who does not consent to being audiotaped during the debriefing interview. All audio 
recordings of study sess ions will be stored in secure, restricted -access locations . Recordings will be tied 
only to a study ID number, and the only document s linking the patient’s study ID to identifiable information 
are in a restricted -access file stored securely on restricted -access folders . Audiotapes of debriefing 
interviews will be transcribed for further analysis using a DFCI -approved, HIPAA -compliant transcription 
vendor  or locally at Dana -Farber . All patient identifiable information will be removed when the audio 
recording s are transcribed. Audio recordings of debriefing interviews will be destroyed when analyses are 
complete.  
 
5.3 Description of Interventions  
The SMART intervention is a mobile health intervention that consists of two smartphone app s, and a 
wearable acceler ometer. For this study, the smartphone app s are named the “SMART app” and “Beiwe 
app” and the accelerometer is the Fitbit Charge 3.  
 
5.31 Smartphone app s 
The SMART study intervention is based on two iOS and Android smartphone applications, the SMART 
app and Beiwe app , which  run on participants’ personal smartphones and collect information about their 
health and behaviors. The SMART app employs  “active” data which require direct participant 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
56 
 
 involvement —for example  survey responses.  The Beiwe app collects  “passive” data , which are generated 
without any direct participant involvement —for example, GPS or accelerometry.  
 The “Beiwe,” app was conceived and designed by one of the co -investigators, Dr. Jukka -Pekka 
Onnela, at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public H ealth. Zagaran, Inc., located in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, built the software. One of the advantages of the Beiwe app is that it protects identifying 
data through hashing, and all data are encrypted while on the device, in transit, and stored on the serve r. 
Once collected by the phone, raw data are encrypted and securely transmitted to an instance of Amazon 
S3 for storage and later retrieval for analysis.  
In a prior pilot study, Dr. Onnela tested the app in 13 patients with major depressive disorder. 
Partic ipants installed the app on their personal smartphones and completed a self -report survey of PHQ -9 
items 3 times per day with >75% adherence to the app over a 30 -day period.12 Participants scores were 
strongly correlated with paper -based surveys administered in clinic (Pearson linear correlation coefficient 
0.84) but were 3.0 points higher on average (i.e. indicating more distress), and participants were much 
more likely to report significant suicidal ideation.  
Since this publication, Dr. Onnela’s lab has developed a more sophi sticated system that features a 
web-based research study portal, a customizable Android and iOS smartphone app, Amazon Web 
Services S3 database, and data modeling and analysis tools. The app collects many different types of 
sensor data and administers surv eys. There are currently several  IRB approved protocols across local 
centers that are utilizing the Beiwe application in research, including  Dana -Farber Cancer Institute,  Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard University (Faculty of Arts and Science s), McLean Hospital, and 
Massachusetts General Hospital. Several studies have begun enrolling patients or healthy controls, and 
the user experience has been overwhelmingly positive. In addition, there are no signs that adherence is 
condition -specific to da te. 
We subsequently adapted this platform to assess symptoms using the PRO -CTCAE; risk -stratify patient 
responses; provide tailored feedback to patients with low -risk symptoms; and notify patients and clinicians 
of high -risk symptoms. Preliminary data from  a pilot in patients with gynecologic cancers at Dana -Farber 
Cancer Institute suggests that patients are able to use the app, have favorable impressions of it, and high 
adherence rates. Moreover, using this app we detected several clinically significant sy mptoms (e.g. severe 
vomiting, abdominal pain) which were not captured in routine clinical practice, and prevented emergency 
department visits by addressing them real -time.14 
The Beiwe platform has the functionality to evaluate patients’ health behaviors and activities  by 
collecting either  active or passive data , or both concurrently . Through previous research , we discovered the 
research platform did not have a clin ician-facing interface to enable tracking of individual  symptoms in real -
time, or a clinician dashboard to enable study staff to monitor a population of patients simultaneously. This 
meant that study participants’ symptoms could be downloaded once daily in to a pdf for the full population, 
and this was format was infeasible for a multi -site study. Moreover, patients reported that the surveys were 
“not engaging,” and Beiwe would not be easily adapted to a more engaging format.  
  Based upon these experiences , the study team at Dana -Farber concluded that there was a significant 
need to develop a better patient - and clinician facing interface for engagement and population 
management  before launching a multi -site trial . As a result, the decision was made to seek o ut a different 
technology platform that could meet these needs. Once an appropriate platform was identified, the decision 
was made to turn off the  “active” data collection features of the Beiwe app, with a plan to continue using 
Beiwe for “passive ” data co llection . We then partnered with a different c ompany to design a new 
smartphone app on a different platform for active data collection. For the SMART app redesign, we 
partnered with  RMDY Health, a n established  commercial digital health provider that creat es mobile health 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
57 
 
 and web programs , including  interventions for medication management, weight loss, prevention, 
adherence, and lifestyle modification programs.  
In collaboration with RMDY, Dana -Farber study staff were able to design a custom “white -label” di gital 
health platform catered specifically to the patient population involved in this research study. The RMDY 
platform is comprised of three main components : 1) an app where patients can answer surveys (i.e. NCI 
PRO -CTCAE survey items)  and receive symptom  management advice tailored to symptom severity, 2) a 
web-based clinician dashboard where staff track patients’ symptoms and steps, and communicate with 
patients , and 3) an admin istrative web site where program content can be managed and generated.   
Throug h the SMART app, patients track their symptoms daily through surveys and then receive tailored 
symptom management advice based on their reported symptoms. Patients can also track their steps, sleep 
and heart  rate, and communicate with their study team dire ctly through the app. The SMART platform also 
includes a clinician dashboard and admin site where nurses, providers, and other study team members can 
login to view and manage patients enrolled to the study. The console also allows study staff to monitor th e 
severity and frequency of symptoms patients are reporting throughout the day , view patient steps, collect 
patient survey response data, send reminders to patients, and assign program content.  
The Beiwe app will be used to passively collect information a bout participants. Passive data collection 
is essential because mobile health interventions that require significant patient involvement tend to have 
higher rates of attrition, and patients’ illness may interfere with their ability to report their symptoms . It is 
essential to develop an intervention that can be utilized to detect patients’ symptoms or anomalies in their 
behaviors with  minimal  involvement.  Rapid identification and management of symptoms can improve 
patients’ quality of life and other disease  related outcomes. We anticipate the remote monitoring of patient 
symptoms using both the SMART app and Beiwe app will allow us to better understand cancer patients' 
behaviors and relate them to clinically significant patient symptoms and  outcomes.  The int ervention 
combination may also provide a method for better identifying clinically meaningful anomalies in cancer 
patients' behaviors.  
 
5.31a Software and Data Collection Features  
The SMART app employs similar  features and data collection methods used in the aforementioned 
studies and protocols. Please see  SMART App Features and Screenshots : Patient Guide  (Appendix 5) 
for descriptions of the app’s features, including: log -in screen, symptom management advice, 
connecting to Fitbit device/Apple Health/Google  Fit, notifications, surveys, the “Call My Clinician” 
function  so that patients can contact their clinical teams without searching for numbers , and general 
app navigation .  
As noted above, t he SMART app collects active data from  participant s’ survey respon ses and 
wearable accelerometer, connected to the platform with patient permission . Active data are collected 
while a patient is using the app (e.g. responding to survey questions). Information regarding data 
collection and privacy measures for the SMART ap p is located in  SMART App Data Privacy and 
Security  (Appendix 7). The Beiwe smartphone app collects passive data from participants ’ phone 
usage , with participant consent,  continuously without patient input. Participant interaction with the 
Beiwe app consis ts of installing the app and keeping it running in the background of their phone; all 
data is collected in the background. Specifically, as noted in the Beiwe  App Data Privacy and Security  
(Appendix 10) the app collects passive data, including: mobility tr aces, consisting of flights (linear 
segments of movement) and pauses (times of no movement) which are constructed from GPS data ; 
and summary statistics of phone communication (calls and text messages) patterns, simple examples 
being the total number of com munication events in a time period (e.g., 1 week), the total number of 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
58 
 
 communication partners,  and reciprocity of communication (defined as the difference between outgoing 
communication volume and incoming communication volume).   
Since passive data collect ion does not require participant input, the study team has put a safeguard 
in place for the Beiwe app to ensure participants log into their app at least once a week. Participants 
will receive bi -weekly push notifications from the Beiwe app containing a pos itive affirmation. The brief 
quote will serve as a reminder for participants to log in to t he Beiwe app and make sure that it is still 
running properly on their phone.   
 
5.31b Symptom Management  
The SMART app is designed to collect and assess participants’  toxicities and symptoms on 
chemotherapy treatment in between visits with their clinician. Participants report the severity of their 
symptoms via a brief in -app survey of PRO -CTCAE items. The app then determines a symptom’s risk 
level and necessary respons e, which is either to provide no intervention, tailored symptom 
management advice, or an alert to call the clinician. Figure 3 provides a more detailed overview of this 
process.  
The symptom response criteria and the Symptom Management Content  (Appendix 2) were 
developed by research staff in cooperation with the oncology providers at Dana -Farber. The study PI, 
who is also a practicing gynecologic oncologist, collated reputable and trusted sources, such as ASCO, 
the National Cancer Institute, the American Can cer Society, Cancer Care Ontario, and the Dana -Farber  
Cancer Institute , to create the content for each symptom, which includes: symptom management 
advice , questions to ask the clinical team , and multimedia content for participants to actively engage in 
symptom management practices . The content and response criteria were then reviewed and refined by 
study investigators, research staff, and gynecologic oncology clinicians to produce the final versions.  
If, over the course of the study, participants identify a  need to access static versions of the patient 
education materials outside of the smartphone app, the study team will create a website which will 
contain static patient education materials about the symptoms that are targeted in the SMART App. 
This website  will present evidence -based information on symptom education and symptom 
management. Some of the content on the website will mirror the content in the symptom management 
app, while other information will be housed only on the website. The purpose of the w ebsite would be  to 
provide a centralized location for patients to find symptom education and symptom management 
information at any time they might be experiencing low -level symptoms. Content will be created by the 
study PI (a practicing medical oncologist at Dana -Farber Cancer Institute) and the study team, and will 
include information from trusted sources listed above .  
 
5.32 Wearable Fitness Tracker  
 
The Fitbit Charge 3 is an accelerometer that is worn on the wrist and tracks users’ heart rate  
continuousl y in addition to steps, distance, and calories.  The addition of an optimal heart rate sensor  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
59 
 
 enables monitoring of the time that the tracker i s being worn ( i.e. adherence).48,49 Wrist -worn activity  
trackers have bee n shown to accurately measure heart rate when com pared with 
electrocardiography,50,51 have good test -retest reliability (intraclass cor relations of 0.75 -0.95)52 but over 
coun t steps compared with  the gold standard ActivPAL in free -living conditions due to the variabili ty in 
limb-specific activities.53 One of  the advantages of the Fitbit Charge 3 is it allows for close monitoring of 
adherence to the device over time  because of its continuous measurement of heart rate . Additionally, 
the device has a long battery life and looks like a  traditional wristwatch which may make participants 
more likely  to adhere to the device  when compared with other wearable fitness trackers . The 
disadvantages  include: it may be less accurate  if the participant is dependent upon a device for 
ambulating (e.g., cane or  walker) or wears the device on her non -dominant arm. 51, 54 The Fitbit data will 
be stored on participants’ devices and smartphones, consistent with the commercially available 
devices, and also uploaded to the RMDY SMART site .,  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
60 
 
 Figure 3. Symptom classification and response in the SMART app intervention  
Participants report  the severity of  symptoms using PRO -
CTCAE items with conditional branching  
No symptoms reported  
No information is given  Symptom management  
Presents advice on how to manage 
the symptom at home; includes links 
to qu estions to ask the clinical team 
at the next visit  Alert to call clinician  
Notifies the pa rticipan t that the 
sympto m is severe and requires 
immediate medical  management ; 
alert instruc ts the participant to hit the 
“Call My Clinician” button  
 The SMART ap p prompts participants to complete quali ty 
of life, phys ical health, and symptom questions   
For each symptom, the app classifies the intervention 
needed based upon the reported severi ty:  
a) No intervention  
b) Symptom management  
c) Alert to call clinician  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
61 
 
 5.4 Data Collection  
Table 2 specifies the instrument and intervention data collection  timelines during each study phase. 
Intervention data will be collected continuously during enrollment . 
 
Table 2. Instrument data collection across study timeline  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data obtained via interviews, surveys and chart abstractions will be stored on the Harvard REDCap server  
and hard copies will be stored in secure, restricted -access locations . Data obtained via the smartphone  apps 
and Fitbit will be stored on the RMDY  and B eiwe research platform s.  
RMDY follows industry -adopted best practices and regulatory requirements for digital therapeutics 
applications. The RMDY platform is fully compliant with HIPAA and GDPR. All applica tions are hosted in 
Microsoft Azure datacenters, offering enterprise -level security, availability, scalability, and compliance. All data 
hosted in the RMDY platform is encrypted “at rest” using AES256 encryption, and “in transit” using TLS 1.2. 
The organiz ation is also currently undergoing a third -party assessment for HiTrust certification, which 
demonstrates compliance with, and adherence to, globally -recognized standards, regulations, and business 
requirements – including ISO, NIST, PCI, GDPR, HIPAA and v arious state laws.  
The Beiwe App will employ the same data privacy and security processes used in IRB approved protocols 
across four Partners Institutions ( DFCI Protocol # 16 -477; BIDMC Protocol #:  2015P -000240; McLean Hospital 
Protocol #s: 2015P001303, 20 15P001538, 2012P000890, 2015P002189; MGH Protocol #: 2015P000666 ). 
Although the app collect s a larg e amount of data, it was custom -built to be used in a health care setting and 
includes robust security and privacy features to safeguard all data and protect  participants’ privacy, including 
data anonymity, participant authentication, and data encryption. SMART App Data Privacy and Security  
(Appendix 7) and Beiwe App Data Privacy and Security (Appendix 10) describe the se processes in detail.   
 
 
  DAY  
Visit 
0 1-89 Visit 
90 INSTRUMENT  Participant Baseline Interview  
    
Participant Post -Baseline Interview    
  
Health/Tx Info  
   
  
Healthcare Utilization & Call Log    
  
Debriefing Interviews    
  
QoL, PF, and Symptom Questions   
   
Physical Function Survey   
   
Medical Care Resource Form    
  
Passive App Data  
  
  
  
Accelerometer Data  
  
  
  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
62 
 
 5.5 Descriptio n of Study Process  
Study procedures are outlined below . Based on the study team’s experience conducting pilot studies, we 
understand that piloting minimal -risk interventions across sites with varying institutional policies and patient 
populations must be f lexible in order to ensure that the study can quickly adapt to patient needs as we learn 
more about them over the course of the study. The study activities currently outlined in the protocol therefore 
may be adapted without the submission of an amendment i n cases where these modifications would pose no 
additional risk to patients, as determined by the overall PI of the study.   
5.51 Instrument Administration  
 
Participant Baseline Survey : 
• Participants will complete a baseline survey when they begin study int erventions (Appendix 14). 
• All data from the interview will be stored in RedCap ; if paper copies are used, they will be stored in 
restricted -access locations .  
• Estimated time to completion: 45 minutes.  
 
Participant Post -Baseline Survey : 
• Participants will c omplete a post -baseline survey approximately three months after the intervention was 
administered, as close to the 3 -month projected assessment date as p ossible (Appendix 15). 
• All data from the interview will be stored in RedCap ; if paper copies are used, they will be stored in 
restricted -access locations . 
• Estimated time to completion: 30 minutes.  
 
App-Based Surveys:  
• Participants will be prompted by the SMART app to complete the survey.  
• The surveys will consist of measures of gl obal quality of life, physic al health, PRO -CTCAE questions for 
10 symptoms,  and an additional question designed to query severe symptoms . 
• Survey items will not interfere with participants’ use of their phone .  
• Symptom surveys are administered daily, and the participant cannot take th e symptom survey more 
than once per day. Quality of life surveys will be given over the weekend. Patients can also submit 
responses less frequently. Once the participant completes the survey it is removed from the ir action list.  
Missed surveys do not remai n on the patient’s action list  and can be completed at the next survey 
timepoint , as applicable . 
• Estimated time to completion: 2-3 minutes.  
• Participants and their oncology  providers will be given summar ies of their survey responses throughout 
the study  through  HIPAA -compliant  secure  email. Patients  and clinicians  may also  choose to have their  
survey responses mailed to them via  priority mail  or to receive hard copies . 
 
Debriefing Interview:  
• Study staff will aim to conduct debriefing interviews with the firs t few participants enrolled at each site 
and a purposively sample  a subset of patients who enroll later (up to 15 total ). 
• Debriefing interviews will be administered by study staff following participants’  completion of the final 
post-baseline survey.  
• Study staff will discuss the debriefing interviews to identify opportunities for protocol improvement.  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
63 
 
 • Estimated time to completion: 20 minutes  
 
Health/Treatment Chart Abstraction:  
• Study  staff will review participants’ medical charts to complete the Health/Tx I nformation form for the 
time-points of participants’ baseline and post -baseline visits.  
 
Health Care Utilization Chart Abstraction:   
• Study staff will review participants’ medical charts to complete the Healt h Care Utilization form after  
participants’ post-baseline visit . 
• Patients will complete the Medical Care Resource Form to capture all health care utilization during the 
study , including care outside of affiliated sites  that may not be captured in site medical records . 
 
5.52 Intervention Administration  
 
5.52a Smartphone App s 
Instructional Session:  
• On Day 0, participants will download, install, and run the SMART and Beiwe apps on their personal 
smartphones , with assistance from study staff as needed . Participants will receive step-by-step 
instructions and login information for the app s (SMART App Installation Information is included in 
SMART App Features and Screenshots (Appendix 5); Appendix 12: Beiwe  App Installation Guide 
iOS and/or Appendix 13: Beiwe App Installation Instructions for Android) . 
• Particip ants are registered to the SMART App by a study team member that has access to the 
clinician dashboard  and admin site . Study staff  will create an account for the participant by using 
their mobile phone number. When the participant opens the SMART App, they  will be required to 
login using two -step verification. First, participants will be promoted to enter their mobile number. 
Next, they will have to enter a 4 -digit personal validation code that will be automatically sent to their 
smartphone via SMS.  The app  does not ask the subject to enter any personal information (name, 
date of birth, etc .) and cannot be directly linked to their health records.  
• Participants will register in the Beiwe App by using a unique User ID and temporary password and 
then choose a ne w password. The subject will be assigned a unique 8 -character Participant ID 
which consists of mixture of numbers and letters. The app does not ask the subject to enter any 
personal information (name, date of birth, phone number, etc.) and cannot be direct ly linked to their 
health records.  
• Participants will enter their oncology providers’ phone numbers for the “Call my Clinician” button 
and enter study staff’s  contact number for the “Call Research Assistant” button.  
• At the end of the registration process  for Beiwe , the participant will click a button to acknowledge  
that she has reviewed the privacy information with the RA and provide in -app consent.  
• The RA will then review how to use the app s and participants will be given a copy of the SMART 
App Participa nt Guide (Appendix 5) and the Beiwe App Participant Guide (Appendix 8) and 
Summary Sheet for Participants (Appendix 3) which describes the app s and provides directions on 
how to use its features, frequently asked questions, information regarding Beiwe posi tive affirmation 
push notifications, as well a review of the data that is collected and privacy measures.  
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
64 
 
 Symptom Management:  
• Participants will be prompted daily to answer questions about 10 unique symptoms via the SMART 
App in the Symptom Survey. If a p articipant is not experiencing any symptoms that day, they can 
select “not -applicable”. Over the weekend participants will be administered quality of life surveys  
(the FACT -G7 and PROMIS Physical Function short form 6b ).  
• If a participant reports one or mo re low -risk toxicities, the app will present tailored advice on how 
she can manage each symptom at home. If participants report high -risk toxicities, they will be 
instructed that they have reported a toxicity that requires further management from their cli nical 
team and  are given the instruction to call their clinician . Their clinician’s phone number will be listed  
within the SMART app so that it is easily accessible for participants’ use. Please refer to Figure 3 
for an overview of this process.  
• In order to ensure participant safety, the RAs and apps  will emphasize to participants that survey  
results will not  be reviewed by a clinician in real-time. Thus,  survey s cannot be used in place of  
communicat ing with clinicians  to request help. The reminder will al so note that if the participant 
feels unsafe, she should contact the treating clinician directly.  
• Participants and their oncology providers will be given a graphical summary of the symptoms 
participants reported by participants in -between visits.  This is d ependent on patient adherence –e.g. 
if a patient is not using the smartphone application and we are unable to receive symptom data, we 
will not have data to share with patients or their clinicians and no summary sheet will be provided. 
See Appendix 4: Samp le Clinical Summary Sheet for an example of what the summary data will 
look like. We will not monitor whether clinicians use the summary sheets, since it is difficult to 
reliably capture what providers read and absorb.  
 
5.52b Troubleshooting the SMART App  
The intervention’s participant guides outline common troubleshooting issues and how to solve them. 
Participants will be instructed to call study staff as soon as possible to report if they are having trouble 
using the app.  
 
5.52c  Fitness Tracker  
All parti cipants will also receive a Fitbit Charge 3 wearable fitness tracker.   
 
Instructional Session:  
• Following the completion of the Participant Baseline Survey on Day 0, participants will set up their 
fitness tracker, with assistance from study staff as needed . Participants will learn how to use the 
fitness tracker; download the Fitbit smartphone app; learn how to synchronize their device to their 
smartphone; and work with study staff to synchronize their accelerometer data to the research 
database.  
• In additio n to the accelerometer, participants will receive the Fitbit  Participant Guide  (Appendix 11), 
which describes proper wear and care, charging and battery life, troubleshooting instructions, 
uploading data, and compliance.  
• Participants will be encouraged to contact study staff at any time with questions or issues to help 
ensure proper wear and use of the fitness tracker.  
 
Tracking Devices:  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
65 
 
 • The accelerometer assigned to each participant will be tracked according to the product serial 
number and assigned uniq ue ID number.  
• Participants will be allowed to keep the accelerometer as a token of appreciation for their 
participation in the study, and to minimize potential transmission of skin infections (e.g. methicillin -
resistant Staphylococcus aureus) between part icipants.  
 
Monitoring  
• If patients are wearing their accelerometer continuously throughout the day and experience a 
severe drop in steps (e.g. ≤1,000 steps in a 24 -hour period) that is unlikely to be attributable to 
external factors (e.g ., severe snowstorm or rain ), study staff will contact the patient to ask if she is 
experiencing severe symptoms.  
 
 5.52d  Apps and Fitness Tracker Use and Compliance  
Participants will be instructed to avoid adjusting app settings (for Fitbit , SMART , and Beiwe  Apps), to 
ensure data is collected . If the study team does not receive data from the SMART or Beiwe Apps or 
fitness t racker , study staff will attempt to contact patients to help resolve the issue remotel y or during an 
upcoming clinic/study visit.  
5.52e Subsequent Enrollment in a Therapeutic Drug Trial  
Participants in this study may enroll in a therapeutic drug trial at a ny point after signing consent to 
participate in this study. However, if a patient enrolls in a therapeutic drug trial that requires structured 
symptom or toxicity reporting we will record this and perform a sensitivity analysis, excluding any 
patients who  participated in a therapeutic trial after enrollment, to determine whether this impacts our 
findings. Since this is a feasibility and acceptability trial, we do not want to censor participants.  
 
5.53 Compensation  
If site policies permit,  patients will be  provided with a gift -card, Clincard  or equivalent valued at $ 50 
after complet ing the baseline and  post-baseline interview s, to thank patients for their time participating in 
the study and to minimize attrition.  Additionally, partic ipants may be reimbursed  for significant study -related 
expenses ( e.g., expenses >$25 directly attributable to  the cost of uploading data from the smartphone app  
over a cellular data plan) if site policies allow.  
 
5.6 Adverse Reactions and Management  
 
5.61 Reporting Adverse or Una nticipated Events  
Potential adverse events (AE) for this project are expected to be all non -medical in nature. There is a  
small chance  that participants could worsen repetitive use injuries (e.g., carpal tunnel syndrome) while 
using  the smartphone app. Sub jects may experience mild anxiety when answering survey questions about 
emotional issues or questions about coping challenges or difficulties related to discussing the subject 
matter. The PI will report unanticipated and serious adv erse events to the IRB i n a timely manner on an 
ongoing basis. For the purpose of this study a Serious Adverse Event (SAE) is defined as an event that, as 
a direct result of the study, causes serious harm to the subject (e.g., hospitalization).   
 
5.62 Anti cipated Reactions & Reac tion Management  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
66 
 
 Should participants become exceedingly upset, disoriented or fatigued or need to attend to matters of 
personal care during the surveys, study staff will ask the subject if they would like to take a break or 
reschedul e the survey for another  time. In the event that participants experience distress while completing 
surveys, we will follow standard procedures used in our behavioral health intervention studies for 
counseling and referral. The PI will be notified immediate ly, and participants wil l be provided with the pager 
numbers for both the study PI and a clinician at the primary site, who will evaluate any participants who are 
distressed for risk of imminent danger and refer them to appropriate services if they are nee ded. 
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
67 
 
 6.0 STATISTICAL AN ALYSIS  
 
6.1 Primary and Secondary Endpoints  
 
Primary Endpoints  
 
1) Feasibility of the SMART intervention  
2) Acceptability of the SMART intervention  
 
Secondary Endpoints  
 
2) Perceived efficacy  
3) Additional patient outcomes, including: h ealth -related quality of life , anxiety and depression, s ymptom 
burden , and health care utilization  
4) Agreement  between patient and physician estimates of performance status  
5) Correlation between data collected from the wearable and smartphone accelerometers  
6) Predictive  ability of wearable acc elerometer and smartphone data for patient’s performance status and 
clinically significant events  
 
6.2. Sample Size  
The primary objective of this study is to assess the feasibility and acceptability rates of the SMART 
intervention.  A convenience sample of  30 patients will be enrolled to the study, with expected accrual of 
approximately 15 patients each at a maximum of 2 community oncology sites.   
6.3 Analysis Plan  
Statistical analysis will be descriptive in nature and will access f easibility, acceptabilit y, and perceived efficacy, 
as well as estimate outcomes parameters.  
Feasibility:  Feasibility will be defined as ≥50% approach -to-enrollment rate among eligible participants , and 2) 
≥50% 3 -month adherence rates to the smartphone app and wearable acceleromet er (based upon attrition rates 
from prior trials of PROs).10 Patients who complete daily surveys ≥4 days per week over the three -month study 
period will be considered as adherent to the smart phone app. Patients who wear the wearable accelerometer 
≥4 days per week over the three -month study period will be considered as adherent to the wearable 
accelerometer.  
Acceptability:  Acceptability will be defined as ≥ 60% of participants “agree” or “strong ly agree” that they “wou ld 
recommend the SMART Study to other patients with cancer receiving chemotherapy ;” and <30% of 
participants answering agree or st rongly agree to either question:   1) “Participating in this study placed a 
substantial burden on me” a nd 2) “I wish I had not agreed  to participate in this study.”  
Perceived efficacy:  Perceived efficacy will be measured by qualitative analysis. We will conduct debriefing 
interviews with approximately 30 pa rticipants and their clinicians (evenly distributed  among the community 
oncology sites) to obtain information about the acceptability of the intervention and recommendations for any 
modifications to impr ove any aspects of recruitment, enrollment, education, the timing of study assessments, 
graphical displa y of information, and th e app that could be improved.  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
68 
 
 Patient outcomes:  We will collect baseline and 3 -month outcome data  from patient interviews and clinician 
surveys . At each time point clinicians and  participants will be asked to rate the participant’s ECOG 
performance status and EuroQoL EQ -5D index; patients will also be asked to rate their symptoms using the 
PRO -CTCAE.  We will also collect health care utilization data (e.g. nursing calls, emergency department visits, 
hospitalizations, and hospice refer rals) from the medical c hart and healthcare utilization logs provided by 
patients . For purposes of estimating outcomes parameters, the distributions of these patient outcomes will be 
summarized using descriptive statistics such as means, standard deviation s, and proportions, and,  where 
appropriate, cumulative incidence functions. Additional demographic information that will be summarized 
include age, marital status, race/ethnicity, education, household structure, income, employment, health literacy  
and nume racy, and cancer treatme nt associated burden . We will abstract information from the medical chart; 
e.g., comorbid health conditions, prior chemotherapy regimens, and time since diagnosis.  
Correlative analyses:  
Agreement between patient -oncologist estimates  of performance status w ill be estimated by Cohen’s 
Kappa statistic.  We will descriptively summarize correlations between active (e.g. quality of life and symptoms) 
and passive (e.g. time spent away from home) data collected from the SMART  and Beiwe apps and the 
wearable accelero meter (average daily steps) with clinical outcomes collected at baseline and post -baseline 
(i.e. performance status, quality of life, and symptoms assessment as obtained from the PRO -CTCAE and 
CTCAE).  In addition to descriptive anal yses and estimating corr elations between passive smartphone data and 
clinical outcomes, passive data may contain information that allows for the prediction of future clinically -
relevant events, such as visits to the emergency department, urgent clinic enco unter, or hospitalizatio n. By 
testing for changes in activity, mobility, and social patterns over time as measured through smartphone use 
may be able to identify significant anomalies in patient behavior in the days prior to relapse. In a study in a 
cohort  with schizophrenia, beh avioral anomalies detected in the two weeks prior to clinical relapse occurred at 
a rate 71% higher than anomalies detected on other days.55 The method is based on a modification of the 
Hotelling’s T test to detect changes in the distribution of previous passively -measured activity. In our proposed 
study, this me thod might be used to qu ery patients in real time to detect if an unscheduled clinical event might 
occur in the near future.  
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
69 
 
 7.0 REFERENCES  
 1. Di Maio M, Gallo C, Leighl NB, et al: Symptomatic toxicities experienced during anticancer  
treatment: agreement be tween patient and physician reporting in three randomized trials. J Clin Oncol 33:910 -
5, 2015  
  
 3. Montemurro F, Mittica G, Cagnazzo C, et al: Self -Evaluation of Adjuvant Chemotherapy -Related 
Adverse Effects by Patients With Breast  Cancer. JAMA Oncol:1 -8, 2015  
 4. Sorensen JB, Klee M, Palshof T, et al: Performance status assessment in cancer patients. An 
inter-observer variability study. Br J Cancer 67:773 -5, 1993  
 5. Hutchinson TA, Boyd NF, Feinstein AR, et al: Scientific problems in clinical scales, as 
demonstrated in the Karnofsky index of performance status. J Chronic Dis 32:661 -6, 1979  
 6. Blagden SP, Charman SC, Sharples LD, et al: Performance status score: do patients and their 
oncologists agree? Br J Cancer 89:1022 -7, 2003  
 7. Dajczman E, Kasymjanov a G, Kreisman H, et al: Should patient -rated performance status affect 
treatment decisions in advanced lung cancer? J Thorac Oncol 3:1133 -6, 2008  
 8. Ando M, Ando Y, Hasegawa Y, et al: Prognostic value of performance status assessed  by 
patients themselves,  nurses, and oncologists in advanced non -small cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer 85:1634 -9, 
2001  
 9. Detmar SB, Muller MJ, Schornagel JH, et al: Health -related quality -of-life assessments and 
patient -physician communication: a randomize d controlled trial. JAMA  288:3027 -34, 2002  
 10. Basch E, Deal AM, Kris MG, et al: Symptom Monitoring With Patient -Reported Outcomes 
During Routine Cancer Treatment: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Oncol 34:557 -65, 2016  
 11. Basch E, Artz D, Dulko D, et al: Patient online se lf-reporting of toxicity symptoms during 
chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 23:3552 -61, 2005  
 12. Torous J SP, Shanahan M, Lin C, Peck P, Keshavan M,  Onnela JP: Utilizing a personal 
smartphone custom app to assess the Patient Health Questi onnaire -9 (PHQ -9) depres sive symptoms in 
patients with major depressive disorder. JMIR Mental Health 2:e8, 2015  
 13. ClinicalTrials.gov: The HOPE Trial: Helping our Patients Excel, 2017  
 14. Wright AA RN, Staples P, Schonholz S, Cronin A, Carlson K, Keatin g NL, Onnela JP: The 
HOP E Pilot Study: Harnessing Patient -Reported Outcomes and Biometric Data to Enhance Cancer Care. JCO 
Clinical Cancer Informatics  
 15. Basch E, Wood WA, Schrag D, et al: Feasibility and clinical impact of sharing patient -reported 
symp tom toxicities and perfo rmance status with clinical investigators during a phase 2 cancer treatment trial. 
Clin Trials, 2015  
 16. Bennett AV, Reeve BB, Basch EM, et al: Evaluation of pedometry as a patient -centered 
outcome in patients undergoing hematopoie tic cell transplant (HCT ): a comparison of pedometry and patient 
reports of symptoms, health, and quality of life. Qual Life Res 25:535 -46, 2016  
 17. Maddocks M, Wilcock A: Exploring physical activity level in patients with thoracic cancer: 
implications fo r use as an outcome meas ure. Support Care Cancer 20:1113 -6, 2012  
 18. Dahele M, Skipworth RJ, Wall L, et al: Objective physical activity and self -reported quality of life 
in patients receiving palliative chemotherapy. J Pain Symptom Manage 33:676 -85, 2007  
 19. Skipworth RJ, Stene  GB, Dahele M, et al: Patient -focused endpoints in advanced cancer: 
criterion -based validation of accelerometer -based activity monitoring. Clin Nutr 30:812 -21, 2011  
 20. Ohri N, Kabarriti R, Bodner WR, et al: Continuous Activity Mon itoring During Concurren t 
Chemoradiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 97:1061 -1065, 2017  
 21. Enzinger AC, Wind JK, Frank E, et al: A stakeholder -driven approach to improve the informed 
consent process for palliative chemotherapy. Patient Educ Couns, 2 017 
  
 23. EuroQol G: Eu roQol --a new facility for the measurement of health -related quality of life. Health 
Policy 16:199 -208, 1990  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
70 
 
  24. Janssen MF, Pickard AS, Golicki D, et al: Measurement properties of the EQ -5D-5L compared 
to the EQ -5D-3L across eight patient groups: a multi -country study. Qual Life Res 22:1717 -27, 2013  
 25. Kim SH, Kim HJ, Lee SI, et al: Comparing the psychometric properties of the EQ -5D-3L and 
EQ-5D-5L in cancer patients in Korea. Qual Life Res 21:1065 -73, 2012  
 26. Sullivan PW, Ghush chyan V: Mapping the EQ -5D index from the SF -12: US general population 
preferences in a nationally representative sample. Med Decis Making 26:401 -9, 2006  
 27. Pickard AS, Neary MP, Cella D: Estimation of minimally important differences in EQ -5D utility 
and VAS scores in cancer. H ealth Qual Life Outcomes 5:70, 2007  
 28. Cella D, Riley W, Stone A, et al: The Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information 
System (PROMIS) developed and tested its first wave of adult self -reported health outcome item banks: 2 005-
2008. J Clin Epidemi ol 63:1179 -94, 2010  
 29. Hays RD, Bjorner JB, Revicki DA, et al: Development of physical and mental health summary 
scores from the patient -reported outcomes measurement information system (PROMIS) global items. Qual Life 
Res 18:873 -80, 2009  
 30. Oken MM, C reech RH, Tormey DC, et al: Toxicity and response criteria of the Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol 5:649 -55, 1982  
 31. Basch E, Iasonos A, Barz A, et al: Long -term toxicity monitoring via electronic patient -report ed 
outcomes in patients receiving chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 25:5374 -80, 2007  
 32. Lowe B, Kroenke K, Herzog W, et al: Measuring depression outcome with a brief self -report 
instrument: sensitivity to change of the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9). J Af fect Disord 81:61 -6, 200 4 
 33. Thekkumpurath P, Walker J, Butcher I, et al: Screening for major depression in cancer 
outpatients: the diagnostic accuracy of the 9 -item patient health questionnaire. Cancer 117:218 -27, 2011  
 34. Johns SA, Kroenke K, Krebs EE , et al: Longitudinal co mparison of three depression measures 
in adult cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 45:71 -82, 2013  
 35. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB: Validation and utility of a self -report version of PRIME -MD: 
the PHQ primary care study. P rimary Care Evaluation o f Mental Disorders. Patient Health Questionnaire. 
JAMA 282:1737 -44, 1999  
 36. Basch E, Jia X, Heller G, et al: Adverse symptom event reporting by patients vs clinicians: 
relationships with clinical outcomes. J Natl Cancer Inst 101:1 624-32, 2009  
 37. Dueck AC, Mendoza TR, Mitchell SA, et al: Validity and Reliability of the US National Cancer 
Institute's Patient -Reported Outcomes Version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO -
CTCAE). JAMA Oncol 1:1051 -9, 2015  
 38. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Wi lliams JB, et al: A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety 
disorder: the GAD -7. Arch Intern Med 166:1092 -7, 2006  
 39. Lowe B, Decker O, Muller S, et al: Validation and standardization of the Generalized Anxiety 
Disorder Scr eener (GAD -7) in the gen eral population. Med Care 46:266 -74, 2008  
 40. Andersen BL, DeRubeis RJ, Berman BS, et al: Screening, assessment, and care of anxiety and 
depressive symptoms in adults with cancer: an American Society of Clinical Oncology guideline adaptation. J 
Clin Oncol  32:1605 -19, 2014  
 41. Lyons KD, Bakitas M, Hegel MT, et al: Reliability and validity of the Functional Assessment of 
Chronic Illness Therapy -Palliative care (FACIT -Pal) scale. J Pain Symptom Manage 37:23 -32, 2009  
 42. Wallace LS, R ogers ES, Roskos SE, et al: Brief report: screening items to identify patients with 
limited health literacy skills. J Gen Intern Med 21:874 -7, 2006  
 43. Bakke E: A Model and MEasure of Mobile Communication Competence. Human 
Communication Research 36:348 -371, 2010  
 44. Austenfeld JL, Stanton AL: Writing about emotions versus goals: effects on hostility and medical 
care utilization moderated by emotional approach coping processes. Br J Health Psychol 13:35 -8, 2008  
 45. Low CA, Stanton AL, Bower JE, et al: A randomized controlled trial of emotionally expressive 
writing for women with metastatic breast cancer. Health Psychol 29:460 -6, 2010  
 46. Carver CS: You want to measure coping but your protocol's too long: consid er the brief COPE. 
Int J Behav Med 4:92 -100, 1997  
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
71 
 
  47. Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, et al: A new method of classifying prognostic comorbidity in 
longitudinal studies: development and validation. J Chronic Dis 40:373 -83, 1987  
 48. Kurti AN, Dallery J: In ternet -based contingency management increases walking in sedentary 
adults. J Appl Behav Anal 46:568 -81, 2013  
 49. Evenson KR, Goto MM, Furberg RD: Systematic review of the validity and reliability of 
consumer -wearable activity trackers. Int J Behav Nutr Ph ys Act 12:159, 2015  
 50. Wallen MP, Gomersall SR, Keating SE, et al: Accuracy of Heart Rate Watches: Implications for 
Weight Management. PLoS One 11:e0154420, 2016  
 51. de Zambotti M, Baker FC, Willoughby AR, et al: Measures of sleep and cardiac functionin g 
during sleep using a multi -sensory commercially -available wristband in adolescents. Physiol Behav 158:143 -9, 
2016  
 52. Kooiman TJ, Dontje ML, Sprenger SR, et al: Reliability and validity of ten consumer activity 
trackers. BMC Sports Sci Med Rehabil 7:24,  2015  
 53. Atallah L, Lo B, King R, et al: Sensor positioning for activity recognition using wearable 
accelerometers. IEEE Trans Biomed Circuits Syst 5:320 -9, 2011  
 54. Cadmus -Bertram L, Marcus BH, Patterson RE, et al: Use of the Fitbit to Measure Adherenc e to 
a Physical Activity Intervention Among Overweight or Obese, Postmenopausal Women: Self -Monitoring 
Trajectory During 16 Weeks. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 3:e96, 2015  
 55. Barnett I, Torous J, Staples P, et al: Relapse Prediction in Schizophrenia through Digi tal 
Phenotyping: A Pilot Study. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association Submitted  
 
DF/HCC Protocol 16 -477: The SMART Study   April 23 , 2021 | v8 
72 
 
 8.0 APPENDICES  
 
Recruitment/Enrollment:  
Appendix 1: Registration Form  
 
Interventions:  
Appendix 2: Symptom Management Content  
Appendix 3: Summary Sheet for Participants  
Appendix 4: Sample Clinical Summary Sheet  
Appendix 5: SMART App Features and Screenshots : Patient Guide  
Appendix 6: SMART Study Clinician Dashboard  
Appendix 7: SMART App Data Privacy and Security  
Appendix 8: Beiwe App Participant Guide  
Appe ndix 9: Beiwe App Info for Study Team  
Appendix 10: Beiwe  App Data Privacy and Security  
Appendix 11: Fitbit Participant Guide  
Appendix 12: Beiwe App Installation Guide: iOS  
Appendix 13: Beiwe  App Installation Guide: Android  
 
Instruments:  
Appendix 14: Part icipant Baseline Interview  
Appendix 15: Participant Post -Baseline Interview  
Appendix 16: SMART App  Survey  
Appendix 17: Health/Tx Information  
Appendix 18: Health Care Utilization  
Appendix 19: Call Log  
Appendix 20: Patient Debriefing Interview  
Appendix 21: Clinician and Site Staff Debriefing Interview  
 
Other:  
Appendix 22: Data and Safety Monitoring Plan   
Appendix 2 3: Reimbursement Sheet   
Appendix 24: Beiwe Positive Affirmation Push Notifications  
Appendix 2 5: Consent Form Template  
 