1 
 
 
Study Protocol  
 
Positive Psychotherapy for Smoking Cessation Enhanced With Text Messaging: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
December 22, 2022  
 
Christopher W. Kahler, Ph.D., Principal Investigator  
 
Correspondence concerning this protocol  should be addressed to:  
Christopher W. Kahler, Ph.D.,  
Center for Alcohol and Addiction Studies,  
Brown University  
Box G -S121 -4, Providence, RI 02912.  
E-mail: Christopher_Kahler@brown.edu  
 
  
2 
 
Study Aims  
This randomized controlled trial will test the efficacy of Positive Psychotherapy for Smoking 
Cessation plus Text Messaging (PPT -S+) compared to a time -matched ST control plus text 
messaging support for quitting (ST+). We hypothesize that participants in PPT -S+ compared to 
ST+ will display higher rates of biochemically -confirmed 7 -day point -prevalence smoking 
abstinence across 12 months of follow -up. 
 
Method  
Note regarding response to Covid pandemic  
The procedures below describe the protocol as implemented prior to March 2020. With social 
distancing and closure to in -person activities, procedures were modified to accomodata remote 
enrollment, assessment, and intervention. Those modification are noted as “AFTER MARCH 
2020”  
Study Setting  
All study procedures will take place at the Center for Alcohol and Addiction Studies in 
the Brown University School of Public Health in Providence, RI  or at the Mass achusetts General 
Hospital in Boston, MA . AFTER MARCH 2020: All procedures happened online or by 
telephone only.  
 
Participants  
A total of 340 participants  will be enrolled in the study over an approximately 3 -year 
period, which started i n February 2017. P articipants must meet the following criteria: 1) be at 
least 18 years of age; 2) smoke at least 5 cigarettes per day for longer than one year; 3) be willing 
to use the nicotine patch; 4) rate the importance of q uitting smoking a 5 on a 0 to 10 scale (where 
10 = extremely important ); 5) have an active, text -capable cell phone and be willing to send and 
receive text messages for the duration of the intervention. Participants who do not have unlimited 
texting will b e compensated an additional $20 to offset any additional costs on their cell phone 
bill. Participants will be excluded from the study, if they meet any of the following criteria: (1) 
are currently experiencing psychotic symptoms, affective disorder, or sub stance use disorder 
other than nicotine dependence; (2) are concomitantly using other pharmacotherapies for 
smoking cessation; (3) are pregnant or nursing, or (4) have any contraindications to the use of 
transdermal nicotine patch.  
AFTER MARCH 2020 : To con firm smoking status at baseline, participants were sent a 
NicAlert test strip for saliva testing of cotinine and completed the test while being observed 
during a Zoom call with a research assistant.  A test positive for cotinine was required for 
enrollment.  The limit of detection for the NicAlert strip is 30 ng/mL  
 
Outcome Variables  
 
3 
 
Primary outcome measures  
The primary outcome for testing intervention efficacy is biochemically  verified 7 -day 
point -prevalence abstinence at 12 -, 26-, and 52 -week follow -ups. We will also use the Timeline 
Followback  [3, 4]  to assess time to first lapse and relapse and continuous abstinence from 
smoking. Participants will provide breath samples for expired carbon monoxide (CO) analysis at 
baseline, each treatment session , and each follow -up interview. At 12 -, 26-, and 52 -week follow 
ups self -reported smoking abstinence with no other use of nicotine -containing products — 
including nicotine replacement therapy and electronic cigarettes —will be verified by both CO 
(cutoff val ue of <4ppm)  [5] and saliva cotinine radioimmune assay a nalysis (cutoff value of < 15 
ng/ml)  [6]. For those reporting smoking abstinence, but with past 7 -day use of other nicotine 
containing  products, abstinence will be verified only by CO.  Continuous smok ing abstinence will 
be defined as self-reporting no cigarettes smoked since quit date with abstinence biochemically 
confirmed at each follow -up or confirmed by collateral reports from significant others .  
 AFTER MARCH 2020: Self-reported abstinence was bio chemically confirmed with a 
NicAlert test which was sent to the participants how and self -administered while being observed 
by the research assistant on Zoom.  
Secondary outcome measures and assessment points  
The secondary outcome of this study is to determine if the effect of PPT -S+ on smoking 
outcome is mediated by greater use of PPT -consistent strategies, reduced attraction to smoking, 
or greater smoking cessation self -efficacy. Participants will complete a Treatment Strategies 
Questionnaire at sess ions 4 -6 to assess frequency of general smoking cessation strategies usage, 
including planning for high -risk situations, and PPT -consistent strategies. PPT -consistent 
strategies are worded in a general way so that participants in each condition can rate ho w often 
they have done that activity; PPT -S consistent strategies include intentionally focusing on mental 
health benefits of quitting, using signature strengths, savoring positive experiences, and engaging 
in positive social interactions  [2]. For those in PPT -S+, we also will have a record of how many 
PPT-S+ interactive texts were responded to , which will be coded according to whether the 
exercise was completed. In both conditions, we will calculate a variable reflecting the percent of 
responses to interactive messages. Smoking cessation self -efficacy w ill be measured at each 
counseling session using a well -validated 9 -item scale  [7]. Residual attraction to smoking (e.g., 
“Does smoking have any attraction for you n ow?”) will be assessed at the end of the treatment 
(i.e. 4 weeks after quite date) with a validated 3 -item scale  [8]. 
 
Recruitment Procedures  
Participants will be recruited through advertisements localized to the greater Providence, 
RI and Boston, MA region on public transportation, newspaper, radio, and local television. The 
advertisements give potential participants the information to call or text the stud y phone number 
or visit the study website for more information. Additionally, a social media campaign will be 
used including an interactive study website. Participants will have the opportunity to complete an 
online screener to determine eligibility.  
 
4 
 
Proc edure Overview  
Prospective participants will be screened either by telephone or by an online web portal 
system according to the inclusion criteria. Participants meeting inclusion criteria will be invited 
to the study sites  to complete a baseline interview  to confirm eligibility. Eligible participants will 
be randomized and start counseling within a week of the baseline interview. Quit date will be 
scheduled for all participants to coincide with their third session of counseling. Participants will 
be assess ed on a variety of interview, self -report, and biochemical measures at baseline and each 
treatment session, and at 12, 26, and 52 weeks after quit date. Interviewers conducting follow -
ups will not be aware of participants’ assigned treatment condition.  
AFTER MARCH 2020: All assessments and counseling occurred by telephone or Zoom 
videoconferencing.  
Assessments  
Baseline Assessment  
At baseline, participants will complete written informed consent. They will then complete 
written questionnaires and interviews  to determine eligibility for the study, including a medical 
history screen. A blood pressure reading will be taken to exclude participants who have elevated 
blood pressure that would require medical treatment. Because nicotine patch is contraindicated 
for nursing and pregnant women, all women of childbearing age will be administered a 
pregnancy test to ensure non -pregnant status. If pregnant, they will be referred to other treatment. 
Participants will be paid $20 for completing the baseline assessment.  
 AFTER MARCH 2020: No blood pressure reading s or pregnancy tests  were done.  
Follow -up Interviews   
Participants will return to the study sites  to complete in -person follow -ups at 12, 26, and 
52 weeks after their scheduled quit date. To increase retention, pa rticipants will be paid up to 
$120 for completing assessments according to the following schedule: $35 for 12 -week follow -
up (plus $20 for those without unlimited texting), $35 for the 26 -week follow -up, and $50 for the 
52-week follow -up. These payments ar e not contingent upon smoking status. When necessary, 
relatives or friends listed by participants as potential locators will provide information about 
participants' whereabouts.  
 
Randomization procedures  
After completing baseline appointment procedures, eligible participants will be 
randomized to either PPT -S+ or ST+ by the Project Coordinator, who is not involved in 
conducting assessments or providing treatment. The urn randomization technique [1] will be used 
to ensure that treatment groups are balanced on gender, PA, and level of cigarette dependence. 
Research assistants wi ll not be informed of treatment condition assignment. The positive affect 
subscale of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies – Depression scale (CES -D PA)  [9] will be 
used to measure participants’ PA over the  past week ; this scale  has been shown to predict 
smoking outcome  [4] and moderate the effect of PPT -S [19]. Participants’ level of cigarette 
5 
 
dependence will be measured via the Fagerstr öm Test for Cigarette Dependence  [10, 11] . 
Condition assignment will be placed in sealed folders, which the counselor will open when 
participants report to the study center for the initial session of counseling, at which point 
randomization is considered complete.  
 
Details of the intervention and control  
Nicotine Replacement Therapy  
All participants will be provided an eight week supply of transdermal nicotine patch with 
initial patch dosage  (7mg, 14mg, or 21mg)  based on their smoking rate at baseline  following the 
product recommen dations .  
Behavioral Treatment Conditions  
All participants will receive a common core of behavioral smoking cessation counseling 
which includes instructions for using the nicotine patch, a text messaging support program , and 6 
weekly sessions of counseling . The first session of counseling lasts about 50 minutes with the 
remaining sessions lasting about 35 minutes. All participants have a target quit date set for 
session 3 (2 weeks post initial  counseling session). Participants who relapse to smoking after 
session 3 may set a new quit date, but the initially scheduled quit date remains as the date on 
which other study procedures (e.g., follow -up visits) are based.  
 
Counselor  Qualifications, Training, and Supervision  
Qualifications for study counselors are a master’s degree or above with experience in 
behavioral health counseling. All counselors will conduct both PPT -S+ and ST+ sessions. 
Counselors will participate in approximately 20 hours of training prior to deliver ing 
interventions. Training will include an overview of PPT -S+ and ST+ protocols, review of 
manuals and handouts, and practice role -play exercises along with selected readings on treatment 
of tobacco use  and positive psychology . Additionally, counselors wi ll be asked to listen to 
several of the audiotape samples from the randomized controlled pilot study and will conduct 
mock sessions  with one another .  
Counselors will participate in weekly supervision sessions. All sessions will be 
audiotaped, and  a sessio n from  every fifth case will be rated for adherence and competence. 
Counselors will be provided feedback on adherence to manual components, level of skill 
delivering components , use of appropriate structure and focus, empathy and facilitation of the 
therap eutic alliance. Counselors who deviate from the protocol will be monitored closely and 
may be asked to role -play protocols until their performance meets acceptable standards.  
Treatment integrity for PPT -S+ and ST+ as described in the treatment protocols wi ll be 
assessed with adherence checklists . Ratings of treatment adherence will be conducted by a 
research assistant unaffiliated with treatment delivery using checklists containing each of the 
critical topics of the treatment session outlines in each condit ion. Checklists will be summed to 
indicate the proportion of intended topics that were covered in a treatment session . Session tapes 
will be rated only after participants’  follow -ups are completed. A second research assista nt will 
rate one -fifth of session s as a reliability check.  
6 
 
 
Standard Treatment+ (ST+)  
ST+ is based on clinical practice guidelines [12] and focuses on recognizing and problem 
solving potential causes of smoking relapse, providing support an d reinforcement of success, and 
encouraging participants to seek support for smoking cessation outside of treatment [13]. When 
necessary, the counselor discusses strategies for managing relapses to smoking. The elements of 
the standard smoking cessation content in both interventions is shown in Table 1. In ST+, about 
20 minutes of each session are dedicated to teaching progressive muscle relaxation, which is 
used to match contact time with PPT -S+ while keeping the amount of time focused on smoking 
in both PPT -S+ and ST+ similar. Relaxation training has  not been shown to improve smoking 
abstinence [12]. Participants are instructed to use relaxation techniques to reduce stress in their 
day-to-day life as needed.  
 
PPT -S+  
Modeled after our previous pilot  [2], the PPT -S+ condition shares the same fundam ental 
smoking cessation components with ST+, but also integrates positive psychology concepts. PPT-
S+ focuses on accentuating individuals’ strengths (e.g., humor, perseverance, kindness, 
spirituality)  and linking them to behavior change, which is intended to enhance self -efficacy and 
development of a non -smoker identity , both potential key predictors of immediate and long -term 
smoking outcomes  [8, 14] . PPT-S+ is also gained -framed  [15, 16]  to highlight that quitting 
smoking can be a rewarding challenge that enhances mental health  [17-19]. Research has shown 
that positive self -affirmations  [20] can reduce defensiveness about health information leading to 
increased behavioral intentions  [21]. Finally, PPT -S+ focuses on in creasing attention to the  daily 
experience  of positive events,  as well as  increasing positive social interactions  and maintaining 
PA.  
PA is distinct from negative affect both conceptually and empirically  [22]. Some studies 
have suggested that low PA prior to smoking cessation treatment may have a unique association 
with poor smoking outcomes independent of depressive symptoms  [23], although a recent study 
did not support this conclusion  [24]. Both reductions in PA leading up to quit date and low PA 
after qu itting have been implicated in smoking relapse  [25, 26] . By focusing s pecifically on 
maintaining  PA, PPT -S+ seeks to reduce the relative attractiveness of smoking as a mood 
enhancer  and to enhance self -efficacy for remaining abstinent . Prior research has suggested that  a 
behavioral activation approach to increasing positive reinforcement during smoking cessation 
has promise  [27]. The PPT -S+ approach toward increasing positive reinforcement is distinct 
from that of behavioral activation , but both approaches may operate through similar mec hanisms 
to affect smoking outcomes —providing alternatives for enhancing positive affect other than 
smoking .  
The PPT-S+ model acknowledges that PPT-S+ may directly enhance positive affect , 
given prior research on positive psychology interventions. It also acknowledges that individuals 
with greater positive affect may find it easier to engage in PPT -S+ strategies . In our pilot trial, 
the effect of PPT -S was, in fact, stronger among those wi th higher levels of positive affect prior 
to treatment [19]. However, results also suggested that it was use of PPT -S strategies that was 
more predictive of long -term outcome than positive affect itself.  
7 
 
The following intervention elements are unique to PPT-S+ (see Table 1 for timing of 
interventions) : 
PPT-S Model of Smoking Cessation . PPT -S+ highlights that despite initial withdrawal 
symptoms, quitting smoking results in improved mental health and reduced stress  [17, 19, 28 -
31]. The importance of attending to positive experiences and havin g positive social interactions 
when quitting is emphasized, noting that these experiences help people manage future obstacles. 
Counselors note that the exercises taught in PPT -S+ can be more difficult to complete during 
periods of stress or low mood, but t hat regular practice of the exercises has been shown to 
increase satisfaction with life and positive moods and reduce depression.  
Positive Introductions . PPT -S+ begins by introducing the concept of signature strengths 
and how those can be important in quit ting smoking. Participants are provided feedback about 
their top five signature strengths based on the Values in Actions Survey  [32], which assesses 24 
signature personality strengths such as Love of Learning , Kindness , Appreciation of Beauty , and 
Gratitude . Participants are asked to share how they have demonstrated use of one of these 
strengths in a recent situation.  
Using Signature Strengths . Counselors highlight the role that signature strengths play in 
leading an engaged life and handling challenges. Throughout treatme nt, participants are asked to 
consider how they can employ their signature strengths to help them manage high -risk situations 
for smoking.  For example, someone with high Love of Learning may be encouraged to seek out 
information on the health benefits of q uitting smoking, whereas someone high in Kindness may 
be encourage d to use some of their money saved from not smoking to treat a friend to dinner.  
Three Good Things . At session 1, participants are instructed to record by text messaging 
three good things th at happened each day. This exercise has been shown to have rapid and 
lasting effects on reducing depressive symptoms and increasing happiness  [33]. This exercise is 
continued through session 3, at which point participants can choose whether to continue the 
exercise over the following weeks.  
Savoring . At session 2, counselors introduce the concept of savoring positive 
experiences , including sensory experiences  (e.g., savoring chocolate rather than eating it in one 
bite), positive memories, and accomplishments . They assign participants to savor at least two 
experiences each day for two weeks and to record what they savored at the end of each day by 
text messaging. They co ntinue this exercise through session 4.  
Active/Constructive Responding . At session 4, participants are instructed to listen 
carefully when people they care about report good events. They are instructed to go out of their 
way to respond actively and constru ctively to these events and to keep a record of these 
experiences through daily text messaging.  
Savoring Acts of Kindness . This exercise begins at session 5 and asks participants to 
become aware of when they exhibit kind behavior toward another person (or note others being 
kind) and to savor the kind behavior by noticing it and writing it down. Participants are asked to 
text the kind acts they did or witnessed each day. This exercise is based on a prior study showing 
that writing down one’s acts of kindness  enhanced well -being  [34]. 
Maintenance Exercise . In the final session, participants discuss their experiences with the 
PPT-S+ exercises and choose which exercis e to continue over the next two weeks.  
 
Text Messaging  
Participants in both ST+ and PPT -S+ receive a core set of text messages to support 
smoking cessation, following the TXT -2-Quit (T2Q) program developed by Bock and colleagues  
8 
 
[35]. The frequency of T2Q messages in PPT -S+ is reduced somewhat to accommodate the PPT -
specific texts without creating unequal response burden between study arms . Participants will 
enroll in the program at baseline by responding to a text message. T2Q is an 8 -week core 
program of daily texts tailored to the user’s phase of quitting (e.g., preparing to quit, early weeks 
of active quitting, sustaining a recent quit, relapsed, preparing to make a second quit attempt). 
Message content includes behavioral (e.g. “ Keep a stress ball handy to squeeze during times of 
intense craving.” ), motivational messages (e.g. “You decided to quit smoking and you’re doing 
it. You’re awes ome”) and information on dealing with nicotine dependence  and withdrawal (e.g., 
“The worst of nicotine withdrawal is over in a few weeks, but breaking the smoking habit comes 
more slowly. ”). T2Q is flexible, allowing for special messages for each phase of quitting (e.g., 
recently quit, recently relapsed, maintaining abstinence, etc.) and allowing participants to set a 
unique quit date.  
All participants will set a quit date to coincide with session 3 of counseling, but the 
program can accommodate those who need to set another quit date. Individuals who relapse are 
encouraged to make another attempt at cessation, and more intensive messaging is given to those 
recently quit or relapsed. Participants in ST+ receive 1 message per day leading up to a quit date, 
4 messages per day in the 2 weeks immediately after quit date, and 2 messages per day in the 
four weeks after that. Those in PPT -S+ receive slightly fewer T2Q texts: 1 message per day 
leading up to a quit date and 2 messages per day in the 4 weeks after the ir quit date. Additional 
help is available on demand through automated motivational messages sent in response to a 
texted key word (e.g., “crave” or “slip”)  [35]. 
 
Text Messaging in PPT -S+ 
In addition to T2Q messages, participants in PPT -S+ will receive daily texts intended to 
increase positive cognitions and engagement with exercises and to prompt participants to 
consider their s ignature strengths and how these can be used to facilitate quitting. Morning texts 
provide static messages relevant to a given exercise  (“Notice what good things happen in other 
people's lives.  Help them celebrate.  It makes you both feel good! ”), while a fternoon/evening 
texts are interactive and ask for open -ended descriptions of what participants did to complete that 
day’s exercise  (“Did you find at least one chance today to respond actively and with enthusiasm 
to someone’s good news? ”), with a reminder sent after one hour if no response is received. These 
responses are tabulated for the smoking cessation counselor. Text messages specific to an 
exercise are initiated at the respective counseling session at which that exercise is introduced by 
texting a ke y word, e.g., ‘Savor ,’ to initiate the savoring texts. The exercise continues each day 
following the session until that exercise is replaced by a new exercise. At session 6, participants 
choose which exercise they want to continue and receive texts based o n their choice for an 
additional two weeks. The texting protocol for PPT -S+ was developed and finalized based on 
pilot testing done with nine participants prior to initiating the randomized trial.  
 
Masking/blinding  
Participants will be randomized to ST+ o r PPT -S+ after completing their baseline 
assessment by the Project Coordinator, who does not conduct outcome assessments. Due to the 
timing of the randomization procedures, project staff who conduct the baseline visit will have no 
way of knowing participan ts’ study condition. Staff conducting follow -up outcome assessments 
will not be informed of condition assignment.  
9 
 
4.9 Timeline   
Recruitment began in February 2017 and will continue until appr oximately April of 2020. 
Follow -ups will continue throughout this time and will be completed in mid -2021.  
AFTER MARCH 2020: Given that recruitment had not yet reached its final goal, we 
restarted enrollment of new participants in June of 2020 and continue to enroll new participants 
through September 2020 with all follow -ups completed by December 2021.  
 
Sample size calculations   
We estimated abstinence rates in PPT -S+ by roughly averaging and rounding the 
abstinence rates seen in our developmental trial  [18] and pilot randomized controlled trial  [19]. 
For PPT -S+, we estimated 45%, 30%, and 25% abstinence at 12, 26, and 52 weeks, with 20% 
continuously abstinent. Results of the pilot study suggested differences in abstinence rates 
between PPT -S and ST that ranged from roughly 12% to  15% [19]. Therefore, for ST+, we 
estimate d 30%, 17.5%, and 12.5% abstinence  at 12, 26, and 52 weeks , with 8% continuously 
abstinent; such effects  would represent a clinically meaningful effect for PPT -S+.  
For the analysis of point prevalence abstinence o ver time, we used a covariance matrix 
based on our past trial  [19] and a program developed for power analysis for generalized 
estimating equations  [36] and determined that a sample size of 272 participants would be needed 
to achieve power  of .80 given our estimated abstinence rates. For the single measure of verified 
continuous abstinence, 298 participants are needed for power of .80.  To allow for up to 10% of 
participants being lost to follow -up, however, we allowed for an initial sample of 340 in order to 
ensure adequate statistical power for our analyses.  
  
References  
1. Wei, I., Application of an urn model to the design of sequential controlled clinical trials.  
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1978. 73: p. 559 -563. 
2. Kahler, C.W., et al., Positive Psychotherapy for Smoking Cessation: A Pilot Randomized 
Controlled Trial.  Nicotine Tob Res, 2015. 17(11): p. 1385 -92. 
3. Brown, R.A., et al., Reliability and validity of a smoking timeline - Follow -back interview.  
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 1998. 12(2): p. 101 -112. 
4. Toll, B.A., et al., Do daily interactive voice response reports of smoking behavi or 
correspond with retrospective reports?  Psychol Addict Behav, 2005. 19(3): p. 291 -5. 
5. Cropsey, K.L., et al., How Low Should You Go? Determining the Optimal Cutoff for 
Exhaled Carbon Monoxide to Confirm Smoking Abstinence When Using Cotinine as 
Referenc e. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 2014. 16(10): p. 1348 -1355.  
6. Jarvis, M.J., H. Tunstall -Pedoe, and C.e.a. Feyerabend, Comparison of tests to distinguish 
smokers from nonsmokers.  American Journal of Public Health, 1987. 77: p. 1435 -1438.  
7. Velicer, W.F., et al., Relapse situations and self -efficacy: An integrative model.  Addictive 
Behaviors, 1990. 15: p. 271 -283. 
8. Vangeli, E., J. Stapleton, and R. West, Residual attraction to smoking and smoker identity 
following smoking cessation.  Nicotine & Tobacco Res earch, 2010. 12(8): p. 865 -869. 
10 
 
9. Radloff, L.S., The CES -D scale: A self -report depression scale for research in the general 
population.  Applied Psychological Measurement, 1977. 1(Summer): p. 385 -401. 
10. Heatherton, T.F., et al., The Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the 
Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire.  British Journal of Addiction, 1991. 86(9): p. 1119 -
27. 
11. Svicher, A., et al., Item Response Theory analysis of Fagerstrom Test for Cigarette 
Dependence.  Addict Behav, 2018. 77: p. 38-46. 
12. Fiore, M., et al., Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Update. Clinical Practice 
Guideline.  2008, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service: 
Rockville, MD.  
13. Kahler, C.W., A.M. Leventhal, and R.A. Brown, Behavi oral interventions in smoking 
cessation , in Principles of Addiction Medicine, 4th edition , R.K. Ries, et al., Editors. 2009, 
American Society of Addiction Medicine: Arlington, VA. p. 803 -814. 
14. Gwaltney, C.J., et al., Self-efficacy and smoking cessation:  a meta -analysis.  Psychol Addict 
Behav, 2009. 23(1): p. 56 -66. 
15. Toll, B.A., et al., Comparing gain - and loss -framed messages for smoking cessation with 
sustained -release bupropion: a randomized controlled trial.  Psychol Addict Behav, 2007. 
21(4): p. 534 -44. 
16. Toll, B.A., et al., Message framing for smoking cessation: the interaction of risk 
perceptions and gender.  Nicotine Tob Res, 2008. 10(1): p. 195 -200. 
17. Kahler, C.W., et al., Negative mood, depressive symptoms, and major depression after 
smoking cessation treatment in smokers with a history of major depressive disorder.  J 
Abnorm Psychol, 2002. 111(4): p. 670 -5. 
18. Munafo, M.R., J. Heron, and R. Araya, Smoking patterns during pregnancy and postnatal 
period and depressive symptoms.  Nicotine Tob Res , 2008. 10(11): p. 1609 -20. 
19. Shahab, L. and R. West, Do ex -smokers report feeling happier following cessation? 
Evidence from a cross -sectional survey.  Nicotine Tob Res, 2009. 11(5): p. 553 -7. 
20. Steele, C., The psychology of self -affirmation: Sustainin g the integrity of the self . Advances 
in experimental social psychology. Vol. 21. 1988, New York: Academic press.  
21. Sherman, D.A.K., L.D. Nelson, and C.M. Steele, Do messages about health risks threaten 
the self? Increasing the acceptance of threatening health messages via self -affirmation.  
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2000. 26(9): p. 1046 -1058.  
22. Clark, L.A. and D. Watson, Tripartite model of anxiety and depression: Psychometric 
evidence and taxonomic implications.  Journal of Abnormal Ps ychology, 1991. 100(3): p. 
316-336. 
23. Leventhal, A.M., et al., Dimensions of depressive symptoms and smoking cessation.  
Nicotine Tob Res, 2008. 10(3): p. 507 -17. 
24. Heffner, J.L., et al., Positive Affect as a Predictor of Smoking Cessation and Relapse: Does 
It Offer Unique Predictive Value among Depressive Symptom Domains?  Substance Use & 
Misuse, 2018. 53(6): p. 980 -988. 
25. Strong, D.R., et al., Impact of bupropion and cognitive -behavioral treatment for depression 
on positive affect, negative affect, an d urges to smoke during cessation treatment.  Nicotine 
Tob Res, 2009. 11(10): p. 1142 -53. 
26. McCarthy, D.E., et al., Psychological mediators of bupropion sustained -release treatment 
for smoking cessation.  Addiction, 2008. 103(9): p. 1521 -1533.  
11 
 
27. MacPhers on, L., et al., Randomized controlled trial of behavioral activation smoking 
cessation treatment for smokers with elevated depressive symptoms.  J Consult Clin 
Psychol, 2010. 78(1): p. 55 -61. 
28. Shahab, L. and R. West, Differences in happiness between smok ers, ex -smokers and never 
smokers: cross -sectional findings from a national household survey.  Drug Alcohol 
Depend, 2012. 121(1-2): p. 38 -44. 
29. Farris, S.G., et al., Does successful smoking cessation reduce anxious arousal among 
treatment -seeking smokers?  J Anxiety Disord, 2015. 36: p. 92 -98. 
30. Kahler, C.W., et al., Time -varying smoking abstinence predicts lower depressive symptoms 
following smoking cessation treatment.  Nicotine Tob Res, 2011. 13(2): p. 146 -50. 
31. Taylor, G., et al., Change in mental he alth after smoking cessation: systematic review and 
meta -analysis.  BMJ, 2014. 348: p. g1151.  
32. Park, N., M.E. Seligman, and C. Peterson, Strengths of character and well -being.  Journal 
of Social and Clinical Psychology, 2004. 23: p. 603 -619. 
33. Seligman,  M.E., et al., Positive psychology progress: empirical validation of interventions.  
Am Psychol, 2005. 60(5): p. 410 -21. 
34. Otake, K., et al., Happy People Become Happier through Kindness: A Counting Kindnesses 
Intervention.  J Happiness Stud, 2006. 7(3): p . 361 -375. 
35. Bock, B., et al., A Text Message Delivered Smoking Cessation Intervention: The Initial 
Trial of TXT -2-Quit: Randomized Controlled Trial.  JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, 2013. 1(2): p. 
e17. 
36. Rochon, J., Application of GEE procedures for sample size calculations in repeated 
measures experiments.  Statistics in Medicine, 1998. 17: p. 1643 -1658.  
 
  
12 
 
Table 1  
Smoking cessation and PPT -S+ treatment  components  by session  
Session #  Smoking Cessation Components  PPT -S+ Components  
1 Reasons for quitting  
Smoking as physical addiction and habit  
Identifying high -risk situations  Positive Introductions  
PPT-S+ Model of Smoking Cessation  
3 Good Things  
2 Proper use of the nicotine patch  
Planning for high -risk situations  
Social support for quitting  
Preparing for  quit date  3 Good Things  
Savoring  
Signature strengths in quitting smoking  
3 (quit date)  Quit date review  
Starting nicotine patch  
Planning for high -risk situations  3 Good Things (optional)  
Savoring  
Signature strengths in quitting smoking  
4 Managing smokin g ‘slips’  
Nicotine patch review  
Planning for high -risk situations  3 Good Things (optional)  
Active/Constructive Responding  
Signature strengths in quitting smoking  
5 Benefits of quitting  
Managing smoking ‘slips’  
Nicotine patch review  
Planning for high -risk situations  3 Good Things (optional)  
Savoring Acts of Kindness  
Signature strengths in quitting smoking  
 Benefits of quitting  
Managing smoking ‘slips’  
Nicotine patch tapering  
Planning for high -risk situations  Review of PPT -S+ exercises  
Choosing PPT -S+ exercises to continue  
Note . PPT -S+ = positive psychotherapy for smoking cessation plus text messaging  