Protocol Template  Page 1 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Study Title: A Health System Wide Evaluation of Mandated Use and Clinical Decision 
Support Tools to Improve PDMP Utilization and Patient Outcomes  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Document Date : 3 December 2021   
Protocol Template  Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 COMIRB Protocol 
 
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
CAMPUS BOX F -490     
TELEPHONE:  303 -724-1055  Fax:  303 -724-0990  
 
 Protocol #: 19-1130  
Project Title:  A Health System Wide Evaluation of Mandated Use and Clinical Decision Support 
Tools to Improve PDMP Utilization and Patient Outcomes     
Principal Investigator:   Jason Hoppe, DO  
Version Date: 3 December  2021         
 I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims :  
Prior  research by this team has shown that when emergency d epartment (ED) prescribers are les s 
likely to prescribe an opioid analgesic  to patient s at high -risk of overdose or misuse  when they  
consult the Colorado Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) . Despit e extensive work to 
reduce work flow and accessibility barriers to use of the PDMP, the majority of providers still do 
not use the PDMP when making prescription decisions.  Clinical decisi on support (CDS) that is 
embedded  in the Electronic Health  Record (E HR) has promise as a tool to increase PDMP use, 
advance  presentation of important PDMP data to providers and  improve opioid safety without 
interrupting provider workflow.   
 This cluster -randomized  study is designed to determine if : 
• CDS tools that  deliver focused, timely clinical information to prescribers can improve use of 
the PDMP   
• The u se of focu sed CDS tools can decrease high -risk opioid prescribing  
• The u se of focused CDS tools is associated with better patient outcomes:  decreasing high -risk, 
long- term , and aberrant opioid use   
 Specifically, we will test the hypotheses that:  
1. Use of a focused CDS tool will increase the percentage of high -risk patients who are checked 
in the PDMP in the target populations, compared to those who have not implemented the tool. 
2. Use of a focused CDS tool will decrease the percentage of high -risk patients  who  receive a 
controlled medication prescription in the target populations, compared to those who have not implemented the tool . 
 II. Background and Significance :  
The opioid crisis is a public health emergency that threatens the wellbeing of our communities. 
Despite an overall decrease in opioid prescribing[1] , 11.4 million US citizens suffer from opioid 
misuse [2] and opioid deaths continue to rise in the US. [3] Opioid abuse and deaths represent a 
significant cost to the US economy, with an estimated $78.5 billion spent annually. [4]
  
Colorado suffered from 1,010 drug -related deaths in 2017, a 9% increase from the prior year and 
the most ever. [5] Prescription opioid deaths reached 357 in 2017. [6] In the 2016 -2017 National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health Colorado ranked 7th in number of individuals > 12 years old 
Protocol Template  Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 reporting past year 
non-medical opioid use 
(5.03%), with more than 300,000 
Coloradans misusing 
prescription pain 
medications. [7] Many 
of those reporting use 
of illegal opioids such as heroin or illicit fentanyl report inappropriate use of prescription opioids prio r to a shift  
to illegal drugs. He nce, improved prescribing of opioids is an essential intervention  in addressing 
the opioid epidemic.  
Ten years ago, the Colorado  PDMP was established in ord er to track controlled medication  
prescribing in an effort to improve patient safety and control misuse and abuse of opioids and 
other controlled medications. By consulting the PDMP, a prescriber can identify patients w ith 
prescription histories that  indicate high -risk or inappropri ate use.  Originally, use  of the PDMP 
required  log on, transcription and searching steps on the state web portal which prescribers 
found the  cumberso me and disruptive to their workflow, especially in fast -paced environments 
such as EDs.  Our prior  project  incorporated PDMP access directly into the UCHealth Electronic 
Health Record (EHR), which resulted in increm ental improvements in PDMP utilization  but failed 
to achieve PDMP usage  in a majority of opioid prescriptions .   
As a g rowing part of improving the digital environment in EHRs , CDS  is focused on providing the 
right information to right person  in the right format at the rig ht time in the right channel  to 
improve patient care . The overall goal is  facilitate decision -making and  improve delivery of best 
practices. CDS tools provide information and alternatives to clinicians to supplement but not 
replace good clinical judgment . The proposed CDS tools  suggest but neither require  nor prohibit  
any particular course of treatment  and are not designed to gather information on compliance 
with state and federal laws governing opioid prescribing . The final decision is always at the 
providers ’ discretion.  
Given the small progress made by incorporating  “one click” PDMP access into the EHR , a logical 
next step is to investigate if we can  improve PDMP use and patient  outcomes by designing 
focuse d CDS tools for ED, hospital discharge and in primary care clinic s. The proposed tool would 
search the PDMP automatically (saving provider time) and then present providers the PDMP information only when the patient is determined to be high risk. This will improve workflow by increasing the signal to noise ratio for PDMPs.  
Our initial studies in incorporating the PDMP into the EHR were carried out in 5 UCHealth EDs 
across the Front Range . Primary care clinics work under different time constraints and practice 
patterns, so it is possible that tools which are beneficial in the ED  are not easily transferrable to  
primary care  workflows . As such, a key first step in designing effective CDS tools to improve opioid 
prescribing has been to consult non -ED physicians and prescribers to d etermine  gaps in their 
knowledge and processes, and learn at what time points additional information and decision 
support  tools would be most effective in their pract ices. This step was described separately in 
Figure 1:  Number of Drug Poisoning Deaths in Colorado by Drug 
Type, 2001 -2016*  
Protocol Template  Page 4 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 study 19 -3063, “Prescriber preferences in development of Clinical Decision Support tools to 
improve PDMP utilization. ” 
In the current form used by the state , PDMP data is av ailable as a list of prescriptions , but is 
generally presented in UCHealth system in the form of a NarxCare report .  This report includes a 
proprie tary calculated risk score that  incorporates aspects of a patient’s controlled medication 
use history and has been shown to  correlate with overdose risk.[8] Individual risk scores are 
provided for opioids, stimulants, and sedatives (controlled su bstances tracked by the CO PDMP).  
These scores will be used to drive CDS tool activations .   
 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report : 
In our prior work at UCHealth EDs, we sought to reduce barriers to PDMP use and investigate the 
effectiveness of improved access to the PDMP and “mandated” consultation of the PDMP prior to signing an opioid e -prescription. We determined PDMP usage rates, prescription rates when the 
PDMP is used  (or not) , and patient  outcomes . In the setting  of already decreasing opioid 
prescribing, we found that  one-click PMDP EHR i ntegration  is associated with an increase in the 
frequency of PDMP searches for ED patients who are prescribed an opioid. Unfortunately , still 
only a minority of ED patients receiving an opioid prescription were searched even after 
mandating use through an interruptive “best practice alert”. “Mandated” use for our  studies , is a 
relatively loose term.  In order to not disrupt clinical workflows, information is presented as a 
“best practice alert”  (BPA)  in a pop -up window but providers can act on  or bypass the alert. This 
design is required in order to ensure the tool does not impede patient care or the exercise of clinical judgment . Additionally, use across different ED sites and providers  was highly variable , 
suggesting inconsistent  care and the need for improvement.   
After adjusting for site, provider and the patient’s race/ethnicity and age, the predicted 
probability  that a patient who received an opioid prescription would have been checked in the 
PDMP was only 0.218 (95% CI: 0.202 – 0.234) under the most stringent “mandatory” use criteria 
in our previous study .  
Notably , there was a significant reduction in the probability that an opioid was prescribed as the 
number of opioids filled in the six 
months prior to the ED visit increased if 
the patient was searched in the PDMP (OR: 0.92 [95%CI:0.91- 0.94] for every 
additional prescription). There was no such reduction for patients who were 
not searched (OR: 1.01 [95%CI:1.00-
1.01] for every additional prescription).  
This suggests t hat reviewing the PDMP 
did have an effect on prescribing behaviors for high -risk patients .  
We conclude that providing effective information  on prior controlled 
medication  use and risk  assessment improves patient safety by decreasing high -risk prescribing.  
However, given poor compliance with “mandatory” consultation of the PDMP, it is clear that improvements are needed in information presentation to facilitate PDMP use. To address this 

Protocol Template  Page 5 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 issue , the current study will focus on designing, testing and implementing CDS  tools to ensure 
delivery  of the right PDMP information to  prescribers at the right time within their workflow to 
increase  compliance with the recommended best practice of PDMP review .  
IV. Research  Methods  
A. Outcome  Measure(s):   
Primary outcome : 
• Changes in the percentage of high -risk patients (pa tients who are flagged by the CD S 
logic) who are checked in the PDMP  
Secondary outcomes:  
• Changes in the percentage of high -risk patients (patients who are flagged by the CDS 
logic) who receive a controlled medication prescription 
• Overall utilization of the PDMP prior to prescribing for low risk/naïve patients vs . high risk 
patients  
• Percentage of patients who receive a controlled medication prescription who go on to 
long- term or aberrant use of controlled medication  when CDS is used vs. controls   
 B. Description of Population to be Enrolled:   
Two distinct populations will be involved  in this study.   
1. Health care providers  licensed to prescribe opioid analgesics in the UCHealth system. 
These individuals will use CDS  tools provided in the course of  normal clinical care  and 
have the opportunity for qualitative feedback on tools . We will collect d e-identified data 
on CDS use and prescribin g practices  of providers . There will be no attempts to link 
qualitative responses with measures of prescribing practices, which will be measured system wide  as described elsewhere . Oncology, hospic e/palliative care, and pediatric 
practices will be excluded  
2. Patient s seeking care in the UCHealth system, who may receive an  opioid prescription. 
The population will be limited to  non-prisoners  12-8 9 years of age. Individuals with an 
active cancer diagnosis, sickle cell disease, or receiving specific end of life care are excluded.  Pregnant women and decisionally challenged people will be included but are 
not considered a target population.  No efforts will be made to include these individuals. 
Patients with limited literacy or limited English fluency will be included but are not considered a target population.  Juveniles seen at providers included in the specialties  of 
interest will be included (ages 12 -17 inclusive) due to the inclusion of their health care 
provider. On the advice of pediatric toxicology experts , a cut poi nt of 12 years of age is  a 
clinically relevant age at which misuse of opioid analgesics and other controlled medications becomes a notable risk . However, no efforts will be made to target or 
enhance inclusion of juveniles.  Pediatrics -only specialist offices will not be includ ed in 
rollout of the CDS tools. Outcomes measures from juveniles  will be examined separately 
from adults but  may be included in the overall population if statistically appropriate.   
 C. Study Design and Research Methods    
This will be a 1) cluster -randomized  (by practice, as identified by a group of providers who 
work in the same department or set of departments within UCHealth ) study  for 
ambulatory/outpatient providers  and 2) a randomized study ( by provider ) for emergency 
medicine and inpatient provider s, with four study  arms : 
 
Protocol Template  Page 6 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 1. Arm 1:  No change in practice  
• Providers are free to access the PDMP when prescribing via the existing integrated 
PDMP button.   
• This control group will enable monitoring of the secular changes in rates of controlled 
medication  prescription  within the UCHealth system . 
• In order to facilitate  analysis of patient outcomes, CDS logic as in group 4 will run 
“silently” in this group such that risks are identified and recorded but not seen by  the 
provider.  
2. Arm 2:  “Mandatory” use of the PDMP for all opioid prescriptions.   
• A best practice alert (BPA)  will be triggered and fire when  ordering an  opioid 
prescription . The BPA will not appear ( i.e. it will be suppressed) if the provider already 
reviewed the PDMP  with in the encounter. The BPA  is shown in Figure 2 below.   
• Although this condition is termed “mandatory” use, it is not a hard stop. T he provider 
can easily close the window without consulting the PDMP  and the prescription can be 
signed whether the PDMP has been consulted or not.  The BPA will be built to track 
utilization of the BPA vs. bypass. Note: This has been deemed too interruptive for 
ambulatory clinics and they will not be included in this arm.   
3. Arm 3:  CDS  for high risk patients  based on PDMP data 
• Based on initial interviews with providers (see 19 -3063) CDS support will be designed 
to be supportive of provider workflows via interruptive alerts (BPAs) for h igh-risk 
patients  only. No alerts will fire for patients without high risk indicators based on data 
in the PDMP or prescription history as shown in Epic.   An example is given below. 
Exact phrasing may be modified during final testing in order to streamline appearance 
of the alert.  
• Again,  BPA will be triggered upon  entry of an opioid or benzodiazepine prescription 
and will fire only for  patient s determined to be at risk for controlled medication 
associated adverse events,  misuse or overd ose, based on logic built to identify high -
risk characteristics . Definition of these risk characteristics is based on CDC guidelines 
and include: NarxCare opioid or overall overdose risk score  (PDMP based)  indicating 
the patient is in the highest ~5% of the population for controlled medication risk , 
initiating opioid treatment with an extended or long acting  release formulation with 
no opioid usage  in the previous 100 days , or information in the PDMP or EHR 
indicating overlapping  opioid use or co -prescribing of a sedative with an opioid .   
• One-click access to the PDMP for all patients will be maintained as in other arms.  If 
the provider reviews the PDMP during the encounter before prescribing, the BPA will 
be suppressed.   
Figure 2:  Example BPA used in prior study.  
Protocol Template  Page 7 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 • As in Group 2, this  is not a truly mandatory check and can be bypassed.  BPA 
messaging was determined based on work with providers to deliver the most useful 
and clear information.  
• The text displayed in the alert will be specific to the patient. BPA logic and phrasing is 
included in Appendix A . 
 
Figure 3: Sample alert.   
 
4. Arm 4:  CDS for high risk patients based on PDMP and/or clinical characteristics    
• The CDS  will fire based on the same characteristics as in Group 3 OR if clinical history 
characteristics recorded in the EHR indicate increased high -risk. Again, these risk 
factors have been determined based on work with providers and include  risk factors 
based on prior published work [9; 10] . Factors included are : history of overdose, an 
active mental health  diagnosis, a history of positive tox screen for illicit drugs, an 
active or prior diagnosis of a substance use disorder, or multiple recent ED visits which included administration of an opioid . 
• One-click access to the PDMP for all patients will be available  as in other arms. If the 
EHR encounter includes records of a PDMP check, the BPA will be suppressed and not fire.   
• As in Group 2  and 3 , this  is not a truly mandatory check and can be bypassed.  
The exact messaging included in and format of the BPA s were  determined based on the 
results of study 19 -3063 and technical feasibility . For high -risk prescribing, each  BPA will 
provide an alert and embedded link to action ( “check the PDMP”) , a reason (“your patient is 
at high risk due to XXX ”) and a link to a website providing more information about the study, 
the logic used to fire the CDS and resources for prescribers such as the CDC Guidelines. No treatment recommendations will be made as the goal of the CDS is to encourage providers to make effective use of exi sting resources to inform their prescribing.  BPAs will be designed to 
track provider use vs. bypass.   

Protocol Template  Page 8 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 A series of silent alerts will be used to capture information about patient risks and provider 
PDMP usage  over time . For Arms 2 and 3 as described above, an alert nearly identical to the 
study alert will fire but not be visible to the provider (2nd level in model) . The silent alert will 
have the same PDMP and EHR  criteria but will not filter out patients for whom the provider 
has already checked the PDMP  (suppressed in provider alert) . This will allow tracking of 
provider PDMP behavior change over time  since we will have PDMP use due to BPA and 
PDMP by provider which suppresses BPAs . This is important to identify behavior change 
regarding PDMP use by providers.   
In addition, a second silent alert (3rd level in model) will fire for all eligible patients seen by 
study providers, using the same criteria as the PDMP + EHR alert described above. As with the 
previously described alert, PDMP use will not  suppress this alert  so that all patients can be 
captured. This alert will allow us to document  the same  risk information for all study patients 
so we can describe patient risk information across intervention groups . Much of this 
information tends to be transient and variable over time. Having a snapshot of the data at 
that moment will be valuable in the final analysis.  
 
Figure 4: Visible (top row) and silent alerts used in the study CDS  
Due to primary care not allowing interruptive BPAs, t here will be two units of randomization  
corresponding to the ED /hospital discharge  and the outpatient  care setting, respectively . 
Prescribers working in UCHealth Emergency Departments  and inpatient facilities   
• Each ED /inpatient  prescriber will be randomized to one of the four study  arms  
described above . Dentists will be excluded.  
• Prescribers  will be stratified based on primary work site .  As a number of facilities 
within the UCHealth  system share staff, “work site” is being defined based on shared 
staffing as follows:  
Emergency Department(s)  Hospital/Inpatient facilities  
UCHospital at AMC  UCHospital at AMC  

Protocol Template  Page 9 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Broomfield Hospital; Commerce City, Green 
Valley, Littleton, Mississippi, Parker, 
Ralston freestanding EDs  Broomfield Hospital  
Highlands Ranch Hospital  Highlands Ranch Hospital  
Memorial Hospital North, Memorial 
Hospital Central, Pikes Peak Regional, Grandview Hospital; Fountain, Meadows, Powers, Woodmen freestanding EDs  Memorial Hospital North, 
Memorial Hospital Central, Pikes Peak Regional, Grandview Hospital  
Greeley Hospital, Longs Peak Hospital, 
Medical Center of the Rockies, Poudre Valley Hospital, Harmony freestanding  Greeley Hospital, Longs Peak 
Hospital, Medical Center of the Rockies, Poudre Valley Hospital 
Estes Park Hospital  Estes Park Hospital  
Yampa Valley Medical Center  Yampa Valley Medical Center  
• Prescribers  will be randomized at th e time of activation of the CDS using permuted 
block randomization  base upon their pr imary work site  and will remain in study for 12 
months.  
• CDS will only fire for discharge prescriptions  (i.e. not for inpatient orders)  for 
prescribers  working in hospital -based  facilities.  
• Providers who work in multiple locations will be assigned to the location where they do the majority of their prescribing.  
Primary care and selected specialty practices   
• Practices will be randomized into study  arms 1 , 3, or 4 . Due to workflow concerns and 
the longitudinal  physician/patient relationship in primary care, and based on 
feedback from primary care leadership, inclusion of an interruptive , non -specific  alert 
was considered to be counterproductive in this population.  
• Practices will be stratified as small, medium, or large based on the number of opioid 
and benzodiazepine prescriptions written in the year prior to randomization . Small 
practices are those with a number of prescriptions  in the lowest third , large practices 
in the highest third , and medium size practice all others.  
• Practices with less than 52 total opioid plus benzodiazepine prescriptions in the year prior to randomization will be excluded. With less than one prescription per week, the impact of the CDS on prescribing is anticipated to be minimal and excluding such low providers will reduce the risk of inactive prescribers biasing results.  
• Practices will be randomized at  the time of activation of the CDS  and will remain on 
study for 12 months.  
 
Practices may be added d uring the course of the study. Follow up for patient outcomes will 
continue for 6 months following deactivation of the alerts.   
CDS tools will be activated first in EDs, then for inpatient providers, and finally in ambulatory 
settings.  This staged roll out will allow for identification and modification of system bugs and 
unanticipated problems, as well as allow for increased socialization of the tools and greater buy in by providers.  
Protocol Template  Page 10 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 This study design is chosen for a combination of sci entific and pragmatic concerns.  This study 
is effectively an implementation of a novel CDS  augmentation, such as would happen 
routinely in a non -research environment on a prac tice-by-practice  basis. Therefore, to better 
mimic this real world situation, the most appropriate unit of randomization would be the 
practice/ site.  However, pragmatic concerns also inform the design, specifically:  
1. Primary care : Randomizing by practice will optimize the opportunities for provider 
education and reduce the risk of cross -group contamination if a single provider or 
practice treated multiple patients with similar risk  patterns but received different CDS 
alerts.  It also ensure s that all members of a treatment team working with a single 
patient or single encounter receive the same information about that patient’s risk  
stratification .   
2. Hospital based:   The small number of EDs and hospitals, especially large EDs, relative 
to the numb er of randomization groups  translate s to a la rge risk of unbalanced groups. 
To address this issue , a smaller unit of randomization is appropriate  specifically for EDs 
and hos pital discharges.  The authorizing provider  is ultimately responsible for opioid 
prescribing and as such is most  appropriate as a smaller unit.  As residents work under 
a number of attending physicians, this will also prevent the development of 
overreliance on automated alerts in a physician in training, in order to minimize the chance of risk to clinical care.  
Prior to CDS activation  and at the time of activation, training materials will be shared with 
relevant sites an d practices.  These materials are included in Appendix #.  A link to a provider 
feedback survey in RED Cap will be included in order to  collect standardized feedback from 
system users.  
Activation  of the alert will be monitored using automated tracking within Epic which identifies 
providers and patients associated with alert firings. A key feature of the CDS is that the PDMP check must be “attested” to in order to suppress the CDS and prevent re -firing of the alerts , 
which is interruptive to the provider. This attestation is a workflow change for providers and 
is essential for CDS success. It can happen prior to prescription entry, in which case the alerts will not activate  (suppression) , or after activation of the alert.  
In the event that providers are being “hit” with CDS alerts multiple times within the same 
encounter for a single patient because they miss the attestation step, an educational message 
with a link to the education website will be sent to the provider via email or EHR internal 
messaging systems to remind the provider to click the attestation button in order to prevent 
multiple firings. A weekly tally of messages sent will be retained, but no patient information  
will be retained.  No provider will receive more  than three educational reminders.  The 
reminder will not include any patient information. This check is intended only to provide an 
additional personalized education step.  
This is important because (1) dissemination of education about new CDS across all of UCHealth is challenging so we will miss providers and (2) we have concerns that if providers find the CDS to be a nuisance (due to a simple knowledge gap of not understand ing the 
attestation requirement) they will not use the CDS.   
Similarly, if a provider receives multiple alerts but does not access the PDMP in response, a reminder will be sent that checking the PDMP requires the same number of “clicks” as 
dismissing the alert and is considered best practice prior to prescribing. As  with the contact 
Protocol Template  Page 11 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 described above, these reminders will not contain any patient specific information and are 
designed as a personalized education step. No provider will receive more than three contacts 
in this way.  
From initiation of educational messages until 9/20/2021, p roviders  who receive one of the 
above educational messages  will receive the message via email. Educational messages sent on 
or after 9/21/2021 will sent  via internal messaging within the EHR . This change in educational 
message delivery will allow for examination of best practices with providers . 
Provider identifying information will be retained in order to determine the effectiveness of the educational outreach. Information retained will include alert firings (including multiple 
firings/patient) and provider actions over time. In order to better understand the 
environments in which educational intervention is most effective, provider specialty, primary work site , and basic demographic information (age, gender, race/ethnicity) , will be obtained 
from within the EHR . Method of  notification (email or internal messaging within the EHR)  will 
also be tracked to compare provider behavioral changes between educational notifications . 
Provider work environment (Emergency Department, inpatient or ambulatory) will be 
determined based on study randomization lists.  Data will be deidentified for analysis.  Data on 
CDS and site performance will be monitored continuously during the c ourse of the study (see 
attached file “Baseline data” for details of data monitored) via automated data extract built 
by ED E pic analytics team and monitored by study team.  No identif iable data will be collected  
in or der to protect confidentiality.  De-identified extracts of these data may be exported from 
Epic to the UCDenv er OneDrive system for CDS  monitoring  and analysis .  Baseline data will be 
gathered retrospectively for the 12 months prio r to first deployment of the CDS  for each 
randomization unit . Pro viders who are not in the system for the baseline will be excluded 
from analysis.  
Validation of the alerts  
In order to ensure that the alerts are functioning properly  prior to activation , up to 30 
individual firings will be identified by study staff and EHR records of the patient will be 
checked to confirm that a controlled medication was prescribed and the risk criteria identified by the alert system are reflected in the medical record. Records of this validation will be maintained only by alert firing number.  Identifying information associated with the alert will not be maintained once the alert firing is validated.  
The addition of routine collection of opioid and overall risk scores from the Appriss PDMP interface is a new addition to the UCHealth electronic health record.  As such, while the developer can supply data on distribution of scores in their development co hort, no data are 
available on the distribution of scores in the UCHealth population.  Therefore risk scores for patients across the UCHealth system will be collected in order to verify the distribution of scores and number of concurrent controlled medicat ion prescriptions , as reflected in the 
score . Only risk scores and the department specialty where the patient is being seen will be 
collected.  As most of these data will be from patients whose visit is not relevant to study procedures or study participation, no identifying information will be colle cted at this step  and 
no attempts will be made to link any given score to a patient, encounter, or specific prescription.  
Collection of patient specific data and outcomes:   
Protocol Template  Page 12 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Data on patient  outcomes will be collected retrospectively . These data are crucial to 
determine the downstream effectiveness of the CDS tools .   
Pilot data from selected sites will be pulled by Compass prior to rollout in order to test the 
data query system. Once the CDS  have been activated , data will be pulled shortly after initial 
deployment, plus up to 2 -4 times per year to monito r progress and data integrity.  Clinical and 
demographic data will be extracted  from Epic by Compass , based on pre -defined criteria. The 
list of patients  identified will be sent to CDPHE, who will provide PDMP data for all individuals 
for whom there is a record. PDMP data  will provide additional information on controlled 
substance use by patients from non -UCHealth sites and may be useful to identify  aberrant or 
high -risk use of controlled medications by the patient. Data will be merged with All Payer 
Claims Data for selected outcomes (ED utilization, hospitalization, death) then secondarily de-
identified by Compass acting as an “honest broker” and returned to the study team as a 
limited data set for analysis.  
D.   Description, Risks and Justification of Proc edures and Data Collection Tools:  
Procedures: This 
study does not 
include any 
procedures which mandate a particular course of patient care or 
prescriber behavior. All PDMP 
information shared 
is already available 
through the state portal or integrated Epic PDMP button. It is designed to improve access and data presentation 
of patient -related information  to facilitate safety through risk stratification. Use of the PDMP 
prior to prescribing an opioid is  considered to be a CDC clinical best practice and is required 
by law in multiple states  and in Colorado under certain circumstances [11]. This study is 
designed to make PDMP access  easier and more efficient (increase signal to noise)  and 
measure the impact through both healthcare system and patient outcomes . As such, it 
represents no greater risk to patients or providers than normal clinical care.   
Data collection :  CDS activation and provider behavior . Most healthcare system data 
collection will be automated within the EHR . This is the lowest risk and most accurate method 
of collecting information on the function of EHR tools  and clinical decisions . Collection of 
feedback from providers will be collected  through secure  REDCap-based surveys and  
information collection tools. Providers have the option of answer ing all questions 
anonymously. However, there is a small risk of release of information considered private on 
clinical practices and decision -making processes. Provision of input is fully voluntary, we will 
not ask for any  information on specific patients or any proprietary information from the 
practice. No information will be provided about statutory compliance to regulatory agencies 
so there is no risk to the provider around employability or reputation.  

Protocol Template  Page 13 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Data collection:  Patient specific outcomes . This is the only stage of the study which will 
access PHI, however, there is no direct patient contact by the research team and the study is 
designed to improve information availability and flow, not  dictate a course of treatment.  As 
such, the primary risk of the study is release of private information or a breach of 
confidentiality around PHI but does not change the patient’s risk beyond that of normal 
medical care.  In order to mitigate this risk, UCDenver Compass for Health will act as an 
“Honest Broker ” and provide only a de -identified data set to the study team  as they have on 3 
prior collaborations  with our team . More information on data protections and processes are 
provided in the COMIRB application document.  
Data collection : Provider educational outreach.  Provider identifying information will be 
collected, unassociated with specific patient information. All data will be deidentified by the 
research prior to analysis. Each provider will be assigned a record number as part of the RedCap database. At the time of analysis, provider name and email will be deleted from the records and the record number will be used to identify the provider. The only risk to the 
provider from the educational outreach is the possibility of a small breach of privacy around 
prescribing patterns. All messaging and data storage will be kept within the UCHealth/UCDenver systems in order to maintain privacy. Records including provider names will be stored in RedCap.  
    
E.   Potential Scientific Problems:   
In our previous work, we noted a temporal trend toward system -wide decrease in opioid 
presc ribing across the EDs examined. If this is ongoing and includes  outpatient clinics , it will 
complicate analysis o f the impact of the CDS tools. As such, it is important both to inc lude a 
control group with no visible CDS  and to apply the CDS  across as large a range of providers as 
possible in order to collect enough data to be able to separate temporal and study related differences.  To avoid p otential data- distorting geographic differences in opioid prescribing, 
we will randomize  clinics by site rather than geographic groupings as w as done in our 
previous study. As we are working only in Colorado, generalizability of the study may be 
limited if there are unique conditions in this state which cannot be controlled for or statistically managed.  
We cannot truly mandate consultation of t he PDMP at any point in patient care, therefore we 
will not be able to definitively determine if prescribing is wholly dependent o n the 
information in the PDMP. However, it is important that  clinical care not be disrupted in order 
to increase acceptance, and therefore impact, of the CDS.    
There is a risk that patients will be seen by multiple providers and so be represented in multiple arms of the study. For primary care, this is a small risk as most patients remain with the same clinics for primary care. This is a greater concern for ED or hospital visits where 
patients are likely to see different providers for subsequent or specialty visits. For provider level outcomes (Aim1) the multiple patient visits can be accounted for with random effects and from a provider prospective the visits can  essentially be treated as unique. For patient 
follow -up outcomes, patients can be censored at the time of a subsequent visit and then 
followed from the new time point.  
At the time of this submission, design and building of the CDS tools is nearly complete and it 
appears that the required system -level process monitoring data can be collected in an 
Protocol Template  Page 14  
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 automated or semi-automated manner, ensuring quality data collection and alleviating 
previous concerns about potential technical problems with system data collection . 
The greatest scientific risk associate d with this study is incomplete data. At each stage of the 
study, it will be possible to  bypass study associated BPAs. When this happens, automated 
data collection fields will remain blank and it will be impossible to determine linkages 
between the BPAs, use of the PDMP, and prescribing behavior.  Epic CDS team have  design ed 
CDS and BPAs so bypasses and utilization can be tracked.  
 
F.   Data Analysis Plan:   
Two categories of data will be collected in conjunction with this study. Hospital s ystem 
measures  will be collected and monitored both at baseline an d during conduct of the study. 
Technical or wording issues in the CDS tools which are identified by this monitoring may be 
addressed, but the alert  logic  and conduct of the study will not be changed.  Patient level 
measures  will be measured retrospectively.  
Hospital system measures will include: 
1. Description of practices to include:  
• # of licensed providers  
• # of patients  
• # of visits  
• Specialty/Service  
• Study group  
2. Description  of prescribing  to include  the number  of opioid  and other  controlled  
medication  prescriptions  written  by: 
• Site/practice/prescriber  
• Study arm  
• Month  
• Specialty  
• PDMP button annotation (reviewed/unable to review)  
• PDMP check not recorded  
• To patient with existing sedative prescription  
• Formulation – immediate vs sustained/extended release  
3. Description  of use of the PDMP  and study -associated  BPAs, specifically  monitoring  
• # of times PDMP activity/website is checked by  site/practice/service , monthly, 
and specialty  
• Frequency of use of the PDMP one -click button per visit and per opioid 
prescription  
• Frequency of CDS and BPA trigger overall and per opioid prescription  
• Frequency of prescriptions for which the BPA would have fired but the prescriber 
had already checked the PDMP (look for change over time – do the BPAs lead to 
learning & change in prescriber behavior)  
• Number of times CDS alert fired , total and per visit  (the alert is designed to only 
fire once during any encounter, thus the per visit rate will be <1)  
• Reviewed  (via radio button or via alert)/unable to review/blank  
Protocol Template  Page 15 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 • Resulted in signed Rx (reviewed/unable checked , signed prescription)  
• Use of training tools  and website . Identifying information on individuals accessing 
tools will not be recorded.  
• Qualitative/semi- quantitative feedback from users as the CDS alerts  are 
implemented  
 Patient specific measures will include : 
o Number of controlled medication  prescriptions, both within UCHealth and 
outside, based on PDMP data (including prescription details to include generic 
name, dosage, MMEs, days prescribed)  
o Use of the PDMP by the prescriber prior to each controlled medication 
prescription written  
o NarxCare risk score at the time of each prescription  
o Number of providers/practices used for controlled substance prescriptions  
o Number of pharmacies used for controlled substance prescriptions  
o Diagnosis of any substance use disorder after the index visit date  
o Accidental overdose of controlled substance after the index date (if data 
available)  
o Patient demographics and clinical history characteristics  
 
Educational outreach analysis: Alert firings for providers part of the educational  outreach group 
will be analyzed for percent of non -compliant firings before outreach vs after  as well as a 
comparison between the two different educational outreach efforts (email or EHR messaging system) . Non -compliance is defined as 3 or more alerts for a single patient/encounter or >80% of 
firings closed using the comment/close option rather than using the PDMP link. Firings over time will be tracked as will changes in com pliance before and after each outreach attempt.  These data 
will be de -identified prior to reporting.  Data will be examined for patterns based on demographics 
or work environment.  
 Calculation of sample size:  
The number of providers who choose to provide input on CDS design and implementation can 
only be very roughly estimated. The UCHealth system includes approximately 18,000 individual 
prescribers, not all of whom will see the alerts. Assuming 5% of individual prescribers choose to 
provide feedback through the survey available on the website,  approximately 900 providers 
could provide feedback.  No minimal response rate is required for significance as no hypotheses 
will be tested with these data . Survey data will be summarized via descriptive statistics only.  
The driving factor in total enrollmen t is the patient outcome phase.  As the tools will be active 
over the course of approximately 20 months, total patient counts over 20 months, rather than a 
power calculation, inform our assumptions about enrollment. Of the approximately 2.3 million 
individuals in the UCHealth system between the ages of 12 – 89, approximately 290 ,000 received 
at least one opioid prescription in the last 20  mont hs. Approximately 906,000 individual patients 
were seen in the UCHealth system i n the same time period.   
The CDS tools used in this study will automatically query each patient record in order to obtain risk data, but data will only be seen by a provider in a fraction of cases.  Based on the advice of privacy officials and COMIRB staff during the design of this study, all individuals queried are included as study participants, even if a provider does not see a study associated CDS alert for all 
Protocol Template  Page 16  
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 patients.  As such, it is estimated that 950,000 patients will be included in this study. The number 
of patients queried will be monitored during the course of the study and updated as needed . 
 
Data to be collected:  
 
Variable  Definition  Importance  
Prescriber/system data  
Overall controlled medication 
prescribing rate  Total number of 
opioid/sedative/stimulant prescriptions divided by total number of visits at each 
site and the hospital system  Measures the overall 
impact for each CDS 
tool 
Individual provider controlled 
medication prescribing rates  Total number of 
opioid/sedative/stimulant prescriptions divided by total number of encounters for 
each provider  Measures the behavior 
and practice variation of individual prescribers 
for each CDS tool  
Overall rate of PDMP use  Total number of times PDMP is accessed 
when opioid/sedative/stimulant prescriptions are written  Measures how readily 
providers obtain information for each 
CDS tool  
Provider specific rate of 
PDMP use  Total number PDMP searches for each 
provider, changes over time for each provider  Measures provider 
search behavior and variability changes for 
each CDS tool  
Overall prescription rate after 
accessing PDMP  Number of times 
opioid/sedative/stimulant were prescribed after accessing the PDMP  Evaluate the impact of 
PDMP review on the decision to prescribe 
controlled mediations  
Provider demographics  Age, sex (M/F), years of employment 
(when available, data saved in EHR)  Evaluate variability in 
provider acceptance based on information stored in the EHR 
system.  
Provider specific prescription 
rate after accessing PDMP  Total number of 
opioid/sedative/stimulant prescriptions divided by the number of times the provider accessed the PDMP for each 
provider  Evaluate provider 
variability in interpretation with and without decision 
support  
Patient specific outcomes  
Patient 
demographics  Age, gender, ethnicity, insurance type  Description of patient 
population  
Visit 
characteristics  Date of service#, service location, provider 
specialty , zip code  Evaluate visit for 
possible influences on 
patient and provider 
outcomes  
Protocol Template  Page 17  
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Opioid 
prescription  Type, name, strength, number of pills , 
prescriber  Evaluate the 
effectiveness of the 
CDS tools  
PDMP search 
completed  Yes/no  Evaluate the 
effectiveness of the 
CDS tools  
Patient 
characteristics  Discharge diagnosis, past medical history, 
current co -morbid diagnoses, social 
history , other medications  Evaluate patient 
variability and other 
influences on 
prescribing/risk levels  
CDS activation  Activation of CDS alert, which alert  Identify risk factors for 
patient as presented to 
prescriber  
Prescriptions 
from PDMP Type of medication (opioid, sedative, 
stimulant), date written#, date filled, # 
medication name, strength, formulation, # of pills  prescribed, # of days supply, 
milligram morphine equivalents (MME), 
insurance type, pharmacy number  Evaluate patient 
outcome, needed for complete picture of prescription use  
Non -UCHealth 
visits from All Payers Claims Data  ED visits, hospitalizations  Evaluate overall patient 
outcome, including unintended consequences of limitation of 
prescription pain 
medications  
Provider  Feedba ck 
Use of training 
materials  and 
website  Usage (file access) over time  Measure of 
effectiveness of 
educational efforts  
Survey 
responses  See draft included with submission  Provide ideas of aspects 
of CDS tool considered 
worthwhile by users.  
Descriptive statistics only, non -quantitative 
analysis.  
#All data will be deidentified prior to release of data to the research team.  
 
G.  Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:   
As PDMP use improves prescribing decision s, this study will provide  immediate, direct b enefit to 
study participants . Further , it will provide greater understanding of the reasons why clinicians use 
or do not use the PDMP as recommended, and explore several options for improving utilization  
and maximizing appropriate clinician use of the information provided.  Finally, it will explore patient focused outcomes when the PDMP is used (or not), and if patient outcomes are better (defined as less aberrant or long term opioid use) when PDMP CDS tools are better integrated 
into the provider’s workflow  and better focused on providing high impact, risk based information 
Protocol Template  Page 18 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 to the provider at the appropriate time. Given the number of patients and providers covered by 
the UCHealth system, and the geographic dispersion of UCHealth facilities around the state, it is 
likely that results will be generalizable through the state and ot her states through the region. The 
degree to which our findings will be generalizable  beyond Colorado  and the mountain west 
regions is uncertain.     
 
 H. References:  
 
[1] Garcia MC, Heilig CM, Lee SH, Faul M, Guy G, Iademarco MF, Hempstead K, Raymond D, 
Gray J. Opioid Prescribing Rates in Nonmetropolitan and Metropolitan Counties Among 
Primary Care Providers Using an Electronic Health Record System -  United States, 2014-
2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2019;68(2):25- 30. 
[2] Elinore F. McCance- Katz MD P. The National Survey on Drug Use and Health: 2017. In: 
UDoHaH Services editor, 2019.  
[3] Hedegaard H, Minino AM, Warner M. Urban- rural Differences in Drug Overdose Death Rates, 
by Sex, Age, and Type of Drugs Involved, 2017. NCHS Data Brief 2019(345):1- 8. 
[4] Schuchat A, Houry D, Guy GP, Jr. New Data on Opioid Use and Prescribing in the United 
States. Jama 2017;318(5):425- 426. 
[5] Vestal C. Overdose Deaths Fall in 14 States, Vol. 2019: Pew Trust, 2018.  
[6] Ingalls J. More than 1,000 Coloradans Lost to Drug Overdoses in 2017, Vol. 2019: Colorado 
Health Institute, 2018.  
[7] Rachel N. Lipari PD, Struther L. Van Horn, M.A., Arthur Hughes, M.S. and, Matthew Williams, 
Ph.D. STATE AND SUBSTATE ESTIMATES OF NONMEDICAL USE OF PRESCRIPTION 
PAIN RELIEVERS. SAMHSA Short Report, 2017.  
[8] Huizenga JE BB, Patel VR, Raz A, Speights. NarxCheck Scores as a Predictor of Unintentional 
Over. In: I Appriss editor, 2016.  
[9] Seymour RB, Leas D, Wally MK, Hsu JR. Erratum to: Prescription reporting with immediate 
medication utilization mapping (PRIMUM): development of an alert to improve narcotic 
prescribing. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2016;16(1):125.  
[10] Seymour RB, Leas D, Wally MK, Hsu JR. Prescription reporting with immediate medication 
utilization mapping (PRIMUM): development of an alert to improve narcotic prescribing. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2016;16:111.  
[11] Colorado Senate Bill 18- 022: Concerning clinical practice measures for safer opioid 
prescribing, 2018.  
 
 
  
Protocol Template  Page 19 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
  
ATTACHMENT A 
Provider/practice specialties included in data  
 
Anesthesiology  
Behavioral Health  
Brain and Spine  
BREAST  
Breast Surgery  
Burn Surgery  
Cardiac Intensive Care  
Cardiac Surgery  
Cardiothoracic Surgery  
Dentistry  
Dialysis  
EXEC HEALTH  
Family Medicine  
General Surgery  
Gerontology  
Gynecology  
Hand Surgery  
INTEGRATED MEDICINE  
Internal Medicine  
INTERVENTIONAL CARDIOLOGY  
Maternal and Fetal Medicine  
Medical Surgical  
Neurology  
Neurosurgery  
Obstetrics and Gynecology  Occupational Medicine  
Ophthalmology  
Oral Surgery  
Orthopedic Surgery  
Otolaryngology  
Pain Medicine  
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation  
Plastic Surgery  
Primary Care  
Psychiatry  
Rehabilitation  
Rheumatology  
Spine and Rehab Medicine  
Sports Medicine  
Surgical Intensive Care  
Surgical/Trauma  
Thoracic Surgery  
Transplant  
Urgent Care  
Urology  
VASCULAR  
Vascular Surgery  
Womens Health  
Workers Compensation  
Wound Care  
 