 Statistical Analysis and Reporting Plan (SARP) 
Endexo-001 
An Open-label clinical study to assess the performance of the d ialyzer with 
EndexoTM in End-Stage Renal Disease Subjects 
Statistical Analysis and Reporting Plan 
8/5/2019 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]

Protocol Endexo-001    Statistical Analysis and  Repor
ting Plan 
 8/5/2019  Page 3 of 12  1.STUDY OBJECTIVES
1.1. Primary Objective 
The primary objective of the study is to 
collect data on the performance of the dialyzer with 
Endexo when used to perform hemod ialysis (HD) in end stage renal disease (ESRD) subjects. 
1.2.  Secondary Objective 
The secondary objective is to collect and summarize adverse eve nts with the dialyzer with 
Endexo when used to perform HD in ESRD subjects. 
2. STUDY DESIGN
2.1.  General Description 
This is a prospective, sequential, multi-center, open-label study with subjects on thrice-weekly 
(in-center) hemodialysis treatment.  
Each subject will participate in a screening period, Optiflux p eriod, Endexo period, and a follow-
up visit.  
Screening Per iod
Screening, which will be up to 4 w eeks in duration, begins with  signing of the informed
consent form (ICF). After the Screening Period is completed (with eligibility verified),
the subject is enrolled and can proceed to the Optiflux Period.
Optiflux periodThe Optiflux Period is 12 HD treatments (visits 1 to 12) on the  Optiflux dialyzer (4
weeks in duration)). A maximum of two missed treatments are permitted within visits 2
to 11. The visit 12 cannot be missed during the Optiflux period .
Endexo period
The Endexo period is 38 HD treatments on the dialyzer with Ende xo (approximately 13
weeks in duration). The visit 13 cannot be missed. A maximum of  four missed treatments
are permitted within Visits 14-50.
Follow-up visitAn in-center Follow-up visit is to be conducted within 1 week of the last scheduled study
HD treatment.
2.2. Discussion of Study Design, Inclu ding the Choice of Control Gro ups 

Protocol Ende
xo-001    Statistical Analysis and  Repor
ting Plan 
 8/5/2019  Page 4 of 12  The design is based on FDA’s Guidance for Industry and CDRH Rev iewers: Guidance for the 
Content of Premarket Notifications for Conventional and High Permeability Hemodialyzer 
(August 7, 1998). A period of 4 weeks using Optiflux, which was prescribed currently, are added in prior to the use of the test product. The measurements in Op tiflux period for each subject can 
serve as the control for comparisons as needed.
 
2.3. Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups 
N/A 
2.4. Blinding 
N/A 
2.5. Determination of Sample Size 
The sample size of 15-24 subjects is based on FDA’s Guidance fo r Industry and CDRH 
Reviewers: Guidance for the Content of Premarket Notifications for Conventional and High 
Permeability Hemodialyzer (August 7, 1998), which recommends that data be collected for a  
minimum of 12 subjects receiving 36 treatments each. 
3.CHANGES IN THE CONDUCT OF THE STUDY OR PLANNED ANALYSES
3.1. Changes in the Conduct of the Study 
Protocol amendment 2: 
Added in the time of administration and reason for saline flush , and
Collected TMP and UFR at 15 m
inutes  (±5 minutes) after the reco rded start of HD
during visits 24, 27 and 30.
3.2. Changes in the Planned Analyses 
Additional listing for reasons of saline flush. The percent of using saline to treat
clotting or clotting related will be calculated if applicable.
Additional K uf will be calculated and summarized for visits 24, 27 and 30.
4.EFFICACY AND SAFETY ENDPOINTS
4.1.  Primary Endpoint(s) 

Protocol Ende
xo-001    Statistical Analysis and  Repor
ting Plan 
 8/5/2019  Page 5 of 12  The primary endpoint is to collect data on the in vivo Kuf of the dialyzer with Endexo during the 
first use at 15 minutes (±5 minutes) after the recorded start o f HD. K uf can be derived from the 
Ultrafiltration Rate and the Transmembrane Pressure (TMP) as fo llows:  
Kuf (mL/hr/mmHg) = UF Rate (mL/hr) / TMP (mmHg) 
4.2.  Secondary Endpoint(s) 
The secondary endpoints include collecting the following data on the dialyzer with Endexo and 
the Optiflux dialyzer:  
The number of any adverse events and device-related adverse eve nts.
Urea Reduction Ratio (URR) and spKt/V (calculated from pre- and  post-dialysis BUN)
for the first study use of the dialyzers
Pre- and post-HD serum albumin and β 2-microglobulin for the first use of dialyzers,
visit 1 for Optiflux and visit 13 for dialyzer with Endexo.
4.3.  Additional Assessments 
The following data will be collected on the dialyzer with Endex o and the Optiflux dialyzer.  
Complement activation (C3a, C5a, SC5b-9) during the first study  use of the dialy zer,
collected pre-HD a nd at 30 minutes (±10 minutes) after the reco rded start of HD,
Thrombus scoring, performed at the end of dialyzer use for ever y dialyzer used in the
study,
Urea Reduction Ratio (URR) and spKt/V every 3-4 weeks,
Total volume (mL) of saline flush for each treatment, frequency  and rate per HD
treatment when using to treat clotting during HD.
5.STATISTICAL METHODS
5.1.  General Methodology 
There are multiple observations of one measurement for each sub ject in each period. All analyses 
will be performed at the subject level i.e., take average of multiple observations first of the 
measurement for each subject then analyze/summarize on subject averages. 
Descriptive statistics (n, mean, standard deviation, median, mi nimum, and maximum) will be 
presented for continuous endpoints. Frequency and percent will be presented for categorical 
endpoints. Any missing values  of an endpoint will not be impute d. All data entered collected will 
be listed. 
5.2. Analysis Methods for Endpoints 

Protocol Ende
xo-001    Statistical Analysis and  Repor
ting Plan 
 8/5/2019  Page 6 of 12  If adequate, 95% confidence interval will be calculated for eac h period (Optiflux or Endexo). For 
comparisons, if adequate, paired-t tests may be performed between periods (Optiflux vs. Endexo) 
for continuous endpoints, McNemar’s tests may be employed for c ategorical endpoints. 
For β 2-microglobulin, the laboratory results for post dialysis will be corrected for ultrafiltration 
using the formula in Bergstrӧm and Wehle (1987). 
 Unc orrected value 
Corrected value = ----------------------------------, 
  1 + ΔW/(0.2PW) 
where ΔW = pre-dialysis weight – post dialysis weight, PW is th e post dialysis weight. 
5.3. Adjustments for Covariates 
N/A 
5.4. Handling of Dropouts or Missing Data 
Any missing values at dialysis t reatment level of an endpoint will not be imputed. 
5.5. Interim Analyses 
No interim analysis is planned.   
5.6. Multicenter Studies 
This is a multi-centers study. Due the similarity of hemodialysis treatments among the 
dialysis clinics, the center effect will not be considered in t his study. 
5.7. Multiple Comparisons/Multiplicity 
N/A  
5.8. Use of an “Efficacy Subset” of Subjects 
N/A 5.9. Active-Control Studies Intended to Show Equivalen ce/Non-inferio rity 
N/A 

Protocol Ende
xo-001    Statistical Analysis and  Repor
ting Plan 
 8/5/2019  Page 7 of 12  5.10. Examination of Subgroups 
Due to small numbers of subjec ts in the study, subgroup analyses were not performed. 
6.STATISTICAL ANALYSES
6.1. Disposition of Subjects 
Frequencies will be for overall, by center, and for the treatm
ent period. 
The subject dispositi on table will include: 
The number of subjects who signed the informed consent.
The number of subjects with screen failure.
The number of subjects who were eligible.
The number of subjects who were enrolled.
The number of subjects who were  discontinued in Optiflux, or in Endexo periods.
The numbers of safety and analysis populations.
The number of subjects and percen t by category of major reasons for early
discontinuation.
6.2. Protocol Deviations  
Any protocol deviations will be listed. Summaries by category o f protocol deviations may be 
presented if the number of protoc ol deviations is sufficiently large. 
6.3. Analysis Populations 
Safety Population (spop):  The spop (safety population) will include subjects who
sign the ICF,  are eligible, are enrolled in the study, and have  at least one HD treatme nt
with the dialyzer with Endexo.
Analysis population (apop):  The apop (analysis population) will include subjects
who are in th e spop, and have a minimum of 36 HD treatments wit h the dialyzer w ith
Endexo.
6.4. Demographic and Other Ba seline Characteristics 
Demographics, descriptive statistics will be presented for age,  frequency and
percent will be presented 
for sex, race and ethnicity.
Dialysis history, frequency and pe rcent of primary cause of ESR D will be
presented.
Medical history, all medical hist ory recorded will be listed for each subject.

Protocol Ende
xo-001    Statistical Analysis and  Repor
ting Plan 
 8/5/2019  Page 8 of 12   Physical examinations, all recorded systems examined at the scr eening and follow-
up will be listed.
Vital signs, descriptive st
atistics will be presented for vital s recorded in the
screening and follow-up.
Initial prescriptions, the pres cription will be listed for each  subject.
6.5. Compliance 
N/A 
6.6. Analysis of Primary Endpoint 
Descriptive statistics for ultrafiltration rate, TMP and ultrafiltration coefficient K uf of the first 
study use (visit 13) of the dialyzer with Endexo will be presen ted under analysis population. A 
95% confidence interval will be calculated if appropriate. Thes e measurements 
observed/calculated for other timepoints (visits 24, 27 and 30)  will be also presented with 
descriptive statistics. 
6.7. Analysis of Secondary Endpoints  
All secondary endpoints will be  analyzed under the analysis pop ulation. 
For URR and spKt/V for the first study use of both dialyzers, d escriptive statistics will be 
presented, and 95% confidence intervals will be calculated if a ppropriate. These measurements 
observed/calculated for other timepoints (every 3-4 weeks) will be also presented with 
descriptive statistics. 
For serum albumin and β 2-microglobulin, the relative percent change {((pre-HD – post-HD)/pre-
HD) x 100} will be calculated. Descriptive statistics will be presented for the pre-HD and post-
HD laboratory values and the relative percent change. Percent changes will also be calculated 
using corrected β2-microglobulin concentrations  based on the equation published b y 
Bergstr ӧm and Wehle. The 95% confidence interval will be derived if appropriate. 
Adverse events will be coded for system organ class (SOC) and p referred term using Medical 
Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA), Version 20.0. Adverse events and device-
related events per treatment will be calculated. The 95% confidence intervals will be derived if 
appropriate. 
6.8. Analysis of Exploratory Assessments 
All exploratory assessments will be analyzed under analysis pop ulation. 
For the measurements of complement activation, the relative percent change {((30 minutes after 
the recorded start of HD – pre-HD)/pre-dialysis) x 100} will be calculated. Descriptive statistics 

Protocol Ende
xo-001    Statistical Analysis and  Repor
ting Plan 
 8/5/2019  Page 9 of 12  will be presented for the “pre-dialysis” and “30 minutes after the recorded start of HD” 
laboratory values and the relative percent change. The 95% conf idence intervals will be 
calculated if appropriate.  
For thrombus formation:  
the number of subjects and percentages, and the number of dialysis treatment s in each
period for each grade category will be presented, and,
the proportion of treatments with full dialyzer clotting will b e calculated for each
subject in each period. Descriptive statistics of the proportio ns will be presented. A
95% confidence interval of the proportions will be calculated i f appropriate.
6.9. Analysis of Safety 
All safety measurements will be analyzed under safety populatio n 
6.9.1 Adverse Events 
See Section 6.7. 6.9.2 Clinical Laboratory Evaluation Descriptive statistics will be presented for r each test and tim epoint required by the protocol. 
Changes between test results fro m pre-dialysis and post dialysi s will also be presented for 
blood samples collected pre- and post-dialysis. 6.9.3 Vital Signs Descriptive statistics will be pr esented for timepoints require d by the protocol. Changes 
between blood pressure (systolic  and diastolic) from pre-dialysis and post dialysis will also 
be presented. 6.9.4 Physical Findings, and Other Observations Related to Safety 
Physical examinations at screening and follow-up will be listed . 
6.9.5 Concomitant Medications/Therapies Concomitant medications will be listed. Medications used for hemodialysis  or during dialysis treatments  will be summarized and 
listed separately for concomitant medications. 7.REFERENCES

Protocol Endexo-
001    Statistical Analysis and  Reporti
ng Plan 
 8/5/2019  Page 10 of 12   FDA Guidance for Industry a nd CDRH Reviewers (1998), Guidance f or the Content of 
Prem
arket Notifications for Conventional and High Permeability Hemodialyzer. 
Daugirdas JT: Second generation logarithmic estimates of single -pool variable vo lume Kt/V: An 
analys
is of error. J Am Soc Nephrol. 4:1205-1213, 1993. 
Bergstrӧm J, Wehle B. No change in c orrected β2-m icroglobulin concentration after 
cuprophane hemodialysis. Lan cet. 1987 Mar; 1(8533):628-9. 
