 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exercise to Prevent Muscle Mass and Functional Loss in Elderly Dialysis Patients   
 
           NCT #01990495  
 
           Date: 5/31/2020
02a. Research Plan  
 
Background  and Significance .   
 
               Prevalence an d Consequences of Chroni c Kidney Disease . In the U nited States, the proportion 
of the population over 65 years is predicted to grow from 12.4% (35 million) in 2000 to 19.2% (71 million ) 
in 2030  (1). Thus , the proportion of elderly dialysis patients  that currently comprise approximately half of 
the incident adult US dialysis population can be expected to increase (2). Aging alone leads to a l oss of 
muscle mass and strength with decreased function , increased atrophy,  and eventually frailty  following bed 
rest (1; 3; 4). Many  of the causes of age-related wasting are the same as those in maintenance 
hemodialysis  (MHD ) patients , including nutritional and  hormonal derangements, o xidative stress, inactivity  
and co -morbid conditions (5;6). In elderly  dialysis patients the situation is compounded , since uremia per-
se causes a loss of muscle mass and function an d together with the aging process predisposes these 
patients to the development of frailty with an increase in fall -related injuries, a decrease in quality of life 
(QOL ) and an increase in morbidity and mortality (7; 8). In chronic kidney disease ( CKD ) physical function 
declines as renal failure progresses (9) and in those new to dialysis the vast majority  (up to 95% ) report 
significantly impaired physical f unction  and reduced activity which is worse in the elderly (10). Older 
dialysis patients have even more co -morbid ities and functional limitation s; the death rate of prevalent 
dialysis patients increases by 2-fold in those age d 66-74 and approximately 3-fold in those age d 75-79 vs . 
those <65 year s (2;11). Moreover, Kurella -Tamura (12), studying elderly nursing home residents with 
multiple co -morbid ities, noted th at during the first dialysis year, 58% died, 29% had a decrease  in 
functional status, and phys ical function was maintained in only 13%. Current recommendations to prevent 
and manage aging events in patients with MHD include provision of an adequate nutrient intake and 
regular exercise (3-6). Exercise -based rehabilitation  is cost effective and has been demonstrated to 
improve muscle mass, muscle function, and QOL in MHD patients ( 13;14). This highlights the need for 
rehabilitation during treatment in patients with CKD, whether  they undergo  dialysis or conservative 
management.  However, implementation of rehabilitation as a standard treatment modality in patients with 
CKD is lacking (13). 
 
 
                                                Mechanisms of Loss of Muscle Mass in CKD . Several processes operative in uremia contribute to 
loss of muscle mass and function by affecting protein turnover. These processes include reduced nutrient 
intake, inflammation , acidosis , anemia, oxidative stress , resistance to and/or deficiencies in anabolic 
hormones (15), and reduced physical activity and disuse du e to concomitant illn esses . Together these 
alterations  lead to an increase in muscle proteolysis, largely because of activation of the ubiquitin -
proteasome sys tem (16), while protein synthesis may also be diminished (17; 18). Other proteolytic 
systems including lysosomal and caspase systems may also be involved (16-18). Maneuvers to correct or 
prevent muscle wasting in uremia have included correction of acidosis, anabolic hormone therapy, and 
exercise  (14; 15 ; 19; 20 ).  Provision of adequate dietary protein and calories can help , but in some 
patients supplements may be required (21; 22 ). Abnormalities in amino acid  (AA) levels are present in  
CKD (23; 24 ). Plasma levels of several essential AA (EAA) especially branched -chain AA (BCAA) 
including leucine , are reduced (25), while non -EAA levels may be abnormally elevated (26). Nume rous 
metabolic abnormalities a t the cellular level have also been described in CKD  (25). Regarding the 
increased catabolism and loss of AA that occurs during MHD , intradialytic parenteral or enteral AA and 
calorie s acutely stimulate whole body and muscle protein synthesis  and inhibit whole body (22; 26), but 
not muscle proteolysis (27). Of note, net muscle protein accretion  can be augmented by concurrent 
exercise  (20; 28). The nutrient effect appears to arise from correction of AA deficiencies and stimulation of 
insulin release. In addition,  EAA, especially the BCAA leucine , directly activates the mTOR signaling 
pathway, which promotes translation initiation of protein synthesis . Whether the AA stimulated mTOR 
signaling response is intact in patients with end-stage renal disease ( ESRD ) is at present unknown . In rats 
with CKD , it has been reported that leucine -stimulated insulin secretion is impaired (29). Nevertheless,  in 
a recent  study with rats with CKD we observed that leucine  does  stimulate the mTOR anabolic signaling 
pathway , albeit less effectively than in normal controls ( 30). In normal humans , EAA are highly  effective in  
stimulating protein synthesis  if ingested  at the time of resistance exercise , a maneuver that also activates 
mTOR signaling , but earlier in the signaling path way (31) (Fig 1).  
 
       Effects of Exercise Training in CKD . While not a uniform finding (32), several st udies  in 
advanced CKD and ESRD have reported that exercise  increases the mass of the exercised  muscle , 
though not necessarily lean body mass  (33-35). Failure to do so  may reflect the local response to  
exercising just one set of muscles ( e.g. lower limbs). In contrast , regular exercise  involving trunk, leg and 
arm muscles increase s total body K content, a measure of body cell mass (33). In general , resistance 
exercise  in particular is effective in increasing muscle mass , muscle fiber area, improving strength and 
function and even reducing inflammation in CKD (33-35). Interestingly, it was reported that prolonged 
endurance exercise  can increase muscle fiber size in ESRD (32-36), which is not the usual response in 
normal  subjects .  Nevertheless , endurance exercise  appears to be  therapeutic , since it improves muscle 
strength as well as  cardiopulmonary function ( 13; 14; 35 -37). Regular endurance exercise  also has a 
marked effect on  cardiovascular risk factors in ESRD subjects (14). Both intensive and moderate aerobic 
training have been shown to improve cardiovascular  performance in MHD subjects, and studies have 
consist ently shown an increase in peak VO 2 following rehabilitation programs, with an average increase of 
17% (14; 36; 37 ).  Peak VO 2 is the gold standard for cardiopulmonary fitness  since it  incorporates 
elements of card iac output, metabolic changes in skeletal muscle, vascular function, and muscle strength  
(38; 39). Moreover, peak VO 2 is an independent predictor of survival in MHD  patients (40). In studies 
employing combined  endurance and resistance exercise  in MHD , significant increase s in muscle mass 
and function have been demonstra ted (41; 42). Indeed , clinical trials and guidelines on physical activity 
and health in non -renal subjects suggest that peak VO 2, muscular strength, and endurance are optimally 
improved by programs using combined aerobic and resistance exercise  vs. either one alon e (38; 39 ). 
Because of its potential benefit s, there have been numerous short -term studies of resistance and/or 
endurance exercise  training in CKD patients  in different venues including facility -based, MHD unit -based 
and even home -based  exercise  training  (14).  Overall , studies in patients with CKD have suggested that in 
addition to improving muscle mass, stren gth and functionality, regular exercise  has a salutary effect on 
cardiac and respiratory function, endothelial function, insulin sensitiv ity, lipid levels, inflammation , 
psycho social status and QOL , and has been shown to be safe  (14; 43). The p otential cardiovascular  
benefits  of exercise  may be particularly  important for ESRD patients , who have a high prevalence of 
cardiovascular  disea se that accounts for near ly half their deaths  (2; 44 ). 
 
        However, most of the exercise  studies in patients with MHD have involve d small number s, lack 
randomized controls, were  of short duration , and enrolled  relatively young subjects in relatively good 
condition . Notably , there  is a dearth of studies s pecifically target ing the elderl y (5). In addition,  there is 
limited information on the cellular mechanism s underlying the salutary e ffect of exercise  in humans with 
ESRD (45-47). Moreover, the precise  relationship between muscle wasting with loss of function and poor 
long-term outcome s in elderly ESRD  patients remains to be establ ished . The extent to which muscle 
atrophy is a consequence of underlying disease processes and the extent to which it actually  contribute s 
to outcome s is also unclear  (47). Thus , there is a need for large -scale prolonged studies to establish the 
true long -term benefits of exercise  on morbidity and mortality in this population. It may  be that given the 
natural limit of lifespan and the co -morbid conditions common in elderly MHD patients (8), the main 
benefit s of exercise  are improvement s in physical function, activities  of daily living , QOL , and a decrease  
in adverse events (e.g. falls and hospitalization s, which are more frequent in the elderly dialysis pa tient 
than the general population ) (7). Sorely needed as a prerequisite to such large, long -term studies is 
development of a low -cost exercise  program that will be relatively easy to administer and adhere to, and 
that will form part of routine ESRD  care (13; 47 ). In this regard a recent short -term study reported  the 
feasibility and potential effectiveness of home -based exercise  in dialysis patients,  half of who m were over 
age 60 (48). Lastly , a small number of studies of exercise  training among elderly CKD subjects , not yet on 
dialysis , have also shown promising results on multiple domains of physical function (5).  
  
      Protein Signaling in CKD . The mechanism whereby resistance exercise  induces muscle 
enlargement in ur emia is incompletely understood, though from our work and others (45; 49), a change in 
the balance between local IGF -1 (up), and myostatin (down) and also activation of anabolic signaling 
pathways , especially the PI3K/ mTOR pathway , which is depressed in CKD, appear to be important (50). 
Exercise  also increases muscle androgen receptor expression  in normals  (51). Among the factors 
regulating muscle mass, IGF -1 plays a key anabolic role (52; 53 ). IGF -1 is synthesized under the influence 
of growth hormone ( GH) and nutrition (54). In skeletal muscle, expression of IGF -1, including the IGF -1Ea 
mRNA transcript and the splice  variant mechano growth factor (MGF), is also regulated by mechanical 
stimuli induced by exercise  independent of GH, and plays a key role in exercise -induced hypertrophy (52; 
53). Indeed , in uremic rats we showed that muscle work overload effectively stimulates local IGF -1 
expression, despite resistance to GH -induced IGF -1 expression (49). In addition,  expression of myostatin, 
an inhibitor of muscle growth  which is  elevated in CKD , decreased. These responses  provide explanations 
for the beneficial effects of exercise  in MHD  patients . Indeed , the same respo nse to exercise  was 
subsequently  observed in MHD subjects  (45). In ESRD skeletal muscle IGF -1 and IGF -1 receptor mRNA 
levels are reported to be reduced (55) and in patients on MHD with muscle wasting , IGF-1 peptide levels 
are low, even when serum levels are unchanged (56). Generally, serum and muscle IGF -I levels are 
normal or even elevated in adults with ESRD (55; 56 ), but are reduced in the severely malnourished 
wasted subject (54). IGF-1 bioavailability may be reduced because of increased  serum IGF binding 
proteins (57). Also contributing to uremic muscle wasting is impaired IGF-1, and insulin  signaling , 
mediated through the IRS -PI3K/Akt signal  transduction  pathway (50; 58). Normally , activation of Akt / PKB, 
leads to mTOR phosphorylation which then activates the 70 -kDa ribosomal S6 kinase (p70S6K), 
eventually leading to increased protein synthesis  (59; 60 ). Akt activation also suppresses proteolysis  (26). 
Notably,  the human studies described above were performed in relatively young ESRD population s and 
data specifically for the elderly are not available.  
 
           The signaling pathways through which IGF -1 stimulates muscle growth are similar to those 
activated by mechanical stimuli alone [ Fig 1], and it is difficult to distinguish between these stimuli, 
especially as mechanical stimulation leads to a local i ncrease in IGF -1 (53; 61). Both mechanical and IGF -
1 induced activation of the Akt/mTOR pathway are essential for promoting muscle growth and repair (53; 
59). How mechanica l stimuli activate the PI3 -kinase/Akt /mTOR  pathway and cause muscle hypertrophy 
are poorly understood (61).  One way is through growth hormone -independent stimulation of local IGF -1 
expression (52; 53 ). mTOR signaling is also directly activated by EAA, particularly  leucine , and then 
mTOR via its downstream signaling proteins , up-regulate s mRNA translation initiation and th ereby  
stimulate s protein synthesis  (Figure 1) (30; 62). Thus mTOR appears to serve as a nutrient sensor  for 
EAA, but how this occurs is unknown (104). AA also elicit an anabolic  response by increasing  insulin 
secretion, but the signaling responses to AA and insulin are  independent though complimentary (62). 
From  these studies  it is clear that AA function more than simply serving as a key protein synthesis 
substrate . 
 
Figure 1.  IGF -1/insulin, exercise and amino acid activated signaling 
pathways in skeletal muscle. IGF-1 and insulin  receptor binding activates 
the IRS -1 PI3K -mTOR and the calcineurin/NFAT and RAS/MAPK pathways 
leading to inc reased protein synthesis  and decreased proteolysis . IGF -1 
also induces muscle repair and growth. Exercise acts upstream of mTOR 
via Akt/PKB to promote muscle fiber adaptation and growth. Mechanical 
stress also acts by stimulating local IGF -1 production. Branched chain 
amino acids , especially leucine, directly activate mTOR and in turn its 
downstream mediators, eukaryocytic initiation factors (eIF)4E binding 
protein 1 and possibly eiIF4G to enhance assembly of eIF4G with eIF4E and 70 -kDa ribosomal S6 kiinase  1, 
thereby stimulating  mRNA translation initiation and ultimately protein synthesis  (62). Figure from (30). 
 
            The activated PI3K/Akt pathway also inhibits protein degradation . It does so by inactivating the 
FOXO transcri ption factors that increase expression of the atrophy -related ubiquitin ligases, atrogin -
1/MAFbx and probably MuRF -1, and thus suppresses proteolysis mediated through the ubiquitin -
proteasome pathway (16). Caspases , an important component of the degradation process , cleave 
complex proteins  into smaller products rapidly degraded via the ubiquitin -proteasome system (16). In 
CKD  and other catabolic states, PI3 -kinase/Akt signaling is depressed (50; 58) and consequently protein 
synthesis and FOXO inactivation  are depressed. Th is permits FoxO to stimulate the E3 enzymes 
atrogin -1 and muscle ring finger -1 (MuRF -1), favoring proteolysis through the ubiquitin pathway. 
Inflammatory cytokines such as TNF -
, may also increase degradation by activating NFK -
B, which 
leads to increased expression of the E3 enzyme MuRF -1 (16). Protein synthesis is attenuated and 
degradation through the ubiquitin -proteasome pathway is accelerated, espec ially if acidosis is present. 
Caspase -3 activi ty is increased, accelerating actinomysin cleavage with increased formation of a 14 -kD 
actin fragment, a muscle proteolysis marker (16; 46). Interestingly we and others noted in uremic 
rodents that by simply increa sing muscle workload, the IRS -1/PI3 -kinase/Akt signaling pathway can be 
fully activated and this leads to a decrease in proteolysis, with a reduction in actin fragment level, 
increased protein synthesis  and muscle hypertrophy (50; 63). In MHD patients , endurance exercise  
decreases the elevated fragment levels  (45). 
 
   There has been intense interest in establishing whether the anabolic response to exerci se can 
be enhanced by providing supplemental EAA (64-66). In normals , leucine -rich supplements are 
especially effective in promoting muscle protein synthesis  and when combined with resistance exercise  
cause an even  greater increase in muscle protein synthesis  than exercise  alone (64; 67). A similar 
response is seen with endurance exercise  (68). Among commonly used protein supplements , whey is of 
special interest.  It is readily digestible, is rich in EAA (~50g/100g/protein), particularly  leucine  
(14g/100g), has a low Na, K , and phosphorus content , is inexpensive, and is effective in enhancing 
muscle protein synthesis  (66; 69; 70). Hulmi (71) reported t hat whey acutely increase d anabolic 
signaling in resistance exercise -trained  normal subjects over 10.5 weeks . Regular exercise with whey 
supplementation caused a greater increase in muscle mass than exercise  alone.  Commonly a 
carbohydrate is added to the w hey or AA supplement to stimulate insulin release and inhibit proteolysis  
induced by exercise  (72). This combination also stimulates anabolic signaling induced by endurance 
exercise  (68). Since in ESRD alterations in serum and intracellular AA profile with reduced serum BCAA 
levels are common (17; 23), provision of EAA at the time of exercise  is likely to be especially effective. 
However , it is conceivable that there may be resistance to the signaling response to AA as there is for 
insulin/IGF -1 in CKD (50; 58). In healthy elderly subject s there is some impairment  to AA -induced 
protein synthesis  (73), and this can be overcome by increasing the leucine  load (66), particularly  in the 
form of whey protein  (74). In a study with CKD rats , described  below , we found that leucine  alone largely 
corrects  and stimulates the anabolic signaling defect present in these rats  (30). Since leucine  also 
stimulate s protein synthesis in non -exercising humans including  the elderly, it is recommended that the 
diet of  the elderly include leucine -rich foods to prevent and treat sarcopenia  (6; 75).  
 
Specific Aims : 
     Specific Aim 1 . To devise a safe, low -cost aerobic and resistance exercise  regimen  to counteract 
the loss of muscle mass and function common in elderly MHD patients that is easily implemented, suitable 
for the home and to which most subjects will adhere . 
 
     Specific Aim 2 . To elucidate the mechanisms whereby a program of exercise -based rehabilitation 
counteracts muscle wasting in elderly ESRD patients.   
 
     Specific Aim 2A. To determine whether the mTO R anabolic signaling response to exercise or a 
high-calorie leucine -rich protein load is intact in elderly MHD patients and whether the response to exercise 
is enhanced by providing this supplement at the time of exercise.   
 
Hypotheses :  
 
      Hypothesis # 1. Regular e xercise, by counteracting  muscle wasting, enhancing cardiopulmonary 
and muscle function , and reducing cardiac risk factors , will improve muscle mass , cardiopulmonary 
function , and psychosocial health in elderly MHD patients . We anticipate tha t our approach to implementing  
a home -based rehabilitation program, modeled on a program effective in cardiac patients, in a rigorous 
randomized clinical trial will provide an innovative and relatively low -cost approach to the management of 
ESRD patients. It is our hope that this proposal will lead to future studies in which long-term outcomes of 
elderly MHD subjects  will be improved.  
     
     Hypothesis # 2 . The mechanisms whereby regular exercise  counteracts muscle wasting in 
elderly ESRD patients  are explained by changes in local skeletal muscle expression of IGF -1, androgen 
receptors  and myostatin , and by stimulating Akt signaling pathways that promote protein synthesis and  
inhibit ing proteolysis .   
     
      Hypothesis # 2A. Provision of leucine -rich protein at the time of acute exercise  will stimulate 
skeletal muscle anabolic signaling in uremia . By augmenting exercise -induced signal transduction, this will 
increase the anabolic response to exercise .  
 
 
Significance:  
 
              Significance  of Specific Aim 1. As described above, muscle wasting with frailty and loss of muscle 
function and reduced exercise  capacity are common in advanced CKD . This is particularly true in elderly 
CKD patients, and these factors have been shown to be associated with in crease s in morbidity and 
mortality (5; 11 ). These issues also compromise  the eld erly patient  who might otherwise be suitable for 
transplantation (75). One simple approach to these problems i s an exercise  program , an approach that has 
been effective in the long -term management of patients  with cardiovascular disease  (76), including the 
elderly (77; 78 ). Such programs in patients with cardiovascular disease  have been consistently associated 
with improved survival rates  (79). Exercise  programs, at least in the short term, also appear to be effecti ve 
in the management of MHD patients (14; 80), but there have been logistic, economic and compliance 
barriers to implementing exercise  regimens in these patients, and the long -term impact on morbidity and 
mortality has not been established. Thus , despite evidence of short -term benefits, at least in younger 
patients, exercise  is not part of routine MHD  patient care . The primary thrust of this application is therefore 
to devise an e ffective, safe and low -cost home -based exercise  regimen that is easily implemented and in 
which a substantial number of elderly MHD patients could potentially participate and adhere to , and that 
improves surrogate markers of long -term benefit. We do realiz e that given natural lifespan limits and the 
co-morbid conditions common in the elderly, the main benefits of exercise  in elderly MHD patients are likely 
to be improvements in physical function, activities of daily living  and QOL , and a reduction in advers e 
events such as falls and need for medical attention. If the present study yields a positive outcome, then it 
will form the basis of a broader study to examine the long -term outcome s of this regimen in both elderly 
and younger patients on MHD . The results  could also have important implications for non-renal patients 
with other catabolic diseases. Thus, this study holds the potential for serving to increase QOL and to 
reduce morbidity and possibly mortality rates in many dialysis patients and at considerabl y lower cost than 
other approaches under consideration, such as daily dialysis. Moreover, i f effective , the study may serve as 
a model for implementing home -based exercise  for advanced CKD patients not needing  MHD, and for 
establishing clinic -based exercis e programs for MHD patients unable to undergo home exercise . 
 
   Significance  of Specific Aim 2. We p ropose  that regular exercise acts largely by : (a) inducing 
changes in local skeletal muscle expression of IGF -1, androgen receptors and myostatin; and (b) by 
stimulating Akt signaling pathways that promote protein synthesis and  inhibit ing proteolysis. This aim will 
provide novel information regarding the impact of uremia on molecular events that regulate muscle mass in 
response to exercise training in CKD . In addition, this may lead to novel strategies for preventing muscle 
wasting in patients with CKD, and provide an impetus for  the use of  rehabilitation as a treatment strategy 
for patients suffering from this condition . 
 
      Significance  of Specific Aim 2A. We postulate that leucine supplement ation  will stimulate muscle 
anabolic signaling in uremia by augmenting exercise -induced signal transduction, and will increase the 
anabolic response to exercise . This information will help elucidate the mechanisms whe reby exercise 
counteracts muscle wasting in elderly ESRD patients . This analysis will also provide  new information 
regarding nutrient supplementation and exercise -induced molecular events in uremia  and may well serve 
as the basis for a more extensive study  that combines regular exercise  and dietary intervention as 
treatment options for managing protein energy wasting in elderly patients .  
 
       Relevance to the VA Patient Care Mission  
 
     CKD is a common condition in the VA; there are approximately 18,000 such individuals with end -
stage CKD requiring MHD  currently being treated in the VA system, and this condition is responsible for 
approximately 18% of all deaths in the VA ( 81,82). The number of persons affected by CKD is projected to 
increase by 35% b etween 2005 and 2015 ( 83; 84). Moreover, CKD is typically associated with other co -
morbid conditions, including cardiovascular disease, resulting in frequent hospitalization s and a mortality 
rate ranging between 15 and 30 times that of age -matched healthy individuals ( 85). It has been estimated 
that a patient with end -stage chronic renal failure requires healthcare resources costing the VA Health Care 
System more than $50,000 annually, making CKD the second most costly condition in the VAHCS, second 
only to  spinal cord injury ( 82). Notably, the majority of these costs are not attributable to dialysis, but rather 
to renal and other medical/surgical hospitalizations. This underscores the frequent and costly co -morbidities 
that are associated with advanced CKD.   Moreover, total Medicare expenditures in 2005 for an elderly (≥67 
years) dialysis patient (similar in age to our population) have been estimated to be >$100,000 per year.  
Costs for MHD treatment in the VA system are expected to double over the next 10 y ears (81).  Exercise -
based rehabilitation programs  have been demonstrated not only to improve functional capabilities of 
patients with CKD (including those requiring MHD) through improvements in muscle mass, strength and 
cardiovascular function, but rehabil itation  has also been shown to reduce disability  and hospitalizations ( 14; 
43; 86). However, these results have come largely from relatively small research -based studies and a major 
gap exists between these research findings and the clinical implementation  of rehabilitation  as a treatment 
modality in MHD patients.  A home -based rehabilitation program that can be easily applied at minimal cost 
has the potential to substantially reduce healthcare costs associated with this condition.  
 
            We have rec ently implemented a National Institutes of Health -sponsored home -based rehabilitation  
program in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) disease, in which we observed marked 
improvements in exercise capacity, and in which no adverse events related to  exercise testing or training 
occurred ( 87). Exercise training as a treatment modality in this population was novel, and the home -based , 
case management exercise model provided a training stimulus that would not have been possible with a 
conventional cente r-based program. W e similarly anticipate that that a home -based exercise program in 
patients with MHD will be “user -friendly” and will effectively counteract muscle wasting, improve 
cardiopulmonary and muscle function, quality of life, and surrogate marker s of long -term outcome s. New 
insight into mechanisms whereby exercise and nutrient supplementation induce an anabolic response in 
CKD will be provided that may assist in developing novel strategies to improve outcomes. Our broader goal 
is to assess the lon g-term effects of such a program at multiple centers. If the program described in the 
current proposal were to be implemented on a wider scale, the overall health of patients with advanced 
CKD requiring MHD could be markedly improved, and healthcare cost  savings  in the VAHCS could be 
substantial. Moreover, if effective, the study may serve as a model for implementing home -based exercise  
for advanced CKD patients not needing MHD, and for establishing clinic -based exercise  programs for MHD 
patients unable to undergo home exercise . Finally, this program could serve as a model for the 
management of Veterans with other chronic disease states such as advanced COPD.     
 
Research Design and Methods  
           
          General study design:   MHD  subjects aged 65 -80 years with impaired exercise capacity and 
function  will be  randomized into two groups (30/ group) . One group will undergo a home -based exercise  
program  and the other usual care  over a 12 week  period . This subject number allows for a drop -out rate of 
20%, w hile maintaining 80% power to detect a significant difference in our primary end -point, peak VO 2. 
After enrollment, all subjects will be  encouraged to consume at least 1 .2 g/kg/ protein/day throughout the 
study. The 12-week program will include a 2-week clinic-based exercise  instruction period with testing at 
baseline before intervention  and after 6 and 12 weeks.  Measures at baseline and 12 w eeks will include 
body composition by anthropometrics and dual energy X -ray absorptiometry  (DEXA), thigh muscle volume  
and composition by CT scan, muscle strength and function, cardiopulmonary exercise  testing , QOL, 
cognitive function and nutritional, inflammatory, lipid and biochemical status.  Muscle biopsies will be 
obtained at baseline and at 12 weeks  and will be assay ed for signaling proteins, and gene  and protein 
expression of key muscle mass regulators. More limited interim testing will be  performed at 6 w eeks. In 
addition, two to three  days  after the 12 -week study , a pilot sub -study will be  performed to  test whether  a 
high-calorie leucine -rich protein supplement enhances exercise -stimulated anabolic signaling. At this time 
muscle biopsies will be  taken. Overview s of the study measurements and timeline are presented in 
Appendi ces I and II .  
 
            For recruitmen t we will draw on a large patient population within 30 -40 miles of the VA Palo Alto 
Health Care System (VAPAHCS) with travel reimburse ment provided . For example, the nearby Satellite 
Healthcare Centers have agreed to actively support the identification and  recruitment of subjects, with their 
Chief Medical Officer, Dr. Schiller, serving as a significant contributor to this study. They operate 30 stand -
alone dialysis centers within a 40 mile radius the VA Hospital in Palo Alto. These centers treat a total of 
5,000 dialysis patients, with approximately 25% of these patients on home dialysis. At any given time, 
approximately 2% of the ir total patient population is enrolled in a clinical trial. There are 6 Satellite 
Healthcare clinics within 10 miles of the VA Ho spital in Palo Alto, which provide MHD services to roughly 
1,000 patients ; these clinics will be a primary source of patients for the study . At Santa Clara Valley 
Medical Center, a Stanford affiliate, ≈300 patients are treated with MHD and this facility has agreed to refer 
study subjects . Smaller dialysis clinics such as VAPAHCS  (Dr. Rabkin ), Stanford Medical Center ( Dr. 
Chertow) and community nephrologists (letters attached) will also serve as resource s. Combined, these 
resources provide a pool of ≈2,000 subjects  in close proximity to our center . From prior experience,  ≈ 5% of 
subjects will meet inclusion  criteria and agree to participate. This will provide an adequate enrollment pool. 
While we expect t he recruitment of subjects to reflect the distribution of women and minorities in our area, 
a concerted effort will made to recruit and include them in the study.   
 
 Study population and inclusion/exclusion criteria:   Males and females aged 65-80 years 
undergoing MHD for at least three  months and without other active/uncontrolled disease will be studied. 
Exercise  and usual care  groups will be matched by age, body mass index ( BMI), MHD  duration , and 
protein intake  using a stratified randomization approach.  
      
           Inclusion criteria .  MHD  subjects  with impaired exercise  capacity and function  will be considered for 
the study . Subjects will be required to be in the peak VO 2 range of 10 to 20 ml/kg/min, equivalent to 
moderate functional impairment in patients with heart failure ( 88; 89). Subjects will be required to have  
dialysis  treatment for >3 months with an average Kt/V ≥ 1.2, and be able to perform exercise  safely.  Racial 
and ethnic composition will reflect the diverse composition of the ESRD population in counties from which 
patients are referred.    
          
           Exclu sion criteria .  Current activity  > 2 hrs/wk of moderate intensity exercise , temporary vascular 
access,  uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, active vasculitis, active autoimmune disease, malignancy, severe  
obesity (BMI > 3 5), alcoholism or other recreational dru g use, unstable cardiac disease (abnormal exercise  
test, angina, uncontrolled arrhythmias  or myocardial infarction within three  months), peripheral vascular 
disease (claudication  with exercise) , lung, liver or intestinal  disease, those who are medically un stable and 
subjects who have received anabolic, catabolic or cytotoxic medications in the past  3 months.  We will also 
exclude subjects with excessive previous exposure to radiation.  Although “e xcessive" in regards to 
previous radiation exposure has not bee n defined by consensus panels and there are no national 
standards or regulatory guidelines that define this, we will not consider subjects for the study who have 
undergone a CT scan or any procedure with similar radiation exposure within the last year.   
 
           Screening .  MHD subjects will be screened for eligibility and to ensure that they can safely complete 
the exercise  program. Screening tests will include: Part 1:  (a) cardiovascular risk factors (including smoking 
history, blood lipids, CRP ,  blood pressure ), and VA cardiovascular disease score ; (b) resting 12 lead ECG ; 
(c) medical history and physical function  questionnaire s; (d) Kidney Disease QOL -36 instrument (90); (e) 
the VAPAHCS  Physical Activity Questionnaire ( 91); (f) chair raise test ; and (g) six-minute walk test . Part 1 
screening results will be collected and presented for evaluation by the investigators in the Cardiology 
Service.  If the subject is approved, they will proceed with Part 2 testing, which will include a treadmill 
exercise  test with 12 lead ECG and measure ment of peak oxygen consumption . If the subject is considered 
sufficiently low -moderate risk following the exercise  test and shows no evidence of severe functional 
impair ment on the 6 -min walk test  (<200 meters) and cardiopulmonary exercise  test (<10 ml/kg/min ), 
he/she will be scheduled  for additional baseline testing.  
 
 Group Assignment . After screening and baseline testing, an independent third party investigator (Dr. 
Heidenreich, letter attached) will match MHD subjects on age, body mass index (BMI), MHD duration, and 
protein intake , and assign them randomly to the exercise or usual care study group s. At the end of 12 
weeks of study this investigator will assign half of the subjects in each group to receive a blinded nutritional 
supplement ( high calorie whey or placebo). The blind will be broken on completion of the study.   
  
  Dietary C ontro l. Prior to entry into the study the subjects will be encouraged to consume 1.2 g 
protein/kg/day, per Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (KDOQI) recommendations (9 2) and 
advised to maintain a steady intake. However , we realize that the recommended intake may not be 
achieved in some subjects.  In order to adjust for variation in  protein intake we will measure the subject’s 
protein intake on 3 occasions during the month prior to entry into the study. Then when assigning subjects 
to the study groups, measured protein intake will be taken into account by the third part study assigne r, so 
that the protein intake in the 2 study groups will be similar.  Protein intake will be monitored by three -day 
dietary records and the normalized protein equivalent of nitrogen appearance (nPNA,), a reflection of 
protein intake in stable conditions.  nPNA is calculated from the urea generation rate by means of  kinetic 
modeling using measurements of pre - and post -dialysis urea levels  plus any urea lost in the urine in 
patients with residual renal function. After entry into the study nPNA is calculated w eekly for the first two 
study weeks, then monthly. During the study period, there will be regular bi -weekly follow up counseling by 
a dietician in an effort to ensure that both groups meet target dietary protein intakes  
  
   Safety Measures . Before screeni ng, subjects will be informed of the nature of the study and the 
procedures to be performed , and will sign an approved consent form. Measures to monitor and ensure 
safety include a screening ECG, maximal exercise  test, and medical approval (see screening).  The 
cardiovascular exercise  lab has extensive experience in conducting clinical studies and has a staff of 
experienced personnel. We do not expect any long -term side  effects from the proposed interventions. The 
exercise  program is well balanced and varied  with aspects of strength and aerobic training. Subjects will 
have a n adaptation period of several weeks in which they will progress at their own rate toward the desired 
intensity and duration goals. During t he lead -in period, exercise  variety and relative ly modest energy output 
of the program will minimize  risk of musculoskeletal and cardiovascular  injury. Subjects will not take part in 
any other research project without investigator approval. All procedures will be performed by trained 
personnel in a hosp ital setting with emergency medical staff available . All samples and data will be  stored 
and analyzed using subject codes to assure participant confidentiality. Interventions employed, including 
exercise  testing and training, are of low to moderate risk .  
 
   Retention of Subjects and Compliance to the Intervention . We will select subjects highly motivated 
to improve and maintain their health. Th us, we expect high compliance and low attrition rates (up to 20% 
drop out). During recruitment, emphasis will be  placed on the importance of completing the 12 -week 
program. According to our power calculations  (detailed below) , we will need  to retain at least 23 
subjects/ group to maintain a power of 80%. On completion of the study, subjects in the exercise group will 
receiv e a small payment ($350 ) for the time and inconvenience of 14 exercise  clinic and lab visits . Subjects 
in the usual care group will receive $75 for their participation (4 clinic and lab visits). Participants in the 
muscle biopsy substudy will receive  an additional $250 . To encourage compliance and continued 
participation  in the exercise program , the investigators will provide regular feedback including weekly 
telephone calls and encouragement regarding exercise  and assistance with diets, scheduling et c., and will 
encourage subjects  to return to the exercise  clinic for evaluation  and reinforcement every two weeks during 
the study.  
   
A.  Specific Aim 1 is designed  to develop  an effective, safe, low -cost aerobic and resistance 
exercise regimen .  Because of the focus on improving cardiopulmonary function  as well as  muscle 
function and mass, both resistance and aerobic exercise  will be components of the rehabilitation program. 
The program is modeled on a successful combined in -home/in -center study program a dministered by Dr. 
Myers  at the VAPAHCS  rehabilitation center for patients with cardiovascular disease with a mean age of 72 
years (87). In general , exercise  rehabilitation is highly effective in patients with cardiovascular disease (76), 
including the elderly (77; 78 ), and is associated with  improved survival rates  (76; 77; 79). Subjects 
randomized to the exercise  group will undergo 12 weeks of exercise , including a 2 -week ramp -up period 
conducted at the VAPAHCS  rehabilitation facility . Subjects will be  required to attend the facility twice a 
week on non -dialysis day s during the initial 2 weeks of the study. These sessions will consist of 45 -60 min 
of supervised exercise  that combines aerobic and resistance training , including warm -up and cool -down. 
Throughout the study, subjects will be asked to perform  45 min utes of unsupervised aerobic exercise  of 
their choice (such as walking) on non -dialysis days.  Following the initial 2 -week supervised period, 
subjects will be instructed to exercise  on their own, and surveillance methods will be employed as 
previously described  (87; 93) and outlined below. Following the 12 -week study period, all subjects will 
undergo muscle biopsie s. The following end -points will be measured  at baseline and after the 12 week 
study period:  
 
             Primary Endpoint . Peak VO 2 is the primary outcome measure and is the gold standard for 
cardiopulmonary fitness . It incorporates elements of cardiac, pulmonary and muscle function  known to 
improve with exercise . 
 
            Secondary Endpoints . These include  lower and upper body strength , body composition, thigh 
muscle mass , muscle biopsy for protein signaling , quantitative muscle morphology and gene e xpression, 
daily activities, QOL, laboratory  measures of cardiovascular  risk factors, nutritional and inflammatory 
parameters as detailed below . 
  
            Together, these measures should allow us to determine whether the home -based exercise  regimen 
is effective in counteracting loss of muscle function and mass common in elderly MHD patients , along with 
reducing cardiovascular risk.  
 
Exercise training, detailed description . Initially, all subjects will undergo four supervised exercise  
sessions over two weeks. The purpose of these sessions is to familiarize the patients to their individualized 
training program, assess stability during exercise , ascertain that they understand their exercise  prescription 
and how to use activity and heart rate logs, and provi de guidelines and education in terms of what is 
expected of them during the study. Subjects will then exercise  at home, with an in -clinic  exercise  session 
repeated every two weeks for the duration of the study. The biweekly exercise  sessions will be used t o 
ensure stability and compliance, to review activity logs, and to modify the exercise  prescription as 
appropriate. Guidelines for patient monitoring, safety, and prescription outlined by the A HA, American 
College Spor ts Med icine, and AACPR will be followe d (76; 94; 95). 
 
             Supervised in -clinic exercise  sessions . These will include 5 min warm -up and cool -down sessions 
before and after a combination of continuous aerobic (treadmill walking, cycle ergometry, arm ergometry, 
rowing, stair climbing) and resistance exercise . Exercise intensities will initially  be targeted to achieve 60% 
of HR reserve for 30 min; exercise  intensity will be documented for each patient by frequent (5 min) 
recordings of heart rate and perceived effort. Progression of exercise  intensity will be individualized in 
accordance with esta blished guidelines (76; 94-96), but in general the goal will be to increase intensity and 
duration to 70 to 80% heart rate  reserve and 45 min, respectively.  Perception of effort will be targeted to 
12-14 on the Borg scale. All in -house sessions and activity surveillance will be supervised by certified 
exercise  physiologists. A nephrologist ( R. Rabkin ), cardiologist (V . Froelicher ) and a clinical fellow will 
address patients’ clinical concerns as necessary. As many MHD  patients have a blunted HR response to 
exercise  or are taking β-blockers, measured maximal heart rate will be used to develop exercise  
prescriptions, and patients will remain on their β-blockers for testing . 
 
            During the initial supervised sessions, r esistance exercise  will involve an introduction to a low -
resistance, high -repetition regimen including upper and lower body major muscle groups under 
individualized supervision in accordance with established guidelines (76; 96). Resistance exercises  will 
include leg press, leg extension , leg flexion, chest press, shoulder press, row, and lat pull -down. During the 
initial sessions, subjects will perform 12 to 15 repetitions at 70% of the 5 -repitition maximum with a 
minimum 2 -minute rest period between sets. Subjects will gradually increase to two sets of these 
exercises , with increasing resistance a s tolerated. Subjects will be given hand -held weights and Thera -
Bands in accordance with their capabilities, and instructed on their use at home based on their 
individualized prescription  (see attached VAPAHCS brochures , Appendices II and III ). Thera -Bands  are 
special latex bands used for resistance exercise  and have been effectively employed in MHD subjects (48). 
 
 Home training sessions . Subjects will receive detailed instructions on individualized exercise  
prescription s, including how to monitor exercise  intensity using heart rate  and perceived exertion, and how 
to use heart rate and activity tracking d evices ( see below). Cycle ergometers will be provided for home use, 
but the subjects will be encouraged to achieve an individualized, targeted exercise  stimulus using walking, 
stair stepping, and other available modes of exercise . Activity logs will be giv en to each patient to record 
activities, their intensity, duration, HR, and pedometer steps.  
 
Detailed description of measurements:  
 
(1)  Vitals : Body weight, height, resting blood pressure and resting heart rate will be measured at the start 
of each testi ng appointment . 
 
(2)  Fitness, functional and cardiopulmonary testing :    
       (a) Peak aerobic capacity  (peak VO 2): Peak VO 2 is considered the gold standard for cardiovascular  
fitness  (39). Aerobic capacity  will be determined on a treadmill using an ind ividualized ramp protocol ( 97) 
with collection of continuous ventilatory gas exchange responses  (38; 39 ).            
       (b) Exercise testing:  Symptom/sign limited ramp treadmill tests will be performed on all patients at 
baseline and after 12  weeks of participation (97). A thorough review of clinical history, medications and risk 
factors will performed at the time of baseline exercise  testing. Exercise  capacity will be measured directly 
using ventilatory g as exchange techniques . The Duke Treadmill and VA Prognostic Scores (38; 9 8) will be 
used to help estimate risk and assess suitability for exercise . Patients with evidence of significant coronary 
artery disease as determined by profound ischemi c markers, ominous arrhythmias, or resting ECGs that 
confound the recognition of ischemia (bundle branch block, more than 1 .0 mm resting ST depression, 
paced rhythm) will be excluded. Patients with hemodynamic instability or inability to exercise , those wi th 
complicating illnesses or questionable motivation to sustain prolonged training will also be excluded. The 
exercise  tests will be performed, analyzed, and reported according to a standardized protocol and utilizing 
a computerized database (99). 
         (c) Measurement of strength : Strength will be measured at baseline and after the 12 -week study 
period using  leg extension 1 repetition maximum for lower bod y strength and chest press 1 repetition 
maximum for upper body strength. Maximal isometric strength will be  measured using a hand -grip 
dynamometer. All assessments will be  performed using standardized guidelines, including appropriate 
warm -up and familiari zation trials, instruction, joint positioning, and rest periods between repeat tests (100).  
        (d) Six-minute walk test: This test incorporates elements of balance as well as strength and aerobic 
capacity . A standardized 6 -min walk test (39) will be  performed at baseline and after the 12 week  study 
period. A 100 foot dis tance will be  marked in a corridor, and patients will be  instructed to walk from end to 
end at their own pace, attempting to cover as great a distance as possible within 6 min utes. The test will be 
supervis ed by a research assistant, who will provide stand ardized verbal encouragement at 30 -second 
intervals. Distance covered is expressed in meters .   
       (e) Chair raises: Balance and strength will be measured using chair raises, a surrogate for muscle 
power. Subjects will be  asked to rise with arms folded  on the chest from a standard seat (46  cm high) and 
then return to a sitting position.  Time to complete five repetitions and number of repetitions that can be 
completed in 60 seconds will be  recorded. Chair raise capacity, validated against more extensive 
assessments (101), correlates strongly with muscle cross -sectional area and is reduced in ESRD (102).   
       (f) Additional monitoring of daily activities:  In addition to formal training se ssions, subjects will be  
encouraged to increase their daily activities  and to exercise  at a moderate individualized intensity for a 
minimum of 45 min each day they do not exercise  at the hospital facility. Energy expenditure will be  
documented with a pedom eter, a heart rate monitor and by intermittent accelerometer  usage . We have 
recently validated these methods of estimating energy expenditure during home -based exercise (93). 
Brochures that we have used for instructing patients on the use of TheraBands at home are presented in 
Appendices III and IV, respectively. Patients will complete daily activity logs (Appendix V), and phone calls 
will be  made weekly to monitor compl iance, to complete the Veterans E xercise  Testing Study (VETS) 7 -
day Activity Recall Ques tionnaire (Appendix VI), and to address any clinical concerns. Energy expenditure 
will be  expressed in terms of kcals/week and MET/hours/week. If patients in the exercise  group fail to meet 
their exercise  goals, they will be strongly encouraged  to increase  their activity and monitoring will be 
increased. This approach is used at our facility (87; 93) and the PI is experienced  in monitoring and 
surveillance of physical activity with these devices  (93). 
 
(3)  Body composition and muscle area:   
        (a) Anthropometric s:  Abdominal girth and thigh circumference.   
        (b) Total body lean mass and percent b ody fat  will be  assessed using whole body DEXA. S cans 
will be performed in duplicate at baseline and 12 weeks. DEXA has been effectively used for measuring 
body composition in ESRD patients , is recommended by the National Kidn ey Disease Outcomes Quality 
Initiative (K -DOQI) as a reference method to assess body composition in ESRD  (92), and has been shown 
to be responsive  to exercise training in numerous studies, including conditions associated with muscle 
wasting suc h as HIV  and osteoporosis ( 103). As water is measured by  DEXA in the fat -free compartment 
and thus may  confound compositional assessment, MHD subjects will be  carefully examined for fluid 
retention before scanning . Scan s will be performed the day after dia lysis at estimated “dry weight”.  
 
       (c) Thigh muscle mass and fat composition  by computerized tomography (CT).  Mid-thigh CT of the 
non-dominant limb will be  performed a day after MHD , with subject s in the supine position with the thigh 
muscle relaxed . Axial CTs will be obtained at the midpoint between the trochanter of the femur and the 
superior border of the patella, using slice thickness of 2.5 mm. The radiographic film will be digitally 
scanned for analysis with a personal computer. The analyses wil l be performed by Dr. McIntire  (Co-
Investigator), who has extensive experience analyzing CT images in patients with CKD.  He will be blinded 
to study group when processing the images.  Thigh muscle cross sectional area (a measure of muscle 
mass) and intersti tial adipose tissue embedded in muscle ( reflects  muscle quality) will be  measured and 
computed.  Measurements of mid -thigh subcutaneous and total fat will also be obtained.  
 
(4) Muscle biopsy measurements:   
        (a) Biopsy procedure . Vastus l ateralis m uscle will be  biopsied under local anesthesia and sterile 
conditions with a Bergstrom needle . This procedure will be performed by Dr. Rabkin (Co -PI), who has 
extensive experience in this area . A ~150 mg sample will be  obtained  by applying suction to the ne edle at 
the time of biopsy  as described previously (104), trimmed of fat and connective tissue and bisected. One 
part will be frozen at -70°C, and the remainder will be mounted in embedding medium and frozen . Biops ies 
will be taken at the beginning and end of the 12 week study period as detailed below.   
 
(5) Biochemical tests:   
  (a) Nutritional parameters : Serum albumin , pre-albumin and glucose will be  measured in the 
PAVAHCS clinical lab. Serum IGF -I and IGF bind ing proteins (IGFBP1, 2, 3 and 5) will be  measured by 
ELISA and Western ligand blots as previously described in our laboratory  at 0 and 12 weeks (105).  
  (b) Insulin sensitivity from fasting serum glucose and insulin levels at 0, 6 and 12 weeks : 
Insulin resistance appears in early CKD and is associated with an i ncrease in cardiovascular disease  (106). 
Resistance is characterized by an increase in serum insulin levels relative to serum glucose le vels and will 
be evaluated using the Homeostasis Model Assessment of Insulin Resistance (HOMA -IR). Fasting glucose 
and insulin samples will be  obtained and the HOMA -IR calculated using the formula of fasting insulin 
(µU/ml) times fasting glucose (mmol/l) d ivided by 22.5. HOMA -IR is used frequently in epidemiologic 
studies and has been validated against a euglycemic -hyperinsulemic clamp technique (r=0.82 -0.88) as an 
estimate of insulin sensitivity (107). We anticipate that insulin sensitivity, measured by HOMA -IR, will 
improve with exercise , though a recent study in MHD subjects failed to show any benefit of aerobic 
exercise  (107). However , it is possible that this may have reflected a suboptimal exercise  program. Insulin 
samples will be batched and analyzed with commercial kits in the PIs lab.  
 (c) Lipid panel:  (Fasting total cholesterol, LDL, HDL, ApoB, very low density lipop rotein, 
lipoprotein(a) and triglycerides) . Individuals with ESRD are reported to have a high prevalence of 
dyslipidemia , particularly  hypertriglyceridemia, and are at greater risk for CVD (44). The benefits of aero bic 
exercise  on lipid profiles in non -CKD patients are well established, but the results in MHD patients are 
mixed (14). Lipid panels will be performed by the VA clinical lab oratory  at baseline  and 12 weeks.  
 (d) C-reactive prot ein (CRP) ,  inflammatory cytokines and complete blood count (CBC) : 
Serum CRP and inflammatory cytokines such as IL -6 and TNF -alpha are elevated in many individuals with 
advanced  renal failure, but can be reduced with resistance exercise  (34). Batched serum sample s will be 
assayed in the C o-PIs lab (Dr. Rabkin) for high sensitivity CRP levels by nephelome try, and IL -6 and TNF -
alpha with ELISA kits at 0, 6 and 12 weeks.  
 (e) Total Testosterone, steroid hormone binding globulin and bioavailable  TT will be  
measured in the  VAPAHCS clinical lab oratory . Measurements will be made at baseline and after 12 weeks .  
 (f) Renal biochemistry : BUN, Creatinine, CA , phosphate electrolytes, and bicarbonate  will be  
monitored monthly.  
 
(6) Questionnaires:   
     (a) Activity questionnaires & logs  (Appendices IV and V) .  All subjects will keep daily activity 
and treatment lo gs. Daily logs will record compliance to the exercise  regimen and quantify any changes in 
physical activity during the st udy. D aily activity logs are helpful in completing the VETS 7 -Day Activity 
Recall Questionnaire, which will be  completed during a weekl y phone call with a staff member  (93).  
      (b)  Diet: Subjects will be instructed on complet ing accurate  three -day food records  at the start of 
the study. Diet ary records will be  collected at 0, 4, 8, and 12 weeks. Dietary analysis will be  performed 
using Nutritionist 5 (First Data Bank, San Bruno, CA) and subjects meet with a clinical dietician  after each 
analysis to discuss results and make proper adjustments. nPNA will be  used to assess protein intake.  
           (c)  Health Related QOL (HRQOL):  HRQO L is a sensitive and validated means to assess a 
patient’s perceived well -being in physical, psychological, and social areas of health  (90). ESRD 
patients have depressed HRQOL scores, but the literature  indicates that physical activity can reduce 
depression , improve physical function, psychological well -being and social and family interactions, thus 
also improving HRQOL in ESRD (109). The Kidney Disease QOL -comprehensive instrument  to evalua te 
QOL will be  used (90). Dr. Kurella -Tamura (Co-Investigator) has published extensively in the area of QOL 
in CKD, and she will oversee these evaluations .    
 
B.  Approach to Specific Aim 2. This pilot  sub-study is targeted  to elucidate the mechanisms 
whereby  exercise training ameliorates or protects against muscle wasting in elderly ESRD patient s 
and to test whether a nutrient supplement can enhance the anabolic response to exercise .   
Since this is a pilot sub -study carried out with a limited number of subjects after completion of the main 12 
week study, we have adopted a unilateral exercise protocol in which the resting contralateral limb serves 
as a control. This protocol will allow us to gain consid erable insight into the salutary molecular processes 
activated by exercise in ESRD  subjects and to test whether these processes can be enhanced by provision 
of a leucine -rich supplement . In brief, t wo to three days after completing the primary 12 -week stud y, 
subjects from both the exercise and usual care groups will be studied in which one limb is exercised for 15 
minutes, after which the vastus lateralis muscles of both the exercised and the contralateral resting limb will 
be biopsied. Half the subjects in  each of these 2 main groups (12 subjects from each group) will be 
matched by BMI and age and randomized to either a placebo mixture or a high calorie nutrient supplement.  
The nutrient supplement will consist of a high-calorie leucine -rich protein (whey pr otein) given at the start 
and end of the exercise session. The study consists of the following 4 groups, each undergoing acute, 
unilateral exercise:  
 
Group 1.   Regular exercise group plus placebo  
Group 2.   Regular exercise group plus nutrient supplement  
Group 3.   Usual care  group plus placebo  
Group 4.   Usual care  group plus nutrient  supplement   
 
An outline of the experimental pro tocol is illustrated in Figure 2 , and a detailed protocol follows.   
 
Biopsies will be obtained from the dominant limb after acu te exercise and from the non-dominant limb 
following rest. A single  biopsy of each limb will taken from each subject. Tissue taken from the biopsies will 
undergo molecular analysis to answer the following questions : 
 
1. What sustained molecular processes , activated by regular exercise , might be contributing to 
the maintenance or improvement of muscle mass in MHD subjects  who participate in a 12 week 
exercise program?  To this end, molecular events in the resting  dominant limb of participants given 
placebo in re gularly exercised (Group 1) and usual care ( Group 3 ) subjects will be compared.  W e will test 
the postulate that regular exercise acts largely by inducing local changes in the  expression of  key 
regulators of muscle mass and also by stimulating the Akt/mTOR  signaling pathways that serve to promote 
protein synthesis and  inhibit proteolysis . We anticipate that a 12 -week program of rehabilitation  will 
increase muscle mass  as measured by CT and DEXA scans,  and improve skeletal muscle function  via 
several interre lated mechanisms . These includ e changes in the balance between IGF -1 and myostatin, 
increased androgen receptor expression, changes in expression of components of the ubiquitin -
proteasome and calpain proteolytic systems , suppression of inflammatory cytokin es, and increased 
anabolic signaling.  This is illustrated in Figure 3.  
 
 
2.  What impact does acute exercise have on anabolic signaling in regular exercise versus usual 
care subjects?   To answer this question  we will measure activity (phosphorylation) of  the IRS-1/AKT and  
mTOR signaling transduction pathway s in the acutely exercised (and the contralateral resting ) limbs of 
regular exercised subjects ingesting placebo  (Group 1) . The same measurements will be made in the 
muscle of the corresponding usual ca re group (Group 3)  (Figure  4).  Activity of the anabolic IRS -1/AKT and 
mTOR signaling pathways in the exercised limb will be compared with these responses  in the contra lateral 
resting limb of the same  subject.  We anticipate that acute exercise will activat e anabolic signaling in both 
groups and that the response will be more vigorous in the regular  exercise group.  
 
 
 
3. Does ingestion of a high -calorie leucine -rich pr otein (whey) supplement enhance  acute exercise -
stimulated anabolic signaling ?  (Specific Aim 2A). The effect of a nutritional supplement on acute 
exercise -induced signal transduction will be assessed by comparing IRS -1/AKT and mTOR signaling in a 
unilateral acutely exercised limb of regularly exercised subjects ingesting the supplement  (Group 2) versus 
the acutely exercised limb of comparable subjects ingesting placebo  (Group  1). A similar comparison will 
be made between the exercised limbs of usual care subjects ingesting the supplement (Group 4) versus 
placebo (Group 3) (Fig 5). 
 
 We anticipa te that the leucine -rich supplement will enhance the acute exercise -stimulated  mTOR 
signaling  pathway  and that the response will be more marked in the group  undergoing the 12 week 
exercise program . This thesis is based on reports that in healthy young subj ects, a leucine -rich supplement 
added to a resistance exercise program stimulates muscle protein synthesis , mass and strength ( 64; 72) 
and although delayed in the elderly, the anabolic response is effectively stimulated by this regimen ( 73).  In 
this regar d, Hulmi reported that whey protein enhanced exercise -induced signal transduction 
(phosphorylation of p70S6K) by nearly five -fold over exercise alone in young healthy subjects ( 71).  
 
 
In summary , we anticipate that a 12 -week program of exercise rehabilit ation will increase muscle 
mass and improve skeletal muscle function and that this is mediated by several different processes that we 
aim to identify. In this regard we expect that basal anabolic signaling will be higher in the resting muscle of 
the regula r exercise group versus the resting muscle of the usual care group, a potential carry over effect 
of regular exercise . In addition, we anticipate that while the high calorie whey supplement will cause an 
increase in anabolic signaling in the resting muscle  of both groups, the response will be greater in the 
regular exercise group, again possibly reflecting a carryover effect of regular exercise .  If a carryover effect 
is indeed present, then this would support the hypo thesis that regular exercise is benefic ial even in ESRD.   
We also anticipate that acute exercise alone will increase anabolic signal transduction, and that this 
response will be enhanced by the high calorie whey supplement. If true, this holds the prospect of 
developing a simple therapeutic str ategy to boost the anabolic response to regular exercise and 
thereby enhance the functional and cardiopulmonary benefits of exercise in patients with ESRD.   
  
Detailed Protocol for Nutrient Supple mentation, Acute Exercise, and Biopsy for Specific Aim 2. An outline 
illustrating the acute exercise, biopsy, and nutrient supplementation protocol for Specific Aim 2 is presented 
in Figure 2. On a morning the day before regular MHD  and after an overnight rest , both regular exercise  
and usual care  subjects will con sume  a light protein -free breakfast between 7 and 8  am and will be studied 
three  hours later after a 60 -min rest. Subjects in both groups will then will begin a unilateral dominant  lower 
limb exercise  session lasting ≈15 min, with the contra -lateral limb at rest. At the start of the exercise  
session , subjects will ingest half the high calorie whey or placebo so as to compensate for AA deficiencies 
common in MHD subjects. The other half of the supplement will be  ingeste d at the end of the exercise  
session so as to enhance anabolic signal transduction. This will be followed by 60 minutes of  rest, then 
muscle biopsies will be  performed on both limbs to assess anabolic signal transduction.  
 The unilateral exercise  will be  performed using seated single knee extension exercise  against 
resistance. Subjects will be  seated with  the hips flexed at 90ο with their back against a backrest at a ≈110ο 
angle. The leg pad will be  positioned ≈5 cm above the ankle and the rotation arm will be  positioned so that 
the knee is bent to 90ο. After a warm -up consisting of 8 -10 repetitions with minimal resistance, the  weight 
will be  adjusted to 70% of the one repetition maximum. The unilateral 1 -RM will be  determined by a post-
training period strength test, performed on a different day. Five sets of 10 repetitions will be  performed, with 
2 min utes of  rest periods betwe en sets. The load  will be  adjusted during the course of the session due to 
fatigue such that each subject is able to perform 10 repetitions during each set.  
 
  The supplement , high-calorie whey , (300 ml) comprises 24 g whey protein (contains ≈3 g leucine ) with 
30g carbohydrates (sucrose) in liquid , and the placebo contains a liquid, dextrose 24  g plus sucrose 30g.  
The amount of whey (Nestle Healthcare) prescribed is guided by studies in normal subjects (66; 69; 70; 
110) including the elderly (70; 74). We do not anticipate any adverse effects from nutrient or placebo if 
taken as prescribed. Whey ha s a low NA, K and phosphorus content (60,140 and 60 mg/serving 
respectively). The vehicle for dissolving the powdered supplement will be of the subject’s choice, but is 
limited to fluids permissible for ESRD  such as apple juice and will be pre -tested for t aste by the subject . 
Whey is also available in a variety of flavors and in long term studies has been included in baked goods or 
sprinkled over foods.  
                 
Detailed molecular analysis of skeletal muscle .  The following items will be measured us ing methods 
established in Dr . Rabkin ’s laboratory.  Note  that receptor and signaling proteins will be measured by 
western immunoblots; mRNA levels by real -time quantitative PCR, and selected degradative proteins by 
immunobloting and serum and local IGF -1 by ELISA.  
 
   mRNA levels of local regulators of muscle mass:  Total IGF -1 (all transcripts), the Ea transcript (a 
generalized tissue form and main form in liver, and the IGF -1Eb transcript, MGF, a loading sensitive and 
more potent form than the Ea form). My ostatin, and receptors for IGF -1, insulin, growth hormone and 
androgens.  
   mRNA levels of inflammatory cytokines IL -6 and TNFα.   
   Signaling protein levels and their phosphorylated forms activated by IGF -1, insulin, EX or AA, 
including IRS -1, Akt, mTOR, p70S6K, rpS6, and 4EBP -1.  
   Protein degradative pathway; mRNA levels of FOX O1 and 3, the atrogenes Murf -1 and 
MAFbx/atrogin -1, E3α, and the 20S proteasome α7 subunit and their proteins when antibodies are 
available. Muscle specific calpain 3 (p84) mRNA and if sufficient tissue, the mRNA for the ubiquitous 
calpains calpain 1 and 2  and calpastatin) will be determined. The 14 kDa actin protein fragment, a 
caspase -3 activity product that serves as an indirect measure of its activity (1 70), and LC3 -II protein, a 
marker of autophagy, will be determined ( 111).                                                                              
   DNA content as an indirect measure of myonuclear number ( 112).                                                                                           
   RNA content, an indirect measure of total tissue ribosomal content and protein translational capacity 
(49).     
  
     Subject Burden . We anticipate that baseline evaluations for each subject will require two-2 hour 
visits, with the exercise test and questionnaires performed on a separate day  from the CT  and biopsy 
evaluations . The initial visit will include questionnaires, health history, DEXA, exercise test and blood panel. 
The second visit will include the CT scan. For the exercise group, the total number of visits to the hospital 
will be approximately  14 (including exercise training sessions), and for the usual care  group the total 
number of visits will be approximately 4. 
 
 
Limitations of the study and anticipated problems.    
 
(1) Though subject  number  is relatively small, the study is rigorous and sufficiently powered to achieve our 
aims and takes into account subject compliance.  To our knowledge this is the first randomized contro lled 
study to test whether home -based exercise  is feasible and effective in elderly MHD subjects.  Ideally we 
would have liked to include  healthy sedentary subjects to serve as controls for comparison  and also more 
extensive testing of nutrient supplementation , but this would have increased the required group sample 
sizes dramatically and encumbered the study . However, there is a large body of rigorous studies 
documenting the effects of exercise  in healthy individuals, including signal transduction.                                                                                               
(2) The study is relatively short in  duration ( 3 months/subject), and surrogate markers of long -term 
outcomes such as peak VO 2, serum albumin, and cardiac risk factors are used. Nevertheless, i f the study 
outcome shows  that our exercise  training program is efficacious, then this will form th e basis for a 
multicenter, long -term outcomes study. Thus , this study could be of great value in determining whether a 
long-term study of home -based exercise  with or without nutrient supplementation is merited, and will be 
invaluable in the design of such a study.                                                                      
(3)  Recruitment of MHD subjects that meet our eligibility criteria and are prepared to undergo a large 
battery of tests  and an exercise  program involving  considerable time requir es highly motivated subjects 
and dedicated personnel. In terms of recruitment , the PIs and Co-investigators are accomplished in this 
area, with Dr . Schiller and staff at  Satellite Health care being particularly  experienced in recruiting and 
conducting ESRD clinical trials . Furthermore , as discussed earlier under the general study design,  we will 
be able to draw on a large patient population , ~2,000, within 30 -40 miles of the VAPAHCS .  
(4) The study sample will include subjects who, in addition to MHD, will h ave other co -morbidities. We 
recognize that a great deal of motivation will be required for compliance with the exercise  program.  Some 
subjects may not be able to sustain 30 continuous minutes of aerobic exercise initially, and will need to be 
gradually pr ogressed as tolerated.  The cardiac rehab ilitation  group at the VA PAHCS  under Dr. Myers’ 
direction ha s significant experience with monitoring, surveillance, and motivating patients to sustain 
physical activity, and will apply similar techniques in the curre nt proposal. We have also built a 20% 
dropout rate into the sample size estimates, as we anticipate that some patients will not complete the 
program.   
(5)  Study subjects , though functionally impaired , are likely to be highly motivated and  in better condit ion 
than many other elderly MHD patients . However , given the consequences of losing muscle function,  a low -
cost regimen beneficial  to even a modest subset of patients , would seem worth implementing. Also , this 
program c ould serve as a model to test in youn ger patients , among  whom many more may be able to 
participate .        
(6) Since the exercise  training program consists of endurance and resistance  exercise , and we anticipate 
that the daily activities of the subjects will increase in response to the exerci se, we will be un able to define 
the role played by each type of training  in any of the responses that occur . To define t hese respective 
roles, separate studies of resistance and endurance exercise  would be  required , but this is beyond the 
scope of this stu dy. 
(7) The study of nutrient supplementation is limited to the acute response at the time of exercise  on one 
occasion  only. It would be preferable  to also study the long -term effects of this combination , but to ensure 
recruit ment to achieve our primary  goal of testing home -based exercise  training , we have limited th is study  
to a pilot . A wider  study would require increas ing the  subject number several fold.   If positive, this pilot  will 
form the basis of a more extensive study.  
(8) As the nutrient supplemen t to be administer ed contains several soluble proteins and AA, we will not be 
able to attribute any responses to a specific AA. This is well  beyond the scope of the present proposal . 
(9) While each of the  questionnaires has been widely used and shown to be  valid, each is subjective. The 
accuracy of the responses depends upon subject’s recollection and the judiciousness with which 
researcher and subject conduct  the interview. For example, t hough the KDQOL has been demonstrated to 
be reliable and valid ( 90), some domains have a higher internal reliability than others. In addition, there is 
some evidence to suggest that subjects participating in a study tend to overestimate their compliance to 
exercise  and diet (113). Our research group has extensive experienc e in using these tools; particular 
emphasis will be placed on taking the necessary time to obtain responses as accurate ly as possible .  
 
                                                    
 
 
Statistics.   Sample Size Computation and Power Analysis .   
  Primary endpoint , Specific Aim 1 .  For this analysis we have used data from a recent 12 -week 
study by Storer et al (36) on the effects of endurance exercise  versus no exercise  (usual care) on 
cardiorespiratory and skeletal muscle fu nction in MHD patients. Change from baseline for peak VO 2 was 
22% (an increase) in the exercise  group and 6% (a decrease) in the usual care group. These findings 
are consistent with an average increase from baseline of 17% in MHD patients participating in exercise -
based rehabilitation programs reported in the literature ( 14). Similarly, our primary outcome will be 
comparison of the change in peak VO 2 for patients randomized to exercise  vs. usual care. To calculate 
the desired sample size we used a two group  t-test of equal means and calculated the per group sample 
size (East 5, Cytel Inc, copyright 2007). Given the desired values for the standardized effect size (the 
absolute value of the difference in group mean changes divided by the common standard deviat ion) and 
overall level of significance and power of the test, the required sample was calculated. To detect a 
difference in group mean changes of 17% in peak VO 2 for exercise vs. usual care, given a common 
standard deviati on of 20% (based on Storer et al ( 36), using a standardized effect size of 0.85), 23 
subjects/group would be required to complete the study to achieve statistical power of 80% with a two -
sided test of significance at the 0.05 level.  Appendix VII shows how the required sample size varies by  
the standardized effect size for power of 0.8 0 (solid curve) and 0.85 (dashed curve). Appendix VIII 
provides curves showing how the power varies by the standardized effect size for a per group sample 
size of 23 (solid curve) and 26 (dashed curve).  For ex ample, a per group sample of 23 provides power 
of about 0.17 and 0.38 to detect a small (0.3) and medium (0.5) standardized effect size, respectively. 
To allow for a 20% dropout rate we plan to enroll 30 subjects per group, or a total of 60.  The 20% 
dropou t rate is based on the PI’s experience (8 7), and other similar research studies.  
  
   Secondary analyses , Specific Aim 2. In this specific aim we will analyze molecular changes in 
muscle biopsied at baseline and at the end of the study. IGF -1 is a key musc le growth factor ; Kopple  et 
al (45) report ed that IGF -1Ea mRNA levels rose ~100% in 12 MHD subjects undergoing 21.5 w eeks of 
combined resistance and endurance exercise . We plan to compare changes in IGF -1 mRNA levels from 
baseline to those levels at the end of 12 w eeks of rehabilitation or usual c are. Muscle will be obtained 
from limbs at rest in the exercise  and usual care subjects as described above  (n=12/group) and we will 
consider a 50% change in IGF-1Ea mRNA to be a clinically meaningful difference . While there are no 
data available in MHD sub jects to estimate the standard deviation of the change in these molecular 
indices from baseline, Appendix VIII may be used to estimate the power associated with an assumed 
standardized effect size that is small (0. 3), medium (0.5) or large (0.8) .  
 
      Secondary analys es, Specific Aim 2A. In this specific aim  we will assess the nutrient -enhanced 
exercise -induced protein signal transduction  pathway in subjects undergoing exercise versus usual care. 
Specifically, we will compare the change in activity (phos phorylation) of the mTOR signal transduction 
pathway induced by unilateral exercise alone versus unilateral exercise  plus nutrient supplementation.  This 
will be a pilot study of 1 2 subjects in each group. Since this is a novel measurement and there are no data 
in MHD subjects describing the variance of this response, a power analysis has not been carried out. 
Change in activity will be  taken to equal the difference in activity between the unilateral exercise  limb and 
the contra -lateral resting limb of the s ame subject. We will also examine the effect of the supplement alone 
vs. placebo on signal transduction in the resting limb of unilateral exercise  and usual care  subjects.  Of 
note, Hulmi (71) reported that whey protein enhanced exercise -induced signaling (phosphorylated p70S6K) 
by near ly 5-fold over exercise  alone in young healthy subjects , whil e Drummond (73) noted a similar 
increase in the elderly following EAA  ingestion .                                                                                               
 
            Statistical analysis plan . Comparisons of clinical and demographic data between groups at 
baseline will be performed by the appropriate statistical test (for continuous variables, t -test for normally 
distributed data and Wilcoxon test for non -normal data; f or categorical variables, chi -square test or Fisher’s 
exact test). These comparisons will be performed at baseline only to assess adequacy of randomization. 
Comparisons between groups for cardiopulmonary exercise test, muscle biopsy, energy expenditure, 
cognitive function, and other functional measures before and after the study period will be performed by 
multivariate ANOVA; post -hoc comparisons will be made using the Bonferroni method. To analyze 
continuous variables measured at three or more time points we will use linear mixed effects regression 
(114). To explore the relationships between a given outcome and other variables, we will use multiple 
regression techniques. Since the reliability of a fitted regression model may be reduced if too many 
predictor s are used (114), we will limit the number of predictors to four variables in each model (≤1/10 of the 
total). For the primary outcome, change in peak VO 2, the specific independent variables in the model wil l 
include exercise compliance (average energy expended in kcals/week), change in muscle strength, and 
change in muscle mass. Missing data will be managed using the multiple imputation method which is 
preferable to older methods and described in detail by S chafer & Olsen (1999).  
 
 For Specific Aim 2 (effect of acute and chronic exercise on muscle wasting), we will employ a linear 
model, using period (baseline vs. 4 months) and treatment (exercise training vs. usual care) as independent 
variables along with their interaction (Bonferroni method). The intention to treat principal will be applied for 
all analyses.                                                                                    
            Timeline .  We anticipate that we will recruit  ≈15 MHD s ubjects/ year during the 4 years of the study. 
We expect that i t will take four  years to complete the study, with much of the final year dedicated to 
completing sample processing and data analysis. We do not expect much delay in getting started as there is 
an established exercise research program at our facility . In addition, the techniques for biopsying muscle  as 
well as  measuring muscle structure and cellular biology are established in the PI’s ( Rabkin ) research 
laboratory . Finally,  both the Satellite Heal thcare Dialysis research group ( Dr. Schiller ) and Dr. Chertow’s 
group (Stanford University) have vast experience in recruiting and performing  clinical trials  in MHD patients . 
A study Timeline of Project Tasks is presented in Appendix I.  
 
            Plan f or Dissemination. Dissemination will be a major focus of year 4.  We believe the results of this 
study will lend themselves well to presentations at the VA RR&D meeting, American Society of Nephrology, 
and a number of rehabilitation meetings (AACVPR, ACSM).  The Co -PIs will devote efforts during years 3 
and 4 to abstract presentations and manuscript preparation. We anticipate that there will be results on 
functional and psychosocial outcomes that will be appropriate for publication in the Journal of Rehabilit ation 
Research and Development, Journal of Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation and Prevention, and Archives of 
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. Physiological results will be appropriate for the Journal of Applied 
Physiology and Nephrology journals, includi ng Journal of the American Society of Nephrology, American 
Journal of Kidney Diseases, and others.  
 
PRELIMINARY  STUDIES  
 
             Exercise training studies . The Co -PI (Dr. Myers)  and one of the Co -Investigators on the current 
proposal ( Dr. Froelicher)  have previously conducted a 3-year NIH -funded Specialized Center of Research 
(SCOR) project of exercise training in patients with cardiovascular disease ( 115; 116), and are currently 
conducting an NIH Specialized Center of Clinically -Oriented Research (SC COR) project on the effects of 
exercise therapy in patients with abdominal aortic aneurism disease ( 87; 93). The proposed project will use 
existing exercise testing and training facilities at the VA Palo Alto Medical Center, and methods similar to 
the curr ent NIH SCCOR project will be used in the current proposal.  
 
              Dr. Myers’  research focus has been in the areas of exercise testing, training, and epidemiology in 
patients with coronary artery disease, chronic heart failure, and spinal cord inju ry. Since January 1992, he 
has directed the exercise research laboratory at the Palo Alto VAHCS.  Dr. Myers has a more than 25 year 
body of work related exercise testing and training in patients with cardiovascular disease . He has served 
on writing groups for guidelines developed by the American Heart Association (AHA), American College of 
Sports Medicine (ACSM), American Thoracic Society (ATS), American Association of Cardiovascular and 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation (AACVPR), and the European Society of Cardiol ogy Working Group on 
Prevention and Rehabilitation. He is a recent recipient of the AACVPR Established Investigator Award, and 
is a Senior Research Career Scientist Award recipient from the VA. The fifth edition of his textbook co -
authored with Dr. Froelic her, “Exercise and the Heart: Clinical Concepts” was published in April 2006.    
 
             Dr. Myers has also published extensively in the area of exercise training among patients with 
chronic heart failure (CHF). The focus of these studies has been on  the application of MRI to quantify the 
effects of training on the myocardial remodeling process. He and his colleagues were the first to employ 
this technology to address a controversy that arose in the 1990s, in which it was suggested that exercise 
training could lead to myocardial damage. Using a high intensity training protocol and a series of 
randomized trials, it was demonstrated that training did not cause further myocardial damage among 
patients with CHF ( 117-120). These results have since been conf irmed by studies performed in Italy, 
Canada, the US and elsewhere, and have been influential in the development of rehabilitation guidelines in 
these patients. Dr. Myers’ followed these initial studies by applying a novel MRI tagging technique, in which 
the myocardium could be visualized more closely in 3 dimensions, including rotational displacement during 
systole and diastole ( 120). These studies demonstrated no adverse effects of training on myocardial size, 
function, or rotation velocity during systole up to one year after undergoing training, and an improvement in 
relaxation velocity in a subgroup of patients with non -ischemic cardiomyopathy.     
 
              An ongoing NIH SCCOR project entitled, “Effects of exercise therapy in abdominal aortic 
aneur ysm (AAA) disease” (Myers and Dalman, Co -PIs, Froelicher, Co -Investigator) is in its 6th year, and 
employs exercise testing and training methods that are similar to those in the current proposal ( 87; 93).  
The purpose of the SCCOR project is to test the ef fectiveness of exercise training to reduce abdominal 
aortic aneurysm risk, limit small aneurysm progression, and modify biologic markers of AAA disease.  The 
study includes 3 arms; one to identify signature protein profiles of AAA disease, another the appli cation of 
MRI to develop and validate hemodynamic computational models in AAA progression, and the 3rd to 
investigate the effects of 3 years of exercise training on AAA size, aneurysm risk, and physiologic 
responses to exercise. Some early results of this trial are presented below.  
 
             Safety, efficacy, and adherence to a home -based exercise train ing program in patients  with 
cardiovascular disease .  Myers J , et al. Effects of e xercise training in patients with abdominal aortic 
aneurysm  (AAA) : Prel iminary results from a randomized trial. J Cardiopulm Rehab il Prev  30: 374 -383, 
2010 , and Myers J et al. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in abdominal aortic aneurysm: Profile, safety, 
and mortality estimates. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil 18:459 -466, 2011 . Figure 6 below shows changes 
in exercise capacity in 57 subjects with AAA disease after 1 -year of home -based exercise training at the 
VA Palo Alto  rehabilitation facility . At the 3 -year evaluation point, s ignificant differences between exercise 
and usual  care groups were also observed for peak VO 2, VO 2 at the ventilatory threshold, and other indices 
of the training response, such as a reduction in submaximal heart rate. Using a case -management 
approach  and the application of weekly phone calls, activity l ogs, heart rate monitors and pedometers, 
subjects in the exercise  group expended an average of >2,000 kcals/week of recreational energy 
expenditure. In a substudy, these methods of activity surveillance have been validated ( Myers J, Dupain M, 
Vu A, Powell A, Smith K, Dalman R, on behalf of the Stanford AAA SCCOR Investigators. Agreement 
between activity monitoring devices during home rehabilitation: A substudy of the AAA STOP Trial. J Phys 
Act Aging,  in press, 201 2).   
 
    
  
  Figure  6. Bar graphs showing 42% increase in exercise time in the exercise group and no change in usual 
care subjects following 1 -year of exercise training in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm disease  (86). 
Changes in exercise capacity were similar at the completion of the full trial, after up to 3 years of home -
based exercise training .   
     Data on the a pproach to activity monitoring and surveillance.  In the current proposal, methods for 
monitoring and surveillance of physical activity will be employed that are similar to the above -mentioned 
ongoing NIH trial. In our NIH trial, we observed that subjects achieved 98±7% of their target heart rates 
during monitoring ( 87). Using 7 -day activity recall instruments to quantify weekly activity, the mean overall 
energy expenditure for s ubjects in the exercise group after 1 year of participation was 2269±1207 
kcals/week (shown in the figure below). This is roughly double the CDC/AHA recommendations for 
physical activity, and is significantly higher than the recently -published HF -ACTION tr ial (≈500 kcals/week) 
and other rehabilitation studies. This degree of exercise stimulus resulted in a 42% increase exercise 
capacity on the 1 -year treadmill test, while no changes were observed in controls. Thus, the approach 
proposed is likely to be succ essful in achieving an adequate training stimulus.    
 
Figure 7. Average energy expenditure over 1 year in the exercise group (from reference # 86) 
 
             Studies on muscle wasting in kidney failur e.. Dr. Rabkin (Co -PI) is a Professor of Medicine, 
Emeritus Active at Stanford University, and a Staff Nephrologist at the Palo Alto VAHCS .  The focus of his 
research is on the mechanisms of muscle wasting in CKD with the goal of identifying potential strategies 
for the prevention and treatment of this diso rder. The current proposal reflects an effort to translate his 
many animal findings to a clinical population with CKD. The following briefly highlight s some of this work 
relevant to the current proposal.  
  
            Chronic uremia attenuates growth horm one induced signal transduction in skeletal muscle.  Sun D, 
Zheng Z, Tummala P, Oh J, Schaefer F,  Rabkin R:  J Am Soc Nephrol 15:2630 -6, 2004 . Resistance to 
growth hormone  contributes to muscle wasting in uremia.  To test whether  impaired growth hormone  
signaling is a cause of the resistance to growth hormone and to elucidate its mechanisms, we studied 
**
PF CRF PF CRF
2 days 7 days**
**
**
0100200300400500Relative IGF -1 mRNA levelCON
WOFig 3
muscle growth hormone  signaling and action in rats with surgically induced chronic renal failure .  As we 
observed previously, growth hormone  stimulated IGF -1 expression was depressed in CRF and evidence 
is provided that  the resistance to growth hormone  is caused at least in part by impaired JAK2 -GHR -
STAT5 phosphorylation and nuclear STAT5 translocation. Furthermore, th is study demonstrated that the 
attenuated J AK2 –STAT5 signaling may be caused by at least two different processes.  One involves 
depressed phosphorylation of the signaling proteins because of increased suppress ion of cytokine 
signaling -2 expression that may be linked to low -grade inflammation. The other may involve increased 
signaling protein dephosphorylation because of heightened protein -tyrosine phosphatase activity.  
 
            Work -induced changes in skeletal muscle IGF -1 and myostatin gene expression in uremia.   Sun 
DF, Chen Y, Rabkin R . Kidney Int  70:453 -9, 2006. Resistance to GH induced IGF -1 gene expression 
contributes to uremic muscle wasting. Since exercise stimulates muscle IGF -1 expression independent of 
growth hormone , we tested whether work overload could increase skeletal muscle IGF -1 expression in 
uremia and thus bypass the defective growth hormone  action. In addition , to provide insight into the 
mechanism of uremic wasting and the response to exercise we examined myostatin expression.  
Unilateral plantaris muscle work overload  was initiated in uremic and pairfed normal rats by gastrocnemius 
tendon ablation with the contralateral plantaris as a control.  Some rats were growth hormone  treated for 7 
days. Work overload  stimulated a gain in weight of the plantaris  muscle in both groups and corrected the 
uremic muscle atrophy.  As shown in Figure 8 below , growth hormone increased plantaris IGF -1 mRNA 
levels >2 fold in pairfed  rats but the response in chronic renal failure  was severely attenuated .  
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 8. Effect of GH on muscle IGF -1 mRNA levels        Fig 9. Effect of work overload  on muscle IGF -
1 mRNA levels  
 
Work overlaod  increased the IGF -1 mRNA levels significantly in both the chronic renal failure  and pairfed  
groups, albeit less brisk in renal failure  (Figure 9). However after 7 days IGF -1 mRNA levels were elevated 
similarly, >2 fold, in both groups. Of note, the atrophied uremic plantaris muscle basal myostatin mRNA 
levels were increased significantly and normalized after an increase in work -overloaded rats  suggest ing a 
myostatin role in the wasting process ( Figure 10).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 10.  Myostatin levels in CRF and response to 
work overload  
 
 
 
In summary, these findings provide insight into the 
mechanisms of skeletal muscle wasting in uremia and the hypertrophic resp onse to exercise, and suggest 
that alterations in the balance between IGF -1 and myostatin play an important role in these processes.  
 
             Increased workload fully activates the blunted IRS -1/PI3 -kinase/Akt signaling pathway in 
atrophied uremic mus cle. Chen Y, Sood S, Biada J, Roth R, Rabkin R.   Kidney Int. 2008. In this study of 
muscle wasting and recovery in chronically uremic rats, we set out to characterize the mechanisms 
whereby resistance exercise increases muscle mass, despite the presence of  impaired signaling through 
the IRS -1/PI3 -kinase/Akt pathway and insensitivity to IGF -1.  Uremic and sham nephrectomized (SN) rats 
with surgically induced unilateral plantaris muscle work overload were studied, with the contralateral 
plantaris muscle servi ng as a nonloaded control. In these control muscles signaling protein levels were 
similar in the chronic renal failure  and SN groups despite atrophy of the chronic renal failure  muscle. 
However, basal state activation (phosphorylation) of the IRS -1/PI3 -kinase/Akt signaling pathway was 
depressed in the uremic rat muscle.  Of note , even though the basal activity of the IRS -1/PI3 -kinase/Akt 
signaling pathway was depressed in the uremic atrophied plantaris muscle, simply increasing the muscle 
workload effective ly activated this signaling pathway and phosphorylation of the signaling proteins in the 
work -overloaded plantaris muscle was similar in both groups of rats  (Figure 11 below ).  Work overload 
induced a significant increase in local IGF -1 and mechano -growth factor expression and also a significant 
increase in signaling protein levels. Together these changes provide an explanation for the work -induced 
increase in signal transduction.  Importantly,  the work -induced signaling response in the uremi c rats  was 
similar to that observed in non -uremic rats and promoted changes that we observed consistent with a 
decrease in muscle protein degradation, an increase in protein synthetic capacity and an increase in 
myonuclear number.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 11. Levels of phosphor ylated signaling protein levels in control and work overloaded plantaris muscle 
of SN (sham nephrectomy) and chronic renal failure  rats. Phosphorylation of IRS -1 and Akt is depressed 
in the control (con) non -loaded muscle of the renal failure  group. W ork o verload  stimulated signaling 
protein phosphorylation similarly in both groups of rats.   
 
We concluded that i ncreasing  the work of atrophied muscle in uremia can fully activate the depressed 
basal IRS -1/PI3 -kinase/Akt signaling pathway and it appears to do  so by increasing IGF-1 and 
mechano growth factor expression and increasing the levels and phosphorylation the IRS -1/PI3 
kinase/Akt/ mTOR signaling proteins. This in turn appears to account for the increase in the reduced 
uremic muscle mass, which reached a level comparable to that seen in normal rat.  
 
            Leucine stimulated mTOR signaling is partly attenuated in skeletal muscle of  chronically uremic 
rats.  Chen Y, Sood S, McIntire K, Roth R,  Rabkin R. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 . The 
branch ed chain amino acid leucine stimulates muscle protein synthesis in part  by directly activating the 
mTOR signaling pathway. Furthermore , leucine, if given in conjunction with resistance exercise, enhances 
the exercise -induced mTOR signaling and protein synt hesis. In this study we tested whether leucine can 
activate the mTOR anabolic signaling pathway in uremia and whether it can enhance work overload -
induced signaling through this pathway. CKD and control rats were studied after 7 days of surgically 
induced unilateral plantaris muscle work overload  and a single leucine or saline load. In the basal state  
4E-BP1 phosphorylation was modestly depressed in non -work ove rload muscle of CKD rats while  rpS6 
phosphorylation was near ly completely suppressed. After oral leucine mTOR, S6K1and rpS6 
phosphorylation increased similarly in both groups while the phospho -4E-BP1 response was modestly 
attenuated in CKD. In work overload CKD muscle leucine augmented mTOR and 4EBP1 phosphorylation, 
but its effect on S6K1 phosphoryla tion was attenuated and it failed to stimulate rpS6 phosphorylation.  
In summary, t his study has established that the chronic uremic state impairs basal signaling 
through the mTOR anabolic pathway , an abnormality that may contribute to muscle  wasting. However 
despite this abnormality, leucine can stimulate this signaling pathway in CKD , though its 
effectiveness is partially attenuated, especially in skeletal muscle undergoing sustained work overload . 
Thus , even though there is some resistance to leucine  in CKD, the se results  suggest a potential role for 
leucine rich supplements in the management of uremic muscle wasting.  
 
Description of key relevant studies published by co -investigators.  
Dr Chertow (Co-Investigator) is Professor Medicine /Nephrology and Chief of Nephrology at Stanford 
University and a leader in the field of outcomes research in CKD.  Dr . Kurella -Tamura  (Co-Investigator) is 
a Staff Nephrologist/Gerontologist VAPAHCS and Assistant Professor of Medicine/Nephrology at Stanford 
University . She  is a widely recognized authority on cognitive disorders in the CKD population . Some 
representative studies  relevant to the current proposal are presented be low.  
 
           Cognitive impairment in chronic kidney disease.   Kurella -Tamura M, Chertow  GM, Luan J, and 
Yaffe K.  J Am Ger Soc; 52:1863 -1869, 2004. The prevalence of cognitive impairment and its association 
with the severity of kidney disease has not been defined.  A cross -sectional study of cognitive function was 
performed in 160 ambulatory person s with ESRD and CKD not yet on dialysis. The performance on three 
cognitive function tests assessing global cognitive function (3MS), executive function (Trails B), and verbal 
memory (California Verbal Learning Trial, or CVLT) was compared to published nor ms. Overall, 17% of 
subjects met established criteria for global cognitive impairment.  Global impairment was present in 27% 
with ESRD and 15% with advanced CKD, but in no subjects with mild to moderate CKD ( p=0.02).  
Unadjusted and adjusted mean scores on  the 3MS, Trails B , and CVLT immediate and delayed recall were 
significantly worse for subjects with ESRD than for subjects with CKD or published norms ( p<0.001 for all 
comparisons). Scores on the Trails B ( p<0.001) and CVLT immediate ( p=0.01) and delayed recall ( p<0.001) 
were significantly worse for subjects with CKD not requiring dialysis than for published norms. In addition, 
the fraction of subjects with impairment on the 3MS and Trails B increased with decreasing kidney function. 
These results demonstr ate that significant impairment in cognitive function is present in both CKD and 
ESRD, and suggest kidney disease directly contributes to cognitive impairment.   
 
            Significance of frailty among dialysis patients.  Johansen KL, Chertow GM , Jin C, Kutner NG. J Am 
Soc Nephrol. 2007 Nov;18(11):2960 -7. The aim of th is study was to determine the prevalence and 
predictors of frailty among a cohort of incident dialysis patients and to determine the degree to which frailty 
was associated with death and hos pitalization. A cohort of 2 ,275 adults was studied who participated in 
the Dialysis  Morbidity and Mortality Wave 2 study, of whom two -thirds met our definition of frailty: a 
composite construct that incorporated poor self -reported physical functioning, exh austion/fatigue, low 
physical activity, and undernutrition. Multivariable logistic regression analysis suggested that older age, 
female sex, and hemodialysis (rather than peritoneal dialysis) were independently associated with frailty. 
Cox proportional haz ards modeling indicated that frailty was independently associated with higher risk of  
death (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 2.24, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.60 –3.15) and with the combined  
outcome of death or hospitalization (adjusted HR 1.63, 95% CI 1.41 –1.87). Therefore, f railty is extremely 
common and is associated with adverse outcomes among incident dialysis patients. Given its prevalence 
and consequences, increased research efforts should focus on interventions aimed to prevent or 
attenuate frailty in the dialysis population.   