PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 1 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018   
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 2 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  Protocol Title  Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block  
Principal 
Investigator/Faculty 
Advisor  Name: Jason Habeck  
Department: Anesthesiology  
Telephone Number: 612 -624-9990  
Email Address: habe0073 @umn.edu  
Student 
Investigator  Name:  
Current Academic Status (Student, Fellow, Resident):  
  
Department:  
Telephone Number:  
Institutional Email Address:  
Scientific 
Assessment   
IND/IDE # (if 
applicable)  n/a 
IND/IDE Holder  n/a 
Investigational Drug 
Services # (if 
applicable)  n/a 
Version 
Number/Date:  3 5/9/201 9 
 
PROTOCOL COVER PAGE  
 
   
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 3 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018   
REVISION HISTORY  
 
Revision #  Version Date  Summary of Changes  Consent Change?  
3 5/9/19  Adjusted inclusion criteria to 
include those who are not enrolled 
in the TSA study.   
    
    
    
    
    
    
  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 4 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  1.0 Table of Contents  
 
1.0 Objectives  7 
2.0 Background  7 
3.0 Study Endpoints/Events/Outcomes  7 
4.0 Study Intervention(s)/Investigational Agent(s)  7 
5.0 Procedures Involved  8 
6.0 Data and Specimen Banking  9 
7.0 Sharing of Results with Participants  9 
8.0 Study Population  10 
9.0 Vulnerable Populations  10 
10.0  Local Number of Participants  11 
11.0  Local Recruitment Methods  11 
12.0  Withdrawal of Participants  13 
13.0  Risks to Participants  13 
14.0  Potential Benefits to Participants  13 
15.0  Statistical Considerations  13 
16.0  Confidentiality  14 
17.0  Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Participants  14 
18.0  Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Participants  15 
19.0  Compensation for Rese arch -Related Injury  15 
20.0  Consent Process  16 
21.0  Setting  19 
22.0  Multi -Site Research  19 
23.0  Resources Available  20 
24.0  References  21 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 5 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINITIONS 
● LB liposome bupivacaine  
● ISB interscalene block  
● TSA total shoulder arthroplasty  
● RCR rotator cuff surgery  
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 6 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  2.0 Objectives  
2.1 Purpose:  To evaluate the movement of the diaphragm after an interscalene 
block with liposome bupivacaine (LB) compared to inters calene block (IB) 
with bupivacaine.  This study will evaluate if there is a possible prolonged phrenic nerve paralysis when using liposome bupivacaine in an interscalene block, using ultrasound.  
3.0 Background  
3.1 Significance of Research Question/Purpose: To date there is no previous 
study looking at diaphragm movement after an Liposomal Bupivacaine 
Interscalene Block .  It is important to see how long the phrenic nerve is 
affected  by this block if at all.   
3.2 Preliminary Data: We have not routinely examined that patient’s diaphragm 
via ultrasound after ISB at M Health.   Patients have not been readmitted 
for breathing problems with our current practice.  
3.3 Existing Literature:  There is no previous literature in LB ISB.  Urmey et al. 
showed 100% phrenic nerve block post ISB. But others (Renes et al) have 
evaluated it using bupivacaine and found that lower doses resulted in l ess 
diaphragm blockade. Cuvillon showed that those with a catheter had 66% 
phrenic nerve paralysis at 24 hours.  
4.0 Study Endpoints/Events/Outcomes  
4.1 Primary Endpoint/Event/Outcome:  The primary study endpoint will be 
diaphragm excursion (movement in cm) from re st to sigh in a sitting 
position.  
4.2 Secondary Endpoint(s)/Event(s)/Outcome(s): The secondary endpoint will 
be the diaphragm excursion (movement in cm) from rest to a quick 
inspiratory breath.  
4.3 Secondary Endpoint(s)/Event(s)/Outcome(s): Evaluation of baseline FEV1, 
FVC (or FEV6) and FEV1/FVC ratio via spirometry.  
5.0 Study Intervention(s)/Investigational Agent(s)  
5.1 Description: This study will be run concurrently with two other studies 
comparing bupivacaine to Liposomal Bupivacaine in shoulder surgeries. We 
will either use already randomized patients for our randomization process or 
if they are not enrolled in either RCR or TSA study we will randomize them to one of the two groups . For this study in particular w e will use an 
ultrasound machine to scan the diaphragm of any patient who had an Interscalene Block for T otal Shoulder Arthroplasy or Rotator Cuff Repair. 
Patients are to be scanned in an upright sitting position and scanned from a low intercostal or subcostal approach using the liver or spleen as an acoustic window. M Mode will be applied and the range of diaphragmatic movement from the resting expiratory position to deep inspiration (sigh test) will be 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 7 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  recorded as was the range of diaphragmatic movement f rom resting 
expiratory position when quickly inspiring through the nose (sniff test). The blocks will be done regardless of the study as they are standard of care for pain control.  The only intervention is ultrasound examination of the patient ’s diaphragm at baseline, 3 hours post block in recovery room and on 
post-operative day 1, and basic spirometry to record FEV1 and FVC via a portable spirometer at the same time points.  If patients did stay in hospital on postoperative day 2 we would also evaluate their diaphragm function.   
5.2 Drug/Device Handling: n/a  
5.3 Biosafety: n/a  
5.4 Stem Cells: n/a  
 
6.0 Procedures Involved  
6.1 Study Design: This is a prospective  study  
Study Procedures: All patients who are enrolled in our TSA or RCR studys fit the criteria 
of being scheduled for overnight shoulder surgery and having an ISB with or without LB. The patients will already be randomized into either an ISB with bupivacaine or with bupivacaine and LB. If the patient is not enrolled or does not fit inclusion criteria for the 
RCR or TSA study they will then be randomized to either bupivacaine or liposome bupivacaine ISB.  The  patients wi ll perform spirometry (one large exhale into a 
spirometer) and have an ultrasound examination of their diaphragm at  baseline prior to 
the block, in PACU after their procedure, and on postoperative day 1 (24 hours after ISB).  Diaphragmatic movement will be evaluated by real -time M -mode ultrasonography 
of the hemidiaphragm using a 17- mm 1 - to 5-MHz broadband phased array US probe. 
Patients are to be scanned in an upright sitting position and scanned from a low intercostal or subcostal approach using the liver or spleen as an acoustic window. M Mode will be applied and the range of diaphragmatic movement from the resting expiratory position to deep inspiration (sigh test) will be recorded a s well as  the range of 
diaphragmatic movement from resting expiratory position when quickly inspiring through the nose (sniff test). This will occur three times, at baseline prior to surgery, in the recovery room, and on the ward on postoperative day 1. All nerve blocks will be confirmed to be functional via a sensory skin test prior to surgery or in the recovery room prior to the recovery room evaluation. 
6.2 Study Dur ation: The patients will be in the study for 2 days.  The duration of 
the study should be 3 months to enroll the 22 patients.  
6.3 Individually Identifiable Health Information: PHI will be recorded but once 
data collection is done then the phi will be removed and replaced with 
unique identifier.  This is just to ensure we see the correct patient for the data collection.   
6.4 Use of radiation : n/a  
6.5 Use of Center for Magnetic Resonance Research:  n/a  
7.0 Data and Specimen Banking  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 8 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  7.1 Storage and Access: the data will be kept in the University box.  Data is kept 
for 7 years.   
7.2 Data : The data kept will be patient demographics such as weight, BMI, age, 
sex.  Also, block medications and volume used, time of injection, surgical 
procedure, range of diaphragm movement at baseline, in recovery room, and on postoperative day 1 and spirometry at baseline, in recovery and postoperative day 1.  
7.3 Release/Sharing: data will be kept with the PI and co -I 
8.0 Sharing of Results with Participants  
8.1    No results will be shared  with participants.  
9.0 Study Population  
9.1 Inclusion Criteria: All patients age 18 years and older who are scheduled for  
shoulder surgery with inters calene block  and remain in the hospital for more 
than 24 hours that are being randomized into a bupivacaine versus LB ISB 
block study or those who are not enrolled in the TSA or RCR study but are 
having shoulder surgery with ISB and planned to spend one night in the hospital.   
9.2 Exclusion Criteria: Non-English speaking patients.  
9.3 Screening: On the week to day prior to surgery patients will be identified 
from surgical case list.  Then prior to or on day of surgery patients will be asked to participate in the study and given enough time to decide to participate and ask questions.  
10.0 Vulnerable Populations  
10.1 Vulnerable Populations:  
☐ Children  
☐ Pregnant women/Fetuses/Neonates  
☐ Prisoners  
☐ Adults lacking capacity to consent and/or adults with diminished capacity 
to consent, including, but not limited to, those with acute medical 
conditions, psychiatric disorders, neurologic disorders, developmental disorders, and behavioral disorders  
☐ Appr oached for participation in research during a stressful situation such 
as emergency room setting, childbirth (labor), etc.  
☐ Disadvantaged in the distribution of social goods and services such as 
income, housing, or healthcare  
☐ Serious health condition fo r which there are no satisfactory standard 
treatments  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 9 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  ☐ Fear of negative consequences for not participating in the research (e.g. 
institutionalization, deportation, disclosure of stigmatizing behavior)  
☐ Any other circumstance/dynamic that could increase v ulnerability to 
coercion or exploitation that might influence consent to research or 
decision to continue in research  
☐ Undervalued or disenfranchised social group  
☐ Members of the military  
☐ Non -English speakers  
☐ Those unable to read (illiterate)  
☐ Employees of the researcher  
☐ Students of the researcher  
x None of the above  
10.2 Additional Safeguards:  
11.0 Local Number of Participants  
11.1 Local Number of Participants to be Consented: 40 patients consented with 
goal of 22  patients enrolled in the study 
12.0 Local Recr uitment Methods  
12.1 Recruitment Process: No recruitment posters.  Only recruit from surgical 
lists. Patients will be recruited from the group of adult surgical patients at 
the University of Minnesota undergoing shoulder surgery  and receiving an 
interscalene block sched uled for overnight stay that elected to participate in 
another ISB bupivacaine versus LB shoulder study . Patients will be 
approached at the preoperative assessment clinic or sur geon’s clini c at the 
Clinic and Surgery Center if possible by a resear ch staff member to 
determine their interest in participation.  If they decide to be a participant they will be consented and given a copy of their consent form for their records and a consent will be scanned and placed into EPIC.   These patients will have  significant time to review the study with research staff as well as 
the physicians performing the procedure due to the fact they arrive several hours prior to their scheduled surgery.  All subjects will have enough time to 
ask questions about the study and the potential risks involved regardless of 
which venue they are consented. 
12.2 Identification of Potential Participants: Patients will be identified by 
members of the treatment team in either the surgeon’s clinic, pre -assessment 
clinic, or preoperative area.  Patients who have opted out of research will not 
be asked to participate in the study. Patients will be approached to consent for the study by a surgeon, anesthesiologist, or member of the research team. Patients who agree to participate in the study will sign both a study 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 10 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  consent and HIPAA authorization allowing the use of specified information contained in medical records for research purposes. 
12.3 Recruitment Materials: n/a 
12.4 Payment: n/a  
13.0 Withdrawal of Participants  
13.1 Withdrawal Circumstances: Subjects who have consented prior to the day of 
surgery and for some reason choose not to participate will be withdrawn and 
a notation will be made in the study records and these people will be considered screen failures.  The surgeon may choose to withdraw the patient from  the study prior to surgery for  any medical reason or if they suffer a 
major life threatening  adverse event . 
13.2 Withdrawal Procedures: If the patient is withdrawn from study prior to the 
procedure, they will be noted in study records as screen failures. If they undergo the procedure and they decide they no longer want to be a part of the study or withdrawn by the physician, they will be withdrawn and no further data will be collected.  This will also be noted in the study documentation. 
13.3 Termination Procedure s: If the study is terminated for any reason, or there 
is more than 5 % major adverse events the data that is already collected will 
be stored in a secure location only accessible to research personnel on this 
study. No further data will be collected if the study is terminated.  Risks to 
Participants  
13.4 Foreseeable  Risks: There is a risk of loss of privacy as well as 
inconvenience the patient as we will ultrasound them prior to and after 
surgery. Otherwise this is a minimal risk study  
13.5 Reproduction Risks: n/a  
13.6 Risks to Others: n/a  
14.0 Potential Benefits to Participants  
14.1 Potential Benefits: There are no potential benefits to the patient from this 
study.  
15.0 Statistical Considerations  
15.1 Data Analysis Plan: We will use the average of the three US exams for each 
timed measurement as the definitive measurement.  We will also use FE V1, 
FVC (or FEV6) and FEV1/FVC (or FEV6) ratio for each time period as a 
secondary measurement. This data will be be given to the statistician who will compare those in the LB ISB group to the bupivacaine ISB group to evaluate for differences (if any) betw een the movement of the diaphragms in 
each group.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 11 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  15.2 Power Analysis: We assumed a 5% rate of block at 24 hours in bupivacaine 
and a 66% block for liposome bupivacaine.  With an alpha of 0.05 and power of 80% we determined we need 9 patients in each group.  A ssuming 
we would have 20% patients drop out, screen fail, or discharge early we planned to enroll 11 per group for total of 22 patients.  
15.3 Statistical Analysis: This study will be analyzed by our staff biostatistician.  
The data will be de -identified and shared with him in box.  The statistician 
will be provided the protocol so they are able to analyze for primary and 
secondary objectives.  
15.4 Data Integrity: All patients will be assigned a unique patient identifier. The 
data that will be sent to the statisticia n will be de-identified.   
16.0 Confidentiality  
16.1 Data Security: All paper documents and consent forms will be stored in a locked cabinet in the anesthesia research office in B573 Mayo. All study 
data will be stored electronically in Box and only the PI and membe rs of the 
research team will have access to the data.  
17.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Participants  
17.1 Data Integrity Monitoring.  
The PI, co -investigators, and research assistants will all have access to the study data 
stored in the Uni versity’s Box storage system. All the research assistants have 
experience collecting pain scores and other relevant study information. The PI of the study will periodically review the study data to ensure accuracy and completeness of study data. 
1.1 Data Safety Monitoring. The Department of Anesthesiology has 
established a Data and Safety Monitoring Committee consisting of several staff 
anesthesiologists which include persons who are board certified as pain specialists. Data will be transmitted in box  to persons on the board on a monthly 
basis for review.  If there are patterns of adverse events, the board will meet as needed and provide recommendations. 
All safety data will be collected on a case report form and transferred into an 
excel spreadsheet t hat will be stored in box. Also, all phone call data will be 
collected on a case report form and transferred into excel in box.   
All data will be collected by research assistants on a daily basis.  Subjects are monitored at several intervals on day of surg ery and daily .  
The data will be reviewed on a regular basis (weekly) by the PI and research staff.  If there are consistent complications noted a meeting will be convened by the DSMB for recommendations.  
The statistical tests for analyzing the safety data  to determine whether harm is 
occurring.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 12 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  The statistician uses R or SAS for analysis.  Most likely a regression analysis will 
be performed to see which event is most likely the contributor for the complications.  Also a chi -square analysis can be performed .  All is very 
dependent on data variability.  
A fatal or serious adverse event that is attributable to either the delivery or the study medication itself.  
Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Participants  
Protecting Privacy: Patients will be asked if this is a good time to have the 
ultrasound study. .  All patients will have the right to refuse when contacted.  
Access to Participants: All patients are required to sign a consent that states their 
privacy of the data being collected.  In additio n, they are required to sign a 
HIPAA consent that further describes the data being collected.  It also describes that all data is de -identified and stored in a secure database.  They will be 
informed that data is stored and reviewed in box which is HIPAA compliant and that only study personnel have access.  Patients are part of the PI and co I job at the University.   
 
18.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
Compensation for Research -Related Injury: In the event that this research activity 
results in an injury, treatment will be available, including first aid, emergency 
treatment and follow -up care as needed. Care for such injuries will be billed in the 
ordinary manner, to the patient and/or insurance company.   
 
18.1 Contract Language: n/a  
19.0 Consent Process  
19.1 Cons ent Process (when consent will be obtained):  
Patients will be identified in the pre -operative time period by the block 
anesthesiologist or research team and if possible  will be consented by the 
research coordinator or research assistant.   If patients have more questions 
and do not want to sign at their clinic will be asked if it is allowable for a study staff member to contact them prior to surgery via phone to clarify if they have any questions.  On the day of surgery, if the patient has not already signed consent and is still interested in participating in the study will be presented with consent and Health and Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) forms .  The patient will review the forms with 
the research staff, or anesthesiologist.  Subjects will be reminded that participation is completely voluntary, and that they may stop participation at any time without question or penalty.  The research staff or anesthesiologist will answer any questions that the subjects may have 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 13 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  about the study.  If the patient decides to participate, they will be asked to 
sign the consent and HIPAA forms.  One copy will be saved for study records, and the subject will be provided with a copy of the forms for their own records. Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (when consent will not be obtained):  
Non -English Speaking Participants: n/a.  
19.2 Participants Who Are Not Yet Adults (infants, children, teenagers under 18 years of age) : 
● n/a 
19.3 Cognitively Impaired Adults, or adults with fluctuating or diminished capacity to consent:  
● n/a 
19.4 Adults Unable to Consent:  
● Permission: n/a  
● Assent: n/a  
● Dissent: n/a  
20.0 Setting  
1.2 Research Sites: Patients will be consented in the surgeon’s clinic or pre assessment clinic.  The surgical procedures will take place at the Fairview riverside campus.   
20.1 International Research: n/a  
21.0 Multi -Site Research  
● n/a 
22.0 Resources Available  
23.0 Resources Available: Research assistants are available to aid in consent and data 
acquisition. All research assistants will be familiar with the study protocol and have 
experience working with similar studies.  
  We plan to enroll 22 subjects.  The plan is to screen 40 subjects to research this target 
population.  This center performs approximately 500 shoulder procedures annually. 
We plan to conduct this study over 3 months.  Enrollment and data collection will be 
completed at this time.  Statistical Analysis will take approximately two months to complete.  
 All procedures will be perform ed in the clinical facilities at the MHealth Clinics and 
Surgery Center and at the West and East Bank. Data storage and analysis will be done using desktop equipment which is available at the Research Office B573 Mayo.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Evaluation of diaphragm movement after an Interscalene block 
VERSION DATE: 3 5/9/2019 
 Page 14 of 14  Revised: 1/19/2018  23.1 References  
Renes et al. Ultrasound guided low dose interscalene brachial plexus block 
reduces the incidence of hemidiaphragmatic paresis.  Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2009;34:498 -502 
Urmey WF, talts Kh, Sharrock Ne: one hundred percent incidence of hemidiaphragmatic paresis associated with interscalene brachial plexus anesthesia as diagnosed by ultrasonography. Anesth Analg 1991; 72:498 –3 