CLOUDBREAK THERAPEUTICS  
Protocol -short  
A Phase 2a Multicenter, Randomized, Vehicle -Controlled, Dose Escalating  Study to 
Evaluate the Safety, Efficacy and Pharmacokinetics of CBT -001 Ophthalmic Solution in  
Patients with Primary or Recurrent Pterygium  
 
Protocol Number:     CBT -CS101  
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier    [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Name of Investigational Product:   CBT -001 Ophthalmic Solution  
Governing IRB/IEC:     Sterling IRB  
Sponsor:      Cloudbreak Therapeutic s, LLC  
15615 Alton Parkway , Suite 450  
Irvine, CA 92618, USA  
Emergency Phone Numbers:   1-949-678-9752  
SAE Reporting Fax Number:   1-949-271-6302  
SAE Reporting Email Address:   ni_jinsong@cloudbreaktherapeutics.com  
Medical Safety Monitor Contact:   Robert Da vid, M.D.  
      Tel (office): 1 -949-200-7899  
      Tel (mobile): 1 -949-246-8368  
      Email: robert.david@clindevop.com  
Date:       April 12, 2017  
 
 
 
Study Number: CBT -CS101 
Name of Sponsor:   
Cloudbreak Therapeutics, LLC  
15615 Alton Parkway, Suite 450  
Irvine, CA 92618  
Tel: 1 -949-678-9752  
Email: ni_jinsong@cloudbreaktherapeutics.com  
Contact Person: Jinsong Ni, Ph.D.  
Name of Finished Product: Ophthalmic Solution of CBT -001 
Name of Active Ingre dient: CBT -001 
Title of Study: A Phase 2a multicenter, randomized, vehicle -controlled, dose escalating study to evaluate the 
safety, efficacy and pharmacokinetics of CBT -001 ophthalmic solution in patients with primary or recurrent 
pterygium  
Study Period:   
Study Initiation Da te (First Subject Enrolled): May, 2017  
Study Completion Da te (Last Subject Completed): December, 
2017   
Phase of Development:  Phase 2a  Stage 2  
Objectives:   
To evaluat e the safety, tolerability and effect in patients with primary pterygium or  pterygium recu rrence via 
unilateral topical ocular dosing of CBT -001 ophthalmic solution for 28 days with 5 months follow -up observation  
Methodology:   
Strategy:   
• Evaluate ocular and systemic safety profile of CBT -001 ophthalmic solut ion in patients with primary or 
recurrent pterygium, that are associated with moderate to severe pterygium vascularity;  
• Establish whether CBT -001 is efficacious in reducing pterygium vascularity;  
• Assess whether CBT -001 is efficacious in inhibiting pterygiu m lesion growth;  
Plan:   
A multicenter, double -masked, vehicle -controlled and parallel study is designed with 28 days TID repeat ocular 
dosing of vehicle and the highest tolerable dose (e.g., 0.2%) , followed by 5 -month  post dose observation. 
Ophthalmic and physical examinations will be performed at screening, Day 1 and weeks 2, 4, 8, 16 , and 24. External 
photograph of the pterygium eye will be taken using a digital camera and the lesion length, width and area as well 
as pterygium vascularity  will be measured  or graded from these images at an independent image reading center.  
Number of Subjects: 50 patients with primary  or recurrent  pterygium.  
Diagnosis and Main Criteria for Eligibility:  
Major Inclusion Criteria  
• Primary pterygium with 0.6 -3.5 mm lesion length from the anterior edge of limbus to the central cornea, 
associated with pterygium vascularity ≥ Grade 3 using the 5 -point Pterygium Hyperemia Grading Scale  
a. A minimum of Grade 3 (moderate) pterygium vascularity in the st udy eye at the screenin g (day 
-60 to day -7) and baseline (day 1) visits, using the 5 -point Pterygium Hyperemia Grading 
Scale (0  = absent, 1  = trace, 2  = mild, 3  = moderate, 4  = severe);  
b. About 0.6 -3.5 mm of encroachment of the pterygium onto the cornea of the st udy eye at the 
screening (day -60 to day -7) and baseline (day 1) visits as measured by slit lamp examination 
(investigator assessment). The measurement is as described by Welch et al  [Welch et al, 2011 ]. 
A standard magnification of 16 is used and the variable aperture is focused on the pterygium 
from the limbus to the apex. Reading the size on the slit lamp scale, measurements are taken 
from the limbus to the apex of the lesion on the cornea and recorded to the nearest tenth of a 
millimeter.  
c. T2 (intermediate) or T3 (fleshy) grade in st udy eye at the screening (day -60 to day -7) and 
baseline (day 1) visits, using the Pterygium Morphology Grading Scale.  Pterygium Morphology 
Grading Scale is classified as T1 = atrophic, T2 = intermediate, T3 = fle shy based upon the 
pterygium morphology photographic -based clinical grading system created by Tan and 
colleagues  [Tan et al, 1997 ]. 
i. T1 (Atrophic): Pterygium in which episcleral vessels underlying the body of the 
pterygium are unobscured and clearly distinguished.  
ii. T2 (Intermediate): Pterygium in which episcleral vessel details are indistinctly seen or 
partially obscured.  
iii. T3 (Fleshy): Thick pterygium in which episcleral vessels underlying the body of the 
pterygium a re totally obscured. Pterygium vessels are distinguished from episcleral 
vessels by the straightened radial orientation of the pterygium vessels.  
• Pterygium recurrence, defined as the presence of corneal vessels with concomitant conjunctival 
vascularity of ≥ Grade 3 after excision surgery of primary pterygium.  
• All patients of both genders 18 years of age or older  
Able to provide written informed consent and comply with study assessments for the full duration of the study . 
Major Exclusion Criteria  
• Uncontrolled systemic disease  
• Active ocular disease, corneal abnormalities other than pterygium, active ocular infection, or any ocular 
pathology unrelated to pterygium in either eye that could affect the assessment of the pterygium  
• History of ocular herpe s disease in either eye  
• Any retina disease that could affect visual acuity (e.g., age -related macular degeneration)  
• Any ocular surgical procedure within the last 3 months  
• Anticipated wearing of contact lenses during any portion of the study. Patients, who wear soft contact 
lenses should discontinue wearing them at least 3 days prior to  Day 1  visit. Patients wearing rigid gas 
permeable or hard contact lenses should discontinue wearing them at least 3  weeks prior to Day 1 visit 
• Female patients who are pregnan t, nursing, or planning a pregnancy during the study  
• Current enrollment in an investigational drug or device study or participation in such a study within 
30 days prior to entry into this study  
• History of myocardial infarction or stroke  
• Any condition or si tuation which, in the investigator’s opinion, may put the patient at significant risk, 
may confound the study results, or may interfere significantly with the patient’s participation in the 
study  
• Known allergy or sensitivity to the study medication(s) or i ts components  
• Double pterygium (i.e., eye with nasal and temporal pterygia)  
• Pterygium that would require surgery  
• Pingueculae, pseudo -pterygia (e.g., chemical or thermal burn, trauma, marginal corneal disease); 
neoplasia (e.g., carcinoma in situ, squamous cell carcinoma, other neoplastic diseases)  
• Current or anticipated use of topical ophthalmic medications in the study eye. Patients must have 
discontinued use of ophthalmic medications in the study eye for at least 2 weeks prior to Day 1 visit.  
• Eye: an eye  does not qualify for the study if any of these criteria are present. However, if none of these 
criteria are pr esent in the other  eye, the patient may still qualify f or enrollment based on that  eye 
provided the patient/eye meets all the inclusion and none of the exclusion criteria.  
Test Product, Dose and Mode of Administration, Batch Number: CBT -001 ophthalmic solution of vehicle or 
the highest tolerable dose (e.g., 0.2%), unilateral topical ocular dosing  
Duration of Treatment: 28 days of continuous unilateral ocular dosing with follow -up period of 1, 3 , and 5 -month 
post dose  
Study Measurements:  
Safety : 
• Ocular: visual acuity, int raocular pressure, biomicroscopy,  ophthalmoscopy  
Systemi c: vital signs , clinical labo ratory (Chem -panel), hematology  
Adverse event reporting  
Efficacy:   
Primary Efficacy Endpoint:  
Comparison between drug -treated and vehicle -treated groups on changes of the severity grade of pterygium 
vascularity from baseline (Day 1) at Week 4;  
 
Secondary Efficacy Endpoints:  
Comparison between drug -treated and vehicle -treated groups on change from baseline (Day 1) at Weeks 2, 4, 8, 16 
and 24 in:  
• Corneal lesion length, defined from the anterior edge of the limbus onto the central cornea  
• Corneal le sion area;  
• Corneal lesion width;  
 
Comparison between drug -treated and vehicle -treated groups on changes of the severity grade of pterygium 
vascularity from baseline (Day 1) at Weeks 2, 8, 16 and 24;  
 
Changes from baseline ( Day 1 ) at Weeks 2, 4, 8, 16 , and 24 in:  
• Corneal lesion length  
• Corneal lesion area  
• Corneal lesion width  
 
Change in severity grade of pterygium vascularity from baseline (Day 1) at Weeks 2, 4, 8, 16, and 24  
 
Comparison between drug -treated and vehicle -treated groups on change from baseline (Day 1) at Weeks 2, 4, 8, 16 
and 24 in:  
• Topographic astigmatism in diopters  
 
Comparison between drug -treated and vehicle -treated groups on change  from baseline (Day 1)  at Weeks 2, 4, 8, 16 
and 24 in:  
Scores of Pterygium Symptom and Life Quality (PSLQ) questionnaire  
Statistical Methods: Two database locks are planned for the study, interim and final.  The interim analysis will be 
performed after at least 80% of pati ents have completed their week 4  visit or discontinued prematurely.  The fin al 
analysis will be performed after study completion.  
 
The O’Brien -Fleming group -sequential method will be used for a multiple -comparison adjustment of p -values for 
efficacy due to analyzing the data for both interim and final analyses.  For the final anal ysis, a 2 -sided test with p -
value ≤ 0.048 will be considered statistically significant for all between and within treatment comparisons.  
 
• In general, continuous data will be summarized with descriptive statistics (number of patients, 
mean, standard deviatio n, median, minimum and maximum)  and will be analyzed using analysis 
of variance (ANOVA) techniques or 2 -sample t -tests for between -group comparisons, and paired 
t-tests for within -group analyses. Categorical variables will be summarized by sample s ize (N), 
frequency count and percent, and analyzed using Pearson’s chi -square test or Fisher’s exact 
test. Ordinal variables will be analyzed using the Cochran -Mantel -Haenszel (CMH) or the 
Wilcoxon rank -sum test for between -treatment comparisons and the si gn-rank test for within -
treatment comparisons.  No imputation for missing data will be performed.  
Duration of Study Follow -Up: 1, 3, and 5 months after the completion of 28 days of continuous ocular dosing.  
 
ATTACHMENT: SCHEDULE OF EVENTS  
Study Procedures  Screening  
Days -60 
to -7 Day 1a Week 2  
(± 5 
days)  Week 
4 
(± 5 
days)  Week 
8 
(± 7 
days)  Week 
16 
(± 7 
days)  Week 
24 
(± 7 
days)  
Informed Consent/Authorization  X       
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X X      
Demographics  X       
Medical / Ocular History  X       
Pregnancy Test  X X X     
Serious Medical Events (SME)  X X      
Subject ID Assignment  X       
Concomitant Medications/Concurrent 
Procedures  X X X X X X X 
Pterygium Symptom and Life Quality 
(PSLQ) questionnaire  X X X X X X X 
Vital Sign measurements (blood 
pressure, heart rate, body 
temperature)  X X X X X X X 
Hematology & Blood Chemistry  X   X   X 
Pterygium Photographyb  X X X X X X 
Pterygium Vascularity Assessment  X X      
Pterygium Morphology Assessment  X X      
Pterygium Size Assessment  X X      
Biomicroscopy  X X X X X X X 
Topographic Astigmatism  X X X X X X X 
Best-Corrected Visual Acuity  X X X X X X X 
Intraocular Pressure  X X X X X X X 
Ophthalmoscopy (dilated)  X X  X   X 
Adverse Events   X X X X X X 
Randomization   X      
Study Medication   Dispense  Collect   Collect  Collect    
Exit        X 
a All measurements at baseline Day 1 are prior to  the instillation of first dose  
b Efficacy endpoints will be assessed using pterygium photography at an independent image reading center  
 