Page 1 of 3 
 Study Protocol  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Official Title:  Pilot Study: Hand & foot Neuromodulation for 
nocturnal enuresis in children  
  
 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID (NCT number):  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
Protocol Date:  June 08, 2020  
 
 
  
Page 2 of 3 
 Scientific Background  
 Nocturnal enuresis is a common problem in children which can have a dramatic psychological 
and social impact on quality of life. Neuromodulation by transcutaneous foot stimulation of peripheral 
tibial nerve branches has been shown to produce a prolonged inhibition of micturition reflex 
contractions and significantly increase bladder capacity. Our primary goal was to evaluate the effect of 
foot stimulation on the frequency of nocturnal enuresis episod es in children.  
 
 
Study Objectives  
 We believe in order to strengthen the evidence in support of transcutaneous foot stimulation in 
this population we need to move forward with a r andomized comparison study using the TENS device 
on the hand and foot as a control. The goal of this study is to prove that hand stimulation with the TENS 
device will not decrease nocturnal enuresis in children and will serve as a placebo 2) to prove that 
stimulation to the foot with the TENS device does decreasing the nocturnal enuresis in children.  
 
The goal of this study is to prove that hand stimulation with the TENS device will not decrease nocturnal 
enuresis in children and prove that stimulation to the foot with the TENS device does decreasing the 
nocturnal enu resis in children.  
 
 
Study Design  & Methods  
 This is an experimental, randomized study. Both the subject and the investigator will be 
informed about the foot and hand stimulation. The results obtained w ill be compared between the two 
groups. The study is expected to end when the six weeks have been completed with associated 
completion of weekly night -time voiding log and quality of life questionnaires. However, if the subject 
cannot follow the study proc edures such as an inability to tolerate foot or hand stimulation or non -
compliance with completing night -time voiding logs and/or quality of life questionnaires, the subject's 
participation will be discontinued and the study will be ended. We expect some e lectrodes to detach 
from the foot or hand. However, occasional unattached electrodes will not end the study, since the data 
will be collected in a week period and a few occurrences of detachment should not change the results. 
Also, if skin irritation is ca used by the electrodes, the study will continue by using the other foot or hand 
and giving the irritated foot or hand a day or two to recover. However, if unexpected serious irritation 
occurs that cannot be avoided by changing feet or hands, the study will  be terminated for that subject  
 
 
Eligibility Criteria  
 Inclusion Criteria - The subject population age range is 5 to 18 years of age. The child needs to 
be adequately potty trained with daytime dryness and be able to communicate quality of life subjective 
information to parents. Children who are unable to comm unicate quality of life subjective information 
to parents effectively will not be included in this study.  
 Exclusion  Criteria - Child outside the age range or unable to communicate effectively, not 
adequately potty trained without daytime dryness.  
 
Page 3 of 3 
 Statistical Considerations  
 The data will be statistically analyzed using student t -test and ANOVA.  