Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 1 Protocol Title : Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for 
the assessment of liver steatosis in liver donors  
Principal Investigator:  Andres Duarte -Rojo 1 
Telephone:  501 -686-5177  
Email:  aduarterojo@uams.edu  
Sub-Investigators:  Daniel Borja -Cacho 2 
Telephone:  501 -526-7515  
Email:  dborjacacho@uams.edu  
Laura W. Lamps 3 
Telephone:  734-647-6581  
Email:  l wlamps@ med.umich.edu  
W. Ray Kim 4 
Telephone:  650-725-6511  
Email:  wrkim@stanford.edu  
 
Location(s) of Study:  1Division  of Gastroenterology and Hepatology   
2Division of T ransplant Surgery  
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
4301 W. Markham #567  
Little Rock, AR  72205  
 
3Department of Pathology  
University of Michigan H ospitals  
Room 5231F, Box 5602, Medical Science B uilding  1 
1301 Catherine Street  
Ann Arbor, M I 48109  
 
4Division of Gast roenterology and Hepatology  
Stanford University  
300 Pasteur Dr . M211 MC 5187,  
Stanford CA 94305   
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 2 Abstract  
The shortage of liver allografts for transplantation causes thousands of patients dying 
in the liver transplant (LT) waitlist every year.  The use of marginal livers is a strategy 
to close the gap between demand and supply of organs.   Steatosis is one of the main 
parameters determining a m arginal liver, and to date there is no method to quantify it 
in a noninvasive fashion.   Controlled -attenuation parameter (CAP)  from transient 
elastography (TE) has successfully been used to evaluate steatosis in patients with 
liver disea se, but its usefulness to address steatosis before LT in organ donors has 
never been tested.  Our primary aim is to determine the accuracy of CAP in the 
quantification of liver steatosis using liver biopsies as reference.  Secondar ily we wi ll 
correlate TE and CAP results , analyze possible associations between CAP/TE and 
post-LT clinical outcomes, and evaluate the change in CAP after LT.  A portable TE 
device (Fibroscan 530) will be used to  quantify the degree of liver steatosis  (CAP) and 
stiffness (TE)  in donors  before organ procurement .  Liver biops ies will be obtained 
after CAP or at the time of organ procurement .  The following post -transplant 
outcomes will be investigated:  primary non -function, early allograft dysfunction, ICU 
length of stay, retransplantation, and death.  A follow up CAP/TE with Fibroscan 502  
or 530  will be performed in transplant recipients having an outpatient visit 3-6 months 
after LT.  Based on power calculations t he study aims to include as many donors  as 
needed to achieve 100  transplanted liver allografts.  
  
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 3 Background  
Worldwide , there is a shortage of liver allograft s to meet the number of patients with 
end-stage liver disease in need for a liver transplant  (LT).  As a result of this mismatch 
between organ demand and supply , about 5000 listed patients do not undergo  LT 
each year and are added to the transplant waiting list  pool in the United States .(1)  It is 
estimated tha t 10-20% of patients in the  waiting list will either die or be come "too sick 
to transplant" , depending mostly on the degree of live r failure .  With increasing waiting 
list times and LT occurring at higher MELD scores, it is expected that the number  of 
patients dying or becoming too sick to transplant  will progressively increase in th e 
forthcoming years.  
In order to meet the LT demands  and to best serve patients, most LT centers are 
increasingly using marginal  donor allograft s at risk for poorer outcomes after LT.   
These so called " extended donor criteria " (EDC ) allograft s include  the use of livers 
with a high percentage of steatosis, livers derived from older or sicker donors, livers 
from donors infected with viral hepatitis B or C, and donati on after circulatory death ( in 
counterpart to donation after brain death).   Although various donor -risk scales  have 
been designed to we igh the co nsequences of using EDC  allograft s, none of them 
provide an accurate risk assessment.  Moreover , the trade -off defin ing the use of  EDC 
allograft s is commonly made under far from idea l circumstances  (over night, at fac ilities 
with limited resources, with non -specialized on -call personnel) , and flawed by  
subjective  evaluations  such as determination of the degree of hepatic steatosis . 
The pe rcentage of liver steatosis in the  donor allograft liver  biopsy is of greatest 
importance to define prognos is of LT, and plays a paramount role i n the decision to 
use or not an  allograft.  To address this, the amount of l arge fat droplets 
(macrosteatosis) within the hepatocyte is semi -quantitatively estimated  against the 
degree of non-fatty liver parenchyma  on a given liver biopsy specimen .  Although 
there is  controversy as to whether very small lipid droplets ( macrosteatosis ) should be  
accounted for in this evaluation, most center s would only consider macrosteatosis in 
their decisi on.  In general, allografts with >30 % of steatosis are more prone to 
experience primary non -function, early allograft dysfunction, and constitute a risk 
factor for acute kidney  injury, biliary complications,  poor allograft survival, and 
retransplantation.  
Controlled -attenuation parameter (CAP)  constitutes a non -invasive method of 
evaluating liver steatosis.  It has several advantages over liver biopsy and other 
methods to assess steatosis in that it is non -invasive, easy to perform,  reliable , not 
expensive, and provides immediate and objective evaluation on a continuous scale .  
CAP is based on  a novel technology measuring the degree of ultrasound attenuation 
of liver fat from ultrasonic signals acquir ed during transient elastography (TE) with a  
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 4 Fibroscan  (Echosens, Paris, France)  device.  A cross -sectional study aiming to define 
the accuracy of  the CAP when compared to liver biopsy  found an area under the 
receiver -operating characteristic (AUROC) curve  of 0.81 (0.74 -0.88) to identify a 
degree of ≥10% of steatosis in the 153 patients studied .  Although CAP was not able 
to accurately tell apart  moderate (>33%) from severe (>66%) steatosis, the technique 
seemed to be more reliable at higher degrees of steatosis, and in patients with no to 
minimal fibrosis (50% of patients had stage ≥2 of fibrosis). (2)  In a more recent study 
including 440 paired CAP -liver biops ies the AUROC to identify >33% steatosis  with 
CAP was 0.84 (0.80 -0.88), (3) and in a meta -analysis including  1771  subjects it was 
0.88 (0.85 -0.91). (4)  The last study reported positive and negative predictive values of 
58% and 94 % for the detection of  >33% of steatosis  (median cut -off point 255 dB/m) , 
and 57% and 93% for the detection of >66% of stea tosis (median cut -off point 290 
dB/m) , respective ly. 
To date , no study has attempted to study CAP to quantify the degree of l iver steatosis 
in deceased  donors.  Such study has been largely limited by the f act that only a few 
institutions have the expertise and resources to operate  a Fibroscan.  With the 
development of the Fibroscan  530, a portable TE device, this is no longer a limitation.   
Given the grave need to increase the number of LT by using EDC allo grafts, CAP has 
the potential of becom ing a very useful tool during donor assessment  (before 
allocation ) by providing a non -invasive and objective evaluation of liver allograft 
steatosis.   If useful, CAP could become quite advantageous to the organ procurement  
agencies by providing a timely evaluation  on steatosis  and fibrosis (this from TE), 
saving resources by avoiding  unnecessary liver biopsies and  procurement of EDC 
allografts posing excessive risk s to LT recipients  (i.e. with excessive steatosis  for each 
given donor -recipient match) . 
Study Aims  
The primary aim of this  study is to determine the accuracy of CAP  from F ibroscan  in 
the quantification of liver steatosis in donors  using liver biopsies as the gold standard .  
Secondary aim s include:  
(1) correlation betw een TE results and fibrosis  
(2) association of CAP and TE results with post-LT clinical outcomes , 
(3) measurement of change i n CAP after LT . 
Study Design  
This is a cohort study with a cross -sectional component  for the primary aim  executed 
independently at UAMS and Stanford University .  The Liver Transplant Program at 
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 5 each participating center will identify study subjects during the process of liver 
allocati on to their listed recipients.  Criteria for recruitment  are as follows:  
Inclusion criteria  – Liver Recipient  
• Men and wo men, Age 18 -years old to 80 -years old inclusive  
Inclusion criteria  – Liver Donor  
• Valid TE with Fibroscan 530, defined as:  
o At least 10 valid measurements  
o IQR/Median stiffness value <30% (only in cases with >7.1 kPa)  
Exclusion criteria  – Liver Recipient  
• Patient did not undergo l iver transplant ation  
Exclusion criteria  – Liver Donor  
• Donation after circulatory death  (DCD)  
• No liver biopsy obtained during organ procurement process  
Investigational Approach  
The chronological process of organ procurement and study is explained in Table 
below:  
Clinical or Research Event  Standard  
of Care  Research  
Only 
1. When a liver donor becomes available, and only after brain 
death is confirmed, the Arkansas Regional Organ Recovery 
Agency (ARORA) contacts the UAMS Transplant coordinator 
and notifies the transplant surgeon.  ✔  
2. The recipient next in the liver transplant waitlist is notified  
and is admitted to UAMS . ✔  
3. A liver biopsy (snap frozen) is performed by the Organ 
Recovery  Agency (when applicable ) before procurement.  ✔  
4. The surgeon travels to perform the liver procurement.   ✔  
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 6 5. Fibroscan 530 is obtained before the  procurement  in the 
donor .    ✔ 
6. A second liver biopsy is obtained by the time of procurement 
(on formaldehyde).  This is reviewed by UAMS pathologists.  ✔  
7. Transplantation occurs.  ✔  
8. Patient is discharged from hospital and continues with 
outpa tient visits (from biweekly to every three m onths as per 
UAMS' liver transplant guidelines).  ✔  
9. At one of the subjects’ regularly scheduled follow -up 
appointments  (3 to 6 months post -transplant) , a second TE is 
performed, this time on the recipient (using either Fibroscan 
502 or 530 ).  ✔ 
10. Subject continues with per protocol follow  up until 
retransplantation, death, or 5 years of follow -up. ✔  
 
Before organ procurement , a Fibroscan -trained investigator will bring Fibroscan 530 to 
the bedside of donor . TE will be performed with either the M - or XL -probe depending 
on the skin to liver capsule distance (M -probe if <2.5 cm, and XL -probe when between 
2.5 and 3.5 cm), as per manufacturer' s recommendations (Echosens, Paris, France). 
In brief, after applying a water -based gel, the corresponding probe will be placed 
against the right hypochondrium at the level of the mid axillary line  (exerting a slight 
pressure ), and then 10 valid TE measurements will be obtained. The procedure 
should take no more than 5 -7 minutes.  Data from TE will be stored  for future 
extraction of CAP.  In order to assure an adequate fasting period before TE (≥3 hours) 
the surgeon leading organ procurement would request stopping of enteral nutrition 
after being initially contacted by the organ procurement organization  (in the case of 
UAMS, the Arkansas Regional Organ Recover Agency  [ARORA]) , when applicable , 
and only after confirmation of brain death . 
As part of the standard evaluation of the donor allograft a liver biopsy is obtained to 
address the degree of steatosis  (one standard frozen core) . Investigators will make 
sure this biopsy is performed by the time of TE .  Only bedside b iopsies on the mid -
axillary line or biopsies  from segments VI/VII  after allograft procurement will be  
allowed.  Although liver biopsies should ideally be performed immediately after 
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 7 performing TE and before organ procurement, liver biopsies obtained from the time  of 
donor identification and up until back table preparation  (inclusive)  will be acceptable.   
In all cases where the organ is allocated to a recipient, the transplant surgeon will be 
asked to grade the appearance of the liver before implantation.  
During liver transplant procedure and immediately after finalization of venous, arterial 
and biliary anastomoses, a second biopsy will be obtained ( formaldehyde ). This 
biopsy is taken routinely as part or the li ver transplant protocol at UAMS to address 
quality of the implanted allograft including damage from reperfusion.  The allograft site 
from which biopsy will  be obtained will  be left  to the discretion of the t ransplant 
surgeon , although  it should be documented in the operative note . 
Before transplantation, the following dat a will be collected about the donor  (data will 
be collected from the United Network for Organ Sharing [UNOS] portal, which 
compiles deidenti fied clinical data relevant to liver transplantation) : 
• height,  
• weight,  
• gender,  
• age,  
• ethnicity,   
• cause of death,  
• comorbidities,  
• platelets,  
• bilirubin,  
• ALP,  
• ALT and AST on the day of TE,  
• peak ALT and AST,  
• presence of any infectious diseas e 
• degree of steatosis from snap frozen biopsy  
• NPO status will be documented as well (in hours), from last oral intake or 
stopping of enteral nutrition to TE procedure , 
• Cold and warm ischemia will be documented as part of the standard of care  
On the day of tr ansplantation, the following will be recorded from the transplant 
recipients : 
• Routine labs on the day of transplantation (CBC, chemistry, liver panel, INR) . 
After t ransplantation, the following liver transplant outcomes will be prospectively 
documented:  
• development of primary non -function  (PNF),  
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 8 • early allograft dysfunction  (EAD),  
• peak ALT,  
• ICU length of stay,  
• retransplantation,  and 
• death.  
PNF will be defined as AST>3000, plus INR ≥2.5 or arterial pH ≤7.30 within 7 days 
from implantation ; whereas EAD as to tal bilirubin >10 mg/dL  on day 7, INR  ≥1.6 on 
day 7, and ALT or AST >2000 U/L during first week post -LT.  Need for 
retransplantation or death at 3- to 6- months post -transplant (depending on follow up 
protocol at each participating center) will be recorded as well.   Where available, a 
follow up TE with Fibroscan 5 02 or 530 will be performed at a  standard -of-care follow 
outpatient visit at 3 -6 months post -transplant.  The patient w ill lie over his/her back and 
both the M and XL probes will be used following the same steps described above.  
All liver biopsies will be evaluated by two  independent  liver pathologist s blinded to the 
results of CAP .  In all cases, both the snap frozen and formaldehyde liver biopsy 
specimens will be reviewed and the degree of macrovesicular steatosis gra ded as per 
standard recommendations ( <5, 5-33%, 34 -66%, >66%) .  Liver pathologists will 
independently stage fibrosis of liver specimens using the Batts -Ludwig  scoring system 
and the Brunt classification . 
Data Analysis  
The primary aim  is to correlate the CAP results with the degree of hepatic steatosis on 
the liver biop sy fixed in formaldehyde .  Spearman's rho will be used for this analysis.  
Parallel analyses will be performed with the snap frozen sample, and c omputerized 
histomorphometry to determine  accuracy of CAP in different possible clini cal 
scenarios.  In order to assess whether a  threshold value of CAP with a sufficiently high 
positive predictive value can be defined t o obviate the need for a liver biopsy  during 
organ procurement , Receiver Oper ating Characteristics (ROC) curves will be plotted , 
and areas under the curve (AUROC) reported as a measure of accuracy  of CAP .  For 
this analysis , the magnitude of steatosis in the formaldehyde samples will be 
dichotomized as ≥34 or <34 % in order to address  steatosis  as for  EDC  allografts .  A 
sensitivity analysis using  computed histomorphometry results and dichotomizing 
grading of steatosis as  ≥20 or <20% will be performed in case the prior analysis lacks 
power, as this degree of steatosis h as been found to be associated with poor post -
transplant outcomes as well.  
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 9 CAP will be performed with either  the M- or XL -probe  depending on the skin to liver 
capsule distance (M -probe if <2.5 cm, and XL -probe when between 2.5 and 3.5 cm) 
as per manufacturer's recommendations  (Echosens , Paris, France ). 
The first secondary aim is to examine correlation between TE results and fibrosi s 
stage  (Spearman's rho) .  In addition to correlating the TE results with fibrosis stage, 
we will explore whether the combination of CAP and TE results can define 
unacceptability and subsequent ly help in the decision to discard and  organ .  To 
achieve this goal a sensitivity analysis with various combinations of CAP and TE will 
be tested in logistic regression models , and then cut -off valued determined by 
constructing AUROC . Agreement between pathologist for both steatosis and fibrosis 
will be examined with the kappa statistic.  A sensitivity analysis for donors on 
vasoactive amines or a peak ALT or AST >300 before procurement is planned to 
better determine accuracy of CAP/TE in liver donors.  
The second sec ondary aim is to correlate CAP and TE results with various post -LT 
outcomes.  Various (logistic, linear or proportional hazards) regression analyses will 
be used depending on the  outcome variable of interest  (PNF, EAD, retransplantation 
or death) .  Predict or variables will inc lude CAP and TE as well as well -known donor 
and recipient predictors of LT outcomes  (i.e. age, MELD, ICU-stay, etc). 
The third secondary aim is to determine  the change in CAP  after LT . Baseline and 
follow up CAP determinations will be compared with paired t -test or Wilcoxon, 
depending on distribution of data.  Normal distribution  will be tested with Shapiro -Wilk. 
Categorical changes (i.e. ≥34% to <34 %) will be addressed with McNemar's test.  
Accurate s ample size  determination is difficult in this pilot study because the test 
characteristics are not defined.  We propose to examine as many donors  as needed to 
achieve 100 transplanted liver allografts , which will allow detection of meaningful 
differences between livers  with high versus low CAP values.  If the prevalence of 
unacceptably high CAP value is as low as 5% of the livers, the sample size will permit 
detection of a threshold t hat ha s 80% positive predictive value or higher.  Between the 
two participating institutions, it is expected to complete inclusion of 100 transplante d 
liver allografts in one year.  It is expected to include no more than 60 patients at 
UAMS.  
Data Collection and Handling  
A database will be created to accum ulate all of the clinical information generated 
during this study. No identifiers, apart from UNOS identification number for donors, 
and name and DOB  for recipients , will be collected.  All data will be stored in 
databases kept in a study folder created at  PI's computer (password -protected).  Main 
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 10 database will include aforementioned identifiers, however, each pair of subject s 
(recipient and respective donor)  will have a unique study ID assigned, and once an 
analytic table is created, all PHI will be remove d from the table (after approval by the 
PI).  Only this de -identified dataset with unique study ID's will be used for statistical 
analyses.  Therefore, the risk to the privacy of the  individuals will be minimized.  
The access to the research folder and its contents will be restricted to the research 
staffs listed in this submission form.  The PHI will be kept in the main database for no 
more than 10 years.   The main database containing PHI will be kept in the study folder 
and will be never transferred out without de -identification of the data.  No hard copy 
research data will be generated in this project.  
Each of the participating centers (UAMS and Stanford University) will work 
independently in gathering their own data.  The PI's from each center will share on a 
monthly basis their subject accrual figures and after study is completed each center 
will share its de -identified database and a  unique database wil l be built.  
Risks and Benefits  
TE is a noninvasive procedure and no adverse effects were reported  in the registration 
trials . FDA approval for Fibroscan 502 was obtained in April/2013 , and for Fibroscan 
530 (the lighter and portable version of Fibroscan 502) in March /2016 . CAP received 
FDA approval in Jun e/2015.  
Liver biopsies in an allograft ca n theoretically result in bleeding, hemobilia, 
arteriovenous fistulas , or infec tion in the recipient .  However, apart from bleeding, 
which can be controlled by the transplant surgeon during the surgical procedure, no 
other complications have been reported.  Moreover, l iver biopsies are performed 
routinely during the org an procurement pro cess or by the time of organ implantation , 
and thus this study would not expose recipients to unusual or  unnecessary risks . 
Each institution will keep its own database until finalization of the study . Afterwards, a 
combined database will be built  by each center sharing a de -identified version of its 
database (datasets will be combined at UAMS) .  Thus,  PHI from UAMS' patients will 
remain within UAMS firewall and only used for specific research purposes in this 
projec t.  Aggregated data will be analyzed and published, but specific data elements 
will not be made available.  Further, subjects  will not forfeit any rights by participating - 
their healthcare and eligibility for health benefits will not be affected in any wa y. 
Although a breach in confidentiality is always a risk when collecting personal 
information from patients, we believe this is small given the system that has been 
devel oped to obtain and handle data.  
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 11 Participants (liver transplant recipients) will not  benefit from this study as clinically 
meaningful  results will only b e available until after completion of study and analysis of 
data.  
Ethics  
Applicable government regulations, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences 
research policies and procedures will be followed.  This protocol and any amendments 
will be submitted and approved by the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) to  conduct the study.  
All subjects  (recipients)  for this study will be provided a consent form describing this 
study and providing sufficient information in language suitable for subjects to make an 
informed decision about the ir participation in this study.   The formal consent of a 
subject, using the I RB-approved consent form, will be obtained before that subject is 
submitted to any study procedure.  This consent form must be signed by the subject or 
legally acceptable surrogate, and the investigator -designated research profe ssional 
obtaining the consen t.  The subject will be approached for signing of informed consent 
at any point from being placed on the waitlist to the admission ending up in liver 
transplantation  (either during a routine outpatient visit or as an inpatient) .  It will be 
emphasized to r ecipient that receipt of a transplant in no way depends upon research 
participation.  
Liver Donors and/or their family will execute a consent process with the Arkansas 
Regional Organ Recovery Agency (ARORA) (Consent form provided with 
documentation).  
  
Study Title:  Usefulness of Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP) for the assessment of liver steatosis 
in liver donors  
PI: Andres Duarte -Rojo, MD, MSc, DSc  
Institution:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #:  9  IRB# 204560  
Date:  06/16/2017 Page 12 Refe rences  
1. Kim WR, Smith JM, Skeans MA, Schladt DP, Schnitzler MA, Edwards EB, 
Harper AM, et al. OPTN/SRTR 2012 Annual Data Report: liver. Am J Transplant 
2014;14 Suppl 1:69 -96. 
2. Myers RP, Pollett A, Kirsch R, Pomier -Layrargues G, Beaton  M, Levstik M, 
Duarte -Rojo A, et al. Controlled Attenuation Parameter (CAP): a noninvasive method 
for the detection of hepatic steatosis based on transient elastography. Liver Int 
2012;32:902 -910. 
3. de Ledinghen V, Vergniol J, Capdepont M, Chermak F, Hiri art JB, Cassinotto 
C, Merrouche W, et al. Controlled attenuation parameter (CAP) for the diagnosis of 
steatosis: a prospective study of 5323 examinations. J Hepatol 2014;60:1026 -1031.  
4. Shi KQ, Tang JZ, Zhu XL, Ying L, Li DW, Gao J, Fang YX, et al. Controlled 
attenuation parameter for the detection of steatosis severity in chronic liver disease: a 
meta -analysis of diagnostic accuracy. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014;29:1149 -1158.  
 