 
1 
 Electronic Health Record based Population health 
management to optimize care in CKD: Kidney 
Coordinated HeAlth Management Partnership 
(Kidney CHAMP) trial  
 
Trial registration : ClinicalTrials.gov   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Funding Sponsor:  1R01DK 116957  (PI, Abdel -Kader & Jhamb)  
National Institutes of Diabetes and Digestive  
and Kidney Diseases  
National Institutes of Health  
2 Democracy Plaza  
6707 Democracy Boulevard  
Bethesda, MD  20892 -5458  
 
Protocol version 1.0  
Jan 1, 2019  
 
  
 
2 
  
I. Study Summary  
Synopsis  
Title Kidney Coordinated HeAlth Management Partnership (Kidney CHAMP) 
trial 
Short Title  K CHAMP Trial  
Study 
Description  This is a randomized clinical trial to test the  effectiveness  of a 
multifaceted  EHR-based  PHM  intervention  to improve  evidence -based  
CKD  care in high-risk patients  
Objectives  Primary Objective  
To perform  a 42-month  pragmatic,  cluster RCT  comparing  the effect  of 
an EHR-based  PHM  intervention  versus  usual care  on key processes  
of care  in 1,650  high-risk CKD  patients.  
Aim 1a: To examine  the effect  of the intervention  on systolic  blood  
pressure  (SBP) in  HTN patients.  
Aim 1b: To examine  the effect  of the intervention  on RAASi  use in 
albuminuric  patients.  
Aim 1c: To examine  the effect  of the intervention  on exposures  to 
potentially  unsafe  medications.  
 
Secondary Objective  
To test the clinical effectiveness of a multifaceted PHM intervention in 
reducing kidney disease progression in 1,700 high -risk CKD patients 
enrolled in a 42 -month pragmatic, cluster RCT  
Primary 
Outcome  ≥40% decline in estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) or end stage 
kidney disease  
Secondary 
Outcomes  • blood pressure control  
• renin -angiotensin aldosterone system inhibitors use  
• exposure to potentially unsafe medications   
Study 
Population  1,650 high -risk CKD patients not presently seeing a nephrologist   
Phase or Trial 
Type  Effectiveness  
Description of 
Sites/Facilities 
Enrolling 
Participants  100 University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC) -affiliated PCP 
practices located across southwest Pennsylvania University of 
Pittsburgh; University of Pennsylvania  
 
 
Description of 
Study 
Intervention  Intervention bundle includes nephrology electronic consults, pharmacist -
led medication reviews and nurse -led CKD education   
Usual Care: per PCP as routine  
 
3 
 Study Duration  42 months  
Participant 
Duration  24 months  
  
 
  
4. GOAL  
Lower  risk for
ESRD   
II. Introduction  
 
CKD  is associated  with an unacceptably  high human  and financial  cost.  Over  12 million  US 
adults  have  CKD stage 3-5.6 As the population  ages  and diabetes (DM),  HTN,  and obesity  
rates increase, the prevalence  of CKD  will grow.6 Kidney  disease  is the 9th leading  cause  of 
death48 and attributable  Medicare  expenditures  are $80  billion.8,19,49  Over  1/3rd of this is 
spent  on ESRD  patients,  who represent  < 5% of patients  with CKD.19 
The overwhelming  burden  of CKD  care falls to PCPs.  PCPs  deliver  most  care to patients  with 
non-dialysis  dependent  CKD due  to its growing  prevalence  and the relative dearth  of 
nephrologists.10-12,50 -52 However,  PCPs  report that  limited  CKD  knowledge, time constraints,  
complex case -mix, and inadequate  system -based  resources  contribute  to gaps  in CKD 
care.12,14,15,17,38,51,53  These  gaps  include  poor patient education,16 inadequate  diagnostic  
evaluation,12,27,38,54  suboptimal treatment  of HTN and use of RAASi  in albuminuric  
patients,19,23,55 -57 inappropriate  medications  or dosages,21,58 -61 and late  referrals of high-risk 
patients.13,19,20   These  shortcomings  inevitably  lead to increased  CKD progression,  
hospitalizations,  and mortality.20,25,26,62 -64 
Novel  system -based  interventions are  needed.  The above  observations  underscore  an 
urgent  need for system -based  interventions  to improve  CKD  care and outcomes.  We 
recently  conducted  a national  survey and  found  the overwhelming  majority  of PCPs  endorse  
systematic  interventions  to improve  CKD  care.14 One potentially  high-impact,  low-cost 
intervention  that has improved  outcomes  in other  chronic  diseases  is EHR- based  PHM.65,66  
CKD  is an ideal  setting  to evaluate  the impact of EHR -based  PHM  due to the: 1) high  
prevalence  of disease,  2) ability  to detect high -risk disease  with widely  used  biomarkers (i.e., 
creatinine/eGFR,  change  in eGFR, urine  albuminuria), 3)  baseline  gaps  in care that provide  
opportunities  for improvement,  and 4) patient  benefit and  health  system savings  conferred  by 
avoiding  or delaying  catastrophic  outcomes  (e.g.,  ESRD).19,31,67  National primary  care 
organizations  have  called  for the use of EHR-based  PHM  in primary  care46 and a recent 
NIDDK  conference  advocated  for urgent  research  examining the  effectiveness  of CKD  
PHM.68 
A conceptual  model.  A conceptual  model of care69,70  provides  an approach to examine  care 
deficiencies.71 Disease  management consists  of 7 simplified  steps  
(Figure  1). At each  step, the 
potential  for lapses  in care exists.  
Leveraging  IT tools  to risk stratify  
patients,  deliver  decision  support,  
and to provide  electronic  guidance  
with specific  recommendations  
overcomes  barriers  at nearly  each  
step by providing  timely  cognitive  
support to aid risk assessment, 
diagnostic  evaluation,  and treatment  
selection  while  lowering  the burden 
on PCPs.72,73 However,  studies  are 
needed  to test the feasibility  and 
effectiveness  of these  strategies  in 
improving  CKD  outcomes.  
 
5. INTENTION
Suppress  proteinuria  
with  RAASi, control  BP, 
avoid  nephrotoxins  
6. ACTION
SPECIFICATION  
Enter  Rx orders,  review
med  list, educate
patient  
7. EXECUTE  
Lisinopril  ordered,
NSAIDs  stopped,  and 
patient  educated  
1. PERCEIVE  
Patient with  
decreased  eGFR  
& proteinuria  
2. INTERPRET  
Patient  has 
progressive  CKD 
3. EVALUATE
CKD from  DM with  
high -risk for ESRD  
Fig 1. A Conceptual  Model  for CKD Management  
 
  Improving  alignment  between patient  risk and treatment  intensity . PCPs  struggle  to recognize  
high-risk patients  early  in their course.13,14,19  In the US, 2/3rds of incident  dialysis  patients have  
less than 1 year of nephrology  care before  initiating  dialysis,  leading  to greater  morbidity  and 
mortality.13,19,20  However,  fewer than 1/3rd of non-dialysis  dependent  CKD  patients  with an 
eGFR<  60 are at high risk for poor outcomes.74 Given  the scarcity  of nephrologists,  a vital need  
exists  for tools to effectively  risk stratify  the CKD population  and improve  the efficiency  of 
resource  allocation.1,76 This study  identifies  high-risk patients  earlier  in their disease  course,  
when  outcome trajectories  can be improved . 
Actionable  strategies  to improve  CKD  care and outcomes  in high-risk disease.  Key 
evidence -based  process  of care targets  in CKD  are improved:  1) HTN control,19,44,55,56  2) 
RAASi  use in  proteinuric  CKD,23,57 3) avoidance of  inappropriate  medications  or 
dosages,21,58 -61 and 4) timely  nephrology  referrals  in high-risk CKD.13,19,20  These  strategies  
have  been  demonstrated  to slow CKD progression,  prevent  ESRD,  decrease  
hospitalizations,  and improve  patient  safety.13,19 -21,23,55 -61 Several approaches  have  been 
shown  to enhance  adoption of these  critical  processes  of care:  a) electronically  delivered  
expert  guidance  by nephrologists,13,77 which slowed  CKD progression,  b) pharmacist  led 
medication reconciliation,43,78 -80 which decreased  medication  related  problems,  and c) patient  
education,56,57  which  increased  patient engagement and self - management.81,82  However,  
large pragmatic  studies  validating  the effectiveness  of these  interventions  are lacking.  
Summary  and Implications:  Combining  complementary  interventions  in a highly  pragmatic,  
cluster RCT of EHR-based  PHM  for high-risk CKD patients  could  establish  a novel,  
exportable  strategy  to improve  patient  care, safety,  and outcomes  (Figure  2). Our 
multifaceted  intervention  will improve  CKD  risk stratification,  resource  allocation,  adoption  of 
evidence -based  interventions,  and patient medication  safety. The  intervention  may thereby  
improve  CKD  outcomes  and transform  approaches  to CKD  care.  Further,  the study  will 
deliver  templates,  algorithms,  and code  to enable  dissemination  to other settings .  
 
 
 
 
   
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure  2. PHM  to improve  CKD care  
 
   
 
III. Study Objectives  
 
The overarching aim of the Kidney Coordinated HeAlth Management Partnership 
(Kidney CHAMP) trial is to test the effectiveness of a multifaceted EHR -based PHM 
intervention to improve evidence -based CKD care in high -risk patients in a highly 
pragmatic, cluster randomized trial (CRT). By combining  timely  nephrology guidance, 
pharmacist -led medication  management services,  and CKD  patient education,  our 
intervention  will improve CKD risk stratification, resource allocation, adoption of 
evidence -based interventions, and medication safety and efficacy , while  minimizing  the 
PCP and patient  burden  
 
Aim 1: To perform  a 42-month  pragmatic,  cluster RCT  comparing  the effect  of an EHR-
based  PHM  intervention  versus  usual care  on key processes  of care  in 1,700  high-risk 
CKD  patients.  
Aim 1a: To examine  the effect  of the intervention  on systolic  blood  pressure  (SBP) in  
HTN patients.  
Aim 1b: To examine  the effect  of the intervention  on RAASi  use in albuminuric  patients.  
Aim 1c: To examine  the effect  of the intervention  on exposures  to potentially  unsafe  
medications.  
 
Aim 2: To test the  clinical effectiveness  of a multifaceted  PHM intervention  in reducing  
kidney  disease  progression  in 1,700  high-risk CKD patients  enrolled  in a 42-month  
pragmatic,  cluster  RCT.    
 
  
 
  IV. Study Design  
 
Study design . A 42-month  cluster RCT  with randomization  occurring  at the practice  level (to 
minimize  contamination)  and stratified  by number  of high-risk CKD  patients  in the practice. All  
90 practices  will be randomized.  Patient  enrollment  will continue  for 18 months, with  a 
minimum  of 24 months  of follow -up (Fig 3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
   
Population  and Setting . The study leverages  a PCP network  that includes  90 practices;  330 
PCPs;  and over 480,000  patients to conduct  a cluster RCT  testing  the effectiveness  of an 
EHR -based  CKD  PHM  intervention.  In this pragmatic  study,  practices  will be randomized  to 
the intervention.  Secondarily,  their high- risk CKD  patients  who are not seeing  a nephrologist  
will be enrolled.  
Eligibility . Inclusion  criteria  are (Figure  3): a) age > 18 and <85, b) most recent  eGFR  < 60 
ml/min/yr, c) UPMC  health  plan insurance, d) established  care with UPMC  PCP,  e) high -risk CKD 
(see Table  1). Exclusion  criteria  are: a) history  of kidney  transplant, b) receiving  maintenance  
dialysis,  c) recent (within  12 months)  outpatient  nephrology  visit, d) baseline  eGFR  < 15ml/min,  
or e) expected  survival  < 6 months/hospice. We will use the validated  4- variable KFRE1,35,83  to 
estimate  5-year ESRD  risk. We will supplement these  criteria  by including  other  patients  who 
are high risk for poor outcomes  (Table  1).37,74   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PCP Recruitment  and Engagement .  
Before  implementation  at each  site, we will provide  a remote/on -site presentation  during  a 
scheduled  practice  meeting. Communication  with lead physicians  will continue  during  the 
study  at least biannually  by teleconference  or on-site lunches to discuss  feedback  and 
concerns  and document comments  on a standardized  feedback  form.  Study/Site  PIs will also 
meet  with practice  physicians  as needed  to address  concerns.  We will anonymously  survey  
intervention  arm PCPs  every  6 months to assess  their experience  with the intervention  
bundle. This  will include:  ease  of use, questions  communicated  by patients, effects  on patient  
medication  use and adherence, utility  of the recommendations, and  temporal  burden  of the 
intervention.  Minor  adjustments  to PHM intervention  workflow  will be made  as needed  to 
ensure  continued  workflow  optimization.  
 
Randomization . The unit of randomization  will be the practice  (Fig. 3), stratified  by estimated  
number  of eligible  CKD  patients  within  the practice  (small  [<15 patients], medium/large  [>15 
patients]). Randomization  will use a computer  generated  random  number sequence  with 
random block  sizes  of 4 and 6. 
CKD  Registry  and PHM  Dashboard . Our CKD  registry  includes  all outpatients  with a recent  
eGFR  <  60 ml/min  followed  by a UPMC  PCP.  The CKD  registry  identifies  patients  with CKD,  
phenotypically  characterizes  them, and  stores  information  on labs, medications  of interest,  
upcoming  PCP appointments,  and information  about  CKD  outreach  (including  dates  of 
electronic  outreach, medication  reviews,  patient  education,  and pending  labs/studies).  The 
registry  is updated  automatically  with activity  in the patient  chart.  
Dashboards  are medical  informatics  data representations that  can be employed  when  decisions  
need  to be made  about  a population  of patients.  These  tools  display  groups  of patients  based  
on clinical  characteristics  and allow  providers  to stratify, filter, and  sort by relevant  variables.  
Thus,  subgroups  of patients  can be rapidly  identified  and targeted  for more  intensive  therapy.  
Dashboards  can improve  evidence -based  care;  however,  they have  been  slow to enter clinical  eGFR  15-29ml/min  OR 
5 year risk of ESRD  > 4% determined  using  the validated  4-variable  
kidney  failure  risk equation35,83  (urine dipstick  substituted  for ACR  when  
necessary) OR 
Rapid  decline  in eGFR  operationalized  as annualized  eGFR  decline  
>=5ml/min/yr74* 
*determined  from 2 eGFR  values  at least 12  months  apart  
 Table 1: High risk CKD  
 
  practice  because of the sophisticated  underlying  data requirements.84,93 
Our CKD  PHM  dashboard  (Figure  4) includes population -based  reports  built off of the registry  
(e.g., high-risk patients  with PCP appointment  in October), as  well as graphical  and tabular  
displays  of key metrics  (e.g.,identified  subpopulation  with albuminuria  who are not on RAASi). 
Population  reports  accessible  through  the dashboard  will allow  the study  coordinator  to sort 
patients  based  on phenotypic  data and upcoming  PCP appointments, and  include  filters  such  
as CKD  stage,  RAASi  use, and  PCP group.  Longitudinal  tracking  and notation  functions  
interface  with the dashboard  and allow  documentation  of study  inclusion,  and dates  of 
scheduled/completed  aspects  of the intervention.  Dashboard  reports  will allow  the coordinator 
to rapidly  flag patients for urgent concerns, send  routine  reminders  to PCPs  to implement 
recommended  interventions,  ensure  follow -up on pending  components  of the intervention,  
and actively  monitor  follow -up status.  Dashboard  reports  will be actionable  and will allow  the 
manager to view more  detailed  information  in a viewing  pane  without  leaving  the report.  The 
reports  allow  the coordinator to jump  directly  into activities  to communicate  with the patient, 
the patient’s PCP,  and the respective  nephrologist  or pharmacist.  
 
 
 
Patient  screening  and enrollment . Each  month, the coordinator  will use the CKD  PHM  tool to 
review  high-risk patients  with an upcoming  (within  1 month)  appointment with  their PCP  to 
determine  eligibility.  Possible  decisions  will include  actively  enroll,  permanently  exclude,  or not 
presently  eligible  but may  rescreen  if deemed  high-risk at next PCP appointment.  Once  
delineated,  the patient’s  status  is noted  in the EHR with a modifiable  study  flag not visible  to 
providers,  but that  is continually  tracked,  updated,  and ascertained  through  the PHM  
dashboard.  
For intervention  patients, the coordinator will  send  a scripted  EHR  message  with associated  
decision  support  to the PCP about  1-3 weeks  prior to their scheduled  PCP appointment.  
When  the PCP accepts  the decision  support recommendations  for an electronic  nephrology  
consultation,  a medication  reconciliation  and safety  review,  and standardized  patient 
Figure  4. PHM  
Dashboard  
 
  education, the orders  will be placed  . Patients  enrolled  to practices  randomized  to usual  care 
will receive  care as they currently  do. 
A study coordinator  is needed  to screen  patients for  eligibility to ensure  identical  enrollment 
criteria  are used  in the intervention  and usual  care arms. Because coordinators  will review  
recent  patient documentation  for potential  enrollees  in the intervention  arm, they  will note if a 
patient has  a terminal  condition,  etc. However,  this information  may only  be recorded in  the 
text portion  of documents.  Hence,  we will use a standardized  form to screen  patients in  both 
arms  to ensure  comparable  enrollment.  To minimize  potential  bias from the nurse  
coordinator’s non -blinded  status, a local PI blinded  to PCP group  assignment  will review  
randomly  selected  screened  patients  on a weekly basis  to ensure  accurate  implementation  of 
the eligibility  criteria.  Potential  discrepancies  will be resolved  by consensus  and further 
training  as necessary.   
Intervention . Approximately 1 -3 weeks  prior to an appointment, PCPs  of enrolled  patients  will 
receive  an EHR  message  informing  them  of the patient’s  high-risk CKD  status. Linked  with 
the notification  is a decision  support alert  (Figure  5) that  asks the provider  to a) order a CKD  
care bundle  that includes  an electronic  nephrology  consultation,  pharmacist  led medication  
reconciliation  and safety  review,  and a CKD  education  session,  or b) order a traditional  
nephrology  consult,  or c) provide  a reason  why neither  choice  is warranted.  Notification  
messages and PCPs’  responses  will be documented  in the EHR.   
 
If the care bundle  is ordered,  a nephrologist  will review  the chart  and provide  specific  prior to 
the appointment.  In addition,  a telephonic  appointment  with a pharmacist  will be made  and 
s/he will contact the  patient  and review  their medication  list and  provide  safety  
recommendations  to the PCP through  the EHR.  
 
During  the patient visit,  a real time decision  support alert will  remind  the PCP to review  the 
nephrology  e- consult  and pharmacist recommendations, to inform the patient about  their 
CKD  status, and to refer the patient  for complimentary CKD  education.  Following  the visit, 
the patient will  have  their CKD  education sessions  scheduled.  Subsequent nephrology  
electronic  follow -ups will be scheduled  according  to the patient’s  clinical  needs  (generally  
every  3-6 months)  and coordinated  through  the PHM  dashboard.  The intervention  has been  
refined  to facilitate  care enhancements, preserve  workflow,  and minimize  PCP and patient 
burden.  
Figure  5. EHR message  linked to decision support  alert  
 
  We have  also taken  steps  to enhance  PCP acceptance  of the intervention: a) high -level support 
from UPMC  Health  Plan,  PCP network  (Community  Medicine  Incorporated,  including  90 
practices  and 330 PCPs), and  the Nephrology  Division;  b) meeting  with lead physicians  and 
refining  the intervention  to harmonize  with workflow;  c) documenting  PCP responses  in the 
EHR;  d) ongoing  communication  with PCP groups  and leadership.  
Electronic  nephrology  consult . Orders  for e-consults  will be received  in an electronic  basket  
monitored  by the study coordinator.  The consults  will be routed  to 1 of 12 board  certified  
nephrology  clinicians,  who will undergo  training  to standardize  consult focus  and 
communication.  The notes  will adopt  a “Situation,  Background,  Assessment, 
Recommendation”94-97 template  to ensure clear, concise  communication.  The note will be 
completed  at least several  days prior to the patient’s  appointment  and routed  to the PCP’s 
message  basket  and documented  in the chart  to allow time for review  and clarification.  The 
initial  consult  will focus  primarily  on HTN control  , proteinuria  assessment  and suppression,  
RAASi  use, and  medication  safety.  The note will include  a bolded  list of recommendations  
with orders  placed  in a pended  status  (i.e., entered,  but awaiting  acceptance  from the PCP).  
To enhance  communication  and care coordination, the e- consultant  will ensure  CKD is 
added  to the problem  list.98 In addition,  the problem  list will convey  that the patient  is 
followed  by the e-consult team, reachable  via listed  message  baskets  and phone  numbers.  
The nephrologist  will include  an order for remote  electronic  follow -up, which  will be captured  
in the PHM dashboard.  Electronic  messages  will be sent to the nephrologist  to perform the 
follow -up approximately  3 weeks  before  the recommended  interval.  When  necessary, 
traditional  office  evaluations  will be suggested.  
Medication  reconciliation  and safety  review . Prior to their upcoming  PCP appointment,  
patients  will be contacted  to schedule  a remote  medication  review  with a study  pharmacist  
(PharmD)  who has expertise  in medication  therapy  management.43 Appointment availability  
will include evenings  to maximize  patient  convenience. Patients  will be asked  to have  their 
medications  available for the review.  Prior to and during  the review,  the PharmD  will gather  
clinical  data from the EHR’s  active  and recently  discontinued  medications.  S/he will also 
note the patient’s  most recent medication  dispensing  record  for each medication  (usually  
documented  in the EHR  with electronic  scripts ). The study  pharmacist  will assess  the 
patient’s  self- reported  medication  regimen,  administration  routine,  adherence,  and will 
reconcile  this with the medication  information  contained  in the EHR. S/he will  assess  over 
the counter (OTC) medications  and herbal  products,  will deliver  guidance  on OTC  
medications  to avoid,  and will screen  for possible  adverse  effects  of all medications.  
Thomas  D. Nolin,  Associate  Professor,  PharmD,  PhD (Co-I), will  guide  the medication  
review,  perform  intermittent  audits  to ensure  intervention  fidelity,  and direct additional  staff 
training  if necessary.91 
The pharmacist  will document  their findings  in the EHR  using  a standard  medication  
reconciliation  and review  template. The note will be sent to the PCP’s  EHR  inbox.  Specific, 
concise  recommendations  and reasoning  will be listed  at the top of the note. Thereafter,  
pharmacist medication  reviews  will be scheduled  quarterly.  
Standardized  patient  education . Once  an order for CKD  education  is placed, the research  
team  will schedule  individual or  group  education  session.  Caregivers  will be encouraged  to 
attend.  Study  nurse  educators  will deliver  the CKD education.  New nurse  educators  will 
undergo  an intensive  3- to 6-month  training  period  under the guidance  of the PIs and 
existing  UPMC  CKD  nurse  educators  and dietitians.  Simulated  and authentic  patient  
education  sessions  will be observed  to judge  readiness.  
Print and video  based  education  material  from the National  Kidney  Disease  Education  
Program  (NKDEP) and  the National  Kidney  Foundation  that reviews  the role of the kidneys, 
CKD  risk factors,  dietary  guidelines, pharmacotherapy, medication  adherence  and safety,  
frequently  asked  questions,  and dialysis  modalities  will be used.  The nurse  will document 
 
  the session  in the EHR  using  a brief templated  education  note (that is captured by  the PHM  
dashboard),  and route  it to the PCP and nephrologist.  After the initial  sessions,  annual  
refresher  sessions  will be scheduled.  
Multi -disciplinary Case Discussions  
Prior to providing recommendations to PCPs, every patient’s management will be discussed in 
case conference calls (2 -4 times per week) attended by APPs, nephrologists, and pharmacists, 
to arrive at consensual individualized recommendations for patients.  
Intervention  Fidelity  
All nephrologists, nurse  educators, and  PharmDs  delivering  a component  of the intervention  
will undergo  standardized  training  until they achieve  consistent and  acceptable  performance.  
This will include  review  of concise  educational  materials,  observation  and apprenticeship  
with existing  providers  at the local site, the use of checklists  operationalizing  key aspects  of 
each  intervention,  the use of SBAR  (situation,  background,  assessment,  recommendation)  
EHR  templates,94-97 and direct observation  during  role played  and actual  interventions.  After 
initial  implementation, the study/site  PIs will randomly  audit  5-10% of e- consults  every  3 
months.  Dr. Nolin  will randomly  audit  5-10% of pharmacy  communications  every  3 months.  
Providers  will receive  targeted  feedback  based  on findings.  Providers  will also continue  to 
use checklists to document  completion  of key aspects  of the intervention  as well as 
deviations  throughout the study.  Refreshers  will occur  every  6-12 months  and remediation  
will occur  as dictated  by observed  performance  (i.e., <80%  fidelity  with items  on checklist).  
  
 
  V. Data collection and Outcomes  
 Routinely collected EHR and administrative data will be abstracted for outcomes assessment 
as shown in Table 2. PCP practice level data will be obtained from public records.  
Table  2: Key variables  and covariates for  usual  care and intervention  patients  
 
 
Primary Outcome  
A >40% decline  in eGFR  or ESRD.92 eGFR  decline  will be adjudicated  based  on the 
baseline  creatinine  and eGFR  determined  from the CKD -EPI equation  and measured  
routinely  in clinical  practice.99 ESRD  will be defined  as an eGFR  < 10ml/min  to account for 
patients  with markedly  reduced  baseline  eGFR  values  (i.e., 16-20ml/min).  
The 40% decline  surrogate  outcome  may increase  power  and precision  by capturing  
additional  events  while  maintaining a similar  risk of type I error92 compared  to the standard  
doubling  of serum creatinine  outcome.  To limit surveillance  bias,  we will use 6-month  
ascertainment windows  and average  all values  within  each  window.  Our data indicate  75% 
of high-risk patients  have  an outpatient eGFR  value  every  6-months.  Additional  analyses  
will compare  changes  in eGFR  slope  over time (using  splines  to account  for non-linearity .  
 
Secondary outcomes  - Process  of care outcomes   
1. HTN control. Outpatient, sitting  BP values  measured  during  each  outpatient  encounter and  
recorded  in the EHR.  BP will be treated  as a continuous  variable.  To minimize  Socio - 
demographics  • Age, gender, race,  ethnicity,  marital  status,  insurance,  and zip code  
for linkage  with neighborhood median  household  income.39 
• Baseline  values  defined  on the date of baseline  visit EHR 
Comorbid  
conditions  • DM, HTN,  hyperlipidemia,  CAD, cerebrovascular  disease, peripheral  
vascular  disease,  CHF,  arrhythmia,  gout, chronic lung  disease,  
chronic  liver disease, mood  disorder,  and malignancy.  
• Baseline  values  defined  on the date of baseline  visit and using  a 24 month  
“look  back” period.  Phenotypes  using  
administrative  & clinical  
codes,  meds,  & lab 
values  validated  in local 
EHR.12,38,39 
Blood  
Pressure  • Baseline  BP - mean  outpatient  BP from the date of the baseline  
study  visit with the PCP until 180 days prior to  the baseline  visit. 
• Follow -up BP – all outpatient  BPs after patient enrollment  Office  visit vital signs  
recorded  in the EHR  
Medication  
use • RAASi,  NSAID  and other medications  deemed  a potential  safety  
concern  (e.g., allopurinol, gemfibrozil, glyburide, metformin,  etc.) 
• Medication  related  problems  and drug record  discrepancies  EHR  medication  list; 
medication  review  
(intervention  patients)  
Laboratory  
values  • Common  laboratory  tests  (e.g.,  K+, cholesterol,  etc.) 
• Baseline  values  - determined  using  the most recent  value from 
baseline  visit up to 365 days prior to the visit. EHR  (restricted  to 
outpatient labs)  
Urine  
albuminuria  • Quantitative  urine  albuminuria  - most recent  ACR  from the baseline  
visit up to 365 days prior to the visit. 
• Urine  dipstick  albuminuria  - median  of outpatient values  available  from 
the date of baseline  visit up to 365 days prior to the visit.100 Outpatient lab  values  
from EHR  Variables  Variable  descriptions  Data  source  details  
Renal  function  
and rate of 
change  in renal  
function  • Baseline  serum creatinine  – most recent  creatinine  from date of 
study  enrollment visit with PCP up to 365 days prior to the visit. 
• Baseline  eGFR  – Calculated using  CKD -EPI.99 
• Baseline  rates  of change  in eGFR  - determined  from baseline  eGFR  and 
prior eGFRs  between  365 to 730 days before  the baseline  value.  EHR  (restricted  to 
outpatient labs)  
 
  ascertainment  bias, we will use 6-month  ascertainment windows  to determine  an average  
BP for each  patient  for each  6-mo period. Patients  lacking  an outpatient value  will have  
their last value  carried  forward   
2. Use of RAASi.  Will be determined  by active  use of an ACEi  or ARB  based  on the EHR  
medication  list at each  outpatient encounter. Analyses  will compare  cumulative  person -time 
exposure  during  the study.  
3. Medication safety.  We will examine  the rates  of use of several  high-risk 
medications21,43,54,61,80,101  that can be  associated  with adverse  outcomes  in progressive  
CKD.  Medication  exposure  will be determined  by presence  of the specified  medication  
on the patient's  EHR  medication  list at each  outpatient encounter.  Analyses  will compare  
cumulative  person -time exposure  during  the study.  
a. Use of NSAIDs: use  examined for all study  patients  
b. Use of glyburide: use  examined  for all diabetic  study  patients  
c. Use of metformin: use  examined  for diabetic  study  patients  with eGFR<30  
d. Use of gemfibrozil:  use examined  for all study patients  with eGFR<30.  
 
 
Exploratory  outcomes . Mortality , hyperkalemia,  and health  utilization  (i.e., costs)  including  
hospitalizations,  emergency  department visits,  and outpatient  encounters  will be ascertained  
by a combination  of EHR  and administrative  data from the UPMC health  plan.  The 
accessibility  of administrative  data that captures events  outside  the health  system and  
supplements  the EHR  is a unique  and complementary  resource  that will  be leveraged  in 
future  study analyses.   
 
Adverse events  
While it is unlikely that systematically providing evidence -based recommendations to PCPs of 
high-risk CKD patients by trained nephrologists and pharmacists will worsen overall clinical 
outcomes, we will monitor safety signals through the EHR, including hy perkalemia, ER visits, 
hospitalizations and mortality.  
 
  
 
  VI. Regulatory and Oversight Considerations  
This study  meets  the criteria  for human  subject’s  research.  
 
We will conduct a cluster RCT  of PCP practices, implementing  a multifaceted  PHM  
intervention  for patients  with high-risk CKD.  The intervention  targets  improvements  in the 
delivery of evidence -based  care and outcomes. Patients  with high-risk CKD  will be identified  
through  demographics  and laboratory  tests  that are  collected  for clinical  purposes. The PHM  
dashboard, which  includes  estimates  from validated  risk prediction  models  and eGFR  
trajectories,  will be used  to identify  and track  enrolled  patients. Shortly  before  their regularly  
scheduled  visit with an enrolled  patient,  PCPs  randomized  to the intervention  arm will receive  
a decision  support  message  and subsequent reminders  notifying  the provider  of the patient’s  
high-risk CKD  status  and recommending  the following  bundle:  1) an  order for  electronic  
nephrology  guidance  or formal  nephrology  office  consultation  if preferred; 2) medication  
therapy  management by  a PharmD,  specifically  including  a medication  reconciliation  and 
safety  review,  and 3) CKD  patient  education.  These  interventions  are all consistent  with 
standard  of care practices  for patients  with high-risk CKD and the PCP will always  be 
permitted  to accept  or refuse  these  suggestions according  to their clinical  judgement. If  the 
provider  accepts these  suggestions,  the individual  intervention  components  will be ordered,  
scheduled,  coordinated,  and tracked.  If the provider  refuses  any of the components, they  will 
be able to justify  why their reasons  for refusal.  Refusal  responses  will be randomly  audited  to 
ensure  accuracy.  
 
a. Recruitment  and Informed  Consent:  
We will include  all primary  care providers  at UPMC  with an active  primary  care continuity  
clinic.  We will identify  these  providers  through  provider  rosters  given  to us by the respective  
departments  and practices.  We will maintain  contact with  each  practice  through  biannual  
sessions  held during  their regular practice  meetings  or lunch  meetings  held at their offices.  
We will remind  providers  of the aims  of the study and  the intervention.  We will also seek  
regular  feedback  from providers  to identify  unforeseen  issues  that were  not encountered  
during  the pilot study  and will work collaboratively  with them to identify  suitable  solutions.  We 
will survey  providers  on their experience  with the intervention  using  both multiple  choice  and 
open -ended  questions.  We will also collect  feedback  from them  using  standardized,  
templated  forms  during  planned  meetings.  The study's  PIs and nurses  will meet  with the 
practices  as described  above.  
 
Per the University  of Pittsburgh  IRB and UPMC Quality Improvement committee guidance, 
the study will not require consent from PCP or patient to enroll them in the study. Both PCP 
and patients will be given information about the study and an opportunity to opt -out. We will 
continue  to meet  with PCPs  to understand  barriers  that may arise  and to develop  solutions  
that ensure  PCP burden  is minimized  and workflow  is preserved.  
 
Notably,  all practicing  PCPs  who partake  in this study  are licensed  providers.  They  vary in 
age from approximately  30 years  to >60 years.  All PCPs  from UPMC  primary  care practices  
are included  in this research;  no one is excluded. The PCPs  care for approximately 480,000  
patients  annually,  including  ~10,000  patients  with high-risk CKD. Individual  patients  seen  will 
vary greatly  in age and health  status  as expected  in any large  group  PCP practice.  
 
The intervention  will only target patients  who have  high-risk CKD  using  validated  risk 
prediction  models.  Low- risk patients  will be excluded  because  outcomes  occur  at a lower  
rate in this setting. Including  these  patients  would  necessitate  a larger, longer, and  costlier 
study  to ensure  adequate  power  to detect small  but meaningful  differences.  Alternatively,  
 
  including  these  patients  using  the current  study  size and follow -up would  result in  an 
underpowered  trial with significant potential  for a type II error. Patients  > 85 years  of age will 
be excluded  as best practices  for CKD  treatment  are less clear in  the very aged.  Patients  < 
18 years  will also be excluded  (see inclusion  of children  below).  Patients  with a history  of 
renal  transplant, end -stage  renal  disease, or  already  under the care of a nephrologist  will be 
excluded  because  these  patients  are generally receiving  specialized  care in addition  to their 
PCP’s  care.  In addition, patients  with very limited  prognoses (e.g., metastatic  cancer,  COPD  
on continuous  oxygen,  stage  IV heart  failure)  will be excluded  during  the screening  process 
due to the difficulty  of substantially  altering  their course  with CKD  treatment  enhancements.  
 
Patients  that are  pregnant  or prisoners  will be excluded from the study  if they are seen  by a 
participating  PCP during  the study  enrollment  period.  Evidence -based  CKD  care differs  
during  pregnancy  (e.g., contraindication  of RAASi,  different  BP goals)  and pregnancy and  
peripartum course  are known  to affect eGFR  and albuminuria  thereby uniquely affecting  
potential  outcomes. In addition,  because  2 components  of our intervention  bundle  require  
scheduling  a group  CKD  education  session  and a telephonic  medication  reconciliation  and 
safety  review  with a PharmD, enrolling  incarcerated  patients  would  be impracticable.  
 
a. Potential  Risk:  
PCPs  will be at minimal  risk with regards  to their reputation,  finances,  legal liability,  or position  
in their department or practice.  Their exposure  is limited  to intermittent  outreach  from the 
investigators  and EHR  communications/reminders regarding  their enrolled  patients.  These  
messages will  recommend  evidence -based  care (e.g., implementation  of RAASi,  avoidance  of 
NSAIDs, checking  a urinary  albumin  to creatinine  ratio) for a high-risk CKD  population.  The 
provider  can then choose  to enact  or ignore  the suggestions, and  document  reasons  for 
refusal.  The messages  and communication  have  been  designed  to activate  in a manner that  
harmonizes  with existing  PCP workflow.  Processing  these  messages  should  require  far less 
than 1 minute  per patient, exposing  the PCPs  to a minimal  risk of temporal  inconvenience.  
Assuming  a uniform distribution  of high-risk CKD  patients  throughout the practices, the  
average  PCP will have ~5  patients  included  in the study.  
However,  because  patient  distribution  is not uniform,  we estimate  a single  PCP may have  up 
to ~15 patients  in the study.  This will still pose  a minimal  temporal  burden  over the course  of 
the trial. 
 
All data analysis  on provider  performance  will be reported  in the aggregate;  hence,  
performance  of an individual  PCP will not be identifiable. In the unlikely event  of a breach  of 
confidentiality,  the physicians  will be exposed  to minimal  risks to their reputation, job 
security/finances,  or legal liability  as physician  data will be strictly  de-identified  with a 
password  protected  “key”  stored  separately  in a password  protected  file on a secure  
university  server.  Even  if the key was stolen  (which  we deem to be very unlikely  to happen), 
the data regarding  physicians  would  be of limited  implication  as there  are no formal  metrics  
regarding  CKD  care and we will not gather any  high-risk provider  information  (e.g.,  dob, 
SSN, etc). Alternative  treatments  at this time are to continue  usual  care (e.g.,  continuing  
medical  education  activities  to PCPs) which  has proven  ineffective  in optimizing  PCP 
performance  including  treatment  of CKD.  
 
This study  will also subject the enrolled  patients  of participating  providers  to minimal  risks. At 
baseline,  enrolled  patients  are at high-risk for poor outcomes  including  catastrophic  
outcomes  such  as ESRD.  The predictive  models  used  to make  these  estimates  have  been  
externally validated  in multiple  populations.  When the  PCP accepts  the recommended  
intervention  bundle  the following  events  will occur. First, electronic  nephrology  guidance  will 
 
  be provided,  which  will give the PCP recommendations  on how to improve  CKD  related  care 
prior to their visit with the patient.  This intervention  is strictly  provider facing  (i.e., the patient  
is not contacted  by the nephrologist).  The PHM dashboard  will be used  to track  whether 
recommendations  are implemented  and to send  reminder messages  to PCPs  unless  reasons  
for non-implementation  are provided.  Second, the  patient  will have  a telephonic  appointment  
made  with a PharmD  to review  their medications. If  an emergent   medication  hazard  is 
discovered,  the PharmD  will ask the patient to hold the offending  medication(s)  and will 
immediately  contact  PIs, and  the patient’s  PCP.  These  emergent  events  are likely  to be quite  
infrequent. Otherwise, following  completion  of the medication  reconciliation  and safety  review,  
the pharmacist’s  findings  will be reported  to the PCP so that they  may be reviewed  with the 
patient  and appropriate  changes  made  (in accordance  with the PCP’s  clinical  judgement). 
Third, the patient will  be scheduled  for a CKD  nurse  education  session  following  their 
appointment  with their PCP  (thereby  allowing  the PCP to share  the CKD  diagnosis  with the 
patient).  The nurse  education  session  will provide  information  on the role of the kidneys,  
kidney  function  assessment,  strategies  to protect kidney  function, medication  safety,  and 
general  information  about  ESRD  treatment  options. Given  patients’  high-risk CKD  status,  
CKD  education  isconsidered  standard  of care and patients  may opt out of the education  
session  if they find it distressing.  
 
Some  of these  interventions  may pose  a small  psychological  risk to the patient. Patients  who 
were  previously  unaware,  may become  aware  of their CKD  status. However,  the patient  will 
have  discovered  the presence  of a serious  illness  with potentially severe  complications  and 
(most importantly) available  treatments. Further  studies  to delineate  the exact  etiology  of the 
CKD  and subsequent treatments  can be initiated.  The intervention  may assist with  proper 
medication  dosing,  avoidance  of nephrotoxic  medications,  and avoidance  of potentially  risky 
procedures  (imaging  with intravenous  contrast  or gadolinium containing  compounds). The 
intervention  may also help delay  the need  for dialysis  and ensure  patients  are prepared for 
dialysis  if it becomes  necessary.  In addition, PCPs  can choose  to defer  discussions  and 
treatment if they feel a patient is  unlikely  to have  high- risk CKD  or benefit from any  of the 
aspects  of the intervention.  The presently  available  alternative  approach  is to continue  
current  practice  with suboptimal  PCP treatment of CKD.  
 
While  it is unlikely that systematically  providing  evidence -based  CKD  recommendations  to 
PCPs  of high  risk patients  by board  certified  nephrologists  and pharmacists  will worsen  
overall  clinical  outcomes,  we will monitor  several  safety  signals.  We will gather these  safety  
data annually  through  the EHR, minimizing  additional  patient  or study  cost burden.  Potential  
adverse  events  that will  be monitored  include:  
1) Rates  of hyperkalemia  (K>5.5,  K>6) 
2) Rates  of emergency  department visits  and hospitalizations  
3) Rates  of death.  
 
Tests  and treatments  implemented  by PCPs  based  on nephrologist’s  or pharmacist’s  
recommendations  are likely  to be relatively  inexpensive  and non-invasive  and should  expose  
the patient to minimal  financial  or bodily  risk. The board  certified  PCP is the final arbiter of 
medical  decisions  regarding  their patients . 
 
No patient will  be excluded  based  on gender, race,  or ethnicity.  However,  we are restricting  the 
intervention  to UPMC  health  plan patients  (including  UPMC  Medicare  Advantage)  for several  
reasons. First, this  allows  us to inform PCPs  and patients  that we have  partnered  with the 
patient’s  insurer in  an effort to optimize  care, thereby  mitigating  potential  financial  concerns.  
Second, the health  plan’s  support will  allow  us to supplement  EHR  data with administrative  
 
  data to adjudicate  outcomes  while  minimizing  misclassification . Our findings  will inform  future  
efforts  to extend  the intervention  while  preserving  fiscal sustainability.  
 
b. Protections  against Risk:  
Data  will be stored  in secured  databases  (e.g.,  MS access,  REDCap)  on secure  university  
servers  accessible  only through  password  protected  computers  in locked  rooms.  All working  
datasets  will be de-identified  limited  datasets  (i.e., dates  of tests, labs  will remain). Identifiers  
will be stored  in a separate, password  protected  file. Access  to the PHM  dashboard  similarly  
requires  1) a valid password  to access  the university  computer,  2) a valid password  to 
access  the EHR,  and 3) clearance/privileges  to access  the PHM  dashboard.  
 
The risk of breach  of confidentiality  is low. Further,  all information  associated  with provider  
performance  or patient  information  will be de-identified  (using  limited  data sets with dates). 
Hence, if there  is a breach  in confidentiality  it is unlikely  to expose  the providers  or patients to 
any significant  harm or discomfort. Given  the lack of published  literature  on the usefulness  or 
futility  of PHM  in CKD,  breach  of confidentiality  regarding  provider  participation  or 
randomization  assignment  is also very unlikely  to result  in any foreseeable  harm or  
discomfort.  Patient  information  will be de-identified  and high-risk variables  (e.g.,  DOB, etc) 
removed from all working  datasets  to minimize  the risk of breach  of confidentiality.  The 
minimum data  necessary  for the study will  be accessed.  In addition,  all researchers  involved  
are clinically  competent  and certified  in HIPAA  compliance.  All stored  electronic  data will be 
kept on University  secure  computers  and secure  servers  in locked  departmental  offices.  The 
corresponding  electronic  databases  are password  protected. All  paper records  associated  
with the study  will be stored  in a locked  file cabinet in  a locked  room. These  measures  are 
likely  to be effective.  
 
To minimize  the risks of the PHM  intervention  (e.g., possible  psychological  distress), we are 
limiting  our intervention  to patients  with high-risk CKD  based  on clinically  validated  risk 
prediction  models. This  model  will limit the targeted  population  thereby  restricting  those  
subjected  to the above -mentioned  risks.   Additionally,  all communications  are targeted  to 
licensed  providers  who will exercise  their clinical  judgment and can  ignore  recommendations  
they feel would  subject the patient  to an undue  burden.  In this manner, the intervention  is 
non-invasive  and nonbinding  (i.e., it is always  left to the provider’s  discretion  whether  to 
follow  suggestions).  Together, these  are likely to successfully  limit unnecessary  
interventions  and the placement  of undue  psychological  or financial  risks on patients.  
 
Data  Safety  and Monitoring  Plan. 
A data and safety  monitoring  plan (DSMP)  will be implemented  by Drs. Jhamb  and Abdel -
Kader,  and members  of the research  team, to ensure  that there  are no changes  in the 
risk/benefit  ratio during  the course  of the study  and that confidentiality  of research  data is 
maintained. Investigators  and study  personnel  will meet  monthly  to discuss  the study  (e.g. 
study  goals  and modifications  of those  goals; subject recruitment  and retention; progress  in 
data coding and analysis;  documentation,  identification  of adverse  events  or research  subject  
complaints;  violations  of confidentiality)  and address  any issues  or concerns  at that time.  
Minutes  will be kept for these  meetings  and will be maintained  in the study  regulatory  binder.  
The status  of recruitment and  data collection  will be discussed  and addressed  among  the 
attendees  with confirmation  that proper  protocol  has been  followed.  Technical  problems  if any 
will be discussed  and plans  developed  to address  them.  Any instances  of serious  adverse  
events  will be reported  immediately  to the University  of Pittsburgh  IRB using  standard  forms  
and/or procedures  that have  been  established  by the IRB. 
 
   
The yearly  IRB renewal  for this study  will include  a summary  report  of the DSMP  findings  
from the prior year.   
 
Inclusion  of Women  and Minorities:  
Given  the study  design  of randomizing  practices,  the subject selection  criteria  are all PCP 
practices  previously  specified.   Secondarily,  the patients  with high-risk CKD  who are seen  by 
a participating  PCP will be included.  We are unable  to control  the gender,  race, or ethnicity  of 
the PCPs  or of their patients.   However,  we will include  all PCPs  regardless  of gender,  race,  
or ethnicity.  We will also include  all of their eligible  patients  between  the ages  of 18 and 85 
who have  high-risk CKD.  No patient will be excluded  based  on their gender  or race or 
ethnicity.   Indeed,  because  patients  with high-risk CKD  are often  of minority  race or ethnicity,  
we expect  higher proportions  of these  groups  than the general  population.  However,  there  will 
not be any proposed  outreach  program  for recruiting  members  of a specific  gender or 
racial/ethnic  group  as subjects.  We do not suspect that  one gender  or racial  group  will be 
excluded  or underrepresented  given  the baseline  patient  demographics  of the PCP practices  
(55% women,  15% African -Americans)  and data from the USRDS  annual  report  revealing  that 
nearly  30% of incident  dialysis  patients  are African -American  and that women  have  a greater  
prevalence  of CKD stages 3 -5. While  we acknowledge  that the local Hispanic/Latino -American  
population  is relatively  small  compared  to the national  average, we will attempt to include  
every  patient deemed  to have  high-risk CKD  seen  by a participating  PCP. The racial  and 
ethnic  diversity  of patients  included in  the study  will be entirely  based  on the diversity  of the 
local PCP practices  and is outside  our control.  We will not exclude  any patient based  on their 
gender, race,  or ethnicity.  
 
 
Inclusion  of Children  
Participants  in this study  are enrolled  at two  levels.   First,  we are directly  enrolling  PCPs.  
None  of the PCPs  are children  and hence  no children  will be recruited  at this stage.   
However,  patients  with high-risk CKD are secondarily  included  in the study  when  they are 
seen  by a participating  PCP.  The participating  PCPs generally  see patients  >18 years  old 
(some  family  practice  physicians  see both children  and adults).  However,  we will only be 
targeting  patients  > 18 years.  Hence,  children  will not be included.  This is justified  for several  
reasons:  
1) the prevalence  of CKD in this age range  is low and there  will be few patients  who meet 
these  criteria, 2)  CKD  in the adult population  has different etiologies,  natural  history, and  
treatments, 3) well validated  risk prediction  models  to determine  high-risk status  are not 
available  to our knowledge. All  of these  reasons make  including  children  impracticable  in 
this study.  
 
   
References  
 
1. Tangri  N, Grams  ME, Levey AS,  et al. Multinational  assessment  of accuracy of equations  
for predicting risk  of kidney  failure:  A meta -analysis.  JAMA.  2016;315(2).  
2. Lipworth L, Abdel -Kader  K, Morse  J, et al. High prevalence  of non-steroidal  anti-
inflammatory  drug use among  acute  kidney  injury survivors  in the  southern community  
cohort  study.  BMC  Nephrol.  Nov 24 2016;17(1):189.  
3. Siew  ED, Parr SK, Abdel -Kader  K, et al. Predictors  of Recurrent  AKI. J Am Soc Nephrol.  Apr 
2016;27(4):1190 -1200.  
4. Matheny  ME, Peterson JF,  Eden SK,  et al. Laboratory test  surveillance  following acute  kidney  
injury.  PloS  one.  
2014;9(8):e103746.  
5. Loudon  K, Treweek  S, Sullivan F,  Donnan P, Thorpe  KE, Zwarenstein  M. The PRECIS -2 tool:  
designing trials  that are fit for purpose.  BMJ.  May  8 2015;350:h2147.  
6. Coresh J,  Selvin  E, Stevens  LA, et al. Prevalence  of chronic  kidney  disease  in the United 
States.  JAMA.  Nov 7 2007;298(17):2038 -2047.  
7. Hoerger  TJ, Simpson SA,  Yarnoff  BO, et al. The  future  burden of CKD in the United  States:  a 
simulation  model  for the CDC CKD Initiative.  Am J Kidney  Dis. Mar 2015;65(3):403 -411.  
8. Honeycutt  AA, Segel  JE, Zhuo  X, Hoerger  TJ, Imai  K, Williams  D. Medical  costs  of CKD in the 
Medicare  population.  
J Am Soc Nephrol.  Sep 2013;24(9):1478 -1483.  
9. Go AS, Chertow  GM,  Fan D, McCulloch CE,  Hsu CY.  Chronic  kidney  disease  and the risks  of 
death,  cardiovascular  events,  and hospitalization.  N Engl  J Med.  Sep 23 2004;351(13):1296 -
1305.  
10. Samal  L, Wright  A, Waikar  S, Linder  J. Nephrology  co-management  versus  primary  care  
solo management  for early  chronic  kidney  disease:  a retrospective  cross -sectional  
analysis.  BMC  Nephrology.  2015;16(1):162.  
11. Richards  N, Harris  K, Whitfield M, et al. The impact of population -based identification  of 
chronic  kidney  disease  using estimated glomerular  filtration rate  (eGFR)  reporting.  Nephrol  
Dial Transplant.  Feb 2008;23(2):556 -561.  
12. Abdel -Kader  K, Fischer  GS, Johnston JR,  Gu C,  Moore  CG, Unruh ML.  Characterizing pre -
dialysis  care  in the era of eGFR  reporting: a cohort  study.  BMC  Nephrol.  2011;12:12.  
13. Lee BJ, Forbes  K. The role of specialists  in managing the  health  of populations  with chronic  
illness: the  example  of chronic  kidney  disease.  BMJ.  2009;339:b2395.  
14. Abdel -Kader  K, Greer  RC, Boulware  LE, Unruh ML.  Primary care  physicians' familiarity,  
beliefs,  and perceived  barriers  to practice  guidelines  in non -diabetic  CKD: a survey  study.  
BMC  Nephrol.  2014;15:64.  
15. Boulware  LE, Troll  MU,  Jaar BG, Myers  DI, Powe  NR. Identification and referral  of patients  
with progressive  CKD:  a national  study.  Am J Kidney  Dis. Aug 2006;48(2):192 -204.  
16. Greer  RC, Cooper  LA, Crews  DC, Powe  NR, Boulware  LE. Quality of patient -physician 
discussions  about  CKD in primary care:  a cross -sectional  study.  Am J Kidney  Dis. Apr 
2011;57(4):583 -591.  
17. Greer  RC, Crews  DC, Boulware  LE. Challenges  perceived by  primary  care  providers  to 
educating patients  about  chronic  kidney  disease.  Journal  of renal  care.  Dec 2012;38(4):174 -
181.  
18. Vest  BM, York  TR, Sand J,  Fox CH, Kahn LS.  Chronic  Kidney Disease  Guideline  Implementation 
in Primary  Care:  A Qualitative  Report  from the TRANSLATE  CKD Study.  J Am Board Fam Med.  
 
  Sep-Oct 2015;28(5):624 -631.  
19. United States  Renal  Data  System.  2015 USRDS annual  data  report: Epidemiology of kidney  
disease  in the United  States.  National  Institutes  of Health,  National  Institute  of Diabetes  and 
Digestive  and Kidney Diseases,  Bethesda,  MD,  2015.  2015.  
20. Chan MR, Dall AT, Fletcher  KE, Lu  N, Trivedi  H. Outcomes  in patients  with chronic  kidney  
disease  referred late  to nephrologists:  a meta -analysis.  Am J Med.  Dec 2007;120(12):1063 -
1070.  
21. Chang F,  O'Hare  AM, Miao  Y, Steinman  MA. Use of Renally  Inappropriate  Medications  in 
Older  Veterans:  A National  Study.  Journal  of the American Geriatrics  Society.  2015:n/a -
n/a. 
22. Fox CH, Swanson A,  Kahn LS,  Glaser  K, Murray BM.  Improving chronic  kidney  disease  care  
in primary care  practices:  an upstate  New York  practice -based research network  (UNYNET)  
study.  J Am Board Fam  Med.  Nov- Dec 2008;21(6):522 -530.  
23. Philipneri  MD,  Rocca  Rey LA,  Schnitzler  MA, et al. Delivery  patterns  of recommended chronic  
kidney disease  care  in clinical  practice:  administrative  claims -based  analysis  and systematic  
literature  review.  Clinical  and experimental  nephrology.  Feb 2008;12(1):41 -52. 
24. Plantinga  LC, Miller  ER, Stevens  LA, et al. Blood Pressure  Control  Among  Persons  Without  
and With  Chronic  Kidney Disease: US Trends  and Risk  Factors  1999 –2006.  Hypertension. 
July 1, 2009  2009;54(1):47 -56. 
 
   
25. Smart  NA, Dieberg G,  Ladhani  M, Titus  T. Early referral  to specialist  nephrology services  
for preventing  the progression to  end-stage  kidney  disease.  The Cochrane  database  of 
systematic  reviews.  2014;6:CD007333.  
26. Smart  NA, Titus  TT. Outcomes  of early  versus  late nephrology referral  in chronic  kidney  
disease:  a systematic  review.  Am J Med.  Nov 2011;124(11):1073 -1080  e1072.  
27. Wyatt  C, Konduri  V, Eng J,  Rohatgi  R. Reporting  of estimated GFR  in the primary care  clinic.  Am 
J Kidney  Dis. May  2007;49(5):634 -641.  
28. Brenner  BM, Cooper  ME, de Zeeuw  D, et al. Effects  of Losartan  on Renal  and 
Cardiovascular  Outcomes  in Patients  with Type  2 Diabetes  and Nephropathy.  New 
England  Journal  of Medicine.  2001;345(12):861 -869.  
29. Lewis  EJ, Hunsicker  LG, Clarke  WR, et al. Renoprotective  Effect  of the Angiotensin -
Receptor  Antagonist  Irbesartan in  Patients  with  Nephropathy Due  to Type  2 
Diabetes.  New  England  Journal  of Medicine.  2001;345(12):851 -860.  
30. Fishbane  S, Hazzan AD,  Halinski  C, Mathew  AT. Challenges  and opportunities  in late -
stage  chronic  kidney  disease.  Clinical  Kidney  Journal.  December  2, 2014 2014.  
31. Drawz  PE, Archdeacon  P, McDonald CJ,  et al. CKD as a Model  for Improving Chronic  
Disease  Care  through  Electronic  Health Records.  Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.  Aug 7 
2015;10(8):1488 -1499.  
32. Narva  AS. Decision Support  and CKD:  Not There  Yet. Clinical  Journal  of the American  Society  of 
Nephrology.  April  1, 2012  2012;7(4):525 -526.  
33. Narva  AS, Norton JM,  Boulware  LE. Educating Patients  about  CKD: The  Path  to Self-
Management  and Patient - Centered  Care.  Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.  Nov 4 2015.  
34. Tuot  DS, Diamantidis  CJ, Corbett  CF, et al. The  last mile:  translational  research to  improve  
CKD outcomes.  Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.  Oct 7 2014;9(10):1802 -1805.  
35. Tangri  N, Stevens  LA, Griffith  J, et al. A predictive  model  for progression  of chronic  kidney 
disease  to kidney  failure.  JAMA.  Apr 20 2011 ;305(15):1553 -1559.  
36. Tangri  N, Kitsios  GD, Inker  LA, et al. Risk  prediction  models  for patients  with chronic  kidney  
disease:  a systematic  review.  Ann Intern  Med.  Apr 16 2013;158(8):596 -603.  
37. Turin TC,  Coresh  J, Tonelli  M, et al. Short -term change  in kidney  function and risk of end-stage  
renal  disease.  
Nephrology  Dialysis  Transplantation.  October  1, 2012 2012;27(10):3835 -3843.  
38. Abdel -Kader  K, Fischer  GS, Li J, Moore  CG, Hess  R, Unruh  ML. Automated  clinical  reminders  
for primary  care  providers  in the  care  of CKD:  a small  cluster -randomized controlled trial. 
Am J Kidney  Dis. Dec 2011;58(6):894 - 902.  
39. Jhamb M, Cavanaugh  KL, Bian  A, et al. Disparities  in Electronic  Health Record  Patient  Portal  
Use in Nephrology  Clinics.  Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.  Nov 06 2015 ;10(11):2013 -2022.  
40. Wright  JT, Jr., Bakris  G, Greene  T, et al. Effect  of blood  pressure  lowering and 
antihypertensive  drug  class  on progression of  hypertensive  kidney  disease: results  from 
the AASK  trial.[see  comment].  Jama.  2002;288(19):2421 -2431.  
41. Appel  LJ, Wright  JT, Greene  T, et al. Intensive  Blood -Pressure  Control  in Hypertensive  Chronic  
Kidney Disease.  
New  England  Journal  of Medicine.  2010;363(10):918 -929.  
42. Group SR,  Wright  JT, Jr., Williamson JD,  et al. A Randomized Trial  of Intensive  versus  
Standard Blood -Pressure  Control.  N Engl  J Med.  Nov 26 2015;373(22):2103 -2116.  
43. St Peter  WL, Wazny LD,  Patel  UD. New  Models  of CKD Care  Including Pharmacists:  Improving 
Medication  Reconciliation  and Medication Management.  Current  opinion in  nephrology  and 
hypertension.  2013;22(6):656 - 662.  
 
  44. Beddhu S,  Rocco MV,  Toto R, et  al. Effects  of Intensive  Systolic  Blood Pressure  Control  on 
Kidney  and Cardiovascular  Outcomes  in Persons  Without  Kidney Disease:  A Secondary  
Analysis  of a Randomized  Trial. Ann Intern  Med.  Sep 19 2017;167(6):375 -383.  
45. Abdel -Kader  K. The Times,  They  Are A-Changin:  Innovations  in Health Care Delivery To Reduce  
CKD Progression.  
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.  Sep 7 2017;12(9):1375 -1376.  
46. Krist  AH, Beasley  JW, Crosson JC,  et al. Electronic  health  record functionality needed to 
better  support  primary  care.  Journal  of the American Medical  Informatics  Association.  
2014 -09-01 00:00:00  2014;21(5):764 -771.  
47. Institute  of Medicine  (U.S.)  Committee  on Quality of Health Care  in America.  Crossing the  
quality  chasm  : a new  health system  for the 21st  century.  Washington,  D.C.: National  
Academy Press; 2001.  
48. Kung HC,  Hoyert  DL, Xu J, Murphy  SL. Deaths: final  data  for 2005.  Natl  Vital  Stat Rep.  Apr 24 
2008 ;56(10):1 -120.  
 
   
49. Collins  AJ, Foley R, Herzog  C, et al. Excerpts  from  the United States  Renal  Data  System 2007  
annual  data  report.  
Am J Kidney  Dis. Jan 2008;51(1 Suppl  1):S1 -320.  
50. Jolly  SE, Navaneethan SD, Schold JD,  et al. CKD  in an  Electronic  Health Record  Problem 
List: Quality of Care,  ESRD,  and Mortality.  American journal  of nephrology.  04/01 
2014;39(4):288 -296.  
51. Rutkowski  M, Mann  W, Derose  S, et al. Implementing  KDOQI  CKD Definition and  Staging 
Guidelines  in Southern  California  Kaiser  Permanente.  American Journal  of Kidney  
Diseases. 53(3):S86 -S99.  
52. Shahinian VB,  Saran R. The Role  of Primary  Care  in the  Management  of the Chronic  Kidney 
Disease  Population.  
Advances  in Chronic Kidney  Disease.  5// 2010;17(3):246 -253.  
53. Agrawal  V, Ghosh AK,  Barnes  MA, McCullough  PA. Awareness  and knowledge  of clinical  
practice  guidelines  for CKD among internal  medicine  residents:  a national  online  survey.  Am 
J Kidney  Dis. Dec 2008;52(6):1061 -1069.  
54. Allen AS,  Forman JP,  Orav EJ, Bates  DW,  Denker  BM, Sequist  TD. Primary  care  management  
of chronic  kidney  disease.  Journal  of general  internal  medicine.  Apr 2011;26(4):386 -392.  
55. Plantinga  LC, Miller  ER, 3rd, Stevens  LA, et al. Blood pressure  control  among persons  
without  and with  chronic  kidney  disease:  US trends  and risk factors  1999 -2006.  
Hypertension.  Jul 2009;54(1):47 -56. 
56. Sakhuja  A, Textor  SC, Taler  SJ. Uncontrolled hypertension by the  2014 evidence -based 
guideline: results  from  NHANES 2011 –2012.  Journal  of Hypertension.  2015;33(3):644 -652.  
57. Curtis  BM, Barrett  BJ, Djurdjev  O, Singer  J, Levin A.  Evaluation  and treatment  of CKD patients  
before  and at  their  first nephrologist  encounter  in Canada.  Am J Kidney  Dis. Nov 
2007;50(5):733 -742.  
58. Chertow  GM,  Lee J, Kuperman GJ,  et al. Guided  medication dosing for  inpatients  with renal  
insufficiency.  JAMA.  
Dec 12 2001;286(22):2839 -2844.  
59. Diamantidis  CJ, Ginsberg  JS, Yoffe  M, et al. Remote  Usability  Testing and Satisfaction 
with  a Mobile  Health  Medication Inquiry  System  in CKD.  Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.  Aug 07 
2015;10(8):1364 -1370.  
60. Fink JC, Chertow  GM.  Medication  errors  in chronic  kidney  disease: one  piece  in the  patient  
safety  puzzle.  Kidney  Int. Dec 2009;76(11):1123 -1125.  
61. Hanlon JT,  Wang  X, Handler  SM, et al. Potentially  inappropriate  prescribing of 
primarily  renally  cleared  medications  for older  veterans  affairs  nursing home  
patients.  Journal  of the American Medical  Directors  Association.  Jun 2011;12(5):377 -
383.  
62. Taal MW.  Slowing the  progression  of adult  chronic  kidney  disease: therapeutic  advances. Drugs.  
2004;64(20):2273 -2289.  
63. Effect  of intensive  therapy on the development  and progression  of diabetic  nephropathy  in the 
Diabetes  Control  and Complications  Trial.  The Diabetes  Control  and Complications  (DCCT)  
Research Group.  Kidney  Int. Jun 1995;47(6):1703 -1720.  
64. Brown  WW,  Peters  RM, Ohmit  SE, et al. Early  detection of kidney  disease  in community 
settings:  the Kidney  Early  Evaluation  Program  (KEEP).  Am J Kidney  Dis. Jul 2003;42(1):22 -
35. 
65. McAlister  FA, Stewart  S, Ferrua  S, McMurray  JJJV.  Multidisciplinary  strategies  for the 
management  of heart  failure  patients  at high risk for admissionA  systematic  review  of 
 
  randomized  trials.  Journal  of the American  College  of Cardiology.  2004;44(4):810 -819.  
66. Gilbody  S, Whitty P, Grimshaw  J, Thomas  R. Educational  and organizational  
interventions  to improve  the management  of depression  in primary  care:  A 
systematic  review.  JAMA.  2003;289(23):3145 -3151.  
67. Patwardhan MB,  Kawamoto  K, Lobach  D, Patel  UD, Matchar  DB. Recommendations  for a  
Clinical  Decision  Support  for the Management  of Individuals  with  Chronic  Kidney Disease.  
Clinical  Journal  of the American  Society  of Nephrology.  February 1, 2009 2009;4(2):273 -283.  
68. http://www.niddk.nih.gov/news/events -calendar/Pages/ckd -populations -2015.aspx . Accessed  
12/1/2015.  
69. Norman  DA. The psychology  of everyday  things.  New  York: Basic  Books; 1988.  
70. Norman  DA, Draper  SW. User  centered  system  design : new  perspectives  on human -computer  
interaction.  
Hillsdale,  N.J.:  L. Erlbaum  Associates;  1986.  
71. Zhang J,  Patel  VL, Johnson  TR, Shortliffe  EH. A cognitive  taxonomy of medical  errors.  J 
Biomed Inform.  Jun 2004;37(3):193 -204.  
72. Stead WW,  Lin H,  National  Research Council  (U.S.).  Committee  on Engaging the  Computer  
Science  Research  Community  in Health Care  Informatics.,  National  Research Council  (U.S.).  
Computer  Science  and Telecommunications  Board.,  National  Research Council  (U.S.).  
Division  on Engineering and Physical  Sciences.,  ebrary  Inc. Computational  technology  for 
effective  health care  immediate  steps  and strategic directions.  Washington,  D.C.: National  
Academies  Press; 2009.  
 
   
73. Medicine  Io. Crossing  the Quality  Chasm: A New  Health System  for the 21st  Century  
National  Academy Press  2001.  
74. Kidney Disease: Improving  Global  Outcomes  (KDIGO)  CKD Work  Group.  KDIGO  clinical  
practice  guideline  for the evaluation and  management  of chronic  kidney disease.  Kidney  Int 
Suppl.  2013;3:1 -150.  
75. O'Hare  AM, Hotchkiss  JR, Kurella  Tamura  M, et al. Interpreting treatment  effects  from 
clinical  trials  in the context  of real-world risk  information:  end-stage  renal  disease  
prevention in older  adults.  JAMA  internal  medicine.  Mar 1 2014;174(3):391 -397.  
76. Chapter  5: Referral  to specialists  and models  of care.  Kidney  International  Supplements.  1// 
2013;3(1):112 -119.  
77. Lee B, Turley M, Meng  D, et al. Effects  of proactive  population -based nephrologist  oversight  
on progression  of chronic  kidney  disease:  a retrospective  control  analysis.  BMC  Health Serv  
Res. 2012;12(1):252.  
78. Salgado  TM, Moles  R, Benrimoj  SI, Fernandez -Llimos  F. Pharmacists’  interventions  in the  
management  of patients  with chronic  kidney  disease: a systematic  review.  Nephrology  
Dialysis  Transplantation.  January  1, 2012  2012;27(1):276 -292.  
79. Stemer   G, Lemmens -Gruber  R. Clinical  pharmacy  activities  in chronic  kidney  disease  and end -
stage  renal  disease  patients: a systematic  literature  review.  BMC  Nephrology.  2011;12(1):35.  
80. Gheewala  P, Peterson  G, Curtain C,  Nishtala  P, Hannan  P, Castelino  R. Impact  of the 
Pharmacist  Medication  Review  Services  on Drug -Related  Problems  and Potentially  
Inappropriate  Prescribing of Renally  Cleared  Medications  in Residents  of Aged Care  
Facilities.  Drugs  & aging.  2014/11/01 2014;31(11):825 -835.  
81. Nunes  JW, Greene  J, Wallston K, et al. Pilot  Study  of a Physician -Delivered  Education Tool  
to Increase  Patient  Knowledge  About  CKD.  American journal  of kidney  diseases  : the 
official  journal  of the National  Kidney  Foundation.  03/27 2013;62(1):23 -32. 
82. Mason J,  Khunti  K, Stone  M, Farooqi  A, Carr  S. Educational  Interventions  in Kidney  Disease  
Care:  A Systematic  Review  of Randomized Trials.  American Journal  of Kidney  Diseases.  6// 
2008;51(6):933 -951.  
83. Tangri  N, Grams  ME, Levey AS,  et al. Multinational  assessment  of accuracy of equations  
for predicting risk  of kidney  failure:  A meta -analysis.  JAMA.  2016;315(2):164 -174.  
84. Waitman LR,  Phillips  IE, McCoy AB,  et al. Adopting real -time  surveillance  dashboards  as 
a component  of an enterprisewide  medication  safety  strategy.  Joint  Commission 
journal  on quality  and patient  safety  / Joint  Commission Resources.  Jul 2011;37(7):326 -
332.  
85. Kovesdy CP,  Coresh J,  Ballew  SH, et al. Past  Decline  Versus  Current  eGFR  and Subsequent  
ESRD  Risk.  J Am Soc Nephrol.  Dec 11 2015.  
86. Fox CH, Vest  BM, Kahn  LS, et al. Improving evidence -based primary  care  for chronic  
kidney  disease:  study  protocol  for a cluster  randomized control  trial for translating 
evidence  into practice  (TRANSLATE  CKD).  Implementation  science  : IS. 2013;8:88.  
87. Diamantidis  CJ, Powe  NR, Jaar BG, Greer  RC, Troll  MU,  Boulware  LE. Primary care -specialist  
collaboration in the  care  of patients  with chronic  kidney disease.  Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.  Feb 
2011;6(2):334 -343.  
88. http://dashboard.healthit.gov/quickstats/pages/FIG -Vendors -of-EHRs -to-Participating -
Professionals.php . Accessed  November  5, 2016.  
89. Epic.   http://www.epic.com/ . Accessed November  21, 2016.  
90. http://dashboard.healthit.gov/quickstats/quickstats.php Accessed November  6, 2016.  
91. Kosmisky DE, Alimi  OR, Fitzgerald CR,  et al. Student -pharmacist  based  medication  
 
  reconciliation  to identify drug  record discrepancies  and medication -related problems  in an 
outpatient  hemodialysis  unit.  Pharmacotherapy.  2012;32(10):E295 -E296.  
92. Levey AS,  Inker  LA, Matsushita  K, et al. GFR decline  as an end point  for clinical  trials  in CKD:  a 
scientific  workshop  sponsored by the  National  Kidney  Foundation and  the US Food and  Drug 
Administration.  Am J Kidney  Dis. Dec 2014;64(6):821 -835.  
93. Gibson OJ,  Balami  JS, Pope  GA, Tarassenko  L, Reckless  IP. "Stroke  Nav":  A wireless  data  
collection and review  system to support  stroke  care  delivery.  Comput  Methods  Programs  
Biomed.  Mar 6 2012.  
94. Marshall  S, Harrison J,  Flanagan  B. The teaching  of a structured tool improves  the clarity 
and content  of interprofessional  clinical  communication.  Quality  and Safety  in Health 
Care.  April  1, 2009 2009;18(2):137 -140.  
95. Randmaa  M, Mårtensson  G, Leo Swenne  C, Engström M. SBAR  improves  communication and 
safety  climate  and decreases  incident  reports  due to communication errors  in an 
anaesthetic  clinic: a prospective  intervention  study.  BMJ open.  January 1,  2014  2014;4(1).  
 
   
96. Panesar  RS, Albert  B, Messina  C, Parker  M. The Effect  of an Electronic  SBAR  
Communication Tool  on Documentation of Acute  Events  in the Pediatric  Intensive  
Care  Unit.  American Journal  of Medical  Quality.  January  1, 2016  2016;31(1):64 -68. 
97. Pope  BB, Rodzen  L, Spross  G. Raising the  SBAR:  how  better  communication improves  patient  
outcomes.  Nursing.  
Mar 2008;38(3):41 -43. 
98. Samal  L, Linder  JA, Bates  DW,  Wright  A. Electronic  problem  list documentation of chronic  
kidney  disease  and quality  of care.  BMC  Nephrol.  2014;15:70.  
99. Levey AS,  Stevens  LA, Schmid  CH, et al. A New  Equation to Estimate  Glomerular  
Filtration  Rate.  Annals  of internal  medicine.  2009;150(9):604 -612.  
100. Hemmelgarn BR,  Manns  BJ, Lloyd A,  et al. Relation between  kidney function,  proteinuria,  and 
adverse  outcomes.  
JAMA.  Feb 3 2010;303(5):423 -429.  
101. Hug BL,  Witkowski  DJ, Sox CM, et al. Occurrence  of adverse,  often  preventable,  events  in 
community hospitals  involving nephrotoxic  drugs  or those  excreted by the  kidney.  Kidney  
International.  12/1/ 2009;76(11):1192 - 1198.  
102. Collaborators  GBDRF,  Forouzanfar  MH,  Alexander  L, et al. Global,  regional,  and national  
comparative  risk assessment  of 79 behavioural,  environmental  and occupational,  and 
metabolic  risks  or clusters  of risks  in 188 countries,  1990 -2013: a systematic  analysis  for the 
Global  Burden of Disease  Study  2013. Lancet.  Sep 10 2015.  
103. Murray  DM.  Design and  analysis  of group -randomized trials. New York: Oxford University Press; 
1998.  
104. Ward BW,  Schiller  JS, Goodman  RA. Multiple  Chronic  Conditions  Among US  Adults:  A 2012 
Update.  Preventing  Chronic Disease.  2014;11:E62.  
105. Hootman JM, Helmick  CG, Brady  TJ. A public  health approach to  addressing arthritis  in 
older  adults:  the most  common cause  of disability.  American journal  of public health.  Mar 
2012;102(3):426 -433.  
106. Yoon PW,  Bastian B,  Anderson RN,  et al. Potentially  preventable  deaths  from the  five 
leading causes  of death -- United States,  2008 -2010.  MMWR.  Morbidity  and mortality  
weekly  report.  May 2 2014;63(17):369 -374.  
107. Wagner  EH, Austin BT,  Davis  C, Hindmarsh  M, Schaefer  J, Bonomi  A. Improving Chronic  
Illness  Care:  Translating  Evidence  Into Action.  Health Affairs.  November  1, 2001  
2001;20(6):64 -78. 
108. Wagner  EH, Bennett  SM, Austin BT,  Greene  SM, Schaefer  JK, Vonkorff  M. Finding common 
ground:  patient - centeredness  and evidence -based chronic  illness  care.  Journal  of 
alternative  and complementary  medicine.  2005;11  Suppl  1:S7 -15. 
  
 
  Statistical Analysis Plan  
Original Statistical Analysis Plan (from grant application)  
 
Clinical outcome (primary study outcome) : A ≥40% decline in eGFR or ESRD .(1) eGFR  
decline will be adjudicated based on the baseline creatinine and eGFR determined from the CKD -EPI 
equation  and measured routinely in clinical practice. (2) To limit ascertainment bias, we will also use a 
once yearly  decision support alert to remind study PCPs in both arms to order a BMP on study patients, 
if results are not  available in the last 6 months. ESRD will be defined as an eGFR < 10ml/min to account 
for patients with  markedly reduced baseline eGFR values (i.e., 16 -20ml/min).  To limit surveillance bias, 
in addition to the above alert, we will use 6 -month ascertainment windows and average  all values within 
each window. Additional analyses will compare changes in eGFR slope over time (using splines to 
account  for non -linearity). Researchers involved in outcome assessment will be strictly blinded.  
 
Process of care outcomes (secondary outcomes) : 1) HTN control. Outpatient, sitting BP values 
measured during each outpatient encounter and recorded in the  EHR. BP will be treated as a continuous 
variable. To minimize ascertainment bias, we will use 6 -month  ascertainment windows to determine an 
average BP for each patient for each 6 -mo period. Patients lacking an  outpatient value will have their 
last value carried forward. 2) Use of RAASi. Will be determined by active use of an ACEi or ARB based on 
the EHR m edication list at  each outpatient encounter. Analyses will compare cumulative person -time 
exposure during the study.  3) Medication safety. We will examine the rates of use of several high -risk 
medications  that can be  associated with adverse outcomes in progressive CKD. Medication exposure will 
be determined by presence  of the specified medication on the patient's EHR medication list at each 
outpatient encounter. Analyses will  compare cumulative person -time exposure during the study.  a) Use 
of NSAIDs: use ex amined for all study patients, b) Use of glyburide: use examined for all diabetic study  
patients, c) Use of metformin: use examined for diabetic study patients with eGFR<30, d) Use of 
gemfibrozil:  use examined for all study patients with eGFR<30.  
 
Sample Size: We base our sample size justifications on computational techniques that match our study 
design  and proposed analytical approach within the constraints of published methodologies (PASS 13 
Power Analysis  and Sample Size Software (2014). NCSS, LLC. Kaysville, Utah, USA). We selected our 
sample size to attain  adequate power to assess differences in the primary outcome using the design 
effect method for  time -to-event approach. (3) We assumed  two-sided tests at α = 0.05, an Intra -Class 
Correlation (ICC) of 0.01 (as recommended for health services  research when no preliminary data on ICC 
are available) (4), a cluster size of 19 patients per practice, and an  18-month enrollment period with an 
additional follow -up of 24 months after the accrual period. For an  individually randomized trial, a total 
sample size of 1,102 provides at least 80% power to detect a hazard ratio  of 0.64 (or a 0.05 difference in 
event proportions) assuming the control event proportion at 24 months is 0.15,  based on our 
preliminary data. Accounting for the clustered design and 20% attrition (e.g., patients leaving the  health 
system), the  required sample size is 1,653.  
For the secondary outcome (BP in patients with HTN and total person -time of medication exposures), 
this sample size achieves at least 80% power to detect a small effect size, standardized mean difference 
of at least  0.2. In the 96% of the cohort estimated to have a diagnosis of HTN, this is equivalent to 
detecting a mean SBP  difference of 3mmHg (based on preliminary data with SBP standard deviation [SD] 
= 15mmHg), a mean RAASi  use difference of ~78 person -years (modeled SD = 390 person -years, based 
on simul ation), a mean  medication use exposure difference of 72 person -years (modeled SD= 360 
person -years based on simulation).  
 
Preliminary Analyses : Preliminary analyses will focus on data checks for completeness and accuracy  and 
address any issues with data quality. Descriptive summaries will be examined overall and by 
intervention  group and time point. We will compare distributions of baseline characteristics for 
practices and patients  between randomized groups to assess the effectiveness of randomization. All 
 
  primary analyses for intervention  group comparisons will use an intention -to-treat approach and results 
will be reported using the CONSORT  extension to cluster RCTs. (5) We will adjust for statistical or clinical 
differences in secondary analyses.  
 
General Approach : We will use linear mixed models (LMM) or generalized LMM (GLMM) to account for  
clustering. These models will include random practice intercepts to account for correlation of 
observations from  patients within the same practice. For analysis involving repeated measurements, 
random patient intercepts  nested within practice effects will also be included. Unadjusted models will 
test a fixed intervention effect;  adjusted models may include stratification variables used in 
randomization, patient and practice characteristics  exhibiting imbalance between intervention groups, 
and variables associated with missingness.  
 
Primary clinical outcome (Aim 2: eGFR decline ≥40% or ESRD) : Our primary analysis will use discrete -
time  survival methods to examine the occurrence of the composite endpoint at 6 month intervals from 
baseline. At  each of these discrete time points, the average of all eGFR measurements within a +/ - 3 
month window will be  used to determine event occurrence. This accounts for random eGFR fluctuations 
and will minimize the impact  of potential ascertainment bias related to more frequent eGFR 
measurements in the intervention group. We will  use a GLMM for binary outcomes with complementary 
log-log link and piecewise -constant hazards. This model  will include random practice intercepts to 
account for practice -level clustering. This is analogous to a Cox  model with frailty for continuous -time 
survival data (i.e., a random effects survival analysis model). As a  secondary analysis, we will treat eGFR 
as a continuous variable and compare the rate of decline over time  between the intervention and 
control group using GLMM with an identity link under the normal family. This will  utilize all repeated 
outpatient eGFRs from each patient. Random patient intercepts nested within random  practice 
intercepts will be included to account for within patient and within practice correlations. The unadjusted  
model will include fixed effects for intervention, time, and treatment by time intera ction. We will test 
for significance of the treatment by time interaction to test intervention effects. As sensitivity analyses, 
we will a) fit  smoothing -spline mixed -effects models since eGFR trajectories may be nonlinear, and b) 
require 2  consecutive eGFR values below the 40% decline/ESRD threshold.   
 
Secondary process of care outcomes (Aim 1):  To assess the intervention effect on HTN control, we will  
compare mean SBP between intervention and control at each 6 -month time point using LMM with 
random  practice intercepts. At each of these time points, the average of all BP measurements within a 
+/- 3 month  window will be used to account for random fluctuations. As an alternative approach, we will 
analyze BP as a  binary outcome defined by achieving BP goal of <140/90 via GLMM with logit link and 
binomial fam ily. In  examining medications (e.g., RAASi), we will calculate the total number of medication 
days for each patient.  The average medication duration will be compared between intervention and 
control using LMM with random  practice effect.   
 
Exploratory analyses : Although this study is not powered to conduct subgroup analyses, we will  perform 
analyses of the secondary outcomes stratified by DM status, HTN with baseline BP (>140/90), and  RAASi 
use to explore whether heterogeneous intervention effects exist among these subgroups.  
Missing Data: The extent of missing data will be described. We will investigate the randomness of 
missing  data using available information on patient and provider characteristics to identify possible 
covert missing data  mechanisms. The analytical models used can handle data that are missing at 
random, but other strategies to  handle missing data (multiple imputation, selection models, pattern -
mixture models) will also be implemented.  In addition, adjusted LMM or GLMM will be used to account 
for variables ass ociated with missingness.  
 
Final Statistical Analysis Plan  
Clinical outcome (primary study outcome): A ≥40% decline in eGFR or ESRD. (1)  eGFR decline will be 
adjudicated based on the baseline creatinine and eGFR determined from the CKD -EPI creatinine (2021) 
equation. (6). To limit ascertainment bias, we will also use a once yearly  decision support alert to remind 
 
  study PCPs in both arms to order a BMP on study patients, if results are not available in the last 6 
months. ESRD will be defined as an eGFR < 10ml/min to account for patients with markedly reduced 
baseline eGFR values (i.e., 16 -20ml/min). To limit surveil lance bias, in addition to the above alert, we will 
use 6 -month ascertainment windows and average all values within each window.  (Table 1).  Researchers 
involved in outcome assessment will be strictly blinded.  
 
Process of care outcomes (secondary outcomes) : 1) HTN control. Outpatient, sitting BP values 
measured during each outpatient encounter and recorded in the  EHR. BP will be treated as a continuous 
variable. To minimize ascertainment bias, we will use 6 -month  ascertainment windows to determine an 
average BP for each patient for each 6 -mo period. 2) Use of RAASi. Will be determined by active use of 
an ACEi or ARB based on the EHR medication list at  each outpatient encounter. Analyses will compare 
cumulative per son-time exposure during the study.  3) Medication safety. We will examine the rates of 
use of several high -risk medications  that can be  associated with adverse outcomes in progressive CKD. 
Medication exposure will be determined by presence  of the specified medication on the patient's EHR 
medication list at each outpatient encounter. Analyses will  compare cumulative person -time exposure 
during the study.  a) Use of NSAIDs: use examined for all study patients, b) Use of glyburide: use 
examined for all diabetic  study  patients, c) Use of metformin: use examined for diabetic study patients 
with eGFR<30, d) Use of gemfibrozil:  use examined for all study patients with eGFR<30.  
 
Sample Size: We base our sample size justifications on computational techniques that match our study 
design  and proposed analytical approach within the constraints of published methodologies (PASS 13 
Power Analysis  and Sample Size Software (2014). NCSS, LLC. Kaysville, Utah, USA). We selected our 
sample size to attain  adequate power to assess differences in the primary outcome using the design 
effect method for  time -to-event approach. (3) We assumed  two-sided tests at α = 0.05, an Intra -Class 
Correlation (ICC) of 0.01 (as recommended for health services  research when no preliminary data on ICC 
are available) (4), a cluster size of 19 patients per practice, and an  18-month enrollment period with an 
additional follow -up of 24 months after the accrual period. For an  individually randomized trial, a total 
sample size of 1,102 provides at least 80% power to detect a hazard ratio  of 0.64 (or a 0.05 difference in 
event proportions) assuming the control event proportion at 24 months is 0.15,  based on our 
preliminary data. Accounting for the clustered design and 20% attrition (e.g., patients leaving the  health 
system), the  required sample size is 1,653.  
For the secondary outcome (BP in patients with HTN and total person -time of medication exposures), 
this sample size achieves at least 80% power to detect a small effect size, standardized mean difference 
of at least  0.2. In the 96% of the cohort estimated to have a diagnosis of HTN, this is equivalent to 
detecting a mean SBP  difference of 3mmHg (based on preliminary data with SBP standard deviation [SD] 
= 15mmHg), a mean RAASi  use difference of ~78 person -years (modeled SD = 390 person -years, based 
on simul ation), a mean  medication use exposure difference of 72 person -years (modeled SD= 360 
person -years based on simulation).  
 
Preliminary Analyses : Preliminary analyses will focus on data checks for completeness and accuracy  and 
address any issues with data quality. Descriptive summaries will be examined overall and by 
intervention  group and time point. We will compare distributions of baseline characteristics for 
practices and patients  between randomized groups to assess the effectiveness of randomization. All 
primary analyses for intervention  group comparisons will use an intention -to-treat approach and results 
will be reported using the CONSORT  extension to cluster RCTs. (5) We will adjust for statistical or clinical 
differences in secondary analyses.  
 
General Approach : We will use linear mixed models (LMM) or generalized LMM (GLMM) to account for  
clustering. These models will include random practice intercepts to account for correlation of 
observations from  patients within the same practice. For analysis involving repeated measurements, 
random patient intercepts  nested within practice effects will also be included. Unadjusted models will 
test a fixed intervention effect;  adjusted models will include stratification variable used in randomization  
(practice  size) and  patient  characteristics ( age, sex, race, baseline levels) . All statistical analyses will be  
performed in R using glmmTMB and lme4 packages to fit discrete -time survival models, GLMM, and 
 
  LMM and use the marginaleffects package to estimate adjusted average responses and contrasts.  
 
Primary clinical outcome (Aim 2: eGFR decline ≥40% or ESRD) : Our primary analysis will use  discrete -
time survival methods to examine the occurrence of the composite endpoint at 6 -month intervals from 
baseline. To determine progression at each of these discrete time points, the average of all eGFR 
measurements within a +/ - 3-month window will be  used in order to  account for random eGFR 
fluctuations and potential ascertainment bias. We will employ  generalized GLMM with complementary 
log-log link with random practice intercepts to account for practice -level clustering. This is analogous to 
a Cox model with frailty for continuous -time survival data (i.e., a random effects survival analysis 
model). The unadjusted m odel will include  fixed effects for intervention, and time. The functional form 
of time (categorical or continuous with restricted cubic splines) will be se lected based on the Akaike 
Information Criteria (AIC). Adjusted models will include pre -specified patient (age, sex, race, baseline 
eGFR) and practice variables (practice size). MMWD, being moved to hospice care, or mortality will be 
treated as competing e vents. Those that did not reach any endpoint will be censored at the end of study 
(July 31, 2022).  In secondary analysis, we will use  eGFR as a continuous variable and include  random 
patient intercepts nested within random practice intercepts. The unadjust ed model included fixed 
effects for intervention, time, and treatment by time interaction. We will compare the rate of eGFR 
decline over time  between groups.  As sensitivity analyses, we evaluated a) smoothing -spline mixed -
effects models since eGFR trajectories may be nonlinear, and b) requiring 2 consecutive eGFR values 
below the 40% decline/ESKD threshold.  
 
Secondary process of care outcomes (Aim 1): To assess the intervention effect on hypertension control, 
we will compare the mean outpatient systolic blood pressure (SBP) between intervention and control at 
each 6 -month time point using LMM with fixed effects for treatment, time, and treatment by time  
interaction. At each time point, the average of all BP measurements within a +/ - 3-month window will 
be used to account for random fluctuations. As an alternative approach, we will analyze BP as a binary 
outcome  defined by achieving BP goal of <140/90 mm Hg or <130/80 mm Hg via GLMM with logit link 
and binomial family. If linearity of time is reasonable, we will compare the slopes between intervention 
and control. These models will include random patient intercep ts nested within random practice 
intercepts and will be adjusted for pre -specified covariates (age, sex, race, and practice size). In 
examining  medication use, we will compare the average medication exposure days between the arms 
using LMM with random prac tice effect. For each medication class, the number of exposure days will be 
determined by counting the number of days from medication order start date to either the 
discontinuation date, survival endpoint date (progression, ESKD, death/hospice, MMWD) or st udy end 
date, whichever comes first. (refer to Table 1 for details). To account for potential overdispersion, we 
will also fit count models including Poisson, generalized Poisson, and negative binomial mixed models 
and select the final model based on minim um Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) or Bayesian Information 
Criteria (BIC). If count models provide better fit, we will report the rate of exposure days per year for 
each medication. We will adjust for baseline medication exposure days in addition to pre -specified 
covariates with the log of the number follow -up days as offset.  In post -hoc analyses, we will e valuate the 
effect of intervention on albuminuria minimization among patients with at least one urine -albumin -to-
creatinine ratio (UACR) measure during  the study period. Similar to the approach we used for examining 
changes in eGFR, we will fit a mixed effects model utilizing all available UACR for each patient adjusting 
for age, sex, race, baseline eGFR and practice size. We will also adjust for diabetes since we found that it 
is associated with having at least one UACR measure during the study period. Changes in UACR from 
baseline to 18 months (approximately the median follow -up time) were calculated by group, and 
between group differences were compared  using contrasts.  
 
Exploratory analyses: Although this study is not powered to conduct subgroup analyses, we will perform 
analyses stratified by age, sex, CKD stage, DM status, HTN with baseline BP (>140/90 mmHg or >130/80 
mmHg), and ACEi/ARB in albuminuric patients, or SGLT -2i use to explore whe ther heterogeneous 
intervention effects exist among these subgroups.  Subgroup by race will also be examined.  
 
Missing Data: The extent of missing data will be described. We will investigate the randomness of 
 
  missing  data using available information on patient and provider characteristics to identify possible 
covert missing data  mechanisms. The analytical models used can handle data that are missing at 
random, but other strategies to  handle missing data (multiple imputation, selection models, pattern -
mixture models) will also be implemented.  In addition, adjusted LMM or GLMM will be used to account 
for variables associated with missingness.  
 
Table 1. Determination of outcomes and covariates based from electronic health record (EHR)  
 Determination from EHR  
General principles  
Baseline time point (T0)  • Office or telemedicine encounters with the PCP after 
the date the patient was determined to be eligible 
will be extracted. The first PCP encounter within 1 
year of the date of eligibility determination will be 
used as the baseline time point (T0).  
Outpatient records  • Outpatient data will be extracted from the EHR. 
Laboratory results or vital records obtained within a 
span of 2 consecutive days will be excluded, as these 
are more likely to stem from inpatient encounters.   
Primary outcome  
Composite of ≥40% decline in 
eGFR from baseline or ESKD  • The CKD -EPI creatinine (2021) equation will be used 
to calculate eGFR . (6) 
• The baseline eGFR will be calculated by averaging the 
two most recent serum creatinine values, which 
should be at least 90 days apart, within a 3 -year look -
back period from the first PCP visit (T0). Improbable 
creatinine values (>10) will be excluded. If a  second 
creatinine measurement beyond 90 days is not 
available, we will progressively reduce the time 
requirement to at least 60 days and then at least 30 
days. In cases where a second creatinine value cannot 
be found, the single closest creatinine value t o T0 will 
be utilized.  
• eGFR at follow -up will be determined by averaging all 
eGFR measurements within +/ - 3 months from  the 
landmark time points (6, 12, 18, and 24 months).  
• Progression or ESKD flags will be generated at each 
follow -up time point. Progression will be identified if 
the averaged eGFR at the respective time point is ≥
40% of the baseline eGFR. ESKD will be recognized if 
the averaged eGFR at the corresponding time point is 
<10 ml/min, or if ICD -10 or CPT codes indicating ESKD 
or kidney transplant are detected within the time 
window of that specific time point.  
 
  • At each index time point, endpoints for MMWD and 
hospice/death will be determined based on ICD -10 
codes or the date of death within the specified time 
window .  
• Individuals who do not reach any endpoint will be 
considered censored at the conclusion of the study 
(July 31, 2022). Patients with no EHR records at the 
follow -up point will be presumed not to have reached 
any endpoint and will also be censored.  
Secondary outcomes  
eGFR (continuous)  • Each follow -up eGFR , calculated using the CKDI -EPI 
(2021) , will be used without averaging. Elapsed time 
from T0 will be determined based on the date the 
creatinine was drawn.  
Composite of confirmed 
progression or ESKD  • For the purpose of sensitivity analyses, we will 
consider progression confirmed if the subsequent 
eGFR measurement, taken at least a month after the 
initial progression, continues to show a decline of 
≥40% from the baseline value. The composite 
outcome is determin ed using a similar approach to 
the primary outcome.  
Blood pressure (continuous)  • Baseline BP will be determined by taking the most 
recent systolic (SBP) and diastolic BP (DBP) prior to 
T0. 
• BP at follow -up will be determined by averaging all BP 
measurements within +/ - 3 months of the landmark 
time points (6, 12, 18, and 24 months).  
• Implausible BP values (systolic BP<70 or >250; 
diastolic BP<10 or >180) will be excluded.  
Hypertension control  • Hypertension control will be defined as SBP<140 and 
DBP<90. Alternative definition with SBP<130 and 
DBP<80 will also be used to reflect more recent 
guidelines.  
• Continuous BP measurements described above will be 
used to determine hypertension control at baseline 
and at each of the landmark time points (6, 12, 18, 
and 24 months).  
Medication use and exposure 
days  • Medication list will be  extracted from EHR medication 
orders that were flagged as sent. Subcutaneous and 
oral medications were excluded.  
• Medications will be  classified into ACEi/ARB, NSAID, 
Glyburide, Metformin, and Gemfibrozil. Use of insulin, 
 
  SGLT2, GLP1, and moderate to high intensity statin 
will also be determined.  
• For each medication class, the count of exposure days 
will be determined by calculating the duration from 
the medication order start date up to the earlier of 
the discontinuation date, survival endpoint date 
(progression, ESKD, death/hospice, MMWD), or the  
study end date. In the case of chronic medications, if 
the discontinuation date is unknown, an expiration 
date of one year from the start date will be assumed. 
For NSAIDs, exposure days will be computed based on 
medication refills, as these are not consis tently 
prescribed for extended periods. In situations 
involving multiple medication episodes, the 
cumulative exposure days across all episodes will be 
utilized.  
• At baseline, a medication will be considered active if 
the start date was within 1 year prior to T0 and has 
not been discontinued by T0.  
Other covariates  
Urine albuminuria  • The most recent urine albumin and urine creatinine 
within 2-years prior to T0  will be used  to calculate 
urine albumin -to-creatinine ratio (UACR) . If this is 
missing, it will be estimated from protein 
quantification using conversion formulas for urine 
protein -creatinine ratio or urine dipstick protein. (7)  
Kidney failure risk equation 
(KFRE)  • At baseline, 5 -year risk and 2 -year risk of ESKD will be 
calculated from baseline eGFR and UACR using a 
validated 4 -variable KFRE. (8)  
• A 5 year KFRE ≥ 4% will be considered high -risk CKD.  
Laboratory values  • K+, hemoglobin, albumin, hemoglobin A1c  
• Baseline laboratory values will be determined by 
averaging the two most recent lab measurements 
within 1 year prior to T0.  
• Implausible lab values were excluded 
(hemoglobin≥27; hemoglobin A1c>20) or censored 
(albumin<1 censored at 1).  
Comorbid conditions  • Diabetes (type 1 and type 2) , hypertension , 
hyperlipidemia, coronary artery disease, 
cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease, 
congestive heart failure, arrhythmia, gout, chronic 
lung disease, chronic liver disease, mood disorder, 
malignancy , Charlson comorbidity score.  
 
  • Comorbid conditions will be identified based on ICD -9 
or ICD10 records, requiring at least 1 incidence in the 
problem list or 2 incidences from the diagnosis list.  
• Baseline values will be defined on the date of first PCP 
visit (T0).  
Sodiodemographics  • age, sex, race, ethnicity, marital status, median 
income at zip code of residence, area deprivation 
index, Rural -Urban category (RUCA score), BMI   
• Baseline values will be defined on the date of first PCP 
visit (T0).  
• For BMI, the most recent height and weight 
measurements prior to T0 will be used in the 
calculation.  
Care  utilization  • The number of visits to the PCP, cardiologist, ER, and 
hospitalizations at baseline will be determined using a 
1 year look -back period from T0.  
 
 
Summary of Major Revisions to the SAP  
 
The major changes in the SAP and their underlying reasoning are itemized below. These determinations 
were made prior to the initial disclosure of the study outcomes to the research team in March 2023.  
• Establishment of Baseline Date: The baseline date was set as the first primary care provider 
(PCP) visit within one year of the eligibility determination date. This choice was made to ensure 
a common starting point (time 0) for both study arms, which is crucial for conducting time -to-
event analyses.  
• eGFR Calculation: To align with current clinical practice, the CKD -EPI 2021 equation was adopted 
for eGFR calculations.  
• Competing Events: Events such as Medication Management Without Dialysis (MMWD), 
transition to hospice care, or mortality were considered as competing events as these endpoints 
may informatively censor the primary outcome (progression or ESKD). An explorati on of the 
intervention's impact on mortality and the composite of progression, ESKD, or mortality was 
planned.  
• Adjusted Models: Efficiency enhancement was pursued through the inclusion of pre -specified 
covariates in adjusted models: age, sex, race, and baseline eGFR. These factors were anticipated 
to be linked with the primary outcome.  
• Subgroup Analyses: Subgroups were formed based on age, sex, and CKD stage. The aim was to 
scrutinize whether treatment effects differed across diverse patient demographic and clinical 
characteristics.  
• SAP Layout and Detail Enhancement: The SAP's layout was restructured, and more 
comprehensive details about variable extraction from EHR were added.  
 
Further alterations were enacted following the unveiling of the initial study results to the research team 
in March 2023.  
 
 
  • Hypertension Control Definition: To remain consistent with contemporary guidelines, a blood 
pressure (BP) goal of <130/80 mm Hg (SBP/DBP) was integrated as an alternate hypertension 
control endpoint. This definition was also added to subgroup analyses rela ted to the primary 
outcome.  
• Medication Exposure Days Calculation: To limit missing data in medication exposure days 
calculation, chronic medications were assumed to be active for one year from the medication 
start date when discontinuation date  is unknown. For NSAIDs, medication refills  were used as 
these are not consistently prescribed for extended periods . 
• Model Considerations for Count Data: Considering the skewed nature of the data, models for 
count data were explored for the analysis of medication exposure days. The final model was 
determined based on AIC and BIC criteria.  
• Intervention effect on UACR: Following the suggestion of a reviewer, we examined the effect of 
the intervention on albuminuria minimization by analyzing the between group changes in UACR.  
• Race subgroup: To address a reviewer’s concern about representativeness of the population 
with respect to race, we performed subgroup analysis by race.  
 
 
References  
1. Levey AS, Inker LA, Matsushita K, Greene T, Willis K, Lewis E, et al. GFR decline as an end 
point for clinical trials in CKD: a scientific workshop sponsored by the National Kidney 
Foundation and the US Food and Drug Administration. Am J Kidney Dis Off J Natl Kidney Found. 
2014 Dec;64(6):821 –35.  
2. Levey AS, Stevens LA, Schmid CH, Zhang YL, Castro AF, Feldman HI, et al. A new equation 
to estimate glomerular filtration rate. Ann Intern Med. 2009 May 5;150(9):604 –12.  
3. Rutterford C, Copas A, Eldridge S. Methods for sample size determination in cluster 
randomized trials. Int J Epidemiol. 2015 Jun;44(3):1051 –67.  
4. Thompson DM, Fernald DH, Mold JW. Intraclass Correlation Coefficients Typical of 
Cluster -Randomized Studies: Estimates From the Robert Wood Johnson Prescription for Health 
Projects. Ann Fam Med. 2012 May;10(3):235 –40.  
5. Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D, CONSORT Group. CONSORT 2010 statement: updated 
guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. BMJ. 2010 Mar 23;340:c332.  
6. Inker LA, Eneanya ND, Coresh J, Tighiouart H, Wang D, Sang Y, et al. New Creatinine - and 
Cystatin C -Based Equations to Estimate GFR without Race. N Engl J Med. 2021 Nov 
4;385(19):1737 –49.  
7. Sumida K, Nadkarni GN, Grams ME, Sang Y, Ballew SH, Coresh J, et al. Conversion of 
urine protein -creatinine ratio or urine dipstick to urine albumin -creatinine ratio for use in CKD 
screening and prognosis: An individual participant -based meta -analysis. Ann  Intern Med. 2020 
Sep 15;173(6):426 –35.  
8. Tangri N, Stevens LA, Griffith J, Tighiouart H, Djurdjev O, Naimark D, et al. A Predictive 
Model for Progression of Chronic Kidney Disease to Kidney Failure. JAMA. 2011 Apr 
20;305(15):1553 –9.  
 
 
 
 