1 	 ClinicalTrials.gov title:  Intramural Needle Ablation for Ablation of Recurrent Ventricular Tachycardia  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Protocol Document Date: July 16, 2020   PI:  William G Stevenson, MD, Professor of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
2 	Sec.	812.25	Investigational	plan.		(a) Purpose		This	is	an	early	feasibility	study,	that	is	a	single-arm,	non-randomized	study	to	determine	the	feasibility	of	using	a	needle	ablation	catheter	to	ablate	recurrent	ventricular	arrhythmia	that	has	failed	antiarrhythmic	drug	therapy	and	standard	radiofrequency	(RF)	catheter	ablation.		Following	ablation	patients	will	be	monitored	for	6	months.	The	duration	of	the	study	is	two	years.	Introduction		Catheter	ablation	has	emerged	as	a	first	line	therapy	for	many	supraventricular	tachycardias.	Ablation	for	ventricular	tachycardias	has	remained	more	challenging.	In	the	largest	multicenter	observational	trial	of	irrigated	RF	ablation	for	VT	after	myocardial	infarction,	at	least	one	VT	remained	inducible	in	43%	of	patients;	47%	had	recurrent	VT	meeting	the	study	endpoint	during	the	initial	6	months	of	follow-up.1	The	one	year	mortality	was	18%	and	recurrence	of	VT	was	associated	with	a	3	fold	increase	in	mortality.	One	of	the	important	reasons	for	failure	of	ablation	is	inability	to	adequately	damage	the	arrhythmia	substrate.	Standard	catheter	ablation	approaches	the	ventricles	through	the	vasculature,	reaching	the	endocardial	surface.	Failure	of	RF	lesions	created	with	present	technology	to	reach	some	intramural	or	epicardial	circuits	contributes	to	ablation	failures.	A	percutaneous	epicardial	approach	allows	epicardial	ablation	for	some	patients,	but	is	not	possible	without	surgery	in	patients	who	have	pericardial	adhesions	from	prior	cardiac	surgery.	Once	epicardial	access	is	achieved,	ablation	is	sometimes	limited	by	the	presence	of	epicardial	fat,	or	overlying	coronary	arteries	that	protect	the	ablation	target.	Options	for	patients	who	fail	ablation	are	limited.	Transcoronary	ethanol	ablation	is	considered	at	some	centers,	but	limited	by	coronary	anatomy.	Intraoperative	surgical	ablation	can	be	considered	for	some	patients,	but	has	significant	morbidity,	and	technologies	for	operative	mapping	have	not	kept	up	with	percutaneous	techniques,	and	few	centers	maintain	a	surgical	ablation	program.		Use	of	left	ventricular	support	devices	is	problematic		in	patients	with	recurrent	VT	due	to	the	fall	in	venous	return	that	occurs	with	VT	in	the	absence	of	right	heart	support.	In	some	cases	the	only	option	is	cardiac	transplantation.	Application	of	radiofrequency	ablation	current	through	a	needle	inserted	into	the	myocardium	offers	the	potential	for	ablation	of	VTs	that	have	an	origin	deep	to	the	endocardium,	that	are	not	adequately	treated	by	other	means.	2	
3 	(b) Protocol		This	is	a	non-randomized	early	feasibility	study.	Patients	with	recurrent	sustained	or	incessant	ventricular	arrhythmia	who	have	failed	antiarrhythmic	drug	therapy	and	prior	catheter	ablation	will	be	offered	participation.	Ablation	will	be	performed	with	the	needle	ablation	catheter.	Patients	will	be	monitored	in	hospital	for	complications	and	during	6	months	follow-up.		Screening	Procedures	Patients	referred	to	Vanderbilt	University	Medical	Center	or	Brigham	and	Women’s	hospital	for	catheter	ablation	of	sustained	or	incessant	ventricular	arrhythmia	or	symptomatic	monomorphic	ventricular	tachycardia	and	who	have	failed	attempted	radiofrequency	catheter	ablation	will	be	offered	participation	in	this	study.		Informed	Consent	The	investigator	or	designated	member	of	the	research	team	will	approach	the	patient	to	obtain	written	informed	consent.	The	background	of	the	proposed	study	and	the	potential	benefits	and	risks	of	the	procedures	and	study	will	be	explained	to	the	subject.	The	patient	must	sign	the	consent	form	prior	to	enrollment.		Patients	who	are	consented	but	in	whom	the	needle	catheter	is	not	inserted,	and	consequently	are	not	treated	with	the	needle	ablation	catheter	will	be	exited	from	the	study	and	not	included	in	the	final	analysis.			Patient	Selection	–	Inclusion	Criteria	Candidates	for	the	study	must	meet	ALL	of	the	following	criteria:		1. Monomorphic	ventricular	tachycardia	or	incessant	ventricular	arrhythmia	(defined	as	>	20%	of	beats	due	to	ventricular	arrhythmia	including	unifocal	PVCs,	couplets,	Nonsustained	VT)	that	is	causing	a	decline	in	LV	ejection	fraction	to	less	than	50%	that	meets	the	following	criteria:	a. Ventricular	arrhythmia	is	recurrent	and	symptomatic	b. prior	antiarrhythmic	drug	therapy	has	failed	due	to	recurrent	ventricular	arrhythmia,	toxicity,	or	intolerance	2. Age	18	or	older	3. Left	ventricular	ejection	fraction	>	10%	as	estimated	by	echocardiography	or	contrast	ventriculography	within	the	previous	90	days.	4. Failed	prior	VT	or	PVC	ablation	due	to	spontaneous	recurrence	of	sustained	VT	or	frequent	clinical	PVCs	.	
4 	5. Able	and	willing	to	comply	with	all	pre-,	post-,	and	follow-up	testing	and	requirements.	6. Signed	Informed	Consent		Exclusion	Criteria		1. Patients	with	idiopathic	VT	defined	as	VT	that	originates	from	a	region	without	evidence	of	scar	detected	by	MRI	or	voltage	mapping	in	a	patient	without	other	evidence	of	heart	disease	that	is	not	causing	significant	depression	of	ventricular	function.	2. Definite	protruding	LV	ventricular	thrombus	on	pre-ablation	echocardiography	when	LV	ablation	is	required.	3. Thrombotic	myocardial	infarction	within	the	preceding	two	(2)	months.	4. Other	disease	process	that	is	likely	to	limit	survival	to	less	than	12	months.	5. Class	IV	heart	failure,	unless	heart	failure	is	due	to	frequent	or	incessant	VT.	6. Contraindication	to	heparin.	7. Allergy	to	radiographic	contrast	dye.	8. Severe	aortic	stenosis	9. Severe	mitral	regurgitation	with	a	flail	mitral	valve	leaflet.	10. Significant	congenital	anomaly	or	medical	problem	that	in	the	opinion	of	the	principal	investigator	would	preclude	enrollment	into	the	study.	11. Enrolled	in	another	investigational	study	evaluating	a	drug	or	device.	12. Unstable	angina	that	is	not	due	to	frequent	or	incessant	VT.	13. Women	who	are	pregnant.	14. Thrombocytopenia	(platelet	count	<	50,000)	or	coagulopathy.	15. Acute	non-cardiovascular	illness	or	systemic	infection.	16. Cardiogenic	shock	unless	it	is	due	to	incessant	VT	Study	Endpoints	Primary	Endpoints	a. Efficacy	endpoint	for	VT:	control	of	VT	as	defined	by:	freedom	from	hospitalization	for	recurrent	VT	during	the	6	months	following	ablation.	b. Safety	endpoint:	absence	of	all	serious	adverse	events	that	are	listed	below	that	are	potentially	device	related	and	occur	within	30	days	of	the	ablation	procedure	(see	below)	c. Efficacy	endpoint	for	ventricular	arrhythmia	causing	significant	ventricular	dysfunction:	decrease	in	ambient	ventricular	arrhythmia	to	<	5000	ventricular	beats	daily						
5 	Secondary	Endpoints	a.	Acute	Procedural	Success	defined	as	termination	of	at	least	one	clinical	or	presumptive	clinical	monomorphic	VT	by	RF	ablation	or	rendering	that	VT	no	longer	inducible.	It	is	recognized	that	this	secondary	efficacy	endpoint	will	not	be	assessed	in	all	patients	because	VT	induction	will	not	be	attempted	in	patients	in	whom,	in	the	judgment	of	the	investigator,	attempted	VT	induction	imposes	unwarranted	risk	of	hemodynamic	deterioration.	A	clinical	or	presumptive	clinical	VT	is	one	that	has	been	documented	to	occur	spontaneously,	or	is	within	20	ms	in	cycle	length	of	a	VT	that	has	been	documented	to	occur	spontaneously.			Definition	of	serious	adverse	events:		1. stroke	2. pericardial	effusion	causing	cardiac	tamponade	or	requiring	drainage.	3. myocardial	infarction	due	to	coronary	occlusion	4. Peripheral	arterial	thromboembolism	5. cardiogenic	shock	not	due	to	ventricular	tachycardia	6. vascular	bleeding	or	injury	requiring	transfusion	or	surgical	intervention	for	vascular	repair	or	to	stop	bleeding.	7. valve	injury:	new	moderate	or	severe	aortic	regurgitation,	new	mitral	valve	disruption	with	severe	mitral	regurgitation	8. Heart	failure	exacerbation	not	due	to	uncontrollable	ventricular	tachycardia,	defined	as	requiring	hospitalization	for	>	24	hours	9. Death	10. Sepsis	Other	adverse	events	(not	necessarily	device	related	or	serious)	that	will	be	collected	post	procedure:		1. syncope	2. chest	pain	3. new	hyperthyroidism	4. new	hypothyroidism	5. urinary	tract	infection	6. pneumonia	7. drug	allergic	reaction	Description	of	Treatments	Pre-Procedure	Assessments	
6 	The	following	pre-procedure	assessments	will	be	performed	for	a	subject	undergoing	treatment	prior	to	the	study	procedure:	- Baseline	medical	history	(including	arrhythmia	symptoms	and	hospitalizations)	- Laboratory	values	(creatinine,	CBC,	PT/PTT,	electrolytes,	and	pregnancy	test,	if	applicable)	- ICD	interrogation	(if	applicable)	- Transthoracic	echocardiogram	within	3	weeks	and	after	the	latest	non-study	catheter	ablation	procedure.	- If	the	subject	has	had	an	echo	within	90	days	to	evaluate	LV	ejection	fraction	and	valve	function,	Intra	cardiac	echocardiogram	(ICE)	would	be	an	option	to	evaluate	for	left	ventricular	thrombus	prior	to	deployment	of	any	catheter	in	the	left	ventricle.	- 	24-48	hour	holter	monitor	since	last	ablation	procedure	to	quantify	arrhythmia	burden	in	subjects	with	ventricular	arrhythmia/PVC	induced	cardiomyopathy			Electrophysiologic	Study		After	written	informed	consent	has	been	obtained	eligible	patients	will	be	brought	to	the	cardiac	electrophysiology	laboratory	in	the	post-absorptive	state.	Hemodynamic	monitoring	and	conscious	sedation	and	general	anesthesia	will	be	implemented	according	to	hospital	standards.	Urinary	bladder	catheter	may	be	placed	to	allow	for	monitoring	of	urine	output	and	fluid	balance,	especially	for	subjects	with	a	history	of	congestive	heart	failure,	or	who	are	hemodynamically	unstable,	or	have	an	ejection	fraction	of	<40%.	Subjects	will	have	continuous	monitoring	of	arterial	pressure	during	the	mapping	and	ablation	procedure.	Arterial	and	venous	hemostatic	sheaths	will	be	inserted,	though	which	one	or	more	diagnostic	electrode	catheters	will	be	introduced	at	the	discretion	of	the	investigator,	to	confirm	the	diagnosis	and	facilitate	mapping	as	per	usual	practice.	If	VT	is	not	incessant,	programmed	cardiac	stimulation	will	be	performed	to	confirm	the	diagnosis	of	ventricular	tachycardia.	Atrial	pacing	and	recording	may	be	performed	at	the	discretion	of	the	operator.		Programmed	ventricular	stimulation	for	assessing	VT	inducibility:		Ventricular	stimulation	will	be	performed	from	the	right	ventricular	apex	and/or	right	ventricular	outflow	tract	at	>	twice	threshold	stimulus	strength.	Programmed	stimulation	at	two	drive	cycle	lengths	(typically	600	and	400	ms)	with	up	to	triple	ventricular	extrastimuli	and	burst	ventricular	pacing	will	be	performed	from	two	right	ventricular	sites.	Burst	pacing	to	a	cycle	length	of	250	ms	or	loss	of	1:1	capture	can	be	performed.	Left	ventricular	pacing	may	be	used	if	RV	pacing	is	ineffective.	The	endpoint	of	stimulation	is	
7 	the	final	stimulus	reaching	the	refractory	period,	or	a	coupling	interval	of	180	ms	or	initiation	of	sustained	ventricular	tachycardia	or	ventricular	fibrillation.	The	endpoint	of	the	procedure	is	absence	of	inducible	sustained	monomorphic	VTs	that	were	targeted	for	ablation	or	absence	of	adequate	target	sites.		Initial	Mapping	to	Identify	the	Target	Region		Once	the	diagnosis	of	VT	has	been	confirmed	an	intracardiac	ultrasound	catheter	will	be	inserted	for	monitoring	ventricular	function,	catheter	location,	and	pericardial	effusion.	Initial	ventricular	mapping	will	then	be	performed	with	a	standard	(non-needle)	ablation	(Biosense	Webster,	Inc	Thermocool,	Navistar,	EZ	Steer,	or	Surround	Flow	catheters)	catheter	for	identification	of	the	likely	VT	origin	and	to	create	a	voltage	map	of	the	region	to	define	potential	scar	using	the	CARTO	electroanatomic	mapping	system	(Biosense	Webster,	Inc).	The	likely	origin	of	VT	will	be	defined	based	on	any	of	activation:	sequence	mapping,	entrainment	mapping,	or	pace-mapping	as	per	usual	laboratory	practice.		For	left	ventricular	mapping	(and	ablation),	systemic	anticoagulation	with	heparin	should	be	administered	with	activated	clotting	time	(ACT)	checked	throughout	the	procedure	at	the	investigators	discretion	or	per	customary	policy	to	maintain	ACTs	of	250-350	seconds.	For	left	ventricular	access	transeptal	or	retrograde	aortic	approaches	can	be	used.		If	long	sheaths	are	used	to	access	the	LV	(e.g.	for	transeptal	approach)	these	will	be	continuously	irrigated	with	heparinized	saline.		Mapping	and	Ablation	with	the	Needle	Catheter		1. The	needle	length	will	be	set	to	7	to	8	mm	initially.	If	this	is	subsequently	ineffective	and			there	has	been	no	evidence	of	myocardial	perforation	with	that	needle	length,	the	length	can	be	increased	to	10	mm	for	septal	or	LV	applications.		2. Set	the	RF	generator	to	temperature	control	mode.		3. Start	continuous	irrigation	with	room	temperature,	heparinized	saline	(1	u	heparin/1ml	Saline)	at	a	flow	rate	of	1	ml/min	during	mapping.		With	a	second	irrigation	pump	start	continuous	irrigation	with	heparinized	saline	to	the	central	lumen	of	the	catheter	that	irrigates	the	gap	between	the	needle	at	a	flow	rate	of	1/ml/min.	throughout	the	procedure.	
8 	4. At	the	potential	target	site	the	needle	is	inserted	into	the	tissue.	The	catheter	stopcock	is	set	to	manual	injection,	and	1	mL	of	50%	heparinized	saline	(1000	u/L)	and	isovue	contrast	is	injected	through	the	needle.	The	stopcock	is	set	to	the	Cool	flow	pump	and	the	pump	irrigation	flow	rate	is	set	to	2	ml/min.	After	30-	60	seconds	RF	application	can	be	initiated.	The	2	ml/min	flow	rate	is	continued	until	2-5	seconds	after	the	termination	of	RF	energy	application.		5. Prior	to	RF	initiation	the	position	of	the	needle	in	the	tissue	is	assessed	from	evidence	of	capture	during	pacing	on	the	needle	and	/	or	appearance	of	the	contrast	in	the	tissue.	If	the	site	is	felt	to	be	potentially	related	to	the	arrhythmia	and	there	is	no	evidence	that	the	needle	has	reached	the	pericardial	space	then	ablation	can	be	performed.	Otherwise,	the	needle	will	be	retracted	back	into	the	catheter	and	catheter	repositioned	for	additional	mapping	or	better	deployment.		The	length	of	the	needle	is	set	to	be	shorter	than	myocardial	thickness	as	assessed	from	ICE	to	reduce	the	chance	that	the	needle	can	reach	the	pericardial	space.	Evidence	that	the	needle	has	potentially	reached	the	pericardial	space	includes	staining	of	the	pericardial	space	by	injected	contrast,	or	development	of	a	new	pericardial	effusion	or	increase	in	previous	pericardial	effusion	assessed	from	ultrasound	imaging.	If	this	occurs	the	needle	the	needle	will	be	retracted	into	the	catheter.	Intracardiac	ultrasound	monitoring	of	the	pericardial	space	will	be	used	to	detect	early	formation	of	an	increasing	pericardial	effusion.	If	an	increasing	pericardial	effusion	is	observed,	heparin	will	be	reversed	and	all	catheters	removed	from	the	left	heart.	Preparations	for	pericardiocentesis	will	be	implemented	and	performed	if	the	effusion	continues	to	increase	or	there	is	any	evidence	of	impending	pericardial	tamponade	by	intracardiac	echocardiography,	or	hemodynamic	deterioration.		If	contrast	appears	in	the	pericardium,	the	needle	will	be	withdrawn	and	close	monitoring	for	pericardial	effusion	continued	with	intracardiac	ultrasound	for	the	duration	of	the	procedure.	An	increasing	pericardial	effusion	will	be	indication	to	reverse	anticoagulation	and	remove	all	catheters	from	the	left	heart.		6.		The	initial	ablation	temperature	should	be	60C	and	maximum	power	35	Watts.	If	needed,	power	can	be	increased	(to	maximum	50	W).	The	duration	of	each	RF	application	should	target	is	60	seconds	and	will	not	exceed	120	seconds.	RF	ablation	can	be	interrupted	early	if	there	is	evidence	of	inefficacy,	such	as	failure	of	VT	to	terminate	after	10	to	30	seconds	of	RF	when	ablation	is	done	during	VT,	or	if	temperature	does	not	increase	as	expected,	indicating	possible	inadequate	needle	deployment,	or	if	dislodgement	of	the	needle	is	suspected	by	the	operator.	
9 	7.		If,	for	any	ablation,	the	impedance	rises	5-	10	ohms	or	more	during	RF	application,	the	RF	application	should	be	terminated	immediately.	The	catheter	should	be	removed	and	any	visible	coagulum	cleaned,	if	present.	The	flow	of	irrigation	throughout	the	catheter	should	be	verified	before	re-inserting	the	catheter.		8.		Ablation	during	sinus	rhythm	-	When	RF	energy	is	delivered	during	sinus	rhythm,	power	levels	up	to	50	Watts	will	be	delivered	for	each	RF	application	for	up	to	2	minutes,	at	the	Investigator’s	discretion.		9.		While	it	is	recommended	that	continuous	RF	application	should	not	exceed	120	seconds,	the	Investigator	has	the	option	of	terminating	RF	current	delivery	at	any	time	and	at	any	given	power	level	as	dictated	by	the	patient’s	clinical	condition.	For	every	application	of	RF	energy,	the	maximum	power,	maximum	temperature,	maximum	impedance	and	duration	of	burn	will	be	monitored	continuously	and	recorded	either	on	optical	disc	or	paper.		10.	After	RF	termination	electrograms	are	recorded	from	the	needle	and	pacing	may	be	performed	through	the	needle	after	ablation	to	assess	capture	if	desired.	The	needle	is	then	retracted	back	into	the	catheter	and	the	irrigation	rate	reduced	to	1	ml/minute.		11.	Verification	of	the	effects	of	the	ablation	procedure	on	inducible	VTs	using	programmed	electrical	stimulation	may	be	performed	based	on	the	subject’s	hemodynamic	stability,	at	the	Investigator’s	discretion.	Using	the	same	stimulation	protocol	as	prior	to	ablation	(above).	If	VT	remains	inducible,	the	mapping	procedure	is	repeated	at	adjacent	sites.		Once	an	RF	lesion	terminates	or	prevents	VT,	two	additional	lesions	can	be	applied	at	closely	adjacent	sites	if	desired,	provided	that	intracardiac	ultrasound	does	not	show	evidence	of	new	pericardial	effusion.		If	defibrillation	is	required	to	terminate	VT	while	the	needle	is	deployed,	the	needle	will	be	retracted	before	the	defibrillator	is	discharged.		12.	At	the	end	of	the	procedure	ultrasound	images	will	be	assessed	for	the	presence	of	pericardial	effusion.		Procedure	endpoints:		1. All	targeted	VTs	are	no	longer	inducible	or	the	targeted	ventricular	arrhythmia	is	no	longer	present	
10 	2. Ablation	has	been	performed	at	the	target	region,	and	programmed	stimulation	to	assess	inducibility	is	not	desired	because	of	concern	that	it	may	precipitate	hemodynamic	deterioration	3. There	are	no	target	sites	identifiable			Repeat	Ablation	Procedures	Repeat	ablation	procedures	will	be	at	the	discretion	of	the	investigator	and	will	follow	the	standard	of	care.		5.6 Post-Procedure	Assessments	After	the	procedure,	management	of	the	arterial	sheath	and	heparin	usage	will	be	at	the	discretion	of	the	investigator.	Prior	to	discharge,	the	investigator	will	assess	and	record	the	subject’s	clinical	status	and	any	complications,	and	complete	the	following	assessments:	a. CK-MB	and	Cardiac	Troponin	will	be	measured	4	to	8	hours	and	approximately	24	hours	after	the	ablation	procedure.	b. Post-procedure	ICD	interrogation	c. Post-procedure	echocardiogram	will	be	obtained	prior	to	hospital	discharge		Drug	Management	Drug	management	during	the	follow-up	period	will	be	at	the	discretion	of	the	investigator	and	treating	physicians.	Anticoagulation	with	aspirin,	warfarin,	or	direct	acting	oral	anticoagulation	is	required	for	a	minimum	of	three	(3)	months.	Warfarin	or	direct	acting	oral	anticoagulation	is	recommended	for	subjects	who	receive	left	ventricular	RF	ablation	lesions	over	large	areas	such	that	the	lesions	are	separated	by	more	than	3	cm.		Patients	will	be	observed	in	hospital	for	a	minimum	of	24	hours	after	the	procedure	with	continuous	ECG	telemetry	monitoring.			Follow-up	Visits	Follow-up	visits	will	be	performed	at	Brigham	and	Women’s	Hospital,	unless	travel	imposes	a	hardship	on	the	patient,	in	which	case	the	patient’s	cardiologist/electrophysiologist	can	perform	the	follow-up	visit	and	send	the	required	information	to	the	investigator.	Each	follow-up	visit	will	include	assessment	of	adverse	events,	antiarrhythmic	drug	use,	and	anticoagulant	use.		Follow-up	visit	one	will	be	between	3	and	6	weeks	after	ablation	with:	• ICD	interrogation	(if	the	patient	has	an	ICD)	
11 	• Medical	history	since	the	last	visit	• For	patients	with	ventricular	arrhythmia	that	is	not	VT	that	was	producing	depressed	ventricular	function,	a	holter	will	be	obtained	between	3	and	6	weeks	after	ablation.		Follow-up	visit	two	will	be	between	5	and	7	months	post	ablation.	This	visit	includes	the	following:	• Transthoracic	echocardiogram	• ICD	interrogation	• Medical	history	since	the	last	visit				(c) Risk	Analysis:		As	discussed	in	the	introduction,	failed	ablation	is	associated	with	risks	of	recurrent	VT,	ICD	shocks	in	patients	with	ICDs,	and	mortality	associated	with	recurrent	VT.1		Possible	increased	risks	of	this	investigation	include	the	following:	Increased	risk	of	perforation	or	tamponade	Increased	risk	of	thromboembolism	Increased	risk	of	myocardial	dysfunction	Increased	risk	of	injury	to	cardiovascular	structures	or	pericardiac	structures	Increased	risk	of	proarrhythmia	Risk	of	contrast	allergy		The	following	precautions	and	procedures	are	taken	to	minimize	risks:		Increased	risk	of	perforation	or	tamponade:	Catheter	mapping	and	ablation	have	a	risk	of	cardiac	perforation	and	tamponade	that	is	approximately	1%.3	Inserting	the	needle	itself	into	the	myocardium	is	anticipated	to	increase	the	risk	of	perforation.	It	is	expected	that	the	small	size	of	this	needle	(27	gauge)	will	be	associated	with	a	minimal	risk	of	significant	pericardial	bleeding,	based	on	animal	studies.	Larger	needles	are	commonly	inserted	into	the	myocardium	during	cardiac	surgery	for	“de-airing”	the	ventricle	and	do	not	produce	significant	bleeding.	The	larger	and	deeper	lesions	produced	by	needle	ablation	compared	to	standard	ablation,	however,	are	anticipated	to	have	an	increased	risk	of	cardiac	perforation	and	tamponade.	Precautions	include:	assessment	of	needle	position	in	the	myocardium	based	on	contrast	injection.	If	the	tip	of	the	needle	reaches	the	pericardial	space,	it	is	anticipated	that	this	will	be	recognized	by	contrast	injection	(the	contrast	dispersing	in	the	pericardium),	and	the	needle	will	be	retracted	without	application	of	RF	
12 	energy.	Intracardiac	ultrasound	will	be	employed	to	monitor	for	pericardial	effusion	throughout	the	procedure	so	that	this	complication	can	be	promptly	detected	and	treated.	The	investigators	are	experienced	in	recognition	and	treatment	of	pericardial	effusion	and	tamponade.	The	procedures	are	performed	at	Brigham	and	Women’s	hospital	with	immediate	availability	of	cardiac	surgery	if	required	for	persistent	or	uncontrollable	bleeding.		Increased	risk	of	thromboembolism:	Catheter	mapping	and	ablation	has	a	known	risk	of	thromboembolism	that	is	less	than	1%.1,	4-6	Thrombus	on	the	needle	catheter	has	not	been	observed	during	animal	studies.	None	of	the	initial	3	patients	experienced	an	embolic	event.	The	needle	will	be	irrigated	with	heparinized	saline.	For	left	heart	mapping,	systemic	anticoagulation	with	heparin	will	be	employed.	RF	application	will	be	promptly	terminated	if	impedance	increases,	which	can	be	an	indication	of	coagulum	formation	with	standard	RF	ablation.		Increased	risk	of	myocardial	dysfunction:	Greater	ablation	lesion	size	is	anticipated	to	have	greater	risk	of	myocardial	damage.	Ablation	targets	will	be	restricted	to	regions	that	are	felt	to	cause	VT,	and	which	in	the	majority	of	patients	are	areas	of	scar	that	do	not	appear	to	contribute	to	ventricular	function.	Gaining	control	of	the	arrhythmia	in	these	patients	is	felt	to	out-weigh	the	risk	of	myocardial	damage.	Hemodynamic	monitoring	will	be	continuous	during	the	procedure.		Increased	risk	of	damage	to	cardiovascular	structures:	valves,	blood	vessels:	This	is	also	a	known	risk	with	standard	catheter	ablation.	The	needle	will	be	kept	retracted	within	the	shaft	of	the	catheter	until	deployment	into	the	targeted	myocardium.	If	defibrillation	is	required	to	terminate	VT	while	the	needle	is	deployed,	the	needle	will	be	retracted	before	the	defibrillator	is	discharged.	Intracardiac	ultrasound	and	fluoroscopy	will	be	used	to	monitor	catheter	position.	The	investigators	are	experienced	with	catheter	mapping.		Increased	risk	of	proarrhythmia:	Larger	ablation	lesions	could	theoretically	increase	the	risk	of	aggravating	arrhythmias.	Cardiac	rhythm	will	be	continuously	monitored	during	the	procedure	and	until	hospital	discharge.	It	is	anticipated	that	the	majority	of	patients	with	have	implanted	defibrillators.	Pre-clinical	studies	have	demonstrated	that	needle	ablation	lesions	are	homogeneous	with	sharp	border	zones;	features	characteristic	of	radiofrequency	ablation	lesions	which	likely	contributes	to	their	very	low	proarrhythmic	potential.2,	7		Risk	of	contrast	allergy:	Patients	with	a	documented	contrast	allergy	are	excluded	from	participation.	
13 		In	addition	to	these	risks,	there	are	risks	inherent	in	the	electrophysiologic	procedure	that	are	not	specific	to	the	needle	ablation.	These	include:	Other	potential	complications	which	may	result	from	catheter	insertion	and	manipulation	as	part	of	the	prerequisite	electrophysiology	study	and	mapping	procedure	include:	Allergic	reaction	to	the	local	anesthetic,	sedatives,	heparin,	protamine,	or	other	agents	administered	during	the	procedure	(risk	<1%).	Arterial	or	venous	injury,	including	arterial	dissection,	thrombosis,	occlusion	or	hemorrhage	at	the	catheter	insertion	sites	or	at	other	sites	along	the	vessels.	This	may	produce	hemorrhage,	hematoma	or	ischemic	injury	to	an	extremity	or	major	organ.	Hemorrhage	as	a	result	of	anticoagulation	(risk	<0.5%)	which	may	require	transfusion.	Infection,	either	at	the	catheter	insertion	site	or	systemically,	including	endocarditis	and	septic	emboli	(risk	<0.5%).	This	risk	can	be	minimized	by	using	standard	aseptic	technique	and,	when	indicated,	by	the	use	of	antibiotic	agents.		Risks/Discomforts	that	may	be	increased	with	needle	ablation	Severity	Expected	Frequency:	common	=	10	–	20	per	100	less	common	=	2	–	9	per	100;	rare	=	1	per	100	Damage	to	other	parts	of	the	normal	electrical	conduction	system.	mild	to	moderate	less	common	Trigger	an	irregular	fast	heart	rhythm	mild	common	Injury	to	the	heart	muscle	with	bleeding	into	the	pericardium	(heart	sac)	surrounding	the	heart.	severe	less	common	Injury	to	the	heart	valves	which	are	located	between	each	of	the	four	heart	chambers.	mild	to	severe	rare	Development	of	blood	clots	and	the	movement	of	blood	clots,	during	or	after	the	procedure.	You	will	be	given	an	anti	blood-clotting	medication	to	help	stop	the	blood	clots	from	developing.	moderate	to	severe	less	common	chest	pain	mild	common	
14 	
 The	following	risks	exist	for	all	ablation	procedures:	  reactions	to	medication	and/or	drugs	that	are	given	during	anesthesia	(drugs	used	to	help	a	person	relax	and	eliminate	pain	during	a	procedure),	mild	to	severe	less	common	blood	loss	mild	to	severe	less	common	fever	mild	less	common	infection	mild	to	severe	less	common	myocardial	infarction	severe	less	common	stroke	moderate	to	severe	less	common	air	embolism	mild	to	severe	less	common	pericarditis	(pain	from	inflammation	around	the	heart)	mild	less	common	bleeding	into	the	groin	area	causing	pain	and	black	and	blue	area	mild	to	moderate	common	damage	to	an	artery	in	the	groin	that	may	require	surgery	(known	in	medical	terms	as	a	pseudoaneurysm	or	AV	fistula)	moderate	less	common	collapsed	lung	severe	rare	bleeding	or	fluid	accumulation	into	the	lung	or	space	around	the	lung	severe	rare	congestive	heart	failure	moderate	less	common	low	blood	pressure	mild	to	severe	less	common	fainting	mild	to	moderate	less	common	damage	or	movement	of	a	defibrillator	wire	that	may	require	surgery	moderate	less	common	shocks	from	an	implanted	defibrillator	mild	less	common	shortness	of	breath	mild	less	common	injury	to	the	nerve	to	the	diaphragm	that	can	cause	shortness	of	breath	moderate	less	common	blood	loss	causing	a	low	blood	count	mild	to	moderate	less	common	skin	burns	from	defibrillator	patches	or	the	ablation	catheter	grounding	pad	mild	to	moderate	less	common	blood	in	the	urine	and	pain	from	the	mild	less	common	
15 	
 urinary	catheter	insertion	  rarely,	death	severe	less	common	  (d) Device	Description	(see	Biosense	Webster,	Inc	Master	Access	File	#	MAF-1893)	Authorization	letter	of	June	17,	2016	from	Biosense	Webster	is	attached.	The	Biosense	Webster	Needle	Ablation	Diagnostic/Ablation	Catheter	is	an	8	F,	steerable,	multi-electrode,	irrigated,	luminal	catheter	with	three	distinct	electrodes:	a	needle	electrode	for	RF	delivery	plus	a	4	mm	tip	electrode	and	ring	electrode	which	are	used	for	mapping,	recording	and	stimulation	purposes.	The	catheter	has	a	unidirectional	deflectable	tip	designed	to	facilitate	electrophysiological	mapping	of	the	ventricles	of	the	heart	and	to	transmit	radiofrequency	(RF)	current	to	the	catheter	needle	electrode	for	ablation	purposes.	For	ablation,	the	catheter	is	used	in	conjunction	with	an	RF	generator	and	a	dispersive	pad	(indifferent	electrode).	The	catheter	has	a	usuable	length	of	115	mm.		The	catheter	has	a	high-torque	shaft	with	a	unidirectional	deflectable	tip	section	containing	a	single	platinum	ring	electrode.	The	tip	and	the	ring	electrodes	are	made	of	platinum-	iridium.	The	needle	electrode	is	made	of	Nitinol.	The	needle	is	used	to	deliver	RF	current	from	the	RF	generator	to	the	desired	ablation	site.		The	catheter	incorporates	one	thermocouple	temperature	sensor	located	within	the	distal	tip	of	the	needle.	The	RF	generator	monitors	the	temperature	of	the	needle	thermocouple	allowing	it	to	use	temperature	feedback	to	limit	power	delivery.		The	needle	electrode	is	controlled	at	the	proximal	end	of	the	catheter.	Pushing	the	needle	thumbknob	into	the	injector	barrel	extends	the	needle	electrode.	A	locking	mechanism	holds	the	thumbknob	in	place	once	the	thumbknob	has	been	pushed	down,	if	the	thumbknob	is	not	locked	and	force	is	removed	a	spring	automatically	retracts	the	needle.	The	needle	extends	a	maximum	of	10	mm	from	the	distal	portion	of	the	tip	electrode.	This	length	of	the	extended	needle	can	be	reduced	by	rotating	the	thumbknob	clockwise.		At	the	proximal	end	of	the	catheter,	a	fluid	input	port	with	a	standard	Luer	fitting	terminates	from	the	open	lumen.	This	port	serves	to	permit	the	injection	of	heparinized	normal	saline	to	irrigate	the	needle	electrode.	During	ablation,	heparinized	normal	saline	is	passed	through	the	needle	to	irrigate	and	cool	the	ablation	sites	as	well	as	the	needle	electrode.	An	irrigation	pump	must	be	used	to	control	the	saline	irrigation.	The	port	also	allows	the	injection	of	Isovue	or	a	similar	contrast	agent	to	verify	under	fluoroscopy	the	placement	of	the	needle	within	the	myocardium.	An	additional	input	port	allows	irrigation	
16 	of	the	gap	surrounding	the	needle.	The	gap	is	irrigated	with	a	second	pump	to	prevent	blood	retrograde	flow	inside	the	catheter	shaft.		Tip	deflection	is	controlled	at	the	proximal	end	by	a	handpiece	in	which	a	piston	slides;	a	deflection	thumbknob	on	the	piston	controls	piston	travel.	When	the	deflection	thumbknob	is	pushed	forward,	the	tip	is	deflected	(curved).	When	the	deflection	thumbknob	is	pulled	back,	the	tip	straightens.	The	shape	of	the	curve	depends	on	the	deflectable	tip	length.	The	high-torque	shaft	also	allows	the	plane	of	the	curved	tip	to	be	rotated	to	facilitate	accurate	positioning	of	the	catheter	tip	at	the	desired	site.		The	catheter	features	single	location	sensor	mounted	within	the	tip	of	the	catheter	which	transmit	location	information	to	the	CARTO®	3	EP	Navigation	System.	An	appropriate	reference	device	is	required	for	location	reference	position	purposes.	The	catheter	interfaces	with	an	RF	Generator	via	a	Catheter	Interface	Cable.		During	mapping	the	needle	is	retracted	within	the	catheter	and	irrigated	at	a	rate	of	1	ml/minute	using	a	continuous	flow	pump	(Cool	flow	,	Biosense	Webster,	Inc).	After	extension	of	the	needle	into	the	myocardium	a	hand	injection	of	1	ml	of	a	50:50	saline	contrast	mixture	is	applied	to	stain	the	tissue	demonstrating	needle	deployment	in	the	tissue,	followed	by	continuous	irrigation	at	2	ml/minute	during	RF	current	application.	The	gap	is	irrigated	continuously	with	a	second	irrigation	pump	at	a	rate	of	1ml/min.		Patient	Population	and	Justification	of	Risk		Patients	will	be	adults	of	either	gender	with	symptomatic	ventricular	tachycardia	that	is	either	immediately	life-threatening	or	causing	ventricular	dysfunction	and	that	have	failed	antiarrhythmic	drug	therapy	and	prior	catheter	ablation	procedure.	In	this	setting,	failure	to	achieve	control	of	the	arrhythmia	can	result	in	eventual	death	or	need	for	cardiac	replacement	therapy	(e.g.	transplantation).1,	5,	6	This	patient	population	has	a	significant	mortality.1,	5	In	one	multicenter	study	of	post-infarction	patients	who	had	failed	antiarrhythmic	drug	therapy	and	were	undergoing	catheter	ablation	the	one	year	mortality	was	18%,	and	recurrent	VT,	indicating	failure	of	ablation,	was	associated	with	a	3	fold	greater	risk	of	mortality.1	Those	who	are	able	to	survive	with	recurrent	ventricular	arrhythmias	are	often	subject	to	recurrent	episodes	producing	syncope	or	eliciting	ICD	shocks	have	reduced	quality	of	life	and	significant	psychological	dysfunction.4	8	If	needle	ablation	achieves	arrhythmia	control,	these	individuals	could	experience	substantial	improvement	in	quality	of	life	and	survival.		This	is	an	early	feasibility	trial	in	50	patients.	The	endpoints	focus	on	identifying	device	related	complications	and	showing	the	possibility	of	efficacy.	Because	this	patient	
17 	population	has	frequent	arrhythmias	a	successful	ablation	that	controls	the	arrhythmia	could	be	dramatically	successful,	as	has	been	observed	in	the	small	number	of	patients	evaluated	at	QEII	Health	Sciences	Centre	in	Halifax,	Nova	Scotia	to	date.	It	is	anticipated	that	the	major	complications	will	be	procedure	related	and	evident	during	or	shortly	after	the	procedure,	prior	to	hospital	discharge.		Data	Analysis		The	populations	baseline	characteristics,	and	procedure	characteristics	will	be	described	with	the	use	of	proportions,	medians	and	inter-quartile	ranges	as	appropriate.	The	primary	endpoint	will	be	assessed	with	a	Kaplan	Meier	survival	curve.	The	safety	endpoint	will	be	reported	as	the	proportion	of	patients	experiencing	any	adverse	event,	and	each	adverse	event.	The	secondary	endpoint	will	be	reported	as	the	proportion	of	patients	meeting	that	endpoint.			(e) Monitoring	procedures.		Early	Feasibility	of	Intramural	Needle	Ablation	for	Ablation	of	Recurrent	Ventricular	Tachycardia	that	has	Failed	Conventional	Radiofrequency	Ablation		Applicability  This	monitoring	plan	addresses	study-specific	issues	for	monitoring	of	“Early	Feasibility	of	Intramural	Needle	Ablation	for	Ablation	of	Recurrent	Ventricular	Tachycardia	that	has	Failed	Conventional	Radiofrequency	Ablation”.		Study Design  A	prospective,	non-randomized	study	will	be	conducted.	A	total	of	130	subjects	with	recurrent	drug/ablation	refractory	sustained	monomorphic	ventricular	arrhythmia	who	are	>	18	years	old	will	be	enrolled	in	this	trial.		Investigator and Clinical Site  This	study	is	a	physician	sponsored	IDE	with	two	approved	sites.									
18 	William	G.	Stevenson,	M.D.	is	the	Sponsor-	Investigator	Vanderbilt	University	Medical	Center	Medical	Center	East	1215	21st	Ave.	S.	Nashville,	TN	37232-8802			Usha	Tedrow,	M.D.	is	the	site	Primary	Investigator	Brigham	and	Women’s	Hospital	75	Francis	Street	Boston,	MA	02115			Study Staff  The	study	site	will	have	dedicated	study	coordinators.	If	the	study	coordinators	are	unable	to	attend	EP	cases,	then	the	investigator	performing	the	case	is	responsible	for	study	data.		Device Storage and Accountability  The	site	is	responsible	for	managing	investigational	device	inventory	in	accordance	with	institution	policy	and	federal	regulations.	Investigational	devices	will	be	kept	in	a	designated	locked	cabinet.	Devices	will	be	logged	in	upon	arrival	and	will	be	logged	out	when	used	during	a	study	procedure	or	expired.	Expired	catheters	will	be	sent	back	to	the	manufacturer	and	when	applicable	a	replacement	device	will	be	ordered.	Following	use,	investigational	devices	must	be	handled	according	to	manufacturer’s	specifications.	Device	records	will	be	kept	in	the	regulatory	binder	under	the	catheter	accountability	section.	Study	coordinator	will	review	catheter	accountability	records	to	verify	appropriate	documentation	of	investigational	devices.		If	a	discrepancy	is	noted	during	monitoring,	immediate	corrective	action	will	be	taken.	The	discrepancy	and	corrective	action	will	be	documented	in	study	records	and	reviewed	with	the	study	staff.		Routine Data Monitoring  Monitoring	will	be	performed	by	Dr.	Bruce	Koplan,	M.D.	and	Dr.	Melanie	Maytin,	M.D.,	every	6	months	or	more	often	if	subject	enrollment	is	high.							
19 	During	monitoring,	the	Monitor	will	ensure:		Regulatory	and	protocol	adherence	by	investigators	and	study	staff.	Accurate	CRF	documentation	by	comparing	CRF	entries	to	patient	medical	records.	Capture	of	AE	data	by	reviewing	patient	medical	records	and	follow-up	records.	Reporting	of	AE’s	to	the	IRB,	manufacturer,	and	FDA	as	per	study	plan	and	regulations.	Each	case	of	cardiac	tamponade	or	cardiogenic	shock	will	be	reviewed	to	make	a	determination	of	whether	these	events	warrant	stopping	the	study.	The	study	will	be	suspended	for	interim	analysis	in	the	event	of	3	serious	adverse	events	related	to	the	procedure	such	as	need	for	surgical	treatment	for	tamponade	or	procedure-	related	death.		Adverse	events	will	be	adjudicated	by	the	study	Medical	Monitors.		Monitoring Reports  Monitoring	reports	will	be	completed	after	every	monitoring	visit.	Any	deficiencies	and	corrective	actions	will	be	documented	and	discussed	with	investigators	and	study	staff.	Checklist	and	worksheets	will	be	filed	in	Monitoring	section	of	regulatory	binder.		(f) Labeling.	Copies	of	all	labeling	for	the	device.	N/A		(g) Consent	materials.	see	attached	Consent	Form		(h) IRB	information.			Vanderbilt	University	Medical	Center	Vanderbilt	Institutional	Review	Board	Human	Research	Protection	Program	3319	West	End	Ave.,	Suite	600	Nashville,	TN	37203	Tel:	615-322-2918		Julie	Ozier,	MHL,	CIP	-	Director	Human	Research	Protection	Program		3319	West	End	Ave.,	Suite	600	Nashville,	TN	37203	Tel:	615-322-2918							
20 	Brigham	and	Women’s	Hospital	Partners	Human	Research	Committee	399	Revolution	Drive	Somerville,	MA	02145		Tel:	617-424-4100	Fax:	617-424-4199		Libby	Hohmann,	M.D.-	Director	and	Chair	Partners	Human	Research	Committee	399	Revolution	Drive	Somerville,	MA	02145	Tel:	617-424-4127				Sec.	812.27	Report	of	prior	investigations.		(a)General.	Previous	Experience	with	the	Device	Animal	Investigations	The	investigations	below	were	performed	in	the	cardiac	experimental	laboratory	at	Brigham	and	Women’s	hospital	and	were	not	conducted	under	GLP	regulations,	as	they	were	either	exploratory	or	conducted	with	a	limited	budget.		Initial	in-vivo	without	Irrigation	The	initial	pilot	study	was	performed	in	3	swine	(32	–	58	kg).2	Ventricular	lesions	were	created	by	extending	the	needle	to	its	full	depth	and	applying	RF	current	for	two	minutes,	
21 	with	manual	titration	of	energy	to	a	needle	temperature	at	or	slightly	below	90	degrees	C.	These	were	compared	to	control	lesions	created	with	a	4	mm	solid	tip	electrode.	Irrigation	was	not	applied	to	either	catheter.	A	total	of	14	needle	ablations	were	created,	one	could	not	be	definitely	located.	Data	from	the	remaining	13	showed	lesions	that	extended	the	full	depth	of	the	needle,	but	narrow,	(only	a	mean	of	4.4+0.1	mm	wide),	compared	to	control	lesions	which	had	a	mean	diameter	of	8.5+2	mm	(figure).	Mean	power	for	needle	ablation	was	only	2	Watts	to	achieve	90	degrees	C.(Stevenson	WG,	Sapp	J,	Annual	and	Final	Report	to	CIMIT	September	2002).	Animals	were	sacrificed	immediately	after	completion	of	the	lesion	creation	protocol.	One	animal	had	cardiac	tamponade	after	perforation	of	the	thin	LV	apex	with	the	needle	catheter.	A	second	had	a	hemopericardium	without	tamponade	at	examination.	Conclusions	were	that	deep	lesions	could	be	created,	with	efficient	energy	application,	but	lesion	diameter	was	likely	insufficient.																		from	ref	Sapp	et	al	PACE	2004;27:594-	599.2		In-vitro	with	Saline	Irrigation	The	second	set	of	investigations	was	performed	to	determine	if	saline	irrigation	of	the	needle	during	RF	application	would	increase	lesions	size.	In-	vitro	experiments	were	performed	in	bovine	myocardium	in	a	saline	bath.(Stevenson	WG,	Sapp	J,	Annual	and	Final	Report	to	CIMIT	September	2002).	Saline	irrigation	was	applied	during	RF	application	and	a	range	of	powers	from	4	to	12	Watts,	and	duration	of	applications	studied.	Tissue	temperature	was	recorded	from	an	intramural	sensor	2	mm	from	the	electrode.	Tissue	temperature	increased	with	power	delivery	and	occasionally	exceeded	100	degrees	C	at	12	Watts	(figure		).	Lesion	diameter	often	exceeded	10	mm	(figure)	and	plateaued	after	90	to	120	seconds	of	the	application	(figure	).	Steam	pops	occurred	at	12	Watts,	but	none	were	observed	at	10	Watts	and	below,	suggesting	that	the	risk	of	pops	can	be	controlled	with	limiting	power	delivery.	

22 			
		
		In-Vivo	Studies	with	Irrigated	Needle		In-vivo	studies	were	then	performed	in	6	goats	(37	–	43	kg)	and	11	swine	(32	–	90	kg).7	The	LV	was	accessed	by	the	retrograde	aortic	approach.	A	total	of	46	needle	ablation	lesions	were	created.	The	needle	was	extended	5	–	7	mm.	Saline	solution	(0.9%)	was	infused	at	1	mL/min	for	60	seconds	and	was	continued	during	the	RF	application	of	120	seconds.	RF	power	was	10	–	14	W	for	9	lesions	(low	power	group)	and	titrated	to	30	to	40	Watts	for	37	lesions	(high	power	group).	After	needle	RF	ablation,	an	endocardial	surface	lesion	was	created	to	facilitate	locating	the	needle	from	endocardial	inspection	by	applying	RF	to	the	dome	electrode	without	irrigation	(titrated	to	a	10	ohm	impedance	fall	for	120	seconds).	The	needle/endocardial	lesions	were	compared	to	18	standard	RF	lesions	created	with	a	4	mm	solid	electrode	with	RF	power	titrated	to	a	temperature	of	65	degrees	C	for	120	seconds;	and	a	second	set	of	17	control	lesions	created	with	a	saline	irrigated	RF	ablation	catheter	(Thermocool)	with	power	limited	to	50	Watts,	temperature	limited	to	<	50	degrees	C,	flow	at	30	ml/min	and	duration	60	to	120	seconds.	

23 	High	power	needle	ablation	lesions	were	substantially	larger	than	standard	irrigated	lesions	(figure).	Low	power	irrigated	lesions	had	similar	depth	to	standard	irrigated	lesions,	but	depth	was	limited	due	to	maximal	extension	of	the	needle	and	thickness	of	the	ventricle.	On	gross	examination,	the	lesions	were	typical	of	RF	lesions,	showing	a	region	of	central	pallor	and	a	hemorrhagic	border	(figure).	Grossly	there	was	no	surface	charring	or	thrombus.				

24 		
		Figure:	Serial	1	mm	sections	Serial	1-mm	sections	through	a	high-power	infusion-needle	ablation	lesion	are	shown.	The	sections	are	shown	serially	from	the	endocardium	(“Endo”)	to	the	epicardium	(“Epi”)	with	depths	from	the	endocardium	marked.	The	reference	bar	in	the	first	panel	is	10	mm	in	length.	The	uncut	(“Gross”)	endocardial	surface	is	seen	in	the	final	panel,	and	is	smooth	and	free	of	char.	The	cross-sectional	area	of	the	lesion	increases	over	the	first	four	sections,	and	reaches	a	stable	diameter	which	persists	throughout	the	depth	of	the	lesion.	The	lesion	has	an	inner	area	of	pallor	and	desiccation,	surrounded	by	a	narrow	hemorrhagic	rim,	which	is	sharply	demarcated	from	surrounding	myocardium.	The	lesion	tapers	and	ends	within	1	mm	of	the	epicardium,	at	a	depth	of	12	mm	from	the	endocardium.	From	Sapp	et	al	J	Cardiovas	Electrophys	2006;17:657	–	661.7	

25 				In-vivo	Irrigated	Needle	with	temperature	monitoring	from	the	dome	and	needle	and	thrombus	assessment		These	studies	limited	power	according	to	temperature	at	the	needle	or	dome	electrodes.	The	needle	was	inserted	5	–	9	mm.	RF	power	was	increased	manually	with	temperature	limited	to	60	–	65	degrees	C	(dome	or	needle)	or	55	degrees	C.	Irrigation	was	initiated	at	2	ml/min	after	needle	extension	and	after	30	sec	at	that	flow	rate	RF	was	initiated	and	continued	for	90	seconds.		A	protocol	to	assess	for	thrombus	formation	at	the	needle	was	also	employed.	A	short	sheath	was	inserted	into	the	carotid	artery,	though	which	a	long	sheath	was	inserted	into	the	LV.	The	catheter	was	inserted	into	the	LV	through	the	long	sheath	After	each	needle	lesion,	the	catheter	was	withdrawn	into	the	long	sheath	without	retracting	the	needle,	and	the	long	sheath	and	catheter	removed	and	inspected	for	thrombus	char.	Animals	were	systemically	anticoagulated	with	heparin.		Control	lesions	(10	in	3	animals)	were	created	with	a	Thermocool	irrigated	catheter	(40	or	50	Watts)	for	60	seconds,	irrigated	at	30ml/min.		In	5	goats	10	needle	lesions	were	created	at	60	–	65	degrees	C	(mean	power	19.8	+	5.1	Watts)	and	11	needle	lesions	were	created	at	55	degrees	C	(mean	power	16.8	+	4.9	Watts)	(figure	).	Lesion	depth	was	similar	to	the	previous	studies.	Lesion	size	was	greater	with	the	60	–	65	degree	C	lesions.	No	char	or	thrombus	was	observed	on	the	catheter	or	aspirated	from	the	sheath	after	removal.	
26 	
	
								In-vivo	Irrigated	Needle	with	50:50	contrast	saline	mix	to	assess	needle	position	and	perforation		In	11	goats	(35	–	47	Kg)	ventricular	lesions	were	created	during	infusion	of	saline	contrast	mixture.	The	needle	was	inserted	5	–	9	mm.	The	contrast	:	saline	mixture	was	Infused	for	5	to	60	seconds	then	RF	was	applied	for	total	infusion	duration	of	2	minutes	with	fluoroscopic	imaging.	After	the	last	lesion,	animals	were	sacrificed	and	the	pericardium	opened	for	inspection.	Lesions	were	sectioned.	(Zei,	PC	et	al.	Contrast-enhanced	fluoroscopic	real-time	localization	of	intramural	infusion	and	RF	ablation	with	a	novel	infusion	needle	catheter.	HRS	abstract	2007)		50	total	needle	deployments	with	extension	of	the	needle	outside	the	catheter	in	an	attempt	to	drive	it	into	the	myocardium	were	performed.	In	3	needle	extensions	no	visible	contrast	seen	intramurally	suggesting	intracavitary	deployment.	In	3	needle	extensions	pericardial	staining	suggesting	perforation	and	the	needle	was	withdrawn.	In	two,	the	catheter	was	intentionally	wedged	in	the	LV	apex	and	the	needle	extended	for	intentional	perforation	to	assess	recognition	of	perforation.	No	animal	

27 	developed	hemodynamic	compromise.	At	Post-mortem	there	was	a	small	amount	of	blood	tinged	pericardial	fluid	in	all	3	of	these	animals			In	44	needle	deployments	well	defined	tissue	staining	was	observed	(figure	).	At	post	mortem	43	lesions	identified	and	had	a	mean	lesion	volume	1.45+0.82	cm2.	There	were	no	needle	dislodgements	during	infusion	or	RF	application.	During	continued	observation,	contrast	was	observed	to	gradually	dissipate	with	time,	as	is	observed	when	tissue	contrast	staining	is	used	to	guide	transeptal	puncture	or	pericardial	puncture	procedures.		In	summary,	the	use	of	a	contrast-saline	mixture	for	initial	irrigation	through	the	needle	allowed	prompt	recognition	of	deployment	in	the	myocardium,	penetration	into	the	pericardial	space,	or	failure	to	enter	the	myocardium.				

28 	Human	Experience	Human	Experience	The	needle	ablation	catheter	has	been	used	with	permission	of	the	Queen	Elizabeth	II	Health	Sciences	Center	in	8	patients	in	Halifax	Nova	Scotia,	Canada.	Primary	physician	operators	were	John	L.	Sapp,	MD	and	William	G.	Stevenson,	MD.	All	patients	had	failed	prior	antiarrhythmic	drug	therapy	and	catheter	ablation	attempts.	All	had	recurrent	ventricular	arrhythmias	that	had	failed	antiarrhythmic	drug	therapy	and	prior	RF	ablation	attempts.	For	our	8	patients	overall,	4	are	free	of	ventricular	tachycardia.	Patients	1,	3,	5	and	6	had	recurrent	arrhythmias.	Patient	5	has	had	one	episode	of	spontaneously	terminating	slow	VT,	which	is	a	marked	improvement	compared	to	prior	to	ablation.	There	was	one	major	procedure	related	complication,	which	was	cardiac	tamponade	in	patient	3.	This	patient’s	course	was	complicated	by	renal	failure,	from	which	he	recovered,	but	he	subsequently	died	from	heart	failure	(see	below).	In	addition	one	patient	(patient	5)	had	heart	block	due	to	ablation	in	the	basal	septum,	but	this	was	expected	due	to	the	location	of	the	VT	at	that	region.			In	patient	8,	ablation	near	the	epicardial	LV	pacing	lead	rendered	this	lead	no	longer	able	to	capture,	as	expected	from	RF	ablation	in	that	area.	There	has	been	no	procedure	related	mortality	and	no	embolic	events.	In	the	last	three	patients	a	small	amount	of	coagulum	has	been	noted	at	the	hole	in	the	dome	electrode	after	catheter	removal.	We	feel	this	is	indicative	of	heating	of	the	dome	electrode	as	it	lies	on	the	tissue.	The	coagulum	has	been	adherent	to	the	dome	electrode,	and	tiny	(figures	below);	smaller	than	that	often	encountered	with	the	use	of	8	mm	electrodes	and	occasionally	even	on	irrigated	electrodes,	in	our	experience.	Use	of	longer	RF	applications	may	be	a	factor	in	these	patients.	Details	of	all	the	8	cases	are	provided	below.		Patient	1:		13	year-old	male	Incessant	VT;	70%	of	beats	EF	25%;	LVEDD	79	mm	4	prior	ablation	procedures,	including	endo/epi	last	procedure;	refractory	to	flecainide,	amiodarone,	beta-blockers,	sotalol	Broad	area	of	early	activation	inferoapical	region	General	anesthetic:	suppressed	ectopy	Combination	of	pace	mapping	and	activation	mapping	Suppressed	with	RF	PVC2	recurred	upon	withdrawal	of	GA	Suppressed	with	reintubation/sedation,	limiting	mapping	largely	to	pace-mapping	during	the	later	part	of	the	case.	
29 	Further	RF	delivered	A	total	of	12	RF	applications	(3-less	than	10	seconds	when	they	had	no	effect	on	ectopy)	No	adverse	effects		Procedure	details:	At	baseline	there	was	ventricular	bigeminy.	The	PVCs	had	RB	morphology,	axis	-60	and	slight	variations	in	the	notching.	Activation	mapping	of	the	LV	revealed	early	activation	surrounding	the	apical	inferolateral	papillary	muscle	as	visualized	by	ICE.	The	site	of	earliest	activation	appeared	to	be	just	distal	(apical)	to	the	papillary	muscle.	The	earliest	site	of	activation	was	identified,	and	the	needle	was	extended.	The	earliest	site	was	10	msec	preceding	the	QRS	on	at	least	one	PVC	morphology,	and	had	a	QS	morphology	on	the	unipolar	electrogram.	RF	was	delivered	at	3	sites	that	appeared	promising,	but	PVCs	persisted,	although	the	initial	morphology	changed.	Another	site	just	distal	to	the	initial	sites	with	angulation	of	the	tip	towards	the	base	had	early	activation.	Extending	the	needle	into	the	myocardium	at	this	site	revealed	a	site	with	local	activation	preceding	the	QRS	by	20	msec.	RF	was	delivered	here	and	abolished	all	ectopy.		No	further	ectopics	were	seen	during	a	further	60	minutes	of	testing	and	observation,	including	with	administration	of	epinephrine	10	and	20	mcg,	and	later	after	esmolol	to	slow	the	heart	rate.	Rapid	burst	pacing	failed	to	induce	any	ectopy.		After	the	sheaths	were	removed	and	hemostasis	achieved,	the	patient	went	into	bigeminy	with	a	different	morphology	PVC,	more	positive	in	V1.	This	had	not	been	seen	previously.		Vascular	access	was	re-obtained,	this	time	with	a	Mullins	sheath	rather	than	the	steerable	Agilis	sheath,	and	with	an	8	Fr	arterial	sheath.	Retrograde	mapping	was	attempted,	but	electrograms	appeared	to	have	greater	noise.	Therefore	we	reverted	to	a	transeptal	approach	and	were	able	to	re-approach	the	culprit	area.	Ectopics	were	extremely	rare	and	so	a	combination	of	pace	mapping	and	very	limited	activation	mapping	was	performed.	A	slightly	more	apical	portion	of	the	same	area	was	identified	as	the	best	target,	and	2	needle	ablation	lesions	were	delivered.	No	ectopy	was	observed	at	all	thereafter.	After	reversal	of	heparinization,	sheaths	were	removed	and	the	patient	was	extubated.	He	was	transported	to	PICU	in	stable	condition.	There	were	no	complications	and	only	very	rare	ventricular	ectopics	observed	overnight.		The	patient	recovered	from	the	procedure	normally	without	evidence	of	complications.		Holter	24	hr	recording	after	procedure	showed	3%	PVCs.	On	day	4	after	the	procedure	occasional	PVCs	emerged.	The	patient	returned	home	to	the	Netherlands.	By	5	weeks	later	periods	of	ventricular	bigeminy,	and	occasional	couplets	were	present.	
30 		Needle	Catheter	Performance		When	mapping	was	reinitiated	a	new	catheter	was	inserted.	With	injection	of	saline,	saline	was	observed	to	leak	from	the	Redel	connector	of	this	second	catheter.	A	third	catheter	was	removed	from	the	packaging	and	after	the	cables	were	plugged	in	it	was	found	that	the	Hypertronics	connector	wasn’t	securely	glued	into	the	handle	as	the	PCB	came	out.	A	fourth	catheter	was	then	used	without	difficulty.					
	
Earliest Site: Intramyocardial 			Tip Bipole Needle Bipole 
31 			
	Ablation	Summary	Target	Arrhythmia	Result	Time	 Temp	Power	Imp	  60	Avg	58	14	120	#	1	  Max	63	24	185	Comments:	        60	Avg	57	23	106	#	2	  Max	61	32	137	Comments:	        12	Avg	50	19	109	#	3	  Max	62	35	122	Comments:	        7	Avg	51	14	108	#	4	  Max	60	22	114	Comments:	        3	Avg	48	9	111	#	5	  Max	53	18	113	Comments:	        67	Avg	58	7	111	#	6	  Max	60	12	125	Comments:	        15	Avg	53	14	119	#	7	  Max	63	27	130	Comments:	        6	Avg	54	11	122	#	8	  Max	62	17	125	

32 	
	Comments:	    61	Avg	57	16	94	#	9	Max	61	21	116	Comments:	    60	Avg	57	19	95	#	10	Max	62	26	111	Comments:	    60	Avg	58	17	92	#	11	Max	60	24	147	Comments:	    60	Avg	58	13	92	#	12	Max	60	17	123			Patient	2	6/15/2011		This	41	year-old	woman	had	a	history	of	VT	and	cardiomyopathy	diagnosed	in	2006,	attributed	to	prior	myocarditis,	based	on	previous	MR	imaging	that	showed	subendocardial	scar.	An	ICD	had	been	placed	in	2007.	In	early	June	2011	she	presented	with	incessant	VT	that	could	not	be	interrupted	with	medications.	An	endocardial	ablation	procedure	was	attempted	in	Winnipeg,	Canada.	Earliest	endocardial	activation	was	identified	at	the	basal	lateral	LV,	but	irrigated	RF	lesions	had	no	effect	on	tachycardia.	Congestive	heart	failure	developed	and	LV	ejection	fraction	was	16%.	She	was	transferred	to	Halifax	for	attempted	needle	catheter	ablation.		Intracardiac	ultrasound	showed	a	minimal	pericardial	effusion	at	baseline.	The	VT	had	axis	-150,	RBBB	morphology,	transition	in	V6	and	Rs	in	V5.		Transeptal	puncture	was	performed	and	the	ablation	catheter	inserted	through	a	large	curve	steerable	sheath	to	the	left	ventricle.	Activation	mapping	revealed	earliest	endocardial	activation	at	the	posterobasal	LV	where	an	early	far-field	signal	was	also	seen.	The	needle	was	deployed	into	the	myocardium	at	9	sites	to	determine	the	earliest	intramyocardial	site.	At	the	10th	site	an	early	pre-potential	was	identified	within	the	area	that	was	earliest	endocardially.	A	1	CC	bolus	of	50:50	contrast/hepaarinized	saline	was	injected	at	this	site	to	verify	that	we	were	intramyocardial.	There	was	good	contrast	tissue	staining,	consistent	with	intramyocardial	deployment.	We	then	pre-injected	at	2	mL/min	heparinized	saline,	and	delivered	temperature-controlled	RF	for	60	seconds	at	60	degrees,	limited	to	40W.	The	VT	terminated	within	5	seconds.	RF	was	then	restarted	and	continued	for	another	26	seconds.	The	needle	was	withdrawn	into	the	catheter.	Programmed	ventricular	stimulation	with	single	and	double	ventricular	extrastimuli	were	delivered,	with	no	reinduction	of	VT.	We	
33 	did	not	appreciate	a	change	in	the	tissue	and	there	was	no	change	in	the	minimal	pericardial	effusion	that	had	been	present	at	baseline.		The	needle	was	reinserted	to	the	same	area	and	a	second	lesion	was	delivered.	Programmed	ventricular	stimulation	was	then	repeated	with	1	to	3	ventricular	extra-	stimulation	from	two	intracardiac	sites	at	two	drive	cycle	lengths	and	only	brief	polymorphic	VT	was	inducible.		There	were	no	procedure	complications	and	the	patient	recovered	well.		As	of	July	29,	2011	there	was	no	recurrence	of	VT	as	detected	by	ICD.	LV	function	had	improved.		Needle	Catheter	Performance		There	were	no	problems	with	needle	catheter	performance.	

34 																																			Ablation	Summary	Target	Arrhythmia	Result	Time	 Temp	Power	Imp	  60	Avg	58	20	130	#	1	  Max	62	29	171	Comments:	        26	Avg	54	11	125	#	2	  Max	60	18	150	Comments:	        45	Avg	58	11	115	#	3	  Max	60	14	125	

35 		Patient	3	7/27/2011		68	year-old	man	with	ischemic	cardiomyopathy,	heart	failure,	prior	myocardial	infarction,	left	anterior	descending	angioplasty,	LV	ejection	fraction	of	30%,	and	VT	with	prior	ICD	placement.	Endocardial	RF	ablation	for	VT	had	been	performed	in	2008.	In	July	2011	he	presented	with	recurrent	episodes	of	VT,	heart	failure	and	ICD	therapies	despite	amiodarone	and	mexiletine	therapy.	Another	endocardial	RF	ablation	was	attempted	and	failed	to	control	VT	and	he	was	transferred	for	attempted	needle	ablation.		Procedure	Four	morphologies	of	VT	were	induced	with	isoproterenol	and	programmed	stimulation	with	double	extrastimuli.	Initial	mapping	in	the	RV	suggested	that	the	VT	was	in	the	LV.	Despite	the	use	of	intracardiac	echocardiography	transeptal	puncture	was	performed	with	difficultly	due	to	atrial	enlargement,	a	large	coronary	sinus	and	posteriorly	positioned	fossa	ovalis.	A	steerable	mapping	catheter	was	advanced	to	the	LV	through	a	large	curve	steerable	sheath.	Earliest	sites	for	VT1	and	VT2	were	in	the	region	of	the	left	ventricular	outflow	tract	immediately	below	the	aortic	valve	on	the	septal	side.	Catheter	stability	at	that	region	was	difficult.	We	then	exchanged	the	mapping	catheter	for	the	needle	ablation	catheter.	The	needle	was	deployed	into	the	myocardium	in	this	basal	septal	superior	LV	region.	Repeated	deployments	were	performed,	as	insertion	into	the	myocardium	was	difficult	with	the	sheath	coming	downward	through	the	mitral	valve	and	then	directed	the	catheter	superiorly.	However,	sites	with	intramural	activation	time	that	preceded	the	QRS	onset	were	identified	and	RF	ablation	lesions	applied.	Initial	lesions	rendered	VT1	and	VT2	no	longer	inducible.	With	isoproterenol	stimulation	and	programmed	stimulation,	VT3	and	VT	4	remained	inducible,	but	were	less	reliably	provokable.		Additional	needle	deployments	were	performed	from	the	LV	by	both	a	transeptal	and	retrograde	aortic	approach.	Additional	deployment	from	the	right	ventricle	was	also	performed	in	the	basal	septal	area.	A	total	of	48	RF	applications	were	performed	ranging	from	14	to	120	seconds	in	duration.	No	VT	was	inducible	with	programmed	stimulation	during	isoproterenol	infusion.		Complete	heart	block	occurred	during	ablation,	as	anticipated	from	ablation	in	the	basal	septum	in	the	region	of	the	AV	conduction	system,	but	it	was	felt	that	heart	block	with	control	of	VT	would	be	preferable	to	continued	VT.		A	small	pericardial	effusion	was	noted	on	intracardiac	imaging	during	the	later	portion	of	the	procedure,	but	was	stable	with	repeated	imaging.	Approximately	one	hour	later	the	patient	developed	hypotension	and	transthoracic	echocardiography	showed	a	large	pericardial	effusion,	which	was	evacuated	with	a	subxiphoid	pericardial	puncture.	Over	the	
36 	next	5	days	he	had	acute	exacerbation	of	(in	addition	to	his	chronic	renal	insufficiency)	renal	failure,	which	subsequently	resolved.	He	was	discharged	home.	Approximately	3	months	later	he	was	readmitted	to	hospital	for	heart	failure.	During	follow-up	he	had	no	further	spontaneous	episodes	of	VT,	but	heart	failure	continued	to	be	a	problem.	He	wished	no	further	therapy,	his	ICD	was	inactivated,	he	was	made	“do	not	resuscitate”	and	died	of	heart	failure.		Needle	Catheter	Performance	Deploying	the	needle	into	the	basal	LV	septum	was	difficult,	as	is	often	the	case	for	mapping	this	area	with	usual	ablation	catheters.	From	the	transeptal	approach	it	requires	the	catheter	traverse	the	sheath	into	the	LV,	which	typically	points	inferiorly,	then	flexing	superiorly	to	reach	the	target	area.	It	was	difficult	to	maintain	that	position	with	sufficient	force,	such	that	the	needle	with	deploy	into	the	myocardial	tissue	when	extruded	and	multiple	attempts	to	insert	the	needle	were	made	with	failure	of	contrast	injection	to	reveal	tissue	staining.	After	1	hr	and	35	min	the	irrigation	solution	could	no	longer	be	injected	through	the	needle,	indicating	that	it	had	clogged	with	the	mixture	of	viscous	contrast	and	saline.	The	catheter	was	replaced	without	incident.		Complications:	This	was	a	challenging	case	due	to	multiple	VTs	from	the	basal	septum.	Heart	block	was	an	anticipated	complication	due	to	the	location	of	the	VT,	requiring	ablation	in	the	basal	septum,	and	has	been	observed	in	other	VT	ablation	studies.(4,6).		Pericardial	tamponade	occurs	in	approximately	1%	of	VT	ablation	cases	(Tokuda	in	press).	It	is	possible	that	it	was	related	to	myocardial	puncture	with	the	needle,	or	the	diagnostic	catheter	in	the	RV	during	this	long	procedure.	The	transeptal	puncture	was	also	difficult	and	tamponade	is	a	known	risk.	Tamponade	presented	over	one	hour	after	the	procedure	suggesting	that	the	bleeding	was	slow	and	it	resolved	without	requiring	surgery.	This	course	is	relatively	typical	for	tamponade	related	to	catheter	ablation.	Acute	renal	failure	was	felt	to	be	due	to	acute	tubular	necrosis,	secondary	to	transient	hypotension	and	hypoperfusion	from	cardiac	tamponade	on	top	of	chronic	renal	failure.	The	patient	had	a	history	of	heart	failure	and	this	continued	after	ablation.	Heart	failure	is	a	major	cause	of	mortality	in	this	patient	population,	as	has	been	observed	in	other	VT	ablation	studies.(6)	It	is	possible	that	the	ablation	procedure	aggravated	his	heart	failure,	either	through	myocardial	injury	or	disadvantaged	myocardial	contractility	induced	by	pacing	dependence,	although	if	VT	had	not	been	controlled,	this	would	likely	have	had	still	greater	adverse	impact.		Ablation	Summary	Target	Arrhythmia	Result	Time	Temp	Power	Imp	
37 	
 33	Avg	54	16	108	#	1	Max	66	30	118	Comments:	    61	Avg	55	20	97	#	2	Max	64	29	118	Comments:	    19	Avg	54	16	99	#	3	Max	63	28	109	Comments:	    51	Avg	58	15	93	#	4	Max	63	25	103	Comments:	    60	Avg	57	23	94	#	5	Max	60	28	150	Comments:	    60	Avg	57	17	95	#	6	Max	62	28	124	Comments:	    80	Avg	58	17	99	#	7	Max	61	28	134	Comments:	    69	Avg	53	23	90	#	8	Max	63	29	121	Comments:	    60	Avg	53	21	100	#	9	Max	61	30	107	Comments:	    15	Avg	45	18	108	#	10	Max	57	30	114	Comments:	    60	Avg	46	23	110	#	11	Max	55	30	116	Comments:	    15	Avg	57	2	134	#	12	Max	60	4	141	Comments:	    20	Avg	57	3	130	#	13	Max	60	13	141	Comments:	    
38 	
 71	Avg	58	5	103	#	14	Max	61	11	128	Comments:	    19	Avg	51	14	112	#	15	Max	63	30	123	Comments:	    18	Avg	49	20	108	#	16	Max	60	30	113	Comments:	    14	Avg	56	3	118	#	17	Max	60	12	124	Comments:	    27	Avg	55	16	100	#	18	Max	61	21	119	Comments:	    61	Avg	57	21	84	#	19	Max	62	29	97	Comments:	    65	Avg	55	26	85	#	20	Max	60	29	103	Comments:	    70	Avg	58	16	86	#	21	Max	61	21	106	Comments:	    91	Avg	58	15	92	#	22	Max	63	25	133	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	13	94	#	23	Max	61	20	133	Comments:	    24	Avg	55	15	90	#	24	Max	66	23	108	Comments:	    19	Avg	57	8	89	#	25	Max	63	14	91	Comments:	    20	Avg	55	8	89	#	26	Max	60	17	93	Comments:	    
39 	
 61	Avg	58	12	85	#	27	Max	62	19	95	Comments:	    61	Avg	58	6	95	#	28	Max	60	12	119	Comments:	    91	Avg	57	19	83	#	29	Max	63	30	108	Comments:	    30	Avg	42	30	108	#	30	Max	45	37	111	Comments:	    28	Avg	43	32	108	#	31	Max	45	35	111	Comments:	    36	Avg	42	33	107	  Patient	4	date:	4/17/2012		The	patient	is	a	61	year	old	male	with	previous	aortic	root	repair,	aortic	valve	replacement,	inferior	wall	myocardial	infarction,	now	with	a	left	ventricular	ejection	fraction	of	0.45.	He	had	a	history	of	recurrent	ventricular	tachycardia	(VT)	for	which	an	ICD	had	been	implanted.	VT	recurrences	had	failed	to	be	suppressed	by	therapy	with	amiodarone	and	mexiletine	and	two	prior	endocardial	catheter	ablation	procedures.		Procedure:	Patient	was	in	sinus	rhythm	with	a	prolonged	HV	interval	at	the	start	of	the	case.	Five	different	morphologies	of	monomorphic	VT	were	inducible	with	programmed	ventricular	stimulation.	A	transeptal	puncture	was	performed	and	the	left	ventricle	accessed	via	the	left	atrium	and	across	the	mitral	valve.	Initial	mapping	during	sinus	rhythm	and	VT	was	performed	with	a	Biosense	Webster	Surround	Flow	catheter	and	was	consistent	with	inferolateral	low	voltage	scar,	but	a	relatively	broad	endocardial	exit	for	the	predominant	VT	with	the	endocardium	not	in	the	reentry	circuit.	We	initially	focused	on	VT3,	which	was	felt	to	be	the	predominant	clinical	VT.	VT3	induced	and	was	mapped	to	the	superior	aspect	of	the	inferoposterobasal	scar.	The	initial	mapping	catheter	was	then	exchanged	for	the	needle	catheter.	Infusion	needle	ablation	was	carried	out	across	the	sites	of	earliest	endocardial	activation	in	the	band	between	the	endocardial	scar	margin	as	determined	by	bipolar	electrogram	(<	1.5	mV)	and	the	apparent	epicardial	scar	margin	as	determined	by	
40 	unipolar	electrogram	amplitude	(<	8.3	mV).	Sites	with	close	pace	matches	for	the	induced	VTs	were	sought.	At	the	site	of	best	pace	match,	access	to	the	subepicardial	region	was	limited	by	what	appeared	to	be	a	papillary	muscle	base	and	very	thick	tissue	at	this	region.	Sites	with	intramyocardial	late	potentials	or	where	intramyocardial	capture	with	delay	(needle	unipolar	pacing)	was	achieved	especially	if	a	near	match	to	an	induced	VT,	were	specifically	targeted.	During	RF	at	a	site	with	an	early	intramyocardal	potential	VT	terminated,	preceded	by	slight	slowing	and	a	PVC.	The	same	VT	recurred	later	additional	RF	lesions	were	placed	in	that	are	with	the	needle	extended	to	9	mm.		Near	the	end	of	the	procedure	the	initial	VTs	were	not	inducible	with	right	ventricular	outflow	tract	pacing.	A	fast	poorly	tolerated	VT	(VTE)	was	induced	prior	to	the	final	lesions	delivered;	further	testing	was	not	performed	after	final	lesion	delivery.	The	patient	recovered	from	the	procedure	well	and	remained	free	of	sustained	VT.	There	were	no	complications.	He	recovered	well.		Needle	Catheter	Performance:		Needle	applications	are	listed	in	the	table	from	the	EP	lab	recording	system	below.	A	total	of	40	RF	applications	were	delivered.	As	discussed	above	we	had	the	impression	that	the	thick	myocardium	over	the	region	added	to	difficulty	in	region	the	reentry	circuit.	There	was	no	difficulty	in	catheter	maneuverability.	After	several	applications,	the	resistance	to	flow	through	the	infusion	channel	of	the	needle	increased,	such	that	it	required	substantial	force	to	inject	the	saline	contrast	mixture,	and	subsequently	became	completely	occluded.	The	catheter	was	exchanged.	The	channel	of	the	second	catheter	later	became	partially	obstructed,	limiting	infusion	and	probably	limiting	lesion	creation.	Both	catheters	were	returned	to	Biosense	Webster	for	examination.		Note	that	in	the	table,	the	recording	system	resets	and	designates	a	new	lesion	when	power	ramps	to	0	in	response	to	reaching	temperature	maximum.	Thus	the	number	continuous	applications	is	fewer	than	the	total	number	in	the	table.		Ablation	Summary	Target	Arrhythmia	Time	 Temp	Power	Imp	 60	Avg	58	16	113	#	1	 Max	62	27	151	Comments:	      61	Avg	58	15	117	#	2	 Max	60	19	132	Comments:	     
41 	
 12	Avg	54	7	146	#	3	Max	62	17	158	Comments:	    11	Avg	56	8	141	#	4	Max	63	19	146	Comments:	    6	Avg	54	10	136	#	5	Max	63	21	140	Comments:	    29	Avg	55	15	129	#	6	Max	63	33	137	Comments:	    15	Avg	58	0	201	#	7	Max	60	1	210	Comments:	    14	Avg	53	12	131	#	8	Max	62	29	137	Comments:	    8	Avg	53	12	133	#	9	Max	62	32	137	Comments:	    5	Avg	53	11	132	#	10	Max	59	28	136	Comments:	    76	Avg	58	7	110	#	11	Max	60	11	131	Comments:	    65	Avg	58	6	124	#	12	Max	61	11	132	Comments:	    91	Avg	59	4	108	#	13	Max	60	11	126	Comments:	    91	Avg	59	5	103	#	14	Max	60	10	120	Comments:	    91	Avg	59	5	102	#	15	Max	61	10	115	Comments:	    
42 	
 23	Avg	58	1	132	#	16	Max	60	10	142	Comments:	    92	Avg	58	10	111	#	17	Max	60	19	131	Comments:	    60	Avg	57	24	88	#	18	Max	60	32	97	Comments:	    71	Avg	58	14	96	#	19	Max	60	20	112	Comments:	    60	Avg	57	22	93	#	20	Max	60	28	106	Comments:	    61	Avg	58	10	101	#	21	Max	62	26	122	Comments:	    61	Avg	58	15	92	#	22	Max	60	19	103	Comments:	    61	Avg	58	12	97	#	23	Max	61	16	109	Comments:	    90	Avg	59	8	94	#	24	Max	60	10	111	Comments:	    16	Avg	58	1	120	#	25	Max	60	10	128	Comments:	    6	Avg	53	3	122	#	26	Max	58	10	130	Comments:	    90	Avg	59	8	101	#	27	Max	60	11	126	Comments:	    91	Avg	59	8	95	#	28	Max	61	14	108	Comments:	    
43 	
 91	Avg	59	8	94	#	29	Max	61	11	110	Comments:	    61	Avg	58	11	93	#	30	Max	61	15	107	Comments:	    45	Avg	57	9	90	#	31	Max	61	14	94	Comments:	    60	Avg	58	10	91	#	32	Max	61	16	105	Comments:	    61	Avg	58	8	96	#	33	Max	60	12	109	Comments:	    68	Avg	58	5	95	#	34	Max	61	10	113	Comments:	    6	Avg	56	1	174	#	35	Max	59	2	178	Comments:	    91	Avg	59	4	133	#	36	Max	60	7	179	Comments:	    97	Avg	59	4	111	#	37	Max	60	12	146	Comments:	    91	Avg	59	3	111	#	38	Max	60	9	135	Comments:	    9	Avg	51	10	126	#	39	Max	60	25	134	Comments:	    5	Avg	53	11	130	#	40	Max	59	31	143	Comments:	    11	Avg	51	12	139	#	41	Max	62	31	162	Comments:	    
44 	
 26	Avg	58	2	115	#	42	Max	60	11	128	Comments:	    54	Avg	58	6	92	#	43	Max	60	9	103	Comments:	    90	Avg	59	5	90	#	44	Max	60	8	99	Comments:	    84	Avg	34	44	98	#	45	Max	36	50	120	Comments:	    80	Avg	33	39	97	#	46	Max	35	50	109	Comments:	    119	Avg	33	43	92	#	47	Max	34	45	105	Comments:	    60	Avg	59	4	95	#	48	Max	60	9	104	Comments:	    60	Avg	62	6	86	#	49	Max	65	9	93	Comments:	    
45 	Patient	5	date:	4/18/2012		The	patient	is	a	48	year	old	woman	with	nonischemic	dilated	cardiomyopathy	left	ventricular	ejection	fraction	of	less	than	0.40.	She	had	recurrent	ventricular	tachycardia	(VT)	for	which	an	ICD	had	been	implanted.	VT	recurrences	had	failed	to	be	suppressed	by	therapy	with	amiodarone	and	mexiletine	and	two	prior	endocardial	catheter	ablation	procedures.	The	last	ablation	procedure	in	2009	was	complicated	by	right	ventricular	perforation	requiring	emergency	cardiac	surgery	for	closure	of	a	laceration	in	the	free	wall	of	the	right	ventricular	outflow	tract	that	was	attributed	to	a	steam	pop	during	ablation	near	that	location.		Procedure:	Patient	was	in	sinus	rhythm	with	a	prolonged	HV	interval	at	the	start	of	the	case.	A	transeptal	puncture	was	performed	and	the	left	ventricle	accessed	via	the	left	atrium	and	across	the	mitral	valve.	Seven	different	morphologies	of	monomorphic	VT	were	inducible	with	programmed	ventricular	stimulation	or	catheter	induced	ectopy.	Initial	mapping	during	sinus	rhythm	and	VT	was	performed	with	a	Biosense	Webster	Surround	Flow	catheter.		VT1	was	mapped	to	the	superior	basal	mitral	annulus.	Frequently	the	VT	morphologies	would	change	between	VT1	and	VT2.	The	needle	was	inserted	into	that	area	and	midmyocardial	signal	preceded	the	QRS	during	VT	and	was	earlier	than	the	endocardial	signal.	Coronary	angiography	confirmed	adequate	distance	to	the	left	coronary	system.	Infusion	needle	ablation	rendered	this	VT	no	longer	inducible.	VT2	was	initiated	by	ventricular	pacing	and	appeared	to	originate	from	the	same	general	area	near	the	basal	aortic-mitral	region.	Further	infusion	needle	RF	lesions	were	delivered	at	site	of	delayed	midmyocardial	potentials,	or	at	sites	where	unipolar	needle	pacing	matched	the	VT	morphology.		VT4	was	mapped	to	the	inferobasal	septal	mitral	annulus	and	ablated	in	this	region.		VT5	and	VT6	were	mapped	to	the	septal	aspect	of	the	right	ventricular	outflow	tract	region	and	needle	ablation	was	applied	in	this	region	both	from	the	RV	and	LV	sides	of	the	sepum.	The	area	of	the	his	bundle	was	tagged	and	carefully	avoided.		During	a	relatively	prolonged	episode	of	ventricular	tachycardia	with	borderline	BP	requiring	DC	cardioversion	VT	was	mapped	to	the	inferior	basal	septum	and	Rf	was	applied.	After	cardioversion	heart	block	was	observed.	This	site	was	well	below	the	site	of	the	His	bundle	recording.	
46 	Programmed	stimulation	for	induction	testing	was	not	repeated	at	the	end	of	the	procedure,	but	multiple	attempts	at	induction	prior	to	the	last	RF	delivery	had	failed	to	induce	the	initial	VTs,	inducing	only	the	VT	targeted	with	the	last	ablation.		The	patient	recovered	from	the	procedure	well	and	was	discharged	from	hospital	2	days	after	ablation.	Other	than	AV	block,	there	were	no	complications.	AV	block	is	a	recognized	complication	of	ablation	in	the	region	of	the	basal	septum	which	was	required	for	these	VTs.	It	was	surprising	that	it	emerged	following	an	ablation	lesion	that	was	well	below	the	His	bundle	region,	but	this	could	have	been	due	to	expansion	of	a	prior	lesion	or	block	of	a	portion	of	the	left	posterior	fascicle	in	that	ablation	region.		At	2	months	interrogation	of	her	ICD	showed	one	slow	(105/min)	episode	of	VT	that	terminated	spontaneously,	which	is	a	marked	improvement	compared	to	prior	to	ablation.		Needle	Catheter	Performance:		There	were	21	needle	RF	ablation	lesions	delivered	(table	below).	There	was	no	difficulty	in	catheter	maneuverability.	There	was	no	increase	in	resistance	to	flow	through	the	infusion	channel	of	the	needle.		Note	that	in	the	table,	the	recording	system	resets	and	designates	a	new	lesion	when	power	ramps	to	0	in	response	to	reaching	temperature	maximum.	Thus	the	number	continuous	applications	(24)	is	fewer	than	noted	in	the	table.		Target	Arrhythmia	Time	 Temp	Power	Imp	 60	Avg	57	24	118	#	1	 Max	62	32	157	Comments:	      60	Avg	58	15	111	#	2	 Max	61	20	130	Comments:	      61	Avg	58	9	121	#	3	 Max	62	16	143	Comments:	      60	Avg	57	16	106	#	4	 Max	61	25	125	Comments:	      61	Avg	58	14	111	#	5	 Max	63	23	129	
47 	
 Comments:	    60	Avg	58	8	112	#	6	Max	61	12	133	Comments:	    61	Avg	57	20	97	#	7	Max	63	30	119	Comments:	    76	Avg	58	13	103	#	8	Max	61	18	120	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	13	105	#	9	Max	61	17	124	Comments:	    90	Avg	59	8	104	#	10	Max	60	13	117	Comments:	    60	Avg	57	22	105	#	11	Max	61	28	191	Comments:	    15	Avg	58	2	148	#	12	Max	64	7	154	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	16	98	#	13	Max	60	21	136	Comments:	    91	Avg	58	16	92	#	14	Max	61	21	110	Comments:	    17	Avg	54	12	121	#	15	Max	66	22	129	Comments:	    37	Avg	54	22	100	#	16	Max	60	33	123	Comments:	    61	Avg	57	20	98	#	17	Max	61	33	120	Comments:	    61	Avg	57	14	93	#	18	Max	60	20	105	
48 	
 Comments:	    61	Avg	57	17	98	#	19	Max	63	31	111	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	17	90	#	20	Max	63	28	108	Comments:	    5	Avg	56	1	210	#	21	Max	60	3	223	Comments:	    5	Avg	58	1	227	#	22	Max	61	3	244	Comments:	    93	Avg	58	15	107	#	23	Max	64	29	250	Comments:	    41	Avg	57	8	96	#	24	Max	61	13	112	Comments:	        Patient	6:	date	6/14/2012		This	63	year	old	man	had	nonischemic	dilated	cardiomyopathy,	an	ICD	and	recurrent	VT.	He	had	failed	prior	endocardial	and	epicardial	attempts	at	catheter	ablation.	Access	to	the	LV	was	obtained	by	a	transeptal	approach.	The	bipolar	voltage	map	did	not	suggest	endocardial	scar,	however,	the	unipolar	voltage	map	indicated	a	large	posterobasal	region	of	low	voltage,	consistent	with	intramural	or	epicardial	scar.	The	clinical	VT	was	repeatedly	induced	with	catheter	manipulation,	but	could	not	be	induced	with	programmed	stimulation	and	the	limited	activation	mapping	that	could	be	performed	suggested	that	the	VT	exit	was	lateral	to	the	aortic	valve.	Needle	ablation	lesions	were	delivered	as	closely	as	possible	to	the	site	of	early	activation.	Needle	deployment	was	very	difficult	here,	because	of	difficulty	achieving	catheter	contact.	Further	needle	was	delivered	throughout	the	region	of	low	unipolar	signal	amplitude	from	the	mitral	end	toward	the	apical	end	of	the	low	voltage	area.	At	each	site	contrast	was	injected	to	verify	intramyocardial	location.	Verification	of	loss	of	capture	was	performed	after	RF	delivery	in	most	cases.	On	multiple	occasions	very	fast	VT	was	induced	with	catheter	manipulation	or	double	extrastimuli.	These	failed	to	respond	to	burst	pacing	and	required	shocks	on	each	
49 	occasion.	This	severely	limited	induction	testing	and	mapping.	Induction	testing	was	performed	with	pacing	from	the	LV	and	RV.	Single	extrastimuli	and	burst	pacing	and	catheter	manipulation	failed	to	induce	VT	at	the	end	of	the	procedure.	We	could	not	be	sure	VT	was	abolished	since	it	was	not	inducible	at	the	beginning	of	the	procedure.	There	were	no	complications	and	specifically	no	clinically	evident	embolic	events.	The	patient	recovered	well	but	had	recurrent	ventricular	tachycardia	of	a	different	morphology	than	observed	during	ablation.	Amiodarone	was	increased.	At	two	months	of	follow-up	he	has	had	further	VT.		Needle	catheter	performance		Power	was	limited	to	35W	and	temp	to	60W.			Each	site	had	1CC	50:50	contrast/saline,	then	2CC	of	saline	before	RF	application	for	up	to	90	sec.	There	were	24	RF	needle	applications.	We	paid	attention	to	avoiding	repeated	torquing	of	the	catheter	and	had	no	problems.	It	was	difficult	to	deploy	the	needle	into	myocardium	adjacent	to	the	aortic	valve	from	the	transeptal	approach	as	it	is	difficult	to	exert	force	in	the	cranial	direction	when	the	catheter	must	come	through	the	mitral	valve	in	the	inferior	direction.	On	removal	of	the	catheter	a	tiny	amount	of	coagulum	was	noted	along	the	perimeter	of	the	dome	needle	hole	(figure	1	below	left	panel).					
Figure	1.	Coagulum	around	hole	in	dome	electrode	(left)	and	shown	after	removal	on	gauze	(right).			Note	that	in	the	table,	the	recording	system	resets	and	designates	a	new	lesion	when	power	ramps	to	0	in	response	to	reaching	temperature	maximum.	Thus	the	number	continuous	applications	(24)	is	fewer	than	noted	in	the	table.	

50 	  Target	Arrhythmia	Time	 Temp	Power	Imp	 16	Avg	53	19	132	#	1	 Max	65	28	146	Comments:	      73	Avg	58	20	123	#	2	 Max	62	30	130	Comments:	      90	Avg	58	16	119	#	3	 Max	63	26	142	Comments:	      85	Avg	56	23	106	#	4	 Max	63	34	123	Comments:	      90	Avg	57	25	108	#	5	 Max	61	33	143	Comments:	      43	Avg	55	20	146	#	6	 Max	60	35	181	Comments:	      4	Avg	46	12	140	#	7	 Max	59	15	150	Comments:	      10	Avg	53	16	123	#	8	 Max	62	24	132	Comments:	      73	Avg	58	22	115	#	9	 Max	63	31	129	Comments:	      6	Avg	49	11	131	#	10	 Max	60	20	139	Comments:	      56	Avg	58	18	111	#	11	 Max	63	30	129	Comments:	      90	Avg	58	20	107	#	12	 Max	64	32	146	Comments:	      90	Avg	58	22	105	
51 	
 #	13	Max	61	32	147	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	20	103	#	14	Max	62	29	121	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	19	112	#	15	Max	65	33	158	Comments:	    7	Avg	54	11	138	#	16	Max	61	18	154	Comments:	    79	Avg	57	15	113	#	17	Max	64	32	134	Comments:	    17	Avg	54	15	122	#	18	Max	63	25	142	Comments:	    71	Avg	58	18	110	#	19	Max	62	30	121	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	21	105	#	20	Max	63	34	135	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	19	105	#	21	Max	62	34	138	Comments:	    36	Avg	57	15	109	#	22	Max	60	21	132	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	17	99	#	23	Max	61	24	118	   *nc	post	=	no	capture	at	10	ma	pacing	from	the	needle	after	ablation.	
52 	Patient	7		66	year-old	man	with	recurrent	VT	and	nonischemic	cardiomyopathy,	left	ventricular	ejection	fraction	approximately	40%.	Has	an	ICD,	history	of	amiodarone	pulmonary	toxicity,	and	failed	therapy	with	sotalol	and	mexiletine.	Previous	catheter	ablation	attempt	performed	ablation	in	the	septum	in	the	para-Hisian	region	which	was	acutely	successful	although	caused	heart	block.	He	had	biventricular	ICD	upgrade	and	unfortunately	developed	recurrent	VT	and	ICD	shocks	progressing	to	incessant	VT	despite	antiarrhythmic	therapy	including	trials	of	dofetilide	and	flecainide.	A	second	catheter	ablation	procedure	one	week	ago	terminated	the	incessant	VT.	Unfortunately	faster	VTs	recurred	requiring	ICD	shocks.		Procedure		Programmed	ventricular	stimulation	induced	sustained	monomorphic	VT3	that	was	moderately	well	tolerated	hemodynamically	but	did	not	usually	sustain	sufficiently	to	allow	extensive	mapping.	Pace-mapping	was	consistent	with	origin	from	the	basal	inferior	LV	septum.	Infusion	needle	ablation	lesions	were	delivered	from	the	LV	side.	VT	remained	inducible	and	limited	mapping	in	VT	showed	a	site	of	early	activation	at	the	basal	inferior	LV	septum.	The	needle	was	deployed	and	the	recording	from	the	needle	was	even	earlier.	RF	terminated	VT	after	which	it	was	no	longer	inducible.	Additional	RF	lesions	were	applied	to	that	area.	RV	was	then	explored	and	further	RF	delivered	with	the	needle	inserted	into	the	septum	at	the	RV	side	across	from	the	inferior	basal	LV	from	the	lesion	that	terminated	VT.	Programmed	stimulation	was	performed	and	no	VT	was	inducible.	During	recovery	occasional	runs	of	AIVR	likely	arising	from	just	inferior	to	the	site	of	ablation	were	observed	transiently.		There	were	no	complications	and	he	recovered	well.	Following	the	procedure	he	remained	free	of	recurrent	VT	at	two	months	of	follow-up.		Needle	Catheter	Performance		The catheter handled well. Power	was	limited	to	35W	and	temp	to	60W.		Each	site	had	1CC	50:50	contrast/saline,	then	2CC	of	saline	before	RF	application	for	up	to	90	sec.	A total of 16 RF applications through the needle were applied. During RF application 6 spontaneous bubbles were noted on intracardiac ultrasound, similar to those that are observed during standard RF ablation and that have been thought to indicate heating at the electrode tissue interface with increasing temperature. The catheter was removed and and inspected. A small ring of coagulum was noted around the dome needle hole 
53 	(figure 2), which was cleaned. The catheter was inspected again after lesions 12 and 16 and no coagulum was identified. There were no thromboembolic complications. 
54 	
 
  Figure	2.	Circular	coagulum	removed	from	dome	electrode.			Note	that	in	the	table,	the	recording	system	resets	and	designates	a	new	lesion	when	power	ramps	to	0	in	response	to	reaching	temperature	maximum.	Thus	the	number	continuous	applications	(24)	is	fewer	than	noted	in	the	table.		Target	Arrhythmia	Time	 Temp	Power	Imp	 90	Avg	57	26	77	#	1	 Max	63	33	99	Comments:	      25	Avg	48	26	84	#	2	 Max	56	33	117	Comments:	      90	Avg	57	26	69	#	3	 Max	63	34	98	Comments:	      10	Avg	57	1	163	#	4	 Max	60	3	182	Comments:	      43	Avg	54	22	81	#	5	 Max	63	34	98	Comments:	     

55 	
 7	Avg	53	9	78	#	6	Max	58	23	85	Comments:	    38	Avg	54	15	77	#	7	Max	63	34	85	Comments:	    10	Avg	48	18	85	#	8	Max	61	29	93	Comments:	    8	Avg	51	12	85	#	9	Max	60	20	88	Comments:	    5	Avg	50	12	85	#	10	Max	62	22	90	Comments:	    6	Avg	50	17	83	#	11	Max	60	26	88	Comments:	    8	Avg	52	13	84	#	12	Max	60	24	88	Comments:	    8	Avg	52	15	83	#	13	Max	65	32	88	Comments:	    32	Avg	56	21	80	#	14	Max	63	33	86	Comments:	    85	Avg	59	10	84	#	15	Max	64	14	102	Comments:	    90	Avg	57	26	70	#	16	Max	62	33	127	Comments:	    90	Avg	56	15	71	#	17	Max	62	27	85	Comments:	    90	Avg	56	27	64	#	18	Max	60	33	105	Comments:	    
56 	
 13	Avg	53	10	94	#	19	Max	66	28	103	Comments:	    72	Avg	53	25	64	#	20	Max	67	33	98	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	15	69	#	21	Max	60	22	87	Comments:	    36	Avg	47	24	65	#	22	Max	56	33	84	Comments:	    10	Avg	52	12	64	#	23	Max	61	24	66	Comments:	    17	Avg	53	18	63	#	24	Max	59	33	66	Comments:	    24	Avg	54	17	62	#	25	Max	59	30	65	Comments:	    90	Avg	57	19	66	#	26	Max	61	33	83	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	17	66	#	27	Max	62	28	87	Comments:	    56	Avg	55	18	66	#	28	Max	63	32	80	Comments:	    9	Avg	53	10	65	#	29	Max	60	23	68	Comments:	    5	Avg	51	8	65	#	30	Max	58	17	68	    Case	8	6/15/2012	
57 		This	70	year-old	man	with	prior	right	coronary	artery	stent	and	nonischemic	cardiomyopathy	recurrent	VT	despite	antiarrhythmic	drug	therapy	with	sotalol	and	mexiletine	and	had	a	history	of	amiodarone	lung	toxicity.	Prior	endocardial	and	then	endocardial	and	epicardial	RF	catehter	ablation	ablation	in	May	2011	failed.	Recurrent	VT	episodes	continued	despite	therapy	with	sotalol	and	mexiletine.		Procedure		Programmed	ventricular	triple	extrastimuli	from	the	left	ventricle	induced	two	VTs:	VT1	had	a	cycle	length	of	280	ms,	right	bundle	branch	block	configuration	in	V1	and	cycle	length	of	280	ms.	VT2	had	a	cycle	length	of	270	ms,	right	bundle	branch	block	configuration	in	V1.	A	transseptal	approach	was	taken	to	access	the	left	ventricle.	The	endocardial	bipolar	voltage	was	largely	normal.	At	the	basal	septum	there	was	a	reduced	unipolar	signal	amplitude,	as	well	as	a	small	patch	at	the	superobasal-lateral	area	consistent	with	intramural	or	epicardial	scar.	Frequent	PVCs	arose	from	the	high	basal	lateral	LV,	and	appeared	to	be	epicardial	(slurred	QRS	upstroke,	and	no	early	endocardial	activation,	with	radial	spread	from	the	high	basal	lateral	LV).	Earliest	endocardial	activation	for	VT1	was	at	the	high	basal	lateral	LV.	Infusion	needle	ablation	lesions	were	delivered	at	the	earliest	area.	VT1	was	no	longer	inducible.	A	new	VT,	VT2	was	induced	with	had	a	more	superior/medial	endocardial	exit.	Further	needle	RF	applications	into	that	area	rendered	this	noninducible.	The	ICD	was	programmed	back	on	at	the	end	of	the	procedure.	The	LV	lead	was	immediately	above	the	site	of	best	match,	and	indeed	pacing	from	the	LV	lead	had	the	best	match	for	VT1.	Aggressive	needle	ablation	was	performed	immediately	below	the	LV	lead.	As	expected	the	LV	lead	no	longer	captured	after	ablation.	Of	note,	it	had	been	programmed	off	previously,	because	of	concerns	of	possible	proarrhythmia,	and	because	his	QRS	was	narrow.		There	were	no	complications.	The	patient	recovered	well	and	was	discharged	home.	Needle	Catheter	Performance	Ten	needle	ablation	lesions	were	applied.	On	removal	of	the	catheter	a	small	amount	of	coagulum	was	noted	at	the	needle	hole	in	the	dome	(figure	3).	
58 	
 
       Target	Arrhythmia	Time	 Temp	Power	Imp	 90	Avg	58	20	133	#	1	 Max	62	31	159	Comments:	      90	Avg	58	21	122	#	2	 Max	62	29	146	Comments:	      90	Avg	58	20	130	

59 	
 #	3	Max	62	31	159	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	20	121	#	4	Max	63	32	147	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	16	116	#	5	Max	61	24	142	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	21	119	#	6	Max	61	27	140	Comments:	    90	Avg	55	18	118	#	7	Max	63	33	132	Comments:	    36	Avg	53	26	149	#	8	Max	60	35	171	Comments:	    90	Avg	54	26	129	#	9	Max	62	35	191	Comments:	    90	Avg	58	18	117	#	10	Max	62	31	137	           Bibliography			1. Stevenson	WG,	Wilber	DJ,	Natale	A,	Jackman	WM,	Marchlinski	FE,	Talbert	T,	Gonzalez	MD,	Worley	SJ,	Daoud	EG,	Hwang	C,	Schuger	C,	Bump	TE,	Jazayeri	M,	Tomassoni	GF,	Kopelman	HA,	Soejima	K,	Nakagawa	H.	Irrigated	radiofrequency	catheter	ablation	guided	by	electroanatomic	mapping	for	recurrent	ventricular	tachycardia	after	myocardial	infarction:	the	multicenter	thermocool	ventricular	tachycardia	ablation	trial.	Circulation.	2008;118(25):2773-2782.	
60 	2. Sapp	JL,	Cooper	JM,	Soejima	K,	Sorrell	T,	Lopera	G,	Satti	SD,	Koplan	BA,	Epstein	LM,	Edelman	E,	Rogers	C,	Stevenson	WG.	Deep	myocardial	ablation	lesions	can	be	created	with	a	retractable	needle-tipped	catheter.	Pacing	Clin	Electrophysiol.	2004;27(5):594-599.	3. Tokuda	M,	Kojodjojo	P,	Epstein	LM,	Koplan	BA,	Michaud	GF,	Tedrow	UB,	Stevenson	WG,	John	RM.	Outcomes	of	cardiac	perforation	complicating	catheter	ablation	of	ventricular	arrhythmias.	Circ	Arrhythm	Electrophysiol.4(5):660-666.	4. Aliot	EM,	Stevenson	WG,	Almendral-Garrote	JM,	Bogun	F,	Calkins	CH,	Delacretaz	E,	Della	Bella	P,	Hindricks	G,	Jais	P,	Josephson	ME,	Kautzner	J,	Kay	GN,	Kuck	KH,	Lerman	BB,	Marchlinski	F,	Reddy	V,	Schalij	MJ,	Schilling	R,	Soejima	K,	Wilber	D.	EHRA/HRS	Expert	Consensus	on	Catheter	Ablation	of	Ventricular	Arrhythmias:	developed	in	a	partnership	with	the	European	Heart	Rhythm	Association	(EHRA),	a	Registered	Branch	of	the	European	Society	of	Cardiology	(ESC),	and	the	Heart	Rhythm	Society	(HRS);	in	collaboration	with	the	American	College	of	Cardiology	(ACC)	and	the	American	Heart	Association	(AHA).	Heart	Rhythm.	2009;6(6):886-933.	5. Calkins	H,	Epstein	A,	Packer	D,	Arria	AM,	Hummel	J,	Gilligan	DM,	Trusso	J,	Carlson	M,	Luceri	R,	Kopelman	H,	Wilber	D,	Wharton	JM,	Stevenson	W.	Catheter	ablation	of	ventricular	tachycardia	in	patients	with	structural	heart	disease	using	cooled	radiofrequency	energy:	results	of	a	prospective	multicenter	study.	Cooled	RF	Multi	Center	Investigators	Group.	J	Am	Coll	Cardiol.	2000;35(7):1905-1914.	6. Carbucicchio	C,	Santamaria	M,	Trevisi	N,	Maccabelli	G,	Giraldi	F,	Fassini	G,	Riva	S,	Moltrasio	M,	Cireddu	M,	Veglia	F,	Della	Bella	P.	Catheter	ablation	for	the	treatment	of	electrical	storm	in	patients	with	implantable	cardioverter-defibrillators:	short-	and	long-	term	outcomes	in	a	prospective	single-center	study.	Circulation.	2008;117(4):462-469.	7. Sapp	JL,	Cooper	JM,	Zei	P,	Stevenson	WG.	Large	radiofrequency	ablation	lesions	can	be	created	with	a	retractable	infusion-needle	catheter.	J	Cardiovasc	Electrophysiol.	2006;17(6):657-661.	8. Sears	SF,	Hauf	JD,	Kirian	K,	Hazelton	G,	Conti	JB.	Posttraumatic	stress	and	the	implantable	cardioverter-defibrillator	patient:	what	the	electrophysiologist	needs	to	know.	Circ	Arrhythm	Electrophysiol.4(2):242-250.	