Page 1 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
  
 
 
Study Title:  
A randomized, placebo -controlled trial of psychedelic -assisted psychotherapy with single dose 
psilocybin for frontline clinicians experiencing COVID -related symptoms of depression and burnout  
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  
Anthony Back MD  
University of Washington  
 
 
IND/IDE Sponsor:  
Anthony Back MD  
 
 
Protocol number:  
BACK001  
  
Revision  
July 18 , 202 2 
Version 1.1 6 
 
 
Funded by:  
Steven and Alexandra Cohen Foundation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
  
Table of Contents  
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  3 
2. Study Design and Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  16 
3. Research Materials and Measures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  18 
4. Participant Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ................................ . 22 
5. Study Agent  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  25 
6. Study Procedure and Schedule  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  26 
7. Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations)  ................................ ................................ ...............  32 
8. Assessment of Safety  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 32 
9. Statistical Considerations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  36 
10. Ethics/Protection of Human Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 37 
11. Data Handling and Record Keeping  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  38 
12. Publication  and Data  Sharing  Policy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 39 
13. Study Administration and Leadership  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 39 
14. Conflict of Interest Policy  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  39 
15.  References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  39 
 
  
Page 3 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 1. Introduction  
1.1. Statement  of Purpose . 
We aim to investigate the effects of a single dose of psilocybin, delivered in the context 
of pre - and post -dose psychotherapy , on symptoms of depression and burnout suffered by 
healthcare clinicians as a result of frontline work in the COVID pandemic.  
 
1.1.1  Aim 1:  
To assess short - and longer -term effects of  psilocybin -assisted psychotherapy  (PAP)  on symptoms 
of depression experienced by physicians and nurses with frontline work exposure in the COVID pandemic.  
Hypothesis 1 .1: Compared to active placebo, PAP will result in short term improvement in 
symptoms of depression  1 day and  1 week after the  psilocybin dose  session.    
Hypothesis 1.2: Compared to active placebo, PAP will result in longer term improvement of 
symptoms of depression 4 weeks after the  medication  dosing  session.  The primary outcome  will be a 
comparison between the psilocybin 25 mg vs control  groups of a combination of depression symptoms 
measured  at 4 weeks  post medication dose session.     
 
1.1.2.  Aim 2:  
To explore  short - and longer -term effects of  psilocybin -assisted 
psychotherapy  (PAP)  on symptoms of burnout  experienced by physicians and nurses with frontline work 
exposure in the COVID pandemic.  
Hypothesis 2.1: Compared to active placebo, PAP will result in short term improvement in 
symptoms of burnout  1 day and  1 week after the  psilocybin dose  session.   
 
1.2. Background  and Rationale  
The COVID19 pandemic is associated with significant psychological morbidity for 
physicians and nurses with frontline work exposure. The experiences of these physicians and 
nurses include multiple, intense exposure to patients who are suffering and dying, stress related 
to clinical decision making under extreme uncertainty especially at the beginning of the 
pandemic, prolonged periods o f work and vigilance leading to physical and emotional 
exhaustion, fear for their own safety and their families’ safety, and  often extended separations 
from family related to self -quarantining because of risk to their families. In addition, stress from 
preparing for crisis standards of care that would require clinicians to make rationing decisions, 
moral injury from feeling tha t they were prevented from doing their best work, and 
disillusionment from layoffs that many health systems made to protect their financial status 
have compounded these stressors. Interviews of physicians and nurses published in the lay 
press have emphasiz ed that ‘we’ll never be the same’1-3 and also that psychological morbidity 
occurs in physicians and nurses with no prior history of mental health issues or treatment.4-6  
The psychological morbidity for frontline physicians and nurses includes symptoms of 
depression, anxiety, burnout and post -traumatic stress.  Front -line clinicians (physicians, nurse 
practitioners, physician assistants, nurses) in the COVID pandemic are experiencing high levels of 
psychological sequelae related to distress experienced in direct clinical care. In a study of health 
care workers in  Wuhan, China, “a considerable proportion of participants reported symptoms of 
depression (634 [50.4%]), anxiety (5 60 [44.6%]), insomnia (427 [34.0%]), and distress (899 
[71.5%]).”7  In addition, “frontline health care workers engaged in direct diagnosis, treatment, 
and care of patients with COVID -19 were associated with a higher risk of symptoms of 
depression (OR, 1.52; 95%CI, 1.11 -2.09; P = .01), anxiety (OR, 1.57; 95%CI, 1.22 -2.02;  P < .001), 
insomnia (OR, 2.97; 95%CI, 1.92 -4.60; P < .001), and distress (OR, 1.60; 95%CI, 1.25 -2.04; P < 
.001).7 A qualitative study found that “ The intensive work drained health care providers 
physically and emotionally.”8  A physician  suicide in the US to date attributed to medical work in 
Page 4 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 hospitals overwhelmed with COVID  is notable for the complete lack of any depressive history in 
a physician who contracted COVID herself, returned to work, was hospitalized for severe 
depressive symptoms, and took her own life days after discharge.9  
These psychological symptoms  of stress are somewhat different than existing DSM classifications 
of depression and anxiety disorders. A n unpublished but publicly released national study of health care 
workers demonstrates that symptom severity is clearly related to intensity of exposure.10 Stressor 
frequency scores correlated significantly with PCL5 scores (R=.57, p<1e -8), PHQ scores (R=.35, P<.001), ISI 
scores (R=.38, p<1e -4), and GAD7 scores (R=.39,  p<.001), likelihood of staying in current occupation (R= -
.39,p<1e -4), and trouble doing usual  work (R=.33,p<.001). 51% of HCW and 44% of FR indicated decreased 
likelihood of staying in  their current occupation. PCL5 scores substantially mediated the association 
between stress frequency scores and work function impairment.  
The implications for the medical workforce that the US needs for the continuing pandemic are 
substantial. An unpublished but publicly released survey of clinicians carried out by the Larry A Green 
center and the Primary Care Collaboration reported that 19% of survey respondents reported that 
clinicians in their practice had retired early because of COVID -19 or were planning on it .11 
Existing interventions for first responders, treated in disaster situations with some 
similarities  to COVID have shown no impact on these psychological sequelae. A 2012 
systematic review concluded that “ the literature is startlingly sparse and is not sufficient for 
evidence -based recommendations for first responders .12 A more recent 2020 systematic review 
of psychological interventions for first responders was also unable to find enough evidence to 
name any best practices.13 Thus while many physicians and nurses are already turning to existing 
treatments with antidepressant medications and psychotherapy, there is as yet no data 
supporting efficacy of these treatments —and data suggests that physicians in particular are not 
willing to be treated with antidepressants . In a study of over 700 resident physicians, where 17% 
scored positive for depression, only about a quarter of those scoring positive were receiving 
treatment (either prescribed through formal treatment, informally t hrough a colleague, or self -
prescribed) for depression.14  Physicians have a negative incentive to seek any type of mental 
health care as many state licensing agencies require physicians to report mental health 
treatment and make this information publicly available.  
Psychedelic -assisted psychotherapy is a new, promising form of treatment for depression  and 
other mental health disorders. Although psychedelic medications were widely used by psychiatrists in the 
1950s and 1960, and considered a ‘major breakthrough’ in the treatment of depression and other mental 
health conditions, changes in federal legislation banning the use of psychedelics heavily impacted  the use 
of psilocybin, LSD, and other medications in 1970 with the Controlled Substances Act.15 Due to these 
changes, the available studies are from the 1950s and 1960s and t hese studies  often  did not have the 
level of scientific rigor or gather the types of data that is commonplace today. However, self -reported user 
experience indicates that psychedelics are quite safe. The 2010  National  Survey  on Drug  Use and 
Health , reporting  a survey  of 57,873 randomly selected Americans about their drug histo ry , found that  
about 32 million Americans (or 17% of adults between 21 and 64) have used any psychedelic drugs at least 
once in their lifetimes .16  (The survey is limited as participants were not asked when they had used 
psychedelic medications. ) 
 A new wave of studies, starting in 2018, have shown that psychedelics, given in the context of 
carefully designed psychotherapy, can improve symptoms of depression  for weeks and in some people, 
years. Randomized clinical trials of psychedelic -assisted psychotherapy, mostly using pharmaceutical grade 
synthesized psilocybin (the psychedelic in ‘magic mushrooms’)  have shown strikingly positive findings, and 
led to a FDA designation for psilocybin as a ‘breakthrough treatment’.17 Earlier this year a randomized 
study of psilocybin -assisted psychotherapy for major depression (not treatment -resistant depression) 
showed strongly positive results.18 “The mean (SD) GRID -HAMD scores at weeks 1 and 4 (8.0 [7.1] and 8.5 
[5.7]) in the immediate treatment group were statistically significantly lower than the scores  
Page 5 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 at the comparable time points of weeks 5 and 8 (23.8 [5.4] and 23.5 [6.0]) in the delayed  
treatment group. The effect sizes were large at week 5 (Cohen d = 2.2; 95%CI, 1.4 -3.0; 
P < .001) and week 8 (Cohen d = 2.6; 95%CI, 1.7 -3.6; P < .001).” Moreover, the antidepressant effect was 
immediate —noted by participants on the first day after undergoing the supervised psilocybin ingestion.  
 Because major depressive disorder typically has a different antecedent history than specific trigger 
of COVID pandemic work exposure suffered by physicians and nurses, another group of patients with 
depressive symptoms following a trigger is a useful comp arison —patients with cancer. In two randomized 
studies of patients with cancer —many with incurable cancer —suffering symptoms of depression and 
anxiety, treatment with psilocybin -assisted psychotherapy resulted in very significant improvements in 
symptoms a fter a single treatment sequence of preparation psychotherapy, medication dosing with  
supervision, and  follow up  integration psychotherapy. In the study conducted by Ross at NYU19 (a 
consultant to this proposal), the results indicated “For each of the six primary outcome measures (HADS T, 
HADS A, HADS D, BDI, STAI S, STAI T), there were significant differences  between the experimental and 
control groups (prior to the  crossover at 7 weeks post -dose 1) with the psilocybin group  
(compared to the active control) demonstrating immediate,  substantial, and sustained (up to 7 weeks 
post -dosing) clinical benefits in terms of reduction of anxiety and depression symptoms.”  
The scientific mechanism for these findings is that treatment with psilocybin -assisted 
psychotherapy occasions a kind of ‘reset’ in ruminative, self -critical inner narratives —patterns which can 
be completely changed with psychotherapy and psilocybin. One of the leading researchers in the field, at 
Imperial College London writes in a 2020 review in Cell that “We suggest one way of looking at the 
difference  between them is that current  medicines [e.g.,  SSRIs] suppress symptoms in a  similar way that 
insulin su ppresses hyperglycemia  in diabetes. Standard antidepressants  protect against the stressors  
that lead to and perpetuate depression,  but don’t directly access and remedy underlying  biopsychosocial 
causes. In  contrast, psychedelic therapy harnesses  a therapeutic window opened up by the  brain via the 
effects of the drugs to facilitate  insight and emotional release and,  with psychotherapeutic support, a 
subsequent  healthy revision of outlook and lifestyle .”15  
 At the neurological level, psychedelics appear to open ‘a therapeutic window’ by dysregulating 
activity in brain circuits and systems that encode habits of thought and behavior. Psilocybin, perhaps the 
most intensively studies of the psychedelics, is a 5-Hydroxytryptamine 2A (5 -HT2A) receptor agonist.20 The 
5-HT2A receptor is maximally expressed in the cerebra l cortex, and thus treatment with psilocybin 
dysregulates cortical function that is associated with predictive processing that the brain normally 
undertakes to enable an individual to make decisions throughout the day. These psilocybin -induced 
changes in pr edictive processing result in both the altered perceptions often reported by individuals in the 
first 6 hours after ingesting psilocybin and more importantly, altered cognitions that can persist af ter the 
psilocybin effect has worn off —and these new cognitions are insights that are reinforced and articulated 
during the follow up  integration psychotherapy.15  
Psychedelic -assisted psychotherapy with psilocybin has the evidence profile best suited to treat 
clinician COVID -related distress of all tested psychedelics  because of its documented efficacy with 
symptoms of depression . To be fair, there is limited evidence for psilocybin -assisted psychotherapy to 
address symptoms of post -traumatic stress disorder, and a Phase 3 study is currently underway testing the 
efficacy of MDMA -assisted psychotherapy for PTSD from other causes.21 However, the MDMA Phase 3 
study does not target frontline clinicians, and is not designed to study clinician COVID -related distress. The 
suitability of MDMA for COVID -related distress is less clear in that no recent evidence exists to support the 
efficacy  of MDMA -assisted psychotherapy for existential distress. There are older studies of MDMA for 
cancer patients, but those studies were conducted before validated measures of existential distress or 
post -traumatic stress were available,22 and ongoing studies have not been reported.  Overall, because 
frontline clinician distress appears to contain major components of anxiety, depression, and existential 
distress, at this point in the state of the science, psilocybin is the psychedelic medication with the 
evidence profile best suited for COVID -related distress . 
Page 6 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 Psilocybin will be used in a proven pre - and post -dose psychotherapeutic process  defined by 
prior research conducted by Griffiths and Ross.19,23 In these studies, psychotherapy involved 2 trained 
therapists for each study participant, and included Preparation sessions conducted in for 6 -8 hours total 
(in 3 sessions) prior to a Psilocybin Dose session, followed by Integration sessions for 6 -8 hours  (again in 3 
sessions). These studies reported a few toxicities, and no severe adverse events. This psychotherapeutic 
context of Preparation/Psilocybin Dose/Integration was extremely well tolerated and resulted in 
improvements in anxiety, depressive sympto ms, and existential distress that were statistically significant 
and clinically meaningful. Cancer patients who participated in the Griffith and Ross studies described in 
qualitative interviews how their existential issues came to have different meanings a fter their 
participation in the study in ways that allowed them to cope better, face death with less fear, and 
experience better quality of life.24 Because this proposal involves psychedelic -assisted psychotherapy with 
a new indication and new target population for psychedelic -assisted psychotherapy, the scientific 
approach most likely to yield valuable results would use a psychotherapeutic process t hat has been 
proven.  
 
1.3. Potential  Benefits  and Risks  
1.3.1  Benefits  
 Subjects in this study may experience relief of symptoms from depression and burnout, 
but it is unknown whether these short term benefits will translate into  significant, long -term 
benefits.  
 
1.3.2  Potential  Benefits  
 Participating physicians and nurses may benefit from the medical and psychiatric evaluations 
that they receive from participating in the study, which will be more evaluation that most of them 
receive during their routine work. Some participants may benefit  by learning about depression, mood 
disorders, and burnout, and by gaining insight about their symptoms through participation in the 
study.  
 The medical knowledge gained by this study may contribute to the understanding of clinician 
depression and burnout and could benefit future clinicians affected by symptoms of depression and 
burnout as a result of the work during the COVID pandemic.  
In addition, knowledge gained by this study c ould lead to development of a novel therapy for 
clinicians who have been severely affected by their clinical work in the COVID pandemic.  
 
1.3.3.  Risks  to Participants  
1.3.3.1 . Risk of the experimental medication (synthesized psilocybin).  
According  to the most  recent  and comprehensive  review,  serotonergic  psychedelic 
medications  “are  generally  considered  to be physiologically  safe  molecules”  that  chiefly  alter  
consciousness.25 Recent  reviews  and searches  of the literature  indicate  that  
psilocybin  is not associated  with  harm  or damage  to any organ  or system  in the body.26 
Psilocybin  can produce  changes  in blood  pressure  and heart  rate,  but these  changes  are not as 
strong or consistent as those seen after psychostimulants (amphetamines), and  sometimes 
these changes only occur at one time poin t.25 More consistently, psilocybin  can produce  
rapid  and intense  changes  in mood  including  periods  of anxiety  or panic.  Both these  
physiological  and psychological  effects  are transient  and do not last beyond  the duration  of 
drug  effects.  
Researchers  studying  the effects  of 30 mg psilocybin  took  precautions  similar  to the 
ones  we will use in this study , and no reactions requiring pharmacological intervention  
occurred.23,27 
Page 7 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
  
1.3.3.1.a. Safety  and Pharmacology of Psilocybin  (mushroom -derived, and synthesized)  
Studies in humans and nonhuman animals indicate that psilocybin has very low 
toxicity  .28,29 The LD 50 ranged  from  285mg/kg  in rats and mice.30 The maximum tolerated dose 
of psilocybin  in humans  has not been  defined  or established.  The best  estimate  of a lethal  
dose  for pure psilocybin in humans is about 19 grams. The full dose of psilocybin that will be  
administered  in this study  is 1/100 times  of the established  LD50 in nonhuman  animals  and in 
humans. A Phase I trial of psilocybin completed in 2019 at oral doses of up to 0.6 mg/kg 
demonstrated no  serious  adverse  events.31 Psilocybin  is not associated  with  disease  or 
damage  to any organ  or system.29 More commonly, damage or disease to organs (as renal 
failure) is  associated  with  mistakenly  consuming  poisonous  mushrooms  under  the belief  that 
they  are psilocybin -containing  mushrooms.32 
Three  cases  of death  possibly  related  to the direct  toxic  effects  of Psilocybe  
mushrooms  (the natural  source  of psilocybin)  have  been  reported  in the world  literature.  One 
fatalit y occurred in a post -cardiac transplant patient who ingested Psilocybe  mushrooms.33 
It is not known  however  whether  psilocybin  was the proximal  cause  of death  or whether death 
occurred secondary to the cardiac stimulant phenethylamine, which is also  present in the 
mushrooms. In the French literature, another fatality linked to Psilocybe  mushroom  use was 
associated  with  far higher  blood  concentrations  of the active  metabolite  of psilocybin than 
would be expected with the doses proposed in this study.34 A final fatality   from Psilocybe 
mushroom ingestion was mentioned in a 1961 review but was poorly characterized , with  no 
psilocin  concentrations  were  reported.35 
In a review of other adverse effects of psilocybin from Psilocybe mushrooms, an 
additional 10  individuals  were  reported  to have  experienced  accidental  deaths  associated  with  
Psilocybe  mushroom  ingestion  (van  Amesterdam  et al. 2012).  In most  cases,  these  accidental  
deaths  resulted from falls from buildings. Given the documented history of  use of Psilocybe  
mushrooms  in a variety of  societies  and cultures,  that  there  are only  3 known  fatalities  at best  
indirectly linked to the physiologic effects of mushroom ingestion is an argument for the  
general safety of this natural product. We believe that the use of synthesized  psilocybin will  
decrease the risk of cardiac toxicity by avoiding any additive or synergistic effect of  
phenylethylamine. Further, a recent review of the potential harm of the ingestion of  
Psilocybe  mushrooms  by the Dutch  medicinal  advisory  board  found  that  the risk of acute  or 
chronic  toxicity  was low (van  Amsterdam,  Opperhuizen,  and van den Brink  2011).  
The source of synthesized psilocybin used in this study is the Usona Institute.36 The 
Usona Institute is a non -profit medical research organization founded in 2014, and has 
developed synthesized psilocybin for use in investigator -initiated studies and Usona 
Institute -sponsored studies (currently underway for Major Depressive Disorder).  The Usona 
Institute synthesized psilocybin has been used in a variety of studies, including open -label, 
dose -escalation studies in healthy volunteers, patients with obsessive compulsive disorder, 
alcohol use, nicotine use, and in randomized studies involv ing patients with depression and 
cancer.19,37 -40 
To date,  over  2000  participants  have  received  synthesized psilocybin  under  controlled  
conditions  in scientific studies with no reports of the occurrence of a significance of adverse 
events  deemed  to be associated  with  drug  administration.  The most  commonly  reported  
adverse  events  from  the scientific  literature  are psychological  in nature  and include  the 
induction  of negative  emotional  states  and paranoid/delusional  thinking  during  psilocybin  
sessions,  as well as far less frequent reports of Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder 
(HPPD).26 A review of  studies conducted worldwide between 1999 and 2008 identified only 
Page 8 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 one subject (out of  110)  who  experienced  any persistent  perceptual  symptoms  associated  
with  HPPD  and these  symptoms  were  mild,  brief,  and resolved  within  three  days  of psilocybin  
exposure .41 Rates of prolonged psychiatric symptoms of any kind following psilocybin  
exposure in healthy study participants are estimated to be 0.08 -0.09%. As in the phase 2  
studies,  common  physical  adverse  events  associated  with  psilocybin  administration  include  
increased BP and heart rate, nausea, and headaches. In the phase 2 studies of cancer  
related anxiety and depression no cases of HPPD were identified and no participants  
developed  any symptoms  of paranoia or anxiety that required  pharmacological  intervention  or 
anything  more  than  reassurance  from  session  facilitators .19,23 In a survey of 1993 individuals 
in the context of unsupervised, illicit use of psilocybin -containing  mushrooms, 11% put self 
or others at risk of physical harm. Of the respondents, 2.6%  behaved in a physically 
aggressive or violent manner and 2.7% received medical help. Of  those whose experience 
occurred >1 year before, 7.6% sought treatment for enduring  psychological symptoms. 3 
cases appeared associated with onset of enduring psychotic  symptoms  and 3 cases  with  
attempted  suicide.42 
To date,  there  have  no reports  of physical  harm  in patients  who  have  received  
psilocybin  under controlled conditions, and no fatalities have been associated with its use in 
a controlled clinical trial. The difference in the side -effect profile between the unknown  
doses  of psilocybin -containing  mushrooms  consumed  in an uncontrolled  setting  and dose - 
controlled  medically  prepared  oral psilocybin  consumed  in a controlled  setting  is thought  to be 
in part doe the focus on the set and setting of the experience. The set refers to the  
emotional/cognitive/behavioral  state/mindset  and expectations  of study  participants  just prior 
to psilocybin exposure and setting refers to the physical environment in which the  exposure  
occurs .43 
There are no confirmed reports of an overdose of synthesized  psilocybin. In the United 
States, use of chemically synthesized psilocybin does not occur.44 Although psilocybin in the 
form of mushrooms is sometimes used non -medically, medical emergencies due to psilocybin 
mushrooms are very rare (psilocybin is mentioned in only 0.1% of drug -related emergency  
department  visits) .45 It can be anticipated  that an overdose  of psilocybin might present in a 
manner similar to “serotonin syndrome”. Removal of any residual  gastric  drug,  supportive  care,  
and cautious  administration  of a serotonin  antagonist  such  as risperidone  are reasonable  
interventions;  however,  to date  no cases  have  described  similar  responses  with  respect  to 
psilocybin,  and the doses  of psilocybin  that might  provoke  these physiological effects would be 
many times greater than even the highest doses used in early human studies.  
 
1.3.3.1. b. Common  side  effects  of psilocybin  
Common acute side effects of psilocybin are almost all psychological, and include 
anxiety, changes  in thought  (experiencing  thinking  speeding  up or slowing  down),  changes  in 
motion  perception, changes in time perception (time slowing down or speeding up), 
depersonalization (feeling as if one is “outside oneself”), derealization (feeling as if the world is 
unreal or as if one is “in a dream”), dizziness, fatigue, impaired concentrati on, inattention, mood 
lability (rapid and sometimes profound changes in mood ), nausea,  nervousness,  parasthesias  
(strange  bodily  sensations  or feelings),  perceptual  alterations  (general),  altered  time  perception,  
alteration  in visual  perception  (distortions,  illusions  and imagery seen with eyes open or closed), 
and unusual thought or feelings about the self or the world .25,41,46 Most of these effects are 
acute and last no longer than six hours . For the most  part,  people  receiving  psilocybin  were able 
to interact, and maintained  insight  concerning  the nature  and source  of their  experience.  
However,  some  participants  occasionally  exhibited  paranoid ideation or temporarily lost insight 
into the experimental situation .41,46 
Page 9 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 Psilocybin  produces  mild  sympathetic  system  activation.  Physiological  effects  include  
pupillary dilation and detectable but moderate increases in blood pressure or heart rate  . 46 
Researchers  sometimes  detected  changes  in blood  pressure  and heart  rate only  at one point  in 
time,  as sixty  minutes  after  drug  administration.25 These effects are transient and are 
generally gone approximately six  hours  after  drug  administration.  People  in previous  human  
studies  have  tolerated  doses  of psilocybin equal to or greater than the doses employed in 
this study. Researchers studying   the effects  of 30 mg psilocybin  took  precautions  similar  to 
the ones  we will use in this study  and no reactions  requiring  pharmacological  intervention  
occurred.27 
 
1.3.3.1. c. Acute  side effects  
Anxiety. The most likely potential adverse effect of psilocybin is anxiety, or possibly 
panic, delusion,  and cognitive impairments, particularly at higher doses (> 25 mg po) during 
the period of  acute  drug  action.  In recent  studies  of psilocybin  in healthy  humans  conducted  
over  the past   15 years , no adverse reactions other than the expected  occasional  episodes  of 
fear or anxiety  during  the time  of drug  effect  have  been  reported.25,29 Such transient 
episodes of fear or anxiety respond well to reassurance and have not  required  
pharmacological  intervention.  Some  individuals  have  been  reported  to develop  paranoid  and 
psychotic  states  while  under  the influence  of psilocybin.  
Insomnia . Although rare, insomnia following psilocybin administration has been 
reported in the  literature;  it has been  described  as self-limiting  and responded  well to 
reassurance  from  the study team.41 In the event that a participant experiences insomnia, a 
study physician may  initially prescribe a sleep aid (i.e. diphenhydramine or hydroxyzine) and 
if the initial  reassurance, education about sleep hygiene and pharmacological intervention 
was unsuccessful, a one -time dose of short -acting benzodiazepine (specifically lorazepam)  
and/or  zolpidem  will be considered.  
 
1.3.3.1. d. Prolonged  side effects  
There  is the possibility  of prolonged  adverse  psychological  reactions,  such  as psychosis  
and depression.  It is generally  believed that individuals with previous psychiatric conditions, 
particularly psychosis or  mania,  are at an increased  risk for hallucinogen -induced  psychosis .29 
Thus, psilocybin  administered to a participant with a history of psychosis or mania could 
precipitate enduring psychiatric illness such as schizophrenia. This risk is very low, but 
cannot  be excluded completely.47 For this reason, all potential  participants  with  personal  or 
family  histories  of Schizophrenia,  Psychotic  Disorder,  or Bipolar  I or II disorder are to be 
excluded from participation. Nevertheless, although the risk is  believed to be minimal, it is 
possible that some participants may develop a brief intense psychological  reaction  while  
under  the influence  of psilocybin.  
The low rate of late psychological  symptoms  is consistent  with  a summary  of such  
effects  from  110 psilocybin  research  participants  reported  in a meta -analysis  conducted  by 
Studerus et al in their laboratory.41 In that report, 7 participants  endorsed negative changes 
in psychological well -being, but only 1 participant (0.9%)  reported a level of distress 
sufficient for him to contact the researchers. Those symptoms      resolved  after  a few sessions  
with  an experienced  psychotherapist.  
Investigators at the Johns Hopkins Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Studies 
recently completed an internet survey of hallucinogen users who  reported  having  a 
challenging  experience  after  taking  psilocybin  mushrooms.42 The rates  and severity  of both  
acute  and enduring  problems  shown  in the survey  are notably  higher  than  those observed in 
Page 10 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 laboratory research studies involving administration of high doses of  psilocybin to carefully 
screened, well -prepared, and closely monitored volunteers. This  observation appears to 
support the efficacy of the standard screening, preparation,  monitoring,  and follow -up 
procedures  designed  to minimize  the possibility  of any enduring  problems.  
 
1.3.3. 2. Potential  risks  of Niacin  (active -placebo -control  agent)  
A participant's symptoms of depression or burnout could change or perhaps worsen 
during the course of the study, as  symptoms  might  change  if that individual were not 
participating in the study.  However, there  is no reason  to believe  that  niacin as an active -
placebo -control  would  exacerbate  symptoms of depression or burnout.  Niacin  has expected  
physiological side effects that make it well suited to be used as an active placebo, including  
flushing,  tingling,  itching,  and redness  of the face,  arms,  and chest,  as well as headaches, and 
these are documented to be transient. Other minor, transient, and occasional  side effects 
include upset stomach, intestinal gas, and dizziness.  Participants will be informed about these 
potential side effects,  and they will be monitored  throughout  the drug  administration  visits.  
 
1.3.3.3.  Potential ri sks of changes  or delay  in participant  treatment s being received prior to 
screening  
Participants will be asked to refrain from starting new medications , including OTC 
suppleme nts, during th e procedures involved in this  study . Should  circumstances  warrant  a 
change  in treatment,  then  participants  will be asked to immediately notify the study team. If 
medically warranted, the participant begins to experience  a decline,  or their  provider  believes  
a treatment  change  is necessary,  then  the participant  will be withdrawn  from  the study  and 
encouraged  to seek  treatment.  
For participants who are tapering and discontinuing antidepressant medications 
prior to entering the study, the following safety measures will be taken:  
• Participants will be required to discuss changes in their antidepressant 
medication with their own prescribing provider, and to provide the study 
staff with a written note from the provider describing the plan.  
• Study staff will be in contact with a participant who is tapering their 
antidepressant medication weekly with a phone safety assessment that will 
involve use of the C -SSRS. (These safety assessments are not designated as a 
‘study visit’ so do not appear in  the study visit flowsheets in Section 3.1 that 
summarize research procedures).  
• Participants will be required to provide the name of at least one adult who 
will be in continuous contact with them during the taper and 
discontinuation period.  
 
1.3.3.4. Risk of Emotional Responses, Discomforts During Administration & follow -up meetings.  
During preparation, medication  dosing , and integration sessions, participants will be 
asked to think about and to discuss their thoughts and emotions about their experiences 
working in the COVID pandemic, including the impact that these experiences have had on their 
lives. They may experience  emotional responses to speaking about these thoughts, feelings,  and 
concerns. The medication dosing  session will take place at Harborview Medical Center and will 
be staffed by two investigators. The PI and/or investiga tors who will be present during the drug 
session will meet the patient at least 3 times prior to the medication  dosing  session. This will be 
done as part of psychoeducation that provides the participant with expectations for what to 
expect during the sessions.  
Page 11 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 1.3.3.5. Risks from routine medical evaluations.  
The other  risks  involved  in this research  are generally  considered  minimal  and include  
those  normally associated with clinical care or research such as psychiatric evaluations, 
medical  examinations, lab  work - urine drug screening, blood draws, and research 
questionnaires.  
Psychiatric Evaluations. Participants must answer personal  questions, which may 
feel unpleasant or tiring, or may find discussing their symptoms and  their illness during the 
psychiatric evaluation unpleasant or upsetting. Screening is  necessary  to assess  participant  
eligibility.  The major  disadvantages  of these  assessments  are the time that it takes to 
complete them. These clinical and research methods represent  minimum  risk(s).  
Blood draws and urine tests for routine screening, including  pregnancy  testing.  
Participants will undergo a blood draw for a comprehensive metabolic panel, pregnancy 
test, liver  panel.  These  tests  prior  to the psilocybin  session  allow  the investigators  to ensure  
that there  are no contraindications to subjects' participation in the study , such as l iver 
function abnormalities  which could produce higher  than  expected  levels  of psilocybin.  
Higher  levels  of psilocybin  may  produce  prolonged  duration  or greater  intensity  of subjective  
effects.  Weighing  the risks  and benefits  of a blood  draw versus potentially unpredictable 
levels of psilocybin, the liver panel conveys more  benefits than risks. Serum pregnancy and / 
or urinary pregnancy testing will be conducted  at the screening visit to avoid  the risk of 
unintended  psilocybin  exposure  in utero.  Less  than  50mL  will be drawn  per collection.  There  
will be a single blood  draw  over the course of study. The blood draw may produce 
temporary  discomfort as a result of sampling blood, and discomfort or bruising at the blood 
drawing  site.  The urinary  drug  screen  is necessary  to verify  abstinence  from  illicit  substances  
or nonprescription  stimulants  prior  to the psilocybin  session.  
 
1.3.3.6.  Reproductive Risks  
 While some women who choose to participate in the study will be post -menopausal, so 
the pregnancy will not be possible, pre -menopausal women who could bear children could be at 
reproductive risk. There have been no systematic studies of the effect of psilocybin in utero, 
but also no case reports of birth defects resulting from psilocybin use. Thus , the reproductive 
risks seem minimal, but are not well characterized. We will screen all participants who are 
pre-menopausal women with pregnancy tests, and couns el them to use birth control until 
after their medication session.  
1.3.3.7.  Risks of privacy and confidentiality  
 There is a special potential risk to study participants because of their profession. D octors in 
some states are required to report any mental health condition that may affect their performance to 
the state licensing board. If not mitigated, these risks could lead to reputational damage and even 
damage to their employability. The same requirement is not mandated for advance practice providers 
or nurses, but those clinicians could still face reputational damage if their participation in this study 
were made public. To mitigate this risk, we have applied for an FDA Certificate of Confidentiality, and 
all data will be entered using a study code.  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 1.3.3.8. Minimizing participant risks  
The anticipated risks and risk mitigation strategies that will be used are summarized 
in the Table below.  
Anticipated risk  Risk mitigation strategies  Occurrence of risk 
in recent published 
studies since 2000  
Changes to any 
treatments a 
participant is 
receiving prior to 
study screening and 
enrollment  1. Clear communication with potential 
participants about existing treatments (for 
example need to taper SSRI before study 
entry).  
2. Coordination between PI and participants 
mental health provider.  
 Published studies 
do not report 
numbers of 
participants who 
had complications 
related to changing 
treatments  prior to 
screening .  
 
Worsening of 
participant mental 
health symptoms 
during the study  1. Weekly phone calls from study staff to 
check in re participant well -being are part of 
the study procedures.  
2. Mental health symptoms will be assessed 
by study therapists during all preparation and 
integration psychotherapy sessions, and 
therapists will discuss with participants and 
the study team (at a weekly meeting or 
urgently with the PI) any issues that may  
warrant a change in study procedures.  
 This risk has not 
been reported in 
published studies 
since 2000.  
 
Increase in 
participant suicidality 
during the study  1. All participants will be screened with the 
Columbia Suicidality Screening instrument at 
preparation, medication days, integration 
sessions, and at follow up  measurements.  
2. If an increase in suicidality is measured, 
study staff will notify the PI immediately and 
arrangements for appropriate evaluation will 
be made with the attending psychiatrist on 
call at Harborview Medical Center.  This risk has not 
been reported in 
published studies.  
Intense psychological 
reactions during the 
medication session  1. All study therapists will have training 
specifically for this issue.  
2. the therapist manual lays out first -line and 
second -line interventions (which are non -
pharmacologic ), as well as indications about 
when to notify the PI Dr Back. These 
interventions are based on consultation and 
experience at other academic centers where 
research with synthesized psilocybin has been 
conducted (NYU, Yale, Johns Hopkins).  This risk has been 
reported in up to 
40% of 
participants. In all 
instances, these 
reactions have 
been managed 
with non -
pharmacologic 
interventions, and 
Page 13 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
  the reactions have 
been transient.  
Discomfort resulting 
from study 
questionnaires  1. All participants will be informed that they 
may take a break at any time from 
questionnaires and that study staff are 
available to discuss issues that warrant follow 
up. 
 This risk has not 
been reported.  
Confidentiality of 
participant identity  1. Because doctors in some states are 
required to report any mental health 
condition that may affect their performance 
to the state licensing board, we have 
submitted a request to the FDA for a 
Certificate of Confidentiality.  
 No prior studies 
have had 
participant 
inclusion criteria 
that specify 
doctors and 
nurses.  
Reproductive risks  1. All female potential participants will be 
asked about their menopausal status at 
screening, and pre -menopausal participants 
will undergo a pregnancy test.  As noted above, 
the reproductive 
risks seem 
minimal, although 
they are not well 
characterized.  
Length of study for 
subjects who were 
taking medications 
prior to study entry 
and who are 
randomized to 
placebo  1. The study team will clearly communicate 
with potential subjects during consent 
conversations to ensure eligible subjects 
know they may be off their medications 
longer if they are assigned the placebo group 
and then chose the open -label psilocybin 
session following un -blinding. We will 
recommend that individuals taking 
medications that need to be s topped, discuss 
this with their provider(s), family, and any 
other trusted people, prior to agreeing to 
participate in the study.  
 
2. Minimize the time for subjects who are 
randomized to the placebo group to an open -
label psilocybin session. We anticipate that 
arranging and scheduling an open -label 
psilocybin session will take 1 -2 weeks. During 
this time, subjects will be followed weekly and 
will have an additional preparation 
psychotherapy session, and every weekly 
contact will include admini stration of the C -
SSRS suicidality screen to minimize risk to these 
subjects. We judge that this additional risk of 1 -
2 weeks off antidepressants  is acceptable given This risk has not 
been reported.  
Page 14 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 that these subjects will be monitored closely.  
 
 
A detailed therapist manual outlines procedures for every contact session with 
participants, and for participant issues that could represent risk, the manual outlines 
responses to minor, moderate, and severe side effects with first -line, second -line, and 
indications to call the PI by phone for urgent or emergent issues. Research  staff  including the 
investigators and PI  will be available  to evaluate  any change  in a participant’s condition.    
Participants  will be asked  to contact  us at any time  if any unpleasant  effects  occur  and will 
be contacted by study staff at least weekly during study participation . A study physician will 
be at the study site on medication dosing days to manage psychiatric emergencies.  
Synthesized p silocybin: Reviews of the drug and the literature indicate that the 
physiological and  psychological effects are transient. The patient will be monitored at all 
times by trained  research  and/or  medical  staff.  The study  medical  doctors  and nursing  staff  
who  are trained  in dealing  with  drug  challenge  studies  (such  as ketamine,  psilocybin,  
yohimbine,  and various  cannabis compounds) will remain in attendance during the entire 
session. Participants will  be asked to remain on the CNRU until effects wear off. Procedures 
will be immediately  stopped  if participants  request  or if they  are exhibiting  significant  
distress.  To minimize risk associated with synthesized psilocybin, participants will undergo a 
thorough  screening  for contraindicated  psychological  conditions  or interacting  medications.  
Dosing  with  psilocybin  must  be performed  in a setting  that minimizes  distraction  and 
interruption,  and the participant must be attended following the dose by research staff 
trained in  providing reassurance and a safe environment until the effects of the single dose 
have  dissipated.  
The PI may  prescribe  a designated  rescue  medication  in the event  of symptoms  that 
require  it during or after the medication dosing session. Rescue medications may be a 
benzodiazepine,  zolpidem,  or other  anxiolytic  or sedative  according  to the physician's  clinical  
judgment.  
Following the investigator brochure, a lthough there have been no reports of their use in 
well-reported clinical trials with oral  psilocybin, medications will be available for the treatment 
of causal symptomatic  hypertension,  agitation,  or severe  psychosis.  Typically,  these  supplies  are 
two dosage  units  of labetalol, nitroglycerin, lorazepam and/or diazepam, and risperidone or 
similar orally - disintegrating  antipsychotic .  
 
If any participant  presents  with  an adverse  reaction  to the psychopharmacological  
agent  as reported  by them  or assessed  by a member  of the research  team,  we will discontinue  
the study  and call for medical  assistance.  Finally,  the participant  may  be withdrawn  from  the   
study  if his/her  withdrawal  is in the best  interests  of either  the participant  or of the research  
(e.g., due to a medical condition making the procedures unsafe or any condition making  
interpretation  of the results  difficult).  
Niacin: (active -placebo -control agent): There is no reason to believe that niacin would  
exacerbate symptoms  of depression or burnout or PTSD . Participants will be informed about 
Niacin's potential side  effects,  and they  will be monitored  throughout  the drug  administration  
visits.  The rationale for using an active -placebo -control agent rather than active low dose  of 
psilocybin  (ranging  2mg  -4mg),  which  have  been  used  in the recent  palliative  care  studies  is 
because  a partial  response  has been  reported  even  with  these  low doses.   
Page 15 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 Changes or delay s in treatment s being received prior to screening : Participants will 
be asked to refrain from starting new  medications to allow the participant and this study to 
safely proceed. If medically  warranted, or the participant begins to experience a decline, or 
their provider believes a  treatment  change  is necessary,  then  the participant  will be 
withdrawn  from  the study  and encouraged  to seek  treatment.   
Involuntary holding, overnight for safety: The medical staff will closely monitor the  
participant's medical status during study administration. The staff take whatever medical  
steps are safely possible to reduce the need for an additional holding period including  
ongoing evaluations during the testing period. However, if there was concern about  
participants  being  a risk to themselves  or others  during  the study,  or if investigator  feels  it is 
medically necessary, and/or if the participant is not compliant, then the participant may  
need  to be involuntarily  held  for his/her  own  safety . If a participant requires overnight 
observation, the participant’s medication would be unblinded to maximize the information 
available to the treating inpatient team. Participants  will be discha rged  after  the study  
physician  believes  that  it is safe  to do so. 
Emotional Responses and Discomforts During Psilocybin Medication S ession , and  
follow -up appointments:  Trained  staff  will be on hand  to help  participants  deal  with  their  
responses  to the study.  The therapist manual outlines first - and second -line interventions 
for emotional responses or any psychological reactions that may be experienced. In studies 
since 2000 conducted at academic research centers, no participants required ‘rescue’ 
medication f or psychological reactions —they were all managed with non -pharmacologic 
interventions.  
Administration  and follow -up appointments:  Only  the trained  clinical  staff  will conduct  
such  sessions. Staff will assist patients who require help with their anxiety. The anxiety  
experienced  is no more  than  normally  reported  in any standard  therapeutic  session.  
Psychiatric evaluation and clinical assessments: All participants must first give 
permission  for the investigators to review medical records and later undergo a psychiatric 
evaluation  and a urinary  drug  screen  to ensure  that  participants  are eligible  to be in the study.  
We will try to schedule  and to complete  tasks  quickly.  Each  participant  is told that  he/she  
does  not have  to answer  any question  that  he/she  does  not want  to answer , but that the 
questions about suicidal ideation and behaviors, including the complete C -SSRS, are required 
to participate in this study . Only  the trained  clinical     will conduct  these  evaluations  and all 
exercise  utmost  sensitivity.  
Routine labs : Screening  is necessary  to assess  participant  eligibility  and to uncover 
sometimes unknown contraindications. We minimize risk by having only skilled  medical  staff  
conduct  the brief  physical  examination  rule out any cardiac  abnormalities.   
Urine toxicology and blood draw s. We minimize medical risk by having skilled nurses 
and phlebotomists do our  blood  drawing.  If a blood  draw  produces  temporary  discomfort,  
then  nursing  staff  can offer  ice or cool  compresses.  There  is also a remote  possibility  of 
inflammation  or infection  at the blood drawing site. Liver panel results will allow the 
investigators to detect poor  metabolism,  which  could  produce  higher  than  expected  levels  of 
psilocybin.  Higher  levels  of psilocybin  may  produce  prolonged  duration  or greater  intensity  of 
subjective  effects.  Weighing  the risks  and benefits  of a blood  draw  versus  potentially  
unpredictable  levels  of psilocybin,  the liver  panel  conveys  more  benefits  than  risks.  The 
urinary  drug  screen  is necessary  for verifying  the participant’s  report  of current  substance use 
and to eliminate potential risks of interactions of the study  medication s with other 
medications needed by the participant . Subjects  are informed  of this testing  in advance  of 
Page 16 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 the screening  appointment and  may  choose  to not participate  in the study.  
Study questionnaires. The research  staff  will inform all participants that they may 
take breaks while completing questionnaires, or stop if they are experiencing too much  
frustration, or anxiety. Participants may take breaks from completing measures and online  
tasks.  Ratings  will be administered  with  sensitivity  by trained  staff,  either  on paper  instruments  
or online portals utilizing secure servers and data capture systems. All online responses will 
be captured on  secure  servers.  This use of online  measures  speeds  up the assessment  process  
and seems  to reduce  some  subject  stress.  All information  will be kept  strictly  confidential.  
Returning to work. Participants will be required to wait 48 hours after a medication 
dosing session before returning to work.  
 
1.3.4. Confidentiality  
All participant records, paper or electronic, will  be stored  in locked  offices  and 
password -protected encrypted drives that will be  accessible  only  to the principal  investigator  
and other study personnel. Research  databases will be coded (all identifiers except id 
number will be removed) during data  analyses  and are also kept  on secure servers  or 
encrypted  computers.  
We have requested from the FDA a Certificate of Confidentiality for this study to 
protect the identities of participants.  
 
2. Study Design and Endpoints  
 
2.1 Description  of the Study  Design  
This is a randomized,  double -blind,  placebo -controlled  study  that offers participants 
randomized to the placebo arm the option  to receive  open -label  psilocybin after primary 
outcome measurements have been completed.  
 
 
 
 
2.2. Research  Methods  and Design  
This study tests a hypothesis that a single session of psilocybin  (the ‘medication dosing’ 
session)  in the context of pre - and post -dose psychotherapy will result in improvement of 
symptoms of depression and burnout  measured 4 weeks post -dose. This study hypothesis will 
be tested in a single site, double -blind, randomized controlled design involving 30 clinician 
participants that will compare effects of a single 25mg oral dose of psilocybin to a 100 mg of 
niacin (active placebo). The primary outcome measure ments will be collected 4 weeks after 

Page 17 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 the psilocybin dose, after which the participant group assignment will be unblinded, and 
participants who received niacin  will be offered the opportunity to have a second dose 
session with a 25 mg dose (with pre - and post -dose psychotherapy).  
Precautions will be taken to reduce potential for COVID exposure , following FDA 
guidance ( https://www.fda.gov/media/136238/download ): 
• Some psychotherapy sessions can be conducted by video, although at least one 
preparation session and one integration session will be done in person.  
• COVID -19 screening procedures mandated by UW Medicine will be followed per 
UW Medicine policy. Currently UW Medicine policies require a basic symptom 
check before ambulatory care encounters, for example.  
• Participants will be tested for COVID using a rapid antigen test on the morning 
of their medication session, and therapists will also be tested on the morning of 
the participant’s medication session.  
• Physical distancing will be maintained as much as possible.  
 
2.3. Study  Endpoints  
 
2.3.1.  Primary  Endpoint  
The primary endpoint will assess symptoms of depression using the Montgomery -
Asberg Depression Rating Scale ( MAD RS), a clinician -assessed instrument, at 4 weeks post  
psilocybin -assisted psychotherapy vs control psychotherapy . We expect at least 50% of 
participants treated with psilocybin to have a 35% reduction in their MADRS compared to 
baseline, which is a clinically significant difference compared to the control arm.  
 
2.3.2.  Secondary  Endpoints  
• Assess symptoms of depression using the Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating 
Scale (MADRS) prior to the primary endpoint at 1 week post psilocybin -assisted 
psychotherapy vs control psychotherapy.  
• Assess symptoms of depression using the MADRS after psilocybin administration 
(for patients randomized to psilocybin or who receive open -label psilocybin) at 1 
week, 4 weeks, 8 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months.  
• Assess  symptoms of burnout using the Stanford Fu lfillment Index  (SFI)  at 4 
weeks post medication administration. We expect at least 50% of participants 
treated with psilocybin to show a reduction in the SFI work exhaustion and 
interpersonal disengagement subscales by at least 25% (from “a lot” to 
“moderately”).   
• Assess symptoms of burnout after psilocybin administration (for patients 
randomized to psilocybin or who receive open -label psilocybin) at 1 week, 4 
weeks, 8 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months.  
• Another secondary endpoint will assess symptoms of post -traumatic stress 
using the PCL5 , measured at 1 week and 4 weeks after the medication session.  
We expect at least 50% of participants treated with psilocybin to show a reduction 
in PCL5 scores by at least 10 points (the clinically meaningful threshold for 
improvement).  
• Assess symptoms of post -traumatic stress using the PCL5 after psilocybin 
administration (for patients randomized to psilocybin or who receive open -
label psilocybin) at 1 week, 4 weeks, 8 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months.  
• A 10% or less difference in the rate of adverse events between the treatment 
and control arms at all study visits.  
Page 18 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
   
 
2.3.3.  Exploratory  Endpoints  
To test hypotheses concerning psychological therapeutic mechanisms, we will assess 
correlation  and mediational  influence of self-reported mystical states 
and psychological  flexibility on changes in primary and secondary  outcomes.  
Exploratory endpoint A: Intensity of mystical experience (measured at the end of the 
medication dosing session) , using the validated Mystical Experience Questionnaire . The 
hypothesis is that this will be a significant mediator of improvements in symptoms of depression 
and burnou t. 
Exploratory endpoint B: Psychological flexibility , using the  AAQII , measured at 4 weeks 
after the medication dosing s ession. The hypothesis is that this will serve as a mediator of 
burnout.  
Exploratory endpoint C: Interoceptive awareness, using the Multidimensional 
Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness.48 The hypothesis is that this will be a mediator of 
improvements in symptoms of burnout.  
 
3. Research Materials and Measures  
3.1. Research  Procedures  
Participants will complete self -report and clinician -administered measures at baseline, prior to the 
medication dosing session, and at designated study visits (see figure  next page ). 
 
 
 
 
Schedule for Activities during Randomized Phase  
Purpose  Screen  Prep  Prep  Medi -
cation  Inte - 
gration  Inte -
gration  Inte - 
gation  Follow  
-up 
Study day (approx)  -21-14  -7 -1 0 1 8 15 28 
Visit number   V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 V7 
Research activity          
Demographics  X        
Eligibility Determination  X        
Medical exam  X        
Informed consent  X        
Caregiver contact info  X        
Blood draw  X        
Pregnancy screen (if applicable)  X   X     
PI review of inclusion/exclusion  X        

Page 19 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 Informed Consent   X       
Mental health evaluation   X       
Education re expectations  X X       
Preparation psychotherapy   X       
Urine screen  X        
Randomization     X     
Medication  (psilocybin or control )    X     
Medication dosing  monitoring     X     
Integration psychotherapy      X X X  
Adverse event reporting     X X X X  
Un-blinding         X** 
         
Measures          
Mont -Asberg Depr ession (MADRS)  X X   X X  X 
Beck Depression Scale   X   X X  X 
Stanford Fulfillment Index   X   X X  X 
Post -traumatic stress (PCL5)   X   X X  X 
Likelihood to leave job   X   X X  X 
Self-reported mystical exp     X     
Moral injury symptom scale   X      X 
Psychedelic Music Questionnaire      X    
Psychological flexibility  (AAQII)   X    X  X 
Interoceptive awareness (MAIA2)   X   X X X X 
Suicidality (C -SSRS)  X X X X X X X X 
Qualitative interview         X 
Adverse events, Suicidality  X X X X X X X X 
**The unblinding will be done after the study coordinator has verified that the Day 28 
measures have been completed.  
 
 
Follow up measures for participants randomized to psilocybin  
Purpose  Follow  
-up Follow  
-up Follow  
-up 
Study day (approx.)  56 84 180 
Visit number  V8 V9 V10 
    
Measures     
Mont -Asberg Depression (MADRS)  X X X 
Beck Depression Scale  X X X 
Stanford Fulfillment Index  X X X 
Post -traumatic stress (PCL5)  X X X 
Likelihood to leave job  X X X 
Psychological flexibility  (AAQII)  X X X 
Interoceptive awareness (MAIA2)  X X X 
Suicidality (C -SSRS)  X X X 
Qualitative interview     
Adverse events  X X X 
 
 
3.1.1.  Clinician administered measures  
 1. Montgomery Asberg Depression (MADRS)49 
Page 20 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
  2. Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)50 
 3. Qualitative interview post -psilocybin  
 
3.1.2.  Self-report measures  
1. Beck Depression Scale  II51  
 2. Stanford Fulfillment Index (Burnout)  (baseline and 4 weeks only)52 
 3. Post -traumatic stress symptoms (PCL5)53 
 4. Professional likelihood of leaving10  
 5. Self -reported mystical experience (MEQ30)  (day of journey only)54 
6. Moral injury symptom scale -Health Professionals Version54b 
 7. Psychological Flexibility (AAQII)55 
8. Music experience questionnaire (day of journey only) [ Mendel Kaelen, personal 
communication]  
9. Multidimensional Assessment of Intero ceptive Awareness (MAIA2)48 
 
3.1.3.  Initial  Research  procedures:  
Phone Pre -screen . Because of a large number of interested potential participants, a 
pre-screening procedure has been developed to reduce burden on potential participants by 
performing more detailed pre -screening prior to an in -person screening visit  (this will allow 
people likely to be ineligible because of low symptom scores to avoid the in -person 
screening visit).  During a phone pre -screening call, the potential participant will be sent a link 
to a version of the MADRS that has been adapted for self -administration (MADRS -S). The 
MADRS -S is designed for self -assessment, and correlates reasonably well with the clinician -
administered MADRS that is being used as an eligibility criterion.(G. Bondolfi, F. Jermann, B. 
Weber Rouget, M. Gex -Fabry, A. McQuillan, A. Dupont -Willemin, J. -M. Aubry, C. Nguyen, Self - 
and clinician -rated Montgomery –Åsberg Depression Rating Scale: Evaluation in clinical practice, 
Journal of Affective Disorders, Volume 121, Issue 3, 2010, p 268 -272). The online pre -screen 
MADRS -S will not collect any identify ing information and will calculate a total score, which will 
be available to the study coordinator at the time of the phone call. The study coordinator will 
inform the caller whether their score is in a range (19 or above) that they will likely meet the  
eligibility criteria  for the study . The pre -screen MADRS -S score will only be used for pre -screen 
phone calls and will not be used as a study measurement.  
In-person screening visit.  At the study screening visit, the study, the conditions, and the 
procedures involved, will be explained,  and discussed with each subject. Each participant will 
have a chance to ask questions and to receive answers  before making a final decision whether 
to participate. Participants who decide to participate will document their informed consent. For 
safety, after completing the consent, the participants may designate 2 adults who will be 
expected to have continuing c ontact with the subject, who may provide patient transportation, 
and who may observe changes in the participants’ behavior and attitude that warrant 
notification of the research staff and/or PI. The screening visit will include the clinician -
administered MADR S, and to be eligible for the study a MADRS score of 20 or greater is 
required.  
 
3.1.4.  Study  Research  Evaluations  and Procedures   
Medication and lifestyle changes  may be required of all participants. All participants will 
be required to taper off and discontinue use of antidepressants (such as SSRIs) before 
starting the study and cannot take antidepressants during the study even if they were 
taking them before study entry. P articipants who were taking antidepressants before 
Page 21 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 study entry will need to be off them for five half - lives of the drug plus 2 weeks  before 
starting the study  and will be required to stay off their medication until after they have 
completed the primary outcome measurements on day 28. After unblinding (as early as 
day 28, after primary outcome measurements are received) . Subjects who were 
randomized to psilocybin will be able to resume antidepressants in consultation with 
their provider . Subjects who were randomized to placebo will need to stay off their 
antidepressants if they wish to have an open -label psilocybin medication session, and 
after their open -label psilocybin session they will need to stay off their medication until 
at least day 29 post -open -label -psilocybin, until after they have completed the day 28 
post -open -label -psilocybin outcome measurements. If a participant randomized to 
placebo does not wish to have an open -label psilocybin medication session, they will be 
able to resume their antidepressants after their primary outcome measurements in 
consultation with their provider, as early as day 29 post -open -label -psilocybin. They will 
also need to abstain from tobacco products, alcohol, or any recreational drugs such as 
marijuana  during the study . Study personnel may obtain a release to contact the 
participant's prescribing provider to discuss current prescriptions and medication 
history. This is decided on a case by case basis upon the discretion of the PI.  
Medication  contraindications  will include  anti-seizure  medications,  insulin  and oral 
hypoglycemics, hypertension medications  that act on the central nervous system  (clonidine  
and aldomet  specifically),  cardiovascular  medications  and the following  psychotropic  
medications:  anti-psychotics (first and second generation agents), anti -depressants and 
mood  stabilizers. Psychotropic medications cannot be taken in the previous two weeks,  
with Prozac (fluoxetine) not being taken within the last 5 weeks prior to receiving  any study 
agents. Participants may only take prn (as needed) benzodiazepines ( i.e., lorazepam)  up to 
three  days  before  the session.  Participants  will refrain  from  taking  any medications the day of 
either the experimental psilocybin medication dosing or active -placebo -control  medication 
dosing  session,  except  prescribed  opiate  pain  medication  or over -the-counter  non-narcotic  
pain  medication  at any time.  It will also be necessary  to refrain  from     drinking alcoholic 
beverages  the day before,  the day of, and the day after  each  medication dosing session.  
Physical  exam,  and blood and urine tests  are required at the screening visit to meet 
eligibility criteria.  As part of the study participant s will have a physical  examination,  and  
screening  blood  (including  a comprehensive  metabolic  panel,  chemistries,  hematological  tests ) 
and screening urine toxicology tests (for medications as described in Section 1.3.3.8; and 
pregnancy for female participants  of childbearing potential ). These results will also become 
part of the research  case  record.  
Randomization and One -time Administration of the Study Medications Psilocybin or 
active - placebo -control  Niacin.  Psilocybin and niacin (active -placebo -control agent) will be 
administered in  identically appearing  opaque capsules with approximately 180ml of  water.  
The dose  of psilocybin  will be 25 mg, which has been recently demonstrated to be as 
effective as a body weight -adjusted dose.56 The dose of niacin  will be 100 mg , and GMP niacin 
will be provided by the Usona Institute . In the study, half of the participants will be  
randomized  to receive  psilocybin  (n=15)  or the active -placebo -control,  niacin  (n=15).  Following 
the first treatment session of either the active agent or active -placebo - control,  participants  
who  were  randomized  to receive  active -placebo -control  will be offered the option to receive 
open -label psilocybin. (The blind will be broken after Day 28  to make this determination; 
this is after our primary endpoint  which is collected on Day 28 . The study rater (for clinician -
administered measures) w i l l remain blinded to the treatment assignment. Data will be 
collected from all  subjects  after  open -label  treatment  for descriptive  purposes,  but these  data  
will not be analyzed  as part  of our primary  analysis  plan.  
Page 22 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 Clinical Assessments and Study Evaluations . Online surveys and measures will be  
offered  using  secure  data  capture  systems,  using online  or paper  documents.  These 
evaluations will include self -report questionnaires and clinician  administered  measures . This 
testing  may  last up to 1 to 2.5 hours.  
Research  study  measures,  follow -ups and assessments  are outlined  (in Tables  below ) 
and represent study specific clinician administered and self -administered measures. Safety  
measures and checks will be completed at some study visits: vital  signs,  adverse events,  
spontaneously  reported  reactions,  general  well-being,  medications,  and changes  to any 
medications.  
All participant  responses  to measures  and assessments  will be recorded  either  on 
traditional  paper  formats  and scanned  to a secure server,  or in online  data  capturing  systems  
which instantly upload responses or surveys to a secure server. All  portable  digital  
participant  data  will be uploaded  immediately  and stored  in secure databases,  on password -
protected  computers  in locked  offices,  and on secure  servers.  
 
3.1.5.  Study  Environmen t 
Research visits and the medication dosing session will be conducted at  Harborview Medical 
Center . The screening, consent, preparation , and integration visits will occur at the Virology Research 
Clinic at Harborview Medical Center in the Ninth and Jefferson Building on the 11th floor. These visits will 
occur in a clinic room designed for outpatient, non -procedural visits, and this is a private room that is 
equipped with comfortable chairs and a window, appropriate for psychotherapy visits. This clinic is 
dedicated research space  that is a non -CRBB space and is directed by Dr. Anna Wald.  
The medication sessions will occur at Harborview Medical Center, in the Sleep Lab. These research 
visits will occur during the day  when the clinic is not in session,  in a room used for nighttime sleep studies. 
These are private, quiet rooms that are outfitted like hotel rooms with minimal equipment, a comfortable 
bed, art prints on the walls, chairs for therapists, and a private bathroom.  
 
3.1.6.  Study  Enrollment  and Withdrawal  
Participant  Population  – physicians and nurses with moderately severe symptoms of 
depression. Participants  meeting  study  inclusion  / exclusion  criteria after careful screening and 
examination will be invited to participate and will be  provided  with  all the information  
needed  to provide  an informed  consent.  We will recruit  30 adult participants ( 25 to 65 years) 
of both sexes  with clinically significant symptoms of depression.  
 
4. Participant Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
4.1. Inclusion  Criteria  
a. Participants must be physicians or nurses or advance practice providers (nurse 
practitioners or physician assistants) with at least 1 month of frontline clinical 
experience during the COVID pandemic  who rate at least 2 of 4 items from the COVID 
Exposure index as ‘more than half the days’ during  their peak 2 week period of 
exposure:  
i. Caring for someone critically ill with COVID -19, or who became critically ill while you 
were involved.  
ii. Working longer hours than usual in order to provide assistance or care  to individuals 
with COVID -19 
iii. Witnessing or responding to a death related to COVID -19, or losing a  patient you had 
been caring for to COVID -19 
iv. Caring for patients who have died without family physically present  due to COVID -19 
precautions  
Page 23 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 b. Have a Montgomery -Asberg clinician -administered depression  score  >21, indicating 
moderately severe symptoms . This measurement is clinician -administered and will be 
performed by a study team member who is not a therapist, who will receive special 
training.  
c. Have had persistent symptoms despite  at least  one medication  and/or  therapy  trial 
of standard  care  treatment  for depression.  
d. English  speaking  – able  to understand  the process  of consent  and the risk and 
benefits  associated  with  the study,  and able  to give written  informed  consent.  
e. Must be willing to sign a medical release for the investigators to  communicate 
directly with their therapist and doctors to confirm a  medication  and/or  medical  
history.  This is decided  on a case  by case  basis  upon  the discretion  of the PI. 
f. Must  be driven home after the medication dosing session by a driver  (which could 
be a friend, family, rideshare or taxi).  
g. Must provide at least one adult to have continuous contact with the participant, 
provide participant transportation, monitor changes in the participant’s 
behavior, and notify research staff of behavior changes.  
h. Has been  off selective  serotonin  inhibitors  for five half-lives  of the drug  plus 2 
weeks.  
i. Must  avoid  taking any psychiatric medications or  starting  a new  psychiatric  
medication  during  the study.  Should  participant's doctor recommend starting a 
new psychiatric medication,  participant  will be required  to notify  the study  team  
and the subject would withdraw from the study  
j. Must  provide  a contact  (relative,  spouse,  close  friend,  or other  caregiver)  who  is 
willing  and able  to be reached  by the Clinical  Investigators  in the event  of a 
participant  becoming  suicidal .  
k. Must  have  a negative  pregnancy  test at study  entry  and prior  to each  medication  
dosing session  if able  to bear  children and  must  agree  to use adequate  birth  
control . 
l. Are willing  to commit  to preparation sessions, medication  dosing  sessions,  integration  
sessions, to complete evaluation instruments and commit to be contacted for all 
necessary telephone contacts.  
 
 
4.2. Exclusion  Criteria . 
a. Personal or immediate family history of schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder, 
delusion disorder, paranoid disorder, or schizoaffective disorder.  
b. Suicidal ideation with a C -SSRS > 3 
c. Current substance abuse disorder (except in the case of mild alcohol use)  
d. Neuroleptic and SSRI medications  that cannot be tapered and discontinued in 
conjunction with the participant’s prescribing physician.  
e. Unstable neurological or medical condition; history of seizure, chronic/severe 
headaches . 
f. Positive urine pregnancy test at the time of screening  
g. Any unstable medical condition that my render study procedures unsafe  based on the 
medical history performed as part of the screening procedures, including active 
cardiac medical issues such as ongoing angina, uncontrolled hypertension, or recent 
cardiac ischemia requiring medical attention (within the past 3 months  
h. Any use of psychedelic drugs within the prior 12 months.  
i. Use of tramadol, due to the potential for serotonin syndrome with concomitant use of 
Page 24 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 psilocybin.  
j. Allergy to niacin  (N.B. the investigators will inform participants that flushing, redness, 
tingling, and headache are normal side effects that do not predict anaphylaxis, which 
although reported is extremely rare).  
k. Individuals who are on MOAI  (monoamine oxidase  inhibitors) or who have a known 
sensitivity to the drug or its metabolites. Psilocybin  is contraindicated in medications 
that are known UGT (UDP -glucuronosyltransferase) enzyme  modulators.  The 
concurrent  use of SSRI/SNRI  meds  is assumed  to be contraindicated  due to the 
potential to increase the risk of serotonin syndrome and/or to attenuate the binding  
of psilocin  to the HT2A  receptor . 
 
 
4.3. Medication management  
Medication contraindications will include anti -seizure medications, insulin and oral  
hypoglycemics, certain hypertension medications (clonidine, and aldomet specifically),  cardiovascular 
medications and the following psychotropic medications: anti -psychotics (first  and second  generation  
agents),  anti-depressants  and mood  stabilizers.  Psychotropic  medications  cannot  be taken  in the 
previous  two weeks,  with  Prozac  (fluoxetine)  not being  taken  within  the last 5 weeks  prior  to receiving  
any study  agents.  Participants  may  only  take  prn (as needed)  benzodiazepines  (i.e., lorazepam)  up to 
three  days  before  the session.  
Participants will refrain from taking any medications the day of medication dosing  session, except 
prescribed opiate pain medication or over -the-counter  non-narcotic  pain  medication  at any time.  It will 
also be necessary  to refrain  from  alcohol  the day before,  the day of, and the day after  each  medication 
dosing  session.  
Participants  must  agree  to: 
a. Ingest only alcohol -free liquids after 24:00 (midnight) the evening before  the 
Medication  Dosing  Session  
b. Refrain  from  the use of any exclusionary  medications.  Except  in the case  that  the PI 
prescribes  benzodiazepine  or zolpidem  for insomnia.  
c. Refrain from  use caffeine or nicotine for two hours before and six hours after  
ingesting  the drug,  or until  research  staff  deem  it safe  to do so. 
 
4.4. Strategies  for Recruitment  and Retention  
Partici pants will be recruited through social media  and professional organizations (i .e., 
Northwest Healthcare Response Network —the organization that has coordinated the clinician 
response to the COVID pandemic in Washington state). Because eligible participants will be 
physicians and nurses, we anticipate a general familiarity with clinical trials , although not for a trial 
involving PAP. A n informational website will be created to enable potential participants to 
understand the study purpose, inclusion criteria, exclusion criteria, and study email and phone 
number.  
 
4.5. Participant  Withdrawal  or Termination  
Participants  may  withdraw  their  consent  for use of their  data  and/or  terminate  
participation  in the study at any moment during the study by calling the Principal 
Investigator or a  member  of the research  team.  To revoke  authorization  of the use and 
disclosure  of Personal  Health  Information,  the participant  must  follow -up the phone  call by 
submitting  a request  in writing to the Principal Investigator. In this event, the Principal 
Investigator will indicate in  the data base that consent from the participant is no longer 
active,  and that data can no  longer  be used.   
Page 25 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 A participant may be withdrawn from the research for any of the following reasons:   
(1) A participant will be withdrawn if they become actively suicidal  
(2) A participant will be withdrawn if during the preparation visits, they show 
signs of severe personality disorder that was not evident in the screening 
visit.  
(3) A participant  may  be withdrawn  if their  withdrawal  is in the best  interests  of either  
the participant  or of the research  (e.g.,  due to  a medical  condition  making  the 
procedures  unsafe or  any condition  making  interpretation  of the results  difficult).  
(4) A participant may be withdrawn if they are unable to comply with study visits (e.g., they 
miss their preparation visits without explanation).  
 
 
4.6. Premature  Termination  or Suspension  of Study  
The Principal Investigator is responsible for monitoring the data, assuring protocol  
compliance, and conducting quarterly safety reviews. During the review process the  
principal  investigator  will evaluate  whether  the study  should  continue  unchanged,  require  
modification/amendment,  or close  to enrollment.  Likewise,  the principal  investigator  will 
periodically  review  the collection,  storage,  and distribution  practices  associated  with  clinical  
data bank, and determine whether changes to enhance confidentiality and privacy are  
required.  
The Principal  Investigator,  the Medical  Monitor  and the IRB have  the authority  to stop  
or suspend  the study  or require  modifications.  
 
5. Study Agent  
Synthesized p silocybin,  the study  drug,  is a 4-hydroxy -N,N-dimethyltryptamine  and 
occurs  in nature  in many species of mushrooms, including the  genera Psilocybe, Conocybe, 
Gymnopilus,  Panaeolus, and Strophparia. Its chemical formula is C 12H17N2O4P. Psilocybin is a 
potent  agonist  at 5-HT2A/C,  and their  binding  potency  to these  receptors  correlates  with  
human  potency as hallucinogens [7]. Psilocybin has been administered to normal volunteers 
to measure physiological  and psychological  parameters  at doses ranging from 0.045mg/kg  to 
0.43mg/kg [45; 51]. It has also been safely administered to patients with OCD at doses  
ranging  from  0.025mg/kg  to 0.3mg/kg.  
After  the FDA has approved  the content  of the protocol,  the psilocybin  will be provid ed   by the 
Usona Institute, Inc., 2800 Woods Hollow Rd. Madison, WI 53711, who will provide this i n f o r m a t i o n  as a 
supplement to this IND application. The Usona Institute utilizes a contract manufacturing 
organization (CMO) to manufacture GMP psilocybin, and the CMO is Almac Pharma Services Limited, 
Seagoe Industrial Estate, Portadown, Craigavon, BT63 SUA, United Kingdom. Using a 222 DEA form, the 
psilocybin  will be shipped to Dr Back  to be stored in DEA safe located in  the Investigational Pharmacy 
at Harborvie w Medical Center . To safeguard the psilocybin, a  special storage safe will be approved by 
DEA to store only the psilocybin. Designated staff  will be the only  personnel  with  access  to the 
psilocybin.  Both  the active  and placebo  will be prepared by designated study staff by a compounding 
process. The UW Investigational Pharmacy (IDS) will store and track the accountability of the 
psilocybin.  A log of the psilocybin  accountability,  compounding,  and release to the study team  will be 
kept  by the designated  IDS staff . This will provide  strict  safeguarding  and accounting  of the agent  both  
for internal  and external  regulatory  agencies.  The sponsor -investigator will be the DEA Schedule 1 
license holder and will dispense the drug directly to study participants.  
 
 
Page 26 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 6. Study Procedure and Schedule  
This study will use a randomized, placebo -controlled, double -blind design to examine 
the clinical and neural effects of psilocybin -assisted psychotherapy with either synthesized 
psilocybin  (25 mg)  or placebo  (niacin  100 mg ), given  along  with  non-drug  preparatory  and 
integrative  psychotherapy sessions. The duration of the randomized study phase is from 
consent until  two weeks after drug administration, which is approximately 6 weeks. The 
blind will be  broken  at 4 weeks after measures have been completed , and the participants  
who  received  placebo  will be offered  the option  to receive  open -label  psilocybin.  In addition  to 
the baseline  assessments  and medical  evaluation,  the study  will consist  of at least  two 
Preparation sessions  with  the study  therapists , the medication dosing session (which will require 
at least 7 hours), and post -medication session Integration sessions, starting the following 
morning after the medication dosing session and continuing at  2 weeks, 3 weeks, and 4 weeks 
post -medication. These integration sessions may be conducted by secure videoconference.  
 
 
6.1. Randomization  Blinded  Study  Phase  
Upon  completion of the Preparation sessions , participants  will be assigned  to one of 
the two conditions  for the Medication Dosing session : the experimental  condition  
(synthesized psilocybin 25mg)  or placebo  (niacin).  The randomization  will be performed by IDS 
and capsules will be placed in envelopes for each participant. Randomization  will be 
stratified by profession (physician vs nurse) and ethnicity (Black or Hispanic vs other) .  
Psilocybin and niacin will be administered in identically appearing opaque, size 0 
gelatin  capsule with approximately 180ml of water. The dose of psilocybin will be 25 mg  and 
the niacin will be 100 mg . Each participant will have the option of participating in the  
medication dosing  sessions.  In the study,  half of the participants  will be randomized  to receive  
psilocybin  (n=15)  or the placebo,  niacin  (n=15).  Following  the first treatment  session  of either  
the active  agent  or placebo,  participants  who  were  randomized  to receive  placebo  will be 
offered the option to receive open -label psilocybin. (The blind will be broken at 4weeks  to 
make  this determination , after primary endpoint measures have been collected . Clinical  
raters  will remain  blind  to the treatment  assignment).  Data  will be collected  from  all subjects  
after  open -label  treatment for descriptive purposes, but these data will not be analyzed as 
part of our  primary  analysis  plan.  
The participant’s condition assignment  will be maintained  from  randomization until 
the 4 week unblinding. If there is an adverse event or other emergency requiring knowledge 
of participant’s  condition assignment, as when pharmacological  intervention  is necessary, the  
blind may be broken for an individual participant. In this case, the study raters who will  
administer  the questionnaires  will remain  blind  to the participant’s  condition  assignment.  
Participants in the placebo condition will be eligible for an open -label study 
continuation.  They  will be re-screened  after  the blind  is broken  to make  sure  they  still meet  
study  criteria.  If they are eligible and choose to enroll in the open -label continuation, they 
may do so,  undergoing  psilocybin -assisted  sessions  occurring  within  another  seven  to 14-day 
period.  
The open -label phase of the study will follow nearly identical procedures to those 
used in  the randomized  phase.  Participants  will be re-assessed  on all study  measures  following  
the same  schedule  of the randomized  phase.  Participants  need  not complete  any portion  of 
the open -label phase or the several follow up phases for their participation in the study to 
be          considered  completed.  
 
Page 27 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
  
6.2.  Study schedule for participants by visit  
 
6.2.1.  Screening and Informed consent  
Prior to participation in this research, subjects will receive a brief secure online  screening  survey  
and then  if eligible,  will be screened  by phone  to determine  preliminary eligibility. All subjects will be 
informed about the  phone  screening  and what  the screening  process  involves.  
All potential participants will be told that we collect demographic information, relevant  
medical history, and psychiatric history during the screening process. Screening data  are entered 
directly into a secure online database  and are considered  a source  document.  
All seemingly  eligible  subjects  will be  told that they need to  come  in for baseline  screening  
visit, and will be informed about baseline questionnaires, clinician assessment, blood draw, and 
pregnancy test (if applicable) to ensure their eligibility. Subjects are free to decline  participation  at 
this point or to discontinue participation at any future point and to  withdraw  from  consideration.  
Some potential participants live in another state,  and it may not be  feasible to have them  
come  for an in-person  screening visit.  In this case  we will conduct  the screening interview u t i l i z i n g secure 
video communication platforms. We will ask these  participants to send us their most recent physical,  
and blood work (recent as of 1 month from the screening visit will be allowed).  This will be faxed  to 
the PI and reviewed  for potential participation. A remote urine test will be ordered for the screening 
process of remote participants.   
Prior to obtaining informed consent, the PI will confirm that the participant meets all 
study inclusion and exclusion criteria. The investigator or research staff member obtaining 
consent will ask the participant to provide a brief summary of the study to ensure they 
understand what is being asked of them and any potential risks and benefits.  
Note that if a female subject is pregnant, or breast -feeding, or does not agree to use an 
approved birth control method (i.e., oral, injectable, or implant birth control, condom, 
diaphragm with spermicide, intrauterine device, tubal ligation, abstinence, o r partner with 
vasectomy) she will be excluded.  
Findings of pregnancy, active cardia c medical issues , abnormal liver function, 
abnormal renal function, or abnormal blood counts, and any lab indicating an undiagnosed 
illness would exclude a participant from moving on to the preparation 1 visit. When 
screening requirements have been met, participants will have a visit with the PI and/or key 
study personnel in which the study, the scheduling and the procedures will be reviewed. All 
participants' questions will be answered prior to obtaining an informed cons ent. 
After providing informed consent, the participant will complete initial measures. Note 
that randomization to the psilocybin or control (niacin) treatment groups will occur at the end of 
visit 2.  
 
6.2.2.  Preparation visits (Visits 1, 2)  
 Preparation  for the medication  dosing session  (psilocybin or control)  consists  of 2 
meetings  for a total  of 5-6 hours in the 2 weeks  before the medication dosing session.  The main  
purpose  of the preparation  meetings  is to develop  rapport  and trust,  which  helps  minimize  the 
risk of fear or anxiety  reactions  during  the psilocybin  sessions.  Additional  meetings  and contact  
hours  will be scheduled  if it is judged  necessary  to establish  rapport  and trust.  Consistent  with  
other published  psilocybin  protocols,  the participant’s  life history  and current  situation  in life will 
be reviewed, and  intentions and  expectations  for the  psilocybin  sessions will  be discussed.  Audio 
or video  recordings  (with  coded  id number)  of this session  will be made  to allow  the 
participant  and the investigator -therapists  to review  preparation sessions.  
 
Page 28 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 6.2.3.  Medication Dosing session  (Visit 3)  
 Procedures  for psilocybin  administration  and the  conduct  of the session  will be similar  to 
procedures used  in studies  with  psilocybin conducted at New York University, Johns Hopkins, 
and Yale.  Participants  will be instructed to  consume  a low-fat breakfast  before reporting  to the 
clinic room  for the psilocybin  sessions.  Before  psilocybin  administration,  urine  pregnancy  test 
will be conducted  in females  of child bearing  potential, and a  negative  pregnancy  test will be 
required  in order  to continue in  the medication session.  Participants  and staff  will also  complete  
pre-session questionnaires.  Before  each  psilocybin  session,  study  personnel  will interview  the 
participant.  If the  investigator  believes  that the session  is contraindicated,  the session  will be 
cancelled  or postponed.  
 Psilocybin  will be administered  in opaque  gelatin  capsules  with  approximately  100 ml 
water.  At least  one therapist , under  the supervision  of the investigators,  will be present  in the 
room  and available  to respond  to participants’  physical  and emotional  needs  during  the full 
course  of the session  (at least  7 hours).  A physician  on the study  team  will be immediately  
available  via pager  or mobile  phone  for at least  3 hours  or until  the peak  effects  of psilocybin  
have  subsided,  whichever  is longer.  
 During  the session,  participants  will lie on a couch,  wear  eyeshades,  and listen  to a 
program  of music  through  headphones.  The participant  will be encouraged  to focus  her or his 
attention  inward.  The eyeshades  and music  are intended  to encourage  this inward  reflection.  
Heart  rate and blood  pressure  will be measured  pre drug  administration,  at 30, 60, 90, 120 
minutes  after  drug  administration,  and then  at least  hourly  until  at least  6 hours after  drug  
administration  and until  drug  effects  have  subsided.  Heart  rate and blood  pressure  assessments  
will be obtained  after  the participant  has been  sitting  or recumbent  for at least  5 minutes.  
Sessions  are expected  to last approximately  7 to 10 hours.  A sample schedule for the medication 
dosing session is as follows:  
 
Approximate  Time  Procedure  or Action  
09:00  Urine  pregnancy  test for females of childbearing potential , 
participant acclimates  to environment,  completes measures . 
09:30  Baseline  BP, Pulse,  Temp . 
Medication  Administration.   
Begin  video  recording.  
10:00 BP, Pulse  
10:30  BP, Pulse  
11:00  BP, Pulse  
11:30  BP, Pulse  
12:30 BP, Pulse  
13:30 BP, Pulse  
14:30 BP, Pulse  
15:30  BP, Pulse  
16:30  BP Pulse.  
Assessment for discharge home.  
 
 At about  the same  time  of each  heart  rate/blood  pressure  measurement,  monitors  will complete  
notations in the Medication Day Case Report Form  to rate the presence  and intensity  of behaviors,  signs,  
and reported  symptoms,  including  sleepiness,  amount  of speech,  anxiety,  stimulation/arousal,  
Page 29 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 tearing/crying,nausea/vomiting,  yawning,  restlessness,  feelings  of unreality,  visual  changes,  euphoria,  and 
peacefulness.  Video  and audio  recordings  will be made  throughout  the session , as allowed by participants . 
Participants will be encouraged to lie comfortably in bed wearing eye shades during  the first 
few hours of the experience and to listen to pre -selected music chosen by the  study staff. Two team 
members will remain with the participants the entire time and  be available for any processing of 
intrapsychic material made manifest by the treatment.  
If participants  experience  or report  on any adverse  effects  or if the research  staff  feels that  at the 
end of testing,  that  the participant  has any adverse  effects,  participants  will be asked  / required  to remain  
until  effects  wear  off and medically  cleared  by the PI. Medical assistance will be offered. The 
investigators will query participants  about suicidal ideation or intent during screening, and prior to 
each psilocybin session.  Participants  who  evidence  suicidal  ideation  or intent  will be withdrawn  from  the 
study  and referred  to appropriate  psychiatric  care.  
In the event that participants experience distressing anxious symptoms during the  drug 
session, the clinical personnel in attendance (the principal investigator and team  member) will 
initiate verbal communication designed to reorient and reassure that  participant. The occurrence and 
intensity of anxiety or panic responses can be reduced  through  providing  participants  with  information  
on potential  drug  effects,  supervision,  and monitoring of participants for the duration of drug effects. 
The goal in this study is to treat participants undergoing anxiety or panic  reactions  first by verbal  and 
psychological  interventions and  using  anxiolytic  med ication  only after verbal and psychological 
interventions have failed, and if participants are  endangering themselves or others. Residual 
symptoms will be addressed during the  frequent  follow -up psychotherapy  visits  with  the 
investigators.  
 At the end of the medication  dosing sessio n: 
o Participants  will complete  paper  or computer -based  questionnaires  designed  to assess  
acute  subjective  experiences  associated  with  the medication  dosing session.   
o Study  therapist s will the participant’s mood and suicidality with the C -SSRS.   
o Participants  will also be asked  to write  a narrative  description  of the experience  of the 
psilocybin  session  before  their  next  in-person  meeting.  
o Participants will remain under observation until both the  participant and investigator 
agree that their perception, cognition, functioning,  and judgment  are no longer  
impaired  by the medication.  
o Participants will be discharged in the company of the adult who is providing 
continuous contact.  
 
6.2.4.  Integration sessions (Visit 4, 5, and 6)  
 During  the meetings  with  the study therapists after  the medication  dosing session,  
participants  will complete  questionnaire  assessment  measures.  During  visit 4, study therapists 
will also complete  questionnaires  retrospectively  rating  various  behaviors  and experiences  
observed  on the session  day and reported  by the participant  during  the meeting (using the  Next -
Day Monitor  Rating  Form),  and participants  will be asked  to discuss  the narrative  description  of 
their  medication  session.  
 The purpose of the integration sessions is to ensure psychological stability after the medication 
dosing session and  provide an opportunity for the participant  to discuss thoughts or feelings from the 
session. These post -medication integration sessions allow time for reflection, meaning -making and 
psychological change. Audio or video  recordings  (with  coded  id number)  of this session  will be made.  
 
6.2.5.  Long -term  follow -up 
 A study therapist who conducted the integration, medication  dosing  and preparation 
sessions will contact the participant at 3 months  post -psilocybin, and 6 months post -psilocybin 
Page 30 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 (note that this takes into account participants who receive psilocybin after the primary endpoint 
measures have been collected in the open label phase of the study (see below). The therapist 
will have a 30 min phone call or video call with the participant,  and the participants will fill out 
measures using a secure online portal.  
 
6.2.6.  Timing  and Location  of Meetings,  Sessions,  and Measures.   
 Although  much effort  is put in to scheduling  participants  within  the stated  time  
frames,  these  are only  estimates.  Variables  out of the  study  team’s  control  (e.g.,  participant  
availability,  university  closings,  availability  of study rooms,  illness)  may  prevent  the scheduling  of 
volunteers  within  the stated  time  frame  goals. There  is no evidence  to suggest  that the 
difference  in timing  of sessions,  meetings,  and measures  will adversely  affect  the volunteer  or 
the validity  of the study.  On those  occasions when  the timing  of meetings,  sessions  or measures  
deviate  substantially  from  the time  frames  in the  protocol,  we will report  these  as deviations  in 
the Continuing  Review.  
 
6.3. Open Label Psilocybin Sessions.   
 The participants who choose to  receive open -label  psilocybin will be re -screened after the 
blind is broken after primary endpoint measures are collected (week 4 ) to make  sure  they  still meet  
study  criteria.  If they  are eligible  and s t i l l choose to enroll in the open -label continuation, they may do so, 
undergoing a  psilocybin -assisted  session  occurring  within  another  seven  to 14-day period.  
The open -label phase of the study will follow nearly identical procedures to those used in  the 
randomized  phase  except that a single preparation psychotherapy session will be given (see Schedule 
below, Study day -1). Participants  will be re-assessed  on all study  measures  following  the same schedule 
of the randomized phase.  
Participants  need  not complete  any portion  of the open -label  phase  or the several  follow  up 
support  appointments  for their  participation  in the study  to be considered  completed.  
Data will be collected from all subjects after open -label treatment for descriptive  purposes and  
will be viewed  not as part  of our primary  analysis  plan  but as part  of a secondary  analysis  examining  the 
impact of PAP on symptoms of depression and burnout . 
 
 Schedule for Activities during Open Label Psilocybin Phase  
Purpose  Prep  Medi -
cation  Inte - 
gration  Inte -
gration  Inte - 
gation  Follow  
-up Follow  
-up Follow  
-up Follow  
-up Follow  
-up 
Study day (‘denotes  open -label)  -1’ 0’ 1’ 7’ 14’ 21’ 28’ 56’ 84’ 180’ 
Visit number  V7 V8 V9 V10 V11 V12 V13*  V14*  V15*  V16*  
Research activity            
Psychiatric evaluation  X          
Education re expectations  X          
Preparation psychotherapy  X          
Urine screen   X         
Medication  (psilocybin )  X         
Medication dosing  monitoring   X         
Integration psychotherapy    X X X      
Adverse event reporting   X X X X      
           
Measures            
Montgomery Asberg Depression  X  X X X X X X X  
Beck Depression Scale  X  X X X X X X X  
Stanford F ulfillment Index  X  X X X X X X X  
Post -traumatic stress (PCL5)  X  X X X X X X X  
Page 31 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 Likelihood to leave job  X    X      
Self-reported mystical exp   X         
Moral injury symptom scale   X      X   
Psychedelic music questionnaire    X        
Psychological flexibility  (AAQII)  X    X X X X X  
Suicidality (C -SSRS)  X X X X X X X X X X 
Qualitative interview       X     
Adverse events  X X X X X X X X X  
*Note that V13, V14, V15 , and V16  are likely to be video or remote visits.  
 
6.4. Rescue  Medications,  Treatments,  and Procedures  
 The plan for managing psychiatric emergencies includes:  
• A detailed therapist manual, and training for all study therapists on procedures in the 
manual for handling potential adverse events including agitation, hallucinations, anxiety, 
and other intense psychological reactions.  
• The two -person therapist team that will be with the participant for the entire medication 
dosing session will include a licensed therapist or physician with training in psychiatric 
emergencies and adverse effects of psychedelics.  
• A psychiatrist team member will be involved in screening and evaluation of all 
participants.  
• A physician with training in psychiatric emergencies and adverse effects of psychedelics 
will be immediately available on site for the medication dosing days.  
• A psychiatrist team member will be immediately available to assess any participant noted 
by study staff to have a significant change in mood or suicidality.  
• In the event of a psychiatric emergency, the Harborview Medical Center Psychiatry 
Emergency Services in the next building is available 24 hours a day, with on -site 
psychiatrists and nurse practitioners.  
• The PI may  prescribe  a designated  rescue  medication  in the event  of symptoms  that 
require  it during  or after  the medication dosing  session.  Study therapists who have 
performed first -line and second -line interventions (that do not involve medications) will 
have the ability to contact the PI by phone, who is available to assess patients within 20 
min during every medication session. If a patient  does have an adverse reaction that 
requires a rescue medication, participants will be monitored for up to 2 hours beyond the 
required 6 hour duration of the  session. If at the end of that period that participant 
requires further, Dr Back (PI) will consult with the attending psychiatrist on call at 
Harborview Medical Center.  
If participants  experience  or report  on any adverse  effects  or if the research  staff  feels  
that at the end of testing, that the participant has any adverse effects, participants will be able 
to remain  until effects  wear  off (likely  only  for a short  period)  and medical  assistance  will be  
offered.  Participants  will be  free to withdraw from the  study  whenever  they  wish.  In addition,  if 
any participant  presents  with  an adverse  reaction  to the psychopharmacological  agent  as 
reported  by them or assessed  by a member  of the research  team,  we will discontinue  the study  
and call for medical  assistance  
 
6.5. Safety  Plan  for Suicidality:  
During all study visits a study investigator with clinical training  will assess the participant’s 
well- being – responses, intent, plan, etc. while administering the C -SSRS (Columbia Suicidality  Severity  
Response  Scale ).  If these procedures result in any  serious  concern s on the part of the investigator, 
they will either  ask the participant  to meet  with  or call the PI or  escort the participant to the 
Page 32 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 emergency room . If necessary, they will also call the participant’s treating clinician and/or their  
emergency contact. As part of the consent, participants are required to designate an  emergency  
contact  person  and provide  their  treating  clinician’s  contact  information.  We will ask the treating 
clinician for their local plan for such emergencies so the study team can  follow  this plan  should  an 
emergency  situation  arise.  
 
7. Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations)  
Participants will not be paid for their participation. Expenses of participating in the study, such as 
parking will be covered by the study.  
 
8. Assessment of Safety  
8.1. Specification  of Safety  Parameters  
8.1.1.  Definition  of Adverse  Events  (AE)  
Adverse  events  (AEs)  are defined  any untoward,  physical,  social,  economic,  or 
psychological  occurrence affecting human subjects in research. An AE can be any 
unfavorable or  unintended  event  including  abnormal  laboratory  finding,  symptom,  reaction,  
or disease.  An AE does  not necessarily  have  a causal  relationship  with  the research,  or any risk 
associated  with the research, the research intervention, or the assessment. Adverse events 
involve  subjects  only.  
 
8.1.2.  Definition  of Serious  Adverse  Events  (SAE)  
In addition to grading the adverse event, adverse events are evaluated to determine  
whether they meet the criteria for a Serious Adverse Event (SAE). An SAE is defined as  
death; a life threatening experience; inpatient hospitalization (for a person not already  
hospitalized);  prolongation  of hospitalization  (for a patient  already  hospitalized);  persistent  or 
significant  disability  or incapacity;  congenital  anomaly  and/or  birth  defects;  or an event  that 
jeopardizes  the participant  and may  require  medical,  surgical,  or other  intervention  to prevent 
one of the preceding conditions (FDA, 21 CFR Part 312). An adverse event is  considered  
serious  if it: 
• is life-threatening  
• results  in in-patient  hospitalization  or prolongation  of existing  hospitalization  
• results  in persistent  or significant  disability  or incapacity  
• results  in a congenital  anomaly  or birth  defect  OR 
• results  in death  
• based  upon  appropriate  medical  judgment,  may  jeopardize  the subject’s  health,  
and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other  
outcomes  listed  in this definition,  or 
• adversely  affects  the risk/benefit  ratio  of the study  
 
An adverse  event  may  be graded  as severe  but still not meet  the criteria  for a Serious  A d v e r s e  
Event. Similarly, an adverse event may be graded as moderate but still meet the  criteria  for 
an SAE.  It is important  for the PI to consider  the grade  of the event  as well  as its “seriousness” 
when determining whether reporting to the IRBs and the Medical Monitor  is necessary.  
 
8.1.3.  Definition  of Unanticipated  Problems  (UP)  
An unexpected  adverse  event  is one that is not listed  in the current  Investigators  
Brochure  for Psilocybin,  assisted  psychotherapy  produced  by MAPS  or an event  that is by 
nature  more  specific  or more  severe  than  a listed  event.  
Page 33 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 Such an event is unlikely because as of 01 December 2016, with over 1000 
individuals  exposed  to Psilocybin  in controlled  research  settings,  there  have  been  no 
unexpected  drug - related  SAEs  to date and  expected  SAEs  have  been  rare  and non-life 
threatening.  
 
8.1.4.  Classification  of an Adverse  Event  
The following  scale  will be used  in grading  the severity  of adverse  events  noted  during  
the study:  
1. Mild  adverse  event  (does  not affect  patient  activity)  
2. Moderate  adverse  event  (mild  disruption  in usual  activity)  
3. Severe  (major  disruption  in usual  activity)  
 
8.2. Time  Period  and Frequency  for Event  Assessment  and Follow -Up 
Adverse events will be reviewed with subjects weekly from the time of preparation 
visit 1 through primary outcome collect at 4 weeks. Information will be assessed in -person 
and during weekly phone calls.  Adverse events or unanticipated problems involving risks to 
subjects or others will be  reported  to the HIC or HSC within  48 hours  of it becoming  known  to 
the investigator,  using  the appropriate  forms  found  on the website.  
 
8.3. Reporting  Procedure  (Adverse  Events)  
The investigator will report the following types of adverse  events : 
a. serious  and unanticipated  and possibly,  probably,  or definitely  related  events;  
b. anticipated  adverse  events  occurring  with  a greater  frequency  than  expected;  
c. other unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others.  
 
8.4. Study  Halting  Rules  
The Medical  Monitor  or the Principal  Investigator  has the right  to discontinue  this study  
at any time.  If the trial is prematurely  terminated,  the Primary  Investigator  is to promptly  
inform  the study  participants  and will assure  appropriate  therapy  and follow - up. If the trial or 
study  is prematurely  discontinued,  all procedures  and requirements  pertaining  to retention  and 
storage  of documents  will be observed.  All other  study  materials  will be treated  in accordance  
with  federal  and state  regulations.  
 
8.5. Attribution of Adverse Events  
Adverse events will be monitored for each subject  participating  in the study  and 
attributed  to the study  procedures  / design  by the principal  investigator  according  to the 
following  categories:  
a. Definite:  Adverse  event  is clearly  related  to investigational  procedures(s)/agent(s).  
b. Probable:  Adverse  event  is likely  related  to investigational  procedures(s)/agent(s).  
c. Possible:  Adverse  event  may  be related  to investigational  procedures(s)/agent(s).   
d. Unlikely:  Adverse  event  is likely  not to be related  to the investigational  
procedures(s)/agent(s).  
e. Unrelated:  Adverse  event  is clearly  not related  to investigational  
procedures(s)/agent(s).  
8.7. Plan  for Grading  Adverse  Events:  The following  scale  will be used  in grading  the 
severity  of adverse  events  noted  during  the study:  
 a. Mild  adverse  event  
 b. Moderate  adverse  event  
Page 34 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 c. Severe  
 
8.8. Plan  for Determining  Seriousness  of Adverse  Events:  
Serious  Adverse  Events:  In addition  to grading  the adverse  event,  the PI will determine  
whether the adverse event meets the criteria for a Serious Adverse Event (SAE). An  adverse  
event  is considered  serious  if it results  in any of the following  outcomes:  
 a. Death;  
b. A life-threatening  experience  in-patient  hospitalization  or prolongation  of existing  
hospitalization;  
c. A persistent  or significant  disability  or incapacity;  
d. Any other adverse event that, based upon appropriate medical judgment, may  
jeopardize  the subject’s  health,  and may  require  medical  or surgical  intervention  
to prevent  one of the other  outcomes  listed  in this definition.  
An adverse event may be graded as severe but still not meet the criteria for a Serious  
Adverse  Event.  Similarly,  an adverse  event  may  be graded  as moderate  but still meet  the 
criteria  for an SAE.  It is important  for the PI to consider  the grade  of the event  as well as its 
“seriousness”  when  determining  whether  reporting  to the IRB is necessary.  
 
8.9. Plan for reporting UPIRSOs (including Adverse Events) to the IRB . 
The Principal  Investigator  will report  the following  types  of events  to the IRB: Any 
incident,  experience  or outcome  that  meets  ALL 3 of the following  criteria:  
1. Is unexpected (in terms of nature, specificity, severity, or frequency) given (a) the  
research  procedures  described  in the protocol -related  documents,  such  as the IRB- 
approved protocol and informed consent document and (b) the characteristics of 
the subject  population  being  studied;  AND  
2. Is related or possibly related to participation in the research ( possibly related  
means  there  is a reasonable  possibility  that the incident,  experience,  or outcome  
may  have  been  caused  by the procedures  involved  in the research);  AND  
3. Suggests  that  the research  places  subjects  or others  at greater  risk of harm  (including 
physical, psychological, economic, legal, or social harm) than was  previously  known  or 
recognized.  
 
8.10.  Unanticipated  Problems  Involving  Risks  to Subjects  or Others  (UPIRSOs)  may  be 
medical  or non -medical in nature and  include – but are not limited to – serious, unexpected,  
and related adverse events and unanticipated adverse device effects . Please note that  
adverse events are reportable to the IRB as UPIRSOs only if they meet all 3 criteria  listed  
above.  
These UPIRSOs/SAEs will be reported to the IRB using  the appropriate  forms . In  the 
event that such events occur, Reportable Events (which are serious or life - threatening and 
unanticipated, or anticipated but occurring with a greater frequency  than  expected,  and 
possibly,  probably,  or definitely  related)  or Unanticipated  Problems  Involving Risks to Subjects 
or Others that may require a temporary or permanent  interruption of study activities will be 
reported immediately (if possible), followed by a  written report to the IRB within 5 calendar 
days (in accordance with IRB Policy 710) of  the Principal Investigator becoming aware of the 
event (using the appropriate forms)  and to any appropriate  funding  and regulatory  
agencies.  
All related  events  involving  risk but not meeting  the prompt  reporting  requirements  
Page 35 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 should be reported to the IRB in summary form at the time  of continuing  review.  If 
appropriate,  such  summary  may  be a simple  brief  statement  that events have occurred at the 
expected frequency and level of severity as previously  documented . 
 
8.11. Plan  for reporting  adverse  events  to co-investigators  on the study,  research  monitor(s),  e.g., 
Protocol Review Committee (PRC), study sponsors, funding and regulatory  agencies,  and regulatory  
and decision -making  bodies.  
For the current  study,  the following  individuals,  funding,  and/or  regulatory  agencies  will be 
notified:  
a. All Co-Investigators  listed  on the protocol.  
b. Food  and Drug  Administration   
c. Study  Funding  and Sponsors  
The investigator  will apprise  fellow  investigators  and study  personnel  of all UPIRSOs  
and adverse events that occur during the conduct of this research project through  regular 
study meetings, or via email as they are reviewed by the principal  investigator.  
The protocol’s research study sponsors, funding and regulatory agencies, and  
regulatory and decision -making bodies will be informed of any Serious,  Unanticipated  and 
Related  adverse  events  within  5 days  (or within  any contract  or policy designated time 
period) of the event becoming known to the principal  investigator.  
 
The principal  investigator  will conduct  a review  of all adverse  events upon completion 
of every study subject. The principal investigator will evaluate  the frequency and severity of 
the adverse events and determine if modifications to the  protocol  or consent  form  are 
required.  
 
8.12. Safety  Oversight  
The principal  investigator  in conjunction  with  the Medical  Monitor  will be 
responsible  for monitoring  the data,  assuring  protocol  compliance,  and conducting  the 
safety  reviews  at the specified  frequency,  which  must  be conducted  at a minimum  of every  
6 months  (including  when  reapproval  of the protocol  is sought).  
During  the review  process,  the principal  investigator  (in collaboration  with  the 
Medical  Monitor)  will evaluate  whether  the study  should  continue  unchanged,  require  
modification or amendment,  continue  or close  to enrollment.  Either  the principal  
investigator,  the HIC, or the Medical  Monitor  have  the authority  to stop  or suspend  the 
study  or require  modifications.  Likewise,  the principal  investigator  will periodically  review  
the collection, storage, and distribution practices associated with clinical data bank, and  
determine whether changes to enhance confidentiality and privacy are required. The  
research  team  will follow  the University of Washington  guidelines  for attribution  of 
adverse  events  and grading the severity of adverse events (including  determining whether 
the adverse event  m e e t s criteria  for a Serious  Adverse  Event).  
 
8.13. Clinical  Monitoring  
After administration  of Psilocybin/placebo,  participants  will be  checked  
regularly. A  research  team  member  will accompany  the participants  and be available  
at all times  to call for medical  assistance  if required.  Procedures  will be immediately  
stopped  if participants  request  to stop  or exhibit  any sign of significant  distress.  The 
study  therapists will have immediate access to the PI or a designated physician to 
Page 36 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 assess any problems, or to clear a participant for  discharge  from  the research  facility.  
 
9. Statistical Considerations  
9.1. Measures  to Minimize  Bias  
9.1.1. Enrollment/Randomization/Masking  Procedures  
The necessary  strict  exclusion  criteria  for psilocybin  interventions  may  limit  
generalizability  of the findings.  The influence  of repeated  testing  in the crossover design 
will be minimized by modeling order  effects  in analyses, but  some  effects  of practice  may  
persist.   
 
9.1.2. Evaluation  of Success  of Blinding  
At the end of the randomized  treatment,  participants  will be asked  to fill out a 5 point 
Likert scale with the following options:  
--I am positive I received psilocybin  
--I think I received psilocybin  
--I cannot tell whether I received psilocybin or niacin (placebo)  
--I think I received niacin (placebo)  
--I am positive I received niacin (placebo)  
 
9.1.3.  Source  Documents  and Access  to Source  Data/Documents  
Paper  source  documents  and research  case  books  will be housed  in restricted  access  files.  
Personally -identified  information  will be restricted  to name,  address,  phone number, birth -
date, social security numbers, dates of care, and will be kept by  investigators  in a separate  
file from  the research  data  which  will be coded  using  a unique  subject  identification.  
 
 
9.1.4.  Quality  Assurance  and Quality  Control  
The principal  investigator is  responsible  for monitoring  the data,  assuring  protocol  
compliance,  and conducting  the safety  reviews  yearly.  During  the review  process,  the 
principal investigator will evaluate whether the study should continue  unchanged,  require  
modification/amendment,  continue  or close to enrollment.  Either the  principal  investigator  
or the IRB have  the authority  to stop  or suspend  the study  or 
require  modifications.  
 
9.2. Statistical approach  
The primary objective of this randomized trial is to compare the mean change from baseline 
MADRS  among patients randomized to receive psilocybin  to that among patients randomized to receive 
niacin .  The time point of primary interest at which change will be assessed will be 4 weeks.  Mean change 
between the two groups will be assessed with the two -sample t -test, or the Wilcoxon rank -sum test if 
distributional assumptions for the t -test are violated .  The table below shows the minimum detectable 
assumed -true  effect size (represented in standard -deviation units, or the difference in mean change 
divided by the common standard deviation) to observe a statistically significant difference (at the two -
sided significance level of .05) with 80% and 90% power for a va riety of total sample sizes.  
  
Sample size  80% Power  90% Power  
N=30  1.06 SD units  1.23 SD units  
N=40  0.91 SD units  1.05 SD units  
N=50  0.81 SD units  0.94 SD units  
Page 37 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
   
Based on the values in the above table, we will randomize 30 patients,  as we hypothesize that an 
assumed -true effect size of 1.06 – 1.23 is achievable based on previous studies by Ross and Davis  and 
achieved effect sizes of 1.46 at 2 weeks at 1.69 at 6 weeks19 or 2.2 at 5 weeks .18 A sample size of N=30 will 
provide >90% power to detect a significant difference in the primary outcome  between the psilocybin 25 
mg vs niacin  groups.   Assuming a 15% drop -out rate of subjects in this study, we will enroll 36 subjects and 
assume 6 will not complete the study, so full enrollment in this study will be 36 with a target of 30 subjects 
completing the study.  
The primary analysis will be done using the intent -to-treat principle.  Randomization will be done 
using a permuted block design with randomly selected block sizes.  
Key secondary endpoints include those listed below, and a hierarchical approach will be taken to 
the potential analysis of these endpoints.  If the primary endpoint is statistically significant, then these 
secondary endpoints will be (potentially) formally  compared in a hierarchical manner in the order listed 
below.  
1.     Mean change in burnout (Stanford Fulfillment index)  from baseline to 4 weeks  between the two 
groups  
2.     Mean change in symptoms of PTSD (PCL5 ) from  baseline to 1 week and 4 weeks between the two 
groups . 
These secondary endpoints will be compared between groups as described above. At the first endpoint 
that is not statistically significant (at the two -sided significance level of .05), all subsequent endpoints will 
be evaluated descriptively and not formall y assessed in order to maintain the overall type I error rate of 
.05. 
 
10. Ethics/Protection of Human Subjects  
10.1.  Ethical  Standards  
The research  will be performed  according  to ethical  principles  and in compliance  with  
all federal,  state,  and local  laws,  as well as institutional  regulations  and policies  regarding  the 
protection  of human  subjects.  
 
10.2.  Informed  Consent  Process  
After an initial phone screen to determine obvious exclusions from the study 
protocol,  potential  subjects  will be invited  for an in-office  visit.  During  the screening visit,  the 
study  procedures  will be described,  and the subject’s questions will be answered prior to 
obtaining an  informed consent. The person obtaining the consent will ask the participant to 
provide a  brief  summary  of the study  to ensure  they  understand  what  is being  asked  of them  
and any potential  risks  and benefits.  For participants who are out of the area, informed 
consent will be obtained via video conference and written consent documented using 
REDCap.  
 
10.3.  Participant  and Data  Confidentiality  
Participant  study  identification  numbers  (which  cannot  be linked  to participant),  
names,  and other  demographic  information,  contact  information,  and previous  medical 
history  will be  kept  in a locked  filing  cabinet located  in a locked  room.  Secure  research  files  
will be used  to store  assessment  and data  forms  derived  from  the research  data  
collection.  Each  participant  is assigned  a numeric  code  to conceal  identity.  This coding  will 
carefully  safeguard  confidentiality  on encrypted  computer  hard  disks  used  for analysis.  No 
personal  identifying  data  will appear  in the computer  files or other  papers  (e.g.,  
questionnaires,  laboratory  raw data).  
Page 38 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 Care  will be taken  to conceal  other  possible  sources  of identification,  including  
addresses  or occupations.  A list of participant  numbers,  names,  and other  demographic  
information  will be kept  in a locked  cabinet  located  in a locked  room.  Cross -referenced  
names  and code  numbers  will be included  in a master list  that will  be stored in a locked file 
cabinet that will be accessible only to the  research staff. The  identities  of participants  will 
not be revealed  in any description  or publications  resulting  from  this research.  The 
granting  agency,  the research  monitors,  the PI’s laboratory,  and collaborators  will have  
access  to de-identified  study  data.  All electronic  data  is double  password -protected  and 
follows  IRB standards at the University of Washington . Digital  data  will be stored  on a 
secured  server  and on secured  desktop  computers.  
 
10.4.  Research  Use of Stored  Human  Data  
The investigators understand the importance of communicating research findings 
from  studies.  Results  from  this study  may  be presented  at conferences  and meetings  or 
published  
in academic  journals.  All data  would  be deidentified  and participant  identity  would  never  be 
disclosed  when  presenting  results  of the study.  
 
10.5.  Future  Use of Stored  Data  
De-identified  data  may  be stored  indefinitely  and used  for publications,  research  
presentations  and meetings.  
 
 
11. Data Handling and Record Keeping  
11.1.  Data  Collection  and Management  Responsibilities  
The principal  investigator,  Anthony Back MD,  will be responsible  for monitoring  
the data, assuring protocol compliance, and conducting the safety reviews at the 
specified  frequency, which must be conducted at a minimum of every 6 months. Dr. 
Back will confer and discuss any issues with the research and oversight team that 
have been brought to light and  will discuss what  alterations might be needed if any, 
in weekly rounds meetings (as is the clinic standard  research  practice).  Any adverse  
events  will be reported  in accordance  with  University of Washington policies.  
During the review process, the principal investigator and the Medical Monitor 
will evaluate whether the study should continue unchanged, require  
modification/amendment,  or close  to enrollment.  Either  the principal  investigator,  the 
IRB, or University of Washington administrators have the authority to stop or suspend 
the study or  require  modifications.  
Research  personnel  will collect  research  data  via direct  interview  after  
potential  subjects’  sign release of information for available informants. This data will 
be recorded in both  written  and/or  electronic  formats,  and all confidential  research 
data  will be separated  and stored  in locked  and secured  files.  
 
11.2.  Study  Records  Retention  
All electronic  research records  will continue  to be encrypted  and password -protected  
after  subject  participation. Both written and electronic records  will be destroyed 10 years 
after the protocol is  completed.  
 
Page 39 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 12. Publication  and Data  Sharing  Policy  
The identities of participants will not be revealed in any description or  publications  
resulting  from  this research.  The granting  agency,  the research  monitors,  the PI’s 
laboratory,  and collaborators  will have  access  to de-identified  study  data.  
 
13. Study Administration  and Leadership  
13.1. Principal  Investigator  
 Anthony Back MD  
 
14. Conflict of Interest Policy  
There  is no conflict  of interest  to report  from  any of the study  staff.  
 
15.  References  
 
1. Ouyang H. I’m an E.R. Doctor in New York. None of Us Will Ever Be the Same.  The New York 
Times. New York, NY: The New York Times Company; 2020.  
2. Buchbiner L. How doctors’ fears of getting COVID -19 can mean losing the healing power of touch: 
One physician’s story.  TheConversation.com2020.  
3. Choo E. Covid -19 is pushing doctors to the brink. Medicine needs to recognize they’re human and 
need help.  The Washington Post. Washington DC2020.  
4. Marwa S. A Double Whammy: The COVID -19 Pandemic and Burnout in Medical Professionals.  
Lean Forward. A place for medical providers to converse on health care topics. Boston, MA: 
Harvard Medical School; 2020.  
5. Jain S. Bracing for an Epidemic of PTSD Among COVID -19 Workers.  Psychology Today2020.  
6. Mock J, Schwartz J. How Doctors and Nurses Manage Coronavirus Grief.  Scientific American2020.  
7. Lai J, Ma S, Wang Y, et al. Factors Associated With Mental Health Outcomes Among Health Care 
Workers Exposed to Coronavirus Disease 2019. JAMA Netw Open 2020;3(3):e203976. DOI: 
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.3976.  
8. Liu Q, Luo D, Haase JE, et al. The experiences of health -care providers during the COVID -19 crisis in 
China: a qualitative study. Lancet Glob Health 2020;8(6):e790 -e798. DOI: 10.1016/S2214 -
109X(20)30204 -7. 
9. Knoll C, Watkins A, Rothfeld M. ‘I Couldn’t Do Anything’: The Virus and an E.R. Doctor’s Suicide.  
The New York Times. New York NY2020.  
10. Hendrickson RC, Slevin RA, Chang BP, Sano E, McCall C, Raskind MA. The impact of working during 
the Covid -19 pandemic on health care workers and first responders: mental health, function, and 
professional retention. MedRxiv 2021. DOI: doi.org/10.1101/2 020.12.16.20248325.  
11. Quick COVID -19 Survey. The Larry A. Green Center; 2020.  
12. Haugen PT, Evces M, Weiss DS. Treating posttraumatic stress disorder in first responders: a 
systematic review. Clin Psychol Rev 2012;32(5):370 -80. DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2012.04.001.  
13. Alden L, Matthews LR, Wagner S, et al. Systematic literature review of psychological interventions 
for first responders. Work & Stress 2020. DOI: DOI: 10.1080/02678373.2020.1758833.  
14. Stoesser K, Cobb NM. Self -treatment and informal treatment for depression among resident 
physicians. Fam Med 2014;46(10):797 -801. ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25646832 ). 
15. Nutt D, Erritzoe D, Carhart -Harris R. Psychedelic Psychiatry's Brave New World. Cell 
2020;181(1):24 -28. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.020.  
16. Kerbs TS, Johansen P. Over 30 million psychedelic users in the United States. F1000 Research. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.2 -98.v1 . 
17. Saplakoglu Y. FDA Calls Psychedelic Psilocybin a 'Breakthrough Therapy' for Severe Depression.  
Live Science2019.  
Page 40 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 18. Davis AK, Barrett FS, May DG, et al. Effects of Psilocybin -Assisted Therapy on Major Depressive 
Disorder: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Psychiatry 2020. DOI: 
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2020.3285.  
19. Ross S, Bossis A, Guss J, et al. Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following psilocybin 
treatment for anxiety and depression in patients with life -threatening cancer: a randomized 
controlled trial. J Psychopharmacol 2016;30(12):1165 -1180. DOI: 10.1 177/0269881116675512.  
20. Chi T, Gold JA. A review of emerging therapeutic potential of psychedelic drugs in the treatment of 
psychiatric illnesses. J Neurol Sci 2020;411:116715. DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2020.116715.  
21. A Phase 3 Program of MDMA -Assisted Therapy for the Treatment of Severe Posttraumatic Stress 
Disorder (PTSD). ( https://maps.org/research/mdma/ptsd/phase3 ). 
22. Sessa B, Higbed L, Nutt D. A Review of 3,4 -methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) -Assisted 
Psychotherapy. Front Psychiatry 2019;10:138. DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00138.  
23. Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Carducci MA, et al. Psilocybin produces substantial and sustained 
decreases in depression and anxiety in patients with life -threatening cancer: A randomized 
double -blind trial. J Psychopharmacol 2016;30(12):1181 -1197. DOI: 10. 1177/0269881116675513.  
24. Swift TC, Belser AB, Agin -Liebes G, et al. Cancer at the Dinner Table: Experiences of Psilocybin -
Assisted Psychotherapy for the Treatment of Cancer -Related Distress. Journal of Humanistic 
Psychology 2017;57. DOI: 10.1177/0022167817715966.  
25. Hasler F, Grimberg U, Benz MA, Huber T, Vollenweider FX. Acute psychological and physiological 
effects of psilocybin in healthy humans: a double -blind, placebo -controlled dose -effect study. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2004;172(2):145 -56. (In eng). DOI: 1 0.1007/s00213 -003-1640 -6. 
26. Tyls F, Palenicek T, Horacek J. Psilocybin --summary of knowledge and new perspectives. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol 2014;24(3):342 -56. DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2013.12.006.  
27. Moreno FA, Wiegand CB, Taitano EK, Delgado PL. Safety, tolerability, and efficacy of psilocybin in 9 
patients with obsessive -compulsive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 2006;67(11):1735 -40. (In eng). DOI: 
10.4088/jcp.v67n1110.  
28. Passie T, Seifert J, Schneider U, Emrich HM. The pharmacology of psilocybin. Addict Biol 
2002;7(4):357 -64. (In eng). DOI: 10.1080/1355621021000005937.  
29. Nichols DE. Psychedelics. Pharmacol Rev 2016;68(2):264 -355. DOI: 10.1124/pr.115.011478.  
30. Usdin E, Efron DH. Psychotropic Drugs and Related Compounds. Washington D.C.: National 
Institute of Mental Health, 1972.  
31. COMPASS Pathways and King's College London Announce Results From Psilocybin Study In Healthy 
Volunteers. 2019.  
32. Franz M, Regele H, Kirchmair M, et al. Magic mushrooms: hope for a 'cheap high' resulting in end -
stage renal failure. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1996;11(11):2324 -27. DOI: 
10.1093/oxfordjournals.ndt.a027160.  
33. Lim TH, Wasywich CA, Ruygrok PN. A fatal case of 'magic mushroom' ingestion in a heart 
transplant recipient. Intern Med J 2012;42(11):1268 -9. DOI: 10.1111/j.1445 -5994.2012.02955.x.  
34. Gerault A, Picart D. Intoxication mortelle à la suite de la consommation volontaire et en groupe de 
champignons hallucinogeèes. Bull Soc Mycol France 1996;112:1 -14. 
35. Buck RW. Mushroom Toxins — A Brief Review of the Literature. New Engl J Med 1961;265:681 -
686.  
36. Investigational Drug & Material Supply Program. Usona Institute. 
(https://www.usonainstitute.org/drug -supply/ ). 
37. Muttoni S, Ardissino M, John C. Classical psychedelics for the treatment of depression and anxiety: 
A systematic review. J Affect Disord 2019;258:11 -24. DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2019.07.076.  
38. Bogenschutz MP, Johnson MW. Classic hallucinogens in the treatment of addictions. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2016;64:250 -8. (In eng). DOI: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.03.002.  
Page 41 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 39. Daniel J, Haberman M. Clinical potential of psilocybin as a treatment for mental health conditions. 
Ment Health Clin 2017;7(1):24 -28. DOI: 10.9740/mhc.2017.01.024.  
40. Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Potential Therapeutic Effects of Psilocybin. Neurotherapeutics 
2017;14(3):734 -740. DOI: 10.1007/s13311 -017-0542 -y. 
41. Studerus E, Kometer M, Hasler F, Vollenweider FX. Acute, subacute and long -term subjective 
effects of psilocybin in healthy humans: a pooled analysis of experimental studies. J 
Psychopharmacol 2011;25(11):1434 -52. DOI: 10.1177/0269881110382466.  
42. Carbonaro TM, Bradstreet MP, Barrett FS, et al. Survey study of challenging experiences after 
ingesting psilocybin mushrooms: Acute and enduring positive and negative consequences. J 
Psychopharmacol 2016;30(12):1268 -1278. DOI: 10.1177/0269881116662634.  
43. Johnson M, Richards W, Griffiths R. Human hallucinogen research: guidelines for safety. J 
Psychopharmacol 2008;22(6):603 -20. (In eng). DOI: 10.1177/0269881108093587.  
44. Johnson MW, Griffiths RR, Hendricks PS, Henningfield JE. The abuse potential of medical psilocybin 
according to the 8 factors of the Controlled Substances Act. Neuropharmacology 2018;142:143 -
166. (In eng). DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.05.012.  
45. Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS)  1994 -2004. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES  
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration  Office of Applied Studies 2006. 
(https://wwwdasis.samhsa.gov/dasis2/teds_pubs/2004_teds_rpt.pdf ). 
46. Griffiths RR, Richards WA, McCann U, Jesse R. Psilocybin can occasion mystical -type experiences 
having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual significance. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl) 2006;187(3):268 -83; discussion 284 -92. DOI: 10.1007/ s00213 -006-0457 -5. 
47. Abraham HD, Aldridge AM, Gogia P. The psychopharmacology of hallucinogens. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 1996;14(4):285 -98. DOI: 10.1016/0893 -133X(95)00136 -2. 
48. Mehling WE, Acree M, Stewart A, Silas J, Jones A. The Multidimensional Assessment of 
Interoceptive Awareness, Version 2 (MAIA -2). PLoS One 2018;13(12):e0208034. DOI: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0208034.  
49. Hengartner MP, Jakobsen JC, Sorensen A, Ploderl M. Efficacy of new -generation antidepressants 
assessed with the Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale, the gold standard clinician rating 
scale: A meta -analysis of randomised placebo -controlled trials . PLoS One 2020;15(2):e0229381. 
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229381.  
50. Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, et al. The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale: initial validity and 
internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. Am J 
Psychiatry 2011;168(12):1266 -77. DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2 011.10111704.  
51. Dozois DJA, Dobson KS, Ahnberg JL. A psychometric evaluation of the Beck Depression Inventory –
II. Psychological Assessment 1998;10(2):83 -89. 
52. Trockel M, Bohman B, Lesure E, et al. A Brief Instrument to Assess Both Burnout and Professional 
Fulfillment in Physicians: Reliability and Validity, Including Correlation with Self -Reported Medical 
Errors, in a Sample of Resident and Practicing Physic ians. Acad Psychiatry 2018;42(1):11 -24. DOI: 
10.1007/s40596 -017-0849 -3. 
53. Blevins CA, Weathers FW, Davis MT, Witte TK, Domino JL. The Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5): Development and Initial Psychometric Evaluation. J Trauma Stress 
2015;28(6):489 -98. DOI: 10.1002/jts.22059.  
54. Barrett FS, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Validation of the revised Mystical Experience Questionnaire 
in experimental sessions with psilocybin. J Psychopharmacol 2015;29(11):1182 -90. DOI: 
10.1177/0269881115609019.  
55. Bond FW, Hayes SC, Baer RA, et al. Preliminary psychometric properties of the Acceptance and 
Action Questionnaire -II: a revised measure of psychological inflexibility and experiential 
avoidance. Behav Ther 2011;42(4):676 -88. DOI: 10.1016/j.beth.2011.03 .007.  
56. Garcia -Romeu A, Barrett FS, Carbonaro TM, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Optimal dosing for 
Page 42 Version 1. 16, July 18, 2022  
2021   
 psilocybin pharmacotherapy: Considering weight -adjusted and fixed dosing approaches. J 
Psychopharmacol 2021;35(4):353 -361. DOI: 10.1177/0269881121991822.  
 