Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 1 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Usability and acceptability of virtual reality- based c ognitive stimulation by healthy participant s 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  
Hina Faisal, MD/Department of Surgery  
 
CO-INVESTIGATORS / COLLABORATORS : 
Eugene C. Lai, MD  / Neurologist   
Jiaqiong Susan Xu/Stati stician 
Antara Dattagupta , EnMED student  
 
SPONSOR / FUNDING AGENCY  
Houston Methodist Hospital  
Reliant Innovation grant  
 
VERSION NUMBER/DATE   
v.1: 05 JUN 2022  
REVISION HISTORY  
 
Revision #  Version Date  Summary of Changes  Consent Change  
(Yes/No)  
    
    
1. Study Summary  
Virtual reality (VR) imitates reality by creating an artificial 3 -D environment using computing 
technology or software. Using this software with a  headset , a virtual environment  is created , 
which cognitively stimulates the user 's brain to think they are in an artificial world . Creating a 
virtual environment allows flexibility and measurement of different types of stimuli while 
recording the various responses provided by users in the controlled virtual environment . VR 
strengthens the brains' ability to focus, learn, and retain experience. VR for attention deficit 
disorders has been reported to have promising results . We plan to follow in similar footsteps 
using the gamification of exercises for cognitive stimulation in healthy volunteers  to record 
outcomes and usability testing .1 These exercise "games " allow users to focus and pay attention 
to the game while helping reorient and cognitively stimulate the user's brain . The games are built 
with increasing difficulty and complexity of user demand and output. Our team developed a 
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 2 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 novel, 3D simulated software platform prototype called  ReCognition VR to provide VR -based 
cognitive exercises to healthy participants  for testing.    
Our premise is that  VR -based cognitive stimulation software will allow controlled delivery of 
structured cognitive exercises focusing on orientation, attention, memory, and executive 
functions . The system will allow  customized frequency and duration of cognitive exercises based 
on the users ' difficulty level  in a delightfully relaxed - environment with music.  
Hypothesis:  
We will test the hypothesis that VR -based cognitive exercise will be  feasible and acceptable  by 
the test population.  
2. Purpose of the Study  / Objectives  
The purpose of this study is to determine the feasibility, acceptability and us ability, and to assess 
the safety of use of a VR -based software in health volunteers. Results from this study will be used 
to inform the design of a future  study in hospitalized patients at risk for delirium.  
The question that drives this study is:  
In healthy volunteers, what is the feasibility of use of the ReCognition VR -based software and 
what is the acceptability and usability of the software?  
OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  
OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  JUSTIFICATION FOR 
ENDPOINTS  
Primary    
The primary objective of this 
study is to assess the feasibility of VR -based cognitive 
stimulation exercises in healthy volunteers.  The primary endpoint  is use of the 
ReCognition  VR -based software 
for 20 minutes by  70% of enrolled 
participants.  It is important to 
know if participants can complete the exercise since an incomplete experience will prohibit assessment of the other variables 
to be  measure d. 
Secondary    
The secondary objectives are  
• to determine the acceptability and usability of VR-based cognitive 
stimulation exercises  The secondary endpoints are:  
• Acceptability and usability:  the 
proportion of participants with a System Usability Scale (SUS) 
score  >35. Successful 
implementation 
depends on the 
acceptability of the intervention and is one of the main factors considered 
before adopting and 
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 3 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  JUSTIFICATION FOR 
ENDPOINTS  
• Proportion  of participants who 
complete the game without 
any user errors  
• Number of attempts to 
complete the game.   implementing 
computerized 
cognitive software.  
Tertiary/Exploratory    
 Tertiary objectives are to report the safety of VR -based cognitive 
stimulation exercises in healthy volunteers.  • Safety will be assessed using each of the following 
endpoints:  
1. Mean change from pre to 
10 minutes:  
a. Heart rate variability:  
b. Pulse oximetry oxygen 
saturation (SpO2)  
c. Respiratory rate  
d. Blood pressure  
2. Mean change from pre to 
end of VR session:  
a. Heart rate variability:  
b. Pulse oximetry oxygen 
saturation (SpO2)  
c. Respiratory rate  
d. Blood pressure  Knowing the 
proportion of change in these biometric measures will assist in designing future  investigation of 
patients at risk of 
delirium 
 
3. Background   
Attention is the most crucial cognitive domain required for the effective completion of mentally 
challenging tasks by healthy individuals. Many healthy people  cannot complete high executive 
brain functioning tasks due to lack of focus or attention, leading to poor performance both at 
work and home. Generally, mild attention deficit is not identified, and daily life stresses are 
usually blamed. Computerized cognitive training programs have shown improve d attention 
deficit disorder and mild cognitive impairment. Virtual Reality (VR) is an emerging technology 
and can improve brain functions, including attention. VR engages multiple learning systems, 
making it a more effective natural environment for cognitive training. Based on this idea, our 
team developed a 3D simulated softw are platform prototype called ReCognition VR with 
incorporated exercise in the forms of games that can improve attention and executive functions.   
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 4 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 Recognition VR  software (Figure 1) allows users to 
immerse themselves in a relaxing virtual 
environment; reorient the user to person, time, and location; and play mini- games to encourage 
attention, focus, and movement of limbs; and 
record user progress and scores in mini -games.  
Critical gaps  exist  in our knowledge of cognitive 
interventions and their application through VR . 
Data on interventions focused on early cognitive 
exercise using Virtual Reality Simulation , 
specifically using Oculus  Quest 2  and Unity 
software , are limited. Moreover, many critical barriers to implement ing cognitive exercise in 
clinical protocols  exist . Cognitive stimulation through VR  is a new and upcoming area in 
technology that i s rapidly expanding but currently limited in the literature. A lack of  
understanding or appreciation for the evidence supporting cognitive stimulation  through VR, 
specifically gamification , contributes to the barriers . The  rapid increase and use of VR  in other 
areas urge s our team to seek this area for  development.   
The maj or goals of this proposal are to assess the feasibility and usability of VR -base d cognitive 
intervention s in healthy volunteers  using ReCognition VR software  while providing easy delivery 
of cognitive stimulation exercises provided by VR . 
4. Study Design  
The study is a single -center, prospective assessment of  the feasibility, acceptability and usability 
of ReCognition  VR -based simulated cognitive stimulation  to improve attention and focus  in 
healthy participants .  
Sample size : We will enroll 3 0 participants : 15 participants who are >18 or up to 35 years of age 
and 15 participants who are >60 years of age . Results from each age group will be analyzed  
separately.  
Justification of sample size : The study is a feasibility stud y having the expectation that 70% of 
participants in each group (>18 -35 years of age and >60 years of age) will complete 20 minutes 
of the ReCognition VR -based exercise and where each group will be  evaluated separately. 
Descriptive statistics will be used to summarize the findings ; 15 participants in each group will be 
recruited. The intent is that this study will provide information for a larger, subsequent clinical trial of patients >60 years old at risk for delirium.  
 
Data and measures to be taken : 
The endpoints for this feasibi lity study are:  
Primary  – 70% of participants in each group will complete 20 minutes of use of the ReCognition 
VR-based software  (a binary outcome) .  
Figure 1: Describes the system architecture to the 
observer and healthy participant s 
 

Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 5 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 Secondary  – We will measure the acceptability and usability of the experience based on  the 
proportion of participants with a System Usability Scale (SUS) score >35.  
We will report on the proportion of participants who complete the game without any user errors  
We will report on the number of attempts each particip ant uses to complete the game.  
We will examine measure that can inform on s afety of the experience to be used in the 
subsequent clinical trial. The measures are : 
1. Mean change from pre to 10 minutes  of the ReCognition  VR-based exercise in : 
a. Heart rate variability:  
b. Pulse oximetry oxygen saturation (SpO2)  
c. Respiratory rate  
d. Blood pressure  
2. Mean change from pre to end of the ReCognition VR -based exercise in : 
a. Heart rate variability:  
b. Pulse oximetry oxygen saturation (SpO2)  
c. Respiratory rate  
d. Blood pressure  
We will report the  demographic variables of age, sex, race and ethnicity for each group and the 
clinical characteristics whereby they meet ASA criteria (body mass index, self -reported history of 
hypertension  with active manage ment, drinking status, and smoking status ; see Section 9 ). 
Accessing data from medical records : 
This feasibility study involves healthy volunteers. No medical records will be reviewed.  Medical 
history will be self -reported.  
Data analysis plan:  
The results of this study will be reported using descriptive statistics. Continuous variables will be 
reported as means with standard deviation or medians and interquartile range contingent on normality of the distribution. Categorical variables will be reported using Chi- square or Fisher’s 
exact test, as appropriate.  
5. Study Intervention  
1. The healthy participant s will be selected from a random population to use the 
Recognition  VR – based cognitive ex ercise interventions . 
2. The study participants will receive a 3D - ReCognition VR -based simulated cognitive 
exercise program targeting attention, organizing thinking, motor activities, and executive 
brain functions . 
3. The study team will create an order set for the 3 -D Recognition VR –  based cognitive 
stimulation exercise sessions to be deliver ed to the healthy  participant s who will place 
virtual reality headsets on themselves.  
4. The detail of the software as follows:  
3-D Recognition Virtual Reality -Based Simulation Sessions Program:  
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 6 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 Software Platform:  
Virtual reality platform  will consist of  
- The virtual reality headsets manufactured by the Oculus Quest 2  glasses (Facebook inc., 
USA) with stereoscopic vision and stereo sound will be used to show the virtual world to 
participant s. 
- Motion Sensor   
- Flat Screen TV with Software  
The virtual reality headsets manufactured by the Oculus Quest 2  glasses (Facebook inc., USA ) 
with stereoscopic vision and stereo sound will be used to show the virtual reality to study participant s. After headset placement, the  study participant s will be able to follow instructions 
provided  by vir tual nurse AVATAR.  The participant s will receive low cognitive load exercises 
based on virtual reality techniques, including a relaxed environment, music therapy, time orientation, delivery instructions, and task completion motivation. The exercise task will focus on attention, organized th inking, motor activities, and executive brain functions.  
Dosing:  
The study participants  will receive approximately 20 minutes of VR - based cognitive stimulation 
session  and fill out a post -user survey.   
The session will provide neurocognitive stimulation, engagement through exercise . 
The physiological data of vital signs will be recorded before, during, and after sessions  (see 
Schedule of Activities).  
Acceptability Survey:  
PI or a research team member will interview the healthy participant s using the System Usability 
Scale  survey .   
The estimated date to complete the study is one month  after the last participant is enrolled .  
Schedule of activities  
Procedures  Day 1,  
Time 1: 
pre Day 1,  
Time 2: 
10 
minutes  Day 1,  
Time 3: 
post  Day 1, 
Time 4: 
end of 
study  
Informed consent  X    
Demographics  X    
Medical history  X    
Administer study intervention  |------ -------- X--------------- |  
Concomitant medication review  X    
Physical exam (including height and 
weight)  X    
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 7 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 Procedures  Day 1,  
Time 1: 
pre Day 1,  
Time 2: 
10 
minutes  Day 1,  
Time 3: 
post  Day 1, 
Time 4: 
end of 
study  
Frailty assessment  X    
Heart rate variability  X X X  
Pulse oximetry  X X X  
Respiratory rate  X X X  
Blood pressure  X X X  
System User Survey     X 
Adverse event review and evaluation     X 
Complete Case Report Forms (CRFs)  X   X 
 
6. Drugs, Biologics, Devices   
Specifically, VR will be simulated using UNITY software and Oculus quest (two headsets) for this 
project.  
7. Collaborative / Multi- site Research  
N/A 
8. Data Privacy  / Confidentiality   
Houston Methodist policies for Protected Health Information (PHI) will be followed, including all 
physical and electronic data security requirements, encrypted devices, and HM  password -
protected servers.  
All data obtained for the study will be stored in a password -protected spreadsheet in a 
Methodist server and will only be accessible to IRB -approved investigators and research staff at 
Houston Methodist. Data will be completely de -identified at the time of collection and sent to 
the statis tician via secure mail for analysis . Research materials will be stored in a password -
protected computer system database on a secure server on the Houston Methodist network. 
Data collected will be transferred and stored on RedCap, a secure web application for building 
and managing databases. Study personnel requiring access will have their own Login/Password. Access to clinical study information will be based on individuals' roles and responsibilities. All study data will be transmitted over an encrypted SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) connection that  
requires user authentication. This application is designed to be in full compliance with the 
International Conference on Harmonization and Good Clinical Practices (ICH -GCP), the FDA's 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 21 Part 11 Electronic Record and Electronic Signatures, the 
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 8 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 FDA's "Guidance: Computerized Systems Used in Clinical Trials," and the Privacy Rule of the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).  
HMRI policy on record retention will be followed, and human subject resea rch data will be kept a 
minimum of 6 years after completing the study.  Research written materials will be stored in the 
Department of Surgery Research Office ( Skurlock 1150 ) and electronic materials on password -
protected computer systems on a secure serve r on the Houston Methodist network.   
A unique identification code will be assigned to each participant in this study, and the study team 
will maintain the linking log. The only individuals who can see un -coded personal health 
information include the Study  Team and the Institutional Review Board at the hospital, 
employees of the sponsor who check that this study is being done correctly, and regulatory 
authorities where required by law.   
Data to be collected include:  
• Sex 
• Age 
• Race, ethnicity  
• Height, weight  
• Heart rate variability & heart rate variability analysis  (Time Frame: before, during , 
and after use of RecognitionVR software ; see Schedule of Activities ) 
• Pulse oximetry oxygen saturation (SpO2 ) (Time Frame: before, during,  and after 
use of RecognitionVR software ; see Schedule of Activities ) 
• Respiratory rate (Time Frame: before, during and after use of RecognitionVR 
software ; see Schedule of Activities ) 
• Safety adverse events  
 
Identifier (or parts of)  Recorded  Disclos ed  Comment  
All elements of dates (except year) for dates 
directly related to an individual, including  
patient names,  birth date, admission date, 
discharge date, date of death; and all ages 
over 89 and elements of dates (includin g 
year) indicative of such age  Yes No Necessary for complete data 
analysis  
Phone numbers; Fax numbers  Yes No Necessary to complete a 
questionnaire  
Medical record numbers  Yes No Necessary to organize data 
collection  
Any other unique identifying  number, 
characteristic, or code  Yes No Virtual cognitive 
interventions frequency 
delieverd  
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 9 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 9. Data and Specimen Banking   
No specimen s will be obtained,  stored, or banked in this study.   
10. Study Population  
This study will be a s ingle -center  study of healthy volunteer s conducted at Houston Methodist 
Hospital. We will enroll 15 participants who are >18 and <35 years of age and 15 participants 
who are ≥ 60 years of age. The rationale for the age distribution is to obtain information from 
people who are considered healthy by ASA criteria 1 and people who meet ASA criteria 2. 
Partcipiants who are >18 to 35 years of age are  a) more likely to have experienced VR software 
previously and b) more likely to meet ASA criteria 1. Participants who are >60 years of age are a) less likely to have experienced VR software previously and b) more likely to  meet ASA criteria 2 . 
These old er participants are considered similar to the target population of a proposed 
subsequent inventional clinical trial; however, it is possible that participants in the younger age group (>18 to 35 years of age) may meet ASA crtieria 2 .   
A total of 3 0 partic ipants  will be prospectively enrolled . All participants  will be g iven post -use 
surveys to assess usability and efficacy outcomes.  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Healthy volunteers  >18 years  of age  who meet one of the following criteria : 
a. ASA 1 : A normal healthy patient. Example: Fit, nonobese (BMI under 30), a 
nonsmoking patient with good exercise tolerance.  
b. ASA 2 : A patient with mild systemic disease. Example: Patient with no functional 
limitations and a well- controlled disease (eg, treated hypertension, obesity  with 
BMI under 35, frequent social drinker, but is  nonsmoking ). 
2. Person  withou t underlying cognitive disorder or associated phobias (e g. claustrophobia).  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Person with a ctive psychiatry disor ders , especially schizophrenia 
2. Person who is d eaf or blind.  
11. Screening and Recruitment  
All participants  will be screened by the principal investigator and clinical research staff , who have 
been trained in the clinical investigational p lan, to determine if the potential participant  is 
eligible for enrollment . Potential participants  will be assigned a screening number  which be 
recorded in an excel sheet ; all participants who receive the study intervention during the will be 
noted . All participants must meet e ligibility criteria (and if not, which eligibility criteria were not 
met will be recorded ); reason s for not meeting enrollmente criteria or receiving study 
intervention will be recorded. No participants belonging to a vulnerable pop ulation will be 
enrolled.  
During the informed consent process, the investigator or designee, who has been trained on the protocol, will explain t he nature and scope of the intervention , potential risks, and benefits of 
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 10 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 participation and answer questions from the potential participants . All participants  will sign and 
date the Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Ethics Committee (EC ) approved informed consent 
form before  any study -specific procedures  are performed . In addition, the signed informed 
consent will be retained with  the research records , and a copy will be given to the participant.  
Healthy Participant s will be identified:  
1. Through public advertisement sent via flyers posted around Texas Medical Center and mass 
emails to public domain  emailing lists  for example, University of Houston and Rice U niversity, 
available to the  local Houston population . 
No medical records will be reviewed for this healthy volunteer study. Medical history obtained 
will be from participant self -report.  
12. Withdrawal of Subjects  
Participant s will be withdrawn from the study if they do not receive any study interventions . At 
the moment of withdrawal, all data related to participant  will be removed from the 
corresponding excel documents and waivers will be shredded.   
A participant  may discontinue his or her participation without giving a reason at any time during 
the study. For example, t he Principal Investigator may withdraw a participant due to failure to 
comply with  pilot  study intervention requirements, or the participant  is uncooperative or refuses 
to continue in the  study  intervention .   
13. Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects   
Only the minimum amount of personal information needed to conduct this study will be 
collected regarding participants'  privacy in terests .  Study participants will be informed that the 
only individuals who can see un -coded personal health information include the following: the 
Study Doctor, other employees who work on this study (including the Institutional Review Board) at the hospi tal, employees of the sponsor who check that this study is being done correctly, and 
regulatory authorities where required by law. In addition , participant s will be carefully informed 
about the Release of Health Information section in the ICF, which descri bes who will access their 
information and how it will be used.  We will emphasize that participation in this study is voluntary and that participants  can choose at any time to cease participation and revoke 
authorization to use and disclose their information.  
14. Risks to Subjects  
The risks below are associated with the use of the Oculus Quest 2 Virtual Reality Headset Device.  
All adverse events (AEs ) will be captured, and recorded at each time point. We will report AEs as 
a proportion of study participant s who developed AEs . 
Specific AEs to be monitored will include:  
Neurological AEs:  (defined as new- onset blurry vision, tingling, perioral numbness, seizures, 
or coma within 30 minutes after starting th e study intervention) 
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 11 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 Cardiovascular AEs:  (defined as new- onset hypotension [SBP <90 mmHg and DBP <60 
mmHg], bradycardia [HR < 50 bpm], tachycardia [HR   >130 bsspm], or any new hemodynamic 
instability requiring more than two vasopressors after starting th e study interventions  
Pulmonary AEs:  (defined as new- onset hypoxia [SpO2 < 88%] and/or hypercarbia [PCO2 > 60 
mmHg] on arterial blood gas within 30 minutes of starting study interventions  
Cardiac Adverse Events:  New -onset hypotension (SBP <90 mmHg and DBP <60 mmHg),  
Bradycardia (H R < 50), Tachycardia ( HR> 100),  and Arrhythmias (Supraventricular or 
ventricular ) with HR > 150 beats per minutes within 5  minutes after  the starting of 3D 
Simulated V R sessions. Or chan ges >20% from baselines.  
Pulmonary Adverse Events : New -onset hypoxia:  SpO2 < 88%, Respirator rate > 35 
breaths/minute within 5  minutes after  the starting of 3D Simulated VR sessions.   
Others: Rash , nystagmus, muscular hypertonicity, clonus or myoclonic jerks, and allergic 
reactions  
If enrolled participant s vital signs changes > 20% from baseline, the session will be stopped as 
it would be considered unsafe events  
The safety precautions to minimize  the risk to participant s are as follows:  
Vital signs  BP, HR, RR, SPO2, and pain scores (using numeric pain rating scale tool) will be 
monitored before, during, and after using  ReCognitionVR software.  
15. Potential Benefits  
No direct benefit to participants is anticipated. The data from this study is expected to inform on 
a subsequent clinical trial of the use of the ReCognition VR -based software in patients at risk for 
delirium.  
16. Financial and Economic Issues   
The participant s in this study will not be compensated , and there is no additional cost to 
participant s for taking part in this study.  
17. Data Safety Plan   
• The research team plans to periodically evaluate data collected regarding the benefits 
and harms of the study in order to evaluate the safety of the participants  
• Data reviewed periodically will be the following:  
o Accuracy of the game/outcome  
o Adverse effects  occurred during study intervention (ex. Seizures, nystagmus etc.)  
o Adverse effects post -24 hours of study intervention  
o Number of software and device re -starts and re -sets.  
 
• Safety information will be collected during study visits and through telephone cal ls with 
participants  
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 12 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 • Data collection will occur during the game. Specifically after the user plays the minigame 
in the ReCognitionVR  Software. The software has been programmed to report the 
outcome to the research team once the user plays the minigame. Safety data collection 
will begin before the study intervention and also be collected 24 hours after study intervention.  
All study dat a will be transmitted over an encrypted SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) connection that 
requires user authentication. This application is designed to be in full compliance with the International Conference on Harmonization and Good Clinical Practices (ICH -GCP),  the FDA's 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 21 Part 11 Electronic Record and Electronic Signatures, the 
FDA's "Guidance: Computerized Systems Used in Clinical Trials," and the Privacy Rule of the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996  (HIPAA).  
HMRI policy on record retention will be followed, and human subject research data will be kept a 
minimum of 6 years after the completion of the study.  Research materials will be stored in \  on 
password -protected computer systems on a secure serv er on the Houston Methodist network.   
The roles and responsibilities of the Investigators (a) assuring that the trial is conducted according to the Protocol and MOP; (b) identifying, recruiting, and enrolling participant s; (c) 
obtaining informed consent from each participant  and protecting their rights; (d) collecting and 
entering study data into REDCap, and following participant s through study completion: (e) 
assuring regular IRB/REB review.  
18. Informed Consent  Documentation  and Process  
Informed consent wil l be obtained in written format using a consent document that is HMRI -
approved. The investigators involved in the consent process will all be credentialed at HMRI to participate in research at HMH.  System Policy and Procedure RE -12 will be followed . The P I and 
investigators  will identify healthy participant s through public and randomized advertisement. 
Potential participants may also consent on the same day of use of ReCognitionVR software.  
During the informed consent process , the investigator or designee, who has been trained on the 
protocol, will explain t he nature and scope of the intervention , potential risks, and benefits of 
participation and answer questions from the potential participant s. All participant s must sign and  
date the Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved informed consent form.  
Additionally, the signed informed consent must be kept in the participant's medical records, and a copy must be given to the participant .  During the informed consent pr ocess, the investigator 
and designee, who has been trained on the protocol, will explain the nature and scope of the intervention , potential risks, and benefits of participation and answer questions from the 
potential participant s. Participant s will be inf ormed that the study  is investigational and that 
their participation in the study is voluntary. They will be informed that they may refuse to participate or may withdraw consent to participate at any time, and for any reason, without jeopardizing their  future care at this institution . 
The P I and study team will ensure enough time to explain the ICF to the participants  and answer 
all questions before signing the ICF. The study and the contents of the ICF will be explained in 
Virtual reality co gnitive simulation of Healthy Participant s 
 
Page 13 of 13 
HMRI Basic Protocol Template v 12062019  
 detail, and ample time will be given to the study participant to read the consent and discuss it. 
Questions will be encouraged and will be answered to the participant's before the document is signed. The study team will not proceed if adequate time is not available to the participant to demonstrate an understanding of the study and indicate a desire to participate.  
19. Waiver of Informe d Consent and /or Authorization  
No waiver of informed consent or authorization is requested . No medical records will be 
reviewed. Participants will self -report their medical history. No PHI will be recorded or stored if 
the participant  does not fit study eligibility or inclusion criteria. The study team will only collect 
the minimum necessary information to verify eligibility per inclusion or exclusion criteria. If the participant  is eligible based on the study's inclusion criteria and agrees to participate in the 
study, then the PI or study team will gain informed consent before collecting any PHI o r 
conducting any study -related procedures.  
20. References  
1. Rizzo, A. A., Buckwalter, J. G., Bowerly, T., Van Der Zaag, C., Humphrey, L., Neumann, C., et al. (2000). 
The virtual classroom: a virtual reality environment for the assessment and rehabilitation o f attention 
deficits.  Cyber Psychol. Behav.  3, 483 –499. doi: 
10.1089/10949310050078940 doi:10.1002/14651858.CD008349.pub4 
2. Lee E, Kim J. Cost -benefit analysis of a delirium prevention strategy in the intensive care unit [published 
online ahead of print, 2014 Oct 29]. Nurs Crit Care . 2014;10.1111/nicc.12124. doi:10.1111/nicc.12124.  
3. Turon M, Fernandez -Gonzalo S, Jodar M, et a l. Feasibility and safety of virtual -reality -based early 
neurocognitive stimulation in critically ill patients.  Ann Intensive Care . 2017;7(1):81. doi:10.1186/s13613 -
017-0303 -4. 
4. Kolenda, H., Gremmelt, A., Rading, S. et al.  Ketamine for analgosedative the rapy in intensive care 
treatment of head -injured patients. Acta neurochir  138, 1193 –1199. 1996.  
5. Ostermann ME, Keenan SP, Seiferling RA, Sibbald WJ. Sedation in the Intensive Care Unit : A Systematic 
Review . JAMA.  2000;283(11):1451– 1459. doi:10.1001/jama.283.11.1451 
6. Elamin et al., Is ketamine the right sedative for intensive care unit patients?: 12AP9 -1.European journal 
of anaesthesiology,June 2007 -volume 24 -issue,p161  
 
 