Philip J. DiSaia, M.D.  
President  
 
Administrative Office  
Four Penn Center  
1600 John F. Kennedy Boulevard, Suite 1020  
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103  
Phone: 215 -854-0770 Fax: 215 -854-0716  
 
Laura L. Reese  
Executive Director of Operations  
 Larry J. Copeland, M.D.  
Vice President  
 
Finance/Development Office  
2127 Espey Court  
Suite 100  
Crofton, Maryland 21114  
Phone: 410 -721-7126 Fax: 301 -261-3972  
 
Mary C. Sharp  
Chief Financial Officer  
  
 SUMMARY OF CHANGES  
 
For Protocol Revision # 9 to: 
 
NCI Protocol #: GOG -0248 
Local Protocol #: GOG -0248 
 
NCI Version Date: December 22, 2014  
Protocol Date: December 22, 2014  
 
# Section  Page(s)  Change  
1. Title Page  1-2 NCI ve rsion date has been updated.  
 
Includes Revisions #1 -9. 
 
Lead Organization has been added.  
 
Revised footer has been added.  
 ICD  NCI version date has been update on the Informed Consent  
 
Philip J. DiSaia, M.D.  
President  
 
Administrative Office  
Four Penn Center  
1600 John F. Kennedy Boulevard, Suite 1020  
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103  
Phone: 215 -854-0770 Fax: 215 -854-0716  
 
Laura L. Reese  
Executive Director of Operations  
 Larry J. Copeland, M.D.  
Vice President  
 
Finance/Development Office  
2127 Espey Court  
Suite 100  
Crofton, Maryland 21114  
Phone: 410 -721-7126 Fax: 301 -261-3972  
 
Mary C. Sharp  
Chief Financial Officer  
  
 PROTOCOL GOG -0248  
 
A RANDOMIZED PHASE II TRIAL OF TEMSIROLIMUS (NCI -SUPPLIED AGENT,  
NSC # 683864, IND # 61010) OR THE COMBIN ATION OF HORMONAL THERAPY  PLUS 
TEMSIROLIMUS  IN WOMEN WITH ADVANCED , PERSISTENT, OR RE CURRENT  
ENDOMETRIAL CA RCINOMA  
NCI Version Date:  December 22, 2014  
(Includes Revisions # 1 -9) 
POINTS:  
PER CAPITA – 10 
MEMBERSHIP – 3 
TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH PER CAPITA – Award  based on specimen submissions. Distribution: 1.0 point for a 
block or 20 unstained slides of formalin -fixed a nd paraffin -embedded (FFPE) primary (1st choice), metastatic (2nd choice), 
and/or recurrent tumor (3rd choice), and 0.5 point for a frozen blood specimen.  
Lead Organization: NRG/NRG Oncology  
STUDY CHAIR   NURSE CONTACT  
GINI FLEMING, M.D.                                            JONI SHORTT, R.N., B.S.N.  
 UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO   MEMORIAL HEALTH UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CTR  
SECTION OF MEDICAL ONCOLOGY (MC2115)  CURTIS AND ELIZABETH ANDERSON CANCER INST  
5841 S. MARYLAND AVE. (ROOM I -211)  ONCOLOGY RESEARCH DEPARTMENT  
CHICAGO, IL  60637                                               4700 WATERS AVENUE  
(773) 702 -6712   SAVANNAH, GA 31404 -3089    
FAX: (773) 702 -0963   (912) 350 -8913   
E-MAIL: gfleming@medicine.bsd.uchi cago.edu   FAX  : (912) 350 -8183   
  E-MAIL: shortJo1@memorialhealth.com  
 
 
TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH CO -CHAIR   PATHOLOGIST  
KIMBERLY K. LESLIE, M.D.    RICHARD ZAINO, M.D.  
See GOG Website Directory   See GOG Website Directory  
  
      
TRANSLATONAL RESEARCH SCIENTIS T  STATISTICIAN      
KATHLEEN M. DARCY, PH.D.   GINNY FILIACI, M.A.  
See GOG Website Directory   See GOG Website Directory  
  
 
 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Philip J. DiSaia, M.D.  
President  
 
Administrative Office  
Four Penn Center  
1600 John F. Kennedy Boulevard, Suite 1020  
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103  
Phone: 215 -854-0770 Fax: 215 -854-0716  
 
Laura L. Reese  
Executive Director of Operations  
 Larry J. Copeland, M.D.  
Vice President  
 
Finance/Development Office  
2127 Espey Court  
Suite 100  
Crofton, Maryland 21114  
Phone: 410 -721-7126 Fax: 301 -261-3972  
 
Mary C. Sharp  
Chief Financial Officer  
  
  
 
PROTOCOL GOG -0248  
 
A RANDOMIZED PHASE II TRIAL OF TEMSIROLIMUS (NCI -SUPPLIED AGENT,  
NSC # 683864, IND # 61010 ) OR THE COMBINATION  OF HORMONAL THERAPY  PLUS 
TEMSIROLIMUS  IN WOMEN WITH ADVANCED , PERSISTENT, OR RE CURRENT  
ENDOMETRIAL CA RCINOMA  
NCI Version Date:  December 22, 2014  
(Includes Revisions # 1 -9) 
 
 
 
SCIENTIFIC COLLABORATORS  
EDGAR G. FISCHER, M. D.  RAVI SALGIA, PH.D.   ANNA DI RIENZO, PH.D.  
See GOG Website Directory   See GOG Website Directory  See GOG Website Directory  
 
 
 
  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPEN TO PATIENT ENTRY SEPTEMBER 29, 2008    
REVISED JUNE 22, 2009  
REVISED  NOVEMBER 24, 2008      
TEMPORARILY C LOSED TO PATIENT ENTRY OCTOBER 19, 2009  
RE-OPENED TO PATIENT ENTRY MAY 24, 2010  
REVISED  MAY 24, 2010 ; REVISED  SEPTEMBER 26, 2011  
REVISED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 2 OF 2  
 
 This p rotocol was designed and developed by the Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG). It is intended to be used only in 
conjunction with institution -specific IRB approval for study entry. No other use or reproduction is authorized by GOG 
nor does GOG assume any resp onsibility for unauthorized use of this protocol.  
SCHEMA* 
Arm 1:  Temsirolimus IV 25 mg (flat dose) weekly  
 
Arm 2:  CLOSED TO ACCRUAL AS OF 12/21/09  Megestrol Acetate (MA)  80 mg bid for three  weeks 
alternating with Tamoxifen (T) 20 mg bid for 3 weeks  PLUS Temsirolimus  IV 25 mg (flat  dose) weekly  
*One cycle = 6 weeks  
 
  GOG -0248  
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
    PAGE  
 
  
1.0 OBJECTIVES    1 
 
2.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE    2 
 
3.0 PATIENT ELIGIBILITY AND EXCLUSIONS   7 
 
4.0 STUDY MODALITIES    10 
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN AND ENTRY/RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURE  19 
 
6.0 TREATMENT MODIFICATIONS    23 
 
7.0 STUDY PARAMETERS    26 
 
8.0 EVALUATION CRITERIA    34 
 
9.0 DURATION OF STUDY    37 
 
10.0  STUDY MONITORING AND REPORTING PROCEDURES  38 
 
11.0  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS    44 
 
12.0  BIBLIOGRAPHY    51 
  
  
SUGGESTED PATIENT INFORMATION/INFORMED CO NSENT  
 APPENDIX I – Clinical Staging (FIGO  
 APPENDIX II – Medications Interacting with CYP3A4 and CYP2D6  
 APPENDIX III – CRADA/CTA Language  
 APPENDIX IV – Specimen Procedures for GOG -0248   
 APPENDIX V – Patient Pill Calendar  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -1- 
1.0 OBJECTIVES  
 
1.1 Clini cal Objectives  
 
1.11 The primary objective is to determine the response rate of patients with 
advanced , persistent, or recurrent  endometrial cancer when treated with each of 
the arms of the trial. The proposed arms are:  
 
• Arm #1  Temsirolimus  IV weekly  
 
• Arm #2 Megestrol Acetate/Tamoxifen plus Temsirolimus IV weekly  
 
1.12   Time to progression and number of patients remaining on study therapy at 24 
weeks will also be collected.  
 
1.13 A secondary objective is to describe the toxicities of each of the arms of t he trial 
when used for patients with advanced/metastatic endometrial cancer.  
 
 1.2 Translational Research Objectives  
 
1.21  Explore whether immunohistochemical expression of hormone receptors 
(estrogen receptor -alpha, estrogen receptor -beta, progesterone r eceptors -A, 
progesterone receptor -B and the alternative estrogen receptor, GPR -30) or 
components of the mTOR signaling pathway (normal and mutant PTEN, total 
and phosphorylated Akt as well as total and phosphorylated p70S6 kinase) are 
associated with treat ment, outcome or clinical characteristics.   
 
1.22 Explore whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the FRAP1  and 
RAPTOR  genes, mutations in PIK3CA , PTEN  and paxillin  or copy number 
abnormalities in PTEN  and paxillin  are associated with treatment,  outcome or 
clinical characteristics.  
   
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -2- 
2.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
 
2.1 Hormonal Therapy  
The Gynecologic Oncology Group ( GOG ) has a long history of studying hormonal 
therapy in women with advanced/recurrent endometrial carcinoma.  Although such 
regimens are generally well tolerated, and may produce responses of long duration in 
selected patients, the overall response rates and progression free survival (PFS) have 
been disappointing.  Among the more active hormonal regimens tested by the GOG has 
been  the sequential use of Megestrol Acetate (MA) at 80 mg bid for 3 weeks 
alternating with Tamoxifen (T) 20 mg bid for 3 weeks.  This regimen produced a 
response rate of 27% in 56 eligible women with no prior chemotherapy o r hormonal 
therapy.1 Median PFS was 2.7 months and median overall survival was 14.0 months. 
This trial will combine this hormonal therapy with a generally well -tolerated biologic 
agent that has the potential to increase the benefits of hormonal therapy.  
2.2 Temsirolimus   
Temsirolimus (CCI -779, sirolimus 42 -ester with 2,2 -bis(hydroxymethyl) propionic -
acid) is a specific inhibitor of mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin).2  mTOR is a 
member of the phosphatidylinositol kinase -related kinases.  Its catalytic activ ity is 
regulated by the mitogen -activated phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (P13K)/Akt pathway.   
Its downstream targets, p70s6 kinase and 4E -Binding Protein 1, are involved in 
controlling translation.  Another of mTOR's downstream targets, eukaryotic initiation 
factor 4e , can induce transform ation when overexpressed in experimental models.3   
 
Rapamycin prevents cyclin -dependent kinase activation and retinoblastoma protein 
phosphorylation , which accelerates turnover of cyclin D1 expression , resulting in a 
decrease cdk 2 complexes inhibiting ce ll cycle progression.  Temsirolimus is a more 
water soluble ester analog of rapamycin with a broad range of anti -proliferative activity.  
It has more favorable pharmacokinetic properties and toxicity profile compared with 
Rapamycin.4  Temsirolimus was well  tolerated with observed activity in various tumor 
types in two Phase I trials evaluating a weekly or a daily x 5 schedule.5,6 Preliminary 
clinical evidence of antitumor activity for temsirolimus has been observed in a number 
of tumor types, including brea st cancer,7 renal cell cancer8,  and mantle cell lymphoma.9  
A randomized Phase III trial reported at ASCO 2006 reported a 3.6 month median 
survival advantage for patients with poor -risk metastatic renal cell carcinoma treated 
with temsirolimus 25 mg IV we ekly versus those treated with interferon.10  
Temsirolimus has received FDA approval  for the treatment of renal cell carcinoma.  
 
Activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway in general predicts for response to mTOR 
inhibitors in vitro . This includes two specific mec hanisms of PI3K/Akt pathway 
activation  that have been well described in endometrial carcinomas: PTEN loss ,11 
which is very common in endometrioid endometrial carcinomas, and PIK3CA  gene 
mutations.12  Interestingly, while in breast cancers PTEN  mutations a nd PI3K3CA  
mutations appear to be mutually exclusive, they have been reported to co -exist at a high 
frequency in endometrial carcinoma.13,14  
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -3- 
Thirty to 50% of sporadic endometrial carcinomas carry somatically acquired 
inactivating mutations and/or deletio ns of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene.15,16  A 
recent study reports PTEN inactivation in up to 83% of endometrioid endometrial 
adenocarcinomas.17  Because inactivation of the PTEN gene is accompanied by 
complete absence of the protein (truncated proteins ar e extremely rare), 
immunohistochemistry of paraffin -embedded tissues with anti -PTEN antibody 6h2.1 is 
a sensitive, inexpensive, and rapid means of classifying tumor tissues by PTEN 
status.17,18   PTEN is a dual specificity phosphatase that negatively regul ates the 
PI3K/Akt signaling pathway.  In samples where PTEN expression was depressed, 
phosphorylated Akt levels were inversely elevated.  Further proof that PTEN 
inactivation is important to the pathogenesis of endometrial carcinoma was garnered 
using muta nt PTEN endometrial carcinoma cell lines.  The expression of exogenous 
PTEN resulted in decreased levels of activated Akt and cell growth inhibition in mutant 
but not wild -type PTEN -containing endometrial carcinoma cell lines.19  Thus, 
endometrial carcinom a represents a rational target for temsirolimus (CCI -779) therapy.  
 
The single agent activity of temsirolimus in endometrial carcinoma has been explored  
in two small , uncontrolled Phase II  trials .39 In the first, 33 chemotherapy -naïve patients 
with recurr ent or metastatic endometrial cancer  were treated. There were 7 PRs in 28 
evaluable patients. Response rate was  25.0% (95% CI: 10.7 -44.9%)  and 16 patients had 
SD. Median duration of response was 5.6 months  ( 95% CI 3.7- 18.7 months ) and of 
stable disease was 8.4 months  ( 95% CI 3.1- 10.5 months ).  Median PFS was 8 months.  
.20  
 In the second, 27 chemotherapy -treated women with recurrent or metastatic 
endometrial cancer were treated at a dose of 25  mg i.v. weekly. Thirteen had received 
prior radiation and 1 0 had received prior hormonal therapy. Twenty five patients had 
adenocarcinoma (8 serous carcinoma) and 2 had adeno -squamous carcinoma; 20 
patients had grade 2/3 disease, 5 unknown grade, and 2 grade 1. Two patients have had 
a confirmed partial response (P R) (7.4%; 95% CI 0.9 -24.3%) and 12 patients had stable 
disease (SD) (44%), median duration 3.5months (2.4 -7.2m) and 10 patients had 
progressive disease (41.7%). Five of the 8 patients with serous disease had SD and of 
the 17 with Grad e 3 disease, 1 had a P R and 7 SD. Median PFS was 3.25 months ( 95% 
CI 2-3.88 months ), 6 month PFS was 8% (95% CI  1 -23%). There was n o correlation 
between PTEN and response .  
 
2.3 Rationale for the Combination of Hormones and Temsirolimus  
 
In addition to predicting for sensitivi ty to mTOR inhibitors, PTEN loss and PI3K  
activating mutations can confer in vitro   resistance to a variety of therapies, including 
chemotherapy, trastuzumab, growth factor receptor TKIs, and hormonal therapy.21,22 In 
many models, this resistance can be ov ercome by use of an mTOR inhibitor such as 
sirolimus or temsirolimus.23,24 Some of the most elegant work has been by Wendel et 
al.25,26  They demonstrated that a reduced dosage of PTEN (loss of even one PTEN 
allelle) which was only modestly tumorigenic in their mouse lymphoma model, resulted 
in lymphomas that were relatively resistant to chemotherapy and only modestly 
sensitive to sirolimus.  However the combination produced a dramatic improvement in 
outcomes, outperforming doxorubicin alone in control tumo rs (which did not have any 
improvement in outcomes with the addition of rapamycin to chemotherapy).  
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -4- 
There is cross -talk between hormone receptor signalling pathways and the PI3K/Akt 
pathway at multiple levels.27-29 PTEN loss activates ER -alpha. Activation  of the 
PI3K/AKT pathway is associated with resistance to tamoxifen or estrogen deprivation 
in breast cancer models.28-30 This resistance can be overcome by temsirolimus in 
vitro .31-32 A randomized Phase III trial of oral temsirolimus plus letrozole versus  
letrozole alone in women with advanced breast cancer was prematurely stopped for lack 
of benefit; this may be related to variability of absorption of the oral compound.  
 
2.4 Translational Research  
The G 1 to S cell cycle checkpoint plays a critical role in controlling endometrial cancer 
cell proliferation.33  Progesterone, the principal hormonal inhibitor of endometrial cell 
growth, inhibits cyclin D1 and is a strong induc er of the tumor suppressors PTEN and 
p53, and the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors  p21 and p27.  When expressed at high 
levels, p53, p21, and p27 prevent cell cycle progression at this checkpoint, and PTEN 
inhibits activation of Akt and mammalian target of rapamycin  (mTOR ).  Unfortunately, 
the growth -limiting effects of progesterone are  often lost in endometrial cancers  due to 
down -regulation of estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER and PR).   
 
The GOG attempted to use sequential hormonal treatment to maintain ER and PR 
expression in a Phase II trial of women with persistent or recurre nt endometrial 
carcinoma (GOG -0119).  The rationale for sequential hormone treatment in this trial 
was based on the thought that t amoxifen , an estrogen surrogate  in the uterus,  would 
upregulate PR expression and allow the medroxyprogesterone acetate to inh ibit G1 to S 
transition  (block cell proliferation) and induce cell differentiation by binding to and 
activating PR .34  Treatment with the medroxyprogesterone acetate would then be 
expected to stimulate a negative feedback loop and down regulate PR expressi on.  
Discontinuation of the medroxyprogesterone acetate and re -exposure to tamoxifen 
would then counteract the negative feedback loop and provide signals to upregulate PR 
expression and responsiveness.  T he response rate to sequential hormonal therapy in 
GOG 119 was an impressive 33% with an additional 35% of the patients having stable 
disease.   
 
Immunohistochemistry studies, performed in tumor tissue from women on GOG -0119, 
demonstrated that  tumor response to sequential hormonal therapy in GOG -0119 was 
linked to the expression of ER -alpha .35  Baseline expression of ER -alpha in the 
recurrent tumor specimens was correlated with the immunohistochemical expression of 
PR, but tumor response was not associated with PR .35  Unfortunately, regardless of the 
robust initial response, all patients eventually failed treatment .  We hypothesize that 
treatment failure to sequential hormonal therapy in endometrial cancer is related to the 
prevalent constitutive activation of PI3K, Akt and mTOR  in endometrial carcinoma , 
whic h eventually overcome s the growth -limiting effects of progestin.   
 
The PI3K/Akt pathway has been shown to regulate the catalytic activity of mTOR, a 
PIK-related kinase, and to activate other downstream target s including p70S6 kinase  
which control s transla tion.  PTEN is a dual specificity phosphatase that negatively 
regulates the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway .  Endometrial cancers with low or no PTEN 
expression often express high levels of phosphorylated Akt.  C onstitutive activation of 
the PI3K/Akt pathway  results from inactivating mutations and/or deletions of the PTEN  
tumor suppressor gene  (PTEN  loss) and mutations in the PIK3CA  gene .11, 12, 1 5-17  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -5- 
Endometrial cancers often exhibit PTEN  loss and mutations in PIK3CA .15-17  The 
finding that activation of the P I3K/Akt pathway is associated with response to mTOR 
inhibitors in vitro  coupled with the data indicating that endometrial cancers often 
exhibit PTEN  loss and mutations in PIK3CA  15-17 provide strong rationale for evaluating 
mTOR inhibitors in advanced or r ecurrent endometrial cancer.  
 
To test these hypotheses in a Cooperative Group setting, the expression of hormone 
receptors (ER -alpha, ER -beta, PR -A, PR -B and the alternative estrogen receptor, GPR -
30) and components of the mTOR pathway (normal and mutant PTEN, total and 
phosphorylated Akt as well as phosphorylated p70S6 kinase) will be examined by 
immunohistochemistry in archival formalin -fixed and paraffin -embedded (FFPE) tumor 
tissue from women in this cohort.  The associations between the immunohistoche mical 
expression of these biomarkers and between these biomarkers and treatment, outcome 
or clinical characteristics will be explored.  
 
FRAP1  and RAPTOR  are the genes that encode mTOR and the regulatory associated 
protein of mTOR (RAPTOR), respectively.  Natural variations, such as single 
nucleotide polymorphorisms (SNPs), have been described for both of these genes.  The 
mTOR and RAPTOR proteins form a complex that is inhibited by mTOR inhibitors 
and, therefore, are strong candidates for variation in resp onse to temsirolimus  treatment.  
Genotyping of normal DNA using the Sequenom iPLEX Gold technology will capture 
the genetic variations in up to 167 tag SNPs and 11 tag SNPs in the RAPTOR  and 
FRAP1  genes , respectively.  SNPs in other genes in the mTOR pathw ay may also be 
genotyped if initial results are promising.  G enotypes at the tag SNPs will be compared 
with treatment, outcome or clinical characteristics  in the patients in this clinical trial.   
Normal DNA will be extracted from a buffy coat prepared from  whole blood drawn 
from women in this cohort.  
 
Mutation analysis and copy number abnormalities will also be determined in genes 
involved in mTOR signaling ( PIK3CA , PTEN  and paxillin ).  As indicated above, loss of 
PTEN  (due to an inactivating mutation or de letion ) and mutation of PIK3CA  are 
common mechanisms for activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway in endometrial cancers.  
Paxillin  is another gene involved in mTOR signaling that has been implicated in the 
regulation of cell growth and invasion.  In lung cancer  tissues, paxillin  was highly 
expressed compared with normal lung, amplified (12.1%, 8 of 66) or mutated (somatic 
mutation rate of 9.4%, 18 of 191); paxillin  mutations (90.5%, 19 of 21) were clustered 
between the functional LD motifs 1 and 2 and the LIM do mains.38 We hypothesize that 
similar defects exist in endometrial cancer and contribute to the dysregulation in cell 
growth and invasion observed in this disease.  In this P hase II trial, DNA will be 
extracted from archival FFPE tumor tissue to examine mut ations and/or copy number 
abnormalities in genes involved in mTOR signaling.  The associations between 
mutations in PIK3CA , PTEN  and paxillin  or copy number abnormalities in PTEN  and 
paxillin  and treatment, outcome or clinical characteristics will be exami ned in this 
cohort.  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -6- 
 
2.5 Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 
The Gynecologic Oncology Group and GOG participating institutions will not exclude 
potential subjects from participating in this or any study solely on the basis of ethnic 
origin or socioeconomic  status.  Every attempt will be made to enter all eligible patients 
into this protocol and therefore address the study objectives in a patient population 
representative of the entire endometrial cancer population treated by participating 
institutions.  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -7- 
3.0 PATIENT ELIGIBILITY AND EXCLUSIONS   
 
3.1 Eligible Patients   
 
3.11 Patients must have histologically confirmed advanced (FIGO S tage III or IV), 
persistent, or recurrent endometrial carcinoma, which is not likely to be curable 
by surgery or radiotherapy.  Histologic documentation of the recurrence is not 
required.  
 
3.12 All patients must have measurable disease. Measurable disease is defined as at 
least one lesion that can be accurately measured in at least one dimension 
(longest dimension to be recorded) . Each lesion must be ≥ 20 mm when 
measured by conventional techniques, including palpation, plain x -ray, CT, and 
MRI, or ≥ 10 mm when measured by spiral CT.  
 
Patients must have at least one “target lesion” to be used to assess response on  
this protocol as  defined by RECIST (Section 8.1). Tumors within a previously  
irradiated field will be designated as “non -target” lesions unless progression is  
documented.  
 
3.13 Prior chemoradiotherapy  for a pelvic recurrence is permitted. Prior 
chemotherapy in the adjuvan t setting for Stage I, II, or III disease is permitted.    
   
Note: No prior chemotherapy in the setting of Stage IV disease is permitted 
unless the patient was without evidence of disease at the completion of 
chemotherapy and had at least six months of pr ogression -free survival since the 
completion of chemotherapy.  
 
Regardless of circumstances, no more than one prior chemotherapy regimen 
(including chemoradiotherapy) is permitted.   (06/22/09 ) 
 
3.14 Patient must be able to take p.o. medications.  
 
3.15 Performance status must be 0 -2. 
 
  3.16 Patients must have adequate organ and marrow function as defined below:  
 
• absolute neutrophil count ≥1,500/ mcl 
• platelets ≥100,000/ mcl 
• total bilirubin within normal institutional limits  
•    AST(SGOT) and alkaline phosphatase  2.5 times institutional upper limit 
of normal , v 3.0 (< 5  times ULN for subjects with liver metastases)   
• creatinine ≤ 1.5 x  norma l institutional upper limit of normal ,  
• cholesterol ≤ 350 mg/dL (fasting)  
• triglycerides ≤ 400 mg/dL (fasting)  
• albumin ≥ 3.0 mg/dL  
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -8- 
3.17 At least 4 weeks  must have elapsed  since the patient underwent any major 
surgery  (e.g., major: hysterectomy, resection o f a lung nodule – minor: a port -a-
cath placement) . 
 
3.18 Patients who have met the pre -entry requirements specified in Section 7.0.  
 
3.19 Patients must have signed an approved informed consent including HIPAA 
authorization.  
 
3.2 Ineligible Patients   
 
3.21 Patients with GOG Performance status of 3 or 4.  
 
3.22 Temsirolimus  is primarily metabolized by CYP3A4.  Patients cannot be 
receiving enzyme -inducing antiepileptic drugs (EIAEDs; e.g., phenytoin, 
carbamazepine, phenobarbital) nor any other CYP3A4 inducer su ch as rifampin 
or St. John’s wort, as these may decrease temsirolimus  levels. A partial list of 
agents which interact with cytochrome P450 (CYP3A) is found in Appen dix II .  
All medications in the inducer section of Appendix II may be considered 
potent.  Use of agents that potently inhibit CYP3A (and hence may raise 
temsirolimus  levels), such as ketoconazole, is discouraged, but not specifically 
prohibited. Temsirolimus can inhibit CYP2D6, and may decrease metabolism 
(and increase drug levels) of drugs that are substrates for CYP2D6 . The 
appropriateness of use of such agents is left to physician discretion. A selected 
list of drugs that may have potential interactions wi th CYP2D6 is found in 
Appendix II .  The following website can also be consulted:  
www.medicine.iupui.edu/flockhart/table.htm    (11/24/08 ) 
 
  All concomitant medications must  be recorded  at baseline.  
 
3.23 Because of the theoretical risk of immunosuppression from mTOR inhibitors,  
patients on maintenance corticosteroids  are ineligible with the exception of short 
term use (fewer than 5 days).  
 
3.24 Patients known to have congestive heart failure. Patients with ba seline 
requirement for oxygen.  Patients with serious concomitant illne ss that , in the 
opinion of the treating physician, will place patient at unreasonable risk from 
therapy on this protocol.  
 
3.25 Patients with a  history of unprovoked DVT or PE, unless patient is maintained 
on anticoagulation for the duration of the trial.  While the exact definition of 
“provoked” is left to the treating physician, a DVT in the setting of pelvic 
surgery or trauma would be considered “provoked.”  
 
3.26 Women of child -bearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test prior to 
treatment on s tudy.  
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -9- 
Because there is an unknown but potential risk for adverse events in nursing 
infants secondary to treatment of the mother with temsirolimus, breastfeeding 
should be discontinued if the mother is treated with temsirolimus.  
 
The effects of temsirolimu s on the developing human fetus at the recommended 
therapeutic dose are unknown.  For this reason and because mTOR inhibitors 
may have antiangiogenic activity, and other antiangiogenic agents are known to 
be teratogenic, women of child -bearing potential an d men must agree to use 
adequate contraception [barrier method of birth control  or abstinence ; oral 
contraceptives (also known as “the pill”) are not acceptable]  prior to study entry 
and for the duration of study participation.  Should a woman become pregn ant or 
suspect she is pregnant while participating in this study, she should inform her 
treating physician immediately.  
 
3.27 Patients with a concomitant invasive malignancy or a history of other invasive 
malignancies, with the exception of non -melanoma s kin cancer, are excluded if 
there is any evidence of other malignancy being present within the past five 
years.  Patients are also excluded if their previous cancer treatment 
contraindicates this protocol therapy.  
 
3.28 Patients who have received hormonal therapy or biologic therapy as treatment 
for endometrial carcinoma.  
 
3.29 Patients who have received chemotherapy directed at metastatic or recurrent 
endometrial carcinoma, except  as noted in Section 3.13.   (06/22/09 ) 
 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -10- 
4.0 STUDY MO DALITIES    
 
4.1  Megestrol Acetate (Megace®)  
   
  4.11  Formulation : Tablets of 40 mg megestrol acetate  
   
   4.12 Storage : Room temperature protected from heat and light.  
 
4.13  Adverse Effects : Weight gain, thromboembolic phenomena, nausea and 
vomiting,  edema, break through bleeding, dyspnea, tumor flare, hyperglycemia, 
carpal tunnel syndrome, and rash.  
 
4.14  Supplier : Commercially available.  See package insert for further information.  
 
4.15 Administration : See section 5.2  
 
4.2  Tamoxifen Citrate (Nolvadex ®) (NSC #180973)  
 
4.21  Formulation: Tablets of 10 and 20 mg of tamoxifen.  
 
4.22  Storage: Room temperature protected from heat and light.  
 
4.23  Adverse Effects: Transient thrombocytopenia and leukopenia, menopause -like 
reactions (hot flushes, nausea), ski n rashes/changes, pruritus vulvae, dizziness,  
headaches, depression, lassitude, muscle pain, fluid retention, anorexia,  
menstrual irregularities, vaginal bleeding, vaginal discharge, food distaste and  
thromboembolic events. Of note also is a report of a fe w cases of severe  
retinopathy associated with decreased visual acuity in patients on high doses  
(>200 mg/day) for prolonged periods over a year. Dose modifications or  
cessation of drug because of adverse effects are seldom necessary. See package  
insert for  complete list of adverse effects.  
 
4.24  Supplier: Commercially available. See package insert for further information.  
 
4.25 Administration: See Section 5.2.  
 
4.3 Temsirolimus  [COMMERCIAL Torisel  (NSC # 683864, IND #61010 ) will be 
distributed by the NCI for t his study]  
 
4.31 Formulation : Chemical Name: Sirolimus 42-ester with 2,2 -bis (hydroxymethyl) -
propionic acid  
 
  Other Names : CCI -779, Torisel®, rapamycin analog, WAY -130779  
 
Classification: Cell cycle inhibitor  
 
Molecular Formula: C 56H87NO 16  M.W.: 1030.30 daltons  
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -11- 
Mode of Action : Temsirolimus (an ester of the immunosuppressive compound 
sirolimus [rapamycin, Rapamune®]) blocks cell cycle progression from the G1 
to the S phase by binding to the intracellular cytoplasmic protein, FK506 
binding protein (FKBP)1 2. This complex inhibits activity of the enzyme mTOR 
(mammalian target of rapamycin), inhibiting translation of several key proteins 
that regulate progression through the G1 phase in response to growth factors. 
Sirolimus, temsirolimus’ major metabolite, al so binds to FKBP12.  
 
4.32     How Supplied : TORISEL (temsirolimus) is supplied by the NCI as a 
commercially labeled kit consisting of the following:  
 
• TORISEL (temsirolimus) injection (25 mg/ml).  The TORISEL vial includes 
an overfill of 0.2 mL.  Inert ing redients in the drug vial include dehydrated 
alcohol, d,l -alpha -tocopherol, propylene glycol, and anhydrous citric acid.  
 
• DILUENT for TORISEL.  The DILUENT vial includes a deliverable volume 
of 1.8 mL.  The diluent vial contains polysorbate 80 NF, polyethy lene glycol 
400 NF, and absolute alcohol USP.  
 
TORISEL will be supplied by the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, 
(DCTD), NCI .  Please d o not obtain commercially available TORISEL through 
any other mechanism.   (Please see Section 4.311)  
 
4.33 Preparation : These mixing instructions apply to commercial TORISEL only; 
commercial drug will be supplied by the NCI for this study.   
 
Protect from excessive room light and sunlight during preparation.  
    
Follow this two step dilution process (TORISEL should  only be diluted with the 
supplied diluent):  
 
Step 1  
Inject 1.8 mL of DILUENT for TORISEL into the vial of TORISEL injection (25 
mg/mL).  Due to the intentional 0.2 mL overfill in the TORISEL injection vial, the 
resulting drug concentration will be 10 mg/m L.  A total volume of 3 mL will be 
obtained.  Mix well by gentle inversion of the vial. DO NOT SHAKE. Allow 
sufficient time for air bubbles to subside.  
 
Step 2  
Withdraw the required amount of TORISEL from the 10 mg/mL drug 
solution/diluent mixture prepared  in Step 1.  Further dilute with 0.9% sodium 
chloride injection immediately in glass or polyolefin containers to a final 
concentration between 0.04 mg/mL and 1 mg/mL.   
 
TORISEL will be supplied by the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, 
(DCTD), NC I.  Please d o not obtain commercially available TORISEL through 
any other mechanism.   (Please see Section 4.311)  
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -12- 
4.34 Storage : Refrigerate intact TORISEL kit at 2º -8ºC and protect from light.  
 
4.35 Stability : The 10 mg/mL drug solution/diluent mixture is  stable for 24 hours at 
room temperature.  
 
Administer within 6 hours of the final dilution in 0.9% NaCl.  Store at room 
temperature (20º -25ºC) and protect from light.    
 
4.36 Route of Administration : Intravenous with an appropriate in -line filter (i.e. 0 .2 to 5 
micron) for all temsirolimus doses equal to or greater than 10 mg.  Do not use an 
inline filter for temsirolimus doses less than 10 mg.  Protect from light during 
administration.  
 
4.37 Patient Care Implications :  For hypersensitivity prophylaxis, g ive 
diphenhydramine 25 -50 mg I.V. (or comparable antihistamine) approximately 
30 minutes before starting temsirolimus infusion.  Infuse over 30 minutes.  
 
If a patient develops a hypersensitivity reaction despite diphenhydramine 
pretreatment, stop the infus ion and wait 30 to 60 minutes (depending upon the 
reaction severity).  At the physician’s discretion, it may be possible to resume 
treatment by administering an H2 blocker approximately 30 minutes before 
restarting the infusion.  The manufacturer recommend s famotidine 20 mg IV, 
rather than cimetidine, because it lacks reported drug interactions.  If famotidine 
is unavailable, administer ranitidine 50 mg IV. Re -attempt infusion at a slower 
rate, possibly over one hour. (Please see Section 5.3 for temsirolimu s 
administration and management of hypersensitivity reactions)  
 
4.38 Incompatibilities : Avoid contact of the diluted product with polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) equipment or devices that are plasticized with di - (2-ethylhexyl)pthalate 
(DEHP) to prevent DEHP leac hing.  Store diluted temsirolimus solutions in 
bottles (glass) or plastic bags (polyolefin or polypropylene).   
 
Temsirolimus is compatible with most infusion sets that are acceptable with 
paclitaxel. Infusion sets which have been qualified for use with te msirolimus 
include the following:  
•Baxter vented paclitaxel set  
•Baxter unvented paclitaxel set  
•Abbott #11947 tubing set  
•Alaris #72953 tubing set  
 
Other non -PVC tubings can be used with the following in -line filters:  
•IV 6200 Disposable I.V. Filter 0.2 micron by EPS®, Inc  
•IV 6120 Disposable I.V. Filter 1.2 micron by EPS®, Inc  
•LV 5000 Large Volume 5 micron Conical Filter by B.Braun  
•Baxter Paclitaxel IV 0.2 micron filter set (2C7555)  
•Codan 5 micron monofilter  
•Alaris extension filter set #20350E  
Other polyethersulfone filters may be used.  
   
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -13- 
4.39 Potential Drug Interactions : Temsirolimus is a CYP3A4 substrate.  Avoid 
concomitant treatment of temsirolimus with potent CYP3A4 inhibitors and 
agents that have CYP3A4 induction potential.  
 
The combination  of temsirolimus and sunitinib resulted in dose limiting toxicity 
at low doses of both agents.  Avoid concomitant sunitinib during temsirolimus 
treatment.   
 
Temsirolimus and warfarin may interact to increase INR. Monitor warfarin 
patient’s PT/INR after st arting and stopping temsirolimus.  
  
4.310  Reported Adverse Events and Potential Risks :  (05/24/10)  
 
Comprehensive Adverse Events and Potential Risks list (CAEPR)  
for 
 Temsirolimus ( CCI-779, NSC 683864)  
 
The Comprehensive Adverse Event and Potential Risks l ist (CAEPR) provides a single list of reported and/or potential 
adverse events (AE) associated with an agent using a uniform presentation of events by body system. In addition to the 
comprehensive list, a subset , the Agent Specific Adverse Event List (ASAE L), appears in a separate column and is 
identified with  bold and italicized  text. This subset  of AEs (ASAEL) contains events that are considered 'expected' for 
expedited reporting purposes only. Refer to the 'CTEP, NCI Guidelines: Adverse Event Reporting R equirements' 
http://ctep.info.nih.gov/protocolDevelopment/default.htm#adverse_events_adeers  for further clarification. Frequency is 
provided based on 1288 patients. Below is the CAEPR for temsirolimus (CCI -779).  
 
Version 2.2, January 22, 20101 
 
 Adverse E vents with Possible  
 Relationship to Temsirolimus (CCI -779) 
 (CTCAE 4.0 Term)  
[n= 1288]  
   
 EXPECTED AEs FOR 
ADEERS REPORTING  
 
Agent Specific Adverse 
Event List  
(ASAEL)  
 
Likely (>20%)  Less Likely (<=20%)  Rare but Serious (<3%)   Expected  
BLOOD AND LYMPH ATIC SYSTEM DISORDERS    
Anemia     Anemia  
 Febrile neutropenia    Febrile neutropenia  
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS    
 Endocrine disorders - Other 
(decreased testosterone)    Endocrine disorders - Other 
(decreased testosterone)  
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS    
 Abdom inal distension    Abdominal distension  
 Abdominal pain    Abdominal pain  
 Constipation    Constipation  
Diarrhea     Diarrhea  
Gastrointestinal disorders – Other 
(Mucositis/stomatitis – Select)2    Gastrointestinal disorders – 
Other (Mucositis/stomatitis – 
Select)2 
  Gastrointestinal disorders – Other 
(Perforation, GI – Select)3  Gastrointestinal disorders – 
Other (Perforation, GI – Select)3 
Nausea     Nausea  
 Vomiting    Vomiting  
GENERAL DISORDERS AND ADMINISTRATION SITE CONDITIONS    
 Chills    Chills  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -14- 
 Edema face    Edema face  
 Edema limbs    Edema limbs  
Fatigue     Fatigue  
 Fever    Fever  
 Flu like symptoms    Flu like symptoms  
 Non-cardiac chest pain    Non-cardiac chest pain  
IMMUNE SYSTEM DISORDERS    
 Allergic reaction4   Allergic reaction4 
INFECTION S AND INFESTATIONS5   
 Infections and infestations – Other 
(Infection – Select)    Infections and infestations – 
Other (Infection – Select)  
 Infections and infestations - Other 
(Opportunistic infection 
associated with >=Grade 2 
Lymphopenia)    Infections a nd infestations - 
Other (Opportunistic infection 
associated with >=Grade 2 
Lymphopenia)  
INJURY, POISONING AND PROCEDURAL COMPLICATIONS    
 Wound dehiscence6   Wound dehiscence6 
INVESTIGATIONS    
 Alanine aminotransferase 
increased    Alanine aminotransfer ase 
increased  
 Alkaline phosphatase increased    Alkaline phosphatase increased  
 Aspartate aminotransferase 
increased    Aspartate aminotransferase 
increased  
Cholesterol high7    Cholesterol high7 
 Creatinine increased    Creatinine increased  
 Fibrinogen  decreased    Fibrinogen decreased  
 GGT increased    GGT increased  
 Lymphocyte count decreased    Lymphocyte count decreased  
 Neutrophil count decreased8   Neutrophil count decreased8 
Platelet count decreased8    Platelet count decreased8 
 Weight loss    Weight loss  
 White blood cell decreased    White blood cell decreased  
METABOLISM AND NUTRITION DISORDERS    
 Acidosis    Acidosis  
Anorexia     Anorexia  
 Glucose intolerance9   Glucose intolerance9 
 Hyperglycemia9   Hyperglycemia9 
 Hypertriglyceridemia7   Hypertriglyceridemia7 
 Hypocalcemia    Hypocalcemia  
 Hypokalemia    Hypokalemia  
 Hypophosphatemia    Hypophosphatemia  
 Metabolism and nutrition 
disorders - Other (hyperlipidemia)7   Metabolism a nd nutrition 
disorders - Other 
(hyperlipidemia)7 
MUSCULOSKEL ETAL AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS    
 Arthralgia    Arthralgia  
 Back pain    Back pain  
 Myalgia    Myalgia  
NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS    
 Depressed level of consciousness    Depressed level of consciousness  
 Dysgeusia    Dysgeusia  
 Headache    Headache  
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS    
 Depression    Depression  
 Insomnia    Insomnia  
 Libido decreased    Libido decreased  
RENAL AND URINARY DISORDERS    
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -15- 
  Acute kidney injury10   
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM AND BREAST DISORDERS    
 Erectile dysfunction    Erectile dysfunction  
RESPIRATORY, THORACIC AND MEDIASTINAL DISORDERS    
 Allergic rhinitis     
 Cough    Cough  
 Dyspnea    Dyspnea  
 Epistaxis    Epistaxis  
 Pleural effusion    Pleural effusion  
 Pneumonitis11   Pneumonitis11 
 Sinus disorder    Sinus disorder  
SKIN AND SUBCUTAN EOUS TISSUE DISORDERS    
 Dry skin    Dry skin  
 Nail loss    Nail loss  
 Pruritus    Pruritus  
 Rash acneiform    Rash acneiform  
Rash maculo -papular     Rash maculo -papular  
 Urticaria    Urticaria  
VASCULAR DISORDERS    
 Hypertension    Hypertension  
 Hypotens ion   Hypotension  
  Thromboembolic event   Thromboembolic event  
 
1This table will be updated as the toxicity profile of the agent is revised.  Updates will be distributed to all Principal 
Investigators at the time of revision.  The current version can be obtained by contacting PIO@CTEP.NCI.NIH.GOV .  Your 
name, the name of the investigator, the protocol and the agent should be included in the e -mail.  
 
2Mucositis/stomatitis:  Gingivitis, mucositis/stomatitis, ulcers in mouth and throat, pharyngitis, and dysp hagia have been 
reported in subjects receiving temsirolimus. 
 
3Perforation, GI - Select:  GI perforation (including fatal outcome) has been observed in subjects who received  
temsirolimus.  
 
4Hypersensitivity /infusion reactions (including some life threaten ing and rare fatal reactions), including and not limited to 
flushing, chest pain, dyspnea, hypotension, apnea, loss of consciousness, hypersensitivity, and anaphylaxis, have been 
associated with the administration of temsirolimus.  These reactions can occu r very early in the first infusion, but may also 
occur with subsequent infusions.  Patients should be monitored early during infusion and appropriate supportive care 
should be available.  Temsirolimus infusion should be interrupted in all patients with sev ere infusion reactions and 
appropriate medical care administered.  A risk -benefit assessment should be done prior to the continuation of temsirolimus 
therapy in patients with severe life -threatening reactions.  
 
5Infections:  Bacterial and viral infections including opportunistic infections have been reported in subjects. Infections may 
originate in a variety of organ systems/body regions and may be associated with normal or grade 3 -4 neutropenia. Bacterial 
and viral infections have included cellulitis, herp es zoster, herpes simplex, bronchitis, abscess, pharyngitis, urinary tract 
infection (including dysuria hematuria, cystitis, and urinary frequency), rhinitis folliculitis, pneumonia, and upper 
respiratory tract infection.  
 
6Wound Dehiscence :  The use of te msirolimus has been associated with abnormal wound healing. Therefore, caution 
should be exercised with the use of temsirolimus in the perisurgical period.  
 
7Cholesterol High :  The use of temsirolimus in subjects has been associated with increases in serum  levels  
of triglycerides and cholesterol. This may require initiation of or increase in the dose of lipid -lowering agents.  
 
8Thrombocytopenia and Neutropenia:  Grades 3 and 4 thrombocytopenia and/or neutropenia have been observed at higher 
frequency in sub jects with mantle cell lymphoma (MCL).  
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -16- 
9Hyperglycemia/Glucose Intolerance:  The use of temsirolimus in subjects was associated with increases in serum glucose 
level. This may result in the need for an increase in the dose of, or initiation of, insulin and /or oral hypoglycemic agent 
therapy.  
 
10Acute Kidney Injury :  Renal failure (including fatal outcome) has been observed in subjects receiving temsirolimus for 
advanced RCC and/or with pre -existing renal insufficiency.  
 
11Interstitial Lung Disease:  There have been cases of nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis, including rare fatal reports. Some 
subjects were asymptomatic with pneumonitis detected on computed tomography scan or chest radiograph. Others 
presented with symptoms such as dyspnea, cough, and fev er. Some subjects required discontinuation of temsirolimus or 
treatment with corticosteroids and/or antibiotics, while some subjects continued treatment without additional intervention.  
 
Also reported on temsirolimus  (CCI-779) trials but with the relations hip to temsirolimus  (CCI-779) still 
undetermined:  
 
BLOOD AND LYMPHATIC SYSTEM DISORDERS  - Hemolysis  
CARDIAC DISORDERS  - Left ventricular systolic dysfunction; Pericardial effusion; Right ventricular dysfunction; Sinus 
tachycardia  
EYE DISORDERS  - Blurred vi sion; Conjunctivitis  
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS  - Ascites; Colitis; Dry mouth; Dyspepsia; Dysphagia; Enterocolitis; Esophagitis; 
Gastritis; Gastrointestinal disorders – Other (Hemorrhage, GI – Select); Oral pain; Pancreatitis; Periodontal disease; Rectal 
hemorrhage  
GENERAL DISORDERS AND ADMINISTRATION SITE CONDITIONS  - Gait disturbance  
HEPATOBILIARY DISORDERS  - Hepatic failure  
INJURY, POISONING AND PROCEDURAL COMPLICATIONS  - Fracture  
INVESTIGATIONS  – Activated partial thromboplastin time prolonged; Blood bi lirubin increased; INR increased 
(potential interaction with Coumadin); Investigations - Other (lactic dehydrogenase increased)  
METABOLISM AND NUTRITION DISORDERS  - Dehydration; Hypercalcemia; Hyperkalemia; Hypoalbuminemia; 
Hypomagnesemia; Hyponatremia;  Metabolism and nutrition disorders - Other (hypoproteinemia)  
MUSCULOSKELETAL AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS  - Bone pain; Generalized muscle weakness; 
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorder - Other (bursitis)  
NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS  - Ataxia; Cognit ive disturbance; Dizziness; Intracranial hemorrhage; Ischemia 
cerebrovascular; Peripheral sensory neuropathy; Seizure; Syncope  
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS  - Anxiety; Confusion; Personality change; Psychosis  
RENAL AND URINARY DISORDERS  – Cystitis noninfective5; Proteinuria; Renal and urinary disorders – Other 
(Hemorrhage, GU – Select); Urinary frequency; Urinary tract pain  
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM AND BREAST DISORDERS  - Irregular menstruation  
RESPIRATORY, THORACIC AND MEDIASTINAL DISORDERS  - Bronchopulmonary hemorrhage ; Hypoxia; 
Pleuritic pain; Pulmonary hypertension; Respiratory failure  
SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE DISORDERS  - Alopecia; Hyperhidrosis  
 
 
Note:  Intracerebral Bleeding:  Subjects with central nervous system (CNS) tumors (primary CNS tumors or metastases) 
and/or receiving anticoagulation therapy may be at an increased risk of intracerebral bleeding (including fatal outcomes) 
while receiving therapy with temsirolimus.  
 
Note : Temsirolimus  (CCI-779) in combination with other agents could cause an exacerbation o f any adverse event 
currently known to be caused by the other agent, or the combination may result in events never previously associated with 
either agent.  
. 
 
Note :  Temsirolimus (CCI -779) in combination with other agents could cause an exacerbation of any  adverse 
event currently known to be caused by the other agent, or the combination may result in events never previously 
associated with either agent.  During the first phase of the combination arm of this trial a clot rate of at least 7/22 
was observed in the combination arm.  (05/24/10)  
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -17- 
4.311  Availability:   
 
Temsirolimus is an investigational agent supplied to investigators by the 
Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD), NCI.  In this trial a 
commercial supply of Temsirolimus is provided, but t he agent is used in an 
investigational way.  
 
Temsirolimus is provided to the NCI under a Cooperative Research and 
Development Agreement (CRADA) between Wyeth Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and 
the DCTD, NCI. (Please see Appendix III).  
 
4.312  Drug Ordering and Acco untability : NCI -supplied agents may be requested by 
the Principal Investigator or their authorized designee at each participating 
institution.  Pharmaceutical Management Branch (PMB) policy requires that 
drug be shipped directly to the institution where th e patient is being treated.  
PMB does not permit the transfer of agents between institutions (unless prior 
approval from PMB is obtained).  The CTEP assigned protocol number must be 
used for ordering all CTEP -supplied investigational agents.  The responsib le 
investigator at each participating institution must be registered with CTEP, 
DCTD, through an annual submission of FDA Form 1572, Supplemental 
Investigator Data Form (IDF), and Financial Disclosure Form.  If there are 
several participating investigators  at one institution, CTEP supplied 
investigational agents for the study should be ordered under the name of one 
lead investigator at that institution.  
 
 Drug may be requested by completing a Clinical Drug Request (CDR [NIH -
986]) (print from the CTEP websit e at http://ctep.cancer.gov/requisition/) and 
mailing it to the Pharmaceutical Management Branch, DCTD, NCI, EPN, Room 
7149, Bethesda, MD 20892 or faxing it to (301) 480 -4612. Beginning 11/10/03, 
all CDR’s for PMB -distributed agents sent to the PMB must be  signed by the 
investigator in whose name the agent is ordered OR by the shipping designee 
OR by an ordering designee whom the investigator has listed on their most 
recent IDF on file with the PMB.  
 
 If the investigator has not designated the individual s igning the CDR as a 
shipping or ordering designee, or if the shipping or ordering designees at a 
clinical site change, the first two pages of the IDF should be updated to reflect 
the current designees, the IDF should be signed and dated by the investigator  
and returned to the PMB by fax at (301) 402 -4870.  For questions (o n the first 
two pages of the investigator’s current IDF) call the PMB at (301) 496 -5725 
Monday through Friday from 8:30 am to 4:30 pm Eastern Time.  
 
      The Investigator, or a responsibl e party designated by the investigator, must 
maintain a careful record of the inventory and disposition of all agents received 
from the PMB using the NCI Drug Accountability Record Form (DARF). See 
the CTEP web site for Policy and Guidelines for Accountabi lity and Storage of 
Investigational Drugs at http://ctep.cancer.gov/requisition/  
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -18- 
      Requests for Investigator’s Brochures (IB) should be e -mailed to 
ibcoordinator@mail.nih.gov  or you may call the IB coordinator at 301 -496-
5725.  
 
4.4 Pathology Requirements  
  
4.41 Eligible disease characteristics : Patients must have histologically confirmed, 
advanced (FIGO stage III or IV) , persistent,  or recurrent endo metrial 
carcinoma.  All histologic cell types and grades of endometrial carcinoma of the 
uterine corpus are allowed.  
 
4.42 Ineligib le disease characteristics : Patients  with a sarcoma, carcinosarcoma  
(MMMT) , or leiomyosarcoma of the uterine corpus are not el igible.   Patients 
with early stage (FIGO stage I or II) endometrial carcinoma are also not 
eligible.   
 
4.43 Requirements: Stained pathology slides are required for central review by the 
GOG Pathology Committee to confirm eligibility.   At least one represen tative 
H&E stained slide (or slides) demonstrating  primary site, histologic cell type 
and grade will be required.   At least one representative H&E stained slide 
documenting the most advanced stage of disease will be required  if the most 
advanced stage is documented by histology or cytology.   If the patient is 
enrolled with  recurrent disease, at least one representative H&E stained 
slide  demonstrating recurrent disease will be  required  if recurrent disease is 
documented by histology.   See Section s 7.2 and  10.2 for additional instructions 
for submitting the stained pathology slides to the GOG Statistical and Data 
Center in Buffalo, NY.   
 
4.44 See Section 7. 3 and Appendix IV for information and instructions regarding the 
specimen requirements for Translational Research.  (05/24/10)  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -19- 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN AND ENTRY/RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURE      
 
All initial and continuing reviews must be submitted to the CTSU Regulatory Office. A CTSU 
IRB/Regulatory Approval Transmittal Sheet should be submitted along with the CTSU IRB  
Certification Form or its equivalent. (CTSU forms can be downloaded at  
https://www.ctsu.org/ public/ rss2_page.asp x). IRB submissions can be faxed or mailed to:  
 
CTSU Regulatory Office  
Coalition of National Cancer Cooperative Groups  
1818 Market Street, Sui te 1100  
Philadelphia, PA 19103  
1-888-823-5923  
  FAX 215 -569-0206  (05/24/10)  
 
5.1 Patient Entry and Registration  
 
When a suitable candidate has been obtained for protocol entry, the following steps 
should be taken:  
 
5.11 Patient must have signed an approved  informed consent and authorization 
permitting release of personal health information.  Current FDA, NCI and 
institutional regulations concerning informed consent will be followed.  
 
 5.12 All eligibility requirements indicated in Section 3.0 must be satis fied. 
  
5.13 The Fast Fact Sheet data must be gathered.  
  
5.14 The institution must register the patient using the web -based registration 
application or by phone if necessary (800 -523-2917).  Instructions for web -
based registration and randomization can be foun d by going to the GOG Web 
Menu page, selecting "Start/finish a patient registration," and then selecting 
"Directions" found on the left side of the page.  
 
5.15 The institution will enter the patient's name, GOG number, and assigned 
regimen in the appropriate p lace in their Log Book to verify the patient's entry.  
 
5.2 Treatment Plan  
 
Stage I Accrual (Patients enrolled prior to 12/21/09):   (05/24/10)  
Treatment randomization will be stratified into two levels based on previous treatment 
for endometrial cancer:  
Level 1.  Patients who have received adjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiation either at 
time of initial diagnosis or for a pelvic recurrence  
Level 2.  Patients who have never received adjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiation 
for pelvic recurrence. (05/24/10)  
Prior radiotherapy in  the absence of chemotherapy is not considered in this 
stratification.  
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -20- 
 
Study therapy will be randomized between : 
 
Arm 1:  Temsirolimus IV 25 mg (flat dose) weekly  
  and 
Arm 2:  Megestrol Acetate (MA)  80 mg bid for 3 weeks alternating with Tamoxifen 
(T) 20 mg bid for 3 weeks  PLUS Temsirolimus  IV 25 mg (flat  dose) weekly . 
 
Therapy is to be continued until tumor progression or undue toxicity.  For purposes of 
evaluation, a cycle will be considered six weeks. Re -evaluation for disease response and 
status wil l be every six weeks for the first 24 weeks of therapy, then every 12 weeks for 
patients who are receiving protocol therapy longer than 24 weeks.  
 
Stage II accrual (Patients enrolled after 12/21/09):  (05/24/10)  
As of December 18, 2009, there have been seve n venous -thrombosis -related events 
reported among the 22 women assigned to the megestrol 
acetate/tamoxifen/temsirolimus arm of this study and none among the 21 women on the 
temsirolimus alone arm.  The combination arm was therefore permanently closed to 
new accrual. The single agent temsirolimus arm has met the criteria to proceed with the 
second stage and will be reopened to accrual.  
 
Patients will be stratified into two levels based on previous treatment for endometrial 
cancer:  
Level 1.  Patients who have received adjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiation either at 
time of initial diagnosis or for a pelvic recurrence  
Level 2.  Patients who have never received adjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiation 
for pelvic recurrence. (05/24/10)  
Prior radiotherapy in the absence of chemother apy is not considered in this 
stratification.  
 
All patients enrolled after 12/21/2009 will receive  
 
Arm 1:  Temsirolimus IV 25 mg (flat dose) weekly  
 
Therapy is to be continued until tumor progression or undue toxicity.  For purposes of 
evaluation, a cycle will be considered six weeks. Re -evaluation for disease response and 
status will be every six weeks for the first 24 weeks of therapy, then every 12 weeks for 
patients who are receiving protocol therapy longer than 24 weeks.  
 
  
  5.3  Temsirolimus  Administ ration  
 
Treatment will be administered on an outpatient basis.  Reported adverse events and 
potential risks are described in Section 4.310 .  Appropriate dose modifications for 
temsirolimus are described in Section 6 .0.  Patients receiving temsirolimus on t his 
protocol may not receive any other investigational agents either for the treatment of the 
patient’s cancer or for any other indication.  Patients on this protocol may not be treated 
with any other anti -cancer therapy.  
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -21- 
Patients will receive temsirolimu s at their assigned dose administered over 30 minutes 
IV weekly continuously . It may be given up to 2 days early or late due to holiday or 
scheduling reasons.   
 
Temsirolimus  is incompatible with polyvinyl chloride (PVC) equipment or devices that 
are plast icized with di - (2-ethylhexyl) pthalate (DEHP).  Please see Section 4.38 
(Incompatibilities) for a list of compatible tubings and filings.  
 
Patients  should be premedicated with diphenhydramine 25 – 50 mg IV  or PO  (or a 
similar antihistamine) approximately  30 minutes before the start of the tesmirolimus  
infusion.  If the subject begins to develop a hypersensitivity reaction despite 
pretreatment with diphenhydramine, the infusion should be stopped for at least 30 – 60 
minutes, depending upon the severity of the reaction.  The infusion may be resumed by 
administering a histamine H 2-receptor antagonist approximately 30 minutes before 
restarting the tesmsirolimus  infusion.  Famotidine 20 mg IV or ranitidine 50 mg IV are 
recommended rather than cimetidine because  of the lack of likely 
metabolic/pharmacologic interactions with the former drugs.  The rate of the 
temsirolimus  infusion may also be slowed from 30 minutes to over an hour.  All 
subjects should be monitored while receiving the temsirolimus  infusion and em ergency 
medical equipment and health care personnel must be readily available to respond to 
hypersensitivity reactions or other medical emergencies.  
 
 5.4 Megestrol Acetate and Tamoxifen Compliance  
 
The use of a patient pill calendar (See Appendix V) durin g study therapy will be 
utilized by the patient and the treating clinic to help promote and monitor compliance 
with Megestrol Acetate and Tamoxifen.  
 
 5.5 Concomitant Medications  
 
In vitro  studies with temsirolimus  in human liver microsomes indicate that CYP3A4 
may be the primary enzyme responsible for the agent’s metabolism, suggesting that 
compounds known to modulate CYP3A4 activity may therefore affect the metabolism 
of temsirolimus .  Inhibitors of CYP3A4 may decrease the metabolism and increase 
temsiro limus  levels, while inducers of CYP3A4 may increase the metabolism and 
decrease temsirolimus  levels.  Temsirolimus  or its metabolites may also interact with 
the CYP450 enzyme system by inhibiting CYP2D6. While caution is indicated in many 
circumstances, th e only medications prohibited on this protocol are the potent CYP3A4 
inducers .  A selected list is included in 3.22 and Appendix II .  The following website 
can also be consulted:  www.medici ne.iupui.edu/flockhart/table.htm . (11/24/08 ) 
 
Therapeutic anticoagulation:  Patients  on warfarin should have PT/INR monitored 
closely during warfarin therapy (e.g., at baseline, weekly for the first three weeks of the 
first cycle, weekly for the first thre e weeks of any cycle following a dose reduction, and 
for a minimum of two weeks after stopping temsirolimus .). Temsirolimus t herapy should 
be held if the coagulation parameters are meaningfully higher than the intended 
therapeutic range  as defined by the t reating physician . 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -22- 
  5.6 Supportive Care Guidelines  
 
Nausea/vomiting : Nausea induced by study agents should be treated initially with a 
phenothiazine (prochlorperazine 10 mg q8h PO prn or promethazine 12.5 -25 mg IV q6h 
prn).  If this is inadequate, a sero tonin type -3 (5-HT(3)) antagonist or benzodiazepine 
should be added until acute nausea is controlled.  Should this prove inadequate acutely, 
a corticosteroid may be added ( e.g., dexamethasone 4 mg q6h prn).   Treatment with 
corticosteroids should be limited  to fewer than 5 days.  
 
After acute nausea has resolved, consideration should be given to initiation of 
prophylactic antiemetic therapy.  If nausea recurs despite reasonable medical 
intervention (as outlined above), dose reduction will be needed as descri bed in Section 
6. 
 
Routine supportive measures for cancer patients such as analgesics, blood transfusions, 
antibiotics, bisphosphonates, and erythropoeitic  colony stimulating factors for treatment 
of anemia  (according to national guidelines) are permitted.   However, given emerging 
data about adverse outcomes in a number of cancer types with erythropoietic colony 
stimulating factors, these should be used with caution, and only to avoid transfusion.  
 
The administration of anticancer therapies, other investiga tional agents, or prophylactic 
use of  granulocyte  colony stimulating factors  are not permitted. Use of granulocyte 
colony stimulating factors for neutropenic fever is permitted.  
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -23- 
6.0 TREATMENT MODIFICATIONS     
 
6.1   Tamoxifen/Megestrol Acetate  
 
There are no dose modifications for the tamoxifen/megestrol acetate.  However, 
because of the risk of DVT, subjects not already on anticoagulation who require major 
abdominal or pelvic surgery or fracture a femur or pelvis should have drug held from 
one week pri or to the procedure (if it is a planned procedure) till they are ambulatory 
again.  Patients receiving both tamoxifen/megestrol acetate and temsirolimus should 
have their temsirolimus held during the same time period during which the 
tamoxifen/megestrol ac etate is held.  However, in general, if temsirolimus is held for 
any reason on Arm # 2, the tamoxifen/megestrol acetate should still continue.  
Suspected severe and unusual toxicities from either agent (e.g. hives from tamoxifen) 
should be discussed with t he study chair.  
 
6.2   Temsirolimus (CCI -779) 
 
Additional cycles of therapy may be administered provided that the patient meets the 
following criteria before each dose (counts done up to 24 hours ahead of time are 
acceptable) : 
 
• ANC > 1,000/ mcl 
• Platelets > 100,000/ mcl 
• Non-hematologic toxicity recovered to < grade 1 (or tolerable grade 2)  
• No evidence of progressive disease  
 
In the event of toxicity, the doses of temsirolimus  will be adjusted according to 
the guidelines shown in the Dose Delays/Dose Modificati ons tables that follow.  
If an adverse event is not covered in the table, doses may be reduced or held at 
the discretion of the investigator for the subject’s safety.  Dose adjustments for 
hematological toxicity are based on the blood counts obtained in pr eparation for 
the day of treatment.  
 
Patients requiring dose reductions should not have the dose re -escalated with 
subsequent treatments.  
 
Subjects with toxicities that are manageable with supportive therapy may not require 
dose reductions ( e.g., hyperlip idemia may be treated with statins, nausea/vomiting may 
be treated with antiemetics, diarrhea with loperamide  rather than by dose reduction).   
 
Loperamide should be started for diarrhea as follows: 4 mg at first onset, then 2 mg 
every 2 -4 house until diar rhea is controlled (maximum = 16 mg loperamide/day).  
 
When triglyceride and cholesterol lowering is desired, use pravastatin, fluvastatin, or 
atorvastatin with the addition of a fibrate if necessary.  Pravastatin and fluvastatin are 
not metabolized by CYP3 A4 and are preferred.  Fenofibrate is preferred in combination 
with statins. Avoid nicotinic acid as it may exacerbate hyperglycemia. Anti -lipid 
therapy should not be started without fasting lipid values.  
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -24- 
When ONLY triglyceride lowering is desired, use a fibrate (fenofibrate or gemfibrozil).  
Please note that only very high triglyceride levels (>500 mg/kL) have been definitively 
associated with increased morbidity while moderate triglyceride increases (200 -499 
mg/dL) have only been associated with increase d cardiac events in patients with risk 
factors for atherosclerotic cardiac disease or with high LDL.  
 
Subjects with glucose elevation who are already on antidiabetic medications should 
have such medications cautiously adjusted if they are to stay on protoc ol, with a 
planned decrease in dosage at the time the patient s comes off temsirolimus therapy. If 
the glucose is over 400, they should be instructed to call their doctor.  Those who are 
not on antidiabetic medication , but with blood glucose levels over 200, should have 
dietary instruction (avoid concentrated sugars); if the glucose is persistently over 200 
and it is the judgment of their physician that they are benefiting from temsirolimus 
therapy, oral hypoglycemics with appropriate monitoring can be used.   Again, these 
must be stopped with cessation of temsirolimus therapy.   (11/24/08 ) 
 
Subjects who experience a clot may, at the discretion of the investigator, be 
continued on study with the addition of anticoagulation.  If warfarin is chosen as 
the method of anticoagulation, INR must be in -range (target as determined by 
investigator, usually 2.0 -3.0) prior to re -initiation of therapy.  (05/24/10)  
 
Weight loss, in the absence of other toxicity, does not require treatment to be held.  
(05/24/10)  
 
For laboratory  abnormalities other than hematologic parameters, study therapy should 
be discontinued in s ubjects who fail to recover to CTC AE Grade 0 -1 or tolerable grade 
2 (or within 1 grade of starting values for pre -existing laboratory abnormalities  other 
than as des cribed above ) from a treatment -related toxicity within 14 days OR  they 
experience agent related adverse events requiring dose modification despite two 
previous dose reductions (i.e. would require a 3rd dose reduction) unless the treating 
physician,  study  chair, and CTEP monitor  agree that the subject should remain in the 
study because of evidence that the patient is/may continue deriving benefit from 
continuing study treatment. The appropriate reduced dose will be determined after 
discussion between the treating physician,  study chair, and CTEP monitor . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -25- 
Adverse Event  Agent  Treatment Modifications  
Blood/Bone Marrow2 
Neutrophils  
 ANC 500 -999 
Platelets  
 50,000 -99,999   
 
 
 
Temsirolimus  • Delay temsirolimus until recovery to ANC 
≥ 1,000 and plt ≥ 100,000  
• Retreat at a one dose level reduction  
• If recovery requires > 14 days,1 discontinue 
all study treatment.  
Neutrophils  
 ANC <500  
Platelets  
 <50,000  • Delay temsirolimus until recovery to ANC 
≥ 1,000 and plt ≥ 100,000  
• Retreat at two dose levels reducti on 
• If recovery requires > 14 days,1 discontinue 
all study treatment.  
Pulmonary/Upper Respiratory  
Grade 2 or higher 
Pneumonitis 
(cough, dyspnea, 
fever)   
 
Temsirolimus  Discontinue temsirolimus pending 
investigation.  If diagnosis is confirmed and 
events ar e considered at least possibly due to 
temsirolimus, the agent is discontinued.  
 
Adverse Event  Agent  Treatment Modifications  
All other non -hematologic adverse events  
Grade 0 -2  
 
 
Temsirolimus  Grade 2 toxicities that are persistent and 
intolerable (i.e. s tomatitis) can result in dose 
delays and dose reductions to the next lower 
dose level  
Grade 3 -4 Hold dose.   
• Re-evaluate until AE resolved to < 1 or 
tolerable grade 2.   
• Re-treat at a one dose level reduction  
• If recovery requires > 14 days, discontinue 
all study treatment.  
• Patients with grade 4 AEs related to agent 
may discontinue study therapy at 
investigator’s discretion.  
            1. 14 days from when the dose was due, or 21 days from the previous dose . 
 2. Hold the study drug if coagulation paramet ers are meaningfully higher than the intended therapeutic range, as 
determined by the treating physician for patients on warfarin (See Section 5.5). Conduct  INR testing weekly for the first 
three weeks of any cycle following a dose reduction . 
Dose Reductio ns for Temsirolimus -related Toxicity  
 
Dose Level  Temsirolimus  Dose 
(mg)  
Starting dose  25 
-1 20 
-2 15 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -26- 
7.0 STUDY PARAMETERS  
 
7.1 The following observations and tests are to be performed and recorded on the 
appropriate form(s): See Section 7. 3 for the specimen requirements for translational 
research for this study. Stained pathology slides will be required for central review by 
the GOG Pathology Committee to confirm eligibility (see Section s 7.2 and  10.2).:  
 
 
Observations and Tests  
 Pre-
Study  Wk 
1 Wk 
2 Wk 
3 Wk 
 4 Wk 
5 Wk 
6 Wk 
7 Wk 
8 Wk 
9 Wk 
10 Wk 
11 Wk 
12 Off  Study 
treatmentf 
 
Temsirolimusi  
  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
 
 
Informed consent   
X  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Demographics   
X  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Medical history   
X  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Concurrent medsa  
X  
X----------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------- X  
 
 
Physical examb  
X**  
X  
X  
X  
X  
  
  
X  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Vital signsb  
X**  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
 
 
Height   
X**  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Weightb  
X**  
X  
X  
X  
X  
  
  
X  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Performance statusb  
X  
X  
  
  
X  
  
  
X  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
CBC w/diff, pltsi,c  
X*  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
 
 
Serum chemistryj,c  
X*  
X  
  
  
X  
  
  
X  
  
  
X  
  
  
 
 
Serum li pid levelsb,d,c  
X***   
  
  
  
X  
  
  
X  
  
  
X  
  
  
 
 
INRh   X                
 
Toxicity Assessmentk   
  X -------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------- X  
X 
 
Tumor measurements   
X***   
Tumor measurements are repeated every six weeks for 24 weeks, and then 
repeated every 12 weeks for patients on study therapy longer than 24 weeks.   
X 
 
Radiologic evaluationg  
X***   
Radiologic evaluation should be performed every six weeks for the first 24 
weeks and then repeated every 12 weeks for patients on study therapy longer 
than 24 weeks.   
X 
 
B-HCG   
Xe  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
*     Within 7 days prior to initiating protocol therapy.  
**   Within 14 days prior to initiating protocol therapy.  
*** Within 28 days prior to initiati ng protocol therapy.  
a:  Document  in patient’s medical chart  at each scheduled visit with special attention to drugs that interact with CYP3A4 and CYP2D6.  
b: Physical exam weekly for the first 4 doses, with dose 7, then every 6 weeks. Physical exam includ es weight, and assessment of PS 
and toxicity; pelvic exam is not required except for tumor measurement or as clinically indicated. Vital signs (temperature, pulse, and 
blood pressure) should be taken with each infusion. Full physician or nurse practitioner  physical exam should be at least every three 
weeks for cycle one, then at least six weeks for subsequent cycles; weeks 1, 2, and 3 require only a brief assessment to incl ude vital 
signs and blood tests.  
c:  Pre-treatment labs for subsequent cycles can be obtained up to 24 hours ahead of treatment.  
d:  Serum cholesterol and triglycerides  should be collected every 3 weeks for the first 2 cycles, then every 6 weeks.  
e:  Serum or urine pregnancy test (w omen of childbearing potential).  To be done within 48 hou rs before starting treatment.  
f:  If patient comes off study treatment prior to progress ion, continue tumor measurements and radiologic evaluations on schedule until 
progression. . Toxicity assessments will be continued until resolution.  Patient s will be f ollowed after last drug dose until toxicity  
resolution , until progression if patient withdraws before progressive disease, and for one year after the end of treatment for survival , 
or until study withdrawal if it occurs before this time.  (05/24/10)  
g:  Bas eline assessment must include an evaluation of the chest by x -ray, CT scan, or MRI, and an evaluation of the abdomen and pelvis 
by MRI or CT scan) ; repeat assessments must include areas with  target and non -target lesions found at baseline.  Radiologic tum or 
evaluations are repeated every six weeks for the first 24 weeks and then repeated every 12 weeks. Repeat after treatment 
discontinuation if patient was taken off study for reasons other than progressive disease as seen in radiologic imaging.  
h.. Only f or patients on warfarin.  This is to be done at baseline, weekly for the first three weeks, weekly for the first three weeks of any 
cycle following a dose reduction, and for a minimum of two weeks after stopping temsirolimus (See Section 5.5).  
i.   Continu ing weekly while patient is on therapy.   
j.   Serum chemistry includes a lbumin, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, bicarbonate, BUN, calcium, chloride, creatinine , glucose, 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -27- 
phosphorus,  potassium,  total protein, SGOT[AST], SGPT[ALT], sodium. Continuing every 3 weeks while on study.  
k.  Weekly for the first four weeks, then with dose 7, then continuing every 6 weeks while on study; when patient is taken of f study, 
continue about once a month until toxicity resolution.  If appropriate, toxicity assessment s can be conducted by telephone . (05/24/10)  
 
  
7.2  Stained Pathology Slide Requirements for Central Review to Confirm Protocol 
Eligibility  (05/24/10)  
 
Stained pathology slides are required for central review by the GOG Pathology 
Committee to confirm eligib ility for the protocol.   At least one representative H&E 
stained slide (or slides) demonstrating primary site histologic cell type and grade will be 
required for ALL patients, with additional slides documenting most advanced stage or 
recurrence if document ed by histology or cytology.   If the most advanced stage of 
disease is not documented by histology, the method of stage documentation needs to be 
stated (e.g. CT, MRI, etc.).  If this protocol allows patients with recurrent or persistent 
disease, slides fr om recurrence and/or persistent disease will be required only if 
recurrence/persistent disease is confirmed by histology or cytology.  
 
When submitting pathology material to the GOG Statistical and Data Center  individual 
slides must be labeled with GOG Pat ient ID, patient initials and the surgical / pathology 
accession number (e.g., S08 -2355) and block identifier (e.g., A6).   Do not label the 
slides with disease site (e.g., right ovary) or procedure date.    
 
Pack the labeled slides into plastic slide casset te(s).   Tape plastic slide cassettes shut 
and wrap in bubble wrap or another type of padded material prior to shipping.   Please 
include the GOG Patient ID, patient initials, and protocol number on all pages of the 
pathology report and black out the patient ’s name.   Ship pathology slides, two copies of 
both the Pathology Form F (if required for the protocol) and the official pathology 
report in your own shipping containing using postal mail at your own expense directly 
to the Pathology Materials Coordinator at the GOG Statistical and Data Center, 
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Research Studies Center, Carlton and Elm Streets, 
Buffalo, New York, 14263 ; phone (716) 845 -5702.   The GOG Upload Application in 
SEDES is an alternative method for submitting pathology reports to the GOG Statistical 
and Data Center.  Please see Section s 4.4  and 10.2 for additional requirements and 
instructions.  
 
7.3  Translational Research  
 
7.31 Specimen Requirements  
 
Please see below for a summary of the specimen requirements for GOG -0248 if 
the patient gives permission for her specimens to be submitted and used for this 
research study. P atients may participate in this treatment protocol even if they 
don’t give permission for their specimens to be submitted and used for this 
research st udy. If this is the case , indicate “pat ient refused” as the reason in 
Item 5 on the SP Form.   
 
Refer to Appendix IV for a description of the Specimen Procedures for this 
protocol including instructions for obtaining a GOG Bank ID, ordering 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -28- 
Specimen Kits fo r GOG -0248, submitting SP Forms as well as preparing, 
shipping, banking and distributing the GOG -0248 specimens.   
 
Quick Scan Summary of the S pecimen Requirements for GOG -0248  (05/24/10)  
 
 1  Label each specimen  with the protocol number (GOG -0248), a GOG Bank ID (# # # # - # # – G # # #), a specimen 
code (see above) and the collection date (mm/dd/yyyy).  
 2  Please complete Form SP for EACH specimen and include a copy when the specimen is submitted to the GOG 
Tissue Bank as described in Appendix IV.   
 3   The unstained slides or block of primary, metastatic, and/or recurrent tumor will need to be shipped to the GOG 
Tissue Bank in your own shipping container using the US Postal Service at your expense.  GOG Tissue  Bank / 
Protocol GOG -0248, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, 700 Children’s Drive, WA1340, Columbus, OH 43205, 
Phone: (614) 722 -2865, FAX: (614) 722 -2897, E -mail: gogbank@nationwidechildrens.org .  Prima ry tumor is the 
1st choice, metastatic tumor is the 2nd choice and recurrent tumor is the 3rd choice.  We strongly encourage the 
submission of more than one type of tumor tissue whenever possible.  In this situation, please label the tumor 
specimens sequen tially using FT01 for primary tumor tissue, FT02 for metastatic tumor and FT03 for recurrent 
tumor, and contact the GOG Statistical and Data Center to have the additional “ optional ” SP Forms for FT02 and 
FT03 added to the patient form schedule.  In the eve nt that it is not possible to submit the archival FFPE tumor 
specimen, submit the SP form via SEDES with the reason the specimen was not collected in item 5 (e.g., patient Required Specimens 
(Specimen Codes)1 Form SP Label  
in Forms  
Tracki ng 
System2 Collection Time Points 
and Requirements  Deadlines and 
Recommendations2 
Archival Formalin -Fixed and 
Paraffin -Embedded (FFPE) 
Primary, Metastatic, and/or 
Recurrent Tumor (FT01):3   
1st choice: Block  
2nd choice: 20 Unstained Slide  
- 15 unstained 5  micrometer 
sections on charged slides for 
immunohistochemistry assays  
- 5 unstained 10 micrometer 
sections on clean glass slides 
suitable for laser capture 
microdissection and/or 
nucleic acid extractions  SP-FT01 -0248  
(05/24/10)  Tumor must have been 
remove d prior to 
starting treatment on 
this phase II trial  Ship FT01 to the GOG Tissue 
Bank  using your own shipping 
container via US Postal Mail at 
your own expense within 8 weeks 
of study entry. 3 
 
Form SP for FT01 will need to be 
submitted to the GOG Statistic al 
and Data Center (SDC) online 
using the SDC Electronic Data 
Entry System (SEDES) within 8 
weeks of study entry.  
Room Temperature Blood 
(WB01)  for immediate 
submission and DNA 
extractio n by the Bank4    
(05/24/10)  
 
Draw 10 ml blood into  your 
own purple -top Vacutainer ® 
tube(s) with EDTA   
 SP-WB01 -0248  Collect prior to starting 
treatment on this phase 
II trial  Ship WB01 to the GOG Tissue 
Bank at ambient temperature the 
day the blood is collected in your 
own shipping container .4 
 
Form SP for WB01 will need t o be 
submitted to the SDC online using 
SEDES the day the blood is 
collected . 
Frozen Blood (WB0 2)5  
(05/24/10)  
 
Draw 10 ml blood into  your 
own purple -top Vacutainer ® 
tubes with EDTA    
 SP-WB0 2-0248  Collect prior  to starting 
treatment on this P hase 
II trial  Ship WB0 2 to the GOG Tissue 
Bank using a Single Chamber Kit 
provided for this trial within 1 
week of starting treatment.5 
 
Form SP for WB0 2 will need to be 
submitted to the SDC online using 
SEDES within 1 week of treatment 
start.  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -29- 
refused or referring site won’t release tumor).  If the quantity of FFPE tumor is lim ited, please call a GOG 
Translational Research Scientist for advice (716 -845-5702).  (05/24/10)  
 4 Room temperature.  whole blood specimen for GOG -0248 MUST  be shipped to the GOG Tissue Bank (address 
provided above) with a completed SP Form for WB01.  This blood specimen must be shipped at ambient 
temperature the day the blood is collected as it will be immediately processed upon receipt at the GOG Tissue 
Bank.  Whole blood will need to  be shipped to the GOG Tissue Bank FedEx Priority Overnight on a Monday 
through Friday schedule for Tuesday through Saturday delivery using the GOG Tissue Bank’s Federal Express 
Account Number (1290 -2562 -0).  Refer to Section V and Section VII in Appendix IV for instructions for 
preparing and shipping the whole blood specimen to  the GOG Tissue Bank for GOG -0248 as the GOG Tissue 
Bank cannot provide Shipping Kits for submitting the room temperature whole blood specimen for this protocol.  
In the event that it is not possible to submit the whole blood specimen, submit the SP form v ia SEDES with the 
reason the specimen was not collected in item 5 (e.g., patient refused, tried but not able to draw blood, non -US 
site, logistically infeasible or IRB refused).   (05/24/10)  
 5 Frozen whole blood specimen for GOG -0248 MUST  be shipped to the  GOG Tissue Bank (address provided 
above) with a completed SP Form for WB02 via Federal Express for next morning delivery using the GOG Tissue 
Bank’s Federal Express Account Number (1290 -2562 -0) on a Monday through Thursday schedule for Tuesday 
through Fri day delivery .  Please store the blood in an ultra -cold freezer or in an appropriate container/cooler 
surrounded by excess dry ice until the blood can be shipped to the GOG Tissue Bank.  In the event that it is not 
possible to submit the whole blood specime ns, submit the SP form via SEDES with the reason the specimen was 
not collected in I tem 5 (see above for examples). (05/24/10)  
 
7.32 Laboratory Testing  
 
Staff at the GOG Tissue Bank will coordinate with the Chairs of the GOG 
Committee for Experimental Medi cine and the Tissue Utilization Subcommittee 
as well as staff in the GOG Statistical and Data Center to distribute appropriate 
specimens to approved investigators for testing for this trial (see below for 
details).  The translational research compo nent of this P hase II protocol 
does involve genetic testing  to study genetic changes that are inherited and 
passed on in families.   (11/24/08 ) 
 
7.321 Immunohistochemistry Assays  
 
Staff at the GOG Tissue Bank will prepare and distribute fifteen 
unstained sections 5  micrometers in thickness on charged slides suitable 
for standard immunohistochemistry assays to Dr. Kimberly Leslie at the 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics .  (05/24/10)  
 
Validated immunohistochemistry assays will be performed and evaluated 
for ER-alpha, ER -beta, PR -A, PR -B, GPR -30, normal and mutant PTEN, 
total and phosphorylated Akt as well as total and phosphorylated p70S6 
kinase in the GOG Receptor Core Laboratory under the supervision of 
Dr. Leslie and her designee .  (05/24/10)  
 
The following i s a general description of the immunohistochemistry 
procedure to evaluate steroid receptor isoform expression.  Appropriate 
unstained slides will be baked at 60ºC for 20 minutes  and then 
deparaffinized through three changes of xylene and graded alcohols to  
water.  Sections will then be treated with 3% H 2O2 to inactivate the 
endogenous peroxidase activity.  Antigen retrieval will be performed in a 
Decloaking chamber in which the slides will be  immersed in 10 mM 
Citrate solution (pH 6.0) and boiled for 20 min utes at 120ºC (20 -25 
p.s.i). The slides will then be cooled in buffer for 20 minutes and rinsed 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -30- 
in three changes of deionized water and phosphate buffered saline ( PBS).  
Non-specific binding will be minimized by incubating the sections with 
5% normal goat serum, in PBS, for 30 min.  PBS will be used to rinse 
and wash the sections between each of the subsequent incubations .  
Slides  will be incubated overnight at 4ºC with optimal concentrations of 
primary antibodies , with an appropriate secondary antibody for  1 hour  
and then with 3,3-diaminobenzidine solution, the chromogen substrate , 
for 10 minutes .  Slides will then be rinsed with deionized water and PBS 
and counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated through graded 
alcohols and permounted.  Positive and neg ative controls will be 
included in each run.  For the negative control sections, the primary 
antibody will be substituted with immune serum.    
 
PTEN will be detected and evaluated using an immunohistochemistry 
assay optimized by Dr. George Mutter at Brigh man and Womens 
Hospital in Boston, MA.  Total and phosphorylated Akt and p70S6K will 
be detected using commercially available antibodies.  The assays to 
detect total and phosphorylated Akt and p70S6K will be optimized with 
respect to antibody concentration  as well as antigen retrieval method and 
time by the GOG Receptor Core Laboratory. Appropriate positive and 
negative controls will be included in each run .   
 
Immunohistochemical staining for each biomarker will be evaluated by 
approved reviewers  in a blin ded manner.  The H -score will be used to 
evaluate the immunohistochemical expression of the steroid receptor 
isoforms.  The H -score is calculated based on estimates of percentages of 
positive stained epithelial and stromal cells in each of 5 intensity 
categories (0, 1+, 2+, 3+, and 4+).  The H -score represents the sum of 
each of the percentages multiplied by the weighted intensity of staining, 
as follows: H -score = (i+1)Pi, where i=1,2,3,4, and Pi varies from 0 to 
100%.  Another more quantitative method inv olves the use of computer 
program imaging to quantify immunohistochemical expression of steroid 
receptors.  We are currently testing such a program at the GOG Tissue 
Bank and have the opportunity to incorporate this methodology in the 
future .  (05/24/10)  
 
The criteria for evaluating the immunohistochemical expression of 
normal and mutant PTEN, total and phosphorylated Akt and total and 
phosphorylated p70S6K will be documented and reviewed by 
appropriate staff in the GOG Statistical and Data Center prior to 
initiating the review of the stained slides for this trial.  
 
Dr Leslie will be responsible for providing an electronic copy of the 
consensus immunohistochemical data for this phase II trial linked with 
accurate specimen identifiers (protocol code, Bank ID,  specimen code 
and collection date) and relevant information regarding assay dates and 
controls to the GOG Statistical and Data Center for analysis.  Dr. Leslie 
will also be responsible to returning any residual unstained slides with 
accurate identifiers t o the GOG Tissue Bank.  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -31- 
 
7.322 Genotyping for Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs)  
 
Staff at the GOG Tissue Bank will exact DNA from room temperature 
blood specimens submitted for this protocol on the day the blood is 
received at the Bank, and will distri bute approved aliquots of DNA and 
banked frozen blood specimens for this trial to Dr. Anna Di Rienzo in 
the Department of Human Genetics at the University of Chicago.  Dr. Di 
Rienzo will supervise the extraction of genomic DNA and the SNP 
analysis for FRAP 1 and RAPTOR .  Genomic DNA will be extracted 
from each frozen blood sample using the Blood & Cell Culture midi kit 
from Qiagen, which yields 160-200 µg of DNA from 10 ml of blood .  
Genotyping of normal DNA using the Sequenom iPLEX Gold 
technology will capt ure the genetic variations in up to 11 tag SNPs and 
167 tag SNPs in the FRAP1  and RAPTOR  genes , respectively .  SNPs in 
other genes in the mTOR pathway may also be genotyped if initial 
results are promising.  (05/24/10)  
 
Dr. Di Rienzo will also be responsib le for the following: (1) providing an 
appropriate aliquot of normal DNA to Drs. Rajani Kanteti and Ravi 
Salgia for the mutation analysis described in Section 7.223, (2) 
submitting an electronic copy of the SNP data for this phase II trial 
linked with accu rate specimen identifiers (protocol code, Bank ID, 
specimen code and collection date) and relevant information regarding 
assay dates and controls to the GOG Statistical and Data Center for 
analysis, and (3) shipping the residual DNA for this trial with app ropriate 
identifiers and documentation regarding DNA concentration and quality 
to the GOG Tissue Bank.   
 
7.323 DNA Sequencing and Mutational Analysis, and Quantitative Real -Time 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)   
 
Staff at the GOG Tissue Bank will distribut e 5 unstained sections 10 
micrometers in thickness on clean glass slides suitable for laser capture 
microdissection and/or nucleic acid extractions to Drs. Rajani Kanteti 
and Ravi Salgia in the Section of Hematology / Oncology at the 
University of Chicago to perform the genomic assessments for PTEN , 
PI3KCA , and paxillin . 
 
Drs. Kanteti and Salgia will supervise the DNA extractions as well as the 
analysis of somatic mutations in PTEN , PI3KCA , and paxillin  and the 
assessment of copy number abnormalities in PTEN and paxillin .  
 
Once the unstained thick sections for this trial are distributed to the 
laboratory, the DNA extraction will be carried out according to Sato 
(Sato, Y et al., Diagnostic Molecular Pathology 10: 265 -271, 2001) with 
minor modifications. The tissue sections will be re -suspended in 0.3 ml 
of digestion buffer (50mM Tris/Hcl, pH 8.5, 1 mM EDTA and 1% 
Tween 20).  The tube will be tightly capped with a pinhole at the center. 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -32- 
High power microwave irradiation will be carried out for 1 to 1.5 min 
with irradiation time split into 15 seconds segment to prevent over 
boiling. The tubes will be centrifuged while they are warm, at 12000 x g 
for 10 minutes and placed on ice.  Using a sterile tooth pick the solid 
paraffin wax ring that forms above the buffer w ill be removed.  
Proteinase K will be added to each sample to get the final concentration 
of 0.5 mg/ml and the tubes will be incubated at 55°C in a water bath for 
48 hours with constant shaking. After two days of digestion with 
proteinase K, Chelex -100 (B ioRad) will be added to each sample to 
final concentration of 5% and the mixture will be vortexed and heated at 
95°C for 10 minutes to inactivate the proteinase K. The samples will 
then be centrifuged for 5 minutes at 12,000 x g and the supernatant 
contain ing DNA will be transferred to a new tube and stored at -20°C or 
4°C.  The amount of DNA extracted will be quantified by running an 
aliquot on 0.8% agarose gel.  The above steps will ensure the suitability 
of extracted DNA for amplification of specific gen es.   
 
Appropriate PCR primers covering the exons spanning the entire coding 
region of PTEN , PI3KCA  and paxillin  will be used and sequenced.  
Aliquots of normal DNA will also be obtained from Dr. Di Rienzo (see 
Section 7.222) for sequencing.  All mutations  will be confirmed by 
sequencing in both directions.   
 
Quantitative real -time PCR will be performed for gene copy number 
measurement of PTEN  and paxillin  using  DNA extracted from the FFPE 
tumor specimens using the Stratagene Mx3000P system and the iQ 
SYBR  green PCR kit (Bio -Rad Laboratories).  Relative gene copy 
number for PTEN  or paxillin  was calculated from the real -time PCR 
efficiencies for each individual run and based on the deviations of the 
target gene and reference gene (LINE -1) in the a test sampl e versus a 
control.  LINE -1 is a repetitive element and copy numbers per diploid 
genome are similar in healthy and malignant human cells.  Reactions will 
be performed in triplicate under standard thermocycling conditions and 
the mean threshold cycle number  will be used.  
 
Drs. Kanteti and Salgia will  be responsible for the following: (1) 
submitting an electronic copy of the mutation analysis in PTEN , 
PI3KCA , and paxillin , and the assessment of copy number abnormalities 
in PTEN  and paxillin  for this phase II  trial linked with accurate specimen 
identifiers (protocol code, Bank ID, specimen code and collection date) 
and relevant information regarding assay dates and controls to the GOG 
Statistical and Data Center for analysis, and (2) shipping any residual 
DNA and unused unstained slides for this trial with appropriate 
identifiers and documentation regarding DNA concentration and quality 
to the GOG Tissue Bank.   
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -33- 
 
7.33 Future Research  
 
See Section X in Appendix IV for important details regarding the banking and 
distribution of residual FFPE tumor tissue, DNA and whole blood specimens for 
future research . (05/24/10)  
7.4       Quality of Life  (05/24/10)  
 
This protocol does not include quality of life research.  
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -34- 
8.0 EVALUATION CRITERIA    
 
8.1 Parameters of Res ponse – GOG RECIST Criteria  
 
8.11 Measurable disease is defined as at least one lesion that can be accurately 
measured in at least one dimension (longest dimension to be recorded).  Each 
lesion must be  20 mm when measured by conventional techniques, incl uding 
palpation, plain x -ray, CT, and MRI, or  10 mm when measured by spiral CT.   
 
8.12 Baseline documentation of “Target” and “Non -Target” lesions  
 
All measurable lesions up to a maximum of 5 lesions per organ and 10 lesions in 
total representative of a ll involved organs should be identified as target lesions 
and will be recorded and measured at baseline.  Target lesions should be 
selected on the basis of their size (lesions with the longest dimension) and their 
suitability for accurate repetitive measur ements by one consistent method of 
assessment (either by imaging techniques or clinically).  A sum of the longest 
dimension (LD) for all target lesions will be calculated and reported as the 
baseline sum LD.  The baseline sum LD will be used as reference t o further 
characterize the objective tumor response of the measurable dimension of the 
disease.  
 
All other lesions (or sites of disease) should be identified as non-target lesions 
and should also be recorded at baseline.  Measurements are not required and 
these lesions should be followed as “present” or “absent”.  
 
All baseline evaluations of disease status should be performed as close as 
possible to the start of treatment and never more than 4 weeks before the 
beginning of treatment.  
 
8.13 Best Response  
 
Measurement of the longest dimension of each lesion size is required for 
follow -up.  Change in the sum of these dimensions affords some estimate of 
change in tumor size and hence therapeutic efficacy.  All disease must be 
assessed using the same technique as  baseline. Reporting of these changes in an 
individual case should be in terms of the best response  achieved by that case 
since entering the study .    
 
8.131  Complete Response  (CR) is disappearance of all target  and non-target  
lesions and no evidence of ne w lesions documented by two disease 
assessments at least 4 weeks apart.  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -35- 
8.132  Partial Response  (PR) is at least a 30% decrease in the sum of longest 
dimensions (LD) of all target  measurable lesions taking as reference the 
baseline sum of LD.  There can be  no unequivocal progression of non-
target  lesions and no new lesions.  Documentation by two disease 
assessments at least 4 weeks apart is required.  In the case where the 
ONLY target lesion is a solitary pelvic mass measured by physical exam, 
which is not radiographically measurable, a 50% decrease in the LD is 
required.  
 
8.133  Increasing Disease  is at least a 20% increase in the sum of LD of target  
lesions taking as references the smallest sum LD or the appearance of 
new lesions within 6 weeks of study ent ry.  Unequivocal progression of 
existing non-target  lesions, other than pleural effusions without 
cytological proof of neoplastic origin, in the opinion of the treating 
physician within 6 weeks of study entry is also considered increasing 
disease (in this circumstance an explanation must be provided).  In the 
case where the ONLY target lesion is a solitary pelvic mass measured by 
physical exam, which is not radiographically measurable, a 50% increase 
in the LD is required.  
 
8.134  Symptomatic deterioration  is defined as a global deterioration in health 
status attributable to the disease requiring a change in therapy without 
objective evidence of progression.  
 
8.135  Stable Disease  is any condition not meeting the above criteria.  
 
8.136  Inevaluable for response  is defined as having no repeat tumor 
assessments following initiation of study therapy for reasons unrelated 
to symptoms or signs of disease .   
 
8.14 Progression (measurable disease studies) is defined as ANY of the following:  
 
• At least a 20% increase i n the sum of LD target lesions taking as reference 
the smallest sum LD recorded since study entry  
• In the case where the ONLY target lesion is a solitary pelvic mass measured 
by physical exam which is not radiographically measurable, a 50% increase 
in the LD is required taking as reference the smallest LD recorded since 
study entry  
• The appearance of one or more new lesions   
• Death due to disease without prior objective documentation of progression  
• Global deterioration in health status attributable t o the disease requiring a 
change in therapy without objective evidence of progression  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -36- 
• Unequivocal progression of existing non-target  lesions, other than pleural 
effusions without cytological proof of neoplastic origin, in the opinion of the 
treating ph ysician (in this circumstance an explanation must be provided)  
 
8.15 Recurrence  (non-measurable disease studies) is defined as increasing clinical, 
radiological or histological evidence of disease since study entry.   
    
8.16 Survival  is the observed leng th of life from entry into the study to death or the 
date of last contact.  
 
8.17 Progression -Free Survival  (measurable disease studies) is the period from study 
entry until disease progression, death or date of last contact.  
 
8.18 Recurrence -Free Survival  (non-measurable disease studies) is the period from 
study entry until disease recurrence, death or date of last contact.  
 
8.19 Subjective Parameters  including performance status, specific symptoms, and 
side effects are graded according to the CTCAE v3.0.  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -37- 
9.0 DURATION OF STUDY     
  
9.1 In the absence of treatment delays due to adverse event(s), treatment may continue until 
one of the following criteria applies:  
 
• Disease progression,  
 
• Intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of treatment , 
 
• Unacceptable adverse event(s),  
 
• Patient decides to withdraw from the study , 
 
• Patient non -compliance with the protocol, or  
 
• General or specific changes in the patient’s condition render the patient unacceptable  
for further treatment in the judgment of th e investigator.  
 
9.2 Patients will be followed after last drug dose until toxicity resolution and for one year 
after the end of treatment, or until study withdrawal if it occurs before this time.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -38- 
10.0 STUDY MONITORING AND REPORTING PROCEDURES  
 
10.1 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING FOR AN INVESTIGATIONAL AGENT  
   
10.11  Definition of Adverse Events (AE)  
 
An adverse event (AE) is any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an 
abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease that occurs in a patient 
admini stered a medical treatment, whether the event is considered related or 
unrelated to the medical treatment.  
 
10.12  Reporting Expedited Adverse Events  
 
Depending on the phase of the study, use of investigational agents, and role of 
the pharmaceutical sponsor, an expedited AE report may need to reach multiple 
destinations.  For patients participating on a GOG trial, all expedited AE reports 
should be submitted by using the CTEP automated system for expedited 
reporting (AdEERS).  All AdEERS submissions are reviewed by GOG before   
final submission to CTEP.  Submitting a report through AdEERS serves as 
notification to GOG, and satisfies the GOG requirements for expedited AE 
reporting.  All adverse reactions will be immediately directed to the Study Chair 
for further a ction.  
 
The requirement for timely reporting of AEs to the study sponsor is specified in 
the Statement of Investigator, Form FDA -1572.  In signing the FDA -1572, the 
investigator assumes the responsibility for reporting AEs to the NCI.  In 
compliance with F DA regulations, as contained in 21 CFR 312.64, AEs should 
be reported by the investigator.  
 
 
10.13  Phase 2 and 3 Trials Utilizing an Agent under a CTEP IND:  AdEERS  
  Expedited Reporting Requirements for Adverse Events That Occur Within 
  30 Days of the L ast Dose of the Investigational Agent  
 
Reporting Requirements for Adverse Events that occur within 30 Days ¹ of the 
Last Dose of the Investigational Agent on Phase 2 and 3 Trials  
 
From the period of protocol activation through September 30, 2011, Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 3.0 (CTCAE v3.0) 
are utilized for defining and grading specific adverse events reported through the 
AdEERS system. (9/26/2011 ) 
 
Beginning October 1, 2011, the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (CTCAE) v 4.0 will be utilized for AE reporting through the 
AdEERS system. CTCAE v 4.0 is located on the CTEP website at 
(http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm
.  All appropriate treatment areas  should have access to a copy of this 
Version of CTCAE.  CTCAE v 4.0 definition is also available on the GOG 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -39- 
member web site ( https://gogmember.gog.org  under MANUALS). 
(9/26/2011 ) 
 
  
Grade 1   
Grade 2   
Grade 2   
Grad e 3  
Grade 3  Grades  
4 & 52 Grades  
4 & 52 
Unexpected  
and Expected   
 
Unexpected   
 
Expected  Unexpected  Expected  
Unexpected  Expected  With  
Hospitali -
zation  Without 
Hospitali - 
zation  With  
Hospitali - 
zation  Without 
Hospitali - 
zation  
Unrelated  
Unlike ly Not 
Required  Not 
Required  Not 
Required  7 Calendar 
Days  Not 
Required  7 Calendar 
Days  Not 
Required  7 Calendar 
Days  7 
Calendar 
Days  
Possible  
Probable  
Definite  Not 
Required  7 Calendar 
Days  Not 
Required  7 Calendar 
Days  7 Calendar 
Days  7 Calendar 
Days  Not 
Required  24-Hrs; 
3 Calendar 
Days  7 
Calendar 
Days  
1 Adverse events with attribution of possible, probable, or definite that occur greater  than 30 days after the last dose of 
treatment with an agent under a CTEP IND require reporting as follows:  
AdEERS 24 -hour notification followed by complete report within 3 calendar days for:  
• Grade 4 and Grade 5 unexpected events  
 AdEERS 7 calendar day report:  
• Grade 3 unexpected events with hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization  
• Grade 5 expected events  
 
2 Althou gh an AdEERS 24 -hour notification is not required for death clearly related to progressive disease, a full report 
is required as outlined in the table.  
 
     Please see exceptions below under section entitled “Additional Instructions or Exceptions  to AdEER S 
Expedited Reporting Requirements for Phase 2 and 3 Trials Utilizing an Agent under a CTEP  IND .” 
 
March 2005  
Note:  All deaths on study require both routine and expedited reporting regardless of causality.  
 Attribution to treatment or other cause must be provided.  
 
• Expedited AE reporting timelines defined:  
- “24 hours; 3 calendar days” – The investigator must initially report the AE via AdEERS 
within 24 hours  of learning of the event followed by a complete AdEERS report within 3 
calendar days  of the ini tial 24 -hour report.  
 - “7 calendar days” - A complete AdEERS report on the AE must be submitted within  
      7 calendar days  of the investigator learning of the event.  
 
• Any med ical event equivalent to CTCAE G rade 3, 4, or 5 that precipitates hospitaliza tion (or 
prolongation of existing hospitalization) must be reported regardless of attribution  and 
designation as expected or unexpected  with the exception of  any events  identified as protocol -
specific  expedited  adverse  event  reporting  exclusions.  
 
• Any even t that results in persistent or significant disabilities/incapacities, congenital anomalies, 
or birth defects must be reported via AdEERS if the event occurs following treatment with an 
agent under a CTEP IND.  
 
• Use the NCI protocol number and the protocol -specific patient ID provided during trial 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -40- 
registration on all reports.  
Additional Instructions or Exceptions to AdEERS Expedited Reporting Requirements for Phase 2 and 
3 Trials Utilizing an Agent under a CTEP -IND:  
 
• There are no additional instructions or e xceptions to AdEERS expedited reporting requirements 
for this protocol.  
 
10.14  Procedures for Expedited Adverse Event Reporting:  
 
10.141  AdEERS Expedited Reports : Expedited reports are to be submitted using 
AdEERS available at http://ctep.cancer.gov. The C TEP, NCI Guidelines: 
Adverse Event Reporting Requirements for expedited adverse event 
reporting requirements are also available at this site.   
Up until September 30, 2011, AML/MDS events must be reported via 
AdEERS (in addition to your routine AE reporting  mechanisms).  In 
CTCAE v3.0, the event can be reported as:  “Secondary malignancy -
Other (specify)”. (9/26/2011 ) 
 
Starting October 1, 2011 when use of CTCAE v4.0 begins: AML/MDS 
events must be reported via AdEERS (in addition to your routine AE 
reporting m echanisms). In CTCAE v4.0, the event(s) may be reported as 
either: 1) Leukemia secondary to oncology chemotherapy, 2) 
Myelodysplatic syndrome, or 3) Treatment related secondary 
malignancy.  (9/26/2011 ) 
 
In the rare event when Internet connectivity is disrup ted a 24 -hour 
notification is to be made to GOG by telephone at: 215 -854-0770. An 
electronic report MUST  be submitted immediately upon re -establishment 
of internet connection. Please note that all paper AdEERS forms have 
been removed from the CTEP website and will NO LONGER be 
accepted.  (9/26/2011 ) 
 
For the purposes of expedited reporting of adverse events to CTEP, 
unexpected events are those not listed in the Agent Specific Adverse 
Event List (ASAEL). The ASAEL is a subset of AEs within the 
Comprehensive A dverse Event and Potential Risks List (CAEPR). This 
list of events is based on CTEP’s clinical experience with this agent and 
defines “expected” Grade 2 and 3 AEs not requiring hospitalization as 
exempt from expedited reporting. The CAEPR is a complete lis t of 
reported and/or potential AEs associated with an agent under a CTEP 
IND. For questions or comments regarding the ASAEL or CAEPR, 
please contact the AdEERS MD Help Desk at adeersmd@tech -res.com . 
The CAEPR f or temsirolimus is located in Section 4.310.  
 
  10.15  Automated CDUS reporting  
 
For studies using investigational agents, the GOG Statistical and Data Center 
(SDC) routinely reports adverse events electronically to the CTEP Clinical Data 
Update System (CD US Version 3.0).  The SDC submits this data quarterly.  The 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -41- 
AEs reported through AdEERS will also be included with the quarterly CDUS 
data submissions.  
 
As of 10/1/2011, this study will cease using CTCAE v3 and switch to CTCAE 
v4 for the purposes of report ing through AdEERS and/or CDUS.   The GOG 
Statistical and Data Center will internally convert the adverse event terms and 
grades reported through AdEERS for this study from April 1, 2011 onward from 
version 4 to version 3.    Additionally, the Statistical an d Data Center will map 
all CTCAE v3 data reported for this study on GOG case report forms to CTCAE 
v4 defined terms and grades for CDUS reporting purposes.   This will allow use 
of a consistently defined set of criteria for reporting adverse events througho ut 
the study with minimal impact on the participating sites.  (9/26/2011 ) 
 
10.2  GOG DATA MANAGEMENT FORMS  
 
The following forms must be completed for all patients registered and submitted to the 
GOG Statistical and Data Center (SDC) in accordance with the s chedule below.  Use 
the SDC Electronic Data Entry System (SEDES) online application found at the GOG 
Web Menu page, to view and print a copy of each form along with instructions, and to 
submit forms electronically.  All amendments to forms submitted throug h SEDES must 
also be submitted through SEDES.  The original form and required copies for forms 
NOT submitted online must be mailed to the GOG SDC.  Note:  Pathology materials 
(Form F, path report , and  stained  path slides ** to confirm eligibility ) should be 
submitted together via postal mail.   The Upload feature in SEDES is an alternate 
method for submitting Form F and Pathology reports  (not applicable for slides).  
(05/24/10)  
 
 
Form± Due within  Copies * Comments  
Weeks  Event  
Form R  (Registration 
Form)  2 
 Registration  
 1 
 Mandatory Submi ssion  via SEDES  
Specimen Consent 
Application  1 Registration  N/A Complete online  
Form OSR (Recurrent 
Gynecologic Cancer On -
Study Form)  2 
 Registration  
 1 
 Mandatory Submission  via SEDES  
 
Form DR (Pre -Treatment 
Summary Form ) 2 Registration  1 Mandatory Submi ssion  via SEDES  
 
Form CONM 
(Concomitant Medication 
Form) - baseline  2 Registration  1 Mandatory Submi ssion  via SEDES  
 
Form D2M  (Solid Tumor 
Evaluation Form) - 
baseline  2 Registration  1 Mandatory Submi ssion  via SEDES  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -42- 
Prim ary/Advanced  
Disease:  
Form F  (Pathology 
Form)  
Pathology Report ** 
Stained Path Slides  
to confirm eligibility  
and advanced disease   
Persistent or Recurrent 
Disease:  
Form F  
Pathology Report  
Stained Path Slides  to 
confirm eligibility,  if 
documented by 
histolo gy or cytology   
 
6 
 
6 
6 
 
 
 
 
6 
6 
6  
 
Registration  
 
Registration  
Registration  
 
 
 
 
Registration  
Registration  
Registration   
 
2 
 
2  
** 
 
 
 
 
2** 
2** 
**  
 
Available in SEDES for print only  
 
Submit via postal mail to GOG SDC 
in Buffalo, New York**  
 
 
 
 
Available in SEDES for print only  
 
Submit via postal mail to GOG SDC 
in Buffalo, New York**  
 
Form D2R  (Cycle Dose 
Drug Form)  2 Completion of each cycle 
of therapy  1 Mandatory Submi ssion  via SEDES  
Form D2M  (Solid Tumor 
Evaluation Form)  2 Tumor response or 
progression assessment  1 Mandatory Submi ssion  via SEDES  
Form SP -FT01-0248 †  
for archival formalin -fixed 
and paraffin -embedded 
(FFPE) primary, metastatic 
and/or recurrent tumor 
(block or unstained slides)  
(05/24/10)  8 Registration  1 Submit via SEDES  
Ship block or un stained slides for 
translational research with a copy of 
the SP Form for FT01 to the GOG 
Tissue Bank in Columbus Ohio †  
 
Form SP -WB01 -0248 ‡ 
for room temperature 
blood for immediate 
submission and DNA 
extraction by the Bank  
(05/24/10)  1 Start of treatment  1 Submit via SEDES  
Ship WB01 blood for translational 
research at ambient temperature the 
day the blood is collected with a copy 
of the SP Form for WB01 to the GOG 
Tissue Bank in Columbus Ohio 
‡(05/24/10)  
Form SP -WB0 2-0248 ‡‡ 
for frozen blood 
(05/24/10)  1 Start of treatment  1 Submit via SEDES  
Ship WB02 frozen blood for 
translational research with a copy of 
the SP Form for WB0 2 to the GOG 
Tissue Bank in Columbus Ohio ‡‡ 
Form T  (Common 
Toxicity Reporting Form)  2 Beginning of each 
subsequent cycle  1 
 Manda tory Submi ssion  via SEDES  
Form Q0  (Treatment 
Completion Form)  2 Completion of study Rx 
and change in Rx  1 Mandatory Submi ssion  via SEDES  
Form Q  (Follow -Up Form)  2 Disease progression; 
death; normal follow -up; 
change in treatment  1 Submit via SEDES  
for o ne year from end of treatment  
 
* The number of required copies including the original form which must be sent to the Statistical and Data Center.  
** Stained pathology slides are required for central review by the GOG Pathology Committee to confirm eligibi lity.  
See Section s 4.4 and 7.2  for additional requirements and instructions.  If F form and path reports are uploaded , only 
one copy of the F form should be submitted with slides.  (05/24/10)    
         Form SP must be submitted online  to the GOG SD C using SEDES regardless of whether the specimen is submitted 
for research.  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -43- 
†         See Footnote 3 in the Quick Scan Summary in Section 7.31 of the protocol and Appendix IV for important details 
about submitting up to three tumor specimens (FT01, FT02 and FT03), loading optional SP Forms for FT02 (second 
type of FFPE tumor) and FT03  (third type of FFPE tumor) , and instructions for shipping the block or unstained 
sections of primary, metastatic and/o r recurrent tumor in your own shipping container to the GOG Tissue Bank and 
for completing the corresponding SP Form(s) . (05/24/10)  
‡         See Footnote 4 in the Quick Scan Summary in Section 7.31 of the protocol and Appendix IV for important details 
for preparing and shipping the room temperature blood (WB01) the day the blood is collected in your own shipping 
container to the GOG Tissue Bank, and for completing the corresponding SP Form.  (05/24/10)  
‡‡        See Footnote 5 in the Quick Scan Summary in S ection 7.31 of the protocol and Appendix IV for important details 
for preparing and shipping the frozen blood (WB02) in a Single Chamber Kit provided for this trial to the GOG 
Tissue Bank within 1 week of starting treatment, and for completing the correspo nding SP Form.  (05/24/10)  
 
 
This study will be monitored by the Complete  Clinical Data Update System (CDUS) Version 3.0 
CDUS data will be submitted quarterly to CTEP by electronic means.  
 
This study utilizes the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Even ts version 3.0 (CTCAE v3.0) 
for defining and grading adverse events to be reported on GOG case report forms. A GOG CTCAE 
v3.0 Manual is available on the GOG member web site ( http://www.gog.org  under MANUALS) and 
can be ma iled to the institution registering a patient to this study if requested.  (9/26/2011 ) 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -44- 
11.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS    
 
Overview, Study Registration and Randomization:   This study is a two -stage, open -label 
randomized phase II clinical trial.  The inten t of this study is to screen regimens for activity.  
The two regimens will be assessed separately to estimate the probability of response.  If both 
regimens are deemed active following completion of stage II, one regimen will be selected for 
further invest igation as a means of prioritization in the event that resources are limited.  All 
patients on this study will be registered and receive a random treatment assignment centrally at 
the GOG Statistical and Data Center.  Prior to registration, eligibility wil l be reviewed via Fast 
Fact Sheet verification.  The sequence of treatment assignments will be concealed from 
institutions and patients until registration with verification of eligibility.  A procedure will be 
used that tends to allocate the two regimens i n the ratio of 1:1 within the strata defined by 1) 
Patients who have received adjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiation either at time of initial 
diagnosis or for a pelvic recurrence of endometrial cancer and 2) P atients who have never 
received adjuvant  chem otherapy or chemoradiation for treatment of endometrial cancer or its 
subsequent recurrence.   Study reports will include a complete accounting of all patients 
registered to this protocol.  
 
11.1 Data Collection:   The principal parameters to be collected, analyze d and reported to 
evaluate the activity level of these treatment regimens are:  
 
11.11 Outcome Variables: the primary outcome variable is the frequency of complete 
and partial clinical response among all eligible patients; survival time and 
progression -free survival time distributions will also be estimated.  
11.12 Tumor Characteristics:  FIGO stage, recurrence status, sites of measurable 
disease, tumor grade , histological cell type, estrogen and progesterone receptor 
status .  
11.13 Patient Characteristics:  age at entry, performance status, race, and prior 
therapy.   
11.14 Adverse Effects:  frequency and severity of adverse effects in patients who 
received any amount of study drug graded according to CTCAE v3.0.   
11.15 Treatment:  the total dose of each study dr ug administered, the number of 
cycles of study therapy administered, the reason for discontinuing study therapy.  
11.16  Laboratory Testing Results :  immunohistochemical expression of estrogen 
receptor -alpha, estrogen receptor -beta, progesterone receptor -A, progesterone 
receptor -B and GPR30 (H -Score); immunohistochemical expression of , total 
Akt, phosphorylated Akt, total p70S6 kinase and phosphorylated p70S6 kinase 
(scoring criteria to be defined); genotype for 11 tag SNPs for FRAP1  and 167 
tag SNPs for RAPTOR ; type and localization of mutations in PTEN , PI3KCA , 
and paxillin ; the ratio of the number of copies of PTEN  to LINE -1 and paxillin  
to LINE -1.   
 
11.2 Accrual Rate:  Previous GOG phase II studies of hormonal agents differed in their 
requirement for biopsied tissue which had an impact on the accrual rate.  This study 
does not require sampling metastatic tumor for the purposes of testing the receptor 
status but does require a tissue block from either primary, metastatic or recurrent tumor .  
Accrual to previous phase II studies of hormonal agents that did not require biopsied 
tissue and did not select for receptor positive patients ranged from 36 to 62 patients 
annually.   
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -45- 
 
The accrual rate of the most recently completed phase II study requiring biopsied tumor 
averaged 10 patients per year among the patients with estrogen receptor positive 
metastatic tumor. The accrual rate on the currently active phase II study among those 
with receptor positive metastatic tumors is now 44 patients per year  (based on 1st and 
2nd quarters of 2007) .  
 
The accrual rate on this study is expected to be higher than the previous study given that 
it does not require a biopsy (primary uterine tissue can be tested for receptors) and the 
fact that this study incorporates a new targeted biolo gic agent.  The accrual rate for this 
study is based upon that observed in GOG 153  (49) and current accrual on GOG 188 
(44), 46 patients per year.   
 
11.3 Study Design and Sample Size:  This study will implement a two -stage design with 
early stopping guidelines intended to limit the accrual of patients to inactive regimens. 
Additionally, if at the end of stage II, both regimens are deemed to have sufficient 
activity, a selection procedure will be employed to prioritize the regimens for further 
investigation.  
 
Hormonal agents studied by the GOG have yielded response rates ranging from 11% to 
33%.  Within estrogen receptor positive subgroups, response rates of hormonal agents 
studied varied from 0% to 50%.  The response rate for a standard hormonal therapy 
studied b y the GOG (Protocol 81 MPA:  200 mg PO daily) is 25% overall.   
 
Data describing response to temsirolimus were provided by Janet Dancey 
(IDB/CTEP/DCTD/NCI) suggest that response may differ depending on whether or not 
a patient has received previous chemoth erapy (alone or in combination with radiation) 
for endometrial carcinoma.  The observed proportions of endometrial cancer patients 
responding were 25% (7) of 33 patient without a history of chemotherapy and 7.5% (2) 
of 27 patients who had previously been t reated with chemotherapy.  Patients with or 
without a history of chemotherapy or chemoradiation are eligible for this study.  Sixty 
percent of patients enrolled on GOG 188 in 2007 had received adjuvant chemotherapy.  
Accrual trends observed on GOG 188 and the increasing use of adjuvant chemotherapy 
for endometrial carcinoma suggest that the proportion of patients receiving prior 
chemotherapy is increasing over time.  A simple (i.e. single) binomial distribution 
approximating  
 the marginal number of response s over both populations may not be adequate.  
Furthermore, splitting the patient population by prior chemotherapy to create two 
separate trials is not feasible due to the length of time it would take to get sufficient 
patients in each trial.  Therefore, a two-stage conditional stratified phase II trial as 
proposed by London and Chang36 will be used which utilizes the marginal number of 
responses across all populations while factoring differing probabilities of response 
within each population.  Conditioned o n the realized sample size in each stratum, the 
probability mass function for R 1 and R 2 corresponding to the responses produced in 
stages 1 and 2 can be found with:  
 
   
12
11 , 1,2.ij ij ij
j kj jnr ij r
j j i i
ij r r r in
P R r p p jr
       

 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -46- 
 
Where i indexes  the number of important stratification levels  under consideration and j 
indexes the stage of accrual.  The distribution of R j depends on the probabilities of 
response, p i, within each stratum.  Stratum 1 will correspond with those patients who 
have never been treated with chemotherapy whereas stratum  2 will correspond with 
those patients who have had prior chemotherapy.  A response rate of 20% or less in 
those patients who have not had previous chemotherapy and a response rate of 10% or 
less in those patients who have received previous chemotherapy wo uld be considered 
not worthy of further study.   The null hypothesis of no treatment effect is H 0: p1 = 0.20 
and p 2 = 0.10.  Under the alternative hypothesis of H 1: p1 = 0.40 and p 2 = 0.30, the 
following design will limit the probability of type I error to  0.06 and type II to 0.10.  
According to London and Chang36, the first stage rejection boundary, a 1, is found with 
the following equation:  
 
 1 1 0 |i i i P R a p p     
 
 
where p 10 = 0.20, Δ 1 = 0.20, p 20 = 0.10, Δ 2 = 0.20, and β is the probability of a type II 
error.  There is interest in spending 50% of the total beta in the first stage, so γ = 0.50.  
Since it is important to maintain the original design parameters for this study, a1 is 
found with  
 
 1 1 0 | 0.5 0.10 0.05i i i P R a p p     
 
 
For each treatment arm we will target 21 patients during each stage of accrual and 
expect n 11 = 8 without previous chemotherapy and n 21 = 13 who have received 
chemotherapy in the past.   Approximating the equ ation above gives a 1 = 4 (note: ≈ 
means ‘less than and as close as possible’).  According to the decision rule provided by 
this method, if there were 3 or fewer responses, the agent would have been deemed 
clinically uninteresting.  Accordingly, the probability of early termin ation under the null 
hypothesis would be 67%.  If the proportions in each stratum differ from those 
expected, the rules above will be recalculated for the observed proportion of patients in 
each stratum while maintaining probability of type I and type II e rror limits as closely 
as possible.  
 
For a given total sample size, the rejection boundary, b 2, is found by searching for the 
smallest marginal total across all strata (over both stages) such that the following 
equation is satisfied:  
 
 1 1 2 0 ,|ii P a R R b p p     
 
 
where R = R 1 + R 2.  The decision rule at the end of the study is to recommend further 
study (if medical judgment indicates) when R > b 2.  Otherwise, the agent is deemed 
clinically uninteresting.  Power of the study is determined by looking at the p robability:  
 
   1 1 0 1 1 2 0 1 | , | .i i i i i i P R a p p P a R R b p p        
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -47- 
The cumulative targeted accrual for the second stage will be 42 patients.  Because the 
rejection boundary depends on the realized sample size and the proportion of patients 
from each stratum, it is difficult to pre sent an exhaustive list of rejection boundaries that 
could be used to determine the worthiness of the agent to undergo further investigation, 
however, Table 11.1 is provided here to give examples of the properties of the design 
where n1 is the sample size for stage 1,  n 11 is the number of patients in the first stage 
that are from stratum 1 (no prior chemotherapy), n 21 is the number of patients in the first 
stage that are from stratum 2 (prior chemotherapy), nTot is the cumulative sample size, 
n12 is the nu mber of patients in the second stage that are from stratum 1 (no prior 
chemotherapy), n 22 is the number of patients in the second stage that are from stratum 2 
(prior chemotherapy), α is the probability of a type I error, and β is the probability of a 
type II error:  
Table 11.1  
 
Stage I  Stage 2  
n1 n11 n21 a1 nTot n12 n22 b2 α β 
20 8 12 3 41 14 27 9 0.039  0.083  
20 8 12 3 41 15 26 9 0.043  0.079  
20 8 12 3 41 16 25 9 0.047  0.074  
20 8 12 3 41 17 24 9 0.052  0.070  
20 8 12 3 41 18 23 9 0.058  0.067  
21 8 13 4 42 14 28 9 0.041  0.087  
21 8 13 4 42 15 27 9 0.045  0.083  
21 8 13 4 42 16 26 9 0.049  0.080  
21 8 13 4 42 17 25 9 0.053  0.077  
21 8 13 4 42 18 24 9 0.058  0.075  
22 9 13 4 43 6 15 9 0.051  0.067  
22 9 13 4 43 7 14 9 0.056  0.064  
22 9 13 4 43 8 13 10 0.028  0.900 
22 9 13 4 43 9 12 10 0.031  0.096  
22 9 13 4 34 10 11 10 0.034  0.091  
 
 
Table 11.2 displays the operating characteristics for the highlighted design and decision 
rule in Table 11.1 under different alternative hypotheses.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -48- 
 
Table 11.2  
 
A
 
AB  Pr(neither A 
nor A+B are 
deemed active 
|
, A A B ) Pr(both A and 
A+B are 
deemed active 
|
, A A B ) Pr(A is 
deemed active 
and A+B is 
not deemed 
active|
, A A B
) Pr(A+B is 
deemed 
active and A 
is not 
deemed 
active|
, A A B
) 
0.1,0.2  0.1,0.2  0.905 0.002 0.046  0.046  
0.1,0.2  0.3,0.4  0.076  0.045 0.004  0.874 
0.1,0.2  0.5,0.6  <0.001  0.049  <0.001  0.951  
0.3,0.4  0.1,0.2  0.076 0.045 0.874 0.004 
0.3,0.4  0.3,0.4  0.006 0.846  0.074 0.074 
0.3,0.4  0.5,0.6  <0.001  0.919 <0.001  0.080 
0.5,0.6  0.1,0.2  <0.001  0.049  0.951  <0.001  
0.5,0.6  0.3,0.4  <0.001  0.919  0.080 <0.001  
0.5,0.6  0.5,0.6  <0.001  >0.999 <0.001  <0.001  
A
=probabilities  of response on regimen A  (stratum 2,stratum 1) ; 
AB =probabilities  of response on regimen 
A+B  (stratum 2,stratum 1)  
Sum the last three columns in each row to get the probability of declaring at least one of the regimens active.  
 
Selection  
In the event that both regimens are found to have sufficient activity following 
completion of stage II of accrual, the following rule will be used to select one of the two 
regimens for prioritized further investigation.  The combination regimen will be chosen 
for further study if the difference in proportion  responding weighted by stratum size is 
at least 0.0 7 (3 more responses among 42 patients per arm) favoring the combination 
arm.  Otherwise the single agent regimen will be selected for further stu dy.  Table 11.3 
displays the operating characteristics for this  selection rule. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -49- 
 
Table 11.3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*based upon simulation of 10,000 samples;  *P r(selecting A| A and A+B were found active, 
, 
A A B
 ) =  
1- Pr(selecting A+B| A and A+B were found active, 
, 
A A B
 ) 
 
95% Confidence intervals for proportion responding to each regimen will be calculated 
with adjustmen t for interim analyses.37 
 
 
11.4 Study Monitoring:   In general, d ata sheets from patients on this protocol will be 
reviewed semi -annually and will also be reviewed by the Study Chair annually or at the 
discretion of the Statistical and Data Center.  In particul ar, adverse events on the 
combination arm will be closely monitored by the Study Chair by review of patient 
summaries every two to three months during the first stage of accrual.  In some 
instances because of unexpectedly severe toxicity, the Statistical a nd Data Center may 
elect to suspend accrual and, after consultation with the Study Chair and the c ommittee  
responsible for monitoring the safety data for phase II trials , recommend early closure 
of a study.  
 
The frequency and severity of all toxicities will be tabulated from submitted case report  
forms and summarized for review by the study chairperson  and GOG Data and Safety 
Monitoring Board (DSMB) in  conjunction with each semi -annual GOG meeting. For 
studies sponsored by the Cancer  Therapy Evaluation Prog ram (CTEP) of the National 
Cancer Institute (NCI),  standardized toxicity reports are also submitted to the drug and 
disease monitors at the  Investigational Drug Branch (IDB) and Clinical Investigation 
Branch (CIB). An overall review of toxicity is usually performed after completion of 
the first stage of  accrual, at which point accrual is generally suspended pending formal 
analysis of  response and toxicity.    
 
All AdEERS reports of serious and/or unexpected events are communicated to the 
Study Chair, sponsor , and regulatory agencies as mandated in the protocol. These  
reports are reviewed by the  Study Chair (or designated co -chair) for consideration of  
investigator notification, amendment, or immediate study suspension. When immediate 
suspension is warranted, all participating  institutions will then receive notification of the 
A 
AB  Pr(selecting A+B| A and 
A+B were deemed 
active, 
, A A B )* 
0.1,0.2  0.1,0.2  0.077 
0.1,0.2  0.3,0.4  0.512 
0.1,0.2  0.5,0.6  0.996 
0.3,0.4  0.1,0.2  0.000 
0.3,0.4  0.3,0.4  0.152 
0.3,0.4  0.5,0.6  0.825 
0.5,0.6  0.1,0.2  0.000  
0.5,0.6  0.3,0.4  0.003 
0.5,0.6  0.5,0.6  0.188 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -50- 
toxicities and reason for study  suspension. Under these circumstances, accrual cannot 
be re -activated until the study  is reviewed by the c ommittee  responsible for monitoring 
the safety da ta for phase II trials . However, in some instances patients  currently 
receiving treatment may continue to receive treatment in accordance with protocol  
guidelines at the discretion of their physicians, unless directed otherwise.    
 
11.5 Study Duration:   The ant icipated duration of accrual is 12 months for Stage I (4 2 
patients) and 12 months for Stage II ( 42 additional patients) if necessary.  Six months or 
less will be necessary to observe the results of Stage I in order to make a decision to 
continue or discont inue accrual.  
 
11.6 Translational Research Analysis:   The expression of candidate markers will be 
determined by standard semi -quantitative methods for IHC evaluation of estrogen and 
progesterone receptors; GPR30; normal and mutant PTEN; total and phosphory lated 
Akt and p70S6 kinase.  Additionally, genotypes for 11 tag SNPs for FRAP1  and 167 tag 
SNPs for RAPTOR ; type and localization of mutations in PTEN , PI3KCA , and paxillin ; 
the number of copies of PTEN  to LINE -1 and paxillin  to LINE -1 will also be 
determi ned.  These data will be transmitted to the GOG Statistical Office, Buffalo, NY.  
The levels of expression of the candidate markers measured prior to study treatment 
will be tabulated/described.  Associations between markers, other baseline data and 
clinic al outcome will be assessed in an exploratory manner.  Methods such as logistic or 
proportional hazards  regression will likely be used for these analyses when response, 
PFS or  survival  is the dependent variable when necessary model assumptions are 
appropri ate.  Exploratory analyses utilizing methods appropriate to the type of data  will 
be conducted to examine the  associations between markers and  between markers and 
clinical characteristics.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -51- 
12.0 BIBLIOGRAPHY    
  
1.  Fiorica JV, Brunet to VL, Hanjani P, Lentz SS, Mannel R, Andersen W. Phase II trial of 
alternating courses of megestrol acetate and tamoxifen in advanced endometrial carcinoma: A 
Gynecologic Oncology Group Study.  Gynecol Oncol 92:10 -14, 2004.  
 
2.  Schmelzle T, Hall MN.  TOR , a central controller of cell growth.  Cell, 103:253 -262, 2000.  
 
3.  Rosenwald IB, Rhoads DB, Callanan LD, et al.  Increased expression of eukaryotic 
translation initiation factors eIF -4E and eIF -2 alpha in response to growth induction by c -myc.  
Proc Nat l Acad Sci USA 90(13):6175 -8, 1993.  
 
4.  Gibbons J, Discafani C, Peterson R, et al.  The effect of CCI -779, a novel macrolide anti -
tumor agent, on the growth of human tumor cells in vitro and in nude mouse xenografts in vivo. 
Proc Amer Assoc Cancer res 40: 2000, 1999.  
 
5.  Raymond E, Alexandre J, Depenbrock H, et al.  CCI-779, a rapamycin analog with 
antitumor activity: a phase I study utilizing a weekly schedule.  Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 
19:728, 2000.  
 
6.  Hidalgo M, Rowinsky E, Erlichman C, et al.  A phase I and pharmacological study of CCI -
779, a Rapamycin ester cell cycle inhibitor.  Ann Oncol 11 (Suppl 4):133, 2000.  
 
7.  Chan S. Targeting the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR): A new approach to treating 
cancer. BJC 91:1420 -1424, 2004.  
 
8.  Atkins MB, H idalgo M, Stadler WM, et al.  Randomized phase II study of multiple dose 
levels of temsirolimus, a novel mammalian target of rapamycin kinase inhibitor, in patients 
with advanced refractory renal cell carcinoma.   J Clin Oncol 22:909 -918, 2004.  
 
9.  Witzig  TE, Geyer S, Ghobrial I, et al.  Phase II trial of single -agent temsirolimus  for 
relapsed mantle cell lymphoma.  J Clin Oncol 23:4347 -5356, 2005.  
 
10. Hudes G, Carducci M, Tomczak P, et al.  A phase 3, randomized, 3 -arm study of 
temsirolimus (TEMSR) of i nterferon -alpha (IFN) or the combination of TEMSR + IFN in the 
treatment of first -line, poor -risk patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma (adv RCC).  J Clin 
Oncol 24 (18s part II of II):930s (abstr#LBA4), 2006.  
 
11. Neshat MS, Mellinghorr IK, Tran C, e t al.  Enhanced sensitivity of PTEN -deficient tumors 
to inhibition of FRAP/mTOR. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:10320 -10325, 2001.  
 
12. Kang S, Bader AG, Vogt PK. Phosphatidylinositol 3 -kinase mutations identified in human 
cancer are oncogenic. Proc Natl Acad S ci USA  102:802 -807, 2005.  
 
13. Oda K, Stokoe D, Taketani Y, McCormick F.  High frequency of coexistent mutations of 
PIK3CA  and PTEN  genes in endometrial carcinoma. Cancer Res 65:10669 -73, 2005.  
 
14. Velasco A, Bussaglia E, Pallares J, et al.  Human Pathol ogy 2006 epub  
 
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -52- 
15. Kanamori Y, Kigawa J, Itamochi H, et al.  Correlation between loss of PTEN expression 
and Akt phosphorylation in endometrial carcinoma.  Clin Cancer Res 7(4);892 -5, 2001.  
 
16. Tashiro H, Blazes MS, Wu R, et al.  Mutations in PTEN are fre quent in endometrial 
carcinoma but rare in other gynecological malignancies.  Cancer Res 15:57(18):3935 -40, 1997.  
 
17. Mutter GL, Lin MC, Fitzgerald JT, et al.  Altered PTEN expression as a diagnostic marker 
for the earliest endometrial precancers.  J Natl  Cancer Inst 92:924 -31, 2000.  
 
18. Mutter GL, Ince TA, Baak JPA, Kust G, Zhou X, Eng C.  Molecular identification of latent 
precancers in histologically normal endometrium.  Cancer Res 61:4311 -4, 2001.  
19. Zhu X, Kwon CH, Schlosshauer PW, et al. PTEN induc ed G(1) cell cycle arrest and 
decreases cyclin D3 levels in endometrial carcinoma cells.  Cancer Res 1;61(11):4569 -75, 
2001.  
 
20. Oza AM, Elit L, Biagi J, et al.  Molecular correlates associated with a phase II study of 
temsirolimus (Temsirolimus) in patie nts with metastatic or recurrent endometrial cancer —
NCIC IND 160.  Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 24(18s):121s (abstr #3003), 2006.  
 
21. Nagata Y, Lan K H, Zhou X, et al. PTEN activation contributes to tumor inhibition by 
Trastuzumab, and loss of PTEN predicts Tra stuzumab resistance in patients.  Cancer Cell 
6:117 -127, 2004.  
 
22. Nicholson RI, Hutcheson IR, Harper ME, et al.  Modulation of epidermal growth factor 
receptor in endocrine -resistant, oestrogen receptor -positive breast cancer.  Endocr Relat Cancer 
2001; 8:175. PMID:11566608  
 
23. She Q -B, Solit D, Basso A, Moasser MM.  Resistance to gefitinib in PTEN -null HER -
overexpressing tumor cells can be overcome through restoration of PTEN function or 
pharmacologic modulation of constitutive phosphadtidylinositol 3’ -kinase/Akt pathway 
signaling.  Clin Cancer Res 9:4340 -4346, 2003.  
 
24. Bianco R, Shin I, Ritter CA, et al.  Loss of PTEN/MMAC1/TEP in EGF receptor -
expressing tumor cells counteracts the antitumor action of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.  
Oncogene 22:2812 -2822, 2003.  
 
25. Wendel HG, De Stanchina E, Fridman JS, et al. Survival signaling by Akt and elF4E in 
oncogenesis and cancer therapy.  Nature  428:332 -7. 2004.  
 
26. Wendel HG, Malina A, Zhao Z, et al.  Determinants of sensitivity and resistance to 
rapamyci n-chemotherapy drug combinations In vivo.  Cancer Res 66:7639 -7646, 2006.  
 
27. Lange CA, Richer JK, Shen T, Horwitz KB. Convergence of progesterone and epidermal 
growth factor signaling in breast cancer. Potentiation of mitogen -activated protein kinase 
pathways. J Biol Chem  273(47):31308 -16, 1998.  
 
28. Lange CA, Richer JK, Horwitz KB. Hypothesis: Progesterone primes breast cancer cells for 
cross -talk with proliferative or antiproliferative signals. Mol Endocrinol 13(6):829 -36, 1999.  
                                                                                                                                               GOG -0248  
 
 -53- 
 
29. Lange CA, Shen T, Horwitz KB. Phosphorylation of human progesterone receptors at 
serine -294 by mitogen -activated protein kinase signals their degradation by the 26S 
proteasome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97(3):1032 -7, 2000.  
 
30. Knowlden JM, Hutcheson IR, Jones HE, et al.  El evated levels of epidermal growth factor 
receptor/cerB2 heterodimers mediate an autocrine growth regulatory pathway in tamoxifen -
resistant MCF -7 cells.  Endocrinology 144:1032 -1044, 2003.  
 
31. deGraffenried LA, Friedrichs WE, Russel DH, et al.  Inhibition of mTOR activity resores 
tamoxifen response in breast cancer cells with aberrant Akt activity.  Clin Cancer Res 10:8059 -
8067, 2004.  
 
32. deGraffenried LA, Fulcher L, Friedrichs WE, et al.  Reduced PTEN exp ression in breast 
cancer cells confers susceptibility to inhibitors of the PI3 kinase/Akt pathway.  Ann Oncol 
15:1510 -1516, 2004.  
 
33. Dai D, Wolf DM, Litman ES, White MJ, Leslie KK. Progesterone inhibits human 
endometrial cancer cell growth and invasivene ss: down -regulation of cellular adhesion 
molecules through progesterone B receptors. Cancer Res 62(3):881 -6, 2002.  
 
34. Whitney C.W., Brunetto V.L., Zaino R.J., Lentz S.S., Sorosky J., Armstrong K.D., Lee 
R.B. Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Onco l. 2004 Jan;92(1):4 -9. 
 
35 Singh M., Zaino R.F., Filiaci V.F., Leslie K. K. Relationship of estrogen and progesterone 
receptors to clinical outcome in metastatic endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncolog y 
Group Study.  
 
36. London WB, Chang MN. One - and two-stage designs for stratified phase II clinical trials.  
Statist. Med 2005;  24:2597 -2611  
 
37.  Atkinson, E. N. and B. W. Brown (1985). "Confidence limits for probability of response in 
multistage phase II clinical trials." Biometric s 41(3): 741 -4. 
 
38. Jagadeeswaran R, Surawska H, Krishnaswamy S, et al. Paxillin is a target for somatic 
mutations in lung cancer: implications for cell growth and invasion.  Cancer Res . 
2008;68(1):132 -42. 
 
39. Oza AM, Elit L, Provencher D, Biagi JJ, Panasci L, Sederias J, Dancey JE, Tsao MS, 
Eisenhauer EA, NCIC Clinical Trials Group. “A phase II study of temsirolimus (CCI -779) in 
patients with metastatic and/or locally advanced recurre nt endometrial cancer previously 
treated with chemotherapy: NCIC CTG IND 160b.” J Clin Oncol  26:2008 (May 20 suppl; abstr 
5516)  
 