IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0664  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  01/04/2017    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Paracervical block with IUD insertion versus no paracervical block IRB  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 01/04/2017  
  
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0664  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  01/04/2017   Paracervical block  with IUD insertion  versus no paracervical block  IRB 
 
Protocol Title: Paracervical block  versus no 
paracer vical block  during IUD insertion  
 
Principle Investiga tor:  
Pamela Berens  
 
 
Co-Investiga tors:  
 
Neda Jooya 
 
 
Populatio n:  
 
50 Adults who present for IUD insertion 
at seve ral UT Physicians Obstetrics and 
Gynecology clinics. 
 
Number of sites:  
Three: Dr. Patti Jayne  Ross  OB/GYN 
Conti nuity  Clinic: UTPB  Suite  350 ; UT 
Physicians Women’s Cen ter- TMC: UTPB 
Suite  250 ; UT Physicians Women’s 
Center- Bellai re: 6700 West Loop South, 
Suite  450 
 
Study duration:  
October 2016 until completion  
(anticipated 1 year) 
 
Subject duration:  
20 minut es or less to place block and 
insert  IUD 
 
 
 
 
 
General information 
 
We propose to compare paracer vical block  versus no local an algesia in women  who 
present for IUD insertio n. We will co mpare the patient’s procedural pain level with 
tenaculum placeme nt and IUD insertion  using paracer vical block versus no 
analgesia during the IUD insertion procedure.. 
 
Background Information 
 
In the United States, approximately 7% of women  used  intrauterine  devices  (IUD)  for 
contrace ption in 2012 (Guttamac her institute).  To date, no standard method  of pain 
control with IUD insertion  has been proposed  or adopted. IUDs  have a less than  
1% rate of failure depending on the type  of IUD used  and have a high rate of 
compliance. Some barriers to women obtaining the IUD are: cost  and the perceived 
pain associ ate with IUD insertion  inclu ding stimulation  of cervical parasympathetic 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0664  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  01/04/2017   and sympathetic nerve fibers and prosta glandin  releas e. Some research has been 
done on the difference  in pain experie nced with IUD insertion  using paracer vical 
block with conflicting  results  (Mody, Cirik). In a study of nulliparous women, 2% 
topical li docai ne gel has been found to be effective for pain reli ef at the tenacul um 
site ho wever  it’s use in a clinical setting is unc ommon (Ra pkin, et al). This stu dy 
involved self-admin istrat ion of the topical p roduct prior to the  procedure and may 
be distasteful to some  patients. Despite the controversy  regarding the ef fectiven ess 
of vario us techniques for pain ma nagemen t, a recent  revision  of the U.S. Select 
Pract ice Recom mendations  for Contraception (2016) inclu des a recommen dation 
that  “paracer vical block  with lidocai ne mig ht reduce patient pain during IUD 
insertion.”  
 
We a re interest ed in performing  an open label  randomized cont rolled trial  of local 
block versus no local blo ck in a group of women who present to the  Dr. Patti Jayne 
Ross  OB/GYN  Conti nuity  Clinic, the UT Physicians Women’s Cen ter, a nd the UT 
Physicians Women’s Center- Bellai re for IUD insertion.  Individual providers vary in 
their use of a local blo ck for pain with IUD procedures. We will co llect data on the 
vital signs of each  woman undergoing  an IUD  insertion procedure. We also  plan on 
collecting demo graphic info rmat ion on each patient involved in the study. We plan 
on assess ing the pain of each  individual throughout each individual IUD insertion 
procedure using a visual analo gue pain scale. Each patient will be  randomized to 
receive either  a paracer vical block  or no local a nalgesia. A standard protocol  for 
admin istrat ion of paracer vical block  will be delineated, distributed, and used  for the 
study. Patient pain will be  assessed  prior to, during the placeme nt of tenaculum,  and 
after  the procedure using the visual  analogue scale  tool. 
 
The study will take place at the clinics mentioned above. IUD placeme nt will be 
carried out by residents and faculty  at the Memo rial Hermann  and LBJ Hospital 
Obst etrics  and Gynecology residency programs rotat ing through the 
aforeme ntioned clinics. 
 
Objectives 
 
We would like to compare patient pain perception in IUD insertion when using 
paracer vical block  versus no bloc k. We aim  to impr ove pain in this patient 
population.  
 
Study Design 
 
The study will be  an open label  randomized controlled trial.  Each woman will be 
conse nted to the study and either  randomized to receive paracer vical block  or 
routine  care (no local anal gesia). The level of  pain of each  woman will be assess ed 
befo re the procedure but after  placeme nt of the specul um, during placeme nt of the 
tenaculum, and after  the procedure by using a  visual  analogue pain assessme nt 
scale.  Vital signs will also be t aken prior to and  after  completion  of the procedure. 
 
Each patient will be  consented prior to the  study. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0664  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  01/04/2017   We would like to assess  the following in each of the study partic ipants undergoing 
the IUD insertion procedure.  
 
a) Age, race, gravity,  and parity  
 
b) Type of IUD received  
 
c) Randomization status, i .e. whether  each  participant rece ived a paracervical block 
or not  
 
d) History of vagin al, pelvic, or cervical surgery  
 
e) History of sexually transmit ted infection  or pelvic inflam matory disease 
 
f) Vital signs (including but not limited  to blood pressu re, respirato ry rate, pulse, 
and oxygen saturation)  befo re and after  the procedure  
 
g) Patient rating of pain befo re, during tenaculum plac emen t, and after  the 
procedure.  
 
h) Complications  associa ted with IUD insertion  procedure or block itself (i.e.: 
cervical stenosis  requiring dilation, failure of IUD placemen t, bleeding) 
 
i) Other  pain medications taken by the patient on the day of but prior to the 
procedure 
 
Study Population  
 
Women of reproductive age,  having IUD placed  at the Dr. Patti Jayne Ross OB/GYN 
cont inuity clinic, The UT Physicians Women’s Cen ter, a nd the UT Physicians 
Women’s Center- Bellai re during the study time. 
 
Inclusion c riteria:  
 
Women of reproductive age be tween ages 18 and 52 who present for an IUD  
insertion  procedure. 
 
Exclusion criteria:   Women less than  age 18 and greater than  age 52, women with 
current PID, women who are not good candidates for an IUD, and patients who have 
a Lidocai ne allergy. 
 
Women aged  18 and over will un dergo a cons ent process  prior to being enrolled in 
the study. 
 
Study Procedures 
 
Women who meet inclusion  criteria who present to the  aboveme ntioned locations 
will be  informed  of the stu dy, and those  agreeing will be  asked  to sign  a cons ent. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0664  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  01/04/2017   These  patients will be  informed  that  routine  care for our practice  is no analgesia. 
These  women  will then  be randomized to either a group getting no  analgesia during 
the IUD insertion procedure and those  receivi ng a paracer vical block  with 1% 
Lidocai ne prior to the  procedure. An established  protocol  will be  used for the 
paracer vical block  arm  of the study. Patient vitals will be  assessed  5 minut es prior 
to procedure and 5 minut es after  procedure. Patient  pain scale will be  assessed  after 
specul um plac ement  but prior to any pr ocedure, with tenacul um plac ement  and 
after placeme nt of the IUD. All complic ations associa ted with the IUD insertion 
procedure will also be  analyzed as will failure to successful ly insert  the IUD. 
 
The following parace rvical block protocol  will be used  for this study: 
Paracervical block  protocol (Study arm) 
Tools: 
Specul um 
10 cc syringe 
1% Lidocai ne 
Single tooth  tenacul um 
 
 
 
1.   Obtain  conse nt and randomization 
2.   Perform pre-procedure vital signs 
3.   Insert the specul um into the vagina 
4.   Perform pain scale #1  
5.   Identify the cervix 
6.   Apply Beta dine to the cervix and surrounding vagin al tissue  
7.   Insert the syringe into the cervico-vagin al junc tion at 12  o’clock (the 
anticipated tenaculum site). Inject 2  cc of Lidocai ne at the tenacul um site on 
the cervix, making sure to fi rst draw back  on the plunger to ensure that the 
needle is not i nserted  into a blood vessel. 
8.   Place  tenaculum  at the anterior lip of the ce rvix at 12  o’clock 
9.   Perform pain scale #2  
10. Inject 3  cc of 1% li docaine  and 4 and 8 o’clock position of  the ce rvix. Ensure 
that  you insert the syringe into the cervix at the cervico-vagin al junction  and 
withdraw the plunger to ensure the needle is not inserted into a blo od vessel 
prior to injecting. 
11. Wait 3  minutes  after last i njection before starting IUD insertion  procedure 
12. Insert IUD 
13. Perform pain scale #3  
14. Cut IUD strings  and remove all ins truments from the vagina 
15. Perform post  procedure vital signs  
 
Paracervical block  protocol (Control Arm) 
Tools: 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0664  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  01/04/2017   Specul um 
Single tooth  tenacul um 
 
1.   Obtain  conse nt and randomization 
2.   Perform pre-procedure vital signs 
3.   Insert the specul um into the vagina  
4.   Perform pain scale #1  
5.   Identify the cervix 
6.   Apply Beta dine to cervix and s urrounding vaginal tissue  
7.   Place  tenaculum  at the anterior lip of the ce rvix at 12  o’clock 
8.   Perform pain scale #2  
9.   Insert IUD 
10. Perform pain scale #3  
11. Cut IUD strings  and remove all ins truments from the vagina 
12. Perform post  procedure vital signs  
 
 
 
Statistics  
 
Demo graphic characte ristics will be  assessed  and descri bed using  descri ptive 
varia bles. Vital sign assessme nt and pain sc ale assessment  will be  descri bed using 
nume rical categories. A two tail T-Test will be  used to assess  the data and we will 
look for a 20% difference in the pain sco re. 
 
Ethics  
 
IRB a pproval will be  sought with the University of Texas system .  
 
Informed  conse nt in writing will be  obtained in English from each individual prior 
to enrollment. No coercion  will be  used. Recruitme nt and conse nt will be ob tained 
by Dr. Jooya and a group of previo usly autho rized and trained residents and 
attendings working out of the clinic. 
 
Data handling and record keeping 
 
Participant informat ion will be  stored on encrypted computers  owned by Drs. 
Berens and Jooya. 
 
Quality control and assurance 
 
All data collection  will be taken by previo usly autho rized membe rs of the 
aforeme ntioned residency programs.  
 
Publication plan 
 
Results are  planned for publicat ion. Participants will not be notified of results.  
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0664  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  01/04/2017   Sources: 
 
Mody et al. Pain control for intrauterine device insertion: a randomized  trial of 1% 
lidocaine paracervical block. Contraception 86 (2012) 704-709. 
 
Cirik et al. Paracervical block  with 1% lidocai ne for pain con trol during intrauterine 
device  insertion: a prospective,  single-blinde d, contr olled study. Interna tional 
Journal of Reproduction, Contraception, Obstetrics  and Gynecology. 2013 
Sep;2(3);263-267  
 
 
Rapkin RB, Achilles  SL, Schwarz EB, et al. Self-Admin istered Lidocai ne Gel for 
Intrauterine Device  Insertion  in Nullipar ous women: A Rand omized Controlled Trial. 
Obst et Gynecol.  2016 Sep;128 (3):621-8. 
 
Lopez LM, Bernholc  A, Zeng Y, Allen R H, et al. Interventions for pain with 
intrauterine  device  insertion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 201 5 Jul 
29;(7):CD007373. Review 
 
US. Selected  Pract ice Recommen dations  for Contrace ptive Use, 201 6 MMWR July  
2016/65(4);1-66. 
 
Hepburn. Method of Local  Anesthes ia for IUD Insertion. Contraceptive Deli very 
Systems. 1980 , 371-377. 