ICARE PROTOCOL  AND ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
Study  Title: A New Approach to Vision Therapy Based on Naturalistic 3 -D 
Computer Gaming  
Study  ID: ICARE2B       
Document Date : 8/30/2023  
NCT number :  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
  The research team will execute two concurrent studies within a common framework. The first will compare 
iCare to standard of care occlusion therapy  (patching) for amblyopia in patients ages 4 to 18 (inclusive). The 
second will compare iCare to a standard of care for home -based CI therapy  (pencil pushups) for convergence 
insufficiency patients ages 8 to 18 (inclusive) . In the context of this study , the term  iCare refers to either the 
amblyopia or CI video game modul e as appropriate for the respective study group . 
  Both the amblyopia and CI studies will follow the same basic approach. Each study will last 12 weeks, and 
participants will return for follow -up visits at Weeks 4, 8, and 12.  Patients  will receive full visual exams to establish 
baseline data upon enrollment, and again at Week 12 to record post -treatment  data.  During the interim visits 
(Weeks 4 and 8), patients ’ visual fun ction will be assessed by a study optometrist, and any changes to  the iCare 
configuration will be addressed as needed.  As iCare is a hom e-based therapy, part icipants must have access to 
a personal computer and the Internet . For patients without access, the research team will provide loaner 
computers and /or pre-paid Verizon wireless mobile hotspots for Internet connectivity.   
  The proposed clinical studies will use the provider -as-investigator model  that involves a minimum of 10 study 
sites and approximately 100 participants  (see statistical power analysis below) . With this approach, the research 
team will recruit optometry and vision therapy clinics and practices from around the country to support study 
execution under the training, guidance, and supervision of the  iCare team. UND  will serve as the “coordinating 
center ” [48], enrolling, training, and oversee ing the study sites  and providing Institu tional Review Board (IRB) 
governance . The UND team has experience in successfully serving in this multi -center coordination role in 
related research  (see Biosketches) . Enrolled providers (known hereafter as investigator -providers ) will, in turn, 
recruit participants from their own patient rosters.  This model  serves several important purposes:  
(1) Provides a geographically diverse pool from which to draw participants, ensuring research isn ’t skewed 
to local demographics  (study cohort more  closely match es the U.S.  population ); 
(2) Expands the recruitment base, ad dressing the systemic challenge of  meeting recruitment goals in 
research involving children [49]; 
(3) Implements a National Research Council -recommended  strategy of involving community -based 
physicians in clinical trials in order to promote  translation of research into  clinical  practice [1]; and  
(4) Ensures that study procedures will easily be incorporated into practice [1] and that usability data gathered 
during study execution are valid.  
The proposed effort is a Continuing Renewal application, with commercialization of the iCare product as its 
ultimate goal. By putting the iCare system directly in the hands of practicing optometrists and vision therapists, 
the research team can solicit feedback on features, commercialization models, and pati ent experiences. This 
will help ensure rapid transition of the test system to commercial adoption at the conclusion of the research effort.      
  To ensure protection of human subjects, integrity of data, and reliability of results, the UND -Barron  Associates  
team will: provide rigorously -complete step -by-step checklists for all procedures; conduct webinar -based training 
on detailed protocols;  and promulgate specific instructions on d ata protection, pati ent safety, and research ethics. 
All investigator -providers  will complete  Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) [50] training  and be 
registered with the UND IRB . During interactive online video training sessions, iCare team members, Drs. Clark -
Gelburd and Biberdorf , will provide detailed instructions regarding  study protocols to investigator -providers,  
including consent administration, inclusion/exclusion criteria , and assessment s. Barron Associates , Inc.  will 
provide thorough instructions on installation and use of the iC are system, the Provider Dashboard  web app, and 
the parental -support web app . These will also be documented in printed manuals and online “how-to” videos . 
Each training webinar  is expected to last 4 hours, with one -on-one “just-in-time” training available at any time. 
Follow -up teleconferences with the investigator -providers  during study execution will reinforce patient protections 
and protocol adherence, as well as solicit  recommendations  on feature enhancements and integration of  iCare 
into provider  workflow s.  
  The amblyopia and convergence insufficiency branches  of the study will run concurrently at the participating 
study sites . Study  details specific to each  are described below .  
 
Amblyopia study  
  Children (ages 4 -18) with amblyopia and meeting study inclusion/exclusion criteria will be recruited according 
to IRB -approved procedures. Informed consent will be sought from the parents or legal guardian with assent 
from the child. Enrollees will be randomized to one of two  groups. A  standard of care  group will be prescribed 
patching for two or six hours per day, seven days per week. Standard of care group p articipants with best-
corrected v ision worse than 20/200 in their amblyopic eye will be prescribed six  hours of patchi ng daily, while 
participants whose best-corrected v isual acuity is 20/200  or better will be prescribe d two hours of patching daily. 
Participants assigned to an  experimental group will play iCare vision therapy  games  for approximately 20 
minut es per day, five days per week.  Assignments will be made via a block randomization scheme based on a 
random permutation. With regards to age, it is expected that amblyopia patients  between ages 4 to 6  years m ay 
experience up a one line (0.1 logMAR) greater improvement than  those over 6 years of age [51]. For this reason, 
assignments within the amblyopia patient cohort will be age -balanced.  
  The primary investigational  hypothesis is that  the improvement in best-corrected v isual acuity  for participants 
in the iCare experimental group will not be inferior to the level of improvement observed in the standard of care 
(patching) group.  An ETDRS (Early Treatm ent Diabetic Retinopathy Study ) logMAR  (logarithm of t he minimum 
angle of resolution ) chart [52] will be used as the primary  assessment of visual acuity  (VA).  To reduce test -retest -
variability, scoring will be based on an interpolated logMAR value (single -letter score) based on a ll 
measurements via the formula, VA = 1.1 – TCLV, where TC  is the total number of correctly read letters and LV is 
the logMAR value of each letter on the chart  (0.02 for ETDRS)  [53]. In children 4 -6 years old, a Lea Symbols 
chart  [46] will also be used, with the best VA score from the two tests used for primary analyses.  
  The pre - to post -intervention change in best-corrected v ision ( logMAR ) at 12 weeks will serve as the primary 
efficacy endpoint. In terms of hypothesis testing, the primary null hypothesis  will correspond to a non -inferiority 
test in which the null hypothesis  will be that the mean of the  logMAR  distribution for the iCare experimental 
study population  is greater than that of the patching experimental study population (indicating inferior average 
outcome) , while the alternative hypothesis will be that the mean  logMAR  for the iCare experimental study 
population  is equal to or more negative than the  mean  logMAR patching experimental study population 
(indicating iCare therapy is non -inferior to patching therapy with respect to improving visual acuity) . The null 
hypothesis will be rejected if the upper 95% confidence limit for the between -group difference (i.e. iCare – 
patching) in mean  logMAR does not excee d the non -inferior threshold of one line on an ETDRS  chart 
(approximately 0.1 logMAR) . Analysis will be performed by way of a linear mixed model (LMM ) in which t he pre - 
to post -intervention change (  logMAR ) will be the LMM dependent variable, while the intervention (iCare vs. 
patching ) will serve as the primary LMM independent variable  and patient age, gender, pre -intervention logMAR  
in the amblyopic  eye, and logMAR in the fellow eye will all serve as secondary LMM independent variables . 
These secondary variables  will be utilized to adjust for any between -intervention disparities in age, gender, pre -
intervention logMAR  in the amblyopic  eye, and logMAR in the fellow eye. Inclusion of these secondary 
independent variables in LMM will also allow assessment of the impacts on these characteristics on outcomes. 
Additionally, a stratification variable “study site” will be incorporated into  the LMM as a random -effect to account 
for within study -site measurement correlation as well as between study -site v ariability.  
   Second ary analyses will test, on a per intervention basis, the null hypotheses that  the mean  logMAR  for each 
treatment  group mean (iCare and patching) is greater than or equal to zero, with the alternative  hypothesis  that 
the mean  logMAR  of the respective study -population is less than zero (indicating improved acuity associated 
with the respective treatment between pre -/post -testing) . Additionally, systematic relationships between  
logMAR  and age, gender  and per -intervention logMAR  will be examined  in secondary factorial analysis.  
  Statistical p ower analysis for the amblyopia study is based on selecting N such that there is at least an 80% 
probability of rejecting the primary null hypothesis  (when the alternative hypothesis is true)  that the mean  
logMAR of the iCare experimental study population minus the mean  logMAR of the patching experimental 
study population exceeds the non -inferior threshold . Assuming a standard deviation in acuity improvement 
between subjects of approximately 2 lines on the  ETDRS chart  (0.2 logMAR  – consis tent with observed variability 
in previous studies [51], [26]), at least 50 patients  must complete the amblyopia study (25 each in the iCare and 
patching groups) to achieve adequate  statistical  power. Thus, if  the true mean of the  logMAR distribution for 
the iCare group is less than or equal to (better than) the true mean of the  logMAR distribution for the patching 
group, there is an 80% chance that the null hypothesis  of iCare amblyopia therapy inferiority  to patching 
amblyopia therapy will be correctly rejected. To account for potential dropouts, up to 64 total patients will be 
consented  into the amblyopia study .  
 
 
 
Convergence insufficiency study  
  The team  will perform a clinical study comparing use of iCare  by an experimental group  to a standard  of care 
(pencil pushups) control group for convergence insufficiency by patients  ages 8 to 18 (inclusive).  Pencil pushups 
are chosen as the control condition as it is the home -based therapy that is most often prescribed by both 
ophthalmologists and optometrists  [33], [34]. Note that  convergence insufficiency is rarely diagnosed and treated 
before age eight, thus the age range is different than for the amblyopia cohort.  Informed consent will be sought 
from the parents or legal guardian with assent from the child.  Enrollees will be assigned via a random 
permutation scheme  to one of two  groups:  (1) the  iCare experimental group, in which participants will be 
prescribed vision therapy  gameplay for approximately 20 minutes per day, five days per week; and (2) a dosage -
matched control group, which will be prescribed pencil pushups for 20 minutes  per day , five days per week.  
  The primary investigational  hypothesis is that  improvement in positive fusion al vergence base -out breakpoint 
(BOB) is greater for par ticipants in the experimental group than  it is for the control group.  Convergence 
amplitudes will be  measured with a base out prism bar  with the patient focused  on a target at 40 cm  [54]. BOB 
will be recorded as prism magnitude at which fusion can no longer be maintained . Study investigators will also 
collect near point of convergence (NPC) data using an Astron International Accommodative Rule . Additionally, 
participants will be assessed via a CI  Symptom Survey [32], a 15-item, 5-level Likert -scale . Individual responses 
will be assigned a value from 0 -4 and summed to produce a score that can be compared to normative data  [55]. 
  The pre - to post -intervention change in BOB  (BOB) at 12 weeks will serve as the primary efficacy endpoint 
for the Phase IIB  CI study . Analysis will employ a LMM with pre- to post -intervention change in  BOB as the 
dependent variable and intervention group (iCare or control)  as the primary independent variable . Additionally, 
the model will include age, gender, pre -intervention  BOB, and study site assignment as secondary independent 
variables, allowing the LMM to account for variability due to these factors and enabling factorial analysis of their 
impact on outcomes.  
  The primary null hypothesi s will be that the mean of the BOB  distribution is the same for the iCare and control 
groups , with the alternative hypothesis that the mean BOB  is greater (i.e. indicating greater improvement) for 
the iCare group . A one -sided p≤0.025 decision rule will be utilized to test the null hypothesis . Seco ndary null 
hypotheses will test, on a per intervention basis, whether the mean BOB  of the study -population is equal to 
zero, with the alternative that the respective study -population BOB  is greater (indicating improved functional 
vergence) . Additionally, relationships between BOB  and age, gender, and pre -intervention BOB  will be 
systematic ally examined  employing the LMM.  NPC data will be analyzed in an identical manner.  
  Statistical p ower analysis for the CI study is based on selecting N such that there is at least an 80% probability 
of rejecting the primary null hypothesis  when the alternative hypothesis is true . With N=50 (25 patients per group)  
the underlying minimum detectable diff erence  in the mean positive fusional vergence in convergence is 7.3 prism 
diopters  (conservatively assuming a standard deviation of 9  prism diopters  [32]). In a previous randomized 
controlled trial, office -based CI vision therapy was found to produce a mean difference in improvement after 12 
weeks of greater than 10 prism diopters  [32]. The Phase IIB CI study is therefore sufficiently powered. To account 
for potential dropouts, up to 64 total patients will be consented  into the CI study .  
 