1 
  
IN-HOME OBESITY PREVENTION TO REACH LOW -INCOME INFANTS  
 
ID: 1R01HD092483 -01 
 
Date: 01/28/ 21 
 
  
2 
 A. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
More than 40% of children enrolled in federally funded programs are overweight or obese by age 5.1-4 This is 
concerning because obese children have a 70% chance of becoming obese adults.5,6 Unfortunately, extant  
obesity efforts have had a limited impact among low -income underserved children, in part because of limitations 
inherent to existing programs: 1) short duration and low intensity; 2) late timing of implementation, when children 
are already overweight or o bese; 3) delivery methods limiting their accessibility and sustainability; and 4) failure 
to address barriers such as a lack of culturally competent and in -language services, poverty, housing instability, 
and access to care, which int erfere with healthy lifestyle changes. To address these gaps, we have integrated 
simple, evidence -based nutrition and physical activity components as part of the services already delivered by 
our home visitation partner, Healthy Families America, with the long -term goal to deploy these efforts to Home 
Visitation Programs (HVPs)  nationwide.  Annually, over 500 publicly and privately funded HVPs provide 
nationwide services to more than 650,000 low -income, underserved infants and their families. T he home visiting 
structure is not only an unparalleled model for scalable and sustainable childhood obesity prevention, but it also 
provides a unique opportunity  to understand factors related to the intergenerational transmission of obesity in 
families who are most at risk.  
Over the last four years, our transdisciplinary team of researchers, home visiting stakeholders, families, and 
community stakeholders (hereafter referred as the COPE team ), has integrated evidence -based nutrition and 
physical activity components into an engaging module that we call COPE : Childhood Obesity Prevention @ 
homE /Contrarrestar Obesidad: Programa para niños En casa . COPE is delivered in English and Spanish as an 
enhancement module  to the services of our HVP partner. Our pilot work supports the successful integration, 
feasibility, and preliminary efficacy of COPE.  
The proposed study builds upon the momentum, resources, and research infrastructure of our pilot work to 
test the larger -scale and sustained impact of COPE on infant’s and mothers’ obesity outcomes, and to study key 
mechanisms of maternal and social transmission on infants’ obesity risk . Specifically, 300 low-income 
mothers/infants enrolled in  Healthy Families America HVP will be recruited and enrolled in the study , for an 
effective final sample of 200 mothers/infants . Based on standard HVP procedures, mothers/infants will be 
matched to highly trained home visitors (nurses) based on their ethnicity/race and language preferences. Home 
visitors, in turn, will be randomly assigned to deliver the standard HVP curriculum only or the standard HVP 
curriculum + COPE as part of their weekly home visits for two years of HVP services. Comprehensive 
assessments of mothers/infants will be conducted at enrollment and after 6 and 12 months of intervention.  
Specific Aim 1 (maternal and infant outcomes). Test the direct effects of COPE on infants and mothers’ 
weight, metabolic risks, diet/energy intake, and physical activity. This will be accomplished by comparing 
changes in body weight, metabolic markers, and eating and activity -related behaviors between infants/mothers 
across study arms (HVP only vs. HVP+COPE). These results will indicate whether HVP is an effective 
infrastructure for primary and secondary obesity prevention.    
Specific Aim 2 (maternal transmission).  Test whether breastfeeding and maternal diet and activity, feeding 
practices, and food insecurity mediate the effect of COPE on infants’ outcomes . This aim will test mechanisms of 
maternal transmission on infants’ obesity risks.   
Specific Aim 3 (social transmission).  Aim 3  is two -pronged.  Aim 3a  tests the direct effect of HVP+COPE 
(vs. HVP only) on the characteristics of  the social and community networks that surround mothers and infants 
(i.e., the density, composition, and quality  of “health support networks”).  Aim 3b  tests whether the characteristics 
of social networks mediate the effects of COPE on maternal and infant outcomes.  These findings will indicate if 
HVP obesity prevention efforts can alter and/or activate  social network mechanisms.   
Secondary Aim . Conduct a real -life economic analysis (costs, cost -savings , and non -monetary benefits) of 
integrating COPE into existing HVPs .  
This proposal addresses the impetus to develop interventions targeting at -risk infants  before obesity is 
established. A lthough maternal -infant interventions are much -needed, they present implementation and 
dissemination challenges , including limitations on compliance and retention , and limited potential for scalability  
and sustainability . Our proposed strategy overcomes these challenges through an innovative solution that 
merges evidence -based nutrition and activity compone nts into an existing, ongoing federally -funded 
infrastructure . The propos ed research is timely as the Institute of Medic ine, the United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA), and Health and Human Services (DHHS)  extend their recommendations to address key 
factors influencing obesity risk in children from birth to 24 months of age .   
3 
 B. SIGNIFICANCE  
 
B.1. Scientific premise  and impact.  The proposed study tests whether delivering in -home obesity prevention 
as part of an ongoing, sustainable service delivery system (home visitation programs, HVPs) is an effective 
approach for primary (infants) and secondary (mothers) obesity prevention am ong low -income, underserved 
families. This research is poised to have a substantial impact because the delivery modalities of current obesity 
efforts disproportionally restrict the reach and engagement of children who are most  at-risk for obesity, and limit 
the development  and generalization of healthy habits in families’ home environment.  Our proposed strategy 
overcomes these challenges through an innovative and potentially cost-effective solution that merges evidence -
based key nutrition and activity components into an ongoing federally funded HVP. Our focus on understanding 
maternal and social determinants  of intervention effects increases the significance, innovation, and impact of 
this research by identifying key determinants that can be leveraged to prevent childhood obesity  in infancy . This 
work will inform maternal and child health public policy initiatives that seek to address the intergenerational 
transmission of obesi ty efforts. If effective, this intervention can be readily disseminated to other HVP s sites 
nationwide.  
 
B.2. Focus on underserved segments of the population.  Although a recent nationally representative study 
found a decline in obesity for children ages 0 -5, this was not true for low -income and non -white children.10 In 
fact, 40% of low -income children enrolled in federally -funded programs are overweight or obese by age five.1-4 
In Los Angeles (LA) County there is a strong, positive association between the prevalence of childhood obesity 
and economic hardship.11 Sadly, even the most successful obesity strategies have had limited impact among 
economically disadvantaged families, partly because of their failure to address factors which profoundly affect 
the ability of at -risk families from diverse racial and ethnic backgro unds to adhere to lifestyle changes in real -
world settings.12,13 Initiating and maintaining healthy habits is ubiquitously difficult, especially for families who 
face a multitude of barriers such as a lack of access to linguistically and culturally competent services, poverty, 
housing instability, and food insecurity. These challenges highlight the dire need to re -conceptualize obesity 
prevention as an integral component of universal care, embedded in a comprehensive system of child and 
maternal health services.  
 
B.3. Focus on infant/maternal transmission. Rapid weight gain during the first 4 -6 months of life has been 
associated with greater odds of child overweight at age 4 -7y,14-16 and in adolescence .14,17 -20. Yet, most obesity 
programs focus on school -aged children , when many youth are already overweight or obese, and only a few studies 
have focused on modifying obesity -risk factors in infancy . Child -feeding practices  and early nutritional 
experiences play a key role in shaping children’s health behaviors and weight outcomes.21-24 For example, i n a 
sample of 718 parents of children ages 3 -5y, parents with an indulgent feeding style had children with a higher 
BMI,25 a finding that has been replicated in 177 Head Start families.26 Another potential mechanism by which 
maternal factors might mediate infant outcomes is via breastfeeding . In developed countries, some studies 
suggest that breastfeeding is protective for childhood obesity.27-30 However, not all studies support this view.31-36 
These mixed findings suggest that a range of maternal factors, including mothers’ feeding practices,37-41 mother’s 
energy intake and diet, food insecurity (as it relates to diet), and physical activity may impact child obesity 
outcomes.42-50 Positive changes in maternal health behaviors and food security are not only beneficial for 
mothers’ health, but are also a promising approach to address intergenerational transmission of obesity risk and 
health disparities. The proposed research represents a unique opportunity to test the impact of key maternal 
mechanisms on obesity transmission and whether a comprehensive approach to maternal/infant health can alter 
children’s weight trajectories.51  
 
B.4. Focus on social transmission. Despite evidence that obesity is 
influenced by social networks and social -ecological systems, which 
extend beyond parent -child context, few childhood obesity initiatives have 
translated these concepts into practice.  Families are embedded in social 
networks and communities that influence their health behaviors and 
practices through several mechanisms, in particular via social influence 
and social support.52-59 These social factors can ultimately promote or 
impede behavior change and maintenance.60-62 Drawing on social 
influence and social network theories, as well as innovative "network -
mediated interventions" that have been successfully applied in other 
areas of public health ,60,62 the promotion of maternal and infant health 
behaviors to prevent childhood obesity ideally involves enhancing 
Figure 1.  Social network characteristics  relevant to 
healthy behavior change  
4 
 families’ social networks so that they support behavior change  (Figure 1 ). The intervention goal is to alter and 
enhance mothers’ s ocial networks so that they provide  greater (a) healthy social influence , with a larger proportion of 
individuals in their network  who engage in the desired health behaviors and so provide healthy behavior norms, 
modeling, cues, and opportunities;63-65 and (b) health -relevant social support , with an increase in the density of  
relationships  that encourage and support healthy behaviors.66,67 Obesity prevention initiatives that explicitly target 
families’ social networks (i.e., their connections to people and organizations) by creating opportunities for meaningful, 
health -supportive relationships to be fostered  and maintained , will help to promote healthy behavior change, and has 
the potential to improve the reach, effectiveness, adoption, implementation, and maintenance of family -based 
interventions.62,68 
 
B.5. Focus on sustained implementation and high intervention dosage.  Obesity researchers and public 
health decision makers have argued against “diets” and promoted the development of healthy habits for life. Yet 
most (if not all) obesity intervention and prevention programs are generally short -lived (8 -12 weeks). We believe 
that the short delivery and low intensity of obesity interventions greatly decreases their potential impact. 
Specifically, the short imple mentation of interventions/programs is inadequate to cover pivotal feeding and 
eating -related developmental transitions that are not only critical for the development of healthy eating habits, 
but also highly challenging for children and parents (e.g., tra nsition from breast milk, to pureed foods, to solid 
foods).69 Furthermore, the greatest challenge of healthy lifestyle interventions is not to initiate healthy practices 
in families, but to help them maintain healthy behaviors for a prolonged period of time. Even when obesity 
interventions directly plan or address this as part of their curriculum, the maintenance phase rarely (if ever) 
exceeds a few weekly one -hour sessions. This timeline is arguably insufficient to ensure mastery of learned skills 
into lifelo ng healthy habits.  
 
B.6. Focus on home visitation programs: an untapped opportunity to address childhood obesity. 
Consistent with a capacity building approach, we aim to extend the 
existing curriculum and mission of HVPs to address the important gaps 
reviewed above (see also Figure 2  and our concept paper70). The 
outcomes of the proposed research combined with our HVP partnership 
is likely to have  national implications. O ver 500 publicly and privately 
funded HVPs provide services to more than 650,000 low -income, 
underserved children and their families in the U.S. annually. HVPs are 
embedded in a comprehensive system of child and maternal health 
service that is designed to promote optimal child development and 
prevent adverse outcomes.71-75 Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 
show that high -quality HVPs can effectively improve children’s physical 
and psychosocial health such as birth outcomes, breastfeeding, 
immunization rates, and overall cognitive and social development.75-93  
Although some HVPs provide basic information on infant nutrition, 
there has been no comprehensive , and sustainable effort to address 
childhood obesity prevention, nutrition, and physical activity as part of 
their services . This may be because the initial focus of HVPs, 40 years 
ago, was to decrease the incidence of low birth weight.94,95 The current 
high prevalence of overweight and obesity among HVPs children is likely to prompt a new national mandate that 
HVPs address childhood obesity prevention as a part of their services. This highlights the pressing need to re-
conceptualize the mission and capabilities of HVPs to address  obesity prevention for all children . The HVP 
structure is ideal to address obesity prevention among underserved families  for many reasons  (see also 70):  
a. HVPs have been in place for more than 40 years, with $1.5 billion annual investment from the Affordable Care 
Act,96 which speaks to the sustainability of the services provided .  
b. They provide culturally and linguistically tailored in -home services, which removes barriers to accessing the 
program (e.g., transportation, childcare), promotes the generalization of skills to the home environment, and 
enables ethnically and racially diverse families to access culturally competent health ser vices.  
c. HVPs have existing partnership with Women, Infants and Children (WIC) programs nationwide.  
d. HVPs already address many barriers to healthy lifestyles such as unemployment, family conflict and violence, 
housing instability, and neighborhood characteristics.  
e. The free and voluntary weekly home visits begin during pregnancy or shortly after birth, and continue until 
the child reaches 2 -5 yo, depending on the HVP model. The extensive timeframe for service delivery makes 
it possible to reinforce health knowledge, skills, and behavioral habits.  
– 
COPE 
 – 
 
Obesity efforts have limited impact among 
underserved, low -income childre n at risk for 
obesity.  
Obesity prevention should be: Initiated in 
infancy, delivered in home , & embedded in an 
infrastructure serving at -risk families.  
The home visiting  model is ideal to provide 
scalable and sustainable early childhood 
obesity prevention.  
COPE will i ntegrate obesity prevention into 
ongoing home visiting services  
Figure 2.  Scientific Premise & Impact of COPE.  
5 
 f. Support, referral, and advocacy is central to the HVP model of delivery, facilitating families’ development of 
social and community networks that support health outcomes.   
g. The widespread presence of HVPs across the US, and established infrastructures in nationwide  urban and 
rural areas,80,91,97,98 are critical for the scalability of services  across the United States.  
h. The model is likely to be cost -effective  as obesity prevention would be delivered as part of an existing 
infrastructure , with the potential to improve child health and reduce societal costs .  
 
B.7. Feasibility of delivering obesity prevention as part of HVPs’ services. Over the last four years, our 
transdisciplinary COPE team has integrated established nutrition and physical activity components and 
activities9,99-104 into a culturally sensitive, language specific, and community -forming model of implementation 
that we call COPE (see Intervention arms  below). COPE does not  target weight loss; rather it focuses on 
preventing the development of childhood obesity through the promotion of healthy behaviors in all mothers and 
infants/children from diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds, regardless of weight status.  
Drs. Salvy & de la Haye secured two pilot grants ( CTSI [Salvy, #8UL1TR000130 ] and NIH Johns Hopkins 
Global Obesity Prevention Center  [de la Haye, # 5U54HD070725 -03]) and completed the following activities:  
1. Obtained IRB approval and developed all study material.  
2. Consolidated our partnership with Cyd Wessell, the National Director of Healthy Family America  (see letter s 
of support), laying the groundwork to enable the dissemination of COPE to other sites nationwide.  
3. Publish the concept paper  outlining the rationale and scientific premises underlying our initiative (see 70)  
4. Manualized  evidence -based nutrition and activity guidelines into educational material and hands -on activities 
that are culturally sensitive (e.g., recipes adapted to families’ preferences) and community engaging (e.g., 
leveraging resources and social networks endogenous to the community through community  gardening and 
communal cooking activities) to meet the needs and desires of HVP families.  
5. Trained home visitors  to implement COPE using science -based content and social -experiential approaches 
to elicit change talk and patient -centered goals; trained recruitment and data collection staff.  
6. Integrated COPE into the curriculum  of our HVP partner in Antelope Valley  (a chapter of Healthy Families 
America in Antelope Valley, CA) , and delivered the module in English and Spanish.  
7. Evaluated recruitment procedures and retention rates, and documented characteristics of the families’ social 
networks that could be targeted to optimize healthy changes.  
8. Enrolled our target pilot sample of 50 HVP mothers/infants and randomized families to receive HVP 
curriculum with or without COPE for 6 months to test the feasibility  of integrating COPE into HVP services 
(see Preliminary findings  below).  
9. Formed our COPE Community Advisory Board  (families, Antelope Valley Partners for Health home visitors, 
stakeholders, physicians ), which provides feedback on the project every 6 months.  
 
Preliminary data: Baseline characteristics and social networks . Mothers (average age = 25 years) in 
our pilot sample were 70% Hispanic/ Latino, 13% African American, 8% White, 5% American Indian/Alaskan, 
and 4% mixed/other race. All were low -income and were receiving federal support through WIC. Mothers’ social 
connec tions were predominantly family and household members, who were the key providers of health -related 
support. Mothers  were somewhat socially isolated from their broader 
community: they  reported few connections to same -age friends, 
spouses/romantic partners  (<50%) , or other (non-family) community 
members. Specific characteristics of mothers’ social networks  were 
identified as potential barriers to healthy behavior change . For example, 
having a larger proportion of social ties  who were female or who lived 
in the same household, and a smaller proportion of friends, was 
associated  with poorer health indicators (i.e., greater gestational weight 
gain, pre -pregnancy and baseline BMI; greater soda intake; and less 
fruit and vegetable intake). These findings have informed the proposed 
study design, which aims to alter and enhance mothers’ social networks 
so that they are more suppor tive of healthy behavior change. For  
example, the proposed intervention will foster new social connections 
to peers in the ir community who can provide support and serve as 
healthy role models.  0200400600800100012001400160018002000
baseline 6mocontrol
cope
Energy Intake (Kcal)  
Figure  3. Effects of COPE on maternal 
energy intake.  
6 
 Preliminary data: infant  and mother  outcomes . To date, our pilot study has collected  and processed  
outcome measures among 25 children and mothers who have completed 6 months of intervention. Children’s 
weight velocity was 18% lower in COPE than in the control group (0.61 + 0.1 kg/month vs 0.75 + 0.1 kg/month), 
although this difference was not statistically significant. Interestingly, 
there were no group differences in infants’ energy intake at baseline or 
at 6-month, which raises the possibility that maternal factors, such as 
breastfeeding and maternal diet acco unt, at least in part, for infants’ 
weight trajectories. This hypothesis will be tested in the proposed study.   
As part of this pilot study, we also assessed maternal energy intake 
(Figure 3 ) and consumption of sugar -sweetened beverages ( Figure 4 ) 
as we hypothesize that these variables impact children’s obesity 
outcomes (as outlined in Aim 2 ). Mothers’ food intake was assessed via 
24-hour food recalls and converted into energy intake (Kcal) by a 
research assistant blind to group assignment. These preliminary trends 
that suggest an improvement in maternal dietary intake in COPE vs. 
control are promising.  
 
B.8. Theoretical Framework.  Our overarching model promotes maternal 
healthy weight, healthy family behaviors  and home environment, and 
supportive family and community social networks, as key pathways affecting 
child outcomes during the important developmental period of infancy/early 
childhood.105,106 This theoretical framework  and underlying scientific premise  
informs our specific intervention model  (Figure 5 ). Our approach is based on 
the Ecological Systems Theory , Family Systems Perspective  and on the Life 
Course Perspective . These frameworks provide the rationale for targeting the 
maternal and social mechanisms to initiate, reinforce, and maintain healthy 
behaviors in infancy/early childhood.  The Ecological Systems Theory  and 
Family and Community Systems  perspective emphasize the need to consider 
the impact of individual, family, community, and societal factors on health and 
social outcomes.107 Social networks, which include parent -child dyads as well 
as other family, friends, and important individuals and organizations, exert 
influence on obesity and related behaviors that should be harnessed.108 Finally, the Life Course Perspective  
underpins our focus on the intergenerational transmission of health behavior , the importance of interven ing 
during critical life stages, and addressing differential exposures to risk / protective factors at key points across 
the lifespan contribute to health disparities.109-113  
 
B.9. Innovation. This study is both theoretically and clinically innovative in:  
1. Focusing on primary prevention of childhood obesity by targeting infancy to promote the development of 
healthy habits for life in culturally sensitive ways.  
2. Using an existing infrastructure that is providing culturally -, family -, and community - oriented services to a 
high-risk segment of the population to address the limitations of current childhood obesity efforts, and 
focusing on scalability, sustainability and cost effectiveness, all of which are critical issues to consider for the 
delivery of health services.  
3. Testing key social and maternal mechanisms in the intergenerational transmission of obesity, and thus 
evaluating whether changes maternal behavior and social networks affect infant outcomes and ultimately 
contribute to childhood obesity pre vention.  
4. Providing weekly in -home obesity prevention to optimi ze the generalization of skills and behaviors in the 
family  environment, and to modify the home environment . 
 
 C. APPROACH  
This research is designed to integrate and leverage  our team’s expertise ( Table 1 ), as detailed in the Personnel 
Justification  section, Multiple PI Plan,  and Biosketches .  
 
C.1. Design overview. Table 2  depicts the logic model of the proposed study , and demonstrates its scientific rigor . 
Healthy Families America home visitors (see Intervention arms  below for their qualifications) will be randomized 
to deliver the HVP curriculum with or without COPE for 12 months (standard HVP duration). Mothers/infants will 
be recruited and enrolled on a rolling basis over 24 months (study months 6 -30), and   
COPE  
Mothers  
Infants  
Social 
Networks  
 
Aim 1 
 
 
 
Aim 2 
Aim 1 
Aim 3a  
 
Aim 3b  
 
Aim 3b 
Figure 5. Intervention model.  01020304050607080
baseline 6mocontrol
cope
Figure  4. Mothers ’ soda consumption.  % of mothers consuming soda daily  
7 
 matched to a home visitor 
based on race , ethnicity 
and language 
preferences. Assessment 
of mothers and  
 infants will be conducted 
by assessment workers  
(who are blind to study 
assignment) at enrollment, 
and after receiving 6 and 
12 months of services. **  
The assessment of 
participants after they ceased to receive servi ces for a given period of time (i.e., “true” follow -up) is impossible 
because of the  ongoing nature of HVP services . We believe that asking home visitors to withhold the delivery of 
the COPE material to allow for a “no COPE” period would be unrealistic in terms of potential contamination, and 
also create an uncomfortable situation for families and HVP staff.  
 
Table 2.  Logic Model COPE  
SITUATION : More than 40% low -income children enrolled in federally funded programs are overweight or obese by age 5. Obesity efforts have 
limited impact among underserved, low -income children, at risk for obesity.  
INPUTS  OUTPUTS  OUTCOMES  
• Existing HVP infrastructure  
• Funding  
• Evidence -based nutrition, activity, and 
behavioral components ; Research and 
education expertise ; Pilot study evidence  
• Partnership (academia, service systems, 
stakeholders, families, community 
organizations)  
• Community Advisory Board (CAB)  
• Training and intervention curricula  
• Input from childhood obesity experts  ACTIVITIES  
Implementation of COPE:  Nutrition, 
Physical activity, Psychosocial Support 
and Behavioral Change, Healthy home 
environment, Support and Community 
Connectedness, Social -experiential activities  
PARTICIPANTS  
• 200 mothers/infants enrolled in HVP  
• Home visitors, directors and 
stakeholders  SHORT AND MEDIUM TERM 
• Healthier infant feeding practices and 
breastfeeding; Healthier home environment; 
Healthier diet and physical activity for mothers 
and infants; Social connections supporting 
health; Improvement in child diet and physical 
activity  
LONG-TERM  
• Lowered obesity incidence and health 
disparities among children involved in HVPs; 
Reduced costs of obesity and related diseases  
ASSUMPTIONS  
• Personal, family and structural factors influence the outcomes of childhood 
obesity prevention.  
• HVP infrastructure provides a scalable, sustainable, cost -efficient delivery 
model for obesity prevention.  
• Combining didactic and social experiential learning is necessary to engage 
and mobilize families and children.  
• Supportive social networks are pivotal to sustain health y change  EXTERNAL  FACTORS  
• Underserved families lack access to opportunities and 
resources that facilitate healthy behaviors (e.g., poverty, food 
deserts).  
• Social and community contexts can support or create barriers 
to healthy behaviors.  
• HVPs do not currently address childhood obesity, and home 
visitors are not trained to address obesity risks.  
EVALUATION  AND OUTCOMES : Aim 1  (maternal and infant outcomes). Test the direct effects of COPE on infants and mothers’ weight, metabolic and 
behavioral trajectories. Aim 2  (maternal transmission). Test the hypothesis that mothers’ weight, diet and behavioral outcomes (activity, feeding 
practices, and food insecurity) mediate the effect of COPE on infants’ outcomes . Aim 3 (social transmission) . Aim 3a  tests the direct effect of 
COPE on maternal networks.  Aim 3b  tests whether the characteristics of maternal networks mediate maternal and i nfant outcomes.   Secondary 
Aim. Conduct a real -life economic analysis (costs, cost -savings and non -monetary benefits) of integrating COPE into existing HVPs . DELIVERABLES : 
Scientific/academic (journals and conferences) and non -academic outlets (online media; meeting with stakeholders).  
 
C.2. Technical merits of our study approach.  Our formative and pilot work made it possible to refine  issues 
related to the technical merit and scientific rigor of our study approach . Intervention dosage. By providing  our 
program components via  weekly  in-home  services initiated in infancy and maintained for a sustained period of 
time ( 12 months ), we resolve many limitations of existing obesity prevention programs. The proposed model of 
delivery makes it possible to: (1) cover key child developmental periods for healthy eating and activity; (2) deliver 
the material gradually , over a sustained period of time , to avoid burdening families and home visitors; (3) guide 
parents to implement changes in their homes to promote generalization  and address ecologically relevant cues 
related to habit formation , (4) and ensure that the skills and knowledge gained are reinforced and mastered to 
promote long -term maintenance. Treatment fidelity.  Intervention fidelity encompasses integrity ( interventions 
are implemented according to established procedures) and differentiation (interventions are distinct from one 
another).114 Our preliminary f indings suggest that our strategies  are effective in preserving integrity and differentiation: 
(1) Comprehensive assessment of the standard HVP curriculum to avoid  content overlap. (2) Home visitors 
	
Table 1. Expertise of team members Salvy  de la 
Haye  HFA Chan dler
-Delaney  Goran Chou  Galama  
Infants and early childhood obesity/nutrition  x  x x x   
Home visitation services    x    x 
Family -based behavioral obesity 
interventions  x       
Underserved, racial/ethnic populations and 
culturally/linguisticall y tailored interventions    x x x  x 
Multilevel interventions for behavior change  x x      
Social network measurement and analysis   x      
Longitudinal modeling of multilevel data   x    x  
Cost analyses of childhood prevention 
efforts       x 
8 
 complete rigorous training to learn the HVP curriculum and meet the requirements of Healthy Families America 
(the HVP model we are partnering with). They receive weekly supervision to review progress and address issues. 
(3) Home visitors delivering COPE re ceive a 2 -day initial training and annual refresher courses from Dr. Salvy 
and the onsite Health Families America dietitian and nutritionist , with scripted manuals and materials. Dr. Salvy 
further reviews 25% of the sessions to monitor fidelity.  (4) Weekly  supervisions (home visitors) and bi -annual 
focus groups (families, home visitors, and Community Advisory Board) are conducted to review progress, dosage 
and timing of delivery, and provide the opportunity to resolve problems or issues encountered. (5) Intervention  
components are delivered in the home  or at spe cified  community -run settings (e.g., community garden) , and meetings 
and supervisions with home visitors implementing different arms are held on separate days (at Antelope Valley Partners 
for Health) to minimize the risks of contamination . COPE supervision is embedded in the weekly supervision home 
visitors already receive to monitor their services. Potential  burden or weakening of HVP curriculum . Potential 
concerns related to adding material to the existing HVP curriculum include (1) diluting or weakening HVPs’ 
outcomes in other areas (e.g., parenting skills, maternal depression) , and (2) increasing the burden on HVP staff 
and families . Our formative evaluation and pilot work  indicate that these concerns are unfounded . COPE was 
designed collaboratively w ith our HVP partner s (who are experienced in integrating new enhancement modules  
into the HVP curriculum ) so that it would complement other program goals. For instance, home visitors report 
that COPE cooking and tasting activities  are used to strengthen mother -child bonding and parenting skills  (a 
standard HVP benchmark area). HVP directors also found no differences between HVP+COPE and HVP only 
families on HVPs’ benchmark areas set by the Health Resources and Services Administration  (i.e., maternal and 
newborn health; child abuse and neglect and emergency department visits; crime or domestic violence; family 
economic security; and coordination and referrals for other community resources and support) . Concerns that 
COPE may overly burden families and lead to greater attrition was also not supported, as the dropout rate was 
considerably lower among mothers in the HVP+COPE group than among  mothers in the HVP only group in our 
pilot study. These findings suggest that the addition of COPE does no t weaken  other HVPs’ targeted outcomes , 
or overly burden families and home visitors . We will continue to monitor these outcomes throughout the 
implementation.  
 
C.3. Participants. Participants will be low -income mothers/infants (6mo at 
enrollment) who are already receiving services from our HVP partner  (Figure 6 ). 
Thus, study enrollment does not require that we recruit more families than our  
HVP partner is already enrolling. Mothers are enrolled in HVP services through 
outrea ch and screening pre -partum, in English or Spanish,  at community health 
centers and hospitals. In order to be eligible mothers must meet a number of (but 
not all) risk criteria (e.g., low -income, housin g instability ). Enrolled mothers are 
matched to a home visitor (nurse) based on culture and language. Recruitment . 
Assessment workers (distinct from home visitors delivering services) who enroll 
families into services will introduce the study to mothers and obtain written 
consent. They will clarify with mothers that their refusal to participate in the study 
will not affect their receipt of any other services provided by the HVP. In our 
experience, families feel comfortable refusing if they are not willing to participate. 
Mothers/infants will be ineligible if they have any of the following conditions:  
eating disorders (e.g., bulimia nervosa), schizophrenia, and obesity -related 
syndrome (e.g., Prader Willi). Participants enrolled in a weight -loss program will 
be ineligible . Based on our pilot work, we expect to recruit 70% Hispanic/Latino, 
13% African American, 8 % White, 5% American Indian/Alaskan, 4% mixed 
race. Retention . We have learned a great deal about retention through our pilot work . For instance, most attrition 
from HVP services occurs in the first six months of services. Therefore, to maximize retention, mothers will be 
invited to participate in the study  after six months of home visits . The unique relationship between home visitors 
and mothers facilitates subsequent retention , as m any of these mothers are socially isolated and home visitors 
are important confidants and supports. We will use multiple strategies that are effective for high -risk populations 
to further retain the study sample: (1) gift cards of $25 at each data collection, with all incentives paid after each 
assessment; (2) frequent contacts to maintain engagement and foster open communication; (3) quarterly 
newsletters to update subjects about study act ivities; (4) acknowledging birthdays and milestones; (5) reminder 
phone calls the day before the weekly visits and assessment sessions.  Randomization . Randomization will be 
at the level of home visitors, who deliver the HVP  (cluster randomization) . Home visitors who serve mothers that 
are participating in the proposed study will be randomly assigned to deliver either HVP only or HVP+COPE. 
Potential concerns with randomizing by home visitors are feasibly addressed in this study. First, the likelihoo d of 
Families eligible for HVP in the region   
(n=4000)  
Enrolled families eligible for the study  
(n=3200 -3600) 
Effective sample after attrition  
(n=200) 
Families recruited and enrolled  
(n=300) 
HVP only  
(n=100) 
 HVP + COPE  
(n=100) 
Figu re 6. Enrollment flow  
9 
 bias is reduced due to the homogenous population enrolled in HVPs (e.g., income, ethnicity/race). Second, to 
reduce contamination, the training and supervisions of home visitors assigned to each arm will be held on separate 
days. All analyses will control for home visitor work experience (number of years in HVP).  
 
C.4. Intervention Arms  (Table 4 ).  
HVP curriculum . Our HVP partner s are two  of 400 
nationwide Healthy Families America  (HFA) sites/chapters, 
housed at Antelope Valley Partners for Health  and the 
Antelope Valley Children’s Bureau . The HFA model meets the 
DHHS criteria for an “evidence -based early childhood home 
visiting service delivery model” ( See 
http://homvee.acf.hhs.gov ). HFA services begin prenatally 
and continue until children are 2 -5yo depending on the HVP 
model . The curriculum  focuses on strengthening parent -child 
relationships and family functioning, promoting positive child 
development, and linkage to community resources (e.g., medical providers, financial/housing assistance, 
childcare, substance abuse treatment , community programs ). HFA accredited home visitors  (Nurses) are 
matched to families on cultural background and language (English or Spanish), to provide culturally sensitive 
services.  Home visitors are selected because of their personal characteristics ( e.g., non-judgm ental, 
compassionate, ability to establi sh a trusting relationship ), their experience working with culturally diverse 
communities, and their  skills to do the job. HFA home visitors are expertly trained and experienced in handling 
situations encounter ed while working with at -risk families. They  receive training in cultural competency, 
substance abuse, reporting child abuse, domestic violence, and linkage to services in their community. Home 
visiting  staff also receive intensive training specific to their role ( e.g., identifying at -risk families, standardized 
assessments, phlebotomy, mental health  referrals, promoting preventive health care, utilizing creative outreach 
efforts, establishing and maintaining trust with families, building upon fami ly strengths, developing individual 
family support plans, teaching parent -child interact ion, managing crises ). Staff also receive weekly supervision, 
ongoing developmental training, and have limited caseloads (10 -15 families) to meet their families’ needs.  
COPE  is a culturally sensitive, language specific , and community -forming model of implementation to deliver 
key nutrition , activity and feeding practice  components as part of HVP services in a way that is engaging for 
families. COPE key components are summarized in Table 4 , and outlined in detail below. Although 
mothers/infants are the focus of HVPs and  COPE, visits are delivered in the home and, as is standard practice 
with HVPs, will engage other household members if possible (e.g., spouse) .  
1. Maternal nutrition . Home visitors teach mothers to prepare and store foods they receive from WIC and the 
Food Bank , and to gradually build healthier nutrition and activity goals congruent to their cultural practices and 
ethnic specific food palate: (a) increasing intake of vegetables and fruits (≥5 servings/day of fruits and vegetables) 
and integrating nutrient -dense ingredients in their families’ meals/recipes; (b) limiting intake of high -saturated fat 
and sugar in modifying families’ favorite recipes ( the material is adapted to families’ cultural and personal 
preferences); (c) eliminating sugar -sweetened beverage intake , supported by the provision of  information and 
activities on sugar content, long -term effects of high sugar consumption, importance of drinking water, and 
impact of advertising;115-121 (d) teaching healthy portion sizes using different visual activities.  2. Infants/young 
children nutrition . The curriculum promotes sustained breastfeeding for the first two years and the gradual 
integration of complementary feeding (pureed and age -appropriate solid foods) that support healthy eating for 
infants . Mothers learn about feeding/eating developmental stages and transitions, and healthy feeding7-9,122 
practices to promote: (a) responsiveness to child hunger and fullness cues; (b) the consumption of nutrient -
dense foods (as opposed to energy -dense); (d) the transition to structured schedule for meals/snacks from 
complementary feeding; and (d) the use of  non-food related child soothing techniques. Mothers also learn 
strategies to address neophobia,123,124 such as repeated multi -sensory (i.e., smell, touch, taste) exposures to 
nutrient -dense novel foods,125 gradual texture shaping, parents/caregivers modeling, and involvement of children 
in food selection and preparation; and strategies to handle meal -related tantrums (e.g., redirection, positive 
reinforcement of appropriate behaviors ).126,127 3. Maternal/child physical activity.  Although there is no 
unequivocally  accepted guidelines for the number of minutes children 0 -2yo should be active each day,128 the 
DHHS has summarized recommendations from the National Association for Sport and Physical Education, 
the American College of Sports Medicine,  and the National Institutes of Health: (a) daily planned physical 
activities, including tummy time, that safel y support the infant’s developmental milestones (e.g. head and neck 
self-support, rolling, floor sitting, kicking, crawling, reaching and grasping for objects, etc.); (b) engage in 30 
 
Table 4. Interventions components 
 HVP  COPE  
Maternal/infant health x  
Child physical and social development x  
Crime and domestic violence x  
Child abuse and neglect x  
Family economic stability x  
Breastfeeding x x 
Maternal nutrition  x 
Physical activity and play  x 
Infant nutrition/feeding practices  x 
10 
 minutes of supervised but unstructured  physical activity each day; and (c) avoid being sedentary for more than 
60 minutes at a time, except when sleeping. The American Academy of Pediatrics (A.A.P.) Expert Committee 
further suggests limiting screen time.129 COPE is premised on the above guidelines in addition to CDC guidelines 
for adults (150 minutes of moderate intensity physical activity/week). COPE teaches parents to make activity/play 
a daily habit for their entire family by exploiting lifestyle activities (e.g.,  taking the stairs, walking to the shop). 
Home visitors help parents design activities around their local environment, schedule, and preferences, and to 
optimize their use of safe spaces. Parents are provided with information about resources and f ree group activities 
conducive to physical activity (e.g., parks, walking clubs, outings, etc.), and classes they can take with their 
children and with other HVP families. The curriculum emphasizes the importance of parents co -engaging in 
activities with t heir children to set a good example through modeling and to provide opportunities for their children 
to be physically active.  
 COPE d elivery format . Our formative work and pilot research indicates  that didactic and experiential 
approaches are needed to help families  adopt behaviors that will promote their child’s health.   
 1. Didactic education  focuses on in -home individualized coaching to help mothers implement changes in their 
“natural environment”. A strong emphasis is placed on  gradual goal setting  in which mothers set objectives for 
their own and/or their children’s weekly activity and diet (e.g., decreasing by “x” the number of sugar -sweetened 
beverages) and on parent modeling  healthy behaviors (i.e., co -engaging in healthy behaviors with their children). 
Parents are taught behavior management and cognitive -behavioral  strategies  to change cues in their home 
environment . Mothers receive individual coaching to gradually eliminate high -energy dense foods from the home 
environment, and to modify the home to make it more conducive to exercising (e.g., removing 
computer/televisions from sleeping areas) .129 2. Social experiential activities  (Table 5 ) were selected in response 
to: our theoretical framework that empha sizes social network influences;  our pilot work that highlights existing 
social netw ork barriers to behavior change;  and families’ desire to learn through hands -on, social activities . 
These activities  are already built into the service infrastructure at Antelope Valley Partners for Health, are 
integrated across all key content are as of COPE , and will be promoted to participants in the intervention arm 
(but not to participants in the control arm)  by their home visitor . Participation by study participants will be 
monitored and recorded by activity staff. One central  purpose of the communal activities is to  foster new , yet 
sustainable  social and community connections that  will provide increased healthy behavior role models  and 
social support  for mothers. This will 
be achieved through activities that 
provide a context for repeated social 
connection among consistent groups 
of COPE participants in their 
neighborhoods , and  through 
activities designed to foster g roup 
learning, discussi on, and shared 
experiences that are aligned with the 
individual didactic learning in home . 
These social activities are similar to 
those delivered as part of the 
National Institute of Food and 
Agriculture’s Expanded Food and 
Nutrition Education Program .130   
 
C.5. Measurements . HVP Assessment Workers (registered  nurses who can draw blood) who enroll families into 
standard HVP services, have been trained to screen and recruit eligible families for the proposed project. They 
will administer the assessments (English or Spanish ; Table 6 ) in the families’ homes o r at the HVP clinic (as 
needed)  at baseline/enrollment, and after 6mo and 12mo of services. Home visitors  will be trained to gather 
interim (objective) weight measurements for the purpose of  generating more frequent  data points , triangulated 
with the assessment workers’ measurements.  
Medical and family history.  A thorough family history and physical examination will be conducted at baseline. 
We will collect demographic data , including socioeconomic status ( education, income, eligibility for SNAP).  
Infant growth & waist trajectories.  Weight will be measured on a digital scale (Tanita) accurate to the nearest 
5g. Length will be measured to the nearest 0.1 cm using an infanto -meter using the standardized WHO approach, 
	
Table 5. Description of COPE experiential and communal activities 
Communal 
cooking  Advance meal preparation to promote home cooking using foods from WIC/food 
bank, and decrease reliance on fast-food. Gatherings are lead by Nadia Sigaran 
(Site Culinary Program Coordinator) and take place in the Wellness Homes 
operated by our partner (Resources & Environment section).  
Community 
gardening  Mariposa master gardeners teach parents/children gardening techniques 
(planting, growing and harvesting fruits and vegetables). Gardens are located 
on Wellness Homes’ grounds. Families tend local gardens with other families.  
Food 
management  Classes to improve food resource management practices such as purchasing, 
selecting, or otherwise obtaining; preparing; and storing foods to increase 
sustained availability of healthy foods throughout the month. This material is 
delivered in local grocery stores and markets.  
Mobile food 
demos  Food demonstrations hosted in neighborhood farmers markets to provide 
convenient and accessible cooking and food preparation demonstrations using 
fresh products from local farmers markets.   
11 
 including use of staff training modules. Weight 
and length will be used to calculate weight -for-
length and weight -for-age z -scores (WHO 
Standards), as recommended by the CDC for 
children <24 mos. Infant growth rates will be 
examined as the change in WLZ from baseline to 
follow up ( 12mo) Waist circumference will be 
measured at the umbilicus (nearest 1 -mm) using 
a non -stretch measuring tape.  
Infant diet &  activity . To fully capture infants’ diet  
(e.g., breastfeeding, use of formula, fruits / 
vegetables, fat/ sugar intake), we will use multiple 
tools. Diet recall. . Mothers will be interviewed 
about their infants’ intake  of fruits, vegetables, 
friend foods, and sugared beverages. Mothers will 
comp lete items from  the Diet and Behavior 
Questionnaire  (DBQ)132 of the National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey  to capture 
breastfeeding/ feeding history  and introduction to 
formula and solid foods. Infants’ activity . Because of validity issues related to accelerometry in infants/young 
children, we opted to capture time engaged in sedentary activities and structured/unstructured physical activity.  
Mothers will report their child’s activities  (e.g., tummy time ,).133-135  
 
Infants  and maternal  biomarkers  for metabolic  risks . Blood  will be drawn  at the Antelope Valley Partners for 
Health  office  by Assessment workers with phlebotomy certification, at baseline   for mothers only . Mothers : Blood 
will be drawn by Assessment Workers  who will make a maximum of 3 attempts to draw the blood during the first 
visit. If the first attempt is not successful, mothers will be invited to return on another day for a second (and final) 
attempt. Plasma  will be stored  at -70°C for analysis . Biomarkers  of type 2 diabetes  risk, lipids , and inflammatory  
markers . CRP  will be measured  using  the Millipore  Multiple  assay  kit at the USC DORI  Core  Laboratory . Lipids  
will be assayed  using  Vitros  Colorimetric  assays  (Johnson  & Johnson  Clinical  Dinostics  Rochester , NY) for 
cholesterol , triglycerides  and HDL-cholesterol . Sitting blood pressure (mothers) using auscultation and heart rate 
will be measured on the right arm after a 5 -minute rest. Three readings of blood pressure and heart rate will be 
obtained and the average of the last  two last will be recorded.  
 
Maternal weight & waist circumference . Weight and height will be measured by Assessment Workers in 
participants’ homes using an electronic scale (Model BWB -800S, Tanita, Portage, MI) and stadiometer (Model 
PE-AIM-101, Perspective Enterprises) according to standard procedures.140 Subjects will remove shoes, belts, 
and heavy outerwear and empty pockets. We will measure height in duplicate and if measurements are not 
within 0.5 cm, we will obtain a third measurement. The mean of all measurements will be used to calculate BMI. 
Waist circumference will be measured at the umbilicus to the nearest 1 mm using a non -stretch measuring tape. 
Maternal obesity prior to pregnancy will be derived from pregravid BMI (recall during pregnancy at recruitment). 
Gestational weight gain will be defined  as the last weight obtained before delivery minus the pregravid recalled 
weight or the weight recorded at the first prenatal visit during the first trimester using electronic medical record 
data.  
 
Maternal diet & activity . Mothers’ dieta ry intake and activities will be assessed using several items from 
NHANES (2017), including intake of fruits and vegetables, fried foods, and sugary -sweetened beverages, and 
time mothers engage in moderate physical activity.  
Maternal social networks & support.  Using egocentric social network methods141 and EgoWeb software 
(http://www.rand.org/methods/egoweb.html , developed with PI de la Haye), we will assess the characteristics of 
the social actors (people, organizations) and relationships that surround mothers.142,143 Using standard name 
generator items,143,144 participants are asked to identify 20 important adults in their lives, and then report on the 
attributes of each person (demographics,  health attributes /behaviors) and types of relationships they share. 
Relationship characteristics of interest include how they know the person (e.g., family, friend from a community 
program , etc. ), frequency of interaction, and provision of  support for health behaviors (e.g., encoura gement for 
or co -engagement in s pecific behaviors)52,53,145. Social Support measures from the PROMIS database will be  used 
to assess emotional and instrumental support, and social isolation. Egocentric network data is used to compute 
network composition variabl es (e.g., proportions of family/ friends  in the network ), and variables that represent 

12 
 important network structures (e.g., sparse or dense support). Respondents will also be asked about health -
related relationships (e.g., information seeking, support) they have with community organizations. Social network 
analysis (SNA) will be used to compute summary statistics for each mother’s network, such as the p roportion of 
network members that engage in regular exercise or that provide health -relevant support, and the density of 
supportive relationships.147   
Maternal food insecurity.  The U.S. Adult Food Security Survey Module148 is an 18 -item, three -stage design 
with screeners. Each stage consists of characteristic conditions and experiences of food insufficiency to meet 
the basic needs of household members, and of the behavioral responses of household members to these 
conditions . We will test if scores mediate the effect of COPE on infants’ outcomes, as energy intake and weight 
are related to food insecurity.42-50  
 
C.6. Analytic Plan .  
General strategy.  Three waves of data will be collected (baseline/enrollment, 6 and 12- months of 
intervention ). Analyses will be carried out according to the intention -to-treat rule consistent with standard practice 
in most clinical  trials. We will conduct standard statistical diagnosis and descriptive statistics  of demographic and 
background variables, and examine f requencies for reasonableness, sparseness (categorical data) and non -
normality (continuous variables) of the data. Missing data will be addressed using multiple imputation and/or full 
information maximum likelihood estimation. Psychometric properties of th e study scales will be investigated to 
ascertain appropriate validity  and reliability. Preliminary analyses will test group equivalence on  baseline  
characteristics . Categorical methods of analysis (e.g., cross tabulations, chi -square) will be used for discrete data 
while t-tests will be used for continuous data to test the comparability of the prevention arms. Factors found to be 
different at baseline will be adjusted for in subsequent analyses. The following covariates  will be entered in all 
analyses: home visitor, home visitor experience (years), number of visits, househol d composition, race/ethnicity, 
acculturation, mother’s age, medical history/gestational diabetes, post -partum depression.  
Social network analysis (SNA). Network data will be analyzed using SNA packages in R (e.g., SNA, igraph) 
to produce visualizations and statistics that summarize the characteristics of each mothers’ network. We will 
compute the following network statistics: the proportion of network memb ers that provide specific types of health 
relevant support, and that engage in specific health behaviors; and the density of supportive relationships within 
each network (i.e., the number of supportive relationships among net work members that are reported, as a 
proportion of the total number of possible supportive relationships where all network members provide 
support).149,150 These statistics will be computed for each assessment period (as well as change statistics across 
periods), and included in the analyses, as described below.  
Statistical Models Aims 1 -3. Our conceptual model includes three types of variables: Intervention arms 
(HVP vs. HVP+COPE) and covariates, mediators, and outcome variables.  We will use multiple statistical 
procedures tied to the analytic objectives of each of our specific aims, including generalized linear modeling, 
path analysis and structural equation modeling (SEM) approaches.  To control for potential cluster effect due to 
home visitors as families are nested with visitor, statistical models will be devel oped based on multilevel path 
analysis to test direct and indirect (or mediational) effects hypothesized in the model.151,152 The models involve 
two levels with mothers or children as Level -1 units and visitors as Level -2 units treated as a random effect. With 
multilevel path modeling approach, the covariance matrix to be analyzed can be properly decomposed into 
individual - and group -level covariances to account for the clustering effect due to visitor nesting effect of the 
data. The multilevel path model can involve all variables from the family level in the analysis. The model can also 
incorporate distal predictors and mediator s from the visitor -level (Level -2) and outcomes from family -level (Level -
1) data. The aims of the proposed study focus on the Level -1 units. Following Bentler -Weeks153 modeling 
notation, the path model can be expressed as: =β+, with all exogenous (distal) variables defined as  and 
all endogenous (mediators and final outcomes) variables as . The parameters in β and  matrices can be 
specified according to the hypotheses of each Aim. Models to be developed are discussed in greater detail below 
for each Aim. Mplus software154 will be used model estimation and evaluation.  
Aim 1 (maternal/ infant outcomes).  Change in weight -related outcome s over the 2 -year implementation is the 
primary outcome comparison. We will use multilevel regression models adjusting for clustering effect of home visitors 
to compare differences in the main outcomes across time by intervention arm. Regression model can b e treated as 
a special case of path model without mediators. These regression models will include all participants, who have at 
least 2 measurements, regardless of when the measurements are  taken, increasing the follow -up of study participants 
and statistical power. Specific measures relevant to Aim 1 a re maternal and children weight -related measures. 
These models will allow the evaluation of intervention effects on, for example, child growth trajectory  and activity , and 
mother BMI, metabolic, and behavior outcomes.  Investigation of the main effects of COPE on outcomes will be 
conducted at each follow -up. Baseline outcome measures will be treated as covariates to control for potential 
13 
 baseline differences. Effects of COPE will be evaluated first at each follow -up assessment point. Longitudinal 
analyses with all follow -up points ( 6 and 12 months) will then be conducted to examine profiles across time to 
investigate the effects of program conditions on trends of outcome measures.  
Aim 2 (maternal transmission).  To estimate the mediational effects of maternal transmission, multilevel 
path models will be developed and evaluated per our hypotheses. The model specification will be guided by our 
conceptual model treating Intervention program as the distal variables along with demographic variables to affec t 
mother’s weight, diet and behavior as mediators, which in turn may influence infants’ outcome. While the 
intervention program will be at the Level -2 unit, all other variables included in the multilevel path models will be 
Level -1 variables obtained from mothers and children. Using breastfeeding and maternal diet on infants’ weight 
trajectories as an example, the mediation mechanism of maternal transmission can be expressed by the process: 
COPE→ breastfeeding * maternal diet → weight. The path model will allow the test of both the direct effect of 
COPE on infant weight trajectory and its indirect effect on through breastfeeding and maternal diet.  
Aim 3 (social transmission) . A multilevel path model similar to the one described in Aim 2 will be specified. 
Mediators can be specified in a process to more appropriately represent the mechanism of social transmission. 
For example, the model can contain a sequence of influences such as: COPE → density of social network 
support→ maternal outcomes → infant  outcome. A direct effect of social network on infants ’ outcomes can also 
be specified to investigate if social network has direct and indirect effect on infants’ outcomes.   
Power Analysis Aims 1 -3 (Figure 7). A total of 30 home visitors will be recruited and randomized to HVP 
or HVP+COPE. With an average o f 13 families served by each visitor, a total of 300 families will be invited to 
participa te in the proposed study over 12 months. Based on our pilot work and existing HVP data,94,95,155 -157 we 
expect a retention rate of 75% of families, which will result in a final sample of 200 mothers/infants. We have 
calculated power using G*Power158 based on an effective sample of N= 200 for the main weight related outcomes 
with the design of repeated measurement. All tests use a two -sided alpha level of .05. Our pilot study showed a 
small to medium effect size of .4 (Cohen’s d) on our main outcome of children’s weight velocity and smaller effect 
on energy intake at 6 months post -test. No previous study has investigated the long -term ( 12 months ) delivery 
of in-home obesity prevention on 0 -2yo children’s growth trajectory, diet and activity. However, an in -home 
intervention compared to outpatient pediatric counseling 
resulted in a large effect size of 1.64 (Cohen’s d) for 
changes in zBMI at 12 months, among obese 2 -5yo 
children.159,160 To account for potential large clustering 
effect at the home visitor level, we assume the intraclass 
correlation (ICC) of .05 to .1 161 with inflation factors (1+(n -
1)*ICC) of 1.4 to 1.8, respectively.162 After taking inflation 
factor into account, our proposed sample size of 200 will 
have enough power to detect medium effect sizes based 
on Cohen’s f163 between .17 and .20. More comprehensive 
path model will be specified in each aim for model 
evaluation and hypothesis testing. We are aware of the 
sample size limitation and will be cautious in the number of 
variables and the size of the model involved. We used the 
hypothesis -testing framework of RMSEA164 to estimate 
power of model fitting in our study. With  = .05, a null hypothesis RMSEA of .00 (almost exact fit for path model), 
an alternative hypothesis RMSEA of .08 (criterion of not acceptable models) and degrees of freedom (size of the 
model) ranging from 10 to 15, the range of statistical power for a sam ple size of 300 is between .83 and .93 . We 
will have sufficient power to detect small to medium  effect of a set of pre -selected parameters associated with 
mediators and outcomes with sample size of 200.165 
Secondary Aim ( Real-life economic analysis ). We will document the costs of adding COPE to HVP’s 
services through cost logs and interviews with HVP directors. We will consider the costs of labor (the time home 
visitors spent in training and in administering COPE, times their wage rate) and of material s (training and 
intervention manuals for home visitors), and evaluate how these costs can be absorbed through the ongoing 
funding from the Affordable Care Act. We will calculate infants and mothers’ weight, metabolic, and beha vioral 
trajectories and how they differ by child gender, household structure, and other observables. These analyses 
will be conducted at two levels. First, we will calculate the cost -effectiveness of HVP+COPE (vs. HVP only) by 
comparing the cost of adding COPE per unit of improvements in weight, metabolic, or behavioral outcomes with 
the cost per unit of improvement in these outcomes vs. alternative obesity programs with similar aims (e.g., 
prevention delivered in outpatient settings). This will provide a m easure of the effectiveness of COPE vs. 
Figure 7. Required sample size by effect size  
14 
 alternative interventions. We will rely on an extensive review of the literature to obtain estimates of costs and 
improvements associated with such alternative programs. Second, in the absence of long -term data, simulation 
models are often used to predict long-term outcomes and/or evaluate the cost -effectiveness of healthcare 
interventions. We have developed a simulation model to predict BMI trajectories and associated medical 
expenditures over the life cycle  (e.g., 166). The model utilizes data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey 
(MEPS) to model yearly changes in BMI and healthcare costs associated with each possible initial BMI state. 
The model was validated using data from the National Health and Nutrition Examin ation Survey (NHANES). This 
work shows that reducing by 10% the risks of overweight/obesity (BMI ≥ 85th percentile) in ages 2 -18 is 
associated with reductions in direct medical costs between $2,830 (men) and $3,000 (women) in adulthood. 
Reducing obesity r isks by 25% is associated with savings of $5,860 and $6,022 in adult men and women 
respectively. We will use this model to predict reductions associated with long -term BMI and medical care 
expenditures over the life cycle and compare these to costs associa ted with COPE.  
 
C.7. Timeline  
 
Table 7. Timeline of planned research activities  
Research Task  Month of Study  
6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60 
Convene weekly research meetings (key personnel)            
CAB meetings            
In-person training of home visitors and refresher courses            
Delivering COPE as part of HVP services            
Recruitment /enrollment /baseline assessment            
33% sample            
66% sample            
      100% sample            
Assessments (based on rolling enrollment)            
6-month assessment            
18-month assessment            
Data entry and data cleaning            
Interim analyses and preliminary reports and publications            
Manuscript preparation and research dissemination             
Clinical and community dissemination            
 
 
  C.8. Deliverables. The most appropriate scientific outlets will be journals dedicated to obesity (International 
Journal of Obesity, Pediatric Obesity)  and general nutrition and public health ( Pediatrics, American Journal of 
Public Health, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition) . We will also target specialized (Obesity Society, 
International Network for Social Network Analysis) and general conferences. Study findings will be disseminated 
to our HVP partners, Community Advisory Board and key stakeholders, and utilized to refin e our existing 
curriculum and protocol for future dissemination.  
15 
 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
A. Participants  
This comparative effectiveness research involves the enrollment of 300 mothers/infants for a final effective 
sample of 200 mothers and their infants  (age 6mo at enrollment).  
Inclusion of women. Women are represented by mothers and female infants, which will be about half of the 
infant sample. Based on our projected effective sample of 200 mothers and their 200 infants (N= 400), we 
anticipate that 75% of our sample will be women (1 00 children  + 200 mothers = 300).  
Inclusion of racially and ethnically diverse families.   The families enrolled in the Home Visiting Program 
(HVP) from which the sample is drawn is culturally, racially and ethnically diverse, reflecting the population of 
low-income families enrolled in home visiting services in the Antelope Valley, CA area. Based on our HVP partner 
(Healthy Families America site in Southern California: Antelope Valley Partners for Health  and Children’s 
Bureau ) clients’ demographics and on our pilot work, we anticipate the following ethnic and racial distribution: 
70% Hispanic/ Latino, 13% African American, 8% White, 5% American Indian/Alaskan, and 4% mixed/other 
race.   
It is important to note that Health Families America  (HFA)  home visitors are matched to families based on 
language and cultural background. Home visitors are rigorously trained to understand, acknowledge, and respect 
families’ cultural differences. Home visitors are selected because of their personal characteristics (i.e. non -
judgmental, compassionate, ability to establish a trusting relationship, etc.), their experience working with 
culturally diverse communities, and their skills to do the job.  
Inclusion of children.  Infancy and early childhood are important developmental periods given that nearly 
one-third of American children two years and older are already overweight or obese167-169 and these rates are 
even higher among low -income children of color. Once obesity is established, it is difficult to reverse,170 and 
obesity in childhood and adolescence are independent risk factors for adult obesity.6 Children develop eating 
and activity habits in the context of their family, and parents influence the child’s health trajectories through their 
own behaviors (e.g., modeling) and through the shared family environment. This proposal addresses the impetus 
to develop interventions targeting at -risk infants before obesity is established, to avoid the significant public 
health implications associated with obesity by reducing lifelong health struggles for at -risk individuals and 
reducing financial burdens for t he society as a whole. The services and obesity module  being evaluated in this 
proposed research involve the provision of home visi ting services to infants/ children  and their mothers. 
Therefore, a  number of the outcomes that will be measured as part of the proposed research will involve children. 
Specifically, c hildren will be represented by the 200 infants that will be the offspring of the mothers, as well as 
mothers who are 18 years of age or younger. A significant proportion of mothers enrolled in home visiting 
services (50%) are ≤ 18 years of age. Based on our pilot data, we expect the total number of participants ≤ 18 
years of age at enrollment will be: 200 infants + 100 mothers = 300.  
The research team is well trained and experienced in conducting research in children. Dr. Salvy (MPI) is a 
Clinical Psychologist with expertise in pediatric and child psychology, and she has been a member of the 
children’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) for several years at the Women and Children’s Hospital in Buffalo, 
NY. She will ensure the quality of the treatment implementation. The involvement of minors as participants in 
this research is in compliance with all subparts of 45 CFR Part 46 as well as w ith Federal laws and regulations.  
Sources  of materials . Data  will be used  specifically  for research  purposes  and held in strict  confidence . 
Data  from human  subjects  include :  
• Clinical  evaluation  and medical  history  via questionnaire /interview ; 
• Demographic  information , via questionnaire  (mothers ) 
• Anthropometry : body  weight , waist  circumference , height  (mothers /infants ) 
• Blood  pressure  (mothers ) and blood  samples  (mothers /infants ); 
• Variables  derived  from dietary  intake , via recall  interviews  (mothers as respondents for themselves and for 
their infants) ;  
• Physical  activity  via interview /recall  (infants ) and accelerometers  (mothers );  
• Social  networks  and support  via questionnaires  (mothers ); 
• Maternal  feeding  style & practices  via questionnaire  (mothers ); 
•  Maternal  food insecurity  via questionnaire  (mothers ); 
 
Records . Mothers’ pre -pregnancy weight and infants’ birth weight will be obtained from our HVP partner. All 
other data used for this study will be collected during the implementation of the study protocol.  
 
B. Potential Risks/Adverse Events and Procedures Used to Minimize the Risks  
For purposes of monitoring and reporting adverse events, the following definitions will be used:  
16 
 Adverse event (AE):  any untoward medical occurrence that may present itself during treatment or 
administration of an intervention, and which may or may not have a causal relationship with the treatment. 
Adverse events could arise from the study (e.g., breach of confidentiali ty) or could arise because of the 
population under study (e.g., a mother reports extensive use of drugs).  
Serious adverse event (SAE):  Any medical occurrence that results in death; is life -threatening; requires 
inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalizations; creates persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Such an even t could include suicidal ideation or 
attempted drug overdose or withdrawal, etc.  
Adverse events monitoring . Each participant (mother and infant) will be evaluated for any adverse events. 
All events will be graded by their attribution (unrelated to protocol; or possibly, probably, or definitely related to 
protocol). Any event reported to the Principal Investigato rs or to designated research associates by the subjects 
or Antelope Valley Partners for Health nursing and medical staff, which also meets the event criteria, will be 
carefully documented in a report submitted to the IRBs. The report will include a descrip tion of the event; when 
and how it was reported; any official charts, records, or documentation to corroborate the event or the reporting 
of the event; and an action plan to prevent future occurrences. All adverse events will be graded as mild, 
moderate, o r severe. Any severe and/or unanticipated adverse event will be immediately reported to the IRBs 
(within 48 hours of occurrence or recognition) and NIH. All adverse events will be summarized annually and 
submitted to the IRBs and NIH. Any action resulting in a temporary or permanent suspension of this study (e.g., 
IRB actions) will be reported to the NIH.  
Physical risks.  There are minimal physical risks added from participating in this study. All lifestyle dietary 
and physical activities suggested are in line with national guidelines. Recommended physical activities are low 
impact and unlikely to create discomfort for par ticipants.  
Psychological risks.  Though n one of the questionnaires contain items that are particularly sensitive, 
personal, or potentially upsetting, i t is possible that a participant may become upset thinking about some of the 
questions or topics in this study. Trained assessors  will be conducting the assessment sessions to address any 
potential incident. All participants will be informed that they are free to refuse to answer any particular questions 
or questionnaires. They will also be informed that they can withdra w from the study at any time without penalty. 
Staff will immediately report any AEs connected to the implementation of the intervention to Drs. Salvy and de 
la Haye who will keep a log of AEs and SAEs. Drs. Salvy and de la Haye will file a written report w ithin 24 hours 
of being notified to the IRB, whether the event relates to the project or not. As part of this process, members of 
the IRB committee review the event and determine whether the event is directly related to project procedures so 
that it can be  determined whether procedures need to be modified to avoid a similar AE in the future. Whether 
the event is related to the project, we will keep a log to provide information about all AEs in annual progress 
reports to the IRB and NIH. Drs. Salvy and de la  Haye will monitor outcomes for AEs, and outcome information 
will be entered into a log for inclusion in reports to the IRB and NIH.  
Social risks . There are no social risks for participating in this study.  
Legal/other risks . None.  
Postpartum depression. The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS)171 is used to assess 
postpartum depression  at enrollment  into home visiting services . Maternal depression will be assessed again 
prior to study enrollment. Mothers who show signs of severe postpartum depression will be closely monitored 
and provided additional referrals and resources as needed. The Safety Officer, Dr. Paul Round, is a physician  
at the Antelope Valley Clinic. Dr. Round oversees the physical and psychosocial safety and well -being of families 
enrolled in home visiting services.  The decision to i nclude/exclude mothers with postpartum depression will be 
taken on a case -by-case basis with the counsel of one of the PI (Dr. Salvy, Psychologist), Antelope Valley 
Partners for Health directors, the Safety Officer (Dr. Round, DO) and our CAB  (which includes mental health 
professionals and Dr. Paul Simon, MD) . We believe that some mothers may benefit from engaging in positive 
and reinforcing activities such as cooking and lifestyle activities. Physical activity has been shown to improve 
moods and alleviate symptoms of depression.  
Trauma and domestic violence . If we suspect that mothers are victims of intimate partner violence, either 
through completion of the questionnaires or through mother report or staff observation, we will implement the 
following procedures: (1) we will make mothers aware of resources av ailable to them in their communities, such 
as shelters; (2) we will work with mothers to develop a safety plan for addressing violence and seeking shelter; 
(3) we will ascertain risk to the child. If we suspect that the child ha s been abused or witnessed domestic violence, 
we will make a report to child protective services. We will work closely with the home visitor and our HVP partner 
to coordinate efforts in the best interests of the mother and child. Mothers who are victims of  domestic violence 
will not be dropped from the study.  
17 
 Suicidal behavior.  As we will be measuring depression in mothers, we will potentially identify participants 
who are suicidal. We follow the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration SAFE -T: Suicide 
Assessment Five -Step Evaluation and Triage approach to deter mining risk and clinical response. The five steps 
are Identify Risk Factors, Identify Protective Factors, Conduct Suicide Inquiry, Determine Risk Level/Intervention, 
and Document (which includes intervention and follow -up).  As per Practice Guidelines, we will estimate suicide 
risk as Low, Moderate, or High. All potentially suicidal mothers will be provided an emergency plan with numbers 
to call, including local hospital emergency rooms, suicide hotlines, and home visitor contacts. Each plan will be 
individ ually tailored to the needs and resources of the mother. Family members will be incorporated into the plan. 
We will be available to home visitors and our HVP partner to work with them as to how to proceed if their clients 
present with suicidal behavior. Ho me visitors also have ready access to supervisors in their agencies to help 
them respond to mental health needs, and some of the agencies run separate mental health programs, thereby 
providing additional resources for home visitors in conjunction with proj ect staff. Mothers who experience 
psychiatric emergencies such as suicidal behavior will not be dropped from the study.  
Alternative treatments . Parents who do not want to receive the nutrition and physical activity module (i.e., 
COPE), will receive the standard home visitation program curricula.  
 
C. Recruitment and Retention  
Participant recruitment.  Low-income mothers and their infants (N= 300, for a final effective sample of 200) 
will be participants in the study. Active participants will be low-income mothers  and their infants ( 6mo-old at 
enrollment) drawn from mothers who are enrolled in HVP services at the Healthy Families America site/chapter in 
Antelope Valle y, CA. Home visitors providing the  HVP services will introduce the study to mothers , and study 
Assessment Workers will  obtain written consent. Home visitors will clarify with mothers that their refusal to participate 
in the study is not affecting the services they provide. In our experience from our pilot research, families feel 
comfor table to refuse if they do not wish to participate. Of note, 90% of families receiving Healthy Families America  
HVP services choose to enroll in enhancement studies when offered (i.e., when a module is added to the core 
curriculum and evaluated). These rates are consistent with our pilot work.  
Inclusion/ exclusion criteria. Participants will be ineligible if either parent and/or child have a Dx of eating 
disorders (e.g., Anorexia Nervosa), Schizophrenia or Obesity -related syndrome (e.g., Prader Willi) . Participants 
enrolled in a weight -loss program will be ineligible.   
Retention . Using conservative estimates, we anticipate that 25% of mothers enrolled will drop out of home 
visiting services over the 12-month study.  Consequently, we will oversample at enrollment (N= 300) to ensure an 
effective sample of 200 mothers and infants. We have learned a great deal about retaining mothers through our 
prior pilot studies. We attribute retention in part to our persistent efforts and abilities of the HVP home visitors, 
but also believe that there are unique features of home visited mothers that facilitate retention in a research 
study. For example, many of these mothers are socially isolated, and opportun ities to exchange with their home 
visitor can be highly rewarding for mothers . We will use multiple strategies to retain the sample over the 
12months of the implementation and assessments. We will rely on approaches widely used in studies of high -
risk populations: (1) a gift card in the amount of $25 at each data collection, with all incentives paid after each 
assessment/data collection  regardless of whether they complete the study ; (2) frequent contact with participants 
to maintain engagement because we believe that open communication between the team and participants is 
critical; (3) quarterly newsletters to update participants about study activ ities; (4) acknowledging birthdays; (5) 
participants are given a reminder phone call the day before the weekly visits and assessment sessions (or on 
Fridays for Monday assessment sessions).  
Informed consent procedure . Informed consent, approved by the appropriate IRB, will be obtained by 
Antelope Valley Partners for Health assessment workers who are trained by our research team. All mothers that 
are enrolled in HFA’s HVP services by Antelope Valley Partners for Health  and Children’s Bureau  will receive a 
detailed explanation of the protocol, including any potential benefits and risks (in English or Spanish). Mothers 
will be required to sign the consent form (in Spanish or English) and provide consent for their infants. Only 
participants from whom consent is obtained will be involved in the study. Signed consents will be kept in the 
participants’ files in locked filing cabinets. Each participant will receive a copy.  
Waiver . No waiver or modification of consent is being requested from the IRB.  
 
D. Protection Against Risk  
 
 Safety reviews . The PIs will review the safety and progress of this study on a monthly basis. The PIs and 
the IRB s will review this protocol on a continuing basis for subject safety and include results of the review in the 
annual progress reports submitted to NIH. The annual reports will include a list of adverse events and address: 
1) whether adverse event rates are consistent with pre -study assumptions; 2) reasons for dropouts from the 
18 
 study; 3) whether all participants met entry criteria; and 4) whether continuation of the study is justified on the 
basis that additional data are needed to accomplish the stated aims of the study.  
It is also important to note that Healthy Families America home visitors are  expertly trained and experienced 
in handling situations they encounter while working with at -risk families. All home visitors receive extensive 
training in cultural competency, substance abuse, reporting child abuse, domestic violence, drug -exposed infants  
and children , and linkage to services in their community. Home visiting  staff further receive intensive training 
specific to their role (i.e., assessment, home visitation, identifying at -risk families, completing standardized 
assessments, phlebotomy, mental health  referrals, promoting preventive health care, securing medical homes , 
immunizations, utilizing creative outreach efforts, establishing and maintaining trust with families, building upon 
family strengths, developing individual family support plans, determining the safety of the home, teaching parent -
child interaction, manag ing crisis situations, etc.).  Staff further receive weekly supervision, ongoing 
developmental training, and have limited caseloads (10 -15 families) to meet families’ needs.  
 
Monitoring plan.  The study’s data safety and monitoring plan will entail several components, overseen 
Principal Investigators (Drs. Salvy and de la Haye):  
1. All University of Southern California (USC) and University of Alabama at Birmingham IRB policies and 
continuous reporting requirements  will be followed in conducting the proposed study.  Any actions taken by 
the IRB as part of its continuing review will be immediately reported to NIH.    
2. The PIs will implement and monitor procedures to ensure that each mother provides informed consent  and 
that all data remains confidential . This will also include a rigorous data management protocol to optimize 
data entry, accuracy/checking, and retrieval. Data will be stored in password -protected files accessible only 
to the investigators and staff under their supervision. In the database, only an ID code number will identify 
subjects. A list linking names and other identifiers with their ID codes will be s tored in a separate file with a 
separate password. All original paper surveys and case report forms will be stored in locked file cabinets. 
The PIs will review all data collection forms for completeness and accuracy of the data and for protocol 
compliance.  In the case of a breach of confidentiality or other adverse event, the Principal Investigators will 
report the event to the IRB and the appropriate NIH officials, and appropriate procedural changes will be 
implemented to prevent future breaches or adverse  events.  
3. An internal committee  comprised of the projects’ Principal Investigators (Dr. de la Haye will serve as the chair 
of the committee and Dr. Salvy will act as clinical training and supervisor chair) and the On -Site Project 
Director (Michelle Kiefer at Antelope Valley Partners for Health) will meet quarterly to assess: participant 
recruitment, accrual, and retention; data quality and timeliness; participant risk versus benefit; and the 
development of external conditions that could potentially affect the study.   Significant problems or adverse 
events will be reported immediately to the USC and UAB IRBs, NIH, or FDA (if relevant).    
4. As part of their training for the study, all personnel who will interact with subjects will receive instruction in 
the completion of an  adverse event reporting form . In response to any adverse event, these forms will be 
completed promptly and returned to the corresponding study team supervisor, who in turn will report the 
information to the Principal Investigators.    
5. An external Data Safety Monitoring Board  (DSMB), not connected to USC, UAB or the research project, will 
convene twice annually, via teleconference, to review the progress of the study, ensure adequate recruitment 
of minority subjects, and to monitor safety concerns.   Key members of the research  team will co -participate 
in the conference calls.   The DSMB will consist of five to -be-named individuals from outside USC:  (1) a home 
visitation program consumer (parent, most likely a mother) (2) a child services a dvocate; (3) a layperson; (4) 
a home visitation program stakeholder ; (5) a health disparities researcher and (6) a mental health 
professional.  The DSMB will meet by phone conference two times within each of the project’s 5 years. Their 
function will be to review the progress of the study, ensure adequate recruitment of minorities into the sample, 
and monitor the study with respect to the safety and well -being of the research patients.   
6. Safety officer.  Dr. Paul Round, DO is a pediatrician at the Antelope Valley Community Clinic. Dr. Round will 
serve as safety officer on this project  to ensure the protection, safety and satisfaction of mothers and staff 
throughout the many facets of the project. Dr. Round will serve as contact -person to family participants, 
service providers, and all project staff to report problems or areas of concern re garding project 
implementation for resolution with investigators.  
 
Additional protections for pregnant women, human fetuses, and neonates involved in research . This 
study involv es parents and their infants ( 6mo at enrollment). This research does not involve women who are 
pregnant. If a mother becomes pregnant during the study, she will continue to receive HVP services, but she will 
not be involved in the study.  
 
19 
 Potential benefits of the proposed research to human subjects and others.  The potential benefits of 
this study include better management of postpartum weight -loss among mothers involved in home visitation 
programs and healthier growth trajectories for their infants. This study will also help researchers and  
professionals understand how home visitation programs can be used as a vehicle for early childhood obesity 
prevention. Participants will benefit by receiving a nutrition and physical activity module at n o cost. Thus, the 
benefits of this project to the individual and society greatly outweigh the risks.  
 
Importance of the knowledge to be gained.  HVPs serve at -risk families, including low socioeconomic 
status (SES) and minority families, who are also at the highest risk of obesity. HVPs currently address multiple 
areas of mother and child health and development ,71,72,74,75,172 but they have yet to be tested as a viable and 
effective infrastructure for obesity prevention in early childhood. The proposed study seizes an untapped 
opportunity to test this potentially cost -effective, scalable and sustainable model of obesity preventi on. This 
represents a unique opportunity to test an innovative model of care for childhood obesity. Findings will inform 
health policies at local, state, and federal levels, as home visitation programs are already implemented in many 
U.S. urban and rural a reas and serve a large proportion of low -SES and minority families. Building a healthy 
lifestyle intervention into this infrastructure makes it possible to reach families who are most at risk for poor 
nutrition, a first step toward decreasing disparities. This research is particularly timely with stable funding for HVPs 
from the Affordable Care Act.91  
 
Risk -to-benefit ratio.  The risks to the participants are minimal and procedures are in place to reduce the 
risk and minimize the impact of adverse events. The potential gains of this project, including the adoption of 
healthier behaviors for mothers and their infants, healthier growth trajectories for children at high -risk for 
overweight/obesity, and the evaluation of a model for obesity prevention through ex isting home visitation 
programs, outweigh the risks.  
 
E. ClinicalTrials.gov Requirements  
The project will be registered in ClinicalTrials.gov  no later than 21 days after the first subject is enrolled. Reporting 
of summary results information (including adverse events) will be reported no later than 1 year after the 
completion date. The ClinicalTrials.gov  registry number (also known as NCT number), brief lay public title, and 
a certification that all required submissions to ClinicalTrials.gov  were completed will be provided in progress 
reports.  The PIs (Dr. Salvy at UAB and de la Haye at USC) will assume responsibility for these aspects of the 
trial.  
  
20 
 MINORS AS RESEARCH SUBJECTS  
The research team is well trained and experienced in conducting research in children. Dr. Salvy (MPI) has been 
trained in Pediatric and Child Psychology and she has been a member of the children’s Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) for several years at the Women and Children’s Hospital in Buffalo, NY. She will ensure the quality 
of the treatm ent implementation. The involvement of minors as participants in this research is in compliance with 
all subparts of 45 CFR Part 46 as well as with Federal laws and regul ations.  
 
 
21 
 INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES  
Women are represented by mothers and female infants, which will be about half of the infant sample. Based on 
our projected effective sample of 200 mothers and their infants (N= 400), we anticipate that 75% of our sample 
will be women ( 100 infants/children + 200 mothers = 300). The families enrolled in the Home Visiting Program 
(HVP) from which the sample will be drawn is diverse, reflecting the population of low -income families enrolled 
in home visiting services in the Antelope Valley, CA area. Based on our HVP partner ( two Healthy Families 
America site s in Southern California: Antelope Valley Partners for Health  and Children’s Bureau ) clients’ 
demographics and on our pilot work, we anticipate the following ethnic and racial distribution: 70% Hispanic/ 
Latino, 13% African American, 8% White, 5% American Indian/Alaskan, and 4% mixed/other race. It is important 
to note that Health Families America  (HFA)  home visitors are matched to families based on language and cultural 
background. Home visitors are rigorously trained to understand, acknowledge, and respect families’ cultural 
differences. Home visitors are selected because of their personal characteristics (i.e. non -judgmental, 
compassionate, ability to establish a trusting relationship, etc.), their experience working with culturally diverse 
communities, and their skills to do the job.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
22 
 References  
 
1. Centers for Disease C, Prevention. Obesity prevalence among low -income, preschool -aged children --
New York City and Los Angeles County, 2003 -2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013;62(2):17 -22. 
2. Weedn AE, Ang SC, Zeman CL, Darden PM. Obesity prevalence in low -income preschool children in 
Oklahoma. Clinical pediatrics. 2012;51(10):917 -922. 
3. Pan L, Blanck HM, Sherry B, Dalenius K, Grummer -Strawn LM. Trends in the prevalence of extreme 
obesity among US preschool -aged children living in low -income families, 1998 -2010. JAMA. 
2012;308(24):2563 -2565.  
4. Centers for Disease C, Prevention. Obesity prevalence among low -income, preschool -aged children - 
United States, 1998 -2008. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2009;58(28):769 -773. 
5. Hannon TS, Rao G, Arslanian SA. Childhood obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Pediatrics. 
2005;116(2):473 -480. 
6. Singh AS, Mulder C, Twisk JW, van Mechelen W, Chinapaw MJ. Tracking of childhood overweight into 
adulthood: a systematic review of the literature. Obes Rev. 2008;9(5):474 -488. 
7. Institute of Medicine (IOM). Early Childhood Obesity Prevention Policies.  Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press; 2011.  
8. Birch LL, Doub AE. Learning to eat: birth to age 2 y. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;99(3):723S -728S.  
9. Raiten DJ, Raghavan R, Porter A, Obbagy JE, Spahn JM. Executive summary: Evaluating the evidence 
base to support the inclusion of infants and children from birth to 24 mo of age in the Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans --"the B -24 Project". Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;99(3):663S -691S.  
10. Harvey JR, Ogden DE. Obesity treatment in disadvantaged population groups: where do we stand and 
what can we do? Preventive medicine. 2014;68:71 -75. 
11. Shih M, Dumke KA, Goran MI, Simon PA. The association between community -level economic hardship 
and childhood obesity prevalence in Los Angeles. Pediatric obesity. 2013;8(6):411 -417. 
12. Kitzmann KM, Beech BM. Family -based interventions for pediatric obesity: methodological and 
conceptual challenges from family psychology. J Fam Psychol. 2006;20(2):175 -189. 
13. Kitzmann KM, Dalton WT, 3rd, Stanley CM, et al. Lifestyle interventions for youth who are overweight: a 
meta -analytic review. Health Psychol. 2010;29(1):91 -101. 
14. Stettler N, Zemel BS, Kumanyika S, Stallings VA. Infant weight gain and childhood overweight status in 
a multicenter, cohort study. Pediatrics. 2002;109(2):194 -199. 
15. Ong KK, Emmett PM, Noble S, Ness A, Dunger DB, Team AS. Dietary energy intake at the age of 4 
months predicts postnatal weight gain and childhood body mass index. Pediatrics. 2006;117(3):e503 -
508. 
16. Ong KK, Loos RJ. Rapid infancy weight gain and subsequent obesity: systematic reviews and hopeful 
suggestions. Acta paediatrica. 2006;95(8):904 -908. 
17. Taveras EM, Rifas -Shiman SL, Belfort MB, Kleinman KP, Oken E, Gillman MW. Weight status in the first 
6 months of life and obesity at 3 years of age. Pediatrics. 2009;123(4):1177 -1183.  
18. Ekelund U, Ong K, Linne Y, et al. Upward weight percentile crossing in infancy and early childhood 
independently predicts fat mass in young adults: the Stockholm Weight Development Study (SWEDES). 
Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;83(2):324 -330. 
19. Dennison BA, Edmunds LS, Stratton HH, Pruzek RM. Rapid infant weight gain predicts childhood 
overweight. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2006;14(3):491 -499. 
20. Stettler N, Stallings VA, Troxel AB, et al. Weight gain in the first week of life and overweight in adulthood: 
a cohort study of European American subjects fed infant formula. Circulation. 2005;111(15):1897 -1903.  
21. Birch LL, Davison KK. Family environmental factors influencing the developing behavioral controls of 
food intake and childhood overweight. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2001;48(4):893 -907. 
22. Birch LL. Development of Food Preferences. Annual Review of Nutrition. 1999;19:41 -62. 
23. Hughes CC, Sherman SN, Whitaker RC. How low -income mothers with overweight preschool children 
make sense of obesity. Qualitative health research. 2010;20(4):465 -478. 
24. Hurley KM, Cross MB, Hughes SO. A systematic review of responsive feeding and child obesity in high -
income countries. The Journal of nutrition. 2011;141(3):495 -501. 
25. Hughes SO, Shewchuk RM, Baskin ML, Nicklas TA, Qu H. Indulgent feeding style and children's weight 
status in preschool. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2008;29(5):403 -410. 
26. Hughes AR, Sherriff A, Lawlor DA, Ness AR, Reilly JJ. Incidence of obesity during childhood and 
adolescence in a large contemporary cohort. Preventive medicine. 2011;52(5):300 -304. 
23 
 27. Harder T, Bergmann R, Kallischnigg G, Plagemann A. Duration of Breastfeeding and Risk of Overweight: 
A Meta -Analysis. Am J Epidemiol. 2005;162:397 -403. 
28. Dewey KG. Is breastfeeding protective against child obesity? Journal of human lactation : official journal 
of International Lactation Consultant Association. 2003;19(1):9 -18. 
29. Owen CG, Martin RM, Whincup PH, Davey -Smith G, Gillman MW, Cook DG. The effect of breastfeeding 
on mean body mass index throughout life: a quantitative review of published and unpublished 
observational evidence. Am J Clin Nutr. 2005;82(6):1298 -1307.  
30. Arenz S, Ruckerl R, Koletzko B, von Kries R. Breast -feeding and childhood obesity --a systematic review. 
Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004;28(10):1247 -1256.  
31. Burdette HL, Whitaker RC. Differences by Race and Ethnicity in the Relationship between Breastfeeding 
and Obesity in Preschool Children. Ethn Dis. 2007;17:467 -470. 
32. Butte NF, Wong WW, Fiorotto M, Smith EO, Garza C. Influence of early feeding mode on body 
composition of infants. Biol Neonate. 1995;67(6):414 -424. 
33. Gillman MW. Commentary: breastfeeding and obesity --the 2011 Scorecard. International journal of 
epidemiology. 2011;40(3):681 -684. 
34. Grummer -Strawn LM, Mei Z, Centers for Disease C, Prevention Pediatric Nutrition Surveillance S. Does 
breastfeeding protect against pediatric overweight? Analysis of longitudinal data from the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention Pediatric Nutriti on Surveillance System. Pediatrics. 2004;113(2):e81 -86. 
35. Martin RM, Patel R, Kramer MS, et al. Effects of promoting longer -term and exclusive breastfeeding on 
adiposity and insulin -like growth factor -I at age 11.5 years: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2013;309(10):1005 -
1013.  
36. Procter SB, Holcomb CA. Breastfeeding duration and childhood overweight among low -income children 
in Kansas, 1998 -2002. Am J Public Health. 2008;98(1):106 -110. 
37. Birch LL, Fisher JA. The role of experience in the development of children's eating behavior. Capaldi, 
Elizabeth D (Ed). 1996;(1996). Why we eat what we eat: The psychology of eating. (pp. 113 -141). ix:DC, 
US: American Psychological Association.  
38. Birch LL, Fisher JO. Mothers' child -feeding practices influence daughters' eating and weight. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 2000;71:1054 -1061.  
39. Birch LL, Fisher JO, Davison KK. Learning to overeat: maternal use of restrictive feeding practices 
promotes girls' eating in the absence of hunger. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003;78(2):215 -220. 
40. Fisher JO, Birch LL. Early experience with food and eating: Implications for the development of eating 
disorders. Thompson, J. 2001;Kevin (Ed); Smolak:eating disorders, and obesity in youth: Assessment, 
prevention, and treatment.  
41. Savage JS, Fisher JO, Birch LL. Parental influence on eating behavior: conception to adolescence. J 
Law Med Ethics. 2007;35(1):22 -34. 
42. Bernal J, Frongillo EA, Herrera H, Rivera J. Children live, feel, and respond to experiences of food 
insecurity that compromise their development and weight status in peri -urban Venezuela. The Journal of 
nutrition. 2012;142(7):1343 -1349.  
43. Larson NI, Story MT. Food insecurity and weight status among U.S. children and families: a review of the 
literature. Am J Prev Med. 2011;40(2):166 -173. 
44. Kaur J, Lamb MM, Ogden CL. The Association between Food Insecurity and Obesity in Children -The 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 
2015;115(5):751 -758. 
45. Schlussel MM, Silva AA, Perez -Escamilla R, Kac G. Household food insecurity and excess weight/obesity 
among Brazilian women and children: a life -course approach. Cadernos de saude publica. 
2013;29(2):219 -226. 
46. Metallinos -Katsaras E, Must A, Gorman K. A longitudinal study of food insecurity on obesity in preschool 
children. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 2012;112(12):1949 -1958.  
47. Martin MA, Lippert AM. Feeding her children, but risking her health: the intersection of gender, household 
food insecurity and obesity. Social science & medicine. 2012;74(11):1754 -1764.  
48. Eisenmann JC, Gundersen C, Lohman BJ, Garasky S, Stewart SD. Is food insecurity related to 
overweight and obesity in children and adolescents? A summary of studies, 1995 -2009. Obes Rev. 
2011;12(5):e73 -83. 
49. Buscemi J, Beech BM, Relyea G. Predictors of obesity in Latino children: acculturation as a moderator 
of the relationship between food insecurity and body mass index percentile. Journal of immigrant and 
minority health / Center for Minority Public Health. 2011;13(1):149 -154. 
24 
 50. Meyers AF, Karp RJ, Kral JG. Poverty, food insecurity, and obesity in children. Pediatrics. 
2006;118(5):2265 -2266.  
51. Committee on Accelerating Progress in Obesity Prevention Institute of Medicine. Accelerating Progress 
in Obesity Prevention: Solving the Weight of the Nation. 2012.  
52. Ashida S, Wilkinson AV, Koehly LM. Social influence and motivation to change health behaviors among 
Mexican -origin adults: implications for diet and physical activity. American journal of health promotion : 
AJHP. 2012;26(3):176 -179. 
53. Ashida S, Hadley DW, Goergen AF, Skapinsky KF, Devlin HC, Koehly LM. The importance of older family 
members in providing social resources and promoting cancer screening in families with a hereditary 
cancer syndrome. Gerontologist. 2011;51(6):833 -842. 
54. Ayala GX, Baquero B, Arredondo EM, Campbell N, Larios S, Elder JP. Association between family 
variables and Mexican American children's dietary behaviors. Journal of nutrition education and behavior. 
2007;39(2):62 -69. 
55. Bauer KW, Neumark -Sztainer D, Fulkerson JA, Hannan PJ, Story M. Familial correlates of adolescent 
girls' physical activity, television use, dietary intake, weight, and body composition. Int J Behav Nutr Phys 
Act. 2011;8:25.  
56. Bauer KW, Laska MN, Fulkerson JA, Neumark -Sztainer D. Longitudinal and secular trends in parental 
encouragement for healthy eating, physical activity, and dieting throughout the adolescent years. J 
Adolesc Health. 2011;49(3):306 -311. 
57. Gorin AA, Wing RR, Fava JL, et al. Weight loss treatment influences untreated spouses and the home 
environment: evidence of a ripple effect. Int J Obes (Lond). 2008;32(11):1678 -1684.  
58. Pachucki MA, Jacques PF, Christakis NA. Social Network Concordance in Food Choice Among Spouses, 
Friends, and Siblings. American Journal of Public Health. 2011:AJPH.2011.300282.  
59. Patrick H, Nicklas TA. A review of family and social determinants of children's eating patterns and diet 
quality. J Am Coll Nutr. 2005;24(2):83 -92. 
60. Valente TW. Social Networks and Health. Models, Methods, and Applications.  New York: Oxford 
University Press; 2010.  
61. Valente TW, Fosados R. Diffusion of innovations and network segmentation: the part played by people 
in promoting health. Sex Transm Dis. 2006;33(7 Suppl):S23 -31. 
62. Valente TW. Network interventions. Science. 2012;337(6090):49 -53. 
63. Marmot M, Wilkinson R. Social determinants of health.  Oxford University Press; 2005.  
64. Smith KP, Christakis NA. Social networks and health: Models, Methods, and Applications.  2008.  
65. Salvy SJ, de la Haye K, Bowker JC, Hermans RC. Influence of peers and friends on children's and 
adolescents' eating and activity behaviors. Physiol Behav. 2012;106(3):369 -378. 
66. Berkman LF, Glass T. Social integration, social networks, social support, and health.  Soc Epidem. 
2000;1:137 -173. 
67. Thoits PA. Mechanisms Linking Social Ties and Support to Physical and Mental Health. Journal of Health 
and Social Behavior. 2011;52(2):145 -161. 
68. Gest SD, Osgood DW, Feinberg ME, Bierman KL, Moody J. Strengthening prevention program theories 
and evaluations: contributions from social network analysis. Prev Sci. 2011;12(4):349 -360. 
69. Dietz WH. Critical periods in childhood for the development of obesity. Am J Clin Nutr. 1994;59(5):955 -
959. 
70. Salvy SJ, de la Haye K, Galama T, Goran MI. Home visitation programs: An untapped opportunity for the 
delivery of early childhood obesity prevention Obesity Reviews. In Press.  
71. Gonzalez A, MacMillan HL. Preventing child maltreatment: an evidence -based update. J Postgrad Med. 
2008;54(4):280 -286. 
72. Fergusson DM, Grant H, Horwood LJ, Ridder EM. Randomized trial of the Early Start program of home 
visitation: parent and family outcomes. Pediatrics. 2006;117(3):781 -786. 
73. Matone M, O'Reilly AL, Luan X, Localio R, Rubin DM. Home visitation program effectiveness and the 
influence of community behavioral norms: a propensity score matched analysis of prenatal smoking 
cessation. BMC public health. 2012;12:1016.  
74. Rubin DM, O'Reilly AL, Luan X, Dai D, Localio AR, Christian CW. Variation in pregnancy outcomes 
following statewide implementation of a prenatal home visitation program. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2011;165(3):198 -204. 
75. Bilukha O, Hahn RA, Crosby A, et al. The effectiveness of early childhood home visitation in preventing 
violence: a systematic review. Am J Prev Med. 2005;28(2 Suppl 1):11 -39. 
25 
 76. Aurelius G, Nordberg L. Home visiting to families with a newborn child. Scand J Prim Health Care. 
1994;12(2):106 -113. 
77. Barnet B, Duggan AK, Devoe M, Burrell L. The effect of volunteer home visitation for adolescent mothers 
on parenting and mental health outcomes: a randomized trial. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2002;156(12):1216 -1222.  
78. Black MM, Dubowitz H, Krishnakumar A, Starr RH, Jr. Early intervention and recovery among children 
with failure to thrive: follow -up at age 8. Pediatrics. 2007;120(1):59 -69. 
79. Daro D, McCurdy K, Falconnier L, Stojanovic D. Sustaining new parents in home visitation services: key 
participant and program factors. Child abuse & neglect. 2003;27(10):1101 -1125.  
80. de la Rosa IA, Perry J, Johnson V. Benefits of increased home -visitation services: exploring a case 
management model. Fam Community Health. 2009;32(1):58 -75. 
81. Drummond JE, Weir AE, Kysela GM. Home visitation programs for at -risk young families. A systematic 
literature review. Can J Public Health. 2002;93(2):153 -158. 
82. Holton JK, Harding K. Healthy Families America: ruminations on implementing a home visitation program 
to prevent child maltreatment. Journal of prevention & intervention in the community. 2007;34(1 -2):13 -
38. 
83. Izzo CV, Eckenrode JJ, Smith EG, et al. Reducing the impact of uncontrollable stressful life events 
through a program of nurse home visitation for new parents. Prev Sci. 2005;6(4):269 -274. 
84. Kersten -Alvarez LE, Hosman CM, Riksen -Walraven JM, Van Doesum KT, Hoefnagels C. Long -term 
effects of a home -visiting intervention for depressed mothers and their infants. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 
2010;51(10):1160 -1170.  
85. Kitzman HJ, Olds DL, Cole RE, et al. Enduring effects of prenatal and infancy home visiting by nurses 
on children: follow -up of a randomized trial among children at age 12 years. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2010;164(5):412 -418. 
86. Love JM, Kisker EE, Ross C, et al. The effectiveness of early head start for 3 -year-old children and their 
parents: lessons for policy and programs. Dev Psychol. 2005;41(6):885 -901. 
87. Lyons -Ruth K, Melnick S. Dose -response effect of mother -infant clinical home visiting on aggressive 
behavior problems in kindergarten. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2004;43(6):699 -707. 
88. Moss E, Dubois -Comtois K, Cyr C, Tarabulsy GM, St -Laurent D, Bernier A. Efficacy of a home -visiting 
intervention aimed at improving maternal sensitivity, child attachment, and behavioral outcomes for 
maltreated children: a randomized control trial. Development and psychopathology. 2011;23(1):195 -210. 
89. Olds DL, Robinson J, O'Brien R, et al. Home visiting by paraprofessionals and by nurses: a randomized, 
controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2002;110(3):486 -496. 
90. Aitken RJ, Allman -Farinelli MA, King LA, Bauman AE. Current and future costs of cancer, heart disease 
and stroke attributable to obesity in Australia - a comparison of two birth cohorts. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 
2009;18(1):63 -70. 
91. Thompson DK, Clark MJ, Howland LC, Mueller MR. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 
2010 (PL 111 -148): an analysis of maternal -child health home visitation. Policy, politics & nursing 
practice. 2011;12(3):175 -185. 
92. Tschudy MM, Pak -Gorstein S, Serwint JR. Home visitation by pediatric residents - perspectives from two 
pediatric training programs. Academic pediatrics. 2012;12(5):370 -374. 
93. Wagner MM, Clayton SL. The Parents as Teachers program: results from two demonstrations. The 
Future of children / Center for the Future of Children, the David and Lucile Packard Foundation. 
1999;9(1):91 -115, 179 -189. 
94. Lee E, Mitchell -Herzfeld SD, Lowenfels AA, Greene R, Dorabawila V, DuMont KA. Reducing low birth 
weight through home visitation: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Prev Med. 2009;36(2):154 -160. 
95. Sackoff J, Schwarz AG, Senter L. Reducing low birth weight through home visitation. Am J Prev Med. 
2009;37(5):472; author reply 472 -473. 
96. Astuto J, Allen L. Home visitation and young children: An approach worth investing in? .  Social Policy 
Report (Volume XXIII, Number IV). Society for Research in Child Development; 2009.  
97. Zielinski DS, Eckenrode J, Olds DL. Nurse home visitation and the prevention of child maltreatment: 
impact on the timing of official reports. Development and psychopathology. 2009;21(2):441 -453. 
98. Salinsky E. Home, but not alone: evidence -based maternal, infant, and early childhood home visitation. 
Issue Brief Natl Health Policy Forum. 2011(843):1 -17. 
99. Altman J, Spahn J, Stoody EE, Rihane C, Casavale KO, Olson R. Laying the foundation for expanding 
the Dietary Guidelines for Americans to address children from birth to 24 months and women who are 
26 
 pregnant. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 2015;115(5):693 -694. 
100. Bailey BW, Perkins A, Tucker LA, LeCheminant JD, Tucker JM, Moncur B. Adherence to the 2010 Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans and the relationship to adiposity in young women. J Nutr Educ Behav. 
2015;47(1):86 -93. 
101. Horsley E. Updated dietary guidelines from the USDA and HHS. Am Fam Physician. 2011;84(3):332 -
334. 
102. Morin KH. Key messages from the current USDA and DHHS dietary guidelines. MCN Am J Matern Child 
Nurs. 2011;36(4):266.  
103. Rahavi E, Stoody EE, Rihane C, Casavale KO, Olson R. Updating the dietary guidelines for Americans: 
status and looking ahead. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 2015;115(2):180 -182. 
104. US Department of Agriculture& US Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans 2010, 7th ed. 2012; 
http://www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/dga2010/dietaryguidelines2010.pdf . 
105. Kramer MS, Wilkins R, Goulet L, et al. Investigating socio -economic disparities in preterm birth: evidence 
for selective study participation and selection bias. Paediatric and perinatal epidemiology. 
2009;23(4):301 -309. 
106. Kramer MS, Seguin L, Lydon J, Goulet L. Socio -economic disparities in pregnancy outcome: why do the 
poor fare so poorly? Paediatric and perinatal epidemiology. 2000;14(3):194 -210. 
107. Bronfenbrenner U, Morris PA. The ecology of human developmental processes. In: Damon W, Eisenberg 
N, eds. The handbook of child psychology . New York, NY: John Wiley; 1988:993 -1027.  
108. Christakis NA, Fowler JH. The spread of obesity in a large social network over 32 years. N Engl J Med. 
2007;357(4):370 -379. 
109. Braveman P, Barclay C. Health disparities beginning in childhood: a life -course perspective. Pediatrics. 
2009;124 Suppl 3:S163 -175. 
110. Lu MC, Halfon N. Racial and ethnic disparities in birth outcomes: a life -course perspective. Maternal and 
child health journal. 2003;7(1):13 -30. 
111. National Research Council and Institute of Medicine. The Future of the Public's Health in the 21st 
Century. Washington, DC2002.  
112. Smedley BD, Syme SL. Promoting Health: Intervention Strategies from Social and Behavioral Research. 
Washington, DC: National Research Council and Institute of Medicine;2000.  
113. Wise PH. Framework as metaphor: the promise and peril of MCH life -course perspectives. Maternal and 
child health journal. 2003;7:151 -156. 
114. Moncher FJ, Prinz RJ. Treatment fidelity in outcome studies. Clinical Psychology Review. 1991;11:247 -
266. 
115. Ebbeling CB, Feldman HA, Chomitz VR, et al. A randomized trial of sugar -sweetened beverages and 
adolescent body weight. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(15):1407 -1416.  
116. Ebbeling CB, Feldman HA, Osganian SK, Chomitz VR, Ellenbogen SJ, Ludwig DS. Effects of decreasing 
sugar -sweetened beverage consumption on body weight in adolescents: a randomized, controlled pilot 
study. Pediatrics. 2006;117(3):673 -680. 
117. Wang YC, Ludwig DS, Sonneville K, Gortmaker SL. Impact of change in sweetened caloric beverage 
consumption on energy intake among children and adolescents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2009;163(4):336 -343. 
118. Ludwig DS, Peterson KE, Gortmaker SL. Relation between consumption of sugar -sweetened drinks and 
childhood obesity: a prospective, observational analysis. Lancet. 2001;357(9255):505 -508. 
119. Kaplowitz GJ. An update on the dangers of soda pop. Dental assistant. 2011;80(4):14 -16, 18 -20, 22 -13 
passim; quiz 29 -31. 
120. Spitzer L, Rodin J. Effects of fructose and glucose preloads on subsequent food intake. Appetite. 
1987;8(2):135 -145. 
121. Wesnes KA, Pincock C, Richardson D, Helm G, Hails S. Breakfast reduces declines in attention and 
memory over the morning in schoolchildren. Appetite. 2003;41(3):329 -331. 
122. Paul IM, Williams JS, Anzman -Frasca S, et al. The Intervention Nurses Start Infants Growing on Healthy 
Trajectories (INSIGHT) study. BMC pediatrics. 2014;14:184.  
123. Pliner P, Salvy SJ. Food neophobia in humans. In: Shepherd R, Raats M, eds. Psychology of Food 
Choice : CABI Publishing; 2006.  
124. Sullivan SA, Birch LL. Pass the sugar, pass the salt: Experience dictates preference. Developmental 
Psychology. 1990;26(4):546 -551. 
27 
 125. Wardle J, Cooke LJ, Gibson EL, Sapochnik M, Sheiham A, Lawson M. Increasing children's acceptance 
of vegetables; a randomized trial of parent -led exposure. Appetite. 2003;40(2):155 -162. 
126. Agras WS, Hammer LD, McNicholas F, Kraemer HC. Risk factors for childhood overweight: a prospective 
study from birth to 9.5 years. J Pediatr. 2004;145(1):20 -25. 
127. Linscheid TR. Behavioral treatments for pediatric feeding disorders. Behavior modification. 2006;30(1):6 -
23. 
128. United States Department of Agriculture. "How Much Physical Activity Is Needed?" Physical Activity  
2015; http://choosemyplate.gov/physical -activity/amount.html . Accessed 01 Apr. 2014.  
129. Barlow SE. Expert committee recommendations regarding the prevention, assessment, and treatment of 
child and adolescent overweight and obesity: summary report. Pediatrics. 2007;120 ( Suppl 4):s164 -192. 
130. U.S Department of Agriculture NIFA Program Leadership. Expanded Food and Nutrition Education 
Program Policies. 2013; http://www.nifa.usda.gov/nea/food/efnep/pdf/program -policy.pdf , 2014.  
131. Thompson AL, Mendez MA, Borja JB, Adair LS, Zimmer CR, Bentley ME. Development and validation of 
the Infant Feeding Style Questionnaire. Appetite. 2009;53(2):210 -221. 
132. McDowell MM, Wang CY, Kennedy -Stephenson J. Breastfeeding in the United States: findings from the 
national health and nutrition examination surveys, 1999 -2006. NCHS Data Brief. 2008(5):1 -8. 
133. Booth MJ, Okely AD, Chey T, Bauman A. The reliability and validity of the Adolescent Physical Activity 
Recall Questionnaire. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2002;34(12):1986 -1995.  
134. Gross LD, Sallis JF, Buono MJ, Roby JJ, Nelson JA. Reliability of interviewers using the Seven -Day 
Physical Activity Recall. Res Q Exerc Sport. 1990;61(4):321 -325. 
135. Timperio A, Salmon J, Crawford D. Validity and reliability of a physical activity recall instrument among 
overweight and non -overweight men and women. J Sci Med Sport. 2003;6(4):477 -491. 
136. Solvik UO, Roraas T, Christensen NG, Sandberg S. Diagnosing diabetes mellitus: performance of 
hemoglobin A1c point -of-care instruments in general practice offices. Clinical chemistry. 
2013;59(12):1790 -1801.  
137. Lenters -Westra E, Slingerland RJ. Three of 7 hemoglobin A1c point -of-care instruments do not meet 
generally accepted analytical performance criteria. Clinical chemistry. 2014;60(8):1062 -1072.  
138. Lenters -Westra E, Slingerland RJ. Six of eight hemoglobin A1c point -of-care instruments do not meet the 
general accepted analytical performance criteria. Clinical chemistry. 2010;56(1):44 -52. 
139. Sanchez -Mora C, M SR -O, Fernandez -Riejos P, et al. Evaluation of two HbA1c point -of-care analyzers. 
Clin Chem Lab Med. 2011;49(4):653 -657. 
140. Lohman TG, Roche AF, Martorell R. Anthropometric Standardization Reference Manual.  Champaign, Il: 
Human Kinetics Book; 1988.  
141. Carrington PJ, Scott J, Wasserman S. Models and Methods in Social Network Analysis.  New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press; 2006.  
142. McCarty C. Structure in personal networks. Journal of Social Structure. 2002;3:20.  
143. McCarty C, Killworth PD, Rennell J. Impact of methods for reducing respondent burden on personal 
network structural measures. Social Networks 2007;29:300 -315. 
144. Marsden P. Recent Developments in Network Measurement Ω. In: Carrington PJ, Scott J, Wasserman 
S, eds. Models and Methods in Social Network Analysis : Cambridge University Press; 2005:8 -30. 
145. de la Haye K, de Heer HD, Wilkinson AV, Koehly LM. Predictors of parent -child relationships that support 
physical activity in Mexican -American families. Journal of behavioral medicine. 2014;37(2):234 -244. 
146. Sarason IG, Levine HM, Basham RB, Sarason BR. Assessing social support: The Social Support 
Questionnaire. . J Pers Soc Psychol. 1983;44:127 -139. 
147. Wasserman S, Faust K. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications.  Cambridge University 
Press; 1994.  
148. Bickel G, Nord M, Price C, Hamilton W, Cook J. Guide to measuring household food security. 
http://www.fns.usda.gov/fsec/FILES/Guide to Measuring Household Food Security(3 -23-00).pdf:  
USDA;2000.  
149. Crossley N, al. e. Social Network Analysis for Ego -Nets: Social Network Analysis for Actor -Centred 
Networks.  SAGE; 2015.  
150. Wasserman S, Faust K. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications.  Cambridge: UK: Cambridge 
University Press; 1994.  
151. Pituch KA, Stapleton LM, Kang JY. A comparison of single sample and bootstrap methods to assess 
mediation in cluster randomized trials. Multivariate Behavioral Research. 2006;41:367 -400. 
152. Preacher KJ, Zyphur MJ, Zhang Z. A general multilevel SEM framework for assessing multilevel 
28 
 mediation. Psychological Methods. 2010;15:209 -233. 
153. Bentler PM, Weeks DG. Linear structural equations with latent variables. Psychometrika. 1980;45:289 –
308. 
154. Muthén LK, Muthén BO. Mplus User’s Guide Seventh Edition.  Los Angeles, CA: Muthén & Muthén; 2012.  
155. Harding K, Galano J, Martin J, Huntington L, Schellenbach CJ. Healthy Families America effectiveness: 
a comprehensive review of outcomes. Journal of prevention & intervention in the community. 2007;34(1 -
2):149 -179. 
156. DuMont K, Mitchell -Herzfeld S, Greene R, et al. Healthy Families New York (HFNY) randomized trial: 
effects on early child abuse and neglect. Child abuse & neglect. 2008;32(3):295 -315. 
157. Hoagwood KE, Olin SS, Horwitz S, et al. Scaling up Evidence -Based Practices for Children and Families 
in New York State: Toward Evidence -Based Policies on Implementation for State Mental Health Systems. 
Journal of clinical child and adolescent psychology : the official journal for the Society of Clinical Child 
and Adolescent Psychology, American Psychological Association, Division 53. 2014.  
158. Faul F, Erdfelder E, Lang A, Buchner D. G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program for the 
social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behavior Research Methods. 2007;39:175 -191. 
159. Stark LJ, Spear S, Boles R, et al. A pilot randomized controlled trial of a clinic and home -based behavioral 
intervention to decrease obesity in preschoolers. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011;19(1):134 -141. 
160. Stark LJ, Clifford LM, Towner EK, et al. A pilot randomized controlled trial of a behavioral family -based 
intervention with and without home visits to decrease obesity in preschoolers. J Pediatr Psychol. 
2014;39(9):1001 -1012.  
161. Murray DM. Design and analysis of group -randomized trials.  Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1998.  
162. Murray DM, Hannan PJ. Murray DM & Hannan PJ. (1990). Planning for the appropriate analysis in school -
based drug -use prevention studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58, 458 -468. J 
Consult Clin Psychol. 1990;58:458 -468. 
163. Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.).  Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Earlbaum Associates; 1988.  
164. MacCallum RC, Browne MW, Sugawara HM. Power analysis and determination of sample size for 
covariance structure modeling. Psychological Methods. 1996;1:130 -149. 
165. Chou CP, Bentler PM. Model modification in covariance structure modeling: A comparison among 
likelihood ratio, Lagrange multiplier, and Wald tests. . Multivariate Behavioral Research. 1990;25:115 -
136. 
166. Gaudette E, Goldman DP, Messali A, Sood N. Do Statins Reduce the Health and Health Care Costs of 
Obesity? PharmacoEconomics. 2015;33(7):723 -734. 
167. National Center for Health Statistics. Health, United States, 2010: With Special Features on Death and 
Dying. Hyattsville, MD: U. S. Department of Health and Human Services,;2011.  
168. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of obesity and trends in body mass index among 
US children and adolescents, 1999 -2010. Jama. 2012;307(5):483 -490. 
169. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, Lamb MM, Flegal KM. Prevalence of High Body Mass Index in US 
Children and Adolescents, 2007 -2008. JAMA. 2010;303(3):242 -249. 
170. Oude Luttikhuis H, Baur L, Jansen H, et al. Interventions for treating obesity in children. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2009;3(1 -57). 
171. Cox JL, Holden JM, Sagovsky R. Detection of postnatal depression. Development of the 10 -item 
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale. Br J Psychiatry. 1987;150:782 -786. 
172. Matone M, O'Reilly AL, Luan X, Localio R, Rubin DM. Home visitation program effectiveness and the 
influence of community behavioral norms: a propensity score matched analysis of prenatal smoking 
cessation. BMC public health. 2012;12(1):1016.  
 