 
Page 1 of 11 
 TUFTS MEDICAL CENTER/TUFTS UNIVERSITY RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
Version date: 10/05/17  
Principal Investigator: Ladin, Keren  
Study Title: Decision -Aid for Renal Therapy Pilot Trial (DART Pilot  Trial)  
 
I. Aim and Hypotheses  
 
AIM 1 . Examine  the feasibility  of recruitment  and randomization  of eligible  advanced CKD  patients  into a RCT of 
DART  versus  UC; and the feasibility  of maintaining  participant engagement throughout the  trial.  
 
Aim 1A. Assess  the number  of participants  screened for participation  per month.  
Aim 1B. Assess  the percentage  of screened  eligible  participants  that are  randomized.   
Aim 1C. Assess  intervention  adherence, defined  as percentage  of DART  completed  
Aim 1D. Assess  participant retention,  defined  as percentage  of study  assessments  completed.  
 
AIM  2: Compare  the effectiveness  of DART  to standard  care  on completion  of advance  care  plans  (primary),  shared  
decision -making,  and decisional  conflict (secondary)  in a diverse  sample  of older  patients  with kidney  failure and 
their caregivers.  Using  an existing  decision -aid not yet studied  in the elderly,  we will randomize  patients  at 2 centers  
to receive  either DART  or usual  care.  The Decision -Aid for Renal  Therapy  (DART)  is an interactive  web -based  
decision -aid that can  empower  patients  and caregivers  to select the  modality  that  best suits  them . 
 
H2a: Patients  engaging  with  DART  will be more  likely  to complete  advance  care  plans  than  those  who  do not. 
H2b: Patients  who  engage  with  DART  will experience  higher rates  of shared  decision -making.  
H2c: Patients  who  engage  with  DART  will experience  significantly higher decisional  concordance.  
 
 
II. Background and Rationale  
 
A. Background : In January,  Medicare  is likely  to begin  reimbursing  end-of-life discussions.  Aligning  patient  
preferences  (goals  of care  and values)  with  treatment is  arguably  the gold  standard  for quality  health  care.  
Treatment of life-limiting  illness  is especially  preference -sensitive,  where  high -intensity  care  often  offers  
marginal  survival  benefit but  can worsen  quality  of life and increase  costs.  Elderly  persons  with  end-stage  renal  
disease  (ESRD) face  a choice  between  high -intensity  dialysis  and low-intensity  medical  management. In adults  
over  70 who  are non-transplant  eligible, dialysis  confers  only  marginally  better  survival  than  medical  
management, while  reducing  independence, mobility,  and increasing  surgical  interventions.  During  their  last 
month  of life, approximately 50%  of elderly  dialysis  patients  are admitted  to an ICU compared  with  24%  of 
cancer  patients,  and only  20% of dialysis  patients  compared  with  55%  of cancer  patients  receive  hospice  
services. This  pattern  of care  is likely  partly  attributable  to suboptimal  shared  and informed  decision -making . 
 
Our recent studies of older  dialysis  patients find  that many  (1) do not recognize  dialysis  initiation  as a choice, (2) 
rarely  engage  in end-of-life planning  including  conversations  with  physicians, (3)  do not participate  actively  in 
treatment  decision -making, and  (4) experience  regret . Our  study  and others  found  that only 10%  of patients  had 
discussed  end-of-life care  with  physicians.   Many  older  ESRD  patients  experience  significant  cognitive  decline  
while  on dialysis  requiring  significant  caregiver  involvement  in treatment and  decision -making.  
 
 
B. Rationale : Successful  end-of-life communication  between  patients, caregivers,  and physicians  is associated  
with  superior  psychosocial  outcomes, less  intensive  treatment,  greater satisfaction,  and higher likelihood  of 
death  at home.  The Decision -Aid for Renal  Therapy  (DART)  is an interactive  web -based  decision -aid that can  
empower  patients  and caregivers  to select the  modality  that best suits  them. DART  was developed  using  a 
 
Page 2 of 11 
 rigorous,  validated, patient -engaged  process  and helps  clarify  decision -points  and tradeoffs  by providing  
individualized  information  about outcomes  that matter most to  patients. DART  is designed  to promote  shared  
decision -making  between  patients, caregivers, and physicians  and align  preferences  with  treatment  received.  
As a result, caregivers  suffer  high  rates  of depression,  anxiety,  and posttraumatic  stress  during  and following  
bereavement.  Our studies  and others  find that fewer  than  10% of patients  discussed  EOL care  with  physicians,  
family, or  friends . This pattern  of care  is partly  attributable  to lack of shared  and informed decision -making.  
 
Although  proven  effective  and in current use  in the general  population,  DART’s  effectiveness  in an older  population  is 
unclear.  The purpose  of this project  is to tailor  and conduct  a pilot  study of DART’s  feasibility  and effectiveness  to 
improve  end-of-life planning  and shared  decision -making  among  older  ESRD  patients.  
 
 
 
III. Research Plan   (NOTE: Tufts Clinical and Translational Science Institute, 
www.tuftsctsi.org , can assist you with study design, sample size calculation, 
statistical analysis, clinical trials and database management, regulatory support, and 
expert consultation on topics including research processes and Data and Safety 
Monitoring Boards (DSMBs). Fi ll out the form located at 
http://informatics.tuftsctsi.org/pims/request.htm  and Tufts CTSI will respond within 
two business days.)  
 
A. Experimental design : Participants (patient -caregiver dyad s) will be randomized to receive 
either usual care or usual care plus  DART. Randomization will ensure that the two study 
groups are comparable and will eliminate bias in intervention assignments.  
Randomization will be blocked  by study  site using  blocks  of randomly  varying  size.   
B. Sample size and statistical analysis(es) : We will enroll  31 dyads  (31 patients  and 31 
accompanying caregivers), a sample  size is sufficient to detect a difference  between  study groups  
of 30%  vs. 65%  completion  of the advance  directive,  assuming  a 2-sided  test of proportions with  
alpha=0.05  and power=80%.  This difference  is significant and  clinically  meaningful. It is based  on a 
conservative  estimate  of 30%  completion  of advance  directives  in the usual care (UC)  group, which  
is likely  to be an overestimate.  
 
 
C. Subject Characteristics  
1. Subject criteria:   
a) Inclusion criteria: CKD stages  4 or 5 (non -dialysis);  2) Age >=70;  3) English  speaking; 4)  willingness  to 
be randomized  to DART, and  (5) able  to sign informed  consent, (6) Kidney Failure Risk E quation 
greater than 15% risk using [www.kidneyfailurerisk.com], (7) GFR<30  
b) Exclusion criteria: Non-English speaking patients will be excluded from this study because DART is an 
online educational program that is only available in English at this time.  
c) Withdrawal/Termination  criteria: Death, withdrawal of consent, censoring for study end  
D. Risk/benefi t assessment : This study does not pose more than minimal risk.  
 
1. Physical risk : None 
 
2. Psychological risk : Participants could experience mild discomfort with the survey 
questions or with the DART educational intervention. This risk is no greater than minimal 
risk, and participants can withdraw at any time.  
 
3. Social risk : Risk of loss of confidentiality.  
 
4. Economic risk : None 
 
5. Benefit of participating in the study : There is n o direct benefit to participants . 
However, t here is a p otential for improving communication between clin icians, patients, 
and family members. A n additional  benefit is the potential for greater concordance 
 
Page 3 of 11 
 between patient values and treatment select ion.  
 
Specific methods and techniques used throughout the stud y: The control group will receive usual care  from their 
health care team for their chronic kidney disease . Following consent, participants (patient -
caregiver dyads) randomized to usual care will participate in three visits to the clinic:  
 
Visit 1 (60 minutes)  
 Participants will be given an education pamphlet, “Choosing a Treatment for Kidney Failure,” 
published by the Na tional Kidney Foundation. A research team member will ask questions about 
the participant’s experiences making decisions about kidney disease and treatment, or helping a 
loved one make decisions about kidney disease and treatment.  
 
Visit 2 (30 minutes). This visit will take place 3 months after visit 1.  
Participants  will be asked questions about their experiences making decisions regar ding kidney 
disease treatment, their goals of medical care, and views about their health.   
 
Visit 3 (30 minutes). This visit will take place 6 months after visit 1.  
Participants  will be asked questions about their experiences making decisions regarding kidney 
disease treatment, their goals of medical care, and views about their health.  
 
The survey instruments will not be audio or video recorded.  
 
 We will attempt to align these t hree visits with the participants’ usual care visits.  
 
Intervention : Decision -Aid for Renal  Therapy  (DART)  is an interactive,  web -based  decision -aid intended  to 
facilitate shared decision -making among patients, caregivers, and clin icians . DART  was designed  using  a rigorous  
scientific  process  with  input from  patients, clinicians,  researchers,  and health  communication  experts  and has 
received  the highest  scores  of any Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) decision  aid by International Patient Decision Aid 
Standards (  IPDAS ). DART  is accessible  on devices  (smart phones, tablets, computers)  that many  patients  and 
caregivers  already  own  or that will be made available to patients in a private setting in  clinics.  DART  is designed to be  
accessible  to diverse populations,  including  older adults  with chronic  conditions,  persons  residing  in rural  areas,  and 
persons  of varying  socioeconomic  backgrounds  A significant  advantage  of decision -aids is their  ability  to be 
disseminated  and implemented  rapidly,  potentially  improving  clinical  practice  and patient  and caregiver  outcome s. 
Participants who engage with  DART watch an approximately 30 -minute interactive video that explain s treatment 
options for kidney failure  and the benefits and risks of different treatment options . Participants have the opportunity 
to make notes while using the program and to print out questions and information from the program. DART 
administration is not part of usual care for chronic kidney disease patients at Tufts Medical Center.  
 
Administering  DART  and training . Participants randomized to DART will access DART during their first visit, 
which will take approximately 90 minutes (60 minutes for an interview and 30 minutes to interact with DART).   
Participants will interact with  DART  (use the program to learn about kidney disease treatments and understand 
the benefits and risks of different treatment options)  in the clinic. A research assistant will help participants 
access and navigate DART on a tablet or desktop computer in the clin ic. Patients and caregivers can complete 
DART together or separately. Participants will also receive an email link to DART if they wish to access it from 
their own tablet or computer at home.   
Participants randomized to DART can continue to access DART fro m home throughout the duration of the trial. 
Participants randomized to DART will also receive Usual Care.  
 
 
Page 4 of 11 
 Usual  Care  Comparator : Comparative  effectiveness  trials  seek  to compare  two alternate  therapeutic  
approaches.  In this case,  usual  care  (UC) is  the most appropriate  comparator because  it represents  the clinically  
relevant  alternative  treatment  that patients  and their caregivers  are most  likely  to experience  in current  practice . = 
 
There  is no current  standard  for pre-dialysis  education,  although  the Centers for Medicare  and Medicaid  Services  
(CMS)  reimburse  chronic kidney disease education.  All participants  receive  both  printed  and e-mailed  electronic  
versions  of ‘Choosing a Treatment For Kidney Failure’ https://www.kidney.org/sites/default/files/11 -10-
0352_choosing_treat.pdf  , written and published by the National Kidney Foundation, and commonly  provided  in 
current  practice.  By providing  identical  written  materials  describing  treatment  options  in a balanced  and fair way to 
all patients  at the first study  visit following  randomization, we  minimize  content  heterogeneity  and bias associated  
with  timing  and setting.  As part of assessments, we will query  participants  in both  study  arms  regarding  participation  
in dialysis  education  sessions.  
DART will not be administered to participants in the usual care group.  
 
Laboratory tests :. We will not conduct laboratory tests for this study. We will assess medical records for the following laboratory tests 
conducted as part of  usual care for chronic kidney disease:  serum creatinine  (which is used to calculate glomerular filtration rate, or 
GFR), calcium , phosphate, bicarbonate,  albumin, hemoglobin, urine album in, urine protein and uri ne creatinine.    
1. Study Procedures : Eligible participants will be approached and, if interested, the study  
coordinator or trained research staff will obtain informed consent  at Tufts Medical Center . Dr 
Vaidyanathapuram Balakrishnan, the St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center Principal Investigator, 
will screen eligible patients and oversee consent of interested patients at  St. Elizabeth’s 
Medical Center . Eligible patients from St. El izabeth’s Medical Center will first give Dr. 
Balakrishnan permission to be contacted about the study, including being approached for 
consent, by Tufts research staff.  
After providing consent, participants (patient -caregiver dyads) will be randomized to one  of two 
study groups  using REDCap . One group will receive usual care, and the second group will receive 
usual care plus DART.  Participants in both study groups will complete three visits to the clinic:  
 
Visit 1 ( 60 minutes for participants in the usual care group; 90 minutes  for participants in the DART 
study group ) 
A research team member will ask questions about the participant’s  experiences mak ing decisions 
about kidney disease and treatment, or helping a loved one make decisions about kidney disease 
and treatment.  Participants who are assigned to receive regular care will receive a printed 
educational pamphlet, “Choosing a Treatment for Kidney Failure,” published by the National 
Kidney Foundation. Participants w ho are assigned to DART will receive the educational 
pamphlet and will also have the opportunity to complete DART in the clinic setting. A research 
assistant will help participants access and navigate DART on a tablet or desktop computer in the 
clinic. Pat ients and caregivers can complete DART together or separately. Participants will also 
receive an email link to DART if they wish to access it from home.  
 
Visit 2 (30 minutes) . This visit will take place three months after Visit 1.  
Participants in both stu dy groups  will be asked questions about their experiences making decisions 
regarding kidney disease treatment, their goals of medical care, and views about their health.  
 
Visit 3 (30 minutes) . This visit will take place six months after Visit 1.  
Both sets of participants will be asked questions about their experiences making decisions regarding 
kidney disease treatment, their goals of medical care, and views about their health.  
 
We will attempt to align these three visits with the participants’ usual care visits.  
 
 
Page 5 of 11 
 Caregiver interviews will be conducted in -person at the clinic if they are accompanying the patient, or 
will be done by mail or phone. The caregiver will be given an addressed, stamped envelope in 
which to mail the survey back.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Subject Timeline :       
Participants  will be recruited  over   10 months  in 2 centers  in Greater  Boston  (TMC  and St Elizabeth’s  
Medical  Center, a Tufts  teaching  affiliate  in Brighton).  This will allow  a sufficient  population  to meet  
recruitment  targets  while  ensuring  a diverse  sample,  including  understudied  populations  known  to 
experience  a greater  burden  of symptoms  and greater difficulty  in decision -making.  Specific  factors  of 
interest  include:  race,  ethnicity,  and socioeconomic  status.  Patients  and caregivers  from these  sites  have  
expressed  interest in  participating  in this study.  St. Elizabeth’s  is a Tufts  University  School  of Medicine  
(TUSM)  teaching  hospital  and a partner in  the Tufts  Clinical  and Translational  Science  Institute  (CTSI); 
multiple  clinical  and research  collaborations  are ongoing  between  TMC  and SEMC.  
 
 
Follow -up time will be  6 months , with follow -up interv iews conducted at 3 months and 6  months  after 
the baseline visit.  
 
 
F. Assessment of Subject Safety and Development of a Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
1. Definition of Serious Adverse Event (SAE) and Adverse Event (AE) for this study : 
Although none are anticipated, d uring the course of a research study, unanticipated 
problems involving risk to subjects or others, non -compliances, and other events may 
occur that need to be reported to the IRB in accordance with 45 CFR.46.103(b)(5) and 
21 CFR 56.108(b). We will follow t he Tufts IRB Reportable New Information Policy . For 
this study, the i ntervention consists of patients and care  partners receiving access to 
and viewing a decision -aid program that contains educational material about chronic 
kidney disease and treatment options. Receipt of access to this program and use of the 
program is intended to better inform patient of their options and prompt patients to 
raise questions with physicians about their future treatment options. The decision -aid 
should not interfere in an y way with the patient -provider relationship. The decision -aid is 
not intended to influence the treatment options that patients select. Whether the patient 
has a medical event (e.g. dialysis initiation) is not an adverse event related to the study. 
Therefo re, although we will collect data related to treatment choices, the intervention 
does not directly impact these choices, and therefore this study does not require a data 
safety plan.  
 
2. Reporting timeframe for SAEs and AEs: n/a 
3. Accountability procedures as t hey relate to dr ugs, devices, and data: n/a 
 
 
G. Subject Participation  
 
1. Recruitment : The study  coordinator  or Co -Investigator Dr. Dan Weiner  will use medical records 
to identify potentially eligible participants  from Tufts Medical Center  based on the clinical and 
demographic data described above . The Co -Investigator  at St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center, Dr. 
Vaidyanathapuram Balakrishnan , will use medical records and the clinic list to identify 
eligible participants from St. Elizabeth’s Medic al Center .  The coordinator and/or PI/Co -I (Dr. 
Keren Ladin or Dr. Dan Weiner) will reach out to the clinician to inform them that their patient 
may be eligible  for Tufts Medical Center participants . At St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center, eligible 
 
Page 6 of 11 
 subjects wil l first be contacted by Dr. Balakrishnan to assess interest in study participation and obtain 
their  permission to be contacted further about the study  by Tufts research staff .  He will oversee the 
consent process at SEMC. the clinician will approach the patient in the clinic, or the study 
coordinator /trained research staff,  will approach the patient in the waiting room,  at either Tufts Medical 
Center or St.  Elizabeth’s Medical Center, to assess their interest in learning more about the study  
and give them a flyer advertising the study.  The study coordinator  or trained study staff  from 
Tufts University will consent interested participants a quiet, private space at the clinic at either 
Tufts Medical Center or St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center  (with the SEMC PI i n the latter case)   In 
addition, t he study coordinator or trained study staff from Tufts University will send a 
recruitment /opt -out letter to potentially eligible patients identified as described above , 
followed by a phone call 1 week later . The SEMC PI will send a recruitment/opt -out letter to 
eligible SEMC patients and follow -up with a phone call 1 week later. A flyer advertising the 
study wi ll also be posted in the clinic  at Tufts Medical Center and St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center  
to allow i nterested patients to contact the PI or study coordinator to learn more about the 
study.  If interested, the coordinator or trained study staff from Tufts University will initiate the 
consent process, either in person or by phone followed by in -person.   
 
Please note that additional trained research staff that will have a study role at both Tufts 
Medical Center and St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center have not yet been identified. They will be 
added to the study protocol once identified through an amendment.  
 
Alternative strategies will include the Tufts CTSI to query the Tufts MC EHR for individuals age 70+, eGFR 
between 10 and 30, and a relationship with an outpatient provider affiliated with Tufts Medical 
Center.  Using this list, coordinators will further sc reen for eligibility, including use of the kidney risk failure 
equation and evaluate notes for patient awareness of their chronic kidney disease.   If aware of kidney 
disease and eligible, opt -out letters  (Appendix 2)  will be sent to participants followed b y a phone call 1 
weeks later.  
 
Patients will be asked to identify a primary caregiver/care partner with whom they discuss important 
matters and who would be most likely to make a decision for them in the case that they could not decide or 
communicate their  wishes. The term caregiver  does  not imply  that the patient requires  immediate  for 
fulltime  care, but  rather refers  to the individual  most  likely  to participate  in decision -making  and assistance  
with  daily  living. If the primary caregiver is accompanying the patient, the caregiver will also be approached 
after the patient has consented. The study will be explained to the caregiver, and the caregiver will be given 
the opportunity to consent to the study . If a caregiver is not accompanying the patient, we wi ll ask the 
patient to identify a  primary caregiver and for the caregiver’s contact information. A recruitment/opt -out 
letter will be sent to the caregiver, followed by a phone call 1 week later , to ask if s/he is interested in 
enrolling and to schedule a time for him/her to come into the clinic to consent for the study if interested.  
 
 A patient does not need a caregiver to participate in the study.  
The recruitment/opt -out letter (patient and caregiver), scripts for phone calls, and flyer are attached to 
this application.  
 
 
 
2. Registration : Patient and caregiver participant who have consented will be given unique 
identifiers after randomization. Patient -caregiver  pairs  (dyads) will  receive  either  DART  or usual  care,  
 
Page 7 of 11 
 with  randomization  blocked  by study  site using  blocks  of randomly  varying  size using RedCap. 
Nephrologists will become aware of the randomization outcomes  immediately prior to the clinic visit, as 
patients will bring with them a printed copy of their preferences and questions about treatment (an 
outcome of the DART).  The unique participant identifiers will be used on all materials and survey forms 
following randomization.  
 
At the baseline  visit,  following  consent  and randomization,  patients randomized  to DART  will receive  usual care  plus 
an email  with  a unique  link to DART. During  the baseline  visit after  completion  of baseline  surveys,  a research  team 
member  will guide  patients  and caregivers  randomized  to DART  on how  to access  and navigate  DART  on a tablet  or 
desktop  and how  to print  question  prompts  to facilitate  discussions  with  their  clinical  team. This  training  will take 
approximately  15 minutes.  To increase  generalizability,  we accommodate  participants  who  do not currently  have  
internet access  by using  web -enabled  tablet set -up in a quiet,  private  room  at the clinic  to access  DART.   Participants  
will receive  a phone  number to reach  research  team members  for questions.  
 
 
3. Screening Interview/questionnaire :A screening script will not be used. The scales and 
questionnaires are provided as Appendix 1.  
 
We will not be audio or video recording the survey instruments.  
 
 
 
Construct   
Measure   Month   
  0 3 6 
Patient  Assessments  
Decisional Capacity  Decisional Conflict Scale  x x* x 
Advanced  Care  Planning  Completion  of Advanced  Directive  x x* x 
Health  related  quality  of life KDQOL -36 x x  
Cognitive  Function  Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  x   
Patient  and Caregiver  Assessments  
Concordance  Goals  of Care  Document   x*  
Satisfaction  with Care  CANHELP Lite  Questionnaire  x x*  
Satisfaction  with Life Satisfaction  with Life Scale  x x x 
Depression  CESD -R x  x 
Anxiety  Hospital Anxiety  and Depression  Scale  † x  x 
Caregiver  Assessments  
Caregiver  Burden  Caregiver  Burden  Scale  x x* x 
 
 
4. Transportation : Interviews and surveys will be administered during regular clinical visits. 
In the case that a patient or caregiver prefer to complete the survey outside the clinic at our 
research lab at 574 Boston Avenue in Medford, we will provide a $5 transportation st ipend 
and free parking.  
 
5. Informed consent process and timing of obtaining of consent : All eligible patients 
from Tufts Medical Center  identified as described above will be approached by the study 
coordinator and/or trained research staff from Tufts Univer sity and will be asked if they 
would like to learn more about the study. The SEMC PI, Dr. Balakrishnan, will make first 
contact with  eligible patients from SEMC. The study coordinator  and/or trained research 
staff from Tufts University  will then describe t he study, and walk through the informed 
consent form with the patient and caregiver. The SEMC PI and Tufts research staff will 
approach eligible, interested patients for consent at St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center. If 
interested, patients and caregivers will  sign the informed consent and will be able to 
participate in the trial. Informed consent will take place in a quiet, private area in the clinic.  
We are currently submitting  Agency/Contract Staff Action Form s for the PI (Dr. Keren Ladin) 
and study coordina tor (Dr. Renuka Pandya) to Stacia Russell  at St. Elizabeth Center’s  Human 
 
Page 8 of 11 
 Resources department to obtain permission to enter St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center. 
Additional  Agency/Contract Staff Action Forms will be submitted for each Tufts University 
study sta ff once they are identified.  
 
If a caregiver is not accompanying the patient, we will ask the patient to identify a primary 
caregiver and for the caregiver’s contact information. A recruitment/opt -out letter will be sent 
to the caregiver, followed by a phone call 1 week later, to ask i f s/he is interested in enrolling 
and to schedule a time for him/her to come into the clinic to consent for the study if interested.  
 
 A patient does not need a caregiver to participate in the study.  
 
 
a. If non -English speaking persons will be enrolled, state the i nformed consent 
process for enrolling the  subjects , including who will conduct the consent 
interview, use of interpreters, translated documents, etc. : n/a 
 
(NOTE: Exclusion of non -English speaking subjects from research requires ethical 
and scie ntific justification. This justification must be stated elsewhere in the 
protocol .) 
 
6. Location where s tudy will be perform ed: The study will be performed at Tufts Medical 
Center, Nephrology Department and at St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center Nephrology 
Department.   
 
7. Personnel  who will conduct the study, including : 
a. Present during study procedure(s) and t heir proximity during the study :  
Keren Ladin, PhD, PI  
Daniel Weiner, MD, MS, Co -I at Tufts Medical Center  
Renuka Pandya, PhD, Coordinator  
Vaidyanathapura m Balakrishnan, Co -I at St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center  
 
b. Primary responsibility for the following activities :  
 
i. Obtaining informed consent : Renuka Pandya, Keren Ladin , Vaidyanathapuram 
Balakrishnan (at St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center)  
 
ii. Providing on -going information to the study sponsor and the IRB : Keren 
Ladin, Renuka Pandya  
 
iii. Maintaining  participant's research records : Keren Ladin ; Renuka Pandya ; Daniel 
Weiner  (at Tufts Medic al Center); Vaidyanathapuram Balakrishnan  (at St. Elizabeth’s 
Medical Center)  
 
8. Subject fees : Keren Ladin  
 
9. Study results : Keren Ladin . Study results will not be given to subjects unless necessary . 
 
10. Procedures to protect subject confidentiality : Keren Ladin  
 
11. Confidentiality : Keren Ladin, Renuka Pandya, Daniel Weiner , Vaidyanathapuram 
Balakrishnan  
 
a. Certificate of Confidentiality : n/a 
 
Page 9 of 11 
  
b. How data will be coded, recorded, and stored to protect confidentiality : All 
patient information will be de -identified using generated patient ID numbers. A file 
linking IDs and patient names will be password protected, and stored on an 
encrypted drive at the REACH Lab in Medford. This file will not contain any other data 
about patients.  
 
Paper surveys will be administered by tr ained research assistants. These will be 
stored securely in the REACH Lab in a locked file cabinet. The REACH Lab is keycard 
protected and is in a building with security personnel at the front desk. Surveys will 
coded into a de -identified database using RE DCap. The file will be saved on the 
Research Drive at Tufts University, which is maintained by TSS. It is a secure and 
encrypted drive that is backed up daily.  
 
Medical record data drawn from medical charts will be gathered using the patient 
name, however  when recorded, it will use only the patient’s  unique ID. This data will 
be input into the REDCap database  and stored securely on the encrypted Research 
drive maintained by TTS . The SEMC PI, Dr. Balakrishnan, will gather medical record 
data on SEMC partici pants and enter this information directly into the REDCap 
database.  
 
c. Parties who will have access to the date, includi ng the key to the identity 
code: Keren Ladin, Daniel Weiner, Renuka Pandya , Vaidyanathapuram Balakrishnan  
 
d. Parties who will have access to  research records : Keren Ladin, Daniel Weiner, 
Renuka Pandya , Vaidyanathapuram Balakrishnan  
  
12. Collaboration :  We will not share data from Tufts Medical Center to St. Elizabeth’s Medical 
Center.  
 
Overview of research team roles at St. Elizabeth’s Medical C enter:  
 
Name  Institutional Affiliation  Role 
Keren Ladin  Tufts University  Recruit ment of  participants,  
obtaining informed consent,  
enrolling subjects, analysis 
of de-identified or 
identifiable data, interaction 
with participants, present 
during study procedures, 
preparation of study results, 
maintaining participant’s 
research records  
Renuka Pandya  Tufts University  Recruitment of participants,  
obtaining informed consent, 
enrolling subjects, analysis 
of de-identified or 
identifiable data, interaction 
with participants, present 
during study procedures, 
preparation of study results, 
maintaining participant’s 
research records  
Vaidyanathapuram St. Elizabeth’s Medical Recruitment of participants, 
 
Page 10 of 11 
 Balakrishnan  Center  obtaining informed consent, 
enrolling subjects, analysis 
of de-identified or 
identifiable data, interaction 
with participants, present 
during study procedures, 
preparation of study result s, 
maintaining participant’s 
research records  
   
 
Please note that additional trained research staff that will have a study role at both Tufts 
Medical Center and St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center have not yet been identified.  They will be 
added to the study  protocol once identified through an amendment.  
 
13. Alternatives :      Patients who choose not to participate in this study  will receive usual 
care for chronic kidney disease from their nephrologist.  
 
 
Successful  recruitment  is the major challenge  of all clinical  trials, although  the sample  in this 
pilot  does  not pose  a significant  challenge  based  on current population  estimates  of potentially  eligible  
participants  using  local  electronic  health  records. Recruitment  barriers  will be overcome  by several  
approaches  including: 1)  personal  outreach  from  treating  physicians;  2) information  sessions  and 
individual  meetings  with  clinic  staff at  participating  clinics; and  3) written  communication  and follow -up 
telephone  calls.  Recruitment strategies  are designed  to minimize  respondent  burden. Should  
recruitment be  below target, alternative  strategies  described  below  will be implemented  within  3 
months  of starting  recruitment .  
 
14. How new information will be conveyed to the study subjec t and how it will be 
documented : New information will not be conveyed to study subjects.  
 
15. Payment, includ ing a prorated plan for payment : Participants  (each patient and 
caregiver in both study groups)  will be offered a $25 gift card after completing the first visit, and 
an additional $15 gift card for each of  the subsequent two follow -up visits , for a total of $55 for 
completing the entire study . In the case that a patient or caregiver prefer s to complete the 
survey outside the clinic at our research lab at 574 Boston Avenue in Medford, we  will 
provide a $5 gift card as a transportation stipend. We will use a participant payment log 
(attached in this amendment) to keep track of gift card disbursement. Participants will fill in the 
top half of the form (name, social security number, and addr ess) after providing informed 
consent. The remainder of the form (gift card amount, date gift card distributed, and participant 
signature) will be completed after the participant receives the gift card.   
 
 
16. Paymen t for a research -related injury : none 
 
I. Outc ome: This is a pilot study, and as such, our main outcomes are feasibility of the study 
design and recruitment, and usability of the intervention. Nonetheless, we estimate that 
patients who will be exposed to DART will be more likely to complete advance care plans, they 
will be more satisfied with their decisions and better informed of their treatment options. We 
also hypothesize that their caregivers will be more likely to know patients’ preferences for care.  
  
J. Tissue banking considerations : none 
 
 
Page 11 of 11 
 VULNER ABLE POPULATIONS : Not recruiting children, prisoners, pregnant women, or persons with 
dementia, all of whom would be ineligible to participate.  
 