Page 1 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)                                                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cardiometabolic Effects of Pecans as a Snack  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
September 19,20 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                 
 
 
HRP -591 - Protocol for   
Page 2 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Human Subject  Research  
 
Protocol Title:  
Provide the full title of the study as listed in item 1 on the “Basic Information ” page in CATS IRB (http://irb.psu.edu ).  
Cardiometabolic effects of including pecans as a snack to improve diet quality: a randomized controlled study  
 
Principal Investigator:  
Name:  Kristina Petersen  
Department:  Nutritional Sciences  
Telephone:  814-865-7206  
E-mail Address:  kup63 @psu.edu  
 
Version Date:  
Provide a version date for this document . This date must be updated each time this document is submitted to the IRB 
office with revisions.  DO NOT revise the version date in the footer of this document.  
  September 19,2023  
Clinicaltrials.gov Registration # : 
Provide the registration number for this study , if applicable . See “HRP-103- Investigator Manual ”, under 
“ClinicalTrials.gov ” for more information.  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Important Instructions for Using This Protocol Template:  
This template is provided to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes the necessary information needed by the 
IRB to determine whether a study meets all applicable criteria for approval.  
 
1. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS:   
• Prior to completing this protocol, e nsure that you are using the  most recent version by verifying the protocol 
template version date in the footer of this document with the current version provided in the CATS IRB 
Library.  
• Do not change the protocol template version date located in the footer of this document.  
• Some of the items may not be applicable to all types of research.  If an item is not applicable, please indicate 
as such  or skip question(s) if indicated in any of the instructional text .  
• GRAY INSTRUCTION AL BOXES: Type your protocol responses below  the gray instructional boxes of guidance 
language.  If the section or item is not applicable, indicate not applicable.  
o Do NOT delete the instructional boxes from the final version of the protocol.  
• Add the completed protoc ol template to your study in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ) on the “Basic 
Information” page.   
 
2. CATS IRB LIBRARY:   
• Documents referenced in this protocol template (e.g. SOP’s, Worksheets, Checklists, and Templates) can be 
accessed by clicking the Library link in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ). 
 
3. PROTOCOL REVISIONS :  
• When making revisions to this protocol as requested by the IRB, please follow the instructions outlined in 
the guides  available in the Help Center in CATS IRB (http://irb.psu.edu ) for using track changes.  
• Update the Version Date on page 1  each time this document is submitted to the IRB office with revisions . 
 
If you need help…  
 
All locations:  
Human Research Protection Program  
Office for Research Protections  
Page 3 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  The 330 Building, Suite 205  
University Park, PA 16802 -7014  
Phone: 814 -865-1775  
Fax: 814 -863-8699  
Email:  irb-orp@psu.edu  
https://www.research.psu.edu/irb  
  
Page 4 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Table of Contents  
1.0 Objectives  
2.0 Background  
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
4.0 Recruitment Methods  
5.0 Consent Process and Documentation  
6.0 HIPAA Research Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization  
7.0 Study Design and Procedures  
8.0 Number of Subjects and Statistical Plan  
9.0 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
10.0  Risks  
11.0  Potential Benefits to Subjects and Others  
12.0  Sharing Results with Subjects  
13.0  Subject Payment and/or Travel Reimbursements  
14.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  
15.0  Resources Available  
16.0  Other Approvals  
17.0  Multi -Site Study  
18.0  Adverse Event Reporting  
19.0  Study Monitoring, Auditing and Inspecting  
20.0  Future Undetermined Research: Data and Specimen Banking  
21.0  References  
22.0  Confidentiality, Privacy and Data Management  
 
  
Page 5 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  1.0 Objectives  
 
1.1 Study Objectives  
Describe the purpose, specific aims or objectives.  State the hypotheses to be tested.  
 
The purpose of the proposed study is to examine how replacement of habitually consumed snack foods 
in the U.S. with 2 oz./day of pecans affects markers of peripheral vascular health, lipids and lipoproteins,  
blood pressure, and glycemic control compared to usual U.S. intake.  
 
The aims of the study are as follows:  
1) To evaluate whether consuming 2 oz/day of pecans  as a snack  improves flow mediated dilation 
compared with habitual intake  in individuals at elevated risk for cardiovascular disease ; 
2 To assess changes in pulse wave velocity , lipids and lipoproteins (concentration, particle size and 
number), blood pressure (central and peripheral) and glycemic control  in each group.  
 
Hypothesis:  
It is hypothesized that replacement of typical snack foods with 2 oz./day of pecans will improve 
peripheral vascular assessments, lipid and lipoprotein profile and glycemic control compared to  habitual  
average American intake.  
 
1.2 Primary Study Endpoints  
State the primary endpoints to be measured in the study.   
 
Clinical trials typically have a primary objective or endpoint. Additional objectives and endpoints are 
secondary.  The endpoints (or outcomes), determined for each study subject, are the quantitative 
measurements required by the objectives.  Measuring the selected endpoints is the goal of a trial 
(examples: response rate and survival).  
 
Flow Mediated Dilation  (FMD)  
 
1.3 Secondary Study Endpoints  
State the secondary endpoints to be measured in the study.  
 
Lipids and Lipoproteins (total cholesterol, LDL -cholesterol, HDL -cholesterol, triglycerides ) 
Lipoprotein particle size and number (LDL -cholesterol, HDL -cholesterol, VLDL and chylomicrons)  
Pulse Wave Velocity  (PWV)  
Peripheral and Central Blood Pressure  
Insulin , HbA1c  and Fasting Glucose  
Dietary intake of macronutrients, nutrients, and food groups  
Diet Quality   
Gut Microbio ta composition  
 
2.0 Background   
 
2.1 Scientific Background and Gaps  
Describe the scientific background and gaps in current knowledge.   
 
For clinical research studies being conducted at Penn State Health/Penn State College of Medicine , and 
for other non -PSH locations as applicable, describe the treatment/procedure that is considered standard 
Page 6 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  of care (i.e., indicate how patients would be tre ated in non -investigational setting); and if applicable, 
indicate if the study procedure is available to patient without taking part in the study.  
 
Current Dietary Guidelines for general health and prevention of chronic disease recommend a healthy 
dietary pattern U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2016) . In the U.S., habitual dietary 
patterns do not align with recommended health dietary patterns. Further, diet quality is suboptimal and 
thus strategies are needed to improve overall diet quality.  The proposed trial aims to examine the 
cardiometabolic effects of pecans, when replacing a habitual snack. This trial will test the hypothesis that 
dietary incorporation of pecans to replace typic al U.S. snack foods will improve diet quality  and confer 
cardiometabolic benefits.  
 
Pecans have the highest polyphenol content of any nut containing 1816 mg/100g (Ros, 2015) . A significant 
proportion of the  polyphenol content is flavanols (494 mg/100g), which are present in higher quantities 
than dark chocolate (246 mg/100g), blueberries (332 mg/100g) and red wine (313 mg/100g) (Gu et al., 
2004) . A meta -analysis of 11 studies showed that flow mediated dilation (FMD), a measure of endothelial 
function, increased by 1.34% after 2 -18 weeks of consuming chocolate/cocoa/flavanols (Hooper et al., 
2012) . This change in FMD is clinically significant; for every 1% increase in FMD, the risk of CVD is reduced 
by 12% (Matsuzawa, Kwon, Lennon, Lerman, & Lerman, 2015) . Furthermore, Balzer et al. showed flavanol 
rich cocoa containing 371 mg or 963 mg of flavanols improved FMD for 2 to 3 hours after consumption; 
consumption of 963 mg of cocoa flavonols for 30 days increased FMD by ~30% (Balzer et al., 2008) . In the 
proposed study, the subjects wi ll consume approximately 212 mg of flavanols (781 mg total polyphenols) 
from pecans as part of the healthy dietary pattern. Therefore, based on previous studies of phenolic rich 
foods, we hypothesize that the polyphenols in pecans will act on the vasculatu re to improve endothelial 
function.  
Nuts, including walnuts, almonds, hazelnuts, pistachios and peanuts, improve endothelial function (Casas -
Agustench, Lopez -Uriarte, Ros, Bullo, & Salas -Salvado, 2011; Neale, Tapsell, Guan, & Batterham, 2017) , 
lipids and lipoproteins (Del Gobbo, Falk, Feldman, Lewis, & Mozaffarian, 2015) , and glycemic control 
(Tindall, Johnston, Kris -Etherton, & Petersen, 2019; Viguiliouk et al., 2014) . Previous studies have not 
investigated the effect of pecans on endothelial function. Three studies have shown that pecans tended 
to reduce total and LDL -cholesterol when consumed for 4 or 8 weeks, compared to a control diet without 
nuts (McKay, Eliasziw, Chen, & Blumberg, 2018; Morgan & Clayshulte, 2000; Rajaram, Burke, Connell, 
Myint, & Sabaté, 2001) , which  would be expected to improve vascular health. Furthermore, Hudthagosol 
et al. showed that 90 g of whole pecans or 90 g of blended pecans increased postprandial plasma levels 
of phenolic acid and flavanols, increased antioxidant capacity and decreased LDL -cholesterol oxidation, 
compared to an isocaloric macronutrient matched meal (Hudthagosol et al., 2011) . In this study, vascular 
health was not measured. However, based on the increase in total plasma phenolic acid an d flavanols is 
it likely that endothelial function would have been greater (improved) after consumption of the pecan -
containing meals compared with the control meal.  
Previous work from our lab has shown that foods rich in phenolic compounds exert health e ffects beyond 
those expected based on the macronutrient profile. For example, in a randomized, crossover controlled 
feeding study, a moderate fat diet ( 34% fat, 6% SFA, 17% MUFA, 9% PUFA, 49% CHO, 16% PRO) containing 
one-avocado per day lowered atherogenic  lipids and lipoproteins more than a matched moderate fat diet 
without avocado (Wang, Bordi, Fleming, Hill, & Kris‐Etherton, 2015) . Specifically, the moderate fat diet 
containing one -avocado per day lower ed LDL -cholesterol and non -HDL cholesterol (−13.5 mg/dL , −14.6 
mg/dL), relative to baseline and to a greater extent ( P<0.05) than the matched moderate fat diet devoid 
of avocado (−8.3 mg/dL, −8.7 mg/dL) and a low fat (LF; −7.4 mg/dL, −4.8 mg/dL) control diet. The greater 
improvements in lipids and lipoproteins with the moderate -fat diet containing avocado vs. the matched 
moderate -fat diet without avocado suggests beneficial effects beyond the fatty acid profile of the 
avocado; it is hypothesized t hat the bioactive compounds and the fiber content of avocados may explain 
the results of this  previous  study.  
Page 7 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Similarly, in a randomized, crossover controlled feeding study comparing a heart healthy diet with walnuts 
to a fatty acid matched diet devoid of walnuts, and a diet lower in alpha -linoleic acid (ALA) and 
proportionately higher in oleic acid, we observed greater total cholesterol and LDL -cholesterol lowering 
(unpublished)  and a greater reduction in aortic diastolic blood pressure (A. M. Tindall et al., 2019)  with 
the walnut containing heart healthy diet vs. the low ALA diet; no difference was detected between the 
walnut containing diet and the fatty acid matched diet devoid of walnuts, and the fatty acid matched diet 
devoid of walnuts and the low ALA diet. Th is suggests that the fatty acid component of walnuts may not 
explain the full effect  that we  observed.  
Based on these studies, we hypothesize that greater improvements in risk factors for cardiometabolic 
disease will be observed with incorporation of peca n into and average American diets vs. the typical U.S . 
diet. This research aligns with the current focus on food -based recommendations, by authoritative 
organizations, because of the inherent limitations associated with nutrient -focused recommendations. 
Furthermore, evidence generated may be used to support food -based recommendations for pecans, and 
since 2 oz/day ( 14 oz-eq/week) of pecans will be provided , the finding s may be used to support higher 
intake recommendations for  nuts, specifically pecans . The 20 20-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans  
recommends  (5 oz. -eq/week of nuts, seeds and soy at 2000 kcal).  
 
2.2 Previous Data  
Describe any relevant preliminary data.  
 
Previous work from our lab has shown that foods rich in phenolic compounds exert health effects beyond 
those expected based on the macronutrient profile  (Wang et al., 2015) . In another  randomized, crossover 
controlled feeding study comparing a heart healthy diet with walnuts to a fatty acid matched diet devoid 
of walnuts, and a diet lower in alpha -linoleic acid (ALA) and proportionately hig her in oleic acid, we 
observed greater total cholesterol and LDL -cholesterol lowering and a greater reduction in aortic diastolic 
blood pressure (A. M. Tindall et al., 2019)  with the walnut containing heart healthy diet vs. the low ALA 
diet; no difference was detected between the walnut containing diet and the fatty acid matched diet 
devoid of walnuts, and the fatty acid matched diet devoid of walnuts and the low ALA diet. This suggests 
that the fatty acid component of walnuts may not explain the full effect that we observed.  
A significant proportion of the polyphenol content is flavanols (494 mg/100g), which are present in  pecans 
in higher quantities than dark chocolate (246 mg/100g), blueberries (332 mg/100g) and red wine (313 
mg/100g) (Gu et al., 2004) . A meta -analysis  of 11 studies showed that flow mediated dilation (FMD), a 
measure of endothelial function, increased by 1.34% after 2 -18 weeks of consuming 
chocolate/cocoa/flavanols (Hooper et al., 2012) . 
Based on these studies, we hypothesize that greater improvements in risk factors for cardiometabolic 
disease will be detecte d following consumption of the average American diet with pecans v ersus  typical 
US dietary intake.  
 
2.3 Study Rationale  
Provide the scientific rationale for the research.  
 
A study with this design would provide the first empirical evidence to directly support the inclusion of 
pecans in a recommended healthy dietary pattern.  In addition to providing evidence about the 
cardiometabolic effects of using pecans to improve the diet quality of an average American diet, this 
study will provide a feasible food -based approach that may be used to lower CVD risk.  
 
Approximately, 50% of Americans are at risk for CVD (29) and therefore, the findings from this study will 
be of direct relevance to many Americans. Specifically, the results will be of interest to individu als who 
are managing their elevated CVD risk with lifestyle strategies and pharmacotherapy; this study will test 
another lifestyle strategy that can be implemented to lower CVD risk.  
Page 8 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  The findings of this trial utilizing a non -pharmaceutical approach will be applicable to overweight and 
obese adults living with one or more symptoms of metabolic syndrome  and are therefore at increased 
risk of cardiovascular disease  in the US, and thus wi ll be of substantial public interest.  
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Create a numbered list below in sections 3.1 and 3.2 of criteria subjects must meet to be eligible for study 
enrollment (e.g., age, gender, diagnosis, etc.).  
 
Vulnerable Populations:  
 
Indicate specifically whether you will include any of the following vul nerable populations in this research. You 
MAY NOT include members of these populations as subjects in your research unless you indicate this in your 
inclusion criteria because s pecific regulations apply to studies that involve  vulnerable populations.   
 
The checklists referenced below outline the determinations to be made by the IRB when reviewing research 
involving these populations. Review the checklists as these will help to inform your responses throughout the 
remainder of the protocol . 
 
• Children –Review “HRP -416- Checklist - Children”  
• Pregnant Women – Review  “HRP -412- Checklist - Pregnant Wom en” 
• Cognitively Impaired Adults - Review “HRP -417- Checklist - Cognitively Impaired Adults ”  
• Prisoners - Review  “HRP -415- Checklist - Prisoners ” 
• Neonates of uncertain viability or non -viable neonates - Review  “HRP -413- Checklist - Non-Viable 
Neonates” or “HRP -414- Checklist - Neonates of Uncertain Viability ” 
[Do not type here]  
 
3.1 Inclusion Criteria  
Create a numbered list of the inclusion criteria that define who will be included in your final study 
sample (e.g. , age, gender, condition, etc .)  
 
1) 25-70 years of age  
2) BMI 25 -40 kg/m2 
3) ≥ 1 criterion for metabolic syndrome  (i.e., waist circumference ≥ 94 cm men or ≥  80 cm women; 
triglycerides ≥150 mg/dL; HDL -cholesterol ≤ 40 mg/dL men or ≤  50 mg/dL women; systolic blood 
pressure ≥130 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure ≥85 mmHg; fast ing plasma glucose ≥100 mg/dL) at 
screening.  
 
 
 
 
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
Create a numbered list of the exclusion criteria that define who will be excluded in your study.  
 
1) Current use of tobacco -containing products or (≤6 months) cessation   
2) Allergy/sensitivity/intolerance/dislike of study foods  
3) Women who are pregnant, lactating, planning to become pregnant or have given birth in the 
past year  
Page 9 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  4) Individuals who have had a cardiovascular event (heart attack, revascularization, stroke), or 
have a history of heart failure, liver, kidney, autoimmune diseases or inflammatory conditions 
such as gastrointestinal disorders or rheumatoid arthritis.  
5) Type 1 or type 2 diabetes  
6) Unstable weight  ≥10% body weight for 6 months prior to enrollment  
7) Systolic b lood pressure >160 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure >100 mmHg  at screening  
8) Fasting blood glucose ≥126 mg/dL at screening  
9) Triglycerides ≥350 mg/dL at screening  
10) Taking any medications known to affect lipids, blood pressure, or blood glucose  levels  
11) Diagno sed inflammatory conditions  or taking prescribed anti-inflammatory medications   
12) Use of antibiotics with in the prior 8 weeks  
13) Taking supplements (e.g., psyllium, fish oil, soy lecithin, and phytoestrogens) and botanicals 
known to affect study outcomes and no t willing to cease for the duration of the study  
14) Individuals consuming >14 alcoholic drinks/week, and not willing to avoid alcohol consumption 
for 48 hour s prior to test visit  
15) Pre-menopausal women who do not have a regular menstrual cycle of 25 -35 days  
16) PI discretion  
 
3.3 Early Withdrawal of Subjects  
3.3.1 Criteria for removal from study  
Insert subject withdrawal criteria (e.g., safety reasons, failure of subject to adhere to protocol 
requirements, subject consent withdrawal, disease progression, etc.).  
 
Failure to comply with study procedures.   
Participant withdraws consent.  
 
3.3.2 Follow -up for withdrawn subjects  
Describe  when and how to withdraw subjects from the study; the type and timing of the data to 
be collected for withdrawal of subjects; whether and how subjects are to be replaced; the 
follow -up for subjects withdrawn from investigational treatment . 
 
 
No safety concerns; no reason for follow -up. If consent is withdrawn no data from the 
participant will be used. Otherwise, if consent is not  withdrawn, data from individuals who 
withdraw from the study may be used in an intent -to-treat analysis but another individual will 
be enrolled  for each participant who drops out  to ensure that an adequate sample size (with 
complete data) is reached.  
4.0 Recr uitment Methods  
▪ Upload recruitment materials for your study in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ).  DO NOT  include the actual 
recruitment  wording  in this protocol.   
▪ StudyFinder:  If StudyFinder ( http://studyfinder.psu.edu ) is to be used for recruitment purposes, separate 
recruitment documents do not need to be uploaded in CATS IRB . The necessary information will be captured 
from the StudyFinder page in your  CATS IRB study.    
▪ Any eligibility screening questions (verbal/phone scripts, email, etc.) used when contacting potential 
participants must be uploaded  to your study in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ). 
[Do not type here]  
 
Page 10 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  4.1 Identification of s ubjects  
Describe  the source of subjects and the methods that will be used to identify potential subjects  (e.g., 
organizational listservs, established recruitment databases, subject pools, medical or school records, 
interactions du ring a clinic visit, etc.).    If not recruiting subjects directly (e.g., database query for eligible 
records or samples) state what will be queried, how and by whom.  
 
StudyFinder :   
o If you intend to use S tudyFinder  (http://studyfinder.psu.edu ) for recruitment purposes, include this 
method in this  section .  
o Information provided in this protocol needs to be  consistent with information provided on the 
StudyFinder  page in your CATS IRB study.  
 
For Penn State Health  submissions using Enterprise Information Management (EIM) for recruitment, and 
for non -Hershey locations as applicable, attach your EIM Design Specification form on in CATS IRB 
(http://irb.psu.edu ). See “HRP-103- Investigator Manual, What is appropriate for study recruitment?” 
for additional information.  DO NOT  include the actual recruitment material or wording in this protocol.  
 
Flyer/posters will be placed in campus bu ildings and facilities as well as the surrounding area (gyms, 
churches, supermarkets, coffee shops, offices of health care providers etc.) to identify potential subjects 
residing in and around the State College. Ads will also be placed in the local papers,  magazines (e.g ., 
Centre Daily Times) and coupon mailers (e.g. Valpak), which are distributed to residential homes. In 
addition, radio ads will be run. Websites (e.g. http://clinicaltrials.gov/, Facebook, Craig's List, 
StudyFinder), and PSU listservs will be used to advert ise the study.  We will register for and utilize PALS 
database to contact participants as well.  We also will contact individuals who have participated in 
previous studies and indicated to our research group that they are interested in participating in futur e 
studies. A letter to local businesses or organization may be utilized requesting they share study details 
with their members/employees if permitted.  
 
4.2 Recruitment process  
Describe how potential subjects first learn about this research opportunity  or indicate as not applicable  
if subjects will not be prospectively recruited to participant in the research .  Subject recruitment can 
involve various methods (e.g. , approaching potential subjects in person, contacting potential subjects via 
email, letters, telephone, ResearchMatch, or advertising to a general public via flyers, websites, 
StudyFinder, newspaper, television, and radio etc.).  DO NOT  include the actual recruitment material or 
wording in this protocol.  
[Do not type here]  
 
4.2.1 How potential subjects will be recruited.  
Public advertisements (flyers/posters/ newspaper ads/circulars/ websites and social media/ 
radio/listservs) in the local community (State College / University Park area)  
A letter to local businesses or organizations requesting they share study details with their 
members/employees e.g. gyms, health clubs, social organizations, businesses located downtown 
or in the surrounding area.   
StudyFinder  
Telephone or email will be used to contact individuals who have participated in previous studies 
and indicated to our research group that they are interested in participating in future studies  
People who are in the PALS database will be contacted using the verbiage in document 
PALS_Statement.doc(0.01)   
4.2.2 Where potential subjects will be recruited.  
University Park and State College PA and surroun ding areas.   
Page 11 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  4.2.3 When potential subjects will be recruited.  
As soon as the protocol is IRB approved , recruitment will commence and continue until the 
target sample size is enrolled.   
 
4.2.4 Describe the eligibility screening process and indicate whether the screen ing process will 
occur before or after obtaining informed consent . Screening begins when the investigator 
obtains information about or from a prospective participant in order to determine their 
eligibility.  In some studies, these procedures may not take place unless HIPAA Authorization 
is obtained OR a waiver of HIPAA Authorization when applicable for the screening procedures 
is approved by the IRB.   [For FDA regulated studies, consent for any screening activities would 
need to be obtained prior to s creening unless  specifically waived by the IRB. ] 
 
Verbal screening consent will be obtained prior to the telephone screening being conducted. 
During the telephone screening a brief description of the study will be provided and the subject 
will provide v floerbal consent to answer screening questions. If th e individual agrees, some 
preliminary screening questions will be asked to establish whether the person is likely eligible 
for the study. If they are, a screening appointment will be scheduled at the Clinical Research 
Center (CRC).  At this appointment, be fore any procedures take place, written informed consent 
will be obtained.  
5.0 Consent Process and Documentation   
Refer to the following materials:  
• The “ HRP-090- SOP - Informed Consent Process for Research ” outlines the process for obtaining informed 
consent.   
• The “HRP -091– SOP - Written Documentation of Consent” describe s how  the consent  process  will be 
documented . 
• The “HRP -314- Worksheet  - Criteria for Approval”  section 7 lists the required elements of co nsent . 
• The “HRP-312- Worksheet - Exemption Determination ” includes information on requirements for the 
consent process  for exempt research.  In addition, the CATS IRB Library contains consent guidance and 
templates for exempt research.  
• The CATS IRB library contains various consent templates for expedited or full review research  that are 
designed to include the required information.  
• Add the consent document(s) to your study in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ). Links to Penn State’s consent 
templates are available in the same location where they are uploaded.  DO NOT  include the actual consent 
wording in this protocol.  
[Do not type here]  
 
5.1 Consent Process : 
Check all applicable boxes below:  
 
 Informed consent will be sought and documented with a written consent form [Complete Sections 
5.2 and 5.6]  
 
 Implied or verbal consent will be obtained – subjects will not sign a consent form  (waiver of 
written documentation of consent)  [Complete Sections  5.2, 5.3 and 5.6]  
 
  Informed consent will be sought but some of the elements of informed consent will be omitted or 
altered (e.g. , deception). [Complete section 5.2, 5.4 and 5.6]   
 
Page 12 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)   Informed consent will not be obtained – request to completely waive the informed consent 
requirement. [Complete Section 5 .5] 
 
 The following checkbox is for all locations EXCEPT Penn State Health and College of Medicine:  
 
  Exempt Research at all Locations Except Penn State Health and the College of Medicine : If you 
believe that the research activities outlined meet one or more of the criteria outlined in “HRP -312- 
Worksheet - Exemption Determination. ” Please verify by checking this box that if conducting an 
exempt research study, the consent process will disclose the following  (all of which are included in 
“HRP -590- Consent Guidance for Exempt Research ”): 
 Penn State affiliation; name and contact information for the researcher and advisor (if the 
researcher is a student); the activities involve research; the procedures to be performed; 
participation is voluntary; that there are adequate provisions to maintain the priva cy interests of 
subjects and the confidentiality of the data; and subjects may choose not to answer specific 
questions.   
 
 If the research includes the use of student educational records include the following language in 
this section  (otherwise delete) : The parent or eligible student will provide a signed and dated 
written consent that discloses : the records that may be disclosed;  the purpose of the disclosure ; the 
party or class of parties to whom the disclosure may be made ; if a par ent or adult student requests, 
the school will provide him or her with a copy of the records disclosed ; if the parent of a student 
who is not an adult so requests, the school will provide the student with a copy of the records 
disclosed.  
 
 Note: If this bo x has been checked, skip the remainder of section 5 and proceed to section 6 of th is 
protocol. If the investigator’s assessment is inaccurate, an IRB Analyst will request revision to the 
protocol and that an informed consent form be submitted for review an d approval. Except for 
exemptions where Limited IRB Review (see “HRP -312- Worksheet - Exemption Determination ”) is 
required or where otherwise requested by the IRB, informed consent forms for research activities 
determined to be exempt without Limited IRB R eview are generally not required to be submitted 
for review and approval by the University Park IRB .  
 
 
5.2 Obtaining Informed Consent   
5.2.1 Timing and Location of Consent   
Describe where and when the consent process will take place . 
 
Verbal consent will be obtained prior to the telephone screening  in a private room  at Chandlee 
Laboratory  or in a private room at the Clinical Research Center, Noll Laboratory .   
  
Informed consent will be obtained at the Clinical Research Center , Noll Laboratory in a private 
room at the screening appointment prior to any screening procedures taking place.  
5.2.2 Coercion or Undue Influence during Consent   
Describe the steps that will be taken to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence 
in the consent process.  
 
Study staff, coordinators, and investigators who are fully trained in the recruiting process will 
respond to potential participants during recruitment so as to avoid any coercion or undue 
influence.   
 
Page 13 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Participation is voluntary and participants can withdraw at a ny time . Participants will  be 
emailed a copy of the written consent form, at the time their screening appointment is 
scheduled, and be asked to read it prior to their visit. At the screening visit, a study coordinator 
will ask the participant if they had a  chance to read the consent form prior to the visit. If not, 
they will be given time to read the written consent form. A study coordinator will then go 
through the written consent form with the participant, allowing time for the participant to ask 
question s throughout.  
 
 
5.3 Waiver  of Written Documentation of Consen t  
Review “HRP – 411 – Checklist – Waiver of Written Documentation of Consent .”  
   
5.3.1 Indicate which of the following condition s applies to this research : 
  The research presents no more that minimal risk of harm to subjects and involves no 
procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context.  
OR 
  The only record linking the subject  and the research would be the consent document and the 
principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality. Each subject 
will be asked whether the subject wants documentation linking the subject with the research, 
and the subject’s wishes will govern. (Note: This condition is not applicable for FDA -regulated 
research. If this category is chosen, include copies of a consent form and /or parental 
permission form for participants who want wri tten documentation linking them to the 
research.)  
OR 
  If the subjects or legally authorized representatives are members of a distinct cultural group 
or community in which signing forms is not the norm, that the research presents no more 
than minimal  risk of harm to subjects and provided there is an appropriate alternative 
mechanism for documenting that informed consent was obtained.  (Note: This condition is not 
applicable for FDA -regulated research. )  
 
Describe the alternative mechanism for document ing that informed consent was obtained:  
 
Not applicable  
 
5.3.2 Indicate  what materials, if any, will be used to inform potential subjects about the research 
(e.g., a letter accompanying a questionnaire, verbal script , implied consent form , or summary 
explanation of the research)  
 
Verbal Script see uploaded  Verbal  Consent 6 -18-21. 
 
5.4 Informed  consent will be sought but some of the elements of informed consent will be omitted or 
altered (e.g. , deception).  
Review “ HRP-410-Checklist -Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process” to ensure that you have provided 
sufficient information.   
 
5.4.1 Indicate the elements of informed consent t o be omitted or altered  
 
Page 14 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Not applicable  
 
5.4.2 Indicate why  the research could not practicably be carried out without the omission or 
alteration of consent elements  
 
Not applicable  
 
5.4.3 Describe why the research involves no more than minimal risk to subjects.  
 
Not applicable  
 
5.4.4 Describe why the alteration/omission will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of 
subjects.  
 
Not applicable  
 
5.4.5 If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, 
describe why the research could not be practicably be carried out without using such 
information or biospecimens in an identifiable format.  
 
Not applicable  
 
5.4.6 Debriefing   
Explain whether and how subjects will be debriefed after participation in the study. If subjects 
will not be debriefed, provide a justification for not doing so.  Add any debriefing materials to 
the study in CATS IRB.  
 
Not applicable  
 
 
5.5 Informed consent will not be obtained – request to completely waive the informed consent 
requirement  
Review “ HRP-410-Checklist -Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process” to ensure that you have provided 
sufficient information.  
 
5.5.1 Indicate why  the research could not pr acticably be carried out without the waiver of consent  
 
Not applicable  
 
5.5.2 Describe why the research involves no more than minimal risk to subjects.  
 
Not applicable  
 
Page 15 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  5.5.3 Describe  why the alteration/omission will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of 
subjects.  
 
Not applicable  
 
5.5.4 If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, 
describe why the research could not be practicably be carried out without using such 
information or biospecimens in an identifiable format.  
 
Not applicable  
 
5.5.5 Additional  pertinent information after participation  
Explain if subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation. If 
not applicable, indicate “not applicable .”    
 
Not applicable  
 
  
5.6 Consent – Other Considerations  
 
5.6.1 Non -English -Speaking  Subjects  
Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by prospective subjects or 
representatives.  
 
If subjects who do not speak English will be enrolled, describe the process to ensure that the 
oral and written information provided to those subjects will be in that language. Indicate the 
language that will be used by those obtaining consent.  
 
Indicate whether the consent process will be documented in writing with the long form of the 
consent documentation or with the short form of the consent documentation.  Review “HRP-
091 –SOP- Written Documentation of Consent” and “HRP-103 -Investigator Manu al” to ensure 
that you have provided sufficient information.  
 
Prospective subjects who do not understand English will not be enrolled.  
 
5.6.2 Cognitively Impaired Adults  
Refer “HRP-417 -CHECKLIST - Cognitively Impaired Adults ” for information about research 
involving cognitively impaired adults as subjects.  
 
5.6.2.1  Capability of Providing Consent  
Describe the process to determine whether an individual is capable of consent.  
 
Not applicable  
 
5.6.2.2  Adults Unable to Consent  
Describe whether and how informed consent will be obtained from the legally 
authorized representative.  Describe who will be allowed to provide informed 
consent. Describe the process used to determine these individual’s authority to 
consent to research.  
Page 16 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)   
For resear ch conducted in the state  of Pennsylvania , review “HRP-013 -SOP- Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Children and Guardians ” to be aware of which 
individuals in the state of Pennsylvania  meet the definition of “legally authorized 
representative .” 
 
For research conducted outside of the state  of Pennsylvania , provide information 
that describes which individuals are authorized under applicable law to consent on 
behalf of a prospective subject to their participation in the procedure(s) involved in 
this rese arch.  One method of obtaining this information is to have a legal counsel or 
authority review your protocol along with the definition of “children” in  “HRP-013 -
SOP- Legally Authorized Representatives, Children, and Guardians .” 
 
Not applicable  
 
5.6.2.3  Assent  of Adults Unable to Consent  
Describe the process for assent of the subjects.  Indicate whether assent will be 
required of all, some or none of the subjects.  If some, indicate which subjects will 
be required to assent and which will not.  
 
If assent will not be obtained from some or all subjects, provide an explanation of 
why not.  
 
Describe whether assent of the subjects will be documented and the process to 
document assent.  The IRB allows the person obtaining assent to document assent 
on the consent document  and does not routinely require assent documents and 
does not routinely require subjects to sign assent documents.  
 
Not applicable  
 
5.6.3 Subjects who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)   
 
5.6.3.1  Parental Permission  
Describe whether and how parental permission will be obtained. If permission will 
be obtained from individuals other than parents, describe who will be allowed to 
provide permission.  Describe the process used to determine these individual’s 
authority to consent to each child’s ge neral medical care.  
 
For research conducted in the state  of Pennsylvania , review “HRP-013-SOP- Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Children and Guardians” to be aware of which 
individuals in the state of Pennsylvania  meet the definition of “children. ”  
 
For research conducted outside of the state  of Pennsylvania , provide information 
that describes which persons have not attained the legal age for consent to 
treatments or procedures involved in the research, under the applicable law of the 
jurisdiction in which research will be conducted.  One method of obtaining this 
information is to have a legal counsel or authority review your protocol along with 
the definition of “children” in “HRP-013-SOP- Legally Authorized Representatives, 
Children, and Guardians .” 
 
Page 17 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Not applicable  
 
5.6.3.2  Assent  of subjects who are not yet adults  
Indicate whether assent will be obtained from all, some, or none of the children. If 
assent will be obtained from some children, indic ate which children will be required 
to assent. When assent of children is obtained describe whether and how it will be 
documented.  
 
Not applicable  
 
6.0 HIPAA Research Authorization  and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization  
This section is about the  access, use or disclosure of Protected Health Information (PHI). PHI is individually 
identifiable health information (i.e., health information containing one or more 18 identifiers ) that is transmitted 
or maintained in any form or medium by a Covered Entity or its Business Associate . A Covered Entity is a health 
plan, a health care clearinghouse or health care provider who transmits health information in electronic form.  
See “HRP-103 -Investigator Manual ” for a list of the 18 identifiers.   
 
If requesting a wa iver/alteration of HIPAA authorization, complete sections 6.2  and 6.3  in addition to section 
6.1. The Privacy Rule permits waivers (or alterations) of authorization if the research  meets certain conditions. 
Include only information that will be accessed with the waiver/alteration.  
[Do not type here]  
 
6.1 Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization  for the Uses and Disclosures  of PHI  
 
Check all that apply:  
  Not applicable, no identifiable protected health information (PHI) is accessed, used or 
disclosed in this study . [Mark all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable]  
 
 Authorization will be obtained and documented as part of the consent process.  [If this is the 
only box checked, mark sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable ] 
 
 Partial waiver is requested for recruitment purposes only  (Check this box if patients’ medical 
records will be accessed to determine eligibility before consent/authorization has been 
obtained) . [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 ] 
 
 Full waiver  is requested  for entire research study  (e.g., medical record review studies ). 
[Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 ] 
 
 Alteration is request ed to waive requirement for written documentation of authorization  
(verbal authorization will be obtained).  [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 ] 
 
6.2 Waiver o r Alteration of Authorization  for the Uses and Disclosures of PHI  
 
6.2.1 Access, use or disclosure of PHI represent ing no more than a minimal risk to the privacy of the 
individual  
6.2.1.1  Plan to protect PHI from improper use or disclosure  
Include the following statement  as written – DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE 
unless this section is not applicable because the research does not involve a 
Page 18 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  waiver of authorization.  If the section is not applicable, remove  the 
statement and indicate as not applicable .  
 
Information is included in the “Confidentiality, Privacy and Data 
Management” section  of this protocol.  
 
6.2.1.2  Plan to destroy identifiers or a justification for retaining identifiers  
Describe the plan to destroy the identifiers at the earliest opportunity 
consistent with the conduct of the research. Include when and how 
identifiers will be destroyed. If identifiers will be retained, provide the legal, 
health or research justification for retaining the identifiers.  
 
Not applicable  
 
6.2.2 Explanation for why  the research could not practicably be conducted without access to and 
use of PHI  
Provide an explanation for why the research could not practicably be conducted without access 
to and use of PHI.  
 
Not applicable  
 
6.2.3 Explanation for w hy the research could not practicably be conducted without the waiver  or 
alteration of authorization  
Provide an explanation for why the research could not practicably be conducted without the 
waiver or alternation of authorization.  
 
Not applicable  
 
 
 
6.3 Waiver or alteration of authorization statements of agreement  
 
By submitting this study for review with a waiver of authorization, you agree to the following statement – 
DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE unless this section is not applicable because the research does  not involve a 
waiver or alteration of authorization.  If the section is not applicable, remove the statement and indicate 
as not applicable.  
 
Not applicable.  
 
7.0 Study Design and Procedures  
Data collection materials that will be seen or used by subjects in your study must be uploaded to CATS IRB 
(http://irb.psu.edu ).   DO NOT  include any actual data collection materials in this protocol (e.g. , actual survey or 
interview questions)  
 [Do not type here]  
 
7.1 Study Design  
Describe and explain the study design.  
 
Page 19 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  A two -arm randomized parallel study is proposed. Subjects will be randomized to one of the following 
attention and resource matched conditions for approximately 12-weeks: 1) education to consume 2 
oz./day of pecans in place of the snacks they usually eat ( AAD+P); 2) continue consuming their current 
diet (AAD) with provision  gift cards worth $ 30 monthly  (equivalent value to the pecans) and matched 
contact with study personnel.  
 
Assessment  of outcomes will occur at baseline and the end of the treatment period  (week 12). Pre-
menopausal women will be scheduled for testing within 7 days of starting their  menstrual period to 
control for hormonal effects on vascular function. Therefore, the treatment periods may be adjusted as 
needed. At the baseline and 12-weeks  two blood samples will be collected (separated by at least 24 -
hours) for endpoint analysis.  Weight will be measured on both days at each tim epoint. Flow mediated 
dilation, central and peripheral blood pressure and pulse wave velocity will be measured on o ne day at 
each time point. Diet intake will be assessed at baseline, week 6, and week 12 using 24 -hour recalls. 
Subjects will also provide a fecal collection at baseline and 12 weeks.  
 
 
7.2 Study P rocedures  
Provide a step by step description of all research pr ocedures being conducted (broken down by visit, if 
applicable) including such information as below (where and when applicable); d escribe the following : 
• HOW: (e.g. , data collection via interviews, focus groups, forms such as surveys and questionnaires, 
medical/school records, audio/video/digital recordings, photographs, EKG procedures, MRI, mobile 
devices such as electronic tablets/cell phones, observations, collection of specimens, experimental 
drug/device testing, manipulation of behavior/use of decept ion, computer games , etc.)  
• WHERE: (e.g. , classrooms, labs, internet/online, places of business, medical settings, public spaces, 
etc.)  
 
 [Type protocol text here ] 
 
7.2.1 Visit 1 or Day 1 or Pre -test, etc.   
Provide a description of what procedures will be performed on visit 1 or day 1 or pre -test in 
order of how these will be done .  If your study only involves one session or visit, use thi s section 
only and indicate 7.2.2 as not applicable.  
 
Participants will be consented prior to any screening activities.  
Screening: This visit will occur at the Clinical Research Center, Noll Laboratory. The clinical visit 
will consist of filling out forms (medical history, personal information); measuring waist 
circumference and height and weight so that BMI can be calcula ted and blood pressure will be 
measured to determine eligibility . Women of child -bearing potential will provide a urine sample 
for a pregnancy test. A blood sample will be taken and a complete blood count, and a blood lipid 
panel will be performed (approxi mately 19 ml of blood or ~1.25 tablespoon will be taken). If the 
initial blood draw is unsuccessful it may need to be repeated, with permission from the 
participant . In addition, if a potential participant takes thyroid medicine they must provide a 
current  (within 6 months) lab test. If they do not have one, an extra 3.5 ml (0.2 Tbsp) of blood 
will be taken to conduct a thyroid test.  If all eligibility criteria are met, participants will be 
scheduled for their baseline measurements. Baseline visits typicall y occur within 1 -2 weeks 
following the screening appointment.  Participants will be provided with one of two standardized 
meals  with foods commonly consumed in the American diet  prepared in the metabolic diet 
center kitchen  to consume the evening be fore the ir Day 2 visit.  The meal options will be 
Mediterranean chicken with potatoes and broccoli OR a black bean quesadilla with broccoli .  
 
Page 20 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  7.2.2 Visit 2 or Day 2 or Post -test, etc. (If applicable)   
Provide a description of what procedures will be performed on visit 2 or day 2 or post -test in 
order of how these will be done.  If your study involves more than two sessions or visits 
replicate this section for each additional session or visit (e.g. , 7.2.3, 7.2.4, etc.).   
 
*Vascular testing may occur on day 1 or day  2 based on participant’s availability  
 
Baseline and Endpoint Measurements  (Day 1)  
Measures will be collected at baseline and 12 weeks . At each timepoint , fasting blood samples 
will be collected for analysis of biochemical endpoints.  Body weight will be taken, and vascular 
health assessments will be performed at baseline and week 12 . Participants will also complete a 
fecal collection at the beginning and end of the treatment period. Participants will complete 
three, 24-hour dietary re calls at baseline, week 6 and week 12  for a total of 9 dietary recalls . 
Participants will be provided a standardized meal for dinner.  
 
 
Central and peripheral blood pressure : Following a 5 -minute rest period, brachial artery systolic 
and diastolic blood pr essure will be measured in the left arm using an automated blood pressure 
cuff. The cuff will reinflate and obtain a pulse wave form. Central blood pressure and wave 
reflection characteristics (augmentation index) will then be derived from the pressure 
waveforms using a validated transfer function with a SphygmoCor System (AtCor Medical, 
Sydney, Australia). This test will be performed in triplicate.  
 
Pulse Wave Velocity:   Arterial stiffness will be assessed by calculating the pulse wave velocity 
(PWV) betwe en the carotid and femoral arteries while in the supine position. A cuff will be 
placed on the participant's thigh. The cuff will inflate during the test to record the pulse 
waveform in the femoral artery. A simultaneous measurement of the carotid artery p ressure 
waveform will be obtained by an applanation tonometry sensor manually held in place above 
the carotid artery. PWV will subsequently be calculated by dividing the linear distance between 
the carotid and femoral sites by the transit time using the Sp hygmoCor system (AtCor Medical, 
Sydney Australia). This measurement will be performed in triplicate.  
 
Plasma/serum analysis: In addition to the blood taken at screening, 12 hour fasting blood 
samples also will be taken. Approximately 45 ml (about  3 Tbsp) will be col lected at each visit . A 
typical American Red Cross blood donation is 1 pint (500 ml). Blood may be analyzed for the 
followin g: blood lipids and lipoprotein concentration, particle number and size, glucose and 
insulin , other markers of glycemia , cholesterol metabolism,  and/or inflammation.  
 
Fecal collection:  At baseline and the end of each treatment period, participants w ill be asked to 
collect a stool sample (~50 g). They will be provided with a stool sample kit and detailed 
instructions for collection of a clean sample  on Day 1 of testing and asked to bring in the 
collected sample on Day 2; if an individual is not able c ollect the sample within this timeframe 
alternative arrangements will be made to accommodate the subject . Fecal samples will be 
analyzed for gut bacteria composition (gut microbiome).   
 
7.2.3 Day 2 of Baseline and Endpoint Measures  
On day 2 of baseline and  endpoint visits, which occur approximately 24 hours after day 1 
testing,  a fasting blood sample will be collected  and flow mediated dilation measures will be 
taken . Body weight will be taken . Fecal sample collection will be brought to the visit by the 
subject.  
 
Page 21 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Flow mediated dilation : Study subjects will undergo endothelial health assessment by FMD at 
baseline (beginning of  study) and end of each intervention period. The  technique of FMD is a 
non-invasive test that assesses endothelium -dependent dilatat ion in  response to increased 
blood flow. Blood flow is induced by inflation and deflation of a cuff  on the forearm. The cuff 
should be inflated to suprasystolic pressures in order to occlude  the brachial artery. A pressure 
of 250 mmHg is a standard pressur e used by many research  groups.  B-mode ultrasound is used 
to assess endothelium -dependent vasodilation.  
 
Plasma/serum analysis: A 12 hour fasting blood sample will be taken. Approximately 45 ml 
(about 3  Tbsp) will be col lected at each visit . A typical Amer ican Red Cross blood donation is 1 
pint (500 ml). Blood may be analyzed for the followin g: blood lipids and lipoprotein 
concentration, particle number and size, glucose and insulin , other markers of glycemia , 
cholesterol metabolism,  and/or inflammation.  
 
7.2.4 Monthly study food or gift card  
Monthly, participants will coordinate pick up times  for study food or gift card  with study 
personnel at Penn State Metabolic Diet Study Center . Depending on Group, the  script on “ Usual 
Care Group Instructions -Marcella -6-18-21” or “Pecan Group Instructions -Marcella -6-18-21” will 
be used.  Participants will also return compliance tracking sheets at months 2 and 3  (see 
attached “Daily monitoring form pecan condition -6-18-2021” or “Daily monitoring for usual care 
condition -6-18-2021)  to identify if/when and how the pecans are being consumed.  
 
Daily monitoring form : Participants will complete daily monitoring forms regarding consumption 
of pecans  (test food)/ food consumed during the usual care condition, changes in medication or 
health during the study. When they pick up their test  food monthly , they will be provid ed with 
the daily monitoring forms and asked to return the completed forms the next time they pick up 
food. Participants will also receive a  phone  call biweekly to ensure compliance.  
7.2.5 24 -hour dietary recalls  
Dietary intake : Three, 24 -hour recalls will  be administered in the week prior to baseline, week 6, 
and week 12 of the study using the Automated Self -Administered 24 -Hour (ASA24®) Dietary 
Assessment Tool. This is an online system where participants will provide information about all 
foods, beverages  and supplements consumed during the previous day. This system generates 
food group and nutrient data from the 24 - hour recalls. These data will be used for calculation of 
diet quality assessed by the Healthy Eating Index 2015 (4).  
 
7.3 Duration of Participati on 
Describe how long subjects will be involved in this research study.  Include the number of sessions and 
the duration of each session - consider the total number of minutes, hours, days, months, years, etc.   
 
Each participant will be involved in the study for appro ximately 12 weeks . Pre-menopausal women will 
be scheduled for testing within 7 days of starting their  menstrual period to control for hormonal effects 
on vascular function ; the treatment period will be adjusted accordingly in pre -menopausal women. 
Particip ants will be expected to pick up the pecans /gift card  monthly  at the diet center on campus. 
Participants will remain in their vehicle and a staff member from the Metabolic Diet Center will bring 
pecans/ gift cards  Compliance monitoring will also be conducted a t this appointment. At the beginning 
and end of the diet period, data collection (described above) will occur.   
 
Total time for study visits, after the initial screening is approximately 3 hours. Times may vary and 
females will require an addit ional 5 minutes for a urine pregnancy test a baseline and the end of the diet 
period.  The following is an estimate of the amount of time participants will spend in study activities:  
 
 
Page 22 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Screening appointment:   
 
Day 1: Forms, blood pressure, weight, height, waist circumference, blood draw – 45-60 minutes  
 
(pregnancy testing: females only – 5 minutes)  
 
Beginning of treatment period : 
Day 1: blood draw, weight,  waist circumference, vascular testing – 60 minutes   
 
(pregnancy testing: females only – 5 minutes)  
 
Day 2: blood draw , vascular testing  – 45 minutes    
 
End of treatment period  (week 12) :  
Day 1:  blood draw, weight, waist circumference , vascular testing – 60 minutes   
 
(pregnancy testing: females only – 5 min utes)  
 
Day 2: blood draw , vascular testing  – 45 minutes   
 
 
Picking up food/ gift card , fecal collections, and completing 24 -hour diet recalls: ~ 7 hours  
  
 
Total time for clinic and diet center visits from the beginning to the end of the study ~ 12 hours   
 
8.0 Number of Subjects  and Statistical Plan  
 
8.1 Number of Subjects  
Indicate the maximum number of subjects to be accrued /enrolled . Distinguish between the number of 
subjects who are expected to be enrolled and screened, and the number of subjects needed to 
complete the research procedures  if applicable  (i.e., numbers of subjects excluding screen failures.)  
 
A sample size of 128 (64 per group) is needed. To complete 128 individuals, approximately 140 
participants will be recruited to accoun t for an anticipated ~10% dropout rate.  
 
8.2 Sample size determination  
If applicable, provide a justification of th e sample size  outlined in section 8.1  to include reflections on, 
or calculations of, the power of the study.  
 
Power analysis for the primary endpoint, FMD, is based on the differences reported in clinical trials of 
tree nuts (5 -8). To detect a 1.2% (standard deviation 2.4; effect size 0.5) between -condition mean 
difference with 80% power ( α=0.05) , 128 or 64 people per group are needed . 
 
8.3 Statistical methods  
Describe the statistical methods (or non -statistical methods of analysis) that will be employed.  
 
The normality of the data will be tested before performing analyses, and transformations will be made if 
needed.  In the primary analyses, the change in outcome measures (baseline to 12 weeks) will be 
compared between groups after adjustment for baseline value, age, sex, and BMI. The mixed model 
Page 23 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  procedure will be used (SAS) with randomization as a fixed factor, and ba seline value for the outcome 
measure, age, sex, and BMI included as covariates.  
9.0 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
This section is required when research involves more than Minimal Risk to subjects  as defined in “HRP -001 
SOP- Definitions.”  
 
Minimal Risk is defined as the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research that 
are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of 
routine physical or psychologi cal examinations or tests.  For research involving prisoners, Minimal Risk is the 
probability and magnitude of physical or psychological harm that is normally encountered in the daily lives, or in 
the routine medical, dental, or psychological examination o f healthy persons.  
 
Please complete the sections below if the research involves more than minimal risk to subjects , otherwise  
indicate each section as not applicable.  
[Do not type here]  
 
9.1 Periodic evaluation of data  
Describe the plan to periodically evalu ate the data collected regarding both harms and benefits to 
determine whether subjects remain safe.  
 
Not applicable  
 
9.2 Data that are reviewed  
Describe the data that are reviewed, including safety data, untoward events, and efficacy data.  
 
Not applicable  
 
9.3 Method of collection of safety information  
Describe the method by which the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case report forms, at 
study visits, by telephone calls and with subjects).  
 
Not applicable  
 
9.4 Frequency of data collectio n 
Describe the frequency of data collection, including when safety data collection starts.  
 
Not applicable  
 
9.5 Individuals reviewing the data  
Identify the individuals who will review the data. The plan might include establishing a data and safety 
monitoring committee and a plan for reporting data monitoring committee findings to the IRB and the 
sponsor.  
 
Not applicable  
 
Page 24 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  9.6 Frequency of review of cumulative data  
Describe the frequency or periodicity of review of cumulative data.  
 
Not applicable  
 
9.7 Statis tical tests  
Describe the statistical tests for analyzing the safety data to determine whether harms are occurring.  
 
Not applicable  
 
9.8 Suspension of research  
Describe any conditions that trigger an immediate suspension of research.  
 
Not applicable  
 
10.0 Risks  
List the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or inconveniences to the subjects related the 
subjects’ participation in the research. Include as may be useful for the IRB’s consideration, a description of the 
probability, magnitude, duration and reversibility of the risks. Consider all types of risk including physical, 
psychological, social, legal, and economic risks.  Note: Loss of confidentiality is a potential risk when conducting 
human subject research.  
• If applicable, indicate which proced ures may have risks to the subjects that are currently unforeseeable.  
• If applicable, indicate  which procedures may have risks to an embryo or fetus should th e subject be or 
become pregnant . 
• If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects.  
 
Gastrointestinal symptoms:   
Some participants may experience GI (stomach) upset from the changes to their diet with incorporation of the 
pecans ; symptoms may include, but are not limited to, any of the following: constipation/diarrhea, nausea, and 
bloating. This will likely subside once the participant becomes accustomed to the study food.   
  
Food Allergies:   
Individuals will be asked to report any food allergies during the telephone screen, however it is possible that an   
unknown food allergy may manifest during the study. This is most likely to occur within the first week of the 
treatment period. Each day participants will be asked to complete a daily monitoring form so that we may track 
any adverse events, includ ing potential food allergies, and identify the source as soon as possible. In addition, 
we ask participants to please inform study staff immediately should any adverse events occur.   
 
Food Preparation  
Pecans and meals (i.e., chicken, steamed broccoli, and roasted potatoes OR black bean quesadilla and steamed 
broccoli) are prepared by a chef with decades of experience  who adheres to food safety protocols. There is a 
possibility of foodborne illness or cross contamination, but risks will be minimized by prope r food handling, 
handwashing, and cleaning procedures. Participants are instructed to refrigerate meals immediately after 
leaving the clinic. If participants do not comply, this could result in foodborne illness.  However, it is possible that 
incorrect food  handling during shipping, storage or preparation, if not detected, could result in food -borne 
illness. Every  
Page 25 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  effort will be made to safeguard against this possibility.  
  
Blood Sampling:   
Blood draws often cause mild pain, swelling or bleeding. There may be some bruising (blood under the surface 
of the skin), which can be minimized by pressing on the site after the needle is removed. There is also a slight 
chance of infection, dizziness or fainting. These risks will be minimized and most likely elimina ted by having 
trained staff draw the blood in a clinical setting using sterile supplies. If dizziness or fainting occurs, 
the symptoms will be alleviated by having the participant lie flat with their feet raised. If these should occur, the 
participant may be asked to remain at the clinic until the nurses have checked the participant’s blood 
pressure  and are sure the participant is ok to leave.   
  
FMD:  
There are no known risks associated with ultrasound. However, because the blood pressure cuff on the  
participants ’ right forearm is inflated tightly, it is likely that the hand and arm below the blood pressure cuff will  
experience “pins and needles” (tingling and pricking sensations) while the cuff is inflated and for a few minutes  
after it is released. D uring the 5 minutes that the blood pressure cuff is inflated on the forearm, the arm could  
become numb. This might be moderately painful. However, any discomfort or numbness should go away within  
minutes of cuff deflation and there are no known long -term r isks associated with this test. There is a possibility  
for red blotching or mild bruising (petechiae) appearing on the skin above and below the location of the blood  
pressure cuff. Studies indicate that petechiae are rare (occurring in less than ½ of 1% of  patients) and it is  
typically not uncomfortable and it does not require treatment. There are no risks associated with measurement  
of blood pressure, heart rate, or EKG as long as the participant is not allergic to adhesive tape. Temporary  
redness at the s ite of the electrode placement is possible.  
 
SphygmoCor  (Pulse Wave Analysis and Pulse Wave Velocity):   
There are no known risks associated with these measurements. The sensation of pressure from the 
blood  pressure cuff or hand -held probe may be uncomforta ble. There is a possibility for red blotching or mild 
bruising  (petechiae) appearing on the skin above and below the location of the blood pressure cuff. Studies 
indicate that  petechiae are rare (occurring in less than ½ of 1% of patients) and it is typica lly not uncomfortable 
and does not  require treatment.   
  
Loss of Confidentiality:   
There is always a potential for loss of confidentiality despite our best efforts. To prevent this from occurring 
all records are coded with a unique ID number and no names are used. Records containing names or 
other  identifying information are kept under lock at the PI’s research office. All records associated with an 
individual’s  participation in the study will be subject to the usual confidentiality standards applica ble to medical 
records. In  the event of publication of this research, no personal identifying information will be disclosed.   
  
Fecal Sample Collection:   
Some participants may experience a certain level of embarrassment or discomfort from being asked to 
collect  stool samples.   
 
  
 
11.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects and Other s  
11.1 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects may experience from taking part in the research. 
If there is no direct benefit to subjects, indicate as such. Compensation is not considered a benefit . 
Compensation should be addressed in section 1 3.0. 
 
Page 26 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Participants will receive their screening laboratory results, including a complete blood count, HbA1C and 
blood lipid values, at no cost.  
11.2 Potential Benefits to Others  
Include benefits to society or others.   
 
The findings of this study will be applicable to  the approximately, 50% of Americans are at risk for CVD 
(29). I f shown to improve peripheral vascular assessments, lipid and lipoprotein profile and glycemic 
control compared to usual average American intake , this may provide evidence in favor of incorpor ating 
pecans.  As approximately one -third of deaths are caused by cardiovascu lar disease and events, this 
could be helpful to those at risk.  The findings of this research will be published in peer reviewed journals 
and these papers will likely be cited by c linical management guidelines and inform dietary 
recommendations. Therefore, the findings of this research are likely to inform clinical practice and 
dietary guidelines for individuals  who have an  elevated risk of cardiovascular disease  (overweight or 
obes e BMI and at least one symptom of metabolic syndrome ).   
12.0 Sharing Results with Subjects  
Describe whether results (study results or individual subject results, such as results of investigational diagnostic 
tests, genetic tests, or incidental findings) will b e shared with subjects or others (e.g., the subject’s primary care 
physicians) and if so, describe how information  will be shared.   
 
Screening results will be provided to all potential participants (regardless of their eligibility status) within 
2 weeks of their screening appointment. All screening results will be reviewed by the Nurse Practitioner 
or Physician at the Clinical Center. S hould any abnormal lab values be identified that warrant further 
evaluation the individual will be contacted (by the Study Coordinator) and asked to schedule a visit with 
their primary care physician. At the completion of the study, the key findings from t he study overall will 
be posted on our laboratory’s website (https://hhd.psu.edu/nutrition/cardiometabolic -lab). Upon 
request, individual results may be given to participants at the completion of all study related data 
collection and analyses.   
13.0 Subject Payment and/or Travel Reimbursements  
Describe the amount , type (cash, check, gift card, other) and timing of any subject payment or travel 
reimbursement. If there is no subject payment or travel reimbursement, indicate as not applicable .  
 
Extra or Course Credit:  Describe the amount of credit and the available alternatives. Alternatives should be 
equal in time and effort to the amount of course or extra credit offered.  It is not acceptable to indicate that the 
amount of credit is to be dete rmined or at the discretion of the instructor of the course.  
 
Approved Subject P ool: Indicate which approved subject pool will be used; include in response below that 
course credit will be given and  alternatives will be offered as per the approved subject pool procedures.  
 
For their time and participation in the study participants will receive  monetary compensation of up to $200 
(check or direct deposit). For participants who withdraw from the study , compensation will be  prorated as 
follows and paid at the completion of their participation in the study:  
 
Completion of day 1 and day 2 testing at baseline = $ 50 
Completion of three 24 -hour recalls at baseline = $25 
Completion of three 24 -hour recalls at week 6 = $25 
Completion of day 1 and day 2 testing at 12 weeks  = $75 
Completion of three 24 -hour recalls at week 12  = $25 
 
Page 27 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Payments will be made at the completion of a participant’s involvement with the study.   
 
Participants may not be eligible for compen sation if determined that specific work or visa laws conflict.  
 
14.0 Economic Burden to Subjects  
14.1 Costs  
Describe any costs that subjects may be responsible for because of participation in the research.  
 
The participants will not bear any costs due to their participation in the study.  
 
14.2 Compensation for research -related injury  
If the research involves more than Minimal Risk to subjects, describe the available compensation in 
the event of research related i njury.  
 
If there is no sponsor agreement that addresses compensation for medical care for research subjects 
with a research -related injury, include the following text  as written  - DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE : 
It is the policy of the institution to provide neither financial compensation nor free medical treatment 
for research -related injury. In the event of injury resulting from this research, medical treatment is 
available but will be provided at the usual char ge. Costs for the treatment of research -related injuries 
will be charged to subjects or their insurance carriers.  
 
For sponsored research studies with a research agreement with the sponsor that addresses 
compensation for medical care for research -related injuries, include the following text  as written  - DO 
NOT ALTER OR DELETE : 
It is the policy of the institution to provide neither financial compensation nor free medical treatment 
for research -related injury. In the event of injury resulting from this resea rch, medical treatment is 
available but will be provided at the usual charge. Such charges may be paid by the study sponsor as 
outlined in the research agreement and explained in the consent form.  
 
Not applicable – the research does not involve more than minimal risk.  
15.0 Resources Availabl e  
 
15.1 Facilities and locations  
Identify and describe the facilities, sites and locations where recruitment and study procedures will be 
performed.  
 
If research will be conducted outside the United States, describe site -specific regulations or customs 
affecting the research, and describ e the process for obtaining local ethical review. Also, describe the 
principal investigator’s experience conducting research at these locations and familiarity with local 
culture.  
 
Penn State University Clinical Research Center -The clinical aspects of thi s study will be conducted at the  
Clinical Research Centre (CRC) on the University Park campus of the Pennsylvania State University. The  
CRC is a purpose -built research unit that supports human clinical research trials, and is fully equipped 
with exam roo ms, invasive and general procedure rooms and five hospital -style bedrooms with 
bathrooms. There is also a specimen processing room with refrigerated and unrefrigerated centrifuges 
for preparation of samples. The study investigators will work closely with e xperienced CRC staff 
(physicians, nurse practitioners, registered nurses and research technologists) to optimize and facilitate 
Page 28 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  the research protocol. The principal investigators, co -investigator, and project coordinators are 
experienced with conducting re search at this location and have conducted multiple clinical trials at this 
location previously.  
 
The Penn State Metabolic Diet Study Center is a state -of-the-art facility consisting of a spacious dining 
area, a pantry and a fully -equipped kitchen specifi cally designed for nutrition studies. In addition, this 
area is available for small group meetings with study participants and counseling/information exchange 
with small groups of individuals.  
15.2 Feasibility of recruiting the required number of subjects  
Indicate the number of potential subjects to which the study team has access.  Indicate the percentage 
of those potential subjects needed for recruitment.  
 
Given the wide age range and broad recruitment criteria we believe these methods, which have 
been  successful in the past, will enable us to recruit the necessary participants within the appropriate 
time  frame.   
15.3 PI Time devoted to conducting the research  
Describe how the PI will ensure that a sufficient amount of time will be devoted to conducting and 
completing the research. Please consider outside responsibilities as well as other on -going research for 
which the PI is responsible.  
 
The Principal Investigators will be responsible for assuring through personal contact between the co -
inves tigator, clinical staff and coordinators that each individual clearly understands and accepts the 
obligations incurred in the undertaking of this clinical trial.  
 
The Principal Investigators will ensure that the clinical staff fully understand the nature of the protocol 
and the requirements for an adequate and well -controlled study; the obligation to conduct the clinical 
investigation in accordance with the applicable federal regulations; the obligation to obtain informed 
consent in accordance with 21 CFR Part 50; the obligation to obtain IRB review and approval of a clinical 
investigation before the investigation may be initiated and to ensure continuing review of the study by 
the IRB in accordance with 21 CFR Part 56.  
15.4 Availability of medical or psychologi cal resources  
Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that subject s might need as a result of 
their participation in the study , if applicable . 
 
Nursing staff  are always present during clinical testing. Highly trained nursing staff will perform clinical 
assessments. Should an individual require psychological services they will be referred to the on -campus 
clinic: Psychological Clinic, 314 Moore Bldg., University Pa rk, Phone: 865 -2191.  
15.5 Process for informing Study Team  
Describe the training plans to ensure members of the research team are informed about the protocol 
and their duties, if applicable.  
 
All study staff will be required to complete the Human Participant Training and Bloodborne Pathogen  
Training as mandated by the Pennsylvania State University Office of Research Protections. In addition, as 
part of the initial training for this study, all staff members (e.g. project managers, research coordinators, 
assistants, and Clinical Research Center [CRC] nursing staff) will conduct an initial project start -up 
meeting to review the scientific protocol and ensure all study procedures are in place.  
Page 29 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  16.0 Othe r Approvals  
16.1 Other Approvals from External Entities  
Describe any approvals that will be obtained prior to commencing the research (e.g., from engaged 
cooperating institutions  IRBs who are also reviewing the research and other required review 
committees , community leaders, schools, research locations  where research is to be conducted by the 
Penn State investigator , funding agencies , etc. ). 
 
IBC approval will be obtained for the collection and analysis of blood and fecal samples.  
16.2 Internal PSU Co mmittee Approvals  
 
Check all that apply:  
  Anatomic Pathology – Penn State  Health  only  – Research involves the collection of tissues or use of 
pathologic specimens. Upload a copy of “HRP-902 - Human Tissue For Research Form ” in CATS IRB.   
 
  Animal Care and Use – All campuses  – Human research involves animals and humans or the use of 
human tissues in animals  
 
  Biosafety – All campuses  – Research involves biohazardous materials (human biological specimens 
in a PSU research lab, biological toxins, carcinogens, infectious agents, recombinant viruses or DNA 
or gene therapy ). 
 
  Clinical Laboratories – Penn State  Health  only  – Collection, processing and/or storage of extra tubes 
of body fluid specimens for research purposes by the Clinical Laboratories; and/or  use of body fluids 
that had been collected for clinical purposes but  are no longer needed for clinical use. Upload a copy 
of “HRP-901 - Human Body Fluids for Research Form ” in CATS IRB.  
 
  Clinical Research Center (CRC) Advisory Committee – All campuses  – Research involves the use of 
CRC services in any way.  
 
  Conflict of Interest Review – All campuses  – Research has one or more of study team members 
indicated as having a financial interest.  
 
  Radiation Safety – Penn State  Health  only  – Research involves research -related radiation 
procedures. All research involving radiation procedures (standard of care and/or research -related) 
must upload a copy of “HRP-903 - Radiation Review Form ” in CATS IRB.  
 
  IND/IDE Audit – All campuses  – Research in which the PSU researcher holds the IND or IDE or 
intends to hold the IND or IDE.  
 
  Scientific Review – Penn State Health  only  – All investigator -written research studies requiring 
review by the convened IRB must provide documentation of scientific review with the IRB 
submission. The scientific review requirement may be fulfilled by one of the following: (1) external 
peer -review process; (2) department/institute scientific review committee; or (3) scientific review by 
the Clinical Research Center Advisory committee.  N OTE: Review by the Penn State Health  Cancer 
Institute  (PSCI) Protocol Review Committee or the PSCI Disease Team is required if the study 
involves cancer prevention studies or cancer patients, records and/or tissues. For more information 
about this requirement see the IRB website . 
 
Page 30 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)    St. Joseph Administrative Review – Penn State Health only  – Penn State Health Research that will be 
conducted at St. Joseph Medical Center or St. Joseph Community Medical Groups.   
 
17.0 Multi -Site Study  
If this is a multi -site study (i.e. , a study in which two or more institutions coordinate, with each institution 
completing all research activities outlined in a specific protocol ) and the Penn State PI is  the lead investigator, 
describe the processes to ensure communication among sites in the  sections below . 
[Do not type here]  
 
17.1 Other sites  
List the name and location of all other participating sites. Provide the name , qualifications and contact 
information for  the principal investigator at each site and indicate which IRB will be reviewing the  study 
at each site.  
  
  Not applicable  
 
 
17.2 Communication Plans  
Describe the plan for regular communication between the overall study director and the other sites to 
ensure that all sites have the most current version of the protocol, consent document, etc.  Describe the 
process to ensure all modifications have been communicated to sites. Describe the process to ensure 
that all required approvals have been obtained at each site (including approval by the site’s IRB of 
record).   Describe the pr ocess for communication of problems with the research, interim results and 
closure of the study.  
 
Not applicable  
 
17.3 Data Submission and Security Plan  
Describe the process and schedule for data submission and provide the data security plan for data 
collected from other sites.  Describe the process to ensure all engaged participating sites will safeguard 
data as required by local information security policies.  
 
Not applicable  
 
17.4 Subject Enrollment  
Describe the procedures for coordination of subject enrollment and  randomization for the overall 
project.  
 
Not applicable  
 
17.5 Reporting of Adverse Events and New Information  
Describe how adverse events and other information will be reported from the clinical sites to the overall 
study director. Provide the timeframe for thi s reporting.  
 
Not applicable  
 
17.6 Audit and Monitoring Plans  
Describe the process to ensure all local site investigators conduct the study appropriately. Describe any 
on-site auditing and monitoring plans for the study.  
 
Page 31 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  Not applicable  
 
18.0 Adverse Event Reporting  
18.1 Reporting Adverse Reactions and Unanticipated Problems to the Responsible IRB  
By submitting this study for review, you agree to the following statement – DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE:  
 
In accordance with applicable policies of The Pennsylvania State University Institutional Review Board 
(IRB), the investigator will report, to the IRB, any observed or reported harm (adverse event) experienced 
by a subject or other individual, which in the opinion of the investigator is determined to be (1) 
unexpected; and (2) probably related to the research procedures. Harms (adverse events) will be 
submitted to the IRB in accordance with the IRB policies and procedures.  
 
19.0 Study Monitoring, Auditing and Inspecting  
 
19.1 Auditing and Inspecting  
By submitting this study for review, you agree to the following statement – DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE:  
 
The investigator will permit study -related monitoring, audits, and inspections by the Penn State quality 
assurance program office(s), IRB, the sponsor, an d government regulatory bodies, of all study related 
documents (e.g., source documents, regulatory documents, data collection instruments, study data etc.).  
The investigator will ensure the capability for inspections of applicable study -related facilities  (e.g., 
pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.).  
 
20.0 Future Undetermined Research: Data and Specimen Banking  
If this study is collecting identifiable data and/or specimens that will be banked for future undetermined  
research , please describe this process in the sections below.  This information should not conflict with 
information provided in section 22 regarding whether or not data and/or specimens will be associated with 
identifiers (directly or indirectly).   If NOT applicabl e, indicate as such below in all sections.  
[Do not type here]  
 
20.1 Data and/or specimens being stored  
Identify what data and/or specimens will be stored and the data associated with each specimen.  
 
Blood (serum/plasma) may be stored for future testing.  
 
Fecal samples will be stored for future testing of microbial composition or identification of metabolites.  
 
20.2 Location of storage  
Identify the location where the data and/or specimens will be stored.  
 
Chandlee Lab: Room 318 in a locked -80o degree freezer  
 
20.3 Duration of storage  
Identify how long the data and/or specimens will be stored.  If data and/or specimens will be stored 
indefinitely, indicate as such.  
Page 32 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)   
Specimens will be destroyed 3 years after publ ication of results, unless permission has been granted to 
keep. If permission to keep the samples has been granted, the samples may be stored indefinitely or 
until the integrity of the sample is comprised; these samples will be stored with non -identifiable  labels.  
 
20.4 Access to data and/or specimens  
Identify who will have access to the data and/or specimens.  
 
Specimens will be boxed, labeled by sample type, study name, and subject ID, and stored in a locked       
-80o degree freezer. Samples will only be accessible to designated staff and students for purposes 
outlined in this proposal.  
 
20.5 Procedures to release d ata or specimens  
Describe the procedures to release the data and/or specimens, including: the process to request a 
release, approvals required for release, who can obtain data and/or specimens, and the data to be 
provided with the specimens.  
 
All specimens will be coded with non -identifiable labels. Participants may elect to make their samples 
available for additional analyses by study collaborators.  
 
20.6 Process for returning results  
Describe the process for returning results about the use of the data  and/or specimens.  
 
No results about the use of data or specimens are returned to participants. The samples are labeled with 
non-identifiable labels and after the list linking identifiers to the codes has been destroyed it will not be 
possible to identify individuals.  
 
21.0 References  
List relevant references in the literature which highlight methods, controversies, and study outcomes.  
 
References:  
1. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. 2016. Nutrient Intakes from Food and 
Beverages: Mean Amounts Consumed per Individual, by Gender and Age, What We Eat in  
America, NHANES 2013 -2014.  
2. Bowman SA CJ, Friday JE, Lynch KL, LaComb RP, Moshfegh AJ. Food Patterns Equivalents Intakes by 
Americans: What We Eat in America, NHANES 2003 -04 and 2013 -14 Dietary Data Brief No. 17. 2017.  
3. Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee. Scientific report of the 2015 dietary guidelines advisory 
committee. Washington (DC): USDA and US Department of Health and Human Services 2015.  
4. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2015 -2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. Office of 
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2016.  
5. Rebholz CM, Appel LJ. Health effects of dietary patterns: critically important but vastly understudied. Am 
J Clin Nutr 2018;1 08:207 -208.  
6. Ros E. Nuts and CVD. Br J Nutr 2015;113 Suppl 2:S111 -20. 
7. Gu L, Kelm MA, Hammerstone JF, Beecher G, Holden J, Haytowitz D, Gebhardt S, Prior RL. 
Concentrations of Proanthocyanidins in Common Foods and Estimations of Normal Consumption. The  Journal of 
Nutrition 2004;134:613 -617.  
8. Hooper L, Kay C, Abdelhamid A, Kroon PA, Cohn JS, Rimm EB, Cassidy A. Effects of chocolate, cocoa, and 
flavan -3-ols on cardiovascular health: a systematic review and meta -analysis of randomized trials. The America n 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2012.  
Page 33 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  9. Matsuzawa Y, Kwon TG, Lennon RJ, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Prognostic Value of Flow‐Mediated 
Vasodilation in Brachial Artery and Fingertip Artery for Cardiovascular Events: A Systematic Review and Meta‐
Analysis. Journal of the American Heart Association 2015;4.  
10. Balzer J, Rassaf T, Heiss C, Kleinbongard P, Lauer T, Merx M, Heussen N, Gross HB, Keen CL, Schroeter H, 
Kelm M. Sustained benefits in vascular function through flavanol -containing cocoa in medicated diabetic 
patients a double -masked, randomized, controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:2141 -9. 
11. Casas -Agustench P, Lopez -Uriarte P, Ros E, Bullo M, Salas -Salvado J. Nuts, hypertension and endothelial 
function. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2011;21 Suppl 1:S21 -33. 
12. Neale EP, Tapsell LC, Guan V, Batterham MJ. The effect of nut consumption on markers of inflammation 
and endothelial function: a systematic review and meta -analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ Open 
2017;7:e016863.  
13. Del Gobbo LC, Falk MC, F eldman R, Lewis K, Mozaffarian D. Effects of tree nuts on blood lipids, 
apolipoproteins, and blood pressure: systematic review, meta -analysis, and dose -response of 61 controlled 
intervention trials. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2015;102:1347 -1356.  
14. Tindall A, Johnston E, Kris -Etherton P, Petersen K. The effect of nuts on markers of glycemic control: a 
systematic review and meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2019;109:297 –314.  
15. Viguiliouk E, Kendall CW, Blanco Me jia S, Cozma AI, Ha V, Mirrahimi A, Jayalath VH, Augustin LS, 
Chiavaroli L, Leiter LA, de Souza RJ, Jenkins DJ, Sievenpiper JL. Effect of tree nuts on glycemic control in diabetes: 
a systematic review and meta -analysis of randomized controlled dietary tria ls. PLoS ONE 2014;9:e103376.  
16. Morgan WA, Clayshulte BJ. Pecans lower low density lipoprotein cholesterol in people with normal lipid 
levels. Journal of the American Dietetic Association 2000;100:312 -318.  
17. Rajaram S, Burke K, Connell B, Myint T, Sabat é J. A monounsaturated fatty acid –rich pecan -enriched diet 
favorably alters the serum lipid profile of healthy men and women. The Journal of Nutrition 2001;131:2275 -
2279.  
18. McKay DL, Eliasziw  M, Chen CYO, Blumberg JB. A Pecan -Rich Diet Improves Cardiometabolic Risk Factors 
in Overweight and Obese Adults: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Nutrients 2018;10.  
19. Hudthagosol C, Haddad EH, McCarthy K, Wang P, Oda K, Sabate J. Pecans acutely increase plasma 
postprandial antioxidant capacity and catechins and decrease LDL oxidation in humans. J Nutr 2011;141.  
20. Wang L, Bordi PL, Fleming JA, Hill AM, Kris‐Etherton PM. Effect of a Moderate Fat Diet With and Without 
Avocados on Lipoprotein Particle Numbe r, Size and Subclasses in Overweight and Obese Adults: A Randomized, 
Controlled Trial. Journal of the American Heart Association 2015;4:e001355.  
21. Tindall AM, Petersen KS, Skulas -Ray AC, Richter CK, Proctor DN, Kris -Etherton PM. Replacing Saturated 
Fat W ith Walnuts or Vegetable Oils Improves Central Blood Pressure and Serum Lipids in Adults at Risk for 
Cardiovascular Disease: A Randomized Controlled -Feeding Trial. J Am Heart Assoc 2019;8:e011512.  
22. Lassale C, Tzoulaki I, Moons KGM, Sweeting M, Boer J, J ohnson L, Huerta JM, Agnoli C, Freisling H, 
Weiderpass E, Wennberg P, van der A DL, Arriola L, Benetou V, Boeing H, Bonnet F, Colorado -Yohar SM, 
Engström G, Eriksen AK, Ferrari P, Grioni S, Johansson M, Kaaks R, Katsoulis M, Katzke V, Key TJ, Matullo G, 
Melander O, Molina -Portillo E, Moreno -Iribas C, Norberg M, Overvad K, Panico S, Quirós JR, Saieva C, Skeie G, 
Steffen A, Stepien M, Tjønneland A, Trichopoulou A, Tumino R, van der Schouw YT, Verschuren WMM, 
Langenberg C, Di Angelantonio E, Riboli E, Wareham NJ, Danesh J, Butterworth AS. Separate and combined 
associations of obesity and metabolic health with coronary heart disease: a pan -European case -cohort analysis. 
European Heart Journal 2017:ehx448 -ehx448.  
23. Kollias A, Lagou S, Zeniodi ME, Boubouchairopo ulou N, Stergiou GS. Association of Central Versus 
Brachial Blood Pressure With Target -Organ Damage: Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. Hypertension 
2016;67:183 -90. 
24. Ben-Shlomo Y, Spears M, Boustred C, May M, Anderson SG, Benjamin EJ, Boutouyrie P, Ca meron J, Chen 
CH, Cruickshank JK, Hwang SJ, Lakatta EG, Laurent S, Maldonado J, Mitchell GF, Najjar SS, Newman AB, Ohishi M, 
Pannier B, Pereira T, Vasan RS, Shokawa T, Sutton -Tyrell K, Verbeke F, Wang KL, Webb DJ, Hansen TW, Zoungas 
S, McEniery CM, Cockcro ft JR, Wilkinson IB. Aortic pulse wave velocity improves cardiovascular event prediction: 
an individual participant meta -analysis of prospective observational data from 17,635 subjects. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2014;63:636 -46. 
Page 34 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  25. Ma Y, Njike VY, Millet J, Dutta S, Doughty K, Treu JA, Katz DL. Effects of walnut consumption on 
endothelial function in type 2 diabetic subjects: a randomized controlled crossover trial. Diabetes Care 
2010;33:227 -232.  
26. Ros E, Nunez I, Perez -Heras A, Serra M, Gilabert R, Casals E, Deu lofeu R. A walnut diet improves 
endothelial function in hypercholesterolemic subjects: a randomized crossover trial. Circulation 2004;109.  
27. Sari I, Baltaci Y, Bagci C, Davutoglu V, Erel O, Celik H, Ozer O, Aksoy N, Aksoy M. Effect of pistachio diet 
on lipid parameters, endothelial function, inflammation, and oxidative status: a prospective study. Nutrition 
2010;26:399 -404.  
28. Chen C -YO, Holbrook M, Duess M -A, Dohadwala MM, Hamburg NM, Asztalos BF, Milbury PE, Blumberg 
JB, Vita JA. Effect of almond consu mption on vascular function in patients with coronary artery disease: a 
randomized, controlled, cross -over trial. Nutrition Journal 2015;14:1 -11. 
29. Benjamin EJ, Muntner P, Alonso A, Bittencourt MS, Callaway CW, Carson AP, Chamberlain AM, Chang 
AR, Cheng S, Das SR, Delling FN, Djousse L, Elkind MSV, Ferguson JF, Fornage M, Jordan LC, Khan SS, Kissela BM, 
Knutson KL, Kwan TW, Lackland DT, Lewis TT, Lichtman JH, Longenecker CT, Loop MS, Lutsey PL, Martin SS, 
Matsushita K, Moran AE, Mussolino ME, O'Flaherty M , Pandey A, Perak AM, Rosamond WD, Roth GA, Sampson 
UKA, Satou GM, Schroeder EB, Shah SH, Spartano NL, Stokes A, Tirschwell DL, Tsao CW, Turakhia MP, 
VanWagner LB, Wilkins JT, Wong SS, Virani SS. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics -2019 Update: A Report Fr om 
the American Heart Association. Circulation 2019;139:e56 -e66.  
  
 
 
22.0 Confidentiality, Privacy and Data Management  
IMPORTANT: The following section is required for all locations EXCEPT Penn State Health and the College of 
Medicine.  Penn State Health and College of Medicine should skip this section and complete “HRP -598 
Research Data Plan Review Form.”  In order to avoid redundancy, for this section state “See the  Research Data 
Plan Review Form” if you are conducting Penn State Health research. Delete all other sub -sections of section 
22. 
 
For research being conducted at Penn State Health  or by Penn State Health  researchers only : The researc h 
data security and integrity plan is submitted using “HRP -598 – Research Data Plan Review Form .”   
 
Refer to Penn State College of Medicine IRB’s “Standard Operating Procedure Addendum: Security and 
Integrity of Human Research Data ,” which is available on the IRB’s website. In order to avoid redundancy, for 
this section state “See the Research Data Plan Review Form” if you are conducting Penn State Health  
research. Delete all sub -sections of section 22.  
 
For all other research : complete the following section.  Please refer to PSU Policy AD95  for information 
regarding information classification and security standards and requirements.  It is recommended that you  work 
with local IT staff when planning to store, process, or access data electronically to ensure that your plan can be 
carried out locally and meets applicable requirements.   If you have questions about Penn State’s Policy AD95 or 
standards or need a co nsultation regarding data security, please contact security@psu.edu .  
 
22.1 Which of the following identifiers will be recorded for the research project? Check all that apply. If none of  
the following identifiers will be recorded, do not check any of the boxes.  
 
 Hard 
Copy 
Data  Electronic  
Stored  
Data  
Names and/or initials  (including on signed consent documents)     
Page 35 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including street address, city, county, precinct, zip 
code, and their equivale nt geocodes,     
All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual, including birth d ate, 
admission date, discharge date, date of death; and all ages over 89 and all elements of dates 
(including year) indicative of such age, except that such ages and elements may be aggregated into 
a single category of age 90 or older     
Telephone numbers     
Fax numbers     
Electronic mail addresses     
Social security numbers     
Medical record numbers     
Health plan beneficiary numbers     
Account numbers     
Certificate/license numbers     
Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers     
Device identifiers and serial numbers     
Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)     
Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers     
Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints     
Full face photographic images and any comparable images     
Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code (such as the pathology number)     
Study code number with linking list     
Genomic sequence data    
State ID numbers    
Passport numbers    
Driver’s license numbers    
 
22.2 If storing paper records of research data, answer the following questions:  
22.2.1  Where will the paper records, including copies of signed consent forms, associated with this 
research study will be stored?  
Consent forms and data collections sheets  will be stored in a locked filing cabinet in a locked office (317 
Chandlee Laboratory)  and in the Clinical Research Centre, Noll Laboratory. M edical histor y forms  will only 
be stored in paper form in locked filling cabinets in 317 Chandlee Laboratory and in the Clinical Research 
Centre, Noll Laboratory.  
    
     
22.2.2  How will the paper records be secured?  
   Paper recorded will be secured in a locked filing cabinet in a locked office. Only research  
   personnel have access to the filing cabinet.    
22.2.3  How will access to the paper records be restricted to authorized project personnel?  
  Only authorized project per sonnel will have key access to the locked filing cabinets.   
 
22.3 If storing electronic records of research data, indicate where the electronic data associated with this 
research study will be stored. Check all that apply.           
 Penn State -provided database application.  Check which of the following database applications 
are being used (check all that apply):  
  Penn State REDCap   
  Other – Specify - provided and approved database application:  
Page 36 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  OneDrive  
          Penn State, College, or Department IT file server  
            Box.psu.edu  (To be retired Sept. 2021; see https://storage.psu.edu/ )       
  Web -based system provided by the sponsor or cooperative group - Specify URL  and contact 
information:  
      
           Other – Specify the database application or server:  
      
Provide details about the data security features  or attach security documentation provided 
by sponsor or group : 
      
 
If there is a list/key that links indirect identifiers (code numbers, participant IDs, etc.) to direct identifiers, that list  
must not be comingled ( i.e., stored in the same location) as the identifiable data, including copies of signed 
informed consent forms. Additionally, access to that list/key must be restricted to authorized project personnel.  
 
22.4 Is there a list/key that links code numbers to identifiers?  
  Yes - explain how the list that links the code to identifiers is stored separately from coded data:  
A master list containin g a study ID number and participant’s identity will be used. This file will be stored 
in a folder saved to OneDrive  where only approved study personnel will be able to access it through their 
OneDrive account. No data containing study ID#'s (code numbers) will be stored with the master list.  
Upon completion of data collection, only the investigators and study coordinator will have access to the 
list. This list will be deleted 3 years after publication of the study results.  
 Not applicable, there is no list that links code numbers to identifiers . Skip to section 22.6. 
 
22.5 Is there a list of people who have access to the list/key?  
 
  Yes – explain how access to that list is restricted and why certain persons require access.  
The principal investigator, co -investigator, study coordinators and trained study personnel  will 
have  access to data and specimens. These personnel will have access to the list because  they 
will be directly involved with the study participants and therefore need access to identifying 
information in the course of participant management.     
 
 
  No – explain why not:  
       
 
22.6 Describe the mechanism in place to ensure only approved research personnel have access to the 
stored research data (electronic and paper).  
  Password -protected files  
  Role -based security  
  Specify all other mechanism s used to ensure only permitted users have access to the stored 
research data.  
  Paper files are stored under lock and key.   
The use of mobile devices or wireless activity trackers to collect identifiable research data must be approved by the 
Office of Information Security. Before completing this section, please contact security@psu.edu  to confirm approval.  
 
Page 37 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  22.7 Will any research data (such as survey data) be collected on a mobile device, such as an electronic 
tablet, cell phone, or wireless activity tracker?  
 No 
 Yes - answer the following questions:  
22.7.1  Specify the provider of the mobile devices(s)  
 Supplied by the sponsor  
 Penn State  owned device  
 A personal device  
 Other – Please specify source:       
 
22.7.2  Specify the type(s) of mobile device(s) that will be used to capture data and all identifiers 
captured on the mobile device(s). Please list all devices, and if more than one, the identifiers 
to be collected on each.  
      
22.7.3  Specify the type of data collected on the mobile devices(s).  
      
 
22.7.4  Specify the application or website used to collect the data from the mobile device, if 
applicable.  
      
 
22.7.5  Describe the measures taken to protect the confidentiality of the data collected on mobile 
device(s). Please address physical security of the device(s), electronic security, and secure 
transfer of data from device(s) to the previously indicated data/file storage location provided 
in section 22.3 . 
      
9.2 Specify the  
The use of online survey tools and email to collect or send research data containing identifiers that represent more 
than minimal risk to subjects must be approved by the Office of Information Security. Before completing this section, 
please contact security@psu.edu.  
 
22.8 Will any research data be directly entered/sent by subjects over the internet or via email (e.g., data 
capture using on -line surveys/questionnaires, surveys via email, observation of chat rooms or blogs)?  
 No 
 Yes - answer the following questions:  
22.8.1  Specify the identifiers collected over the internet or via email (Including IP add resses if IP 
addresses will be collected).  
The ASA24 system does not collect any identifying data directly from Respondents. However, IP 
address information is accessed for the purpose of routing information between the server and the 
respondent's computer —often the IP address is that of the user's Internet Service Provider (ISP). IP 
addresses are not stored or tracked by the ASA24 system. However, logs of connections are kept in the 
hosting environment for audit trail purposes. This information is not mine d in any way but would be 
available if there were a legal obligation to release it.  
Page 38 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  22.8.2  Specify the type of data collected over the internet or via email.  
      Intake of foods, beverages and supplements in the past 24 hours. All subjects are provided 
with a unique personal link that aligns with their study ID for completion of the survey so no identifying 
information is collected.  
22.8.3  Describe the measures taken to protect the confidentiality of the data collected?  
      All subjects are provided will a unique personal link that aligns with their study ID that they 
use to access the survey. No identifying information is uploaded to the website or collected from the 
subject.  
22.8.4  Describe how the research team will access the data once data collection is complete.  
      Response data are secured at the hosting site using industry standard security controls , 
including firewalls and encryption. All data entered into the ASA24 system at the Respondent’s computer is 
encrypted by the internet browser (e.g., Internet Explorer, Firefox) before they are transmitted to our 
servers using Secure Socket Layer (SSL) Tec hnology. SSL allows for the authentication of the sending and 
receiving computers.   
Only approved study members and the ASA24 operations team can access response data. Access is 
gained through the Researcher Portal, which is username and strong password protected. Data are 
downloaded in spreadsheets directly from the Researcher Portal.  
22.8.5  If the research involves online surveys, list the name(s) of the service provider(s) that will be 
used for the survey(s) (e.g., REDCap, Penn State licensed Qualtri cs, Survey Monkey, 
Zoomerang)? (Note: The IRB strongly recommends the use of REDCap for online surveys that 
obtain sensitive identifiable human subjects data.)  
 Penn State REDCa p 
 Penn State Qualtrics (de -identified data only)  
 Other - Please specify:  
Application: National Cancer Institute ASA -24 
URL (If applicable): https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/asa24/   
22.8.6  If the answer above is “Other” contact security@psu.edu  for approval of an alternative data 
capture method  
      
 
Depending on the nature of the subject matter involved, certain security requirements must be in place for the audio 
and/or video recording or photographing of subjects. If the subject matter presents more than minimal risk to the 
subjects, then, before co mpleting the section below, please contact the Office of Information Security at 
security@psu.edu  to confirm whether these requirements are required.  
9.3 Specify the  
22.9 Will any type of recordings (e.g., audio or video) or  photographs of the subjects be made during this 
study?  
 No - skip to section 22.10 
 Yes - answer the following questions:  
22.9.1  What will be used to capture the audio/video/images? Give a brief description of  content.  
 Audio – Describe the intended content  of the audio recording:  
      
 Video – Describe the intended content  of the video recording:  
Page 39 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)        
 Photographs of the subjects – Describe the intended content  of the  photographs:  
      
 3-D Images – Describe the intended content  of the of 3-D images:  
       
 Other - Specify:   
      
22.9.2  How will the recordings/photographs/images be stored (electronically or physically)?  
 
22.9.3  Where will the recordings/photographs/images be stored?  
      
22.9.4  Who will have access to the recordings /photographs/images?  
      
22.9.5  Will any of the recordings be transcribed?  
 Not applicable  
 No 
 Yes – indicate who will be doing the transcribing?  
      
22.9.6  Will the recordings/photographs be used for purposes other than this research study?  
 No 
 Yes - specify purpose(s) (e.g., publication, presentations, educational training, future  
 undetermined research):  
      
9.6 What type of r  
22.10  Certificate of Confidentiality (COC) - Is the research biomedical, behavioral, clinical or other research 
that is funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)?  
 Yes - check one of the following:  
  The research involves human subjects as defined by the DHHS regulations (See Wo rksheet  
HRP-310).  
  The research involves collecting or using biospecimens that are identifiable to an individual.  
  If collecting or using biospecimens as part of the research, there is a small risk that some 
combination of the biospecimen, a request for the biospecimen, and other available data 
sources could be used to deduce the identity of an indiv idual.  
  The research involves the generation of individual level, human genomic data.  
 
Note:  If any of the 4 items above are checked, a COC is automatically issued by NIH and 
applies to the research. Information about the COC must be included in the consent form.  
 No - answer the foll owing question.  
If the research is not funded by NIH, will the investigator apply for a COC for this research study?  
 No 
 Yes 
 
Note:  For research not funded by NIH, the IRB may require a COC if the research is collecting 
personally identifiable information and the information is sensitive and/or the research is 
collecting information that if disclosed could significantly harm or damage the subject.  
Page 40 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)   
22.11  What steps will be taken to protect subjects’ privacy interests? (Check all that apply.)  
  Ident ification and recruitment of potential subjects follows procedures consistent with privacy 
standards  
  Consent discussion and research interventions will take place in a private setting  
  Limiting the information being collected to only the minimum amount of data necessary to 
accomplish the research purposes  
  Limit ing the people with access to the identifiable research data to the minimum necessary as 
specified in the application and consent process  
  Other – Specify:   
      
 
22.12  What is the process for ensuring correctness of data entry?  
  Double data entry to reduce risk of errors  
  Electronic edit checks to ensure data being entered are not obviously incorre ct 
  Random internal quality and assurance checking of research data  
  Direct entry by subjects  
  Other - Specify:  
      
 
22.13  Does this research involve the generation of large -scale human genomic data as defined in NIH 
Genomic Data Sharing Policy ( http://gds.nih.gov )? 
  No 
  Yes – If Yes, describe the plan for de -identifying the dataset before sharing it with NIH -designated 
data repositories.  
      
 
22.14  The European Union (EU) General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)  
22.14.1  To determine if the research is subject to the GDPR answer the following questions:  
22.14.1.1  Will the Penn State principal investigator, or another entity under the 
Penn State principal investigator’s direction, be collecting, recording, 
storing, using, any personal data* of any subjects physically located in the 
European Economic Area (EEA)** at the time of data collection (e ven if the 
subject is NOT an EEA resident) or any EEA citizens? (This includes 
recruitment through social media sites, use of third party internet sites, 
mobile devices or apps to collect data, and/or direct receipt of data from 
subjects.)  
  No 
  Yes (This research may be  subject to the GDPR)  
22.14.1.2  Does this research involve the transfer of personal data collected u nder 
the GDPR from an EEA country? (This includes direct transfer of data from 
research collaborators.)  
  No 
  Yes (This research may be  subject to the GDPR)  
 
Page 41 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  22.14.2  If the research may be subject to the GDPR as indicated in the answers to the questions 
above, answer the following:  
22.14.2.1  Will any of the data fall into one of the following categories: health data, 
racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, 
trade union membership, genetic data, biometric data used for purpose of 
identifying an individual, sex life or sexual orientation?  
  No 
  Yes 
22.14.2.2  Will any of the data be related to criminal convictions or offenses?  
  No 
  Yes 
Comments on any of the above responses:  
      
* “Personal data” means any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person; an identifiable 
natural person is one who can be identified, directly or indirectly, by reference to an identifier such as a name, an 
identification number, location data, an online identifier or to one or more factors specific to the physical, 
physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of that natural person.  
** Eu ropean Economic Area  (EEA)  – Includes the 28 -member states of the European Union (Austria, Belgium, 
Bulgaria, Croatia, Republic of Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, 
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxem bourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, 
Slovenia Spain, Sweden, UK) and Norway, Iceland, Lichtenstein.  
22.15  Does this research involve transfer or disclosure of data and/or specimens to and/or from Penn State?  
  No - skip the re mainder  of section  22.15 . 
  Yes - answer the following questions.  
 
Check all that apply:  
 Data  are being transferred or disclosed to Penn State  
 What is the name of the third party(ies) (the institution, sponsor, etc.) sending or providing the  
data?  
LabCorp ( Morrisville, NC)  
Quest Diagnostics  (Pittsburgh, PA)  
 
Is the third party requiring us to sign a contract regarding the data?  
 Yes - If Yes, this contract must go through the Office of Sponsored Programs  
https://www.research.psu.edu/osp/ overview -pages/data -use-agreements  
 No 
 Data  are being transferred or disclosed from  Penn State  
What is the name(s) of the third party(ies) (the institution, sponsor, etc.) receiving or accessing 
the data?  
      
 
Note: Data transfers or disclosures may require a Data Use Agreement (DUA).  
 Specimens  are being transferred to Penn State  
Page 42 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  What is the name(s) of the third party(ies) (the institution, sponso r, etc.) sending the specimens?  
      
 
 Specimens  are being transferred from  Penn State  
What is the name(s) of the third party(ies ) (the institution, sponsor, etc.) receiving the specimens?  
LabCorp  and Quest Diagnostics  
 
Note: All material transfers, either sending or receiving, require a Material Transfer Agreement 
(MTA).   Please contact the Office of Technology Management for more information.   
22.15.1  Describe how the data/specimens will be securely transferred or disclosed to/from the third 
party(ies).  
LabCorp  and Quest Diagnostics  
Serum/plasma samples will be shipped to Quest on dry ice via FedEx or a Quest Courier. T he  
   Blood samples will be labeled with the subjects study ID number and the timepoint of collection;  
   no other information will be on the vial.    
22.15.2  How are the research data/specimens being  transferred from and/or sent to the third 
party(ies)?  Complete the appropriate section(s) and check all that apply within each 
completed section.  
22.15.2.1  Data being transferred or disclosed  to Penn State : 
  Data are being received in aggregate/metrics (just counts, no individual 
data)  
  De-identified individual data are being received and there is no linking 
list at either institution (no identifiers, or links to identifiers, such as code 
numbers)  
 Coded research data without  any identifiers are being received and the 
linking list remains with the entity sending the data; the recipient of the 
data will not  have access to the linking list  
  Coded res earch data with  identifiers (such as dates and/or any of the 
identifiers listed in section 22.15.3 aside from Study Code) are being 
received and the linking list remains with the entity sending the data; the 
recipient of the data will not  have access to th e linking list  
  Data with  identifiers (such as dates and/or any of the identifiers listed i n 
section 22.15.3) are being received and the linking list remains with the 
entity sending the data; the recipient of the data will have access to the 
linking list  
  Data with  identifiers along  with the linking list are being received  
  Other – Specify:  
     
Data with  only  the Study ID  are being received by PSU. The linking list remains with the PSU; the entity 
sending the data will not  have access to the linking list  
 
22.15.2.2  Data being transferred or disclosed  from Penn State : 
  Data are being sent in aggregate/metrics (just counts, no individual data)  
  De-identified individual data are bei ng sent and there is no linking list at 
either institution (no identifiers, or links to identifiers, such as code 
numbers)  
Page 43 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)    Coded research data without  any identifiers are being  sent and the linking 
list remains with the entity sending the data; the recipient of the data will 
not have access to the linking list  
  Coded research data with  identifiers (s uch as dates and/or any of the 
identifiers listed in  section 22.15.3 aside from Study Code) are being sent 
and the linking list remains with the entity sending the data; the recipient 
of the data will not  have access to the linking list  
  Data with  identifiers (such as dates and/or any of the identifiers listed in  
section 22.15.3) are being sent and the linking list remains with the entity 
sending the data; the recipient of the data will have access to the linking 
list  
  Data with  identifiers along with the linking list are being sent  
  Other – Specify:  
      
 
22.15.2.3  Specimens being transferred or disclosed  to Penn State : 
  De-identified specimens are being received and there is no linking list at 
either institution (no identifiers, or links to identifiers, such as code 
numbers)  
  Coded specimens without  any identifiers are being received and the 
linking list remains with the entity sending the specimens; the recipient 
of the specimens will not  have access to the linking list  
  Coded specimens with  identifiers (such as dates and/or any of the 
identifiers listed in section 22.15.3 aside from Study Code) are being 
received and the linking list remains with the entity sending the 
specimens; the recipient of the specimens will not  have access to the 
linking list  
  Coded specimens with  identifiers (such as dates and/or any of the 
identifiers listed in section 22.15.3) are being received and the linking list 
remains with the entity sending the specimens; the recipient of the 
specimens will have access to the li nking list  
  Coded specimens with  identifiers along with the linking list are being 
received  
  Other – Specify:  
      
 
22.15.2.4  Specimens being transferred or disclosed  from Penn State : 
  De-identified specimens are being sent and there is no linking list at 
either institution (no identifiers, or links to identifiers, such as code 
numbers)  
  Coded specimens without  any identifiers are being sent and the linking 
list remains with the entity sending the specimens; the recipient of the 
specimens will not  have access to the linking list  
  Coded specimens with  identifiers (such as dates and/or any of the 
identifiers listed in section 22.15.3 aside from Study Code) are being 
sent and the linking list remains with the entity sending the specimens; 
the recipient of the specimens will not  have access to the linking list  
  Coded specimens with  identifiers (such as dates and/or any of the 
identifiers listed i n section 22.15.3) are being sent and the linking list 
Page 44 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  remains with the entity sending the specimens; the recipient of the 
specimens will have access to the linking list  
  Coded specimens with  identifiers along with the linking list are being 
sent  
  Other – Specify:  
      
 
 
22.15.3  If transferring data/specimens with identifiers to or from Penn State, which of the following identifiers will 
be included with the data/specimens? Check all that apply:  
 Names   Medical record numbers   
 Initials   Health plan beneficiary numbers   
 Street address   Account numbers   
 City  Certificate/license numbers  
 Driver’s License numbers   Passport numbers  
 State   State ID numbers  
 Zip Codes    Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers   
 County   Device identifiers and serial numbers   
 Geocodes   Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)  
 Precincts   Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers  
 All elements of dates (except ye ar) for dates 
directly related to an individual, including birth date, 
admission date, discharge date, date of death    Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints  
 Ages > 89  and all elements of dates (including 
year) indicative of such age, except that such ages 
and elements may be aggregated into a single 
category of age 90 or older    Full face photographic images and any comparable images   
 Telephone numbers   Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code (such as 
the pathology number)  
Specify:       
 Fax numbers   Study code numbers  
 Electronic mail addresses   Master list linking study code numbers to subject(s)  
 Social security numbers   Genomic sequence data  
  Other – specify:       
 
 
Balzer, J., Rassaf, T., Heiss, C., Kleinbongard, P., Lauer, T., Merx, M., . . . Kelm, M. (2008). Sustained benefits in vascul ar function 
through flavanol -containing cocoa in medicated diabetic patients a double -masked, randomized, controlled trial. J Am Co ll 
Cardiol, 51 (22), 2141 -2149. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2008.01.059  
Casas -Agustench, P., Lopez -Uriarte, P., Ros, E., Bullo, M., & Salas -Salvado, J. (2011). Nuts, hypertension and endothelial function. 
Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis, 21 Suppl 1 , S21 -33. doi:10.1016/j. numecd.2011.01.009  
Del Gobbo, L. C., Falk, M. C., Feldman, R., Lewis, K., & Mozaffarian, D. (2015). Effects of tree nuts on blood lipids, 
apolipoproteins, and blood pressure: systematic review, meta -analysis, and dose -response of 61 controlled intervention  trials. 
The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 102 (6), 1347 -1356. doi:10.3945/ajcn.115.110965  
Gu, L., Kelm, M. A., Hammerstone, J. F., Beecher, G., Holden, J., Haytowitz, D., . . . Prior, R. L. (2004). Concentrations of  
Proanthocyanidins in Common Fo ods and Estimations of Normal Consumption. The Journal of Nutrition, 134 (3), 613 -617. 
Retrieved from http://jn.nutrition.org/content/134/3/613.abstract  
Hooper, L., Kay, C., Abdelhamid, A., Kroon, P. A., Cohn, J. S., Rimm, E. B., & Cassidy, A. (2012). Effects of chocolate, cocoa, and 
flavan -3-ols on cardiovascular health: a systematic review and meta -analysis of randomized trials. The American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition . doi:10.3945/ajcn.1 11.023457  
Hudthagosol, C., Haddad, E. H., McCarthy, K., Wang, P., Oda, K., & Sabate, J. (2011). Pecans acutely increase plasma postpran dial 
antioxidant capacity and catechins and decrease LDL oxidation in humans. J Nutr, 141 . doi:10.3945/jn.110.121269  
Mats uzawa, Y., Kwon, T. G., Lennon, R. J., Lerman, L. O., & Lerman, A. (2015). Prognostic Value of Flow‐Mediated Vasodilation in 
Brachial Artery and Fingertip Artery for Cardiovascular Events: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis. Journal of the 
American Hear t Association, 4 (11). doi:10.1161/jaha.115.002270  
Page 45 of 45 (IRB USE ONLY: V. 03/01/2021)  McKay, D. L., Eliasziw, M., Chen, C. Y. O., & Blumberg, J. B. (2018). A Pecan -Rich Diet Improves Cardiometabolic Risk Factors in 
Overweight and Obese Adults: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Nutrients, 10 (3). doi:10.3390/nu10030339  
Morgan, W. A., & Clayshulte, B. J. (2000). Pecans lower low density lipoprotein cholesterol in people with normal lipid level s. 
Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 100 (3), 312 -318.  
Neale, E. P., Tapsell, L. C., Guan, V., & Batterham, M. J. (2017). The effect of nut consumption on markers of inflammation and 
endothelial function: a systematic review and meta -analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ Open, 7 (11), e016863. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen -2017 -016863  
Rajaram, S., Burk e, K., Connell, B., Myint, T., & Sabaté, J. (2001). A monounsaturated fatty acid –rich pecan -enriched diet favorably 
alters the serum lipid profile of healthy men and women. The Journal of Nutrition, 131 (9), 2275 -2279.  
Ros, E. (2015). Nuts and CVD. Br J Nu tr, 113 Suppl 2 , S111 -120. doi:10.1017/s0007114514003924  
Tindall, A., Johnston, E., Kris -Etherton, P., & Petersen, K. (2019). The effect of nuts on markers of glycemic control: a systematic 
review and meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr, 109 , 297 –314.  
Tindall, A. M., Petersen, K. S., S kulas -Ray, A. C., Richter, C. K., Proctor, D. N., & Kris -Etherton, P. M. (2019). Replacing Saturated 
Fat With Walnuts or Vegetable Oils Improves Central Blood Pressure and Serum Lipids in Adults at Risk for Cardiovascular 
Disease: A Randomized Controlled -Feeding Trial. J Am Heart Assoc, 8 (9), e011512. doi:10.1161/jaha.118.011512  
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2016). 2015 -2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans . Office of Disease Prevention 
and Health Promotion  
Viguiliouk, E., Kendall, C. W., B lanco Mejia, S., Cozma, A. I., Ha, V., Mirrahimi, A., . . . Sievenpiper, J. L. (2014). Effect of tree nuts 
on glycemic control in diabetes: a systematic review and meta -analysis of randomized controlled dietary trials. PLoS ONE, 
9(7), e103376. doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0103376  
Wang, L., Bordi, P. L., Fleming, J. A., Hill, A. M., & Kris‐Etherton, P. M. (2015). Effect of a Moderate Fat Diet With and Wi thout 
Avocados on Lipoprotein Particle Number, Size and Subclasses in Overweight and Obese Adults: A Randomize d, Controlled 
Trial. Journal of the American Heart Association, 4 (1), e001355. doi:10.1161/jaha.114.001355  
 