 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   1 of 18 
 
©2009 Huron Consultin g Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution subject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
TITLE: Effectiveness of Intense Therapeutic Ultrasound in the  
            Management of Patients with Plantar Fasciitis  
 
STUDY #: 2620384       DATE: April 5, 2014  
IRB Approval #: 1404296558R002  
 
Sponsor:  Guided Therapy  
  33 S Sycamore  
  Mesa, Arizona 85202 -1150 USA  
 
Principal Investigator:  Dan Latt, MD, Ph.D.  
    University of Arizona   
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services , LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution subject to End User License Agreement at  Experience . Redefined . TM 
http://www .huronconsultinggroup .com/SOP  hrppsops @huronconsultinggroup .com  
UACCESS EDOC  NUMBER (FOR PROJECTS REQUIRI NG AN IRB  
FEE) 2620384  
PROJECT TITLE : Effectiveness of intense therapeutic ultrasound in the management of patients with  
 plantar fasciitis  
 
INVESTIGATOR  
Principal Investigator  Name , 
Degree (s): L. Daniel Latt,  MD, PhD  
Principal Investigator UA netID  dlatt 
Status /Rank : Assistant Professor  
Center :  University of Arizona Medical Center  
Section :  
Department : Department of Orthopaedic Surgery  
College : Medicine  
Contact phone :  520-626-4024  
Official University  Email : dlatt@email.arizona.edu  
  
ADVISOR  CONTACT INFORMATION  (REQUIRED FOR ALL STUDENTS AND RESIDENTS ) 
Name , Degree (s), UA NetID:  
Contact phone :   
Official University Email :  
  
ALTERNATE /COORDINATOR  CONTACT INFORMATION  
Name , UA NetID: Cynthia Fas tje, cfastje  
Contact phone :  (520)626 -7512  
Official University Email : cfastje@email.arizona.edu ; cfastje@ortho.arizona.edu  
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   3 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
SECTION 1 : REQUIRED SIGNATURES  
1. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  
I will conduct my rese arch according to  the University of Arizona HSPP Investigator Manual . 
   
3/12/14    
L. Daniel Latt, MD, PhD    
Signature   Date   Print Name  
 
2. ADVISOR (FOR ALL STUDENTS AND  RESIDENTS ACTING AS  THE PI ) 
I will oversee the student researcher according to the University of Arizona HSPP Investigator Manual . 
     
  
Signature   Date   Department  
 
3. SCIENTIFIC /SCHOLARLY REVIEW  (CANNOT BE ASSOCIATED WITH THE PROJECT ) 
I have examined the proposal cited above , and find that the information contained therein i s complete and that the scientific or 
scholarly validity of the project appears  appropriate .   
   
4/3/14    
John Ruth, MD    
Signature   Date   Print Name  
 
jtr@email.arizona.edu    
(520)626 -4270  
Official University Email   Phone number    
 
4. DEPARTMENT /CENTER /SECTION REVIEW  
I have reviewed this application and determined that all departmental requirements are met and that the investigator has 
adequate resources to conduct the Human Research . 
   
4/3/14    
John Ruth, MD    
Signature   Date   Print Name  
 
jtr@email.arizona.edu    
(520)626 -4270  
Official University Email   Phone number    
 
5. RESPONSIBLE PHYSICIAN  (PROJECTS INVOLV ING MEDICAL PROCEDURES WHICH THE PI IS NOT 
AUTHORIZED TO CONDUC T) 
I am a physician licensed by the State of Arizona (or US license fo r the SAVAHCS ). I will be responsible for ensuring that all 
procedures that are part of this project and that require the attendance of a licensed physician will have a suitable physician  
present during the procedures . If at any time this is not possible , I will inform the IRB before any procedure s are conducted . 
     
  
Signature   Date   Print Name  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   4 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
6. NATIVE AMERICAN OR INTERNATIONAL INDIGENOUS POPULATIONS REVIEW  
Signature needed only if research takes place in Indian Country or among internation al Indigenous populations , actively 
recruits Native Americans or international Indigenous populations for enrollment , and/or requires stratification of Native 
Americans or international Indigenous populations as one of the statistical analyses or study aim s.  
 
 Social and Behavioral Projects :  American Indian Studies , (520)621-7108  
 Biomedical Procedures :  Office of Outreach and Multicultural Affairs , (602)827-2327  
 
I have examined t he proposal cited above and advise that  further appropriate tribal /Indigenous approval [  ]is [  ]is not 
necessary . 
     
  
Signature   Date   Print Name  
  
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   5 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
 
SECTION 2: GENERAL INFORMATION  
1. Not including this project submission , how many : 
a. Human R esearch studies is the PI  involved in as key personnel ?  
6 
b. Active subjects are there in the PI 's open  Human R esearch study /ies? 21 (61 total)  
c. Investigators are involved on the PI 's open Human Research studies ? 21 
d. Research coordinators are involved on the PI 's open Human Research studies ? 1 
2. What is the expected length of this project ? 3 years  
3. Retention of study materials be fore, during , and after completion of the project:   
a. Where will the original signed consent and PHI 
Authorization  documents be stored (building name and 
room)?  Biomedical Research Labs 
(BRL) room B101  
b. How long will the data/consents  be kept  after conclusion of the 
project?   6 years  
 Other:__________  
4. If the Human R esearch project  is funded , identify all 
sponsoring entity /ies): Guided Therapy Systems  
5. If funding support is from a federal agency (such as a training 
grant , infrastructure grant , salary support , project grant , etc.), list 
federal agency and grant number   
6. Total f unding amount  OR per subject amount : $15,180  
7. The Principal Investigator hereby affirms that ALL individuals who meet the definition of 
"investigator " for this project in the current "Policy on Investigator Conflict of Interest in 
Research " have completed the man datory Conflict of Interest training 
(http:/www .orcr.arizona .edu/coi/training )  Yes 
8. Will this project be registered on ClinicalTrials .gov because  …?  Yes  No 
a. the local PI is the sponsor of the clinica l trial  (including NIH -funded clinical trials 
where the local PI is the funding recipient OR IND holder);   
OR 
b. The PI has been designated by a sponsor , contractor , grantee , or awardee to register 
the clinical trial  to ClinicalTr ials.gov, as the Responsible Party  (responsible for 
conducting the trial , and has sufficient data rights ) 
 
If yes, please check the appropriate box:  
 ClincialTrials .gov "NCT " number for this trial (define ): 
 Registration pending    
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   6 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
 Clinical trial does not require registration (click  above to see what studies 
qualify)  
 
 
SECTION 3.  PROJECT NARRATIVE  
 
1) Background  
 The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the efficacy of combining intense therapeutic ultrasound (ITU) 
with standard care for the treatment of chronic plantar fasciitis.  A secondary objective is to eva luate the tolerability 
and safety of intense therapeutic ultrasound in the treatment of plantar fasciitis.  
These objectives will be accomplished through the following specific aims:  
Aim # 1: Compare patient reported outcomes of pain, function and level of activity for subjects treated with  
standard of care plus ITU (ITU group) to those treated with  standard of care plus sham  ITU (control group).    
Aim # 2: Compare the changes in plantar fascia thickness in subjects treated with standard of care plus ITU to  those 
treated with standard of care plus sham ITU.     
Aim # 3: Evaluate the tolerability  and safety  of ITU for the treatment of  chronic plantar fasciitis Chronic Plantar 
Fasciitis .  Chronic plantar fasciitis (CPF) is a common cause of plantar heel pain that is a result of a degenerative 
process of the plantar fascia and its surrou nding perifascial structures .  It is the most common cause of heel pain, 
affecting 10% of the U.S. population, and one of the most co mmon foot and ankle problems . One study show ed that 
individuals with this disease scored significantly lower in general health -related quality of life in addition to foot 
specific quality  of life (pain and function) . 
The plantar fascia, or plantar aponeurosis, originates on the posterior tuberosity of the calcaneus and inserts into the 
proximal phalanges of the toes. It acts like a cable, which tightens with flexion of the metatarsophalangeal joints, 
the “windlass ” mechanism, thereby restoring the arch during mid -stance, stiffening the medial column of foot for 
push -off and transferring the force of the gastrocnemius muscle contracture to the ground. Although the exact 
etiology of CPF is unclear, the predominance of evidence indicates that it is the combination of age and overuse 
which lead to degener ative changes within the fascia that result in the symptoms associated with this disease.   The 
most common presentation for patients with plantar fasciitis include pain with the first few steps in the morning, 
pain at the beginning of the activity that res olves with continued activity, pain and stiffness with prolonged 
standing, and pain at the end of the day.  
The diagnosis of CPF is made clinically based on history and physical exam.  Confirmation with diagnostic 
imaging may be necessary when the symptoms are atypical or are refractory to treatment.  MRI is a useful 
diagnostic tool  to evaluate for plantar fascia  thickening and edema in and around the fascia, both of which are  
consistent with the diagnosis of CPF. In addition, many physicians use MRI to excl ude other causes of plantar heel 
pain. Ultrasound can also be used to measure the thickness of the plantar fascia. Multiple studies have shown that 
patients with CPF have increased thickness of the fascia compared to asymptomatic individuals. Mean thicknes s in 
these studies for subjects with CPF range from 4.8 -6.5 mm as opposed to 2.3 -4.0 mm for subjects without the 
disease. One of the studies showed that the thickness was increased in medial, central and lateral bands of plantar 
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   7 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
fascia uniformly along with  68% of patients with CPF reporting central band tenderness as opposed to 26% having 
lateral band tenderness. In addition to the evidence of inflammation, the presence of a hyper -echoic lesion in the 
plantar fascia was noted in 68% to 84% of patients with CPF. Diagnostic ultrasound has also been used to quantify 
the effectiveness of treatments such as extra -corporeal shock wave therapy, NSAIDs and Botox injections for 
subjects with CPF.  
More than twenty different treatments have been used for plantar fascii tis. The combination of rest, ice, stretching 
and NSAIDs are used as initial management in most patients and have been shown to effectively treat symptoms in 
90% of patients in  less than 12 months. However, 10 % of patients fail conservative management and continue to 
have symptoms beyond 12 months (termed refractory plantar fasciitis or RPF). Surgery consisting of partial plantar 
fascia release or gastrocnemius recession is often considered in these patients.  However, the outcomes of surgery 
are not unifor mly positive with 50% of patients reporting residual symptoms.  Moreover, evidence supporting 
surgical treatment of RPF is weak as there are no randomized controlled trials comparing its efficacy to other 
treatments.  Thus, for many patients the risks of s urgery such as arch instability, prolonged wound healing, and 
longer rehabilitation times simply outweigh the benefits.  Is there a non -invasive treatment that can be used as an 
adjunct to speed healing in patients with CPF and as an alternative to surgery  in those with RPF?  The primary 
objective of this study is to evaluate the efficacy of combining the non-invasive treatment with intense therapeutic 
ultrasound (ITU) with standard care for the treatment of chronic plantar fasciitis.  A secondary objective  is to 
evaluate the tolerability and safety of intense therapeutic ultrasound in the treatment of plantar fasciitis.   
Intense therapeutic ultrasound (ITU).  Various types of ultrasound have been used to treat soft tissue injuries since 
the 1930s. Intense t herapeutic ultrasound (ITU) is a recently developed ultrasound based therapy in which sound 
waves are concentrated to produce selective thermal coagulative change over a small area while leaving the 
remaining regions unaffected.  ITU has been used clinical ly for treating the facial skin for the past decade and it has 
recently received FDA approvals for non -surgical brow and submental tissue lifting. Over 300,000 patients 
worldwide have been treated using this technology. Clinical studies have shown that 85%  of subjects receiving this 
treatment on facial skin tissue showed an improvement in facial lifting with no significant pain, erythema, 
inflammation or scarring. Histologically, it has been shown that ITU induces the production of dermal collagen 
with thic kening of the dermis and straightening of the elastic fibers in the reticular dermis. On -going research in our 
laboratory has shown that ITU can improve healing of damaged Achilles tendon in a rabbit model.  Preliminary 
results showed an increase in marker s for wound healing (e.g. VEGFa, TNF α, IL-1β, and TGF β1) and a decrease in 
markers for scar tissue formation (e.g. COL1 α1, COL1 α2, and COL2 α2) in injured rabbit tendon treated with ITU 
compared to injured, untreated rabbit tendon.  These results have led u s to want to explore the possibility using ITU 
to treat patients with CPF.   
 
2) Lay Summary  (approximately 400 words ) 
 The purpose of this study is to assess the effectiveness of ITU in the treatment of CPF by comparing pain, 
function, and cha nge in plantar f ascia thickness  in subjects treated with ITU in addition to standard of care to 
subjects that are treated with standard of care alone. The primary outcome measure will be a computer adaptive 
questionnaire where pain, function and level of activity will be compared between the two groups. In addition, 
with the use of diagno stic ultrasound, plantar fascia  thickness and presence or absence of hyper -echoic lesion 
will be compared be tween the two groups.  Finally,  the safety and tolerability of ITU will be monit ored through 
the course of the study.  It is hypothesized that patients receiving ITU in addition to standard of care will have a 
more rapid resolution of their pain, faster return to activities, and a greater decrease in plantar fascia thickening 
on ultra sound as compared to those only receiving standard of care.  
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   8 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
 
3) Setting of the Human Research  
The PI is an assistant professor in the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and surgeon with the University of 
Arizona Health Network.  Subjects will be recruited from  the outpatient clinic of Dr s. Daniel Latt  (PI) and Peg 
Chilvers .  The age, gender, height, weight, activity level, pain level, and physical exam findings of patients will 
be obtained directly from the subject, the subject’s medical record, or from direct examination and then 
recorded in a password protected excel file.   The online survey can be completed from any computer  available 
to the subject .  Intense therapeutic ultrasound and diagnostic ultrasound will be administered in the Human 
Move ments Biomecha nics Lab (BRL B101 ).  
 
4) Resources available to conduct the Human Research   
Equipment for intense therapeutic ultrasound will be provided by Michael Slayton and Rich Amodei from 
Guided Therapy Systems.  The equipment for measuring height and weight will be i n the orthopedic clinic.  
Personnel available to conduct the study include 2 surgeons, 1  clinical research coordinator, 2  sonographer s, 1 
medical student, and 2 undergraduate assistants.  These individuals  will be available to recruit and consent 
patients,  coordinate and conduct the study,  analyze the data , and produce a manuscript . 
5) Study Population  
Male and female adults (18 years or older) with plantar heel pain and point tenderness near the medial calcaneal 
insertion of the plantar fascia for at least th ree months without improvement will be considered for inclusion 
into the study.   Subjects with diabetes, bilateral plantar heel pain, current systemic or local infection, previous 
foot surgeries, other foot/ankle pathologies (inflammatory arthritis, gout, neurologic disorders, connective 
tissue disorders and malignancy), contraindications to the use of NSAIDs, and pregnancy will be excluded.   
The target enrollment of this pilot study is 50 participants.    
 
6) Recruitment Methods  and Consenting Process  
Subject s will be recruited utilizing public media, list  serves, community organizations, and via referral.  Please 
see the attachments to this application for an electronic media and brochure representations of the 
advertisements to be utilized.   We would like t o select from  the following wording to produce  recruitment 
materials - 
“We are seeking adults with chronic heel pain.   Have you had chronic heel pain?  Chronic heel pain is pain 
which has been present for at least 3 months and may be the result of plantar  fasciitis.  Have you had heel pain 
for the last 3 months?  It may be the result of plantar fasciitis.  Plantar Fasciitis is a painful, inflammatory 
condition occurring where the plantar fascia attaches to the calcaneus (heel bone).    The most common 
symp toms are 1) pain with the first few steps in the morning, 2) pain at the beginning of an activity which 
improves as the plantar fascia is stretched during the activity, 3) pain and stiffness with prolonged standing, 
and 4) pain at the end of the day.  The standard treatment of Chronic Plantar Fasciitis consists of stretching, 
anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDS), and heel cups .  Despite these treatments, 5% - 20% of patients will 
still have symptoms at 1 year!   Participate in a study to determine the effe ctiveness of Intense Therapeutic 
Ultrasound for the treatment of Chronic Plantar Fasciitis.  What is Intense Therapeutic Ultrasound?  Intense 
Therapeutic Ultrasound (ITU) is a noninvasive method of healing tissues with sound waves.  ITU promotes 
collagen g eneration and is FDA approved for the non -surgical lifting of the brow.  What is the purpose of this 
study?  The purpose of this study is to determine if intense ultrasound can promot e healing of plantar fasciitis.   
This study will determine the effectiven ess of ITU in speeding the healing of plantar fasciitis.  The time required 
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   9 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
to heal will be compared for traditional treatment methods  + placebo  to that required by traditional treatment  
+ ITU.  Every subject will receive anti -inflammatory medication, a vi scoelastic heel cup, and physical therapy.  
Patients receiving just these treatments will be compared to those also receiving ITU treatments.  Who can 
participate?  The following criteria are required for participation:  A physician associated with the stu dy has 
diagnosed you with plantar fasciitis.  To be eligible you need to have chronic heel pain that is diagnosed as 
plantar fasciitis by a physician associated with the study.   The/your symptoms exist in only one foot.    You 
must not have diabetes or be pregnant.  You must be 18 years or older .  What will participation require?  You 
will need to  be assigned to either a control group (standard medical care) or to an experimental group  
(standard medical care + ITU).  You wi ll need to not use any other treatments. You will need to commit to the 
assigned treatment for 3 months.  You will need to answer an additional online or telephone questionnaire at 6 
months.  W hy should I participate?  Although you will not receive payment , what is learned may benefit others!  
To participate , please call [contact information ].  If interested, please call [contact information]or send an 
email to [contact information]  and provide preferred contact information. ” 
 
In addition to anatomical labe ling of the  achilles tendon, calcaneus, and plantar fascia, we would like to use 
the caption s, “Inflammation of the pla ntar fascia can cause heel pain ” and “ stretching the plantar fascia .”     
Interested individuals who contact the laboratory  will have the  logistics of the study explained and be referred 
to the clinic for diagnosis and treatment of heel  pain.  All patients diagnosed with plantar fasciitis by 
participating physicians will be contacted by the r esearch team to to discuss the details associated with  
participation .  We would like to obtain a temporary deferment of authorization to obtain contact information 
from the electronic medical record for those individuals who are  initially  identified in th e clinics  by 
participating physicians .  Additionally, we would like permission to provide the consent and authorizat ion 
forms and other information  by e/mail should this be conducive to obtaining in formed consent.  The mailing  is 
for informational purposes  only to allow the subject more time to consider p articipation in the study .  The 
informed consent process will be completed in person.  Both English and Spanish versions of the consent forms 
will be utilized , although the Spanish consent for m will be submitted as a modification once the English version 
is approved.  Finally, we would like to provide a map and information sheet to assist participation in the study 
(see attachments).  
  
7) Procedures involved in the Human Research  
After obtaining  informed consent and authorization from the subject, study personnel will verify the 
screen ing of  participants utilizing the inclusion/exclusion criteria and collect the following 
information - age, gender, height, weight, activity level, pain level, and p hysical exam findings  
including x -rays - which will be recorded on the data abstraction sheet (see attachment) .  The 
activities strictly associated with the research are the assignment to a study group (Control or ITU), 
the a dministrat ion of patient report ed outcome  measures (questionnaires) , and therapeutic and/or 
diagnostic ultrasound  (Table 1) .  Additionally, a dverse events will be recorded at each visit (see 
attachment).  Treatment tolerability will be prior to, immedi ately after, and at 2 days post -treatment.    
Standard of care is integrated into both arms of the investigation and includes a structured physical 
examination, the use of an NSAIDs for 3 weeks (Naprosyn 500 mg po bid or Ibuprofen 800 mg po tid 
taken with meals), viscoelastic heel cups for 1 2 weeks, and supervised physical therapy with home 
exercise program for 6 weeks. These components are described below - 
 
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   10 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
 
 
Table 1. Calendar of Activities  
Structured physical examination .  The focused exam will consist of assessment of hindfoot and 
midfoot alignment, inspection for swelling, palpation of the calcaneus and entire plantar fascia, range 
of moti on of the ankle with the knee flexed and with the knee extended, and calcaneal squeeze test. 
Pertinent positive findings on exam include: valgus hindfoot, midfoot planus, tenderness to palpation 
at the insertion of the plantar fascia onto the calcaneus, an kle dorsiflexion less than 10 degrees with 
the knee extended or greater than 10 degree augmentation in ankle dorsiflxion with the knee flexed. 
Pertinent negative findings include: lack of swelling at the ankle and midfoot, no tenderness at the 
Achilles ins ertion, the retrocalcaneal bursae, along the arch, posterior to the medial malleolus, or at 
Baxters point, and positive calcaneal squeeze test.  
Physical Therapy .   Supervised physical therapy will occur two times per week and include 
gastrocnemius stretchi ng, plantar fascia specific stretching, modalities (ice and heat), and plantar 
fascia deep tissue massage (see instructions to PT appendix 2  of the protocol ).  Use of advanced 
modalities such as iontophoresis, phonophoresis, or TENS will not be permitted. The home exercise 
program will consist of PF specific stretch and gastrocnemius stretch to be done for ten minutes two 
times per day (see home exercise program handout, Appendix 2  of the protocol ).  Subjects will be 
required to record the frequency of each  exercise in a logbook (see Appendix 3  of the protocol ). 
The research components are described below - 
Rand omization and Blinding .  Suitable subjects will be randoml y assigned (1:1) to receive standard of 
care with a sham  ultrasound treatment  (Control group) or standard of care + ITU treatment (ITU 
group)  by the application of an algorithm (e.g. even vs odd) to the number provided  by a random -
number generato r.  Most members of the research team and the subject will be blinded  to group 
assignment.   Only the clinical research coordinator and ultrasound treatment team will be privy to the 
subject’s group assignment.  
Patient Reported Outcome Measures  (Aim 1) .  The principal aim of this study is to compare the 
efficacy of treatment and time course of response to treatment between the two groups using validated Timeline  Standard of Care  Research Activity  
-1 focused history, x -rays, NSAID s, heel cups  Informed consent and assessment of inclusion/exclusion criteria ; 
enrollment in the study (randomization to treatment group)  
0 NSAIDs, heel cups, focused exam  questionnaires;  
ultrasound (diagnostic & treatment ) 
2 weeks  NSAIDs, heel cups, foc used exam  questionnaires;  
ultrasound (diagnostic & treatment ) 
4 weeks  heel cups, focused exam  questionnaires  
ultrasound (diagnostic)  
6 weeks  heel cups, focused exam  questionnaires  
ultrasound (diagnostic)  
12 weeks  heel cups, focused exam  questionnaires  
ultrasound (diagnostic)  
24 weeks   questionnaires  
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   11 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
patient reported outcome measures assessing pain, function and level of activity. Subjects will 
complete v alidated patient reported outcome questionnaires assessing pain, function and level of 
activity prior to initiating treatment and at 0, 2, 4, 6, 12, and 24 weeks after starting treatment.   
 
Pain  will be assessed using the of the foot function index pain s ubscale (FFI -P) and the subject 
reported outcome measures (SROM).  These two instruments have been used to assess pain in 
previous studies of plantar fascia treatments. (Please see Appendices  1-D and 1 -E of the Protocol.)  
 
Function  will be assessed using t wo validated PRO instruments the PROMIS PF CAT and the FAAM. 
The PROMIS PFCAT is a subject relevant outcome measure that uses computer adaptive survey 
questions to assess the patient ’s pain and function in relation to daily activities .    (Please see 
Appendix 1 -A of the Protocol.)   The FAAM has been shown to be a reliable, responsive, and valid 
measure of physical function for individuals with a broad range of musculoskeletal disorders of the 
lower leg, foot, and ank le.  (Please see Appendix 1 -B of the Protocol.)  
 
Level of Activity  will be assessed using the activity subscale of FAAM. This subscale scores 
quantitatively the level of difficulty subjects  often  face when they perform basic activities of daily 
living. It has shown to be an accurate and reliable predictor of the activity level while performing day -
to-day activities.   (Please see Appendix 1 -B of the Protocol.)  
 
Diagnostic Ultrasound (Aim 2).   Diagnostic ultrasound  will be utilized to c ompare the changes in 
plantar fascia thickness that occurs over time in subjects treated with standard care to those treated 
with ITU plus standard of care.   Diagnostic ultrasound imaging will be performed with an FDA 
approved ultrasound scanner (Spark® System, Ardent Sound,  Inc. – Mesa, AZ, see Appendix 6  of 
proposal ) using a coupling gel (Polysonic®, Parker Laboratories, Inc ., Fairfield, NJ, see Appendix 7  
of the attached proposal ) by a trained sonographer or physician. The subject will be positioned prone 
on an exam table with  the feet over the edge of the table. The plantar fascia of the affected and 
contralateral feet will be imaged. The width and depth of the fascia as well as the size and location of 
a hyperechoic lesion, when present, will be recorded using both long and s hort axis imaging. Change 
in plantar fascia thickness relative to the baseline measurement will be calculated. Decreased 
thickness of 0.8 mm or greater will be considered clinically significant as these changes have been 
shown to correlate with decreased p ain and increased mobility.  
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   12 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
Experimental Treatment :  Intense Therapeutic Ultrasound (ITU).   Subjects in the ITU group will 
receive standard treatment plus two treatments (at week 0 and week 2) of ITU to the affected plantar 
fascia  (Table 1 in red).  ITU t reatment will be performed using a GEN II 
system (Guided Therapy S ystems, Mesa, AZ ). (Please see Appendix 5 of 
the Protocol.)   We are seeking classification as a non-significant risk 
(NSR) device .  (Please see the attached NSR statem ent.)  Trained study 
personnel will conduct the treatments.  The treatment session will last 15 
– 20 minutes. During this time the subjects will be required to lay prone 
position on an exam table with their feet hanging over the end of the 
table. An average energy up to 5 joules  / thermal zone will be 
administered to the symptomatic Plantar Fascia in a linear pattern along 
the Plantar Fascia (Figure 1) with up to 50 lines. Each line will include 
individual thermal zones, less than 1 mm3 in volume, cent ered at 10 – 13 
mm depth, an d approximately 2 mm apart.   
 
Figure 1: The treatment site located  
around the insertion of the plantar  
fascia onto the posterior process  
of the calcaneus   
 
 
Assessment of Safety and Tolerability (Aim 3).   Subject self -assessments of treatment tolerabil ity will 
be conducted immediately after, two days after (phone survey) and two weeks after treatment using 
a10-point visual analog scale (V AS, see Appendix 1 -C).  The subject will be asked to report their 
current level of pain and the maximum level of pain  experienced over the last two days. The V AS is 
the standard for assessing pain for both clinical and research purposes.  Recording of adverse events 
will take place at all visits (see adverse event reporting form Appendix 4  in the protocol ). Adverse 
event s and serious adverse events will be monitored throughout the study .  A treatment will not be 
administered if there is residual pain/discomfort experienced by the subject from the previous 
treatment.    
 
Statistical analysis .  Data will be assessed for vari ance homogeneity and normality.  FFI-P, PFCAT,  
and FAAM scores before and after intervention will be compared between the two groups using a 
paired t -test. Additionally, the m ean thickness of the plantar f ascia will be compared  between the two 
groups befor e and after treatment and significance determined utilizing p aired t tests.  P<0.05 is 
considered to be statistically significant.  
 
8) Risks to subjects  
Exposure to ITU may produce short -term sensations which may cause discomfort  and mild erythema 
for up to a  few hours following the exposure.   No detrimental side effects have been reported in 
previous clinical trials investigating similar devices in which ultrasound energy was applied to the 
neck and face.    Additionally, the ITU in this investigation will ut ilize lower power parameters  than 
those reported for these similar devices.   We are seeking classification of the GEN II system (Guided 

 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   13 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
Therapy Systems, Mesa, AZ)  as a non -significant risk device.  ( Please s ee the attached  NSR 
statement.)   Adverse events w ill be recorded at each visit (see appendix 4 of the protocol ).       
Additionally, x -rays will be obtained as part of the standard care.  A small  risk exists of developing 
cancer later in life as a result of exposure to radiation .        
Finally,  risk of exposure of protected health information (PHI) exits.  However, we have  minimized 
this risk by implementing three levels of precaution.  Access to protected health information will be 
restricted  to the minimum number of individuals required to complete the  tasks .  The files containing 
the PHI will be kept electronically and geographically separate from the data files  with entries    
identified only by a randomly generated number  to be used as the PHI key .  Both files will be  
encrypted and password protected and then  stored on password protected, secured computers.  
9) Potential benefits to subjects  and/or society  
 Subjects receiving intensive therapeutic ultrasound treatment may experience faster healing time, 
decreased pain and return to full function earlier as a result of the treatment. Patients not placed into 
the ITU group will receive no additional individual benefit by participating in the study. The results of 
this study may lead to further research or widespread clinical application of ITU in turn incre asing 
knowledge in this area or improving the care available to individuals affected by plantar fasciitis.   
However, in general the subjects will obtain no significant benefit by participating in the study.  
 
10) Provisions to protect the privacy of subjects  and the confidentiality of data  
The consenting process will be initiated in the clinic with the physicians in the privacy of an exam 
room.  The n ames and contact information for potential subjects will be kept  in a password encrypted 
excel file on a passwor d protected, secured computer .   Only the minimum number of research 
personnel required to complete the consenting process will have access to PHI.  Once enrolled in the 
study a  unique patient identifier  will be u sed in subsequent date files  generated in the study .  . A list 
linking subjects to identifiable information will be stored on a password protected, secured computer. 
This list will only be accessible to the study coordinator during the study and to the PI (L Daniel Latt, 
MD PhD) following data analysis.  Should  the arrival of  subjects in the lab overlap, we will have a 
separate  room available apart from the lab so that the consenting and subsequent exam and treatment  
can be conducted in privacy.   Should a participant decide to leave the study, the patient’s PHI records 
will be destroyed , but the data will be retained . Upon closure of the IRB project, all patient identifiers 
will be destroyed.  
 
11) Access to Private Information  
a. Authorization for access to Protected Health Information  (PHI) 
We are requesting a temporary waiver of authorization so that we may obtain contact information 
from the medical records for those subjects identified in clinic as interested in the study.   We will 
obtain author ization for PHI during the consenting process.   This request is based upon the following 
justification - 
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   14 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
1) The use or disclosure of protected health information involves no more than minimal risk to the privacy of 
individuals, based on , at least, the presenc e of the following elements;  
a) An adequate plan to protect the name and phone number  from improper use and disclosure has been 
implemented through the utilization of password protected files .  Additionally, the PHI will be obtained and 
accessed only by the m inimal number of investigators required to conduct the study.  Furthermore, the 
computer containing the PHI will be password protected and secured.   
b) An adequate plan to destroy the identifiers at the earliest opportunity consistent with conduct of the 
research, unless there is a health or research justification for retaining the identifiers or such retention i s 
otherwise required by law, has been implemented in that the contact information will be destroyed if the 
subject declines participation.   An author ization will be obtained prior to the additional collection of PHI.    
c) Adequate written assurances that the protected health information will not be reused or disclosed to any 
other person or entity, except as required by law, for authorized oversight of th e research study, or for other 
research for which the use or disclosure of protected health informat ion would be permitted by HIPAA, are 
hereby provided in that the PHI will only be utilized to con duct the study  as described within the attached 
protocol .       
2) The research could not practicably be conducted without the waiver or alteration of the HIPA A authorization 
requirement because access to contact information is required to begin the process of informed consent.  If the 
subject indicates that they are  not interested in participating, their contact information will be removed from the 
encrypted data file.   No other information will be obtained from the records until authorization is provided by 
the subject.    
3) The research could not practicably be conduc ted without access to and use of t he protected health information 
because obtaining authorization at the clinic for participation in the study may not be consistently feasible.   
  
12) Cost to subjects   
The proposed research has no associated costs to the subj ects. 
 
13) Subject compensation  
The subjects will not be compensated.  
 
14) Medical care and compensation for injury  
  If an injury occurs, medical care is available.  No funds are available to co ver compensation for any 
injury  incurred as a result of participation in this investigation .    
15) Withdrawal of subjects  
Subjects may withdraw from the study at any time either  in person, in writing, or by telephone. 
Subjects withdraw by contacting either Dr. Daniel Latt or the project lead.   Abrupt withdrawal 
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   15 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
presents no risk. Should subjects fail to comply with instructions given to them, they may be 
withdrawn from the study.  
  
16) Sharing of results with subjects   
The results of the study will not be shared with subjects.  
 
17) Information management  
N/A 
 
18) Drugs , Devices , and Gases   
Equipment for intense therapeutic ultrasound will be provided by Michael Slayton and Rich Amodei 
from Guided Therapy Systems  and operated by trained sonographers.   
a) Name of drug /device :  GEN II  
b) FDA approval status of the drug /device :  We are seeking classification as a Non-Significant Risk 
(NSR ) Device  with the following reasons - 
(a) GEN II will  not be utilized nor is intended to be utilized as  an implant .   Additionally, 
the device  does no t present a potential for serious risk to the health , safety , or welfare 
of a subject . 
(b) GEN II i s not purported or represented to be for a use in supporting or sustaining 
human life and  does not  present  a potential for serious risk to the health , safety , or 
welfare of a subject . 
(c) The GEN II device i s not of substantial importance in diagnosing , curing , mitigating , 
or treating disease , or otherwise preventing impairment of human health and does not 
present a potential for serious risk to the health , safety , or welfare of a subject . 
(d) The GEN II does not otherwise  present a potential for serious risk to the health , safety , 
or welfare of a subject . 
c) The GEN II will be controlled by the PI  and/or representatives of the sponsor, Guided Therapy 
Systems : 
i)  The device wil l be stored in the PI ’s laboratory located in the Department of Orthopaedic 
Surgery, Biological Research Buildings, Building B Room 101  or in possession of GTS 
representatives . 
ii)  The site is sufficient ly secure to protect the equipment.  
iii)  The storage conditi on for the equipment is  not of concern beyond normal sheltered  conditions.  
iv) The GEN II device does not require stringent control and tracking of utilization.    
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   16 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
v) Trained sonographers will perform the ITU utilizing the GENII system.    
vi) Disposal issues are not  relevant to the use of the GEN II system.    
 
SECTION 4: LIST OF ATTACHMENTS  FOR THIS SUBMISSION  
Document Name  Version Date  
1. F107 v030614  1. 3/6/14  
2. Latt CV_Nov 2013  2. 11/2013  
3. Ortho - Planters Fasciitis Broch_v7  3. 2/2014  
4. Craig’s List  4. 3/4/14  
5. T502a - ICF Cons ent Form v031014  5. 3/10/14  
6. T504a - PHI Authorization Form v031014  6. 3/10/14  
7. T504b - PHI Autorizacion Spanish v031414  7. 3/14/14  
8. map 8. 9/23/13  
9.  ITU protocol latt final  9. 4/5/14  
10. AE Log  10. 4/5/14  
11. NSR Statement 022614  11. 2/26/14  
12. ITU-PF patient Instructions  12. 3/10/14  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submission List  for F200: Application for Human Research  
 
Required  items  for all F200 submissions:  
• F107 : Verification of Training Form  
• Current PI /Co-PI CVs or biosketch, if not included with copy of grant application  
 
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   17 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
Other Items as applicable : 
• Biosafety  Review letter  (for UA - Institutional Biosafety Committee ) 
• Certificate of Confidentiality  
• Compressed Gases Review letter  (for UA – Research Instrumentation ) 
• Contract  – complete or draft copy of contract including budget  
• Data Collection Tools  – surveys , questionnaires , diaries not included in the protocol , data 
abstraction form for records review  
• Data Monitoring Charter and Plan   
• Drug /Device information  – Investigator 's Brochure , drug product sheet , device manual , user's 
manual , instructions for use , packag e insert , IND/IDE documentation , FDA 1572 form , 510k 
indication , FDA exemption , sponsor determination of device risk , etc. 
• Export Control Review  
• Grant Application (s) – complete copy of grant , regardless of home institution or funding agency , 
and a copy of the Notice of Grant Award  
• Informed Consent /Permission/Assent  Form (s) – including study specific release of information 
documents , DHHS approved sample consent forms .  If consent will not be documented in writing , 
a script of information to be provided oral ly to subjects  
• Other Approval letters  (e.g., school districts , Tribal , other IRB approvals ) 
• Participant Materials  – All written materials to be provided to or meant to be seen or heard by 
subjects (e.g. study newsletter , physician to participant letter , wallet cards , incentive items , 
holiday /birthday cards , certificates , instructional videos /written guides , calendars , certification of 
achievement , etc.) 
• PHI Authorization Form (s) 
• Protocol  – including all amendments /revisions , sub- or extension -studies  
• Radiat ion Safety Review  letter  
• Recruitment Materials  – telephone scripts , flyers , brochures , websites , email texts , 
radio /television spots , newspaper advertisements , press releases , etc. 
• Scientific Review Committee  letter (for cancer related projects – AZCC SRC ; other units as 
applicable if the unit has a scientific review committee ) 
• Site Authorizations for research purposes and /or access to administrative records /samples  
o External sites (such as schools, other hospitals or campuses, etc.)  
o UAHN  University Campus, South Campus and clinics Site Review Authority  (SRA)  approval  
• Supplemental site information  (for sites engaged in research where the UA is the IRB of record )  
o Copy of any approvals granted from that site  (including determinations if this site has an IRB 
of its own)  
o Site-specific F107  
o Copy of the site 's human subjects training policy  
o CV and medical license (if applicable ) of site PI  
• Travel Authorization documentation (for UA – Office of Global Initiatives)  
• Use of retrospective research samples and /or data  – IRB approval letter , original consent under 
which samples /data were collected , letter allowing access to samples  
 
 FORM : Application for Human Research  
NUMBER  FORM DATE  PAGE  
F200   18 of 18 
 
    
 
©2009 Huron Consulting Services, LLC.  Huron Consulting Group  
Use and distribution su bject to End User License Agreement at  Experience. Redefined. ™  
http://www.huronconsultinggroup.com/SOP  hrppsops@huronconsultinggroup.com  
Submitting  documents  to the IRB  
All materials must be typed and submitted electronically .  Maintain electronic copies of all information 
submi tted to the HSPP office in case revisions are required . It is recommended that version dates be used 
while naming documents.   
1. Documents must be submitted to the VPR -IRB@email .arizona .edu account and not to i ndividual 
staff email accounts .  After contact by a staff member future correspondence may be 
communicated directly to the staff member  concerning the submission.  
2. If acknowledgement of receipt is needed , please request a "Read Receipt " through your 
email s erver .   If you use Microsoft Outlook 2007, this is accomplished by clicking "Options" and 
choosing the "Request a Read Receipt" checkbox in a new email.  
3. One submission request per email (e.g. one new project submission, one continuing review plus 
attachme nts, or one modification request).   
4. All submissions must have signatures . An email acknowledgement in place of a signature will not 
be acceptable . If electronic signatures are not available for use, the signature pages may be signed 
and scanned as a separa te Adobe PDF document and attached to the submission email.  
5. Microsoft Word documents are REQUIRED  for (applications , consents , recruitment materials, 
and data collection instruments (if available ).  PDFs may be submitted for documents that 
typically are no t revised by the IRB (e.g. Investigator Brochures , sponsor protocols).  
6. The e mail subject line must include : IRB # (if assigned one ), PI Last Name , and type of 
submission (Modification , New Project , Continuing Review, Reportable Item, etc.).  
7. The email must provide a list of the documents submitted for review .  While the documents 
attached do not have to adhere to a specific naming scheme , it is requested that each document be 
named to clearly reflect what is inside .  
Submissions not following these guideline s will be returned without review  