1 
 Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
STUDY PROTOCOL  
Behavioral Economic Applications to Geriatrics Leveraging Electronic Health Records (BEAGLE)  
 
Principal Investigator:  
Stephen D. Persell, MD, Associate Professor, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine  
 
Supported by:  
The National Institute on Aging  
[R33AG057383]  
 
Version 2 
Version Date: June 1 , 2023  
Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
2 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
STUDY TEAM ROSTER  
PARTICIPATING STUDY SITES 
PRÉCIS 
1. STUDY OBJECTIVES  
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
3. STUDY DESIGN  
4. SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF PARTICIPANTS  
5. STUDY INTERVENTIONS  
6. STUDY PROCEDURES  
7. SAFETY ASSESSMENTS 
8. INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION  
9. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
10. DATA COLLECTION AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
11. PARTICIPANT RIGHTS AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
12. COMMITTEES 
13. PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS  
14. REFERENCES 
15. SUPPLEMENTS/APPENDICES  
ABBREVIATIONS  
 
 
  
3 
 STUDY TEAM ROSTER 
Stephen D. Persell , MD, MPH  (Principal Investigator), Division of General Internal Medicine, 
Department  of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,  750 N Lake Shore 
Drive, 10th floor, Chicago, IL 60611,  Phone: 312-503-6464, Email: spersell@nm.org  
Theresa Rowe, DO (Co-investigator) , 
Lucia C. Petito , PhD  (Statistician), Division of Biostatistics, Department of Preventive Medicine, 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 680 N. Lake Shore Drive, Suite 1400, Chicago, 
IL, 60611 Email: lucia.petito@northwestern.edu 
Jody D. Ciolino , PhD  (Statistician) , Division of Biostatistics, Department of Preventive Medicine, 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 680 N. Lake Shore Drive, Suite 1400, Chicago, 
IL, 60611 Email: jody.ciolino@northwestern.edu 
Craig Fox, PhD  (Co-investigator), Anderson School of Management, University of California at Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Email: craig.fox@anderson.ucla.edu 
Noah Goldstein, PhD (Co-investigator), Anderson School of Management, University of California at 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Email: noah.goldstein@anderson.ucla.edu  
Jeffrey Linder, MD, MPH  (Co-investigator), Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 750  N Lake Shore Drive, 10th floor, 
Chicago, IL 60611, Email: Jlinder@northwestern.edu   
Jason Doctor, PhD (Co-investigator), Schaeffer Center for Health Economics and Policy, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Email: jdoctor@usc.edu 
Daniella Meeker, PhD (Co-investigator), Ji Young Lee, MS (Data Analyst), Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 750 N Lake Shore Drive, 10
th floor, Chicago, IL 
60611, Email: jlee1@northwestern.edu  
Tiffany Brown , MPH  (Project Manager), Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 750 N Lake Shore Drive, 10th floor, 
Chicago, IL 60611 , Phone:  312-503 -9068, Email: t-brown@northwestern.edu 
Yaw A. Peprah , MPH  (Project C oordinator), Division of General Internal Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 750 N Lake 
Shore Drive, 10th floor, Chicago, IL 60611, Email: yaw.peprah@northwestern.edu Fax for all 
members of study team: 31 2-503- 2755  
 
 
 PARTICIPATING STUDY SITES  
Northwestern University.  Stephen D. Persell, MD, MPH, Division of General Interna Medicine, Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 750 N Lake Shore Drive, 10th Floor, Chicago, IL 60611, 
spersell@nm.org  
4 
 This study occurs within the Northwestern Medicine health care system.   
5 
 PRÉCIS  
Study Title  
 
Behavioral Economic Applications to Geriatrics Leveraging Electronic Health Records (BEAGLE)  
 
Objectives  
 
The main intent of this study is to determine whether an intervention  comprised of 3 electronic 
health record (EHR) nudges  designed using behavioral economic concepts reduces rates of over -
prescribing in 3 clinical areas: prostate screenings,  urinary  testing for non-specific reasons female 
patients, and  treatment for  diabetes mellitus (DM) . Our primary hypothesis is that practices randomized to 
receive these nudges  will have lower over -prescribing rates in these 3 domains compared to control 
practices.  
  
Design and Outcomes  
 
We will conduct a multi-site cluster randomized trial of a behavioral intervention targeting overuse of  
prostate screening, urinary testing, and treatment for diabetes in geriatric patients , with practice as the unit 
of randomization.  
The 3 co-primary  outcome s are measured at the patient level , and capture  whether an eligible patient 
received unnecessary treatment for a particular measure. We will report  marginal  monthly rates of each 
outcome . These include:  
1. Ordering of prostate specific antigen (PSA) for prostate cancer screening in adult men aged 76 
years and older  
2. Ordering of urinalysis or urine cultures (UA/UC) for non-specific reasons to identify bacteriuria 
in women aged 65 years and older  
3. Overtreatment  of diabetes (DM)  with insulin or oral hypoglycemic drugs in adults aged 75 years 
and older.   
In the main analysis, we will compare a 12 -month historical period to an 18-month intervention 
period. In subsequent secondary analyses  to determine persistence of study effects, we will track all 3 co -
primary outcomes for another 12 months after the intervention ceases.  
 Interventions and Duration  
 We will randomize clinics to either a brief education arm (clinicians at those clinics receive an invitation 
to an online education module) or brief education plus 18 months of clinical decision support within the 
EHR for the three clinical topics above.  
The intervention period will be  18 months  long, followed by an additional 12 months  of data 
collection to assess persistence of study effects.  We will also use data from a 12 month historical baseline 
period immediately prior to the start of the intervention period.  
 
Sample Size and Population 
 
We will recruit clinicians (physicians, advance practice nurses, and physician assistants)  from 60 
primary care clinics (internal medicine, family medicine and geriatr ics) affiliated with Northwestern 
Medicine. Approximately 350 eligible clinicians will be recruited for this study.  
6 
 We will randomize practices to intervention or control (1:1 allocation) using a constrained 
randomization algorithm, to achieve balance betw een study arms on baseline clinic characteristics.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
7 
 1. STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
1.1 Primary Objective  
 Here, our primary aim is to evaluate the effects of an  electronic health record (EHR) nudge designed to 
reduce over testing and treatment in geriatric patients for 3 clinical issues using a pragmatic cluster 
randomized controlled trial.  We will measure the impact on validated quality measures associated with  
each of the 3  types of  ‘nudge interventions’  and indicators of patient safety.  The 3 clinical areas targeted 
by this nudge are:  
 1) Ordering of prostate specific antigen (PSA) for prostate cancer screening in adult men 
aged 76 years and older  
(2) Orderin g of urinalysis or urine cultures (UA/UC) for non-specific reasons to identify 
bacteriuria in women aged 65 years and older  
(3) Overtreatment of diabetes (DM) with insulin or oral hypoglycemic drugs in adults aged 
75 years and older.   
 1.2 Secondary Objectives  
 1.2.2. We plan to evaluate the persistence of any effects observed in Aim 1 by extending the analysis to 
include another 12 months of follow -up data.   
 
1.2.1 Using a clinician survey administered twice – once pre -intervention roll -out and once at the end of 
the intervention period, we will measure the impact of our intervention on clinician attitudes.  
 
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE   
 
2.1 Background on Overtreatment and Unnecessary Testing in Geriatric Populations  
 Despite strong recommendations from the American Geriatrics Society as part of the Choosing Wisely 
Initiative , sometimes clinicians do not follow best practices regarding ordering testing and treatments for 
their older adults that may lead to patient ha rm. These include: (1) testing and treatment for asymptomatic 
bacteriuria (ASB) in older women, (2) prostate specific antigen (PSA) screening in older men without 
prostate cancer, and (3) aggressive treatment with insulin or an oral hypoglycemic for older patients with 
type 2 diabetes.  
 
 Clinical decision support nudges, informed by behavioral economics and social psychology and 
delivered via EHRs, are promising strategies to reduce the misuse of services.  Behavioral economics-informed interventions influence conscious and unconscious drivers of clinical decision making, are low 
cost to implement and disseminate, and can be incorporated into existing delivery systems.  Our team has 
successfully employed these methods to the overuse of antibiotics for acute respiratory infections and has 
the necessary expertise in primary care practice, geriatrics, health informatics, social psychology, quality improvement, pragmatic trials and performance measurement to make this project a success.  As our 
population continues to age, effective strategies to improve clinical care of older adults by reducing 
misused testing (e.g., urinalysis for ASB, prostate cancer screening with PSA) and treatment (e.g., overly -
intense treatment of diabetes with insulin or other oral hypogl ycemic) are critically needed.   
 
 
8 
 2.2. Study Rationale  
 
Preliminary data . This study builds on a pilot study conducted at Northwestern University by the same 
study team, which was funded by the National Institute  on Aging (R21 #____; clinicaltrials.gov i dentifier 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). The EHR nudge  used here, presented as clinical decision support prompts, were 
designed and pilot tested as part of  that study.  
 
 During 2017- 2018, our team interviewed NM primary care physicians caring for older adult 
patients to identify potential drivers of overuse of testing and treatment. Clinician participants reported knowledge of the Choosing Wisely recommendations (e.g., “We’ve always k nown to be a little more 
lenient for elderly patients because of hypoglycemia and falls…”), a reliance on patient preference (e.g., “Some patients are very insistent or expectant that they would want to continue to get testing”), clinical 
uncertainty and a n underestimation of harms (e.g., “Don’t want to over test her, but at the same time if 
she has treatable UTI want to treat her to get her some relief.”). Additionally, we found that clinicians often perceive discussions with patients about not ordering te sts or treatments to be time consuming (e.g., 
“After long discussion, seems overwhelming majority of patients want to do the test. Given limits of time we have, I’ve been less detailed in discussion…”). Finally, the theme of clinical inertia or resistance to 
change was present (e.g., “If this patient is doing well, I might leave it [diabetes treatment] alone.”)  
 In fall 2018, w e used data from these interviews and worked with clinical and decision science experts to 
design  a nudge comprised of  three clinical decision support interventions. The study team extensively 
reviewed the language and programming decisions prior to launching a pilot test of these interventions in 
January 2019. We consented and enrolled fourteen Northwestern Medicine primary care physi cians to 
receive clinical decision support within NM’s Epic electronic health record (EHR) when conditions within their patient’s chart met nudge trigger eligibility criteria. Images of the 3  best practice advisories 
(BPAs )tested in the pilot intervention are included as Protocol Supplement 1 (pg. 2 -3).  The pilot study 
ran for six months between January -July 2019. We did not receive any clinician complaints regarding the 
interventions during the study period. In June 2019, we fielded a clinician survey to collect their feedback on their experience with study nudges. We will use the three interventions in this randomized controlled 
trial. During the R21 pilot study, the PSA alert fired 15 times, in 2 cases (13%) the tes t was not done and 
in 3 (20%) cases the test was ordered and an exception added to the report.  The UA/UC alerts fired 34 times and in 21 cases (62%) the test was not ordered. Finally, the DM alert fired 93 times and on chart 
review 34% of patients whose clinician received DM CDS had diabetes therapy reduced during the pilot 
period.  
 Rationale for Accountable Justification.  
Asking clinicians to provide an accountable justification for their ordering action that is not consistent 
with professional guidelines or best practices may reframe the behavior as non -normative by requiring the 
clinician to supply in the EHR a justification that becomes part of the record  when the clinical action is 
taken.  In addition to changing perceptions of what is normative behavior , entering a note that will go into 
the patient record may engage feelings of social accountability that promote more careful reflection.  
 
3. STUDY DESIGN  
 The Behavioral Economic Applications to Geriatrics Leveraging Electronic Health Records (BEAGLE) 
trial is a single site, cluster -randomized controlled trial with practice as the unit of randomization. The 
primary aim is to test the ability of an intervention based on behavioral economic principles to r educe the 
9 
 rates of commonly occurring inappropriate testing and treatment in geriatric patients across 3 domains: 
PSA, UA/UC, and DM. We will randomize practices using a 1:1 allocation; clinicians at intervention 
practices will receive the intervention when an eligible patient is seen. If physicians at intervention clinics 
wish to override the clinical decision support tool, they will ne ed to provide justification that appears in 
the patient’s EHR (accountable justification). C linicians at control practices will receive a one -time 
education module about the risks of over -treatment and testing in these areas.  
 We will enroll approximately 350 clinicians from 60 participating primary care clinic sites and collect 
baseline data for the 12 months leading up to the intervention start  (monthly data collected using a look-
back window of 12 months). All clinicians will receive a one-time education  module about the risks of 
over-treatment and testing in these areas at the time of consent and enrollment . Clinician surveys will be 
administered at the time of enrollment and after the intervention is completed. The 3 co -primary outcomes 
are quality measures [detailed below in section 6]. Secondary outcomes are patient safety measures 
[detailed below in section 6]. The 18 -month intervention period will be followed by a 12-month follow -
up period to measure persistence of effects after interventions end. Patient-level data from EHRs at 
participating practices were abstracted at 3 points [detailed below in section 11]. 
 
4. SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF PARTICIPANTS  
 
This clinical trial will be conducted at 60 clinics within  Northwestern Medicine: Northwestern Medical 
Group in the North and Central regions and Regional Medical Group located in the western and northwestern Chicago suburbs. Leadership for these regions endorsed the system -wide conduct of this 
trial and its perf ormance with a waiver of informed consent.  
 
4.1 Clinic Eligibility  
 Practices that deliver outpatient primary care and include internal medicine, family medicine or geriatrics 
physicians or advanced practice providers will be included in this study.  We will exclude practices that 
only have residents or only provide emergency care.  
 
4.2 Patient eligibility  
 All p atients aged 65 years and older will be included in the overall study patient population. We will 
assess study outcomes for all clinics, clinicians and individual patients who meet the pre-defined study 
eligibility criteria for each measure.  
 
Co-Primary O utcome  Eligibility Criteria  
PSA All adult men aged 76 years and older with a visit to a participating primary 
care or geriatrics NM clinic between  September 1, 2018 – February 28, 2023  
DM All adults aged ≥ 75 years old with a visit to a participating primary care or 
geriatrics NM clinic visit between  September 1, 2018 – February 28, 2023  
UA/UC  All adult women aged 65 years and older with a t least one  primary care, 
geriatrics, or immediate care NM visit between September 1, 2018 – Februar y 
28, 202 3 
 
Note: all subjects over the age of 89 years will be aggregated into a single category. We will obtain these 
outcomes by queries of the NMEDW. Some data are prospective in that they do not exist at the time of 
10 
 IRB submission but retrospective in that we will only have access to them after collected in NM Epic as 
part of routine care delivery.  
 
5. STUDY INTERVENTIONS  
 
5.1 Definitions of Study Interventions  
 Clinician education (control) . An interactive educational module (15 -20 minutes) covering the three 
targeted areas of overuse.  
 
Clinical decision support  plus clinician education (intervention).   
Best Practice Advisories were programmed into Epic to present content to the clinician and  
feature functionality to add content to the encounter documentation. Clinicians attributed to clinics in the 
‘CDS intervention + Education’ arm receive CDS alerts when conditions within a chart meet triggering criteria. For example, a CDS alert appears when a clinician places an order for a PSA test when the patient meets qualifying criteria (e.g., ≥ 76 years old, no prior prostate cancer). The CDS alerts encourage 
the clinician to cancel the order in the cases of PSA and urine testing or to decrease diabetes medication 
in the case of diabetes overtreatment (Table 1); however, they do not restrict clinical decision making in any way. If the clinician proceeds with the order for the PSA, urinalysis, or urine culture they are asked to enter text justifying the order. This justification is then included within the encounter report, visible to any clinician within the chart, under a heading titled ‘Testing Justification’. If the clinician does not enter a justification, the note “No justification given” is included in the encounter report.[9, 10]  Images of the 
CDS presented to the clinicians for each alert and triggering criteria are included in the supplemental material. The EHR programming logic used in the pilot study was re -tested for this trial. 
 
5.2 Administration and Duration of Interventions  
 The clinician educational module will be administered by the study team. The nudges will be delivered 
via NM’s instance of Epic and administered by NM IT . 
 The intervention period will be 18 months in length for all participants. We will continue to collect data 
on all study outcomes for 12 months after the intervention ends to measure persistence of effects. The pre-
intervention baseline period will be 12 months in length.  
 5.3 Interruption due to COVID -19 Pandemic  
 The intervention period for BEAGLE was originally slated to begin in April 2020. However, on March 
21, 2020, the governor of Illinois and mayor of Chicago issued a “stay-at -home” order to mitigate harm 
from the COVID -19 pandemic. This severely impa cted regular primary care activities at Northwestern 
Medicine. As such, we chose to delay the start of the intervention until regular care resumed. T he 
intervention was rolled out on September 1, 2020, and the look-back period for the study measures was adjusted to exclude data collected between March 1 , 2020 and  August 31, 2020. So, for example, study 
outcomes reported in December 2020 included the following 12 months of data: June 1, 2019 – February 
29, 2020 plus September 1, 2020 – Novembe r 30, 2020.  
 
6. STUDY ENDPOINTS  
 6.1 Primary endpoints  
11 
  
Our team developed and validated by manual chart review three electronic clinical quality measures (one 
associated with each of the 3 study interventions).  These measures will be abstracted from the EHR once 
a month for the duration of the intervention pe riod. T he three co -primary endpoints  are: 
 PSA. The PSA screening in older men (PSA) measure is defined as the presence of a PSA laboratory 
result in the EHR during the measurement period among men aged 76 years and older at the start of the measurement period with at least one visit during the measurement period with a clinician included in the 
study and who are without a diagnosis or procedure suggesting a history of prostate cancer (Protocol 
Supplement 2, pg. 4).  Patients on androgenic agents or anabolic steroids are excluded (Protocol 
Supplement 2, pg. 7). Labs constituting the numerator are provided in Protocol Supplement 2 (pg. 7).  
Patients are attributed to the primary care clinician with whom they have the greatest number of visits during the measurement period. The measurement period consists of the 365 days preceding the 
measurement date.  
 
UA/UC.  Urine Testing for Non -Specific Reasons (UA/UC) is defined as the absence of a diagnostic code 
for a specifi c genitourinary sign, symptoms or other potentially relevant indication (Protocol Supplement 
3, pg. 8 ) among instances where a urinalysis (UA) and/or urine culture (UC) is obtai ned in the interval 24 
hours before to 48 hours after a face -to-face ambulatory  care visit by a woman aged 65 years or older 
with a qualifying clinician during the study period. Testing episodes are attributed to the clinician who 
ordered the test. Only UA and/or UC ordered by a qualifying clinician are included. Only the first testi ng 
episode in a measurement period is included in patients with multiple qualifying visits. The measurement period is the 365 days preceding the measurement date.  
 
DM. Diabetes Overtreatment in the Elderly (DM) is defined as the having the most recent hem oglobin 
A1C during the measurement period or during the year prior to the measurement period (if no A1C obtained during the measurement period) of less than 7.0 among adults aged 75 years and older with a 
diagnosis of diabetes mellitus who have insulin or an oral hypoglycemic (e.g., sulfonylurea or 
meglitinide, Protocol Supplement 4, pg. 12 ) on their active medication list at the end of the study period.  
Patients are attributed to the primary care clinician with whom they had the greatest number of visits 
during the measurement period. The measurement period is the 365 days preceding the measurement date.  
 6.2 Secondary endpoints  
 
We chose secondary endpoints related to the primary PSA, UA/UC, and DM outcomes. These were 
selected to identify other burdens o n the healthcare system, and included:  
 
• PSA 
o Prostate biopsy in older men 
o Prostate MRI in older men  
o New prostate cancer diagnosis in older men  
• UA/UC  
o Total urinalysis use in women aged 65 and older  
o Total urine culture use in women age 65 and older  
o Antibiotic  treatment in women age 65 and older (all oral UTI treatments)  
o Antibiotic treatment in women age 65 and older (nitrofurantoin and Fosfomycin only)  
o C. difficile infection in women age 65 and older  
12 
 o Rash in women age 65 and older  
• DM 
o Hypoglycemia requiring an urgent care visit (not emergency department)  among eligible 
patients  
 
We will also measure the three co -primary outcomes monthly during a follow -up period (months 19- 30) 
to evaluate the persistence of any effects observed during the study period.  
 
We will survey the clinicians who consent to participate in an online question naire about their attitudes 
about their experience with study interventions as well as their attitudes and beliefs about testing and treatment more broadly among geriatrics patients. See Baseline Clinician Survey and Follow-up Clinician 
Survey.  
 
7. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 7.1 Schedule of Evaluations  
 
Assessments  Historical 
practice: 
Baseline 
overuse 
(Month -
17 to 
Month 0)  Baseline, 
Enrollment, 
Randomization 
(Month 0, Day 
1) Intervention 
Start 
(Month 1)  Monitored 
and 
Measured 
Monthly  Intervention 
End (Month 
18) Follo w-
up 
Period 
(Month 
19 to 
Month 
30) 
Clinician -level 
Assessments        
Informed Consent   X     
Demographics   X     
Inclusion/Exclusion  X      
Provider Attitudes 
Survey   X   X  
Patient -level 
Assessments        
ICD-10 codes  X X X X X X 
Ordering  X X X X X X 
Adverse Events  X  X X X  
 
 
7.2 Description of Evaluations 
 
7.2.1 C onsent.  We will send providers at participating sites an introductory email that includes a 
description of the broad goals of the study, a general description of the intervention, and a link to the electronic consent form and baseline survey. The consent document will indicate that participation is 
voluntary and that decisions to participate (or not) will have no bearing on any provider’s status at his or 
her clinic. Providers who provide consent to participate will be asked to complete an online survey and 
brief educational session prior to the intervention phase, permit de -identified patient records pertaining to 
eligible  patients who saw them to be included in the st udy database, and complete a 15-minute post -
intervention survey. We will also describe compensation that providers will receive for participation.  
 
13 
 7.2.2 Enrollment. The enrollment date will be documented on the online consent form at the time of 
consent. The i nterventions will be activat ed after all clinicians have been enrolled or declined to 
participate. 
 
7.2.3. Baseline assessments. We will collect information about the rates of each of the 3 co -primary 
outcomes monthly for the 12 months leading up to the activation of the intervention. This period will document historical practice. We will also administer a survey to assess provider characteristics and 
provider attitudes toward practice guidelines, clinical decision support, and practice environment.  
 8. SAFETY ASSESSMENTS 
 We did not study any safety endpoints related to the PSA primary outcome. The safety endpoints related 
to the UA/UC  and DM primary outcomes were deemed serious adverse events, and included:  
 
• EHR -identified ED or hospital care possibly due to UTI or sepsis among women 65 and over 
following an office visit  
• EHR -Identified ED or hospital care possibly due to hyperglycemia among previously tightly 
controlled  
• Poor diabetes control (HbA1c>9%) among individuals who were previously tightly controlled  
(HbA1c < 7%)  
The Principal Investigator will report any unanticipated events to the IRB as well as the Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) assembled for this study. When notified of an unanticipated event, the DSMB 
will convene and make a decision as to whether the study should continue. The IRB will also be notified 
of the DSMB's decision.  
 8.1 Safety Monitoring and Reporting  Procedures  
 
The Principal Investigator will report any unanticipated events to the IRB as well as the Data Safety and 
Monitoring Board (DSMB) assembled for this study (listed in Section 14 below) . When notified of an 
unanticipated event, the DSMB will convene and make a decision as to whether the study should 
continue. The IRB will also be notified of the DSMB's decision. 
 
9. INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION  
 
Following each DSMB meeting, the board will make recommendations to the local IRBs as to whether 
the study should continue or if changes to the protocol are necessary for continuation.  
  
10. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
10.1 General Design Overview 
 Hypotheses  
 Our primary hypothesis is that practices randomized to receive behavioral economic interventions will 
have decreases over time in the over -screening, over -treatment, and over-testing of older patients who 
14 
 may no longer warrant such care. This hypothesis will be evaluated in an intent ion-to-treat difference-in-
differences framework using a mixed -effects logistic regression model. Fixed effects will include the 
effects of interventions over time (i.e., interactions between randomization assignment and time), using a 
historical period 12 months prior to the intervention period. Providers and randomization unit (clinic) will 
be modeled as random effects.  
 Design  
 We will conduct a cluster randomized trial using data abstracted from the EHR at one academic health 
system. We chose a cluster -randomized design at the clinic level to minimize spillover effects – 
contamination that might occur if individual providers in close proximity are randomized to different interventions.  The study design for BEAGLE  included the implementation of a modified constrained 
randomization scheme, to ensure that clinics in each study arm were similar prior to activation of the intervention. 
 
Outcome measures  
 This study has 3 co-primary outcomes, referred to as PSA, UA/UC, and DM (defined in Section 6 above, 
and further detailed in Section 10.4 below). They capture the over -testing, over -screening, and over -
treatment of older patients, who se medical needs may have evolved to require less care.  
10.2 Sample Size and Randomization 
Power Calculations  
Study power for BEAGLE was designed around estimating minimum  detectable absolute rate reductions 
for the three co -primary outcome  measures at the individual level. Power calculations were done for a 2 -
level mixed effects logistic regression model that included a random  intercept for clinic using PASS 
software. Historic data, from a period spanning X, 2017 – Y, 2018 were used to  estimate an in ter-clinic 
correlation coefficient of 0.017. In all calculations, we assumed a two -sided type I error of 5% 
(Bonferrroni-corrected  to 0.05/3 = 0.017), 80% power, 30 clinics in each arm, and that patients would be  
divided equally between clinics in 2 groups . Initial calculations assumed  baseline event rates and sample 
sizes described in Table 1 . These analyses should  have  been conservative, as our assumed sample size 
was derived  from an  historic 12 -month period, while  the study follow -up period was 18 months . We did 
not assume any clinic drop -out, as all data will be available via  the EHR. With these assumptions, we 
anticipated hav ing adequate power to detect an absolute difference of roughly 4% for each of the  
measures. For the PSA and UA/UC outcomes, this c orresponded  to a relative risk between 0.80 and 0.87; 
for the DM outcome, it corresponded  to a relative risk between 0.73 and 0.8 1. 
Table  1. Summary of power calculations for the BEAGLE study . 
 PSA  
N=9,500  DM 
N = 6,600  UA/UC  
N = 15,000  
Baseline event rate 20% 25% 30% 15% 20% 25% 20% 25% 30% 
Minimum detectable absolute 
rate reduction  4.1%  4.5%  4.8%  3.9%  4.4%  4.8%  3.8%  4.2%  4.4%  
Corresponding relative risk  0.80 0.82 0.84 0.74 0.78 0.81 0.81 0.83 0.85 
 Treatment Assignment Procedures – Constrained Randomization  
15 
 Clinics were randomized to receive either the active intervention or control. Clinicians were attributed to 
precisely one clinic based on the clinic where they spent the plurality of their time in March 2019 –  
February 2020. A ll 60 eligible  primary care clinics seeing adult patients were randomized. The study 
design for BEAGLE  implemented  a modified constrained randomization scheme.  Eight clinic -level 
variables were selected based on their possible influence on the three co -primary outcomes, and were 
incorporated into the randomization schemes in a principled manner to reduce potential bias and promote 
comparable arms at the analytic unit (clinician/patient encounter). These clinic -specific variables, created 
using data abstracted from the EHR,  were:  
1. Health system region –  We categorized each practice into one of four geographic areas in the Chicago 
area (categorical).  
2. Number of clinic ians attributed to each practice (continuous).  
3. Number of men eligible for PSA overtesting (age 76 years or older, no history of prostate cancer, not 
on androgenic agents or anabolic  steroids) seen in clinic between March 1, 2019 and February 29, 
2020  by a participating clinician (continuous). 
4. Annual PSA overtesting rate (percent age). 
5. Number of women eligible for unnecessary UA/UC testing  measure between March 1, 2019 and 
February 29, 2020  (continuous).  
6. Annual UA/UC overtesting  rate (percentage).  
7. Number of patients eligible for DM overtreatment measure between March 1, 2019 and February 29, 
2020  (continuous).  
8. Annual DM overtreatment rate (percentage).  
Six practices only contributed nine months of data  (June 1, 2019 – February 29, 2020)  because they were 
acquired by Northwestern Medicine between March 1, 2019 and June 1, 2019 .  
We used the methodology presented in [cite ] to implement the constrained randomization algorithm . 
First, the study biostatistician (LCP) generated  possible 1:1 randomization schemes. Since there were 
infinitely many ways to randomize the 60 practices into 2 groups, the study biostatistician decided to 
create 100,000 possib le sequences.  Second, t he balance of t he eight prespecified variables (which were 
“constrained” upon) was then evaluated in the 100,000 possibilities. Schemes were deemed candidate schemes if they had  “adequate balance” –  that is, the measure of imbalance for each variable (separately) 
could n ot surpass a pre-specified threshold. For categorical variables, we allowed no more than a 
difference of two practices across each arm. For continuous variables, we compared sample means across 
study arm, and adapted the ideas of the minimal sufficient bal ance approach . We called a variable 
‘adequately balanced’ if a T -statistic from an independent two  sample t-test with equal variance was 
between -0.385 and 0.385, corresponding to a p -value for the individual variable of 0.30. Last, the final 
sequence was selected from the candidate schemes (which were adequately balanced) at random with 
equal probability.  
As was disclosed in the study protocol paper , we achieved adequate balance for seven of the eight pre-
specified variables used in the constrained rand omization algorithm. D ue to a coding error, we applied 
balancing criteria for the PSA measure on the number of eligible  patients (denominator) and the number 
of PSA orders (numerator)  rather than the annual PSA overtesting  rate (#4 above). This is an absolute 
measure instead of a relative measure that accounts for the size of the eligible patient population at each 
clinic. For a complete discussion of the implications of this error, please reference the protocol paper.  
The study biostatistician  (LCP) generated the final randomization in R version 3.6.4 (R  Core Team, 
2020). [25] Randomization occurred in June 2020.  The allocation of the sequence was concealed until 
16 
 after the intervention period began in September 2020 (due t o interruption of regular care during the 
COVID-19 pandemic).  
10.3 Interim analyses and stopping rules  
No interim analyse s were conducted for primary or secondary outcomes. The Data Safety and  Monitoring 
board is granted the power to recommend discontinua tion of the study to the IRB, if safety concerns are 
found. The DSMB will meet at least three times over the course of the study: prior to the commencement 
of the study, at approximately month 9 of the intervention period, and at the end of the intervention 
period. Additional meetings will occur as needed or as dir ected by the study sponsor.  Following each 
meeting, the board will make recommendations to the  IRB as to whether the study should continue or if 
changes to the protocol are needed.  
10.4 Outcomes  
10.4.1 Co-primary outcomes  
This study has 3 co-primary out comes, referred to as PSA, UA/UC, and DM (defined in Section 6 above). 
They capture the over -testing, over -screening, and over -treatment of older patients, who may need less 
care than they are receiving. The ICD-10 codes used to capture these co -primary ou tcomes are defined in 
detail in the Supplement  to this document. These outcomes are computable clinical quality measures that 
are abstracted from the EHR. They were previously validated as part of pilot work for this study. These 
will be extracted from the EHR on a monthly basis, with data for each month representing a 365 look-
back period.  
An office visit will be  eligible for inclusion in the outcome denominator if it meets the following criteria:  
PSA. Men were eligible for the PSA over -screening measur e if they were age 76 years or older and 
attended at least one visit in the 365 days prior to the measurement date (for example, 365 days prior to 
February 1, 2020) with a clinician included in the study. Eligible patients had no history of prostate 
cancer  (determined via diagnosis or procedure code) and were not taking an androgenic agent or anabolic 
steroid as of the measurement date.  
UA/UC.  Women were eligible for the urine testing for non-specific reasons (UA/UC) measure if they 
were age 65 years or older and had an in -person ambulatory care visit with a participating clinician in the 
365 days prior to the measurement date where a urinalysis  and/or urine culture was obtained in the 
interval 24 hours before to 48 hours after the visit. If a woman had multiple qualifying visits in the 365-
day window, only the first was included.  
DM. Patients were eligible for the diabetes over -treatment measu re if they were age 75 years or older with 
a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and their most recent hemoglobin A1C in the 365 days prior to the measurement date was less than 7.0%. Patients were attributed to the primary care clinician with whom 
they had the  greatest number of visits in the 365-day window.  
10.4.2. Secondary and safety outcomes  
The secondary outcomes  related to the primary PSA, UA/UC, and DM outcomes included:  
 
• PSA 
o Prostate biopsy in older men 
o Prostate MRI in older men  
o New prostate cancer diagnosis in older men  
17 
 • UA/UC  
o Total urinalysis use in women aged 65 and older  
o Total urine culture use in women age 65 and older  
o Antibiotic treatment in women age 65 and older (all oral UTI treatments)  
o Antibiotic treatment in women age 65 and older (nitrofurantoin and Fosfomycin only)  
o C. difficile infection in women age 65 and older  
o Rash in women age 65 and older  
• DM 
o Hypoglycemia requiring an urgent care visit (not emergency department)  among eligible 
patients  
 
We will also measure the three co -primary outcomes monthly during a follow -up period (months 19- 30) 
to evaluate the persistence of any effects observed during the study period.  
 
We did not study any safety endpoints related to the PSA primary outcome. The safety endpoints related 
to the UA/UC and DM primary outcomes were deemed serious adverse events, and included:  
 
• EHR -identified ED or hospital care possibly due to UTI or sepsis among women 65 and over 
following an office visit  
• EHR -Identified ED or hospital care possibly due to hyperglycemia among previously tightly 
controlled  
• Poor diabetes control (HbA1c>9%) among individuals who were previously tightly controlled  
(HbA1c < 7%)  
 
10.5 Statistical Analyses 
We will use the following descriptive statistics to characterize the sample: Means and medians for 
continuous measures, frequencies for count data, standard deviations and interquartile ranges for variance.  
To test  our 3 co-primary  hypotheses, we will employ a mixed -effects hierarchical logistic regression 
model to estimate the adjusted marginal effect over time of each intervention on the 3 co -primary 
outcome s. Fixed effects will include intervention assignment, time period ( histor ical baseline versus 
intervention period), time period interacted with intervention assignment, time (continuous, linear), and a 
3-way interaction term between time period, intervention, and time (continuous) . The coefficient on the 3-
way interaction term will represent whether the log -odds of the monthly rate of change in each co-primary 
outcome differs between intervention and control patients during the intervention period. Providers will 
be included as random effects. To isolate the effect of the  interv ention on the co -primary outcome s, we 
will also include fixed effects for the variables included in the constrained randomization procedure . 
The secondary and safety outcomes will be examined in a similar fashion. If they are sufficiently rare (for 
example, no events in a given month), model convergence may become an issue. First, we plan to expand 
the time frame from months to quarters  and fit the same model . If that fails , we will abandon the time -
varying aspect of the analysis and  do one pull for the hi storical baseline period and one pull for the 
intervention period. The mixed effects logistic regression model would then be run without including 
continuous time. If that still fails to converge, we will exclude the random effects for providers and use a 
fixed effects logistic regression model.  
18 
 Last, the three co -primary o utcomes of interest will be examined in the following pre -specified 
subgroups:  
• Sex (DM measures only)  
• Race and ethnicity  
• Age groups (for UA/UC: 65-74, 75-84, 85+) (for PSA: 76-79, 80- 84, 85+) (for DM: 75 -79, 
80-84, 85+). We will also examine for effects on patients younger than the target popuations 
(for UA/UC: 50 -64, PSA: 70 -75, DM 65-74).  
 
 
11. DATA COLLECTION AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
11.1 Data Collection Forms  
 Two types of data were collected: 1) data from electronic medical and billing records, abstracted from 
Northwestern Medicine’s Electronic Data Warehouse; and 2) data from online surveys at the beginning 
and end of the study.  
 11.2 Data Management  
 The study analyst, JYL, extract ed data from the NMEDW at 3 points: end of baseline period, end of 
intervention period, and end of additional follow -up period.  
 
Both the baseline and 18M surveys will be administered via REDCap.  
 11.3 Quality Assurance  
 Extensive quality assurance was co nducted during the pilot R21 phase of this study.  
 
12. PARTICIPANT RIGHTS AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
 12.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review  
 The study protocol and the informed consent document will be reviewed and approved by the 
Northwestern University Institutional Review Board (IRB).  
 
12.2 Consent Process  
 Not applicable. We were granted a waiver of consent for clinician and patient record  review. Here, we 
provide details about the alteration of the consent process for our online consent script ahead of baseline and study close -out clinician surveys.  
 12.2.1 Patient Consent Process  
 We were granted a waiver of the consent process to review (NMEDW query) patient medical records to 
collect study data because we met the following criteria:   
19 
 • This research was NOT FDA-regulated and only involve d adults  
• The research involved  no more than minimal risks to subjects. Review of medical record 
data had  strict inclusion and exclusion criteria and identified data was only seen by the 
study analyst extracting data from EDW.  
• This research could not be practicably be carried out without the waiver . We were 
attempting to describe clinician testing and  treatment behavior across the entire geriatric 
patient population and to use these measures as the basis for clinician interventions that 
turn on and off based on data that reside within the EHR.  
• To understand how the nudges work, w e must have access to  identified patient and 
clinician data. Our analyst assign ed a study identifier and strip ped out all identifiers prior 
to finalizing and sharing the study analytic files.  
• The waiver will NOT adversely affect the rights and welfare of subjects.  
• Subjects  (patients)  will not be provided any study information as they will be unaware of 
study participation.  
 12.2.2 Clinician Consent Process  
 
We were also granted a waiver of consent for clinician record review because we met the following 
criteria:  
  
• This research is not FDA-regulated. It is a quality improvement study designed to evaluate 
clinical decision supports impact on guideline recommended care. Clinicians’ actions are in no 
way restricted.  
• The research does not involve non- viable neonates. Adult NM  clinicians will be presented alerts 
in the EHR when criteria within the chart are met.  
• The research involves no more than minimal risk. Clinical decision supports are intended to help 
clinicians make safer clinical decisions for their patients. Their int eractions with study nudges and 
their performance on study quality measures will have no effect on their NM employment. 
Performance data will be confidential.  
• The waiver of consent will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of clinicians who interact with study nudges. Clinicians have choices in how they respond to nudges. Clinicians will be able 
to order tests and treatments in the exact same way as prior to the initiation of this pilot study.  
• The research could not practicably be carried out witho ut the waiver of consent. This study 
attempts to describe clinician interactions with EHR tools intended to improve quality of care. If we consented clinicians for this study, clinicians that would volunteer to participate would very likely be different fr om non-volunteering clinicians. The goal of the study is to develop and test 
clinical decision supports that could be turned on for large populations of clinicians and not just 
the subgroup of clinicians that may be interested.  
• We will inform all particip ating clinicians about study nudges, will respond promptly to any 
questions or concerns they have about their experience interacting with them, and will provide 
summary quality measure data at the clinic level at the end of the study.  
 
Further, we were gr anted a waiver o f documentation of consent for the clinician surveys administered at 
baseline and end of the intervention.  We used  REDCap functionality to present IRB approved informed 
consent language as first section of survey and require a ‘yes’ response in order to proceed and 
view/interact with online survey. If a clinician refuse d participation by marking ‘no’ to consent item, they 
will only see a ‘thank you, please close your browser’ message and we no longer sen t reminders to that 
clinician. Clinicians were instructed they can print the consent language from their browser if they would 
like a hard copy to keep for their records. The consent language was  presented as first section on both the 
baseline and the 18M f ollow -up survey.  
20 
  
Both the study PI (SDP) and project manager (TB) had  their contact details included with the online 
consent script. They respond ed promptly to any potential participant who reaches out with questions or 
concerns. The full study team revi ewed the online consent language to ensure it ha d all informed consent 
elements that are necessary.   PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION (PHI AND HIPAA)  
This study involves the use of Protected Personal Health Information (PHI) accessed through NM EDW. 
We were g ranted  a waiver of HIPAA authorization. We have reviewed the HIPAA Waiver of 
Authorization checklist (HRP -441) and provide details below.  
• We clearly define here the description of the PHI our study will access and why it is necessary for 
this research.  
• The use of PHI involves no more than minimal risk to the privacy of individuals based on the 
following:  
o An adequate plan is in place to protect the identifiers from improper use and disclosure. 
See data security section above.  
o An adequate plan is in place to destroy the identifiers at the earliest opportunity 
consistent with conduct of the research. We will destroy identifiers as soon as study 
analytic files are created and study manuscripts accepted. Identifiers will be destroyed 
prior to the end of the gr ant period.  
o Adequate written assurances that the protected health information will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as required by law, for authorized 
oversight of the research study, or for other research for which the use or disclosure of 
protected health information for which an authorization or opportunity to agree or object 
is not required by 45 CFR 164.512.  
• Given that the research describes the entire geriatric patient population with a visit during the 
study look-back or intervention period, this research could not practicably be conducted without 
the waiver.  
• The research could not practicably be conducted without access to PHI.  
 
 
12.3 Participant Confidentiality  
 We will only extract the minimum necessary data to answer research objectives. All analytic files will be 
de-identified.  
Clinician surveys focus on their clinical role and attitudes and should not feel intrusive. However, 
clinicians can skip any survey items they wish and still submit the survey.  
Clinic le aders and individual clinicians will be provided study team contact information so they can report 
concerns or complaints about study interventions at any time. We will also be informed of any tickets to 
Epic helpdesk that are related to study interventions by NM Epic programmers.  
 
 
12.4 Study Discontinuation 
 
While this was a minimal risk study, we established a DSMB. Following each DSMB meeting, the board 
made recommendations to the IRB as to whether the study should continue or if changes to the protocol  
were necessary for continuation.  
21 
  
13. COMMITTEES 
 
The Data Safety Monitoring Board  was comprised of:  
 - Jerry Gurwitz, MD, Chairperson  
- Carl Pieper, DrPH, Biostatistician  
- Michael Steinman, MD, Safety Officer 
 
14. PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS  
 Publication of results from our research will follow the NIH Public Access Policy, which requires that we 
submit to the National Library of Medicine’s PubMed Central an electronic version of final, peer -
reviewed manuscripts upon acceptance for publication,  to be made publicly available no later than 12 
months after the official date of publication.  
  
  
22 
 ABBREVIATIONS  
 
ASB: asymptomatic bacteriuria 
BEAGLE: Behavioral Economic Applications to Geriatrics Leveraging Electronic Health Records 
BPA: best practice advisory  
CDS: clinical decision support  
DM: diabetes mellitus  
DSMB: Data Safety and Monitoring Board  
EHR: electronic health record  
IRB: Institutional Review Board  
NM: Northwestern Medicine 
NMEDW: Northwestern Medicine Enterprise Data Warehouse  
PSA: prostate specific antigen  
UA/UC: urinalysis/urine culture  
 
 
 