APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 1 of 27YALE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE 
HUMAN INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
Application to Involve Human Subjects in  Research
DATE STAMPED-RECEIVED PROTOCOL NUMBER
SECTION I: ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION
Title of  Research Project: Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial of  N-acetylcysteine (NAC) for the 
treatment of Pediatric Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in  Children
Principal Investigator:
Michael H.  Bloch,  M.D., M.S.Yale Academic Appointment:
Postdoctoral Research  Fellow
Campus Address: 
Child Study Center, 230 S. Frontage Rd, PO BOX 207900, New  Haven, CT  06520
Campus Phone:
 203-974-7551Fax:  
203-785-7611Pager: 
203-745-9921E-mail: 
Michael.bloch@yale.edu
Protocol Correspondent Name & Address (if different than  PI):
Kaitlyn E.  Panza, B.A.
 Child Study Center, 230 S. Frontage Rd, PO BOX 207900, New  Haven, CT  06520
Campus Phone: 203-737-4809
Fax: 203-785-7611
E-mail: Kaitlyn.panza@yale.edu
SECTION  II: GENERAL  INFORMATION
1.Performing Organizations:   Identify  the hospital, in-patient or  outpatient facility, school or 
other agency that will serve  as the location  of the  research.  Choose all that  apply:
 Faculty Advisor: (required if PI is a student, 
resident, fellow or other trainee)            NA
James F. Leckman,  M.D.Yale Academic Appointment:
Professor
Campus Address: 
Child Study Center, 230 S. Frontage Rd, PO BOX 207900, New  Haven, CT  06520
Campus Phone:
 203-785-7871Fax: 
203-785-7611Pager: E-mail: 
James.leckman@yale.edu
Please refer  to the HIC website for  application  
instructions and  information required to 
complete this application.  The  Instructions are 
available at http://info.med.yale.edu/hic/forms/index.html.  Submit the original application and two (2) copies of all materials including relevant sections of the  grant which funds this project  
(if applicable) to the HIC.  
HIC OFFICE USE ONLY
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 2 of 27a. Internal Location[s] of  the Study:
 Magnetic Resonance  Research Center  PET Center
     (MR-TAC)    YCCI/Church  Street Research Unit  (CSRU)
 Yale Cancer Center  YCCI/Hospital Research  Unit (HRU)
 Yale-New Haven Hospital  YCCI/Keck Laboratories
 Specify Other Yale Location: Yale  Child Study  Center, School of  Medicine
b. External Location[s]:
 APT Foundation, Inc.  Haskins Laboratories Connecticut  Mental  Health Center
 John B. Pierce Laboratory, Inc.
 Veterans Affairs Hospital,  West Haven  Other Locations, Specify: 
c. Additional Required Documents (check  all that apply):  N/A
*YCCI-Scientific  and Safety Committee (YCCI-SSC) Approval Date:  
*Pediatric  Protocol Review Committee (PPRC) Approval Date:  
*YCC Protocol Review Committee (YRC-PRC) Approval Date:
*Dept. of  Veterans Affairs, West Haven VA HSS Approval Date:  
*Radioactive Drug Research  Committee (RDRC) Approval Date:  
 YNHH-Radiation  Safety Committee (YNHH-RSC) Approval Date:  
 Magnetic Resonance  Research Center PRC (MRRC-PRC) Approval Date:  
 YSM/YNHH  Cancer  Data Repository (CaDR) Approval Date:  
 Dept. of  Lab Medicine request for services or specimens form
*Approval from these committees is required before  final HIC approval  is granted. See instructions 
for documents required for initial  submission  and approval of  the protocol. Allow sufficient time for  
these requests. Check with the oversight body for their time requirements.
2.Probable Duration of Project: State the expected duration of the project,  including all  
follow-up and  data analysis activities. 3-4 years.
3.Targeted Enrollment: What is the number  of subjects
a. targeted for enrollment at Yale  for this protocol?   If this is a multi-site study, what  is the total   
    number of subjects targeted across  all sites? Approximately 40 subjects all from Yale.
b. expected to sign the  consent form? 40 subjects
c. expected to  complete  some or all interventions  for this protocol?  40 subjects
4.Research  Type/Phase:  (Check all that apply)
a. Study Type
     Single Center Study
     Multi-Center Study
Does  the Yale PI serve as  the PI of the multi-site study? Yes  No 
     Coordinating Center/Data Management
     Other: 
b. Study  Phase  N/A
     Pilot  Phase I  Phase II  Phase III  Phase IV
     Other  (Specify) 
c. Area of Research:  (Check  all that apply) Note that these are  overlapping definitions and more 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 3 of 27    than one category may apply to your research protocol. Definitions for the following can be found  
    in the instructions  section 4c:
     Clinical Research:  Patient-Oriented      Clinical  Research:  Outcomes and 
     Clinical Research: Epidemiologic and Behavioral                 Health Services
     Translational Research  #1 (“Bench-to-Bedside”)      Interdisciplinary  Research
     Translational Research  #2 (“Bedside-to-Community”)  Community-Based Research
5.   Is this  study required to be registered in a public database? Yes No 
If yes, where is it registered?
Clinical  Trials.gov registry 
Other (Specify) 
6.Will this research  study  utilize clinical care services at  Yale New  Haven Hospital or YMG?
Yes  No
If  yes, might  these  be billable  to the  subject, the sponsor, grant or other  third party payer?
Yes No   
If you answered "yes", please register  this study in the IDX/GE system at
http://www.yalemedicalgroup.org/pfs/forms/10000/NewS tudyRequest.pdf
7.Are there any  procedures involved in this protocol that  will be performed at YNHH or one of 
its affiliated entities?   Yes ___ No  X
  If Yes, please answer questions a through c and note instructions below.  If  No, proceed  to 
Section III.
a. Does your YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific  procedure  that you will 
perform?
N/A 
b. Will you be using any  new equipment or equipment that you have not used in  the past for 
this procedure?
 N/A
c. Will a novel approach using existing equipment be applied?
 N/A
If you answered “no” to question 7a, or  "yes" to question  7b or c, please contact the YNHH 
Department of Physician Services (688-2615) for prior approval  before commencing with  your 
research protocol.
 N/A
SECTION III: FUNDING, RESEARCH TEAM AND TRAINING
1.Funding Source: Indicate all  of the funding source(s) for this study. Check  all boxes that apply.
Provide information regarding the external funding  source.  This information  should include 
identification of the  agency/sponsor, the  funding mechanism (grant or contract),  and whether  
the award is  pending or has been  awarded. Provide the M/C# and  Agency name (if  grant-
funded).  If the funding source  associated with  a protocol is  “pending”  at the time of the 
protocol submission to the HIC (as is the  case  for most NIH submissions), the PI  should note 
“Pending” in the  appropriate section  of the protocol application, provide the M/C# and 
Agency name (if  grant-funded) and further note that University (departmental) funds  support 
the research (until such time that  an award is  made).  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 4 of 27PI Title of Grant Name of Funding Source  Funding Funding Mechanism
Michael Bloch Double-blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial of N-
acetylcysteine for 
Pediatric OCD International Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder 
Foundation -- pending  Internal
  ExternalGrant-M#           
Contract# 
  Internal
  ExternalGrant-M#           
Contract# 
  Internal
  ExternalGrant-M#        
Contract# 
2.Research  Team:  List all members of the research team.  Indicate under the affiliation 
column whether the investigators or  study  personnel are  part of the Yale faculty  or staff, or 
part of the faculty or staff from a collaborating  institution, or are  not formally affiliated  with  
any institution. ALL  members of  the research  team MUST complete Human Subject 
Protection Training (HSPT) and Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Training  before they may be listed on  the protocol.   See  NOTE below.
***My signature  here indicates that I have read, am in compliance with, and will continue to be in 
compliance with the  HIC’s Protocol-Specific  Conflict of Interest  policy  and the University’s policy on 
Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment.
NOTE: The  HIC will remove from the  protocol  any personnel who have not signed the application  and/or 
completed required training. A personnel  protocol amendment will need to be submitted when training is  
complete or signature is provided.NameSignature *** Protocol-Related
 COI? Affiliation
Principal Investigator 
Michael H.  Bloch,  
M.D., M.S.  Yes  NoChild Study Center
Role: Co-investigator
James F. Leckman,  
M.D.  Yes   NoChild Study Center
Role:  Co-investigator
Robert E.  King,  M.D.
 Yes   NoChild Study Center
Role:  Co-investigator
Christopher Pittenger, M.D.
 Yes   NoCMHC, Psychiatry
Role:  Co-investigator
Angeli Landeros-Weisenberger, M.D.
 Yes   NoChild Study Center
Role:  Study  
PersonnelMegan E. Smith, B.A.
 Yes   NoChild Study Center
Role: Study  
PersonnelKaitlyn E.  Panza, B.A
 Yes   NoChild Study Center
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 5 of 27SECTION  IV:
 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR/F ACULTY  ADVISOR / DEPARTMENT C HAIR  
AGREEMENT
As the principal investigator of this research project, I certify  that:
The information provided in this application is complete and accurate.
I assume full responsibility for the protection of human subjects and the proper conduct  of the
      research.Subject safety  will be of paramount concern, and every effort will be made to  protect  subjects’
      rights and welfare.The research will be  performed according to ethical principles and in compliance with all federal,
      state  and local laws, as  well as institutional regulations and  policies regarding  the protection  of  
      human subjects.All members of the research team will be kept apprised of research goals.
I will obtain  approval for this research study and any subsequent  revisions  prior  to my  initiating the
      study  or any  change  and I will obtain continuing approval of this study prior to the expiration  date     
      of any approval period.I will report to the HIC any serious injuries and/or other unanticipated problems involving  risk to
      participants.I am in  compliance with the requirements set by the University and qualify to serve as the
      principal investigator of this project  or have  acquired the appropriate  approval from  the 
      Dean’s Office or Office of the  Provost,  or the Human Subject Protection Administrator at
      Yale-New Haven Hospital.I will identify  a qualified successor should I cease my  role as principal investigator  and facilitate a
smooth transfer of  investigator responsibilities.
_____
 PI Name (PRINT)  and Signature Date
As the faculty advisor  of this research project, I certify that:
The information provided in this application is complete and accurate.
This project has scientific value and merit  and that the student or trainee investigator has the 
      necessary resources  to complete  the project and  achieve the aims.
I will train the  student  investigator  in matters  of appropriate research compliance, protection of
      human subjects and  proper conduct  of research.
The research will be  performed according to ethical principles and in compliance with all federal,
      state  and local laws, as  well as institutional regulations and  policies regarding  the protection  of  
      human subjects.The student investigator will obtain approval for this research study and any  subsequent revisions
      Prior to initiating the  study or revision  and will obtain continuing approval  prior to  the expiration
      of any approval period.The student investigator will report to the  HIC any serious injuries and/or other unanticipated 
      problems involving risk to participants. I am in  compliance with the requirements set forth by the University and qualify  to serve as
      the faculty advisor of  this project.
___________ ______ _____
    Advisor Name (PRINT)  and Signature Date
 Signature  of PI Date
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 6 of 27Department Chair’s Assurance Statement
Do you know of any  real or apparent  institutional conflict of interest (e.g., Yale ownership of a
sponsoring company, patents, licensure)  associated with this  research project?
 Yes (provide a  description of that  interest in a separate letter addressed to  the HIC.)
 No
As Chair,  do you have any real or apparent  protocol-specific conflict of interest between yourself and
the sponsor of the  research project, or its competitor  or any  interest  in any intervention and/or method
tested in  the project that  might compromise this research project?
Yes, and I  agree  to submit the  Protocol-Specific Conflict of Interest Disclosure Form.
No
I assure the HIC that the  principal investigator and  all members of the research  team are qualified by
education, training, licensure and/or experience to assume participation  in the conduct of this research
trial. I also assure that the  principal investigator  has departmental support and sufficient resources to
conduct this  trial appropriately.
   ____________________________
   Chair Name (PRINT) and Signature        Date
   _________________________________
   Department
YNHH Human Subjects Protection Administrator Assurance  Statement
Required when the study is conducted solely at YNHH by  YNHH  health  care providers.
As Human  Subject Protection Administrator  (HSPA) for  YNHH, I certify that:
I have  read a  copy of the protocol  and approve it being conducted at YNHH.
I agree to submit  a Protocol-Specific Conflict of Interest Disclosure Form if  I am aware of any real 
or apparent institutional conflict of interest.
The principal investigator  of this study is qualified to serve as P.I.  and had the support of the hospital  
for this research project.
  ______________________________________
    YNHH HSPA  Name (PRINT) and  Signature       Date
For HIC Use Only
Date Approved Human Investigation  Committee  Signature
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 7 of 27SECTION V: RESEARCH P LAN
1.Statement of Purpose: State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested.  
The aim of  the study is  to determine if N-acetylcysteine  is an effective treatment for OCD in  
children.
2.   Background: Describe the background information that  led to the plan for this  project. Provide
      references to support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data. 
Pediatric OCD affects 1-3% of children  (Douglass, Moffitt et al. 1995; Zohar 1999).  We 
currently have  effective first-line  interventions  for pediatric OCD such as Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy (CBT) and  pharmacotherapy with serotonin reuptake inhibitors  (SRIs) (POTS  2004).  
However, roughly  half of children with OCD still have clinically significant OCD symptoms 
despite treatment with first-line pharmacological and CBT  interventions for OCD (POTS 2004).  
When severe,  OCD  can be  incapacitating  with devastating consequences for children  and their 
families. Augmentation strategies  with antipsychotic  medications can improve the effectiveness 
of SRI therapy  but do not eliminate OCD symptoms (Bloch, Landeros-Weisenberger et al. 2006).  
Furthermore, all pharmacological treatments  for OCD  have  an increased side effect  burden when 
compared to  adults. Novel  treatments  for children  with OCD are needed.  
Converging lines of evidence from neuroimaging, genetic and  pharmacological studies  
support the importance of glutamate abnormalities  in the pathogenesis of OCD (Rosenberg, 
MacMaster et al.  2000;  Rosenberg, MacMillan  et al. 2001; Chakrabarty, Bhattacharyya et al. 
2005; Coric, Taskiran et al. 2005; Poyurovsky, Weizman et al. 2005; Arnold, Sicard et al. 2006; Dickel, Veenstra-VanderWeele et al.  2006; Lafleur, Pittenger et al. 2006; Pasquini and Biondi 
2006; Pittenger,  Krystal  et al. 2006; Whiteside, Port  et al. 2006;  Stewart,  Fagerness et al. 2007).  
In magnetic  resonance  spectroscopy studies, elevated  concentrations of glutamate and related 
compounds have been demonstrated in the caudate nucleus and orbitofrontal  cortex of OCD 
patients compared  to normal controls (Rosenberg, MacMaster et al. 2000; Rosenberg, MacMillan 
et al. 2001; Whiteside, Port et al. 2006) .  Cerebral  spinal  fluid analysis has likewise  demonstrated 
elevated glutamate  levels compared to normal controls (Chakrabarty, Bhattacharyya et al.  2005).  
In genetic  studies, single nucleotide polymorphisms  within  the glutamate transporter gene 
SLC1A1 have  been  associated with the diagnosis of OCD (Arnold, Sicard et al. 2006; Dickel, 
Veenstra-VanderWeele et al. 2006; Stewart,  Fagerness et al. 2007).  Open-label, 
pharmacological treatment studies have  suggested that  glutamate  modulating agents such as 
riluzole (Coric, Taskiran  et al. 2005; Pittenger, Coric  et al. 2008;  Grant,  Lougee et al. in  press), 
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) (Lafleur,  Pittenger et al.  2006)  and memantine (Poyurovsky, Weizman 
et al. 2005; Pasquini  and Biondi 2006)  may be effective  in the treatment of OCD.  However,  no 
double-blind, placebo-controlled  trials  of glutamatergic agents have been completed  in OCD.
NAC is a naturally occurring amino-acid that has  been used safely for  decades as an  
antioxidant agent and as  an antidote for acetaminophen overdose.  Due to  its benign safety 
profile, NAC  is available  as an over-the-counter medication  at a cost of less than 25 cents a day.   
More recently, NAC has been demonstrated  to be a glutamate modulating agent.   NAC is 
converted to  cystine, a substrate  for the glutamate/cystine antiporter located on glial cells. The 
uptake of  cystine by glia causes  glial release  of glutamate into the extrasynaptic  space,  where it 
appears to stimulate inhibitory  metabotropic glutamate  receptors on glutamatergic  nerve 
terminals and  thereby  reduces the synaptic release  of glutamate (Moran,  McFarland et al. 2005).  
NAC has been recently demonstrated  in randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled  studies to 
be  effective for  the treatment for  bipolar  depression  and schizophrenia (Berk, Copolov et  al. 
2008; Berk, Copolov et  al. 2008).  NAC has also been demonstrated in  double-blind, placebo-
controlled studies to effectively reduce  the symptoms of trichotillomania, a  disorder that is 
considered to  be on the  OC spectrum  and is often  comorbid with OCD (Grant, Odlaug et al. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 8 of 272009).  NAC has also  demonstrated to be safe  without significant side effects in  a recent double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial in children  with autism  (Posey, Erickson et al. 2009).
3.   Research  Plan: Provide an orderly scientific  description of the  study design  and research procedures
as they directly affect the  subjects. 
Subjects: Children with OCD will be recruited  through the TS/OCD Clinic at  the Yale Child 
Study Center.  Inclusion  and Exclusion Criteria are  listed below.
Intervention:  Subjects will be randomized  in a ratio of 1:1  to receive  treatment with  NAC or 
placebo.   NAC (or placebo) will be  titrated up to a maximum dose of 2400mg/day over  the 
course of  1 week. Subjects will take  a single 600mg tablet twice a day  for 1 week, and then 
increase to two 600mg tablets twice  a day for the remainder of  the 12 week  study.  After 
completion of the study  all subjects receiving placebo  will be  offered NAC treatment for the 
following 12 weeks.
Subjects, their parents, investigators, staff,  and persons performing the assessments will 
remain blind to treatment assignment from the  time of  randomization  until their completion of 
the study  after  12 weeks. Randomization data are kept  strictly confidential  until the time of 
unblinding and  are accessible  only to authorized  persons.  The identity  of the treatments  will be  
concealed by the use of  study  drugs that are identical in packaging, labeling, schedule of 
administration and  appearance. Placebo and  study  drug  will be  prepared  in a like  fashion at the 
Yale-New Haven Hospital Investigational Drug Service  pharmacy.   
NAC is an altered  form  of the amino acid cysteine, which is commonly found in food and 
synthesized by the  body.  N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is generally well tolerated and  has been 
extensively used in the treatment of acetaminophen  overdose/toxicity at  high doses  for many 
years. The  dosage in acute acetaminophen  overdose is a  140mg/kg loading  dose, followed  by a  
maintenance dose of 70mg/kg administered every  4 hours for 17 consecutive  doses.  The dose 
used to  treat  acetaminophen overdose  in children  is approximately 10-fold greater than the 
maximum dose we  will use  in this study.   Although generally well-tolerated, the PDR indicates 
that adverse reactions  reported with  oral NAC include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache 
(especially when  used along with nitrates) and rashes when used at higher doses (Cheng,  Lin et  
al. 2007) . There  are rare reports of renal stone formation and  cases of bronchospasm with 
intravenous use only.  The long-term  use of NAC has been well-studied in the treatment of 
Chronic Obstructive  Pulmonary Disease  and was extremely well-tolerated  (Grandjean,  Berthet et 
al. 2000) .  NAC has been well-tolerated  in the treatment of adults with  OCD and  trichtillomania 
(TTM) at a maximum dose of 3000mg (Pittenger, Krystal et al. 2005; Lafleur, Pittenger et al. 2006).  
Assessment:  Pre-study screening procedure: After  an initial phone screen to  rule out  obvious 
exclusions from the  study protocol, potential  subjects will have an initial evaluation that will be  
performed by a  multidisciplinary clinical team.   Exclusions in  screening would include  (1) 
Comorbid bipolar  disorder, psychotic disorder,  substance use disorder, developmental  disorder 
or mental retardation (IQ<70), (2) asthma  diagnosis requiring treatment in the last 3 months,  and 
(3) a change in psychotropic medications  or behavioral treatment for OCD within the last month.  
In addition  to a standard clinical evaluation consisting of history,  and mental status exams, 
subjects will receive a clinical diagnostic interview  using the Kiddie-Schedule  for Affective 
Disorders and Schizophrenia (K-SADS) (Kaufman, Birmaher et al. 1997). Additional baseline  
ratings will be conducted for  OCD,  tic, depression  and anxiety severity using:   1) Children’s 
Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale  (CY-BOCS) (Scahill, Riddle et al. 1997), (2) 
Dimensional Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (DY-BOCS).Additional baseline ratings 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 9 of 27will be conducted for OCD, tics, trichotillomania, depression and  anxiety  severity  using (3) Yale  
Global Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS)  (Leckman, Riddle  et al. 1989), (4) ADHD Rating Scale  
(ADHD-RS) (DuPaul,  Power  et al. 1998), (5) Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for Children 
(MASC) (March, Parker et al.  1997), (6) Children’s Depression Inventory (CDI) (Kovacs 1985), 
(7) Massachusetts  General Hospital – Hairpulling  Scale (MGH-HPS) (Keuthen, O'Sullivan et al. 
1995), (8) Clinical  Global Impression (CGI)  scale  (Guy 1976) and (9) Pediatric-Adverse Events  
Rating Scale (PAERS)  (March, Karayal et  al. 2007).  The pediatric adverse events  rating  scale 
will be used to monitor safety  throughout the trial.  A  medical  assessment  including vital 
signs, physical exam and urine drug screen  and pregnancy test will be completed prior to study 
enrollment.  The measures  utilized in this study are  outlined below.
Baseline Assessments
K-SADS
Psychiatric History
General Medical  HistoryMedical Assessments
Vital Signs
Physical Exam
Mental Status  Exam
Urine Toxicology
Urine Pregnancy TestRating scales
CY-BOCS    DY-BOCS
YGTSS         ADHD-RS 
CDI             MASC
MGH-HPS  CGI 
           PAERS              
The table  below indicates the clinical ratings scheduled planned for the trial.  If subjects’ 
have significant ADHD, tic, anxiety or depression  symptoms at screening, ratings of these  
symptoms will  be followed regularly at study assessments.  Subjects will be  encouraged to  
continue outside therapy and will be  required to continue all concurrent medications during  
the course of this trial.   Subjects will also be  asked about the number of missed doses  of 
medications at each study visit.
MeasureScreening/ 
Baseline Week 2Week 4Week 8Week 
12
CY-BOCS x x x x x
DY-BOCS x x x x x
YGTSS x  x x x
ADHD-RS x  x x x
CDI x  x x x
MASC x  x x x
MGH-HPS x  x x x
CGI x x x x x
PAERS x x x x x
      
NAC dose 600mg  BID1200  mg 
BID1200  mg 
BID1200  mg 
BID1200  mg 
BID
3.Statistical Considerations: Describe the statistical analyses that support the study design.  
We will use the CY-BOCS as our primary  outcome measure.  Our primary analysis will 
involve a mixed  effects modelusing weekly  CY-BOCS ratings from baseline to 12 weeks with 
treatment (NAC/placebo) as a fixed  factor and time as a within-subject factor. We will adhere to 
intention-to-treat principles in our analysis.  We powered our study to have 80% power  to detect 
a large  effect of NAC (d=0.9) assuming =0.05.  Given a similar variance in the Cy-BOCS 
scores in previous placebo-controlled trials of pediatric OCD, we would expect  this effect size to 
correspond to a 6.5 point  difference in Cy-BOOCS between the NAC and placebo groups (POTS 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 10 of 272004).  By comparison,  the effect size of NAC in the treatment of adults with trichotillomania, 
using the MGH-HS (d=1.2,  N=50), and in bipolar  depression, using the Montgomery-Asberg 
Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) (d=0.8,  N=80) was considerably  larger  (Grant,  Odlaug et al. 
2008).
As a secondary outcome we will examine the safety and tolerability of NAC.  Given  our 
sample size of 40 we will have limited power to detect  adverse events of low frequency.  That 
being said, assuming that we do not see a side-effect  in the placebo  group, we will have 80% 
power to detect NAC related side-effect, if it occurs in one-third of NAC treated subjects.  
Frequency of side-effects will be measured with the PAERS as discussed in the assessments 
section.
SECTION VI: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS, DEVICES, BIOLOGICS & PLACEBOS
1.Identification of Drug, Device or  Biologic: What is (are)  the name(s) of the drug(s), device(s) or
biologic(s) being used? Identify  whether  FDA approval has been granted and for what  indication(s). 
N-Acetylcysteine (USP grade) is FDA approved for the pediatric  population in oral form  to 
reduce the extent of liver injury after an acetaminophen overdose. N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is 
an altered form  of the amino acid cysteine, which is commonly found in food and 
synthesized by the body. NAC is generally well tolerated and has been extensively used at 
high doses  in the treatment of acetaminophen  overdose/toxicity for many years. The NAC 
dosage for acute acetaminophen overdose,  in both adults and children, is a 140mg/kg loading 
dose, followed by a maintenance dose of 70mg/kg  administered every  4 hours  for 17 
consecutive doses. The long-term use of NAC has also been investigated in six-month to 
three-year studies. These studies examine the efficacy and tolerability of NAC (dosed  
between 600-1200mg per day) in the treatment  of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
COPD (Pela,  Calcagni et al. 1999; Grandjean, Berthet et al. 2000;  Stey, Steurer et al. 2000;  
Kasielski and Nowak 2001; Poole and Black  2001; Chikina, Iagmurov  et al. 2002; Decramer, 
Rutten-van Molken et al. 2005). NAC  helps the body synthesize glutathione, an important 
antioxidant. In animals, the antioxidant  activity of NAC protects the liver from the adverse 
effects of exposure  to several toxic chemicals.  NAC also protects the body from 
acetaminophen toxicity  and is used, at very high levels, in hospitals for patients with 
acetaminophen poisoning. It has also been  shown to be effective at treating liver failure from 
causes other than acetaminophen poisoning (e.g., hepatitis, and other drug toxicity)  and at 
preventing kidney damage caused by injections of iopromide, a contrast medium used in 
people scheduled to undergo computerized tomography (CT)  imaging.
All protocols which  utilize a drug, device or biologic not approved by, but  regulated by, the FDA  must 
provide the  following information:   Not applicable to this research project
   i.   What is  the Investigational New  Drug (IND)  or Investigational  Device Exemption  (IDE)  number 
   assigned by  the FDA? 
   ii.   For  IDE’s: Did the  FDA approve this IDE as a Category A (experimental/investigational) or as a   
         Category B (non-experimental/investigational)? 
iii. Who  holds the  IND  or IDE? 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 11 of 27The clinical investigation  of a drug product that  is lawfully marketed  in the United States may be
exempt from the requirements for  filing an IND. If there  is no IND  and an exemption is  being  sought,
complete the following:
i.   Is the intention of the investigation to report to the  FDA  as a well  controlled  study in  support of a
     new indication  for use or to be  used to support any other significant change in the  labeling  for the
     drug?   Yes   No
ii.If the drug that is  undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed as a prescription drug product, is
      the intention of the investigation to support a significant change in the advertising for the product?
       Yes   No
iii.  Does the investigation  involve a route of  administration or dosage  level  or use in  populations  or   
      other factor  that significantly increases  the risks (or decreases the  acceptability  of the  risks)   
      associated with  the use of the  drug product?   Yes   No
The NAC dosage  for acute acetaminophen overdose is a 140mg/kg loading  dose, followed by a 
maintenance dose of 70mg/kg administered every  4 hours for 17 consecutive  doses. The dose 
used to treat  acetaminophen overdose  in children  is approximately 10-fold greater than the 
maximum dose we  will use in this study.   
iv.Will the investigation  be conducted in compliance with  the requirements for institutional (HIC)    
      review and with the requirements  for informed  consent of the FDA regulations  (21 CFR Part 50  
and 21 CFR Part 56)?  Yes   No
v.   Will the investigation  be conducted in compliance with  the requirements regarding promotion and  
charging for investigational drugs?  Yes   No
2. Background  Information: Provide  a description  of previous  human  use, known  risks,  and data 
addressing dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration, and any  other factors  that might  
influence risks. If this is the first  time this drug is being  administered  to humans, include relevant 
data on animal models. 
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is generally well  tolerated and has been extensively used at high 
doses in the treatment of acetaminophen overdose/toxicity for many years. The NAC dosage for acute acetaminophen  overdose is a 140mg/kg loading dose, followed by a maintenance dose of 
70mg/kg administered  every 4 hours for  17 consecutive  doses. The long-term use  of NAC has 
also been  investigated in six-month to three-year studies examining the efficacy and tolerability 
of NAC (dosed  between  600-1200mg per day)  in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease COPD  (Pela, Calcagni et al.  1999; Grandjean, Berthet et al. 2000;  Stey,  Steurer et al. 
2000; Kasielski  and Nowak 2001; Poole and Black 2001;  Chikina, Iagmurov et  al. 2002;  
Decramer, Rutten-van  Molken  et al. 2005). A recent study by Decramer and colleagues in  2005 
concluded that there were  no adverse  events thought to be  drug related in  their study examining 
the use  of 600mg/day  of NAC in over 500 patients  with COPD. Additionally, Chikina  and 
colleagues found that  the most effective dose of NAC  in the treatment of COPD  was 
1200mg/day (the study examined doses of NAC ranging from 600-2400mg/day). A meta-analysis examining  the efficacy of NAC in COPD,  performed in  2000, revealed that NAC was  
well tolerated without significant adverse effects  (Grandjean, Berthet et al. 2000). Although  
generally well-tolerated, the PDR  indicates that adverse reactions reported  with  oral NAC 
include nausea,  vomiting, diarrhea,  headache  (especially when  used along with nitrates)  and 
rashes. There are rare reports of renal stone formation.  It  is also important  to note that rare  
reports of  bronchoconstriction have  occurred with intravenous NAC (but no reports  of 
bronchospasm related to  the oral  use of NAC). Although  there are no known  contraindications to 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 12 of 27NAC use, individuals with asthma will be  excluded  from the study given the rare, but potential, 
adverse effect of bronchospasm. 
The safety and tolerability of chronic  NAC at  higher doses has been evaluated in a  number of 
contexts.  In a double-blind,  placebo-controlled randomized trial of oral  NAC in  HIV-infected 
patients, subjects were  treated with 8,000mg per day of NAC for 8 weeks (De Rosa et al, 2000).  
Adverse effects in this trial were minimal and some subjects reduced the dose due to side effects, with the average dosage by the  end of the trial  being 6.3  grams/day;  however,  the reduction in 
"dose" was similar  for the placebo arm. In another double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized 
trial involving 43 Alzheimer's patients, subjects were given placebo or  50 mg/kg/day orally  
(Adair, Knoefel et  al. 2001). In that study, there were  no adverse  effects  more common  than in 
placebo (except perhaps headache).
In acetaminophen  overdose,  the dose of NAC is 140 mg/kg load followed by 70 mg/kg every 4 
hours for 17 consecutive  doses. At this dosage,  NAC can cause nausea, vomiting and sometimes 
generalized urticaria. In normal volunteers  the dose that the vast majority of patients were able to 
tolerate was 3200 mg/m2/day. Common  toxicities  at higher doses were bad taste and 
gastrointestinal disturbances (Pendyala and Creaven. et al).
Severe toxicity is rare and occurs at doses an order  of magnitude  higher than what  we will be 
using in this study.   In a single case report,  a 16-kilogram child received 39,207 mg of 
intravenous NAC due to a medical error; she developed cerebral edema  with uncal herniation 
(Bailey, Blais  et al. 2004) .  The lethal  oral dose of NAC is 4400 mg/kg in mice and 5050 mg/kg 
in rats (RTECS 2001).
According to the PDR: “NAC is rapidly  absorbed  from the gastrointestinal tract and transported 
to the liver via the portal circulation, where  it undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism. Peak 
plasma concentrations are observed  approximately 0.5 to 1 hour following oral administration of 
doses of 200 to 600 milligrams. NAC  is metabolized to N-acetylcysteine, N, N-diacetylcystine 
and L-cysteine. L-cysteine itself is metabolized to glutathione,  protein, taurine and sulfate. NAC 
has low bioavailability, probably because  of its extensive first-pass  metabolism in the liver. The 
terminal half-life  of total NAC is approximately 6.25 hours  after ingestion.  Use of supplemental  
NAC along  with carbamazepine  may cause  reduced serum levels  of carbamazepine.”
NAC helps the body synthesize glutathione, an important antioxidant. In animals, the antioxidant 
activity of NAC protects  the liver from the adverse effects of exposure  to several toxic 
chemicals. NAC also protects the body from acetaminophen toxicity  and is used at very high 
levels in hospitals for patients with acetaminophen poisoning.  It has also been shown to be 
effective at treating liver failure from causes  other than acetaminophen poisoning (e.g., hepatitis, 
and other drug toxicity) and at preventing  kidney  damage caused  by injections of iopromide,  a 
contrast medium  used  in people scheduled to undergo computerized tomography (CT) imaging.
Supplementation with NAC has been shown to reduce the proliferation of certain cells lining  the 
colon and may  reduce the  risk of  colon cancer  in people with  recurrent polyps in the colon.
There have been several case reports of oral NAC producing dramatic improvements in 
Unverricht-Lundborg disease, an inherited  degenerative disorder involving  seizures and 
progressive disability. One study used up to 3 grams of NAC per  day.
Oral supplementation with NAC  has been  used successfully in two cases to treat a rare syndrome 
that complicates  kidney  dialysis. This condition, known as pseudoporphyria, has no other known 
treatment. Controlled clinical trials are needed to confirm these  preliminary observations.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 13 of 27Our choice of using 2400 mg daily in this study stems from our preliminary experience with NAC in trichotillomania and refractory OCD (Lafleur, Pittenger et al. 2006;  Grant, Odlaug et al. 
2008).  Although a  dose of 2400mg has demonstrated efficacy for treating adults with  TTM,  
higher doses of NAC are routinely used  in the treatment of other psychiatric conditions.   This 
dose has been well tolerated in this case report  and in several other clinical observations 
(Pittenger, Krystal  et al. 2005).
3. Source: a) Identify the source  of the drug, device or biologic to  be used. 
      N-Acetylcysteine will  be obtained  from  the Yale-New Haven  Hospital  Investigational  Drug 
Service pharmacy through a commercial  supplier
b) Is the  drug or device  provided  free of charge?  Yes   No
    If yes, by whom? 
4. Preparation and Use:  Describe  the method of preparation, storage, stability  information,  and for 
parenteral products, method of sterilization and method of testing  sterility and pyrogenicity.  
NAC will  be stored  at the YNHH IDS pharmacy. Placebo will be  placed  in the same  capsules as NAC, 
thus NAC and placebo will look and smell identical. 
5. Use of Placebo:  Not applicable  to this research project
Provide a  justification which addresses the following:
a.   Describe the safety and efficacy  of other available therapies  (if any). 
b.   State the maximum total length of time a  participant may receive placebo  while on the study. 
c.   Address the  greatest potential harm that may come to  a participant as a  result  of not receiving    
     effective therapy  (immediate or delayed onset.)  
d.   Describe  the procedures that are in place to safeguard  participants  receiving placebo. 
(a)Pharmacotherapy with  SSRIs and cognitive behavioral therapy are both relatively 
safe and effective treatments for  pediatric OCD (POTS  2004).  We  will recommend 
to all subjects considering  enrollment in  this trial  that they engage in  adequate trials 
(>3 months) of each  of these interventions  prior to enrolling in  this trial.  Assuming  a 
child has significant  residual  OCD symptoms despite  engaging in  both  these 
treatments, additional options include  (1) antipsychotic augmentation, (2) switching 
SSRIs and (3)  continuing on their current  treatments.
1.Antipsychotic Augmentation – Randomized,  placebo-controlled studies  in 
adults with OCD indicate that antipsychotic  addition to  ongoing  SSRI 
monotherapy is a  modestly  effective treatment for refractory  OCD.  Estimates 
indicate that the Number needed to treat  for this intervention is  5 with an 
outcome measure  of treatment response.  However, antipsychotic treatment  is 
associated with  significant side-effects including sedation, weight-gain,  
metabolic side effects  such as  diabetes and lipid abnormalities and the risk of 
extrapyramidal side  effects such as  tardive dyskinesia and akathisia.  The risk 
of these side  effects  appears more  pronounced  in children than adults and no 
controlled studies for OCD have  been conducted in these medications.
2.  For children who have tried only 1 SSRI  an additional option is to  switch  to 
a different SSRI   or SNRIs such as venlafaxine  and clomipramine.  There are 
no controlled studies assessing efficacy  of medication switches in  children  
with OCD.  Data in adults  suggest that  if a patient has not  responded to  1 
SSRI the likelihood of responding to a  different one is 25% and  if they have 
not responded to 2 SSRIs, the likelihood of responding to a  third  is 10%.   
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 14 of 27There is no significant evidence that the  rate of response to  switching to  a 
serotonin norepinephrine  reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) such as venlafaxine or 
clomipramine is  any different.  SSRIs are associated with side effects such as 
insomnia, sedation,  nausea, diarrhea,  sexual dysfunction, behavioral activation 
and suicidal ideation.
3.Continuing current therapies – current evidence  suggests that  the treatment  
response to SSRIs or CBT  plateaus  by 3 months after the initiation of 
treatment.  The risk of  continuing their current  therapy varies based on the 
nature of that therapy,  but does not contain  the additional risks associated  with  
NAC.
(b)12 weeks.
Since the study medication is added to the  children’s  current medications, the risk of 
symptoms worsening is not significantly greater in this clinical trial than it would be if the patient’s medications were changed as  part of standard clinical care. The only  
additional risks in this  study are potential adverse effects of N-acetylcysteine or no 
response in the  placebo  group.  We  will monitor subjects carefully for  these changes 
during the course of the  study and discontinue  the study and provide or refer subjects 
for appropriate treatment as necessary.  Subjects assigned to placebo  will have the 
opportunity to receive  active NAC after  the 12 weeks. 
(c)If a child is  discontinued from the study because  of the worsening of symptoms, the 
child, if  receiving active medication, will be referred for appropriate behavioral  and 
pharmacological treatment, and if  on placebo  will be offered  active medication in  
addition to the  above therapy.  
6.Use of Controlled  Substances:
Will this research  project involve  the use of controlled substances in human subjects?
 Yes   No See instructions to view  controlled substance listings. 
7.   Continuation of  Drug Therapy After Study Closure    Not applicable to this project
Are subjects  provided the opportunity to continue to receive  the study drug(s)  after  the study has 
ended?  Yes   No
If yes, describe  the conditions under which  continued access  to study drug(s)  may apply  as well as 
conditions for termination of such access. 
Subjects receiving  placebo with receive NAC free of charge for the  next 12 weeks of the protocol.  
They will  continue  clinical sessions  as needed  for the next 12 weeks.  After receiving 12 weeks of 
NAC, they will be  instructed on how to obtain NAC over-the-counter  but encouraged to  receive  
continued psychiatric care.   We  will make  appropriate clinical  referrals  as necessary at the end  of 
the trial.  We will offer continued  consultations to outside practitioners throughout the study 
period.
SECTION VII: HUMAN SUBJECTS  
1.Recruitment Procedures: How will potential subjects be identified, contacted and recruited?  
Attach copies of any  recruitment materials  that will be  used.
 Flyers  Internet/Web Postings  Radio
 Posters  Mass E-mail Solicitation  Telephone
 Letter   Departmental/Center Website  Television
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 15 of 27 Medical Record Review  Departmental/Center Research Boards  Newspaper
 Departmental/Center Newsletters  Web-Based Clinical Trial Registries
 Other  (describe):  Clinicaltrials.gov Registry (do  not send materials to HIC)
1. a. Assessment  of Current Health Provider  Relationship for  HIPAA  Consideration:
Does  the Investigator or any member of the research  team have a direct existing clinical  
relationship with any  potential subject?  
 Yes, all subjects
 Yes,  some of the subjects
 No
If yes, describe  the nature of this relationship.  
We may recruit subjects who come to be  seen at our clinic. Some children  may be  referred  for 
psychopharmacology consult.  Other subjects may come specifically because of interest  in the 
study. No subjects will be  taken off current medication or withdrawn from  ongoing therapy in  
order to participate in the  trial, unless the current medication is ineffective or causing 
unacceptable adverse  effects. Families of children who are not interested  in the study will be 
treated in the usual clinical manner.
2.Subject Population Provide a detailed description of the targeted involvement  of human subjects 
for this research project. 
In many cases subjects will be screened via telephone. The telephone screen will be  used to  
inform the parent (primary caretaker) about the nature of the study, the duration of the study, number of visits, randomization, etc.  The telephone screen will include collecting a brief history 
to exclude subjects that are unlikely to be eligible.  People  may  not be eligible because of an 
ongoing medical  problem (asthma  or pregnancy),  presence of an excluded psychiatric diagnosis  
(see exclusion criteria), or because  they are unable  to attend scheduled study visits.  Interested  
subjects will be scheduled for a  screening visit.  The screening visit will occur over one  visit. 
The overall purpose  of the  screening is to confirm that the subject meets  all entry criteria. The 
first step in the screening  visit  will be to review  the consent form,  answer questions  about the 
protocol and to obtain written informed consent. All procedures will be described to  the subject  
in a developmentally  appropriate manner.
2.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:  What are the criteria used to determine  subject inclusion  or exclusion? 
How will eligibility be  determined, and by whom?  
Subjects will be  well-characterized and must meet selection criteria to  be enrolled. The measures  
used in the baseline assessment will be used  by the principal investigators to  determine if  
subjects meet  inclusion/exclusion criteria.
  
Inclusion Criteria:
1.Children aged  8-17  years.
2.Primary diagnosis of  OCD.  
3.Duration of OCD greater than 6 months.
4. Significant  Current  OCD  symptoms:  Current CY-BOCS score greater than or equal to  
16.
Exclusion Criteria:
1.Comorbid bipolar  disorder, psychotic disorder,  substance use disorder, developmental  
disorder or mental retardation (IQ<70).
2.Recent change (less than 4 weeks) in medications that  have  potential effects on OCD 
severity (such as Selective  Serotonin Reuptake  Inhibitors,  clomipramine,  naltrexone,  
lithium, psychostimulants, anxiolytics, or antipsychotics).  Medication change is defined 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 16 of 27to include either dose changes or medication discontinuation. 
3.Asthma requiring medication use within the  last 3  months  (case  reports have linked 
intravenous NAC administration with asthma exacerbation)
4.Known hypersensitivity  or previous anaphylactoid reaction to acetylcysteine  or any  
components in  its preparation.
5.Positive pregnancy test or drug  screening test.
6.Previous use of  N-acetylcysteine (dose  greater than 600mg  for more than 2 weeks).
       3.a. Will email or telephone correspondence be used to screen  potential subjects  for eligibility
        prior to the potential subject coming to the  research office?   Yes   No
3.b. If yes, will identifiable health information be collected  during  this screening process and 
retained by the  research  team?   Yes   No
4.Subject Classifications: Check off all classifications of subjects that  will be invited to enroll in 
the research project. Will subjects, who may  require additional safeguards or other  
considerations, be enrolled  in the study? If so, identify the population of subjects  requiring  special  
safeguards and  provide a justification  for their involvement.
  Children  Healthy Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus
 Non-English Speaking  Prisoners  Economically disadvantaged persons
 Decisionally  Impaired  Employees  Pregnant  women  and/or fetuses
 Students  Females  of childbearing  potential
For children, we will  obtain consent  from  their parent (legal guardian) before enrolling them in  the 
study.  We will also require childhood assent for participation.  A  simple quiz testing the 
understanding of the protocol and  important elements of informed consent is in place  at the end  of the  
consent form.   
For females  of child bearing potential  we will conduct a urine pregnancy test prior to  enrollment in the  
study. If the pregnancy test is positive we will refer people to  appropriate treatment and will exclude 
them from participation in  the trial until completion  of their pregnancy.  For  sexually  active females,  
we will provide  contraceptive counseling  and refer  them for contraceptive treatment if indicated.  The 
acceptable methods of contraception  will include  oral birth control pills  (OTCs), IUD, transdermal 
preparations, parenteral preparations,  barrier contraceptive methods (i.e.  condoms  and diaphragm) and 
abstinence.  Because full confidentiality regarding pregnancy cannot be  entirely guaranteed, these  
testing requirements  and the limited scope of  confidentiality  will be made known  to all subjects  during  
the consent  procedure. In  this manner, young women who would not  be comfortable with pregnancy  
testing or  sharing the  results of such testing can “opt out” of the study at the time  of the initial consent, 
without having to declare specific reasons.
Since subjects will also be screened  for drugs, it would  be advisable to explain that these results  will 
also be kept  confidential. However, if subjects exhibit any  behaviors that could be an  immediate  
danger to themselves or  others and/or other serious medical  conditions,  subjects will be excluded, 
parents will be  advised of  these findings, and subjects will be  referred  for the appropriate evaluation. If  
subjects or parents are uncomfortable with the provisions surrounding drug testing, then, they may also opt out of participating. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 17 of 27a. Is this research proposal designed  to enroll  children who  are wards of the state as potential 
subjects?  Yes   No (If yes,  see Instructions section VII  #4 for  further requirements) 
SECTION VIII: CONSENT/ ASSENT P ROCEDURES
1.Consent Personnel: List all members of the research team  who will be obtaining consent/assent. 
Michael H.  Bloch,  MD, MS, Angeli  Landeros-Weisenberger MD, James  F. Leckman, MD, 
Robert E.  King,  MD, Kaitlyn  E. Panza, BA, Megan E. Smith, BA
2. Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, including parental permission or  surrogate permission and  the steps taken to  ensure  
subjects’ independent decision-making.  
The research team (PI, his designee  or research coordinator)  will explain  the study to the 
child and legal guardian.
Understanding of the study will be tested  using a brief questionnaire (see consent  and 
assent form)  of the key elements of the study. 
The research team will discuss the child’s participation in the study with the patient’s 
primary clinician and/or pediatrician.  The clinician’s opinion about  the patient’s  
participation and  ability to  provide  informed  consent  will be documented.  
3. Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide Informed Consent/Assent:  Indicate how  the 
personnel obtaining  consent will assess the potential subject’s ability and  capacity to consent to  the 
research being proposed. 
Subjects will be  minors (ages 8-17) and the  consents will  be obtained from the parent 
(guardians).  We will also obtain assent from  minors participating  in our trial.  The consent  
documents will  be reviewed verbally with both parent and  child.  A brief  questionnaire  will be 
used to assess their basic understanding of  our protocol – random assignment, need for regular 
visits, and the need for twice  daily medication  use. If for any reason,  it becomes clear that either 
the parent or child can  not comprehend trial design  or procedures they will not be enrolled in  this 
study.
4. Documentation of  Consent/Assent: Specify  the documents that will be  used during the 
consent/assent process. Copies of all documents  should be appended to the protocol,  in the same 
format that they will be given to subjects.
Parental Consent Form, young  child  assent Form, adolescent assent form.  
5.Non-English Speaking Subjects: Explain  provisions in  place to  ensure  comprehension  for 
research involving  non-English speaking subjects. Translated copies  of all  consent materials  must 
be submitted for approval prior  to use. 
This protocol  will not involve  Non-English  speaking subjects. 
6. Waiver of Consent: Will you request  either a waiver of consent, or a waiver of signed consent, for 
this study? If  so, please address  the following:
This section is not applicable to this research  project
Waiver of consent: (No consent form  from subjects will be  obtained.)
a. Does the  research pose greater than minimal risk to  subjects?   Yes   No
b. Will the  waiver adversely affect  subjects’ rights  and welfare?  Yes   No
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 18 of 27c. Why  would the research  be impracticable to  conduct without the waiver? 
d. Where appropriate, how will pertinent  information be returned to, or shared with subjects
at a later date? 
Waiver of signed consent: (Verbal  consent  from subjects will be obtained.)
 This section is not applicable to this research  project
a. Would the  signed consent form be  the only record linking the subject and  the research?  
 Yes   No
b. Does  a breach of confidentiality  constitute  the principal risk to subjects?   Yes   No
OR
c. Does  the research pose greater than minimal risk?  Yes   No AND
d. Does  the research include  any activities  that would require signed consent in  a non-
research context?   Yes   No
7.  Required HIPAA Authorization: If the  research  involves the creation,  use or disclosure of 
protected health  information (PHI), separate subject authorization is required under the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule. Indicate which of the following  forms are being provided:
 Compound Consent and  Authorization form
  HIPAA Research Authorization  Form
8.Request for waiver of HIPAA authorization: (When requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either  the entire  study, or for  recruitment purposes only)
Choose one: For entire study: ______ For recruitment purposes  only: x___
i.Describe why  it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s  authorization for 
use/disclosure of this data;
ii.If requesting  a waiver  of signed authorization,  describe  why it would be impracticable 
to obtain the subject’s signed authorization for  use/disclosure of this  data;
i. We are requesting a waiver of HIPAA authorization for recruitment purposes only.  Subjects will be initially recruited through  word of mouth, 
OCD advocacy  organizations,  physician  referrals and internet ads.  We will 
need to use PHI such as  name,  telephone number and email addresses to 
schedule initial  screening interviews.  It would be impractical to coordinate 
initial subject enrollment  and recruitment without this  data.
ii. Signed authorization  is impractical because initial screening of patients 
recruited through advertisements  or referral may occur over  the telephone 
or email.
By signing  this protocol application, the investigator assures that  the protected  
health information for which a Waiver  of Authorization has been requested will not  
be reused or disclosed to  any person or entity other than those listed  in this 
application, except as required by law, for authorized  oversight  of this research 
study, or as  specifically approved for use in another  study  by an IRB.
SECTION IX: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH SUBJECTS
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 19 of 271.Risks: Describe the reasonably foreseeable risks, including risks  to subject privacy, discomforts, 
or inconveniences  associated with subjects participating in the research. 
The risks in this study include: 
1)drug side effects  of N-Acetylcysteine, 
2)worsening  of symptoms 
3)length of  research protocol and  time required to complete study instruments  
4)unanticipated side effects like nausea 
Drug side effects
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is an altered  form of the amino acid cysteine, which is commonly 
found in food  and synthesized by the body.  N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is generally well 
tolerated and has been  extensively used in the treatment of acetaminophen overdose/toxicity 
at high doses for many years. The  dosage in acute acetaminophen overdose is  a 140mg/kg 
loading dose  followed  by a maintenance dose of 70mg/kg administered  every 4 hours  for 17 
consecutive doses.  The long-term use of  NAC  has also been investigated in six-month to 
three-year studies examining  the efficacy  and tolerability of NAC (dosed between 600-
1200mg per day) in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary  disease  COPD (Pela, 
Calcagni et al. 1999; Grandjean,  Berthet et al. 2000; Stey, Steurer et  al. 2000; Kasielski and 
Nowak 2001;  Poole and  Black 2001; Chikina, Iagmurov et al. 2002;  Decramer, Rutten-van 
Molken et al. 2005). A  recent study by Decramer and colleagues in  2005 concluded  that there 
were no adverse events thought  to be  drug related in their study examining the use of 
600mg/day of NAC in  over  500 patients with COPD. Additionally,  Chikina and colleagues 
found that  the most effective dose of NAC in the  treatment of COPD was 1200mg/day (the 
study examined doses of  NAC ranging  from 600-2400mg/day). A  meta-analysis examining 
the efficacy of NAC in COPD performed  in 2000 revealed that NAC was  well  tolerated  
without significant adverse effects (Grandjean, Berthet et al. 2000). Although generally well-tolerated, the PDR indicates  that adverse reactions reported with  oral NAC include nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea, headache (especially when used along with nitrates) and rashes. There are rare reports of renal stone formation.  It is important to  note that  rare reports of 
bronchoconstriction have occurred with intravenous  NAC (but no reports of bronchospasm  
related to oral use  of NAC). Although there are  no known contraindications to NAC use, 
individuals with asthma  will be  excluded  from  the study given the rare, but  potential, adverse 
effect of  bronchospasm. 
We have treated  a number of adult  psychiatric patients with  NAC at higher doses,  up to 3000 
mg/day, without side  effects beyond mild nausea (Pittenger, Krystal et al. 2005;  Lafleur, 
Pittenger et al. 2006). 
Worsening of symptoms
Since N-Acetylcysteine  is added  to the patients’  current medications, the risk of symptoms 
worsening in this study is probably not greater  than it would be if the patient  continued on 
their current medication. The only additional risks in this study are potential adverse effects  
of N-Acetylcysteine.  
Ratings
Patients may find the  battery of behavioral  and movement ratings tedious. 
Unanticipated side effects
NAC is commonly used in acetaminophen  overdose as well as COPD.  Although NAC has 
been shown to be  effective and  without adverse effects in  adults with  trichotillomania, 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 20 of 27schizophrenia and bipolar disorder,  the use of this medication in  children  with OCD might be 
associated with  unforeseen risks, such as worsening  of existing symptoms or emergence of 
new symptoms. All medications  can be associated with allergic reactions. Any  clinical  trial 
involves risks and side  effects that cannot be  predicted. Subjects will be told of any  important 
new information  that might affect  their  decision to continue in  the study. In addition, the  HIC 
will be notified regularly  of any new information  about the safety of the study medication
2.Minimizing Risks:  Describe the manner in which the above-mentioned risks  will be minimized.  
Subjects will be  seen  regularly during  dose titration to  monitor  increases in  the medication dose. 
Adverse effects will be systematically  evaluated and documented with respect to severity and  
duration. Evaluation of adverse effects  and dose are closely tied  in so that the medication schedule 
is set up, such that  decisions about dose increases  occur at study visits. The  treating  clinician is 
free to delay an increase or  reduce the dose at  any time to  manage a suspected medication-related 
adverse effect.
3. Data  and Safety Monitoring Plan: Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
(DSMP) based on the  investigator’s risk assessment  stated below. (Note: the HIC will make  the 
final determination  of the risk to subjects.) For more information, see  the Instructions, page  24.
a. What is the  investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for  subjects 
participating in this study? 
b. If children are involved, what is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for the children participating in this study? 
c. Data and Safety  Monitoring Plan: 
a)  This trial  is greater than minimal risk to the  child, but presenting the prospect of direct benefit  
to the individual subjects.
b)  This trial is greater than minimal risk to the child,  but presenting the prospect of  direct benefit 
to the individual subjects  
c) 
Data Management : 
All data obtained during the course of the study will be stored  both  electronically and  in hard 
copy. The  study coordinator will be responsible for ensuring completion of all study forms and  
collection of  all data materials. Study data will be  entered into an  electronic spreadsheet  by 
dedicated data managers and/or  study  coordinators. Double data entry procedures will be  used  to 
ensure accuracy and  completeness.
To protect  the privacy  of subjects, all information  will be kept confidential and only  members of 
investigative team, and  the HIC will have  access to the study data.  All paper data will be 
maintained and secured in locked  file cabinets.  To further safeguard privacy, a  numbering 
system will be used  to assign  a unique identifier to each  subject. Each subject will have the same 
unique identifier for  both paper and electronic  spreadsheet. Only individuals with  appropriate 
Human Research  Subjects  Protection training will be  permitted to handle  study subject data 
forms.  
Safety Monitoring Plan:
Since this is a placebo-controlled,  double-blind,  study of children  with OCD, we believe the risks  
involved in this study are greater  than minimal  risk to the child, but presenting  the prospect  of 
direct benefit to the individual subjects. However, assessment of adverse events, including 
grading of severity and attribution to research will be conducted  at each visit.  We will use the 
Pediatric Adverse Events Rating Scale  (PAERS) to specifically track  possible  adverse  events 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 21 of 27throughout the trial (March, Karayal  et al. 2007).  Serious and unanticipated and related adverse  
events will be reported immediately  to the HIC (using HIC form 6A), and any appropriate 
funding and regulatory agencies. Also, serious anticipated adverse events will be reported  
immediately to the HIC and others whenever  their magnitude or frequency exceeds  expectations. 
Dr. Bloch  will evaluate the adverse  event and determine whether  the adverse event  affects  the 
Risk/Benefit ratio of the study and whether modifications to the protocol  (at Risks  to Subjects) or 
consent form (at Risks and Inconveniences) are  required.
Personnel responsible for the safety review and its frequency.
Dr. Bloch will conduct a review of all adverse  events at least quarterly  and if any serious adverse  
events occur. He will evaluate the frequency  and severity of the adverse events and determine if 
modifications to the protocol  or consent forms are required.  During the review  process Dr. Bloch 
will evaluate  whether the study should continue unchanged, require modification,  continue or 
close enrollment.
Since this is a study of a FDA-approved medication in children with OCD, we believe  the risks  
involved in this study are greater  than minimal  risk to the child, but presenting  the prospect  of 
direct benefit to the individual subjects. However, assessment of adverse events, including 
grading of severity and  attribution to research,  will be conducted  at each visit indicated below.
1. Attribution of Adverse  Events
Clearly: The  adverse event  is clearly  related to the intervention
Likely: The  adverse event is likely  related to the intervention
Possibly: The adverse event  may be related to the  intervention
Unlikely: It  is unlikely  that the adverse event is  related to  the intervention
Not: The  adverse event is clearly not related  to the intervention
2. Plan for Grading  Adverse Events
The FDA's definition of serious adverse events (21 CRF 312)
SAEs include any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose results  in death or the 
immediate risk of death,  hospitalization  or the prolonging of an existing hospitalization,  
persistent or significant disability/incapacity or congenital anomaly/birth defect (NOH  Guide-  
6/11/99)
Grades of Risk:
0 = No Adverse Event or within  normal  limits
1 = Non-Serious Adverse Event
2 = Serious  Adverse Event
3. Plans for reporting  serious and unanticipated and related adverse events,  anticipated adverse  
events occurring  at a greater frequency than expected, and other unanticipated problems 
involving risks to subjects or others to the  HIC:
Serious and related unanticipated adverse  events will be reported immediately to the HIC (using 
HIC form 6A), and any appropriate  funding and regulatory  agencies. Other  unanticipated 
problems involving risks to subjects or others  will also be reported to  HIC.
Serious anticipated adverse events will be reported immediately to the HIC and others whenever 
their magnitude or frequency exceeds expectations.  Dr. Bloch will evaluate the adverse  event 
and determine  whether the adverse event affects the Risk/Benefit  ratio of the study and whether 
modifications to the protocol (at Risks to Subjects) or consent form  (at Risks and 
Inconveniences) are required.  For the current study, the following individuals, funding, and/or 
regulatory agencies will be notified:  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 22 of 27a.All co-investigators
4. Plans  for reviewing and reporting  non-serious anticipated and unanticipated adverse events:
Dr. Bloch will conduct a review  of all adverse  events at least quarterly. He will evaluate the 
frequency and severity of the adverse events and determine if modifications to the protocol or 
consent forms are required.
4.    Confidentiality & Security  of Data:
a.    What protected health information  about subjects will be  collected  and used for the  research?   
       
b.    How will the research data be  collected, recorded and stored? 
c.    How will  the digital data be stored?  CD   DVD   Flash Drive   Portable Hard   
       Drive   Secured Server   Laptop Computer   Desktop Computer   Other
d.    What methods and procedures will be  used to safeguard the confidentiality and security of    
       the identifiable study data and the storage  media  indicated above during the subject    
       participation  in the  study? 
e.    What mechanisms are  in place to ensure the proper use and continued protection of these   
       data after the subject  participation in the study has ceased? 
f.    What will be done with the data when the research is completed? Are there plans  to destroy  
the identifiable data?  If yes, describe  how, by whom and when identifiers  will be destroyed. 
If no, describe how the data  and/or  identifiers  will be secured.
g.   Who will have access to the protected  health  information? (such as the research  sponsor, the  
investigator, the  research staff,  all research monitors, FDA, QUACS, SSC, etc.)
h.   Which external or internal individuals or agencies (such as the study sponsor, FDA, QUACS,
       SSC,  etc.) will have access to the study data? 
i.    If appropriate, has a Certificate  of Confidentiality been obtained? 
j    Are there any  mandatory reporting requirements? (Incidents of child abuse,  elderly  abuse,
      communicable diseases, etc.)  
(a)Private identifiable information will be collected but will be kept confidential and will not  be 
divulged in any  publication emanating from this work
(b)Clinical data, outcomes of diagnostic  instruments, and research data will be collected by the 
principal investigator and other  study personnel  and stored in  a locked file  cabinet in  a 
locked office.  Data will be  entered  into a database  on a password-protected  computer in  a 
locked office, by study personnel.
(c)Above
(d)All data will be  coded and stored  in locked  cabinets/password protected computer in  an 
office that is  locked.  Information  that will breach subject confidentiality will not  be shared. 
Rather, data will only be released  upon written consent of the subject and will be  available  
for review by the Yale human Investigation  Committee.
(e)The consent form will ask families to provide  consent to  contact them in  the future.  This  
request will make it clear  that participation in the study is not contingent on granting  this 
permission. Furthermore, granting permission to be  re-contacted  does not obligate the family 
to participate in any future project.  Published reports will contain only aggregate data and  
will be free of personal identifiers.
(f)We will hold paper files for  seven years at which point they will be  destroyed.  As noted  
above, archived computer files  will not have any identifying information.
(g)Principal investigator, co-investigator  and study personnel.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 23 of 27(h)The International Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Foundation is a potential sponsor of this 
project and could have access  to trial data  if they come to Yale to monitor the conduct of this 
research study.
(i)We will not preserve drug screening data after completion of tests so we will not apply for a 
certificate of confidentiality.
(j)Yes. Evidence of child abuse or situations in which the subject is deemed a danger to self or 
others will be  reported.
5. Potential  Benefits: Identify any  benefits  that may be reasonably expected to result from  the 
research, either to the  subject(s)  or to society  at large. (Payment  of subjects  is not considered a 
benefit in this context of the risk benefit assessment.) 
Children may benefit from the  thorough medical  and psychiatric evaluations that they will 
receive while participating in the study. D uring the study, subjects will also receive a higher level 
of evaluation and care than routine treatment.  Additionally, subjects may benefit from the study 
medication. 
         SECTION  X: RESEARCH ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC  CONSIDERATIONS
1.     Alternatives: What other alternatives are  available to the study subjects outside of the research?
1)Continuing patient’s current medications or therapy, which might include various SSRIs or clomipramine) or cognitive behavioral  therapy.  Both these interventions have 
demonstrated efficacy  for the treatment of  pediatric  OCD.  All subjects will be 
recommended to engage in adequate trials  of both these interventions  before enrolling in  
the trial.  
2)Antipsychotics in addition to SSRIs  have shown some benefit for the treatment of 
refractory OCD  in adults.  These  medications are associated with  a significantly greater 
side effect  burden  than  NAC.  Families will be made aware of this  additional treatment 
option prior to enrolling in  this study.
3)Since N-Acetylcystiene is FDA approved  for use to  reduce  the extent of liver injury after 
acetaminophen overdose,  the patient’s doctor might  feel comfortable prescribing it off 
label to the patient.
 
2. Payments  for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any  payments that will be  
made to subjects  and the conditions for  receiving this compensation. 
Subjects will be  paid  a total of $150 for participation in  the study -- $50 screening assessment, 
$25 for each  of the 4 follow-up visits. .
3. Costs for Participation (Economic  Considerations): Clearly  describe the subject’s costs 
associated with  participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that  
will be provided  at no cost to subjects.     
Families will not be charged  for the study medications, clinical assessments, services or 
laboratory tests  directly  related to the study. As noted  above,  some  subjects may  be seen for a 
clinical consultation prior  to study entry. This clinical consultation will be  charged  as part of 
standard of  care in the  usual  manner.
4. In Case  of Injury: This section is required for  any research  involving more than  minimal risk.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 24 of 27a.     Will medical treatment be  available if research-related injury occurs? 
b.     Where and  from whom may treatment be  obtained? 
c.     Are there  any limits to the  treatment being provided? 
d.     Who  will pay for this treatment?  
e.     How  will the  medical treatment  be accessed by subjects? 
(a) Yes
(b) Initial  assessment  and appropriate referral will be carried  out by the research team.  The 
PI (Michael  H. Bloch,  MD) will conduct assessment  under  the supervision  of Dr. King and  Dr. 
Pittenger. Whether  these events were considered "related to  the study treatment"  or not,  our 
research team will participate  in the assessment and appropriate disposition of the case.  The 
disposition has taken many forms: in some cases, we  assume ongoing  clinical care of  the subject; 
in other  cases, we  secure  appropriate referrals and are no longer involved in  the patient's care; 
other cases may involve  a combined approach in which we provide care in  collaboration with 
appropriate specialists. In all cases, the disposition is guided by the family's preference and  
clinical judgment regarding the subject's best interest. Every reasonable effort will be made  to 
involve the subject's primary care  provider.
(c) Our intervention  will focus on assessment and securing  an appropriate referral in 
collaboration with the  family and the primary  care provider.
(d) We will provide our assessment and  referral  services without charge. Ongoing care will 
be paid by the  family or family's  insurance carrier.
(e) As noted in 4b, the  occurrence of  an adverse event requiring care outside the confines  of 
the study will be  initially assessed by the research team. Referrals to  the family's  primary  care  
provider or  other specialists will be  made in accordance with the nature of the subject's problem.  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 25 of 27REFERRENCES
Adair, J.  C., J. E. Knoefel, et al. (2001).  "Controlled trial of N-acetylcysteine for patients with 
probable Alzheimer's disease." Neurology  57(8): 1515-7.
Arnold, P. D., T. Sicard, et al. (2006). "Glutamate transporter gene SLC1A1  associated with 
obsessive-compulsive disorder."  Arch  Gen Psychiatry 63(7): 769-76.
Bailey, B.,  R. Blais, et al.  (2004). "Status epilepticus  after a  massive intravenous N-
acetylcysteine overdose leading  to intracranial hypertension and  death." Ann  Emerg Med 
44(4): 401-6.
Berk, M.,  D. Copolov, et al. (2008).  "N-acetyl cysteine as a  glutathione  precursor for 
schizophrenia--a double-blind, randomized,  placebo-controlled trial." Biol  Psychiatry  
64(5): 361-8.
Berk, M.,  D. L. Copolov, et al.  (2008). "N-acetyl cysteine for depressive  symptoms in  bipolar  
disorder--a double-blind randomized placebo-controlled  trial."  Biol Psychiatry 64(6): 
468-75.
Bloch, M. H., A. Landeros-Weisenberger,  et al. (2006). "A systematic  review: antipsychotic 
augmentation with treatment  refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder." Mol Psychiatry 
11(7): 622-32.
Chakrabarty, K., S. Bhattacharyya, et al. (2005).  "Glutamatergic  dysfunction  in OCD." 
Neuropsychopharmacology 30(9): 1735-40.
Cheng, B., S.  T. Lin, et al.  (2007).  "[Effects of HBx gene on apoptosis of human liver cell L-02  
after adriamycin intervention]."  Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing  Za Zhi 15(12): 947-8.
Chikina, S., B. Iagmurov, et al.  (2002). "[N-Acetylcysteine: low and high  doses in  the treatment  
of chronic obstructive lung diseases  in Chernobyl accident liquidators]."  Ter Arkh  74(3): 
62-5.
Coric, V., S. Taskiran,  et al. (2005). "Riluzole  augmentation in  treatment-resistant obsessive-
compulsive disorder: an  open-label trial." Biol Psychiatry 58(5): 424-8.
Decramer, M., M. Rutten-van Molken, et al.  (2005). "Effects of  N-acetylcysteine on outcomes  in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (Bronchitis Randomized  on NAC Cost-Utility 
Study, BRONCUS): a  randomised  placebo-controlled trial." Lancet 365(9470): 1552-60.
Dickel, D. E., J. Veenstra-VanderWeele, et al.  (2006).  "Association testing of the positional and 
functional candidate gene SLC1A1/EAAC1 in early-onset obsessive-compulsive  
disorder." Arch Gen  Psychiatry 63(7): 778-85.
Douglass, H. M., T. E. Moffitt, et  al. (1995). "Obsessive-compulsive  disorder in a  birth cohort of  
18-year-olds: prevalence and predictors." J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 34(11): 
1424-31.
DuPaul, G. J., T. J. Power, et al.  (1998). ADHD Rating Scale-IV , The Guilford Press.
Grandjean, E. M., P. Berthet, et al. (2000). "Efficacy  of oral long-term N-acetylcysteine in 
chronic bronchopulmonary  disease: a meta-analysis of published double-blind,  placebo-
controlled clinical  trials." Clin  Ther 22(2): 209-21.
Grant, J.  E., B. Odlaug,  et al. (2008). "A double-blind, placebo-controlled  study of a glutamate 
modulating agent, N-acetyl cysteine,  in the treatment of trichotillomania " Arch  Gen 
Psychiatry in  press.
Grant, J.  E., B. L. Odlaug,  et al. (2009). "N-acetylcysteine,  a glutamate modulator, in the 
treatment of  trichotillomania: a double-blind,  placebo-controlled study." Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 66(7):  756-63.
Grant, P., L.  Lougee, et al.  (in press ). "An  open-label  trial of  riluzole,  a glutamate antagonist, in 
children with treatment -refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder."  Journal  of Child and 
Adolescent Psychopharmacology .
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 26 of 27Guy, W. (1976). ECDEU  Assessment Manual for Psychopharmacology . Rockville,  Md,  National 
Institute of Mental  Health.
Kasielski, M. and  D. Nowak (2001). "Long-term administration of N-acetylcysteine decreases  
hydrogen peroxide exhalation in subjects with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease." Respir Med 95 (6): 448-56.
Kaufman, J., B. Birmaher, et al.  (1997). "Schedule  for Affective Disorders  and Schizophrenia for 
School-Age Children-Present and Lifetime Version  (K-SADS-PL):  initial reliability and 
validity data."  J Am Acad Child Adolesc  Psychiatry 36(7):  980-8.
Keuthen, N. J., R. L. O'Sullivan,  et al. (1995). "The  Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) 
Hairpulling Scale:  1. development and factor analyses." Psychother Psychosom 64(3-4): 
141-5.
Kovacs, M.  (1985). "The Children's Depression,  Inventory (CDI)." Psychopharmacol  Bull 21(4): 
995-8.
Lafleur, D. L., C. Pittenger, et al. (2006). "N-acetylcysteine  augmentation  in serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder." Psychopharmacology  (Berl) 184(2): 
254-6.
Leckman, J.  F., M. A. Riddle, et al. (1989).  "The  Yale Global Tic Severity  Scale:  initial testing  
of a clinician-rated scale  of tic severity." J Am Acad  Child  Adolesc  Psychiatry 28(4): 
566-73.
March, J. S., O. Karayal, et al. (2007). CAPTN: The Pediatric Adverse Events Rating Scale. The 
Scientific Proceedings of the 2007 Annual  Meeting of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, Boston.
March, J. S., J. D. Parker, et al. (1997). "The  Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for Children 
(MASC): factor structure, reliability, and validity." J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
36(4): 554-65.
Moran, M.  M., K. McFarland, et al. (2005). "Cystine/glutamate exchange regulates metabotropic 
glutamate receptor  presynaptic inhibition of excitatory transmission and vulnerability to  
cocaine seeking." J Neurosci 25(27):  6389-93.
Pasquini, M.  and M. Biondi (2006). "Memantine augmentation for refractory obsessive-
compulsive disorder."  Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol  Psychiatry 30(6): 1173-5.
Pela, R., A. M. Calcagni, et al. (1999). "N-acetylcysteine  reduces  the exacerbation  rate in 
patients with moderate to  severe  COPD." Respiration 66(6):  495-500.
Pittenger, C.,  V. Coric,  et al. (2008). "Riluzole  in the treatment of mood  and anxiety  disorders."  
CNS Drugs  22(9): 761-86.
Pittenger, C.,  J. H. Krystal, et  al. (2005). "Initial  evidence of the beneficial effects of glutamate-
modulating agents in the  treatment of self-injurious behavior associated with borderline 
personality disorder." J Clin Psychiatry 66(11):  1492-3.
Pittenger, C.,  J. H. Krystal, et  al. (2006). "Glutamate-modulating drugs as novel 
pharmacotherapeutic agents in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder." NeuroRx  
3(1): 69-81.
Poole, P. J. and P.  N. Black (2001). "Oral mucolytic drugs for exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease:  systematic  review." BMJ 322(7297): 1271-4.
Posey, D. J.,  C. Erickson, et al.  (2009). A Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial of Oral N-
Acetylcysteine in Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders. American  College of  
Neuropsychopharmacology 46th Annual meeting,  Hollywood,  FL.
POTS (2004). "Cognitive-behavior therapy, sertraline,  and their combination for children and 
adolescents with  obsessive-compulsive disorder:  the Pediatric OCD Treatment Study 
(POTS) randomized controlled trial."  JAMA 292: 1969-76.
Poyurovsky, M., R. Weizman, et al. (2005).  "Memantine for treatment-resistant OCD." Am J  
Psychiatry 162(11):  2191-2.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/17/2017 VALID THROUGH 4/15/2018                                                                                                                                                            HIC#1004006623
version Page 27 of 27Rosenberg, D. R., F. P. MacMaster, et al.  (2000). "Decrease in caudate glutamatergic  
concentrations in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder patients taking paroxetine." J  
Am Acad Child  Adolesc Psychiatry 39(9): 1096-103.
Rosenberg, D. R., S. N. MacMillan,  et al. (2001). "Brain anatomy  and chemistry may  predict 
treatment response in  paediatric obsessive--compulsive disorder." Int  J 
Neuropsychopharmacol 4(2): 179-90.
RTECS (2001). Registery  of Toxic  Effects of Chemical Substances
National Institute  for Occupational Safety  and Health.
Scahill, L.,  M. A. Riddle,  et al. (1997). "Children's  Yale-Brown  Obsessive  Compulsive  Scale: 
reliability and validity." J Am Acad  Child  Adolesc Psychiatry 36(6): 844-52.
Stewart, S.  E., J. A. Fagerness,  et al. (2007). "Association of the  SLC1A1 glutamate transporter 
gene and obsessive-compulsive disorder."  Am J  Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet  
144(8): 1027-33.
Stey, C.,  J. Steurer, et  al. (2000). "The  effect of oral  N-acetylcysteine in chronic bronchitis: a  
quantitative systematic review." Eur Respir J 16(2):  253-62.
Whiteside, S.  P., J. D. Port, et al. (2006).  "A magnetic resonance spectroscopy  investigation of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder and anxiety."  Psychiatry Res 146(2):  137-47.
Zohar, A. H. (1999). "The epidemiology  of obsessive-compulsive disorder  in children and 
adolescents." Child Adolesc  Psychiatr Clin N Am 8(3): 445-60.