 
1 
 STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
 
Integrating Mindfulness into the  
Patient -Centered Medical Home  
 (MINDFUL -PC) 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
and  
 
Mindfulness Influences on Self -Regulation:   
Mental and Physical Health Implications  
(Mindful Self -Regulation fMRI pilot study)  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Principal Investigator:   
MINDFUL -PC PI : Zev Schuman -Olivier, MD  
Mindful Self -Regulation UH2 CHA Site PI : Zev Schuman -Olivier, MD  
Overall UH2 Collaboration PIs : Eric Loucks, PhD  and Willoughby Britton, PhD (Brown 
University ); Jean King, PhD  (UMASS Medical School ) 
 
MINDFUL -PC Supported by:  
Arthur Vining Davis, Arnold P. Gold Foundation, CHA/HMS Department of Psychiatry, 
Cambridge Health Alliance  
 
The Mindful Self -Regulation experimental fMRI pilot study is supported by:  
National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health through grant “Mindfulness 
Influences on Self -Regulation: Mental and Physical Health Implications” ( UH2AT009145)  
 
This protocol integrates funding from multiple sources. All protocol elements that derive 
from NCCIH fund ing are represented in blue text throughout the protocol.  
 
Dated: June 2 7, 2018  
  
 
2 
 NCCIH protocol template  
Version 1.3 (Submitted 7/21/16)  
 
Revisions made:  
 
Version Number: 1.1  
Version Date: 1/08/2016  
1. Clarified language about group termination and assessment completion (section C.3.h.) 
(1/8/2016).  
 
Version 1.2:  
Version Date:  05/11/2016   
2. Changed order of DSMP sections, to create more logical flow (sections D, and separate 
DSMP document.) (05/11/2016).  
3. Changed goals related to recruitment numbers for patients and PCP (A.2.b., C.2., D.3.b.) 
(05/11/2016).  
4. Adjusted Patient screening, inclusion/exclusion, and scheduling procedures for 
MINDFUL -PC participants (C.3.b.) (05/11/2016).  
5. Adjusted dates in Implementation Staging Map (C.4.b., and Table 4. MTPC 
Impl ementation Schedule) (05/11/2016).  
6. Adjusted Study flow schema for Patient participants (Figure 1b.) (05/11/2016).  
7. Removed plans for Haitian -Creole MINDFUL -PC groups (C.3.d.2. ) (05/11/2016).  
8. Added licensed clinician to conduct screening evaluations for the  MTPC groups 
(C.3.d.2.) (05/11/2016).  
9. Added questionnaires (Mindfulness Resources Use Survey, Emotion regulation (DERS) 
and interoception awareness (MAIA) in section C.3.f.10.) and removed questionnaires 
(PROMIS -SDSF, PROMIS -PISF, PROMIS -GHSF) (05/11/2016) . 
10. Added electronic informed consent possibility (C.3.d.1. Informed Consent Visit) and 
possibility to fill in questionnaires electronically through REDCap (Pre -treatment 
Assessment Visit, Mid -Training Assessment Session, Post -Treatment Survey Session).  
11. Adde d: food can be provided during the informed consent session (C.3.d.2.) 
(05/11/2016).  
12. Clarified language about Follow -up Survey Sessions (C.3.d.2.) (05/11/2016).  
13. Changed participant remuneration related to main MINDFUL -PC study (C.3.d.2., D.7.) 
(05/11/2016) . 
14. Added waitlist Biweekly Engagement Phone Call (PT Study Week 1 -8) (05/11/2016).  
15. Added section on Data Monitoring and Quality Assurance (D.2.c.6.) (05/11/2016).  
16. Added description of Session Quality and Protocol Adherence (D.8.) (05/11/2016).  
17. Added procedu res for Unanticipated Problems that are not Adverse Events: Possible Risk 
of Suicide (D.2.c.7.) (05/11/2016).  
18. Added Description of Sources of Research Materials for all study arms and the fMRI 
study and describe Data Linkage to subjects and access to data (D.10.) (05/11/2016).  
 
3 
 19. Added paragraph on present study personnel, responsibilities and inclusion (D.11.), and 
added personnel for fMRI study (postdoctoral fellow) (05/11/2016).  
20. Added paragraph on Human Subjects and Confidentiality and Recruitment procedure s 
(D.3.) (05/11/2016).  
21. Added a fourth task during fMRI scanning (emotion regulation task using pain stimuli) 
(A.2.a.), including respective additional hypotheses (A.2.b.), and analyses (C.5.b.), and 
risk assessment (D.2.d.2.), adjusted the timing of the 4 tasks and added a structural (DTI) 
scan (C.3.a.) (05/11/2016).  
22. Changed task choice and reference for the specific inhibitory control task (C.5.b.) 
(05/11/2016).  
23. Adjusted recruitment and informed consent procedure for fMRI participants (C.2.c, 
C.3.d.3., D.5 .c.) (05/11/2016).  
24. Adapted and added to fMRI participant inclusion/exclusion criteria (C.1.c.) (05/11/2016).  
25. Added a phone -protocol for screening and scheduling participants to the fMRI study, to 
the group -scheduling phone -call (C.3.d.3.) (05/11/2016).  
26. Added details about toxicology and pregnancy screenings of fMRI participants (C.3.d.3.) 
(05/11/2016).  
27. Changed subject remuneration and reimbursement of travel expenses for fMRI 
participants (D.7.b.) (05/11/2016).  
28. Adjusted Study Visit and Assessment Schedule f or fMRI Pilot Study Participants (Table 
4) (05/11/2016).  
 
Version 1.3:  
Version Date: 8/16/2016  
29. Corrected typos in protocol and flyer and clarified language around identification code 
(07/21/2016).  
30. Added additional detail about fMRI contraindications and screening process to the ICF 
and protocol (C.1.c.1./2., C.3.d.3. Group Scheduling Phone Call, and C.3.d.3. fMRI 
Session Visit) ( 07/21/2016 ). 
31. Clarified number of subjects in fMRI pilot study in Figure 1b Study flow schema for 
Patient participants, and consi stently added the maximal recruitment number of n=30 for 
the fMRI pilot study in the text ( 07/21/2016 ). 
32. Clarified timing and content of pre -fMRI phone calls (C.3.d.3.) ( 07/21/2016 ). 
33. Specified information on screened drugs (C.3.d.3. Pre -treatment fMRI Sessi on 
Visit)( 07/21/2016 ). 
34. Clarified language around the total payment for the fMRI pilot in the protocol and ICF 
(protocol section D.7.b, and Table 4. Study Visit and Assessment Schedule for fMRI 
Pilot Study Participants) and clarified that drug screening com pletion is necessary for 
reimbursement ( 07/21/2016 ). 
35. Removed F. Markovski as Research Assistant, added Angela Lozad a and Andrea Chen as 
Research Assistants ( D.11. ) (07/21/2016 ). 
36. Added sensors as possible sources of incidental findings ( 07/21/2016 ). 
 
4 
 37. Added risk of noise during scanning ( 07/21/2016 ). 
38. Included NIH version dates and numbers on all documents ( 07/21/2016 ). 
39. Clarified processes after incidental findings (D.2.d.2.3.) ( 07/21/2016 ). 
40. Clarified that result of drug screenings will not be added to  partici pants ’ medical records 
and will only be kept in  their research records , and added language about Certificate of 
Confidentiality application (D.1.a.) ( 07/21/2016 ). 
41. Clarified how MRI data will be kept at imaging site (Martinos Center) and how it will be 
incorporated with other CHA study data (D.1.a.) ( 07/21/2016 ). 
42. Changed nature of response inhibition task to an emotional response inhibition task, 
using standardized and validated emotional pictures (A.2.b.6, C.5.b.) ( 07/21/2016 ). 
43. Deleted redundancy in Confide ntiality section ( 07/21/2016 ). 
44. Updated Randomization Schema (C.3.c. Table 1) ( 07/21/2016 ). 
45. Standardized font type, consolidated text and formatting, and improved readability of 
protocol organization (7/21/2016).  
46. Deleted D.1.c. Sending Data to Research Col laborators Outside CHA , as it is not longer 
relevant  (8/16/2016) . 
47. Added information about the emotional pictures, used in the emotional Go/NoGo  task 
(C.5.b.6., D.2.d.1.3) in line with the new ICF information  (8/16/2016) . 
48. Added  information  about storing fMRI data under unique numeric identifier and acrostic , 
but add ing year of birth, in case a radiologist has to assess the brain scan  (D.1.a.)  
(8/16/2016) . 
49. Added links to Martinos security and imaging manuals for reference (D.1., D.2.d.2) 
(8/16/2016).  
 
Version 1. 4: 
Version Date:  (February 8th, 2017 ) 
 
1. Added post -treatment study visits 2 (12 weeks after baseline) and 3 (16 weeks after 
baseline).  For each of these additional visits, patient participants will fill out the Action 
Plan Initiation Survey (APIS -5).  Compensation is $5 for each of these study visits, which 
will be dispersed at the final 6 -month follow -up visit for a total of $30 as the final 
payment (C.3.d.3.) (10/31/16).  
2. Modified APIS -5 and APA -10 instruments to include 6 categories of action plan goals for 
patient participants to choose from (activity level/exercise, diet/eating/drinking, sleep, 
self-care practice, medication, and reducing substance use) (C.3.f.6.) (10/31/16).   
3. Adapted orientation and informed consent procedure, so that information sheet instead of 
informed consent are distributed at the orientation session (C.2.c, C.3.d.3, D.2.d.2.3, 
D.5.c)  (11/7/16) . 
4. Elimination of two survey sessions (10 -12 week and 56 -week) survey sessions for PCPs 
who enroll in the study from this point onwards.  We are naming this PCP group "Group 
3" to distinguish from existing PCP Groups 1 and 2  (11/7/16) .    
 
5 
 5. Addition of 2 questions regarding actual pain level during the scan and 18 questions, 
immediately after scanning, regarding the subjec tive experience with the tasks during the 
scans (fmri questions)  (C.3.f.14.) (11/7/16) .  
6. Changed instance of first contact about the optional fMRI pilot study from the 
MINDFUL -PC orientation session to a phone call prior to the MINDFUL -PC orientation 
sessi on, with the option of sending the fMRI pilot study  flyer and information sheet  about 
the optional fMRI pilot study  via email prior to the MINDFUL -PC orientation session . 
 
Version 1. 5: 
Version Date:  (April 6, 2017 ) 
1. PCP Enrollment has been completed as of February 10th, 2017  
2. Remove PCP Visit Study Session for Patient Participants  
3. Expand referral requirements: patients can be referred to MINDFUL -PC by either a 
licensed CHA primary care provider, or a licensed CHA mental health clinician.   
4. Add Action Plan Study Session for Patients during Study Weeks 6 -7 
5. Add Action Plan Worksheet as a study material to be completed by patients during 
Action Plan Study Session  
6. Modify APIS -5 Survey to reflect changes in Action Plan Worksheet  
7. Change APIS -5 study sessions to W eeks 9,10, and 16 ($5 compensation each)  
8. Add Study Completion Bonus of $30 to be disbursed at end of study if all study 
participation items have been completed  (Total compensation is now $140).   
9. Study payments occur three times:  at baseline (up to $20), at 8 weeks (up to $40), and at 
24 weeks (up to $80).   
10. Clarified which/how many surveys waitlist participants need to complete in order to be 
eligible for a spot in the next MTPC group once their 6-month study participation is over  
11. Clarified how surveys completed on paper will be handled  
12. Add two research assistants:  Alissa Yap and Yuki Ebihara  
 
Version 1.6:  
Version Date: ( April 25, 2017 ) 
1. Add one research assistant: Alexandra Brunel  
 
Version 1.7:  Version Date:  ( May 24, 2017 ) 
1. Add one research assistant ( Ekaterina Protsenko ) 
 
Version 1.8: Version Date: (Add date of approval of Amendment 23)  
1. Add one research coordinator (My Ngoc To)  
 
Version 1.9: Version Date: ( June 13, 2017 ) 
1. Add one research assistant (Thomas Fatkin)  
Version 1.10: Version Date: ( July 25, 2017 ) 
1. Add two research assistant s (Nermin Hasanovic  and Liza Hoffman ) 
 
6 
 2. Add patient participant adverse events self-report form  to be completed at the 8 -week and 
6-month study sessions  
3. Add “STOP ACHE GO” to the patient participant mindfulness practice diary.  STOP 
ACHE GO stands for:   
Stop or Slow down  
Turn towards experience or Take notice of breathing  
Observe with Openness  
Pleasantness/UnPleasantness  
Allow it to be as it is/Accept the ACHE is here/Anchoring to present with breathing 
Compassion/Curiosity  
Holding the experience with warmth  
Expand awareness from ACHE to breathing, then to body, then to all the senses 
Gratitude/ Grounding in values  
Open to life, its challenges and beauty/Orient towards experience with kindness  
 
Version 1.11: Version Date: ( Retracted on September  26, 2017)  
1. Add one research assistant (Sumayyah S. Ahmed)  
 
Version 1.12:  Version Date: ( October 2, 2017 ) 
1. Add Health, Eating, Activity, and Rest Tracking (HEART) pilot study informed consent 
and procedures  for alumni cohort and concurrent cohort  
2. Remove scales HCCQ, VAS, PDRQ , and action plan interview  
3. Add compensation related to HEART pilot study  
4. Revis e analytic methods to include the more robust and flexible mixed methods analysis  
 
Version 1.1 3: Version Date:  (September 29, 2017)  
1. Add one research assistant (Tenzin Desel)  
 
Version 1.14: Version Date: ( October 19, 2017 ) 
1. Add two research assistants (Alyssa Craparotta and Michael Berry)  
 
 Version 1.15:  Version Date: ( November 17th, 2017 ) 
1. Add research Assistant (Feyisayo Falayi)  
2. Add engagement calls for alumni cohort of HEART study protocol  
3. Add engagement calls for alumni cohort of HEART study informed consent form  
 
 
 Version 1.16:  Version Date: ( December 18th, 2017 ) 
1. Add action plan interview for MINDFUL -PC completers  
2. Add action plan interview to MINDFUL -PC patient informed consent form  
3. Add payment of $15 for action plan interview.  
 
 
Version 1.17:  Version Date: ( January 11th, 2018 ) 
1. Remove daily diet picture tracking with a mobile app from the HEART study  
measures.  
2. Remove daily sleep tracking with a mobile app from the HEART study measures  
3. Remove ASA24 from HEART study measures  
 
7 
 4. Add “ Food, Activity, and Sleep Tracking (FAST) Questionnaire ” to HEART study 
measure.   
5. Adjust HEART pilot study payment structure to match modifications to health 
behavior tracking activities  
6. Add 3 -Factor Eating Questionnaire -R18 as a study measur e to MINDFUL -PC patient 
participant battery  
 
Version  1.18:  Version Date: (March 6, 2018 ) 
1. Add Bridget Kiley to protocol  
 
 
 
Version 1. 19:  Version Date: ( April 12, 2018 ) 
1. Add Behavioral Measures  study visit  to HEART Study , and modify HEART Study 
Informed Consent Form  and payment structure accordingly . Behavioral Measures 
consists of 3 tasks: (Sustained Attention Response Task (SART), Heartbeat Detection 
Task (H BDT), and 5 -Trial Adjusting Delay Hypothetical Discounting Task ( HDT ).  
2. Remove alumni cohort from  HEART Study informed consent form and alter the 
definition of concurrent cohort to include MINDFUL -PC participants who are joining 
an MTPC group after being in the LDC.  
3. Modify Weekly Mindfulness Practice Diar y to indicate how blanks will be treated  by 
adding one line that states, “I f you leave any field blank we will treat this as a “0” or 
“No” 
4. Add to MINDFUL -PC patient demographics survey optional sections that ask about 
gender and sexual identity  in order to ensure adequate access and representation 
among underrepresented populations . 
 
Version 1.2 0: Version Date ( May 18, 2018 )  
1. Add permission for SPEXT.com transcription service to be used on Action Plan 
interview recordings.  
 
Version  1.21:  Version Date: ( June 8, 2018 ) 
1. Add Wallis Slater to protocol  
 
Version 1.21:  Version Date: ( June 27, 2018)  
1. Add Annamarie Vu to protocol  
 
 
 
8 
 Outline : 
 
A. Introduction, Specific Aims and Hypotheses  
B. Background and Significance  
C. Clinical Research Plan: Design and Methods  
D. Human Subjects Procedures and Confidentiality  
 
A. Introduction, Specific Aims and Hypotheses:  
 
A.1. Introduction:  
 
This project aims to integrate mindfulness training into the heart of the standard healthcare 
delivery system. Since Patient -Centered Medical Homes (PCMHs) are recommended by the 
Affordable Care Act as a model for the current wave of health care reform, this project focuses 
on harnessing the momentum for change by creating a replicable and sustainable implementation 
model for mindfulness  in the PCMH. This project will train primary care providers (PA, APRN, 
DO, MD) in Mindfulness -based Stress Reduction (MBSR) and Mindful Communication. In 
addition, we have developed a modified version of MBSR for primary care called Mindfulness 
Training f or Primary Care (MTPC), which will be implemented directly into the PCMHs 
throughout a culturally and socio -economically diverse community health system. This project 
will investigate the effects of MTPC for patients, the effects of MBSR and Mindful 
Commun ication for providers, and the effects of the combination of both trainings on patients’ 
experiences of care and providers’ experiences of caring. This project will also evaluate the 
effects of MTPC, Mindful Communication, and the combination of both on pa tient health 
outcomes, health maintenance behaviors, and rates of medications prescribed for symptom -relief. 
This innovative project was developed by a multidisciplinary team with strong support from 
CHA executive leadership and will become the core projec t of our new academic Center for 
Mindfulness and Compassion at CHA.  
 
In addition, the project has been funded as a core clinical trial for the NCCIH Science of 
Behavior Change UH2 project “Mindfulness Influences on Self -Regulation: Mental and Physical 
Heal th Implications.” For this project our research team has integrated a PCP -patient visit into 
this mindfulness -based intervention, while also adding a self -management assessment battery 
and an evaluative process for measuring rates of initiation and mainten ance of jointly -selected 
health action plans.  
In addition, we will conduct an experimental pilot fMRI study to evaluate several mechanistic 
self-regulation targets and their potential impact on medical regimen adherence as measured by 
initiation and maint enance of health action plan goals.  
 
A.2. Aims and Hypotheses:  
 
A.2.a. Specific Aims:  
 
 
9 
 1. We aim to train primary care providers in Mindful Communication and implement 
MTPC directly into PCMHs throughout a culturally and socio -economically diverse 
community health system ( Implementation Aim ). 
 
2. We aim to investigate the effects of MTPC for patients, MBSR and Mindful 
Communication for providers, and the combination of the trainings on patients’ 
experiences of care and providers’ experiences of caring ( PCP -Patie nt Relationship 
Aim). 
 
3. We aim to evaluate the effects of MTPC for patients, MBSR and Mindful 
Communication for providers, and the combination of the trainings on patient health 
outcomes,  capacity for self -management of chronic illness,  health maintenance behaviors, 
and rates of medication prescribed for symptom -relief ( Behavioral Health Outcomes 
Aim). 
4. We aim to investigate the main effects of MBSR and Mindful Communication for 
providers on provider wellbeing, resilience, and work -place satisfaction ( Provider 
Resilience Aim ). 
 
5. We aim to investigate the effects of MTPC for patients, MBSR and Mindful 
Communication for providers, and the combination of the trainings on medical regimen 
adherence ( Medical Regimen Adherence Aim ).  
 
6. We aim to assess the effect of patient mindfulness training on chronic disease self -
efficacy and neuroimaging targets of inhibitory control, self -compassion, interoceptive 
attention and emotion/pain regulation. This study also aims to evaluate the effects size of 
the influence of these mechanistic targets on medical regimen adherence outcomes (Self -
Regulation Mechanisms Aim).  
 
7. HEART Study: We aim 1) to demonstrate feasibility of using commercially available 
activity/sleep/diet trackers and online daily sur veys for ecological behavior tracking in a 
MBI RCT and 2) to use the daily behavior tracking to validate the action plan goal setting 
process and the self -report action plan initiation measure.  
 
 
A.2.b. Specific Goals and Hypotheses : 
 
1. Implementation Goal : Our implementation goals are a) to implement at least two MTPC 
groups in at least 8 CHA primary care sites within two years, b) to train at least 25-40 
primary care providers in Mindful Communication, c) to enroll a socioeconomically -
diverse population of patients, and d) to enroll a culturally -diverse population of patients 
with at least 30% of patients completing the program being non -Caucasian or having a 
primary language other than English.   
 
2. PCP -Patient Relationship Hypothesis : We hypothesize greater satisfaction with the PCP -
patient relationship among patients with the combination of provider and patient 
mindfulness training compared with only one or neither training types.  
 
 
10 
 3. Health Outcomes Hypotheses : We hypothesize reductions in depression, anxiety and 
stress as a main effect of MTPC. We hypothesize reductions in use of medications 
prescribed for symptom reduction (benzodiazepines, opioids, etc.), and overall 
improvement in markers of health maintenance and chronic illness management (i.e. 
PQRS data) . We hypothesize the highest levels of initiation and maintenance of self -
management action plans will be demonstrated among the MTPC group with 
Mindfulness -trained providers.  
 
4. Provider Resilience Hypothesis : We hypothesize greater workplace well -being, reduced 
experience of burnout, and increased resiliency among providers as a main effect of 
provider MBSR + Mindful Communication training.  
 
5. Medical Regimen Adherence Hypotheses:  We hypothesize a main effect of MTPC group  
status on levels of initiation and  maintenance of medical regimen health behavior change.  
The highest levels will be demonstrated among the MTPC group with Mindfulness - 
trained providers. We hypothesize that total formal mindfulness practice, post -study total  
mindfulness score, baseline mi ndful non -judgment score, and self -compassion will be  
associated with successful initiation and maintenance of action plans.  
 
6. Self-Regulation Mechanisms Hypotheses:  In 4 different fMRI tasks, we hypothesize (a) 
greater activation of anterior cingulat e cortex (ACC) and medial orbitofrontal cortex 
(OFC) and decreased activation in amygdala/hippocampus after MTPC intervention 
compared to before intervention (i.e, a pre -post increase) in an emotional Go/NoGo 
inhibitory control task ; (b) greater activation of insula after (compared to before) MTPC 
in a self -compassion task (that contrasts self -reassurance conditions with a self -criticism 
condition); (c) greater insula activation during an interoceptive attention task (that 
contrasts an interoceptive attentio n condition with an exteroceptive attention condition); 
and (d) greater rostral ACC (rACC) and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) 
activation during the anticipation of pain and greater activation in the lateral prefrontal 
cortex (LPFC) and somatosensor y areas during pain in an emotion/pain regulation task, 
after compared to before the MTPC intervention.  
We hypothesize that all inhibitory control and interoceptive targets will be associated  
with higher levels of initiation of regimen adherence, while sel f-compassion, 
interoceptive targets and emotion/pain regulation will be associated with higher levels of 
regimen maintenance.  
 
HEART Pilot Study Hypotheses  
 
7. HEART pilot study validation  goal:  Our goal is to implement  activity and heart -rate 
tracking, nutrition, sleep, and mindfulness practice tracking in a cohort of MINDFUL -PC 
alumni to determine  whether this suite of behavioral monitoring tasks  can behaviorally 
validate the signal from the self -reported action plan initiation protocol.   
 
We hypothesiz e that self-reported action plan initiation with activity, diet, sleep or 
mindfulness practice will be associated with a behavioral change as assessed with the 
daily tracking devices.  
 
 
11 
 8. HEART pilot study concurrent cohort:  We hypothesize that participants  who are in an 
8-week MTPC group will demonstrate higher levels of action plan initiation , with an 
associated change in behavioral monitoring,  than participants who are randomized to the 
waitlist condition.  We also hypothesize that participants who chose to increase activity 
will have a greater increase in daily activity than those who chose a diet -, mindfulness - or 
sleep -related action plan goal.  
 
 
 
B. Background and Rationale:  
 
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) promotes the Patient -Centered Medical Home (PCMH)  delivery 
model as a tool to reshape the healthcare delivery system [ 1]. The PCMH model encourages a 
whole -person orientation, self -management skills for patients with chronic diseases (NCQA, 
element 4B [ 2]), and enhanced collaboration for these patients by requiring interdisciplinary 
integration of clinical, community prevention, and health promotion services (Section 3502, 
ACA p.1050). In the ACA, both the PCMH and Accountable Care Organization (ACO) models 
have incentive systems that support initiatives  to encourage patient -centered care (PCMH: ACA 
Section 3502, p.1050; ACO: ACA Section 3022, p.731). If a healthcare delivery system 
transformation project could demonstrate enhanced levels of patient -centeredness in primary care 
while also enriching patien t self -management skills to cope with chronic illnesses, this project 
would be innovative and ripe for dissemination within the national PCMH movement.  
 
Mindfulness training is an evidence -based approach to patient -centered caring [ 3] and whole -
person self-management [ 4]. Mindfulness is “the awareness that emerges through purposely, and 
non-judgmentally, paying attention to the unfolding of experience moment -by-moment” [ 5]. 
Mindfulness -based Stress Reduction (MBSR) is an 8 -week program that serves as th e basis for 
multiple different condition -specific mindfulness -based interventions (MBI) provided in medical 
settings [ 6]. In 2013, National Institutes of Health invested 44.3 million U.S. dollars into direct 
funding for MBI research (NIH Reporter 2014), an d publications related to mindfulness -related 
research have exponentially increased over the past 30 years, with more than 500 publications in 
2013 alone [ 7]. Several studies have demonstrated that Mindful Communication training for 
healthcare providers, w hich involves training in MBSR followed by 10 months of 
communication training [3], can reduce provider burnout and increase resiliency, while also 
increasing patient -centered com munication, improving provider empathy and enhancing patient 
satisfaction [3, 8, 9, 10]. Multiple clinical trials have demonstrated that MBIs improved self -
management in major areas of community health and chronic illness management [ 11, 12]. One 
recent meta -analysis demonstrated that MBIs are broadly effective for anxiety, depression,  and 
pain [ 13]. MBIs are associated with tobacco smoking reduction [ 14, 15], reduction in alcohol 
consumption [ 16,17,18], reduction in prescription opioid misuse among patients with chronic 
pain [ 19], and reduced HIV -risk behaviors [ 20]. MBIs demonstrate increased  asthma -related 
quality of life with reductions in stress and anxiety [ 21]. MBIs produce a reduction in systolic 
and diastolic blood pressure in patients with pre -hypertension [ 22], and particularly large 
reductions in hypertension have been seen within stud ies of African -American patients [ 23, 24]. 
Among patients with non -insulin dependent diabetes, one small MBI study demonstrated 
improved glycemic control [ 25], while large studies with active controls have demonstrated 
effective integration of diabetes self -management skills [ 26], decreased stress and improved 
 
12 
 quality of life [ 27]. MBIs can reduce the stress associated with chronic illness [11, 12], and t hey 
are particularly effective in reducing depressive relapse in Major Depressive Disorder [ 28]. 
 
We have been  developing a modified version of MBSR called Mindfulness Training for Primary 
Care (MTPC), which is a MBI adapted specifically for the primary care environment. MTPC 
combines MBSR skills with additional attention to patient/provider relationships, cultura l and 
socio -economic diversity, coping with chronic illness, reducing unnecessary medical care, and 
encouraging self -management skills acquisition. In this project, we plan to bring mindfulness 
directly into the heart of our healthcare delivery system, by offering high -quality training for our 
primary care providers in MBSR and Mindful Communication [3] while also integrating the 
innovative MTPC program directly into the PCMH.  
 
Despite all the evidence supporting MBIs, several gaps in the current research a nd care delivery 
models may be acting as barriers to rapid dissemination and integration of mindfulness into the 
healthcare delivery system. First, while there are several provider studies showing increased 
levels of patient -centered care and provider resi liency, no studies examine the effects of provider 
mindfulness training on patient health outcomes. Second, while a multitude of patient studies 
showing reductions in stress, pain, anxiety, and depression exist, no previous studies have been 
designed to id entify whether the combination of training both patients and providers offers a 
synergistic effect on overall health outcomes as well as the quality of the provider/patient 
relationship, the level of motivation for health maintenance, and the ability to se lf-manage and 
cope with chronic illness. Third, the overwhelming majority of MBSR courses have been 
conducted in educated, Caucasian, English -speaking populations, leading some to criticize 
mindfulness as unready for the cultural and socio -economic diversi ty in the standard healthcare 
delivery system. Finally, most MBIs are offered through behavioral health or as a 
complementary private -pay service delivered outside the standard health care system without 
coverage by insurance payers. This project will addr ess these important gaps in the current 
research and delivery system, by evaluating the integration of the novel MTPC model into a 
system of urban, community, multi -cultural, safety -net PCMHs, while also assessing the 
influence of provider training on outc omes.  
 
In addition, this study offers an opportunity to identify and test mechanistic self -regulation  
targets (physiologic, psychological, neuropsychological, etc.) that are influenced by mindfulness  
and potentially account for its effect on medical regime n adherence. Since the majority of  
medical regimen adherence and health behavior change occurs within primary care, the  
development of a paradigm for measuring action plan initiation and maintenance among patients  
within the patient -centered medical home is needed.  
 
Feasibility and Facilities : 
 
The Cambridge Health Alliance (CHA) employs about 160 primary care providers at 15 primary 
care practices in the Boston Metro -North cities of Cambridge, Somerville, Everett, Malden and 
Revere.  CHA currently has app roximately 140,000 primary care patients. Language interpreters 
are available at every primary care site. The study will be conducted at several CHA primary 
care health centers, including Cambridge Primary Care Center, Cambridge Family Health, 
Cambridge Fa mily Health North, East Cambridge Health Center, Windsor Street Health Center, 
Everett Family Health Center, Revere Family Health Center, Malden Family Health Center, 
Broadway Health Center, Union Square Family Health, and Somerville Primary Care.  Current ly, 
 
13 
 CHA is undergoing a delivery system transformation initiative integrating mental health into 
primary care sites, creating patient -centered medical homes across the entire healthcare system 
over the next 2 -3 years.  
 
In addition, the Cambridge Health Al liance has awarded a yearlong grant to the CHA Center for 
Mindfulness and Compassion (CMC), and CMC faculty and staff eagerly offer support for the 
MINDFUL -PC project.  
 
The MGH/HST Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging is a leader in translational resear ch 
with and development of a host of state -of-the-art imaging technologies. Martinos faculty  
include world -class experts in disciplines spanning the basic biosciences and clinical  
investigation. The backbone of the Martinos Center is the Imaging and Comput ational Core  
Resources. The Imaging Cores include the MRI, MEG and Optical Imaging Cores, with an  
extensive and expanding inventory of state -of-the-art imaging facilities and equipment, including  
related laboratories and testing rooms. The Computational Co re oversees data processing,  
computational infrastructure, software and hardware issues. Together, the Imaging and  
Computational Cores develop and provide state -of-the art biomedical imaging and image  
processing technology and techniques to the Center's re search faculty and user community.  
 
C. Clinical Research Plan: Study Design and Methods:  
 
C.1. Study population:  
 
This study will have two types of participants: CHA primary care providers (PCP) and CHA 
patients.  In addition, patient participants will be screened for eligibility to participate in an 
optional fMRI neuroimaging experimental pilot study (fMRI participants).  
 
C.1.a. PCP Participants:  
 
C.1.a.1. PCP Participant Inclusion Criteria : 
All of the following are required criterion for inclusion in the study:  
1. Current primary care provider at a CHA PCMH  
2. Completion of health care training degree, including MD, DO, APRN, and PA  
3. Willing to participate in interviews and engage in all procedure.  
 
C.1.a.2. PCP Partici pant Exclusion Criteria : 
Any of the following is regarded as a criterion for exclusion from the study:  
1. Previous enrollment or randomization of treatment in the present study  
2. . 
 
C.1.b. Patient Participants:  
 
C.1.b.1. Patient Participant Inclusion Criteria : 
All of the following are required criterion for inclusion in the study:  
1. Current CHA patient with an enrolled CHA primary care doctor.  
2. CHA patients 18 years of age and older.  
3. Able to tolerate and participate in interviews and engage in all procedures.  
 
14 
 4. Able to give written consent in English OR willing and able to provide consent and 
complete assessments through a professional language translator when necessary.  
5. Diagnosis eligible to be covered by insurance for group visits (e.g., anxiety disorder, 
depression , insomnia, pain syndrome, or adjustment disorder related to chronic illness, 
etc.).  
 
 
C.1.b.2. Patient Participant Exclusion Criteria : 
Any of the following is regarded as a criterion for exclusion from the study:  
1. Any cognitive impairment that precludes in formed consent.  
2. Patients who, in the opinion of the Principal Investigator, pose an imminent risk of 
suicide or danger to self or others.  
3. Likelihood of potential incarceration such as a conviction or pending charges that may 
potentially result in imprisonm ent. 
4. Previous enrollment or randomization of treatment in the present study within the 12 
months.  
5. Behaviors that may cause disruption to a mindfulness group.  
6. Patients with symptoms of psychosis, thought disorder, and/or severe mental illness, 
including sch izophrenia, schizoaffective, bipolar disorder, or a current severe episode of 
major depressive disorder.  
7. Refusal of insurance to cover group psychotherapy treatment may lead to exclusion from 
participation in groups.  
8. Patients in their third trimester of pr egnancy who foresee conflicts that preclude their 
commitment to completing all activities.  
9. Patients with highly unstable medical problems that put them at a high risk of 
hospitalization.  
10. Temporal Exclusion: Patients with  limited English Proficiency as defined by less than 4 
out of 7 correct on REALM -SF health literacy screening assessment (equivalent to 7th 
grade reading level or above) [Note: Patient with limited English Proficiency will be 
placed on a wait list for spec ific clinical pilot groups designed for this population, which 
will be developed for 2016].  
 
C.1.c. Patient Participant fMRI  Pilot : 
 
All of the above criteria for patient participants apply to the subset who will take part in the 
fMRI experiment. In additi on, the following criteria will apply:   
 
C.1.c.1. Patient Participant fMRI Pilot additional Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Adults 21 -60 years old enrolled for participation in the MINDFUL -PC study.  (Assessed 
before the phone -screening using the main study database.)  
2. During baseline visit, patient has a history of either major depressive disorder,  
dysthymia, or generalized anxiety disorder, OR has current mild to moderate symptoms  
of depression (score range of 10 -20 on DASS -21 Depression subscale) or anxiety  
(score >7 on DASS -21 anxiety subscale).  (Assessed before the phone -screening using the 
main study data from the baseline visit.)  
3. Participant does not have a substance use disorder nor intoxication at the time of 
scanning. Participants must report no more than infreq uent recreational cannabis use (i.e., 
 
15 
 no more than two times a month) and must report capacity for abstinence from both 
cannabis and ethyl alcohol for the 72 hours prior to the scan.  (Assessed during the phone -
screening.)  
4. Normal or corrected -to-normal visi on, and correction must be with contact lenses. (The 
fMRI tasks require ability to read on a screen and there is not enough space for 
glasses/goggles in the scanner).  (Assessed during the phone -screening.)  
5. Right -handed as defined by Edinburgh Handedness In ventory [ 29]. (Assessed during the 
phone -screening.)  
 
C.1.c.2. Patient Participant fMRI Pilot additional Exclusion criteria:  
1. Current severe panic disorder, active severe PTSD symptoms, or psychosis.  
2. Current suicidality OR severe depression as evidenced by a  score of 20 or higher on the  
DASS -21 Depression subscale.  
3. Standard direct exclusion criteria for undergoing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
procedures for research purposes  (safety standards) , i.e., Meniere’s disease, epilepsy, 
strong claustrophobia, currently pregnant or breastfeeding or planning to conceive or 
breastfeed during the study, cardiac pacemaker, prosthetic heart valve, neurostimulator, 
implanted pumps, non -MR-compatible implants or devices.  (Assessed dur ing the phone -
screening .) 
4. A history  of neurological disease or injury, including a history of seizures or significant 
head trauma (i.e., extended loss of consciousness, neurological sequelae, or known 
structural brain lesion) , or previous brain surgery . These participants are excluded 
becau se they may confound the results of the study due to potential abnormalities in their 
nervous system.  (Assessed during the phone -screening .) 
5. Severe skin disease, skin allergies, or multiple reactions to topical preparations, dressings 
or tapes (because we will be placing sensors on the skin to record cardiac activity and 
skin conductance).  (Assessed during the phone -screening .) 
6. Age greater than 60 years old because age effects may confound the results of the study, 
because white matter integrity decreases w ith age and reduced inhibitory control.  
(Assessed before the phone -screening using the main study database.)  
7. Current meditation or intense yoga practice of more than 30 min a week or meditation 
experience of more than 20 hours in the past 10 years. (Since this pilot is focused on 
investigating mechanisms, we will limit the sample to participants who are new to 
mindfulness techniques).  (Assessed before the phone -screening using the main study 
database.)  
8. Participants with body weight >230 lbs or BMI > 38 will  require additional in -person 
screening and PI approval, because of potential tight fit in the MRI scanner.  (Assessed 
during the phone -screening .) 
9. Participants with vascular disease, such as peripheral vascular disease, varicose veins, or 
lymphedema, in both lower limbs. (Participants may be included with PI approval, if they 
have vascular disease only in the right limb, which will not receive cuff -pain stimulation  
and no signs of disease in the left limb.)   (Assessed dur ing the phone -screening .) 
 
16 
 10. Based on clinical judgment and safety assessment by the PI, the participant is 
inappropriate for fMRI or unable to complete experiments.  (Assessed only if af ter the 
phone -screening and other interactions with the patient, the study personnel  has doubts 
about the patients’ ability to participate in this additional study.)  
 
C.1.c.3. Patient Participant HEART Pilot Additional Inclusion C riteria:  
1. Participant must be currently enrolled in, or have completed, the MINDFUL -PC study . 
2. Participant must have access to a smartphone that is compatible with the activity tracker 
application . 
3. Participant must be willing to use the smartphone application and/or wear a wristband 
activity tracker every day for activity monitoring periods of the HEART study  and be 
willing to take pictures of their food and drink intake.  
4. Participant must be able to fill out the study questionnaires daily on a computer  or 
compatible mobile device.    
 
 
 
Screening will be conducted by study staff and research assistants. Decisions on the 
inclusion/exclusion will be made by the study staff under the supervision of the neuroimaging 
postdoctoral fellow and Princip al Investigator in cases where no additional  clarifications are 
needed. In cases w here MRI safety needs further assessments, the postdoctoral fellow or imaging 
consultants at the Martinos Center for Biomedical Engineering will coordinate the assessment 
with the MR I physics staff at the Martinos  Center , and will decide on inclusion or exclusion of 
the participant.   
 
17 
 C.2. Recruitment:  
 
C.2.a. PCP Recruitment :  
 
PCP recruitment has been completed for this study as of February 10, 2017.    No further PCP 
enrollment  or study sessions  will take place  after this date .   
The study aims to enroll 50-120 PCPs as participants.  PCPs will be recruited through print/flyer 
advertisements in department offices and health centers, email invitations, announcements at 
departmental meetings, and a presentation at CHA medical grand rounds and family medicine 
grand rounds. The presentation for Medicine grand rounds will take place on October 1st, 2014, 
and the presentation for Family Medicine grand rounds will take place on September 30th, 2014.  
The study aims to enroll at least 25-40 PCPs into an intervention group (Group 1) and at least 25-
40 into a control group (Group 2  and 3 ). 
 
C.2.b. Patient Recruitment : 
 
The study aims to enroll a total of 434-1,000  CHA patients as participants during  the p roject. 
Patients will be recruited through print/flyer advertisements in health centers, CHA marketing 
materials, community informational meetings, and referral by PCPs and other members of the 
health care team. In addition, we aim to develop a video intro duction about mindfulness to be 
played in patient waiting areas within health centers with translations into the primary languages 
of the health centers (Once developed these videos will be provided for review by the CHA IRB 
prior to implementation).  This  study aims to randomize 290 patients to an 8 -week study 
intervention and another 144 to a control group.   
 
C.2.c. Experimental fMRI Pilot Patient Recruitment:  
The study aims to enroll a  maximum of 30 patients into an experimental fMRI pilot study to be 
conducted at the Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging in Charlestown, MA. 
Participants will be informed about this fMRI pilot study during the reminder  phone call before 
the MINDFUL -PC orientation session . Participants will be told that this is an optional pilot study 
and that they do not need to participate in this pilot study in order to participate in the larger 
study. Participants will also be informed that they will ONLY be able to participate in the fMRI 
pilot study if they get randomized to the MT PC intervention condition. In the email confirmation 
for the orientation session, we will further include the fMRI  neuroimaging study flyer with 
information on the fMRI pilot study and the fMRI  information sheet about the fMRI study. 
Participants will hear again about the fMRI pilot as part at the MINDFUL -PC orientation session  
at their primary care health center .  Again p articipants will be told that this is an optional pilot 
study and that they will ONLY be able to participate in the fMRI pilot study if they get 
randomized to the MTPC intervention condition. Patients are further informed about 
inclusion/exclusion criteria related to the fMRI study and that the number of scanner time slots 
may be limited, so all participants who enroll and qualify may NOT be offered an opportunity to 
attend a scanning session. All participants interested in participating will be ranked on the call -
list in numerical order based on the order that they expresse d interest as well as their level of 
reliability and timeliness during previous recruitment steps and interactions. The call -list ranking 
is to ensure that this study enrolls participants who are most motivated and most likely to be able 
to complete the ex tra demands related to the fMRI scanning and additional visits, and also to 
ensure that the limited scan slots for this study are allocated efficiently. During the orientation 
session, participants will receive the flyer with information on the fMRI pilot study with 
 
18 
 potential scan times  and we will again make available the  information sheet about  the fMRI 
study to read and review at home. Phone screening of MRI inclusion/exclusion criteria will be 
completed after the orientation and randomization to the min dfulness group, for interested 
mindfulness group participants (see attached phone script). We will phone screen interested 
mindfulness group participants during the group -scheduling phone call. The phone screen will 
include questions based on the Martinos Center MRI safety screening form and the Edinburgh 
Handedness Inventory to verbally screen participants and make sure they fulfill MR I safety 
criteria and all other criteria related to the fMRI study. After the phone screening, and if 
participants fulfill all criteria, they are given the opportunity to ask any questions they might still 
have about the study. We will then schedule an fMRI measurement scan session. If the 
participant needs additional time to make an informed decision or if we have to make additional 
inquiries based on the MRI eligibility phone screening process, we will arrange a follow -up 
phone call with the patient (within 1 -3 days of the group -scheduling phone call), to decide on 
study participation and potentially schedule the fMRI meas urement session.  
 
C.3. Experimental Design and Study Procedures:  
 
C.3.a. Design Overview and Study Participants:  
 
This study uses a mixed 2 x 2 factorial design embedding a randomized controlled trial within a 
naturalistic quasi -experimental implementation  project.   
 
The implementation project, developed in collaboration with the CHA Center for Mindfulness 
and Compassion (CMC), will encourage CHA PCPs from across all CHA health care centers to 
participate in a mindfulness training program. All PCPs will be  invited to participate in the study 
procedures, and those who enroll in the study will naturalistically be assigned to two different 
groups: those who engage in the mindfulness training program (Group 1) and those who decline 
to engage in the training pro gram but are still willing to complete study procedures ( Groups 2 
and 3 ). The mindfulness training program includes an 8 -week MBSR training course of 2.5 hours 
weekly with an 7-hour day of silent practice at the beginning of week 7 (Group 1a), or an 
abbrev iated 18 -hour weekend -long Mindfulness training course (Group 1b). Members of Group 
1a will first receive MBSR training from senior MBSR teachers and Group 1b will receive 
training from CMC faculty and staff. After this MBSR training, members of Group 1a a nd Group 
1b will be able to participate in a once -monthly 2.5 hour -long Mindful Communication course 
for 10 months during Year 1 of the study. We expect that this Mindful Communication training 
will eliminate between -group differences from MBSR course mode ls, allowing us to collapse 
Groups 1a & 1b for research analysis.  Both Group 1 and Group 2 will be invited to participate in 
several survey sessions: prior to starting the mindfulness training implementation project, 
between PCP study weeks 10 and 14, and  then again after PCP study month 12 (see Figure 1a).   
Group 3 PCPs, enrolled after October , 2016, will not receive mindfulness training, and will only 
be required to participate in the initial survey session at baseline.   
 
Figure 1a. Study flow schema fo r PCP participants:  
 
 
19 
  
Within this naturalistic implementation project, we will conduct a randomized controlled trial of 
CHA patients with a PCP referral. Patients will be randomized using a stratification algorithm to 
receive either MTPC training or one 60-min introduction to mindfulness session.  This 
randomization will be based on the level of mindfulness training of the patient’s primary care 
provider (Group 1 vs. Group 2  and 3 ).  Those patients who are randomized to receive MTPC 
training (MTPC Group) will be instructed by behavioral health specialists who are trained as 
MTPC Group Leader s, as described later in section C.4.a. of the protocol . The MTPC group is a 
group psychotherapy intervention held within a primary care health center on 8 consecutive 
weeks with 10-12 enrolled patients with 2 hour-long sessions, including a 7-hr day of silent 
practice . As the level of desire to participate in mindfulness training may be a confounding 
factor, we will use a 60 -min introduction to mindfulness group as a co ntrol in order to eliminate 
bias related to expectation and selection that could otherwise influence measures of treatment 
effect.  In contrast, those patients who are randomized to receive only the 60 -min introduction to 
mindfulness (Control Group) will b e given preference to enroll in MTPC after the study’s 
completion.  Both groups of patients will complete surveys at the induction of the study, again 
after patient study week 8, and at study week 26  (see Figure 1b). Patients will complete an 
interview with a research coordinator to assess their maintenance of their action plan goal at 
week 26.  
 
Figure 1b. Study flow schema for Patient participants  
 
 
 
In this RCT, we will also conduct an optional experimental fMRI pilot study. This study will  
include a pre/post within -subjects design with 90 minutes of neuroimaging before and after  
completion of the MTPC  group . Each scanning session will begin with setting up the equipment 
for autonomic monitoring (i.e., respiratory belts, finger plethysmograph, finger s ensors for skin  

 
20 
 conductance and a belt for monitoring breathing rate). The scanning session  will consist  of a 
localizer scan (3 min), an anatomical scan (7 min), and a resting state scan (7 min), followed by 
an inhibitory control task (the emotional Go/ NoGo inhibitory control task ; 15 min), a self -
compassion task (15 min), a DTI -scan measuring white matter tracts (8 min), an interoceptive 
attention task (10 min) and an emotion/pain regulation task (10 min). The neuroimaging will take 
about 10 minutes for  setting up autonomic monitoring outside the scanner and 75 -90 minutes in 
the scanner.  
 
C.3.b. Patient Screening  
 
C.3.b.1. EPIC Chart Review  
In order for patients to be screened for enrollment in the MINDFUL -PC study, they will be 
required to have a CHA P CP, and a referral from a CHA PCP or licensed CHA mental health 
clinician . The MINDFUL -PC Research Coordinator  or other IRB -approved,  EPIC -trained study 
staff will review the patient’s EPIC chart for information on inclusion and exclusion criteria 
using the template attached.  The Research Coordinator or other IRB -approved, trained study 
staff will consult with the Medical Director or Principal Investigator if there are any questions  on 
the patient’s eligibility , per their inclusion/exclusion criteria .  Only the Medical Director or 
Principal Investigator will make decisions about patient exclusion .   
 
C.3.b.2. Informational and Scheduling Phone Call  
If the patient is eligible from this chart review  process , the Research Coordinator or other IRB -
approved, trained study staff will call the patient to inform them of their referral.  During this 
screening phone call, the MINDFUL -PC Research Coordinator or other IRB -approved, trained 
study staff will inform the pa tient of the MINDFUL -PC study  and ask screening questions  using 
the phone script attached .  Using information from  these screening questions , the PCMH 
behavioral health care specialist, the MINDFUL -PC P rincipal Investigator, or the Center for 
Mindfulness a nd Compassion  Medical Director will assess for the patient’s eligibility for the 
study.  If the patient is eligible but has not had a behavioral health evaluation within the past 6 
months, or met with a behavioral health provider within the last 3 months, t he patient will be 
scheduled for a 1 -hour behavioral health evaluation with a  behavioral health care specialist  in the 
PCMH .  The behavioral health care specialist will complete the MINDFUL -PC Patient 
Screening Form.  If the patient has had a behavioral he alth evaluation within the last 6 months 
and met with their behavioral health provider within the last 3 months, the current behavioral 
health care specialist of record will complete the MINDFUL -PC Patient Screening Form without 
scheduling an additional ev aluation.  Once a patient is eligible for the study, the PCMH 
behavioral health care specialist will refer the patient to the  MINDFUL -PC Research 
Coordinator, who will schedule the patient for a n Informed Consent Session which will be 
followed by a  mindfulness group orientation session.    
 
C.3.c. Participant De -identification, Randomization, Allotment, and Blinding:  
 
A unique numeric identifier and acrostic will be created for all participants (PCPs and patients) 
who have signed an informed consent and a list linking these identifiers with the participant’s 
name, birthday, and MRN (if applicable) will be kept in a password -protected file by the 
principal investigator.  All data will be linked to these coded identifiers and no direct patient 
identifie rs will be transmitted from REDCap to SAS 9.3 for analysis.  
 
 
21 
 For patient participants, the name, birthday, and MRN will be entered into an initial REDCap 
database strictly for the purpose of screening and consent process.  Next, a unique numeric 
identifier  and acrostic will be created for all participants (PCPs and patients) who have 
completed an informed consent and the linking list will be kept in a password -protected file by 
the principal investigator.  All further study data collected in a second REDCap  database will 
reference this unique numeric identifier and acrostic.  All data will be linked to these identifiers 
and no direct patient identifiers will be transmitted from REDCap to SAS 9.3 for analysis.  
Through a collaboration with the CHA Quality Off ice and CHA information technology, we will 
generate medical record reports for participants who are in our study and this information will 
remain protected with the CHA system, and will not include any study data except name, MRN, 
and birthday.  
 
Any patie nt participant who is eligible with a screen, has completed the informed consent form at 
the orientation session , and has completed the baseline assessment battery will be eligible for 
placement on our program list and ultimately randomization into either of the two groups using a 
stratification algorithm. Randomized patients will be stratified with two layers based on PCP 
group and health center location.  PCPs who refer after the PCP portion of the study closes will 
be considered “non -trained” (equivalent  to Groups 2 and 3) for purposes of randomization.  We 
will begin with 4 health center regions (Malden, Revere, Somerville, and Cambridge) and health 
centers within each region will have their own list, but ultimately hope to expand so that e ach 
participat ing health center location with a mindfulness -trained behaviorist will have its own 
waitlist for new groups. When a new group is scheduled to open at a health center location, those 
patients with PCPs at that health center location will be randomized to ei ther intervention group 
or control (First stratification layer —Location). Patients with a PCP from another health center 
but who have a specific language need may be included on the waitlist for capability of that 
health center. We hypothesize an increased  rate of MTPC patient referrals from PCPs who are 
enrolled in the mindfulness training program versus those who only received information about 
mindfulness -based interventions. Therefore, within each group location, in order to achieve an 
optimal 2 x 2 fac torial structure (see randomization schema figure), patients will be randomized 
using a second stratification layer based on the primary care provider’s level of mindfulness 
training (Group 1 vs. Group 2  or Group 3 ) to either 8 -week MTPC or one 60 -min intr oduction to 
mindfulness , using a 2:1 randomization ratio, respectively  (Second stratification layer —PCP 
Group), based on the second layer of stratification (See Table 1). Study staff will maintain the 
waitlists and then notify the patient participants of their acceptance into either group.  
 
Table 1 . Randomization Schema:  
  
 MTPC Group  Control Group  
Group 1: Providers with Mindfulness Training  145 72 
Group 2  and 3 : Providers with introduction & community 
referral   145 72 
2 x 2 Factorial design testing main effects of patient training and primary care provider training, 
as well as the interaction of the combination.  
 
This study will not be blinded; however, upon referral, all patients will receive a screening from 
the prim ary care behavioral health care provider, complete an informed consent, complete a set 
of pre -treatment baseline surveys and then will be informed that  they will be given a random 
 
22 
 number and placed on the waiting list for upcoming groups. They will be told  about capacity 
restrictions, that there will be two groups consisting of different group lengths, and that if they 
would like to do more groups after completion of the program, they will be notified about groups 
that become available sometime in the next year or two.  
 
C.3.d. Study Visits : 
 
In this section, the flow of study visits will be described for both PCPs and Patient participants.  
 
PCP Study Visits have been completed as of February 10, 2017.   No additional PCP study visits 
will take place after th is date.    
C.3.d.1. Overview of PCP Study Visits (SEE TABLE 2 IN APPENDIX A) : 
Phone Screen Visit  (PCP Group 1a or Group 1b) : 
PCPs who express interest in the MBSR program or the weekend 18 -hr mindfulness retreat will 
be screened by phone or email by the study Research Coordinator who will register PCP 
participants for the study at one of the Patient -Centered Medical Homes. At the time of 
registration, the PI, Research Coordinator or a research assistant will conduct a brief screening 
interview to determine the PCP’s eligibility for the study. This will take 10 minutes by phone or 
email.   
 
Phone Screen Visit ([PCP Group 2  and 3 ]): 
PCPs who express interest in referring patients to mindfulness groups will be asked to fill out an 
eligibility questionnaire on paper or  through a secure REDCap link.  Eligible PCPs will be given 
the opportunity to continue on to the informed consent session.   
 
Informed Consent Visit (PCP Study week 1 [Group 1a , s, or Group 2 and 3 ] or Week 10 [Group 
1b]):  
PCP participants will be  provided with written descriptions in English of the research study 
procedures, timeline and participant commitments electronically  through a secure REDCap link  
for review prior to enrollment . PCPs will be given an opportunity to email and/or call the stu dy 
staff for answers to any questions about the consent document and they will be asked to complete 
a consent quiz to ensure understanding of the most crucial points.  
 
PCPs will be given the opportunity to review and sign the informed consent form and ask  any 
remaining questions about the research either online through a secure REDCap link  or in-person 
at their primary care location  [Groups 1a, 1b, 2 , and 3 ], or during  the first hour of the first group  
[Groups 1a and 1b] . The Principal Investigator , Research Coordinator, or other IRB -approved, 
trained study staff  will review each PCP’s consent quiz and will be fully responsible for any 
issues related to informed consent, and will ensure that participants receive adequate oral and 
written information a bout the aims, procedure, possible risks and benefits of the study. When 
participants are ready, they will be asked to sign a written or electronic informed consent form 
approved by the CHA Institutional Review Board (IRB).  Signed paper informed consent f orms 
will be stored in a double -locked filing cabinet.  Electronically signed informed consent forms 
will be printed out and stored in a double -locked filing cabinet.  This document includes a full 
description of the study procedures and associated risks. Participants will receive an additional 
electronic or paper copy of the signed informed consent form for their own records.  Participants 
must give written informed consent in order to participate in the study. Participation in the study 
is voluntary.  All  participants will be notified that they are free to discontinue from participating 
 
23 
 in the study at any time.  All participants will be asked to complete and sign a section 
acknowledging that sessions will be audio -recorded for research purposes. No study -specific 
procedures or investigations will be performed before the participant has signed and dated the 
Informed Consent Form. Consent quiz forms will be reviewed prior to starting study procedures, 
a score of at least 90% on the consent quiz is required t o start the study. The principal 
investigator will review any errors on the consent quiz with PCPs prior to starting the study. The 
Principal Investigator will store the original, signed Informed Consent Form. The informed 
consent portion of the visit shou ld take 30 minutes.  
 
Pre-treatment Assessment Visit (PCP Study Week 1 [Group 1a ,Group 2 , and Group 3 ] or 10 
[Group 1b]):  
PCP participants will complete a 20 minute long set of survey batteries before beginning the 
program. PCPs will be given the opportunity to complete  survey batteries on paper  or 
electronically through a secure REDCap link .  Paper surveys will be stored in a double -locked 
filing cabinet, and will be transferred electronically to the secure REDCap  database by IRB-
approved MINDFUL -PC study personnel  with double -audit to minimize errors in data entry .  In 
this survey  session, PCP participants will complete the PCP Baseline Battery, the PCP 
Mindfulness Self -Report Battery, the PCP Clinical Assessment Battery, and the PCP Experience 
of Caring Battery.  
 
Mindfulness -Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) course (PCP Study weeks 1 -10): 
PCPs who choose to enroll in the mindfulness training course may participate in Mindfulness -
based Stress Reduction (MBSR) training with 8 sessions lasting 2.5 -hours over 9 weeks with a 7-
hour day of silent practice . The first hour of the first week’s group will be for completing the 
consent and pre -treatment assessment visit.  
 
Mindfulness Weekend Intensive Retreat (PCP Study Week 10):  
PCPs who do not elect to receive MBSR training with 8 weekly sessions will be able to 
participate in an intensive 18 -hour weekend retreat. The first hour of the first day will be for 
completing the consent and pre -treatment assessment visit.  
 
Mid-Training  Assessment Session (Completed between PCP Study Weeks 10 -14): 
After 8 weeks or the intensive weekend retreat, PCPs will be asked to fill out another survey 
battery  electronically through a secure REDCap link, or on paper .  Paper surveys will be stored 
in a double -locked filing cabinet, and will be transferred electronically to the secure REDCap 
database by IRB -approved MINDFUL -PC study personnel with double -audit to minimize errors 
in data entry.   In this 20 -minute session, PCP participants will complete the PCP Mindfulness 
Self-Report Battery, the PCP Clinical Assessment Battery, and the PCP Provider Resilience 
Battery. The Adverse Event Reporting Form will also be completed.  
 
Mindful Communication Course (PCP Study Weeks 14 -56): 
PCPs assigned to receive Mindfulness training will then take a course in Mindful 
Communication for the next 10 months.  They will receive 10 monthly sessions of 2.5 -hour 
Mindful Communication instruction.  
 
Post-Treatment Survey Session (PCP Week 56):  
After completing 10 months of Mindful Communication  [Group 1a or 1b] , at Study Week 56  
[Group 2] , PCPs  will be asked to complete another series of surveys  electronically through a 
 
24 
 secure REDCap link, or on paper.  Paper surveys will be stored in a double -locked filing cabinet, 
and will be transferred electronically to the secure REDCap database by IRB -approved 
MINDFUL -PC study personnel with double -audit to minimize errors in data entry .  These 
surveys will take approximately 20 minutes.  In this session, PCP participants will comp lete the 
PCP Mindfulness Self -Report Battery, the PCP Clinical Assessment Battery, the PCP Provider 
Resilience Battery, and the Adverse Event Reporting Form.  
 
C.3.d.2. Overview of Patient Study Visits (SEE TABLE 3 IN APPENDIX A) : 
 
Screening Visit:  
Behavioral health care providers in primary care will screen patients who express interest in 
participating in a MTPC group and already have a referral from an eligible CHA PCP. In order 
for patients to be screened for enrollment in the MINDFUL -PC study, t hey will be required to 
have a referral from a participating PCP.   We will create a new EPIC referral process for PCPs, 
such that when a PCP checks off Mental Health, under Question 2 “Where will the patient be 
seen for Psychiatry,” the PCP will be able t o select MINDFULNESS.  Then, under “Services 
Requested,” a PCP will be able to specify his or her health center region: “MINDFUL -PC 
Malden”, “MINDFUL -PC Revere”, “MINDFUL -PC Somerville”, or “MINDFUL -PC 
Cambridge”.  This streamlined EPIC order will be sent t o the MINDFUL -PC Research 
Coordinator via CHA Central Intake.   
 
The “6 -3 Rule”: All patients must have a 1 -hour behavioral health evaluation within the past 6 
months documented by a CHA clinician in EPIC  in order to be eligible to participate in the 
study.   In addition, all patients must have had a visit with their behavioral health care provider 
within the last 3 months.   If a patient has not received a behavioral health evaluation  within the 
last 6 mont hs or has not had a behavioral health care visit within the last 3 months , he or she will 
be scheduled for a 1 -hour behavioral health evaluation with one of the licensed clinicians who 
have been trained to lead MTPC groups  or a licensed clinician who has b een trained to conduct 
screening evaluations for the MTPC groups .   
 
In order to be eligible to participate in the MINDFUL -PC study, all patients must have a  CHA 
PCP, and a  referral from their CHA PCP or a licensed CHA mental health clinician .  . 
 
In order  to be eligible to participate in the MINDFUL -PC study, all patients must have a 
MINDFUL -PC Patient Screening Form  completed by a behavioral health care provider upon 
performing a behavioral health evaluation.  Patients  must fill out a Patient Eligibility 
Questionnaire  electronically via an e -mail link to a secure REDCap form  or by voice over phone.  
This questionnaire will be reviewed by the MINDFUL -PC PI or Center for Mindfulness and 
Compassion Medical Director, who will then assess the eligibility of the patient and schedule a 
1-hour behavioral health evaluation, if appropriate.  The behavio ral health clinic ian will conduct 
a behavioral health evaluation to  determine the patient’s eligibility for the study and to enroll 
patients into the program. Data from the screening interview, MINDFUL -PC Patient Screening 
Form, and Patient Eligibility Que stionnaire will be entered into a secure REDCap form .  
 
Since the research study is overlaid on an implementation pilot program, we will rely on the 
assessment of the referring mental health clinician (either a masters or doctoral level clinician) to 
ident ify patient diagnoses and the presence of any severe mental illness. The Research 
Coordinator or other IRB -approved study staff with non -clinical training, but background in 
 
25 
 psychology will be reviewing diagnoses on the submitted screening forms. Any diagn oses that 
suggest major mental illness will be reviewed with the PI daily. The PI is a board -certified 
psychiatrist and will decide if a patient with mental illness will be included and excluded from 
the study. If the decision is unclear from the referral documentation, then the principal 
investigator will contact the screening behavioral care provider to discuss the patient’s 
appropriateness for the study. If the patient passes the screening interview, he or she will be 
offered to be scheduled to attend th e Mindfulness  Orientation Session .  
 
Mindfulness Orientation Session (Prior to Randomization; To be scheduled prior to PT Study 
Week 1):  
This will be a 2.5 hour  session.  For the first 1.5 hours, interested patients consent to participate 
in the study and will then complete the pre -treatment survey session.  For the remaining hour, 
patients will be invited to attend a 1 -hour orientation to MTPC.  Patients will be paid 20 dollars 
for completion of surveys and attendance of 60 minute orientation session.  
 
Informed Consent Session : 
Prior to the  beginning of the Mindfulness Orientation Session,  patient s will be asked  to complete 
an Informed Consent Form.  This session will be held either prior to the Mindfulness Orientation 
Session within a clinical space at each participating CHA primary care health center  or at the 
CHA Center for Mindfulness and Compassion . Patients will complete informed consent and 
consent assessment in-person upon arrival at the orientation.  Because this intervention is well -
established with more than 1000 studies demonstrating the safety and efficacy of Mindfulness -
based interventions [ 30], the group represents a low -risk psycho educati onal experience .  To 
ensure all patients have access to study personnel and an opportunity to ask questions, patients 
will complete the informed consent form in -person during an Informed Consent group Session 
prior to the beginning of the Mindfulness Orientation Session. With the permission of primary 
care site leadership, we will provide food for patients during the informed consent session.  The 
MINDFUL -PC Research Coordinator or Program Manager and  other  trained study personnel 
will be present at this Informed Consent Session in order to answer any individual questions.  
The informed consent document will include a full description of the study procedures and 
associated risks. The participant will also be ask ed to complete an Informed Consent  Assessment  
to ensure comprehension of the study procedures, rights of participants, as well as understanding 
of the risks and benefits of the study. The patient will not be able to sign the document without 
having complet ely correct answers on the consent assessment . After completion, participants will 
be given an  additional copy of the signed informed consent form for their own records.  
Participants must give written informed consent in order to participate in the study.   Participation 
in the study is voluntary.  All participants will be notified that they are free to discontinue from 
participating in the study at any time.  All participants will be asked to complete and sign a 
section acknowledging that sessions will be audio -recorded for research purposes. No study -
specific procedures or investigations will be performed before the participant has signed and 
dated the Informed Consent Form.   The signed informed consent forms will be stored in a binder 
in a double -locked c abinet at the Center for Mindfulness and Compassion.  Only IRB -approved 
study staff will have access to this cabinet.     
 
Patients who scored less than 90% on the informed consent assessment will meet individually 
with the Research Coordinator  or other ap proved study personnel who will administer the Rapid 
Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine —Short Form (REALM -SF) form [ 31] to assess patient 
literacy levels.  This is a 7 -item word recognition test , which takes about 2 minutes,  offers a valid 
 
26 
 quick assessment of patient health literacy and has excellent agreement with the 66 -item 
REALM instrument in terms of grade -level assignments. Patients are instructed to read seven 
words aloud for a member of t he study team.  Patients who pronounce fewer than fo ur of the 
words correctly read at a literacy level of 4th to 6th grade.  
 
Initially , in pilot groups  in the year 2015 , only patients with an English r eading proficiency of at 
least a 7th grade level will be included.  Patients with less than a 7th grade re ading level in 
English will be excluded from pilot groups in 2015.  In 2016, we will begin to offer MTPC 
groups in other language, to serve patients with limited English proficiency (LEP).  It is our goal 
to offer MTPC groups in Portuguese, Spanish  by mid -2016 , and to pilot a LEP group for English 
speakers with low levels of literacy .  Once the study protocol and informed consent documents 
are approved by the IRB, we plan to develop translations of the consent form into at least the 3 
most common languages at CHA. The translated informed consent forms will be translated by 
the CHA Department of Translation Services (DTS) and approved by the IRB. Written consent 
will be given by the non -English speaking participant on a translated Inform ed Consent Form, 
and the participant will receive a copy for his or her own records.   
 
Patients can reach study staff during the Informed Consent Session to  review any difficulties 
with the consent assessment or other questions, so that patients have an o pportunity to ask any 
necessary questions about the research study prior to completion of the consent. Patients will be 
given the opportunity to review the protocol with a trained study staff member  if they fail the 
consent assessment .  Patients will also be given an opportunity to correct their answers on the 
consent assessment . If they can’t pass the assessment after reviewing it and the protocol with the 
coordinator, then they will evaluated by study staff for the presence of low literacy versus  
cognitiv e deficits disrupting their ability to complete study tasks.  If they have cognitive deficits 
that disrupt the ability to complete study tasks, then they may be unable to participate in the 
study.  Patients with a score of 90% or higher on the Informed Conse nt Quiz will be eligible for 
participation in the study. The Principal Investigator is fully responsible for any issues related to 
informed consent, and will ensure that the participant receives adequate written information 
about the aims, procedure, possi ble risks and benefits of the study and opportunity for oral 
discussion of questions if needed.  
 
Pre-treatment Survey Session Visit:  
The Research  Coordinator or other approved study personnel will inform the patient participant 
that he or she must complete a series of surveys before the start of the  1-hour MTPC group 
orientation . Patients will complete the surveys through a link to the secure REDCap  database 
using an electronic device  in the primary care health center , or using paper surveys, which will 
be entered into REDCap by our IRB -approved study staff.  Any paper surveys will be stored in 
our double -locked filing cabinet in the CMC Research Office .  Electronic devices will be 
provided for patients to take surveys at each participating CHA health center.   
 
In this session, patient participants will complete the Patient Baseline Battery, the Patient 
Mindfulness Self -Report Battery, the Patient Clinical Assessment Battery, the Patien t Self -
Management Battery,  and the Patient -PCP Relationship Battery. These surveys are expected to 
take the average patient 60 minutes to complete.  
 
MTPC Orientation Session:  
 
27 
 Patients who have consented to participate in the study and have completed the pr e-treatment 
survey session will be invited to stay for the  60-minute mindfulness orientation session.  During 
this session, interested patients will meet for one visit with a behavioral care provider in groups 
of up to  30 participants. This group will be held within a clinical space at each participating CHA 
primary care health center. It will be one hour in length and the behavioral care provider will 
offer a list of mindfulness resources available in the community.  Pati ents will be reminded that,  
after this session, they will be randomly assigned to either the 8 -week or referral to community 
resources and electronic resources and placed on a 6-month waiting list.  Details about this 
intervention can be found in section C. 3.e.3.  
 
Scheduling Phone Call:  
Once an eligible individual has demonstrated an understanding of the study procedures and 
potential risks of participating, provided written informed consent, completed pre -treatment 
assessments on REDCap, and attended the MT PC orientation session, then he or she will be 
placed onto the waitlist for  randomization for  the respective health center and assigned a 
randomization ID by health center.  This ID will be entered into a randomized algorithm with 
stratification, which wil l be used to allot the participant to a study group.  The Research 
Coordinator or another approved member of the research personnel will contact the patient by 
phone to schedule him/her for the specified study group, and a scheduling email will be sent.  
Patient participants will be assigned either to an 8 -week MTPC group or to a 6-month waiting 
list for the MTPC group , and  will be informed of their placement during the phone call. Patients 
will also be encouraged at this time to ask any questions they might have.    
 
If a participant cannot attend the assigned group, he or she will have to wait to be rescheduled for 
at least  6 months from the completion of his/her pre -treatment assessments.   
 
Biweekly Engagement Phone Call  (PT Study Week 1 -8): 
All patient participants will receive an ongoing 3 -5 minute Participant Engagement phone call 
from a member of the study staff.  This  call will be made according to the brief phone script 
attached.  This call will be made every two weeks during Study Weeks 1 -8.  The purpose of this 
outreach call will be to provide support for patients in both groups, help participants cultivate a 
relati onship with study staff, give participants a place to ask questions, and support participants 
in completing study visits.  The call will have five talking points:  1) How have you been in the 
last 2 weeks?  2) Have you had any issues with completing the we ekly Mindfulness Practice 
Diary or the Mindfulness Resources Use Diary?  3) Have there been any issues with your 
participation in the study in general?  4) We appreciate your contribution to the research study 
and encourage you to continue filling out the diaries – just as a reminder you will receive $20 for 
each survey session and $20 if you complete all the weekly diaries.  5) Is there anything else 
you’d like to share with us?  Study staff will complete a call log for all engagement calls, and 
issues rai sed in these calls will be discussed twice a week in research staff meetings.   
 
Mindfulness Intervention (MTPC Intervention Group; PT Study Week 1 -8): 
Patients in the 8 -week MTPC program will meet with a behavioral care provider for 8 weeks in 
groups of a pproximately 6-12 participants, to receive 2 hours of instruction in MTPC. MTPC 
groups will be generally held in the evenings in clinical spaces within each participating CHA 
primary care health center. Between weeks 6 and 7 there will be a weekend 7 hour long day of 
silent practice  at locations within the local community or within a nearby CHA hospital facility 
space.  The total duration of the program is 2 3 hours over 8 weeks with additional expectations 
 
28 
 for daily home practice by participants. Details a bout this intervention can be found in section 
C.3.e. 4. 
 
Action Plan Study Session  (Completed between PT Study Weeks 6 -7): 
During Patient Study Weeks 6 -7, all patients participating in the MINDFUL -PC program will fill 
out an Act ion Plan Worksheet  and watch a brief SMART goal video (for example: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1 -SvuFIQjK8) , which is designed to support the creation of 
a short -term health goal .  Patients randomized to the 8 -week MTPC group will  receive 
instruction and support during  the group in developing health goals for a short -term action plan, 
and communicating these goals effectively to  people in their life who might be important 
stakeholders in their health .  Duration:  15 minutes.   
 
After completing the  Action Plan Worksheet , patient participants will complete the Action Plan 
Assessment (APA -10), a 10 -item scale that evaluates patient behavior in the domains of self -
determination, motivation, shared decision -making, and barrier appraisal.  This survey will be 
completed online  in REDCap  or on paper , and is expected to take the average patient 5 minutes 
to complete.  
 
Post-treatment Survey Session Computer Visit 1 (Completed between PT Study Weeks 8 -12): 
After eight weeks, participants in both groups will be asked to complete another series of surveys 
online on REDCap  or on paper . Patient participants will again be given the option to either 
complete the surveys on a device at their PCMH  or outside of the office on a computer of their 
choosing .  Electronic devices will be provided to patients in the 8 -week MTPC group so that 
they may complete their surveys at their PCMH in the hour following their final weekly meeting.   
Paper survey answers will be transfer red to a secure REDCap database by MINDFUL -PC study 
staff, and all paper surveys will be stored in a double -locked filing cabinet.   Research assistants 
(to be hired later) will be available at several scheduled 1 -hour sessions at PCMH sites to bring 
electr onic devices and offer support for survey completion. Patients assigned to the 6-month 
waiting list  may visit their PCMH to use a device to complete their surveys during one of these 
scheduled sessions .  
 
In this session, patient participants will complete the Patient Mindfulness Self -Report Battery, 
the Patient Clinical Assessment Battery, the Patient Self -Management Battery, the Patient -PCP 
Relationship Battery,  the Action Plan Initiation Survey (APIS -5), the Weekly Mindfulness 
Practice Diary, the Patient Satisfaction Survey, and the Adverse Event Reporting Form.  These 
surveys are expected to take the average patient 65 minutes to complete.  
 
Post-treatment Survey Session Computer Visit 2 (Completed at PT Study Week 9): 
In this session, patient participants will complete the Action Plan Initiation Survey (APIS -5).  
This survey is expected to take approximately 5 minutes to complete.   
 
Post-treatment Survey Session Computer Visit 3 (Completed at PT Study Week 10): 
In this session, patient participants will complete the Action Plan Initiation Survey (APIS -5).  
This survey is expected to take approximately 5 minutes to complete.   
 
Post-treatment Survey Session Computer Visit 2 (Completed at PT Study Week 16):  
In this session, patient participants will complete the Action Plan Initiation Survey (APIS -5).  
This survey is expected to take approximately 5 minutes to complete.   
 
29 
  
 
Follow -up Sur vey Session Computer Visit (Completed between PT Study Weeks 24-26): 
After six months, both patient groups will complete a survey about attitudes about primary care 
providers. Patient participants will again be given the option to either visit their PCMH t o 
complete the surveys on a CHA device,  on paper,  or complete the surveys outside of the office 
on a computer of their choosing.  Patients requiring interpreters or electronic devices can 
schedule a meeting visit at their PCMH to complete the surveys. Thes e surveys are expected to 
take the average patient 70 minutes to complete.  
 
In this session, patient participants will complete the Patient Mindfulness Self -Report Battery, 
the Patient Clinical Assessment Battery, the Patient Self -Management Battery , the Patient -PCP 
Relationship Battery , the Action Plan Initiation Survey (APIS -5), the Weekly Mindfulness 
Practice  and Resources  Diaries, and the Adverse Event Reporting Form.  
 
Waitlist patient participants must complete the following study requirements in orde r to be 
eligible for a spot in the next MTPC group once their 6 -month study participation has ended:  
three 45 -minute study survey batteries, the Action Plan Worksheet, 1 of 3 Action Plan Follow -
Up Surveys, and 6 of 8 weekly Mindfulness Practice/Resource s urveys.  
 
Action Plan Interview (Completed after PT Study Week 26):  After completing the study, 
participants will have an opportunity to give comments about their experience in the MINDFUL -
PC program.   
 
This interview will last for 20 -30 minutes and will b e conducted according to the Action Plan 
Interview Guide .  Participants will be invited to interview via e -mail. Interviews will be recorded 
using a USB -based device that attaches directly to the telephone line.  No identifying 
information beyond first nam e will be used in the interviews.  Participants will always be asked 
permission before turning on the recording device  – if they decline  permission, no recording will 
be made.  Recording device s will be stored in the secure research office double -locked filing 
cabinet when not in use, and will only be accessed by IRB -approved study staff.  Recording files 
will be kept on CHA’s secure study G Suite server and will only be accessible by IRB -approved 
study staff .   Recordings will be transcribe d using a transcription service with whom we have a 
HIPAA BAA agreement in place  following IRB approval , such as Spext.com .  A sample of the 
email communication to participants is presented below:  
 
“Dear (Participant Name),  
 
Thank you so much for your participation in the MINDFUL -PC study. We would like to invite 
you to share you r experience with the MINDFUL -PC Program, especially the action planning 
process . This will take place in a 20 -30 minute phone call with one of our re search staff. Your 
response is confidential, and will be incredibly useful feedback on how we can make this 
program better for future participants. You may decline this invitation if you do not wish to share 
your experience. If you are interested, please l et us know and we will arrange a time with you.”  
 
The calls will be conducted by a research assistant who has a strong background in qualitative 
research methods and phone interviewing and who has also fully grasped the objectives of the 
Action Plan Interv iew Guide (see supporting materials). If needed, other team members may be 
 
30 
 trained to conduct the action plan interview by learning the objectives in the Action Plan 
Interview Guide , sitting in on two Action Plan Interview calls , and conducting one “test” call 
with another study staff member .  
 
C.3.d.3. Overview of Patient Study Visits in Experimental fMRI pilot study ( SEE TABLE 4 IN  
APPENDIX ): 
 
Orientation Session Reminder Phone Call and Email Confirmation:  
Participants will be informed about the fMRI pilo t study during  a phone call before the 
MINDFUL -PC orientation session. In the email -confirmation for the orientation session, we will 
further include the flyer with information on the fMRI pilot study and the information sheet 
about the fMRI study.   We will also let participants know about the possibility to enroll as part of 
the concurrent cohort in an optional health behavior tracking study , the Health, E ating , 
Activity, and Rest Tracking (HEART) pilot study .   
 
Orientation:  
During the orientation  session, patients will be informed on the voluntary, additional fMRI pilot 
study. Patients will also be informed that they will only be able to participate in the fMRI pilot 
study if they get randomized to the MTPC condition and are eligible to this fMRI study.  
Randomization will be conducted based on the MINDFUL -PC study protocol. Patients will hear 
basic information about neuroimaging (e.g. safety, experience in the scanner, such as noise, 
limited space to move, etc.) and they will receive a flyer with information on the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria for the fMRI study, as well as further information on MRI  and fMRI , 
and contact information for reaching neuroimaging personnel at the Martinos Center.  
Participants will also be given an informational flyer a nd a brief verbal description of the 
HEART study. Participants wishing to participate in the  HEART  study may do so without 
participating in the fMRI pilot study.  
 
 
Group Scheduling Phone Call:  
During the scheduling phone call for the mindfulness group only , patients are asked about their 
interest in the optional fMRI pilot study. We will then screen interested mindfulness group 
participants verbally, using a phone screening interview based on the Martinos Center MRI 
Patient Screening form and the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (see phone script Pt Protocol - 
Randomization Status Phone Call). We will assess if participants fulfill all criteria related to the 
fMRI study. Participants will be given the opportunity to ask questions they have regarding the 
study , the flyer , the information sheet  or other aspects regarding the fMRI. Some screening 
questions represent an immediate exclusion from the study ( see phone  screening  script), other 
items represent  potential risks, and require further clarification. In this case, the responsible 
Operations Manager and Chief MR I Technologist at the Martinos Center for Biomedical 
Engineering will be contacted by the neuroimaging post -doctoral fellow , with the necessar y 
information to decide the safety for fMRI  scanning for a patient with a certain condition. In case 
the responsible Operations Manager cannot confirm MRI safety, the patient will be excluded 
from the fMRI  study. Participants will also be asked if they hav e used any illicit drugs in the past 
30 days, and any drug use could result in exclusion from the study based on the clinical judgment 
of the PI. If a patient fulfils all  eligibility criteria, we will then schedule an fMRI measurement 
scan session. If the patient needs additional time to decide about participating in this study or if 
we have to make additional enquiries based on the MRI eligibility screening, we will arrange a 
 
31 
 follow -up phone call with the patient (within 1 -2 days of the group -scheduling ph one call), to 
decide on study participation and potentially schedule the fMRI measurement.  
 
C.3.d.4. Overview of Patient Visits in HEART pilot study (see Table 4 in APPENDIX)  
 
HEART Pilot Study Informed Consent Session:  
 
Concurrent Cohort:   
 
Participants are first notified of the opportunity to enroll in the HEART study during the 
MINDFUL -PC confirmation  phone call to attend MINDFUL -PC orientation. Following this, at 
the in-person orientation, participants will  be led through the verbal and wr itten consent process 
for MINDFUL -PC.  Once they have signed their MINDFUL -PC consent forms, they are eligible 
for the HEART study and will be given the HEART study information packet, as well as the 
HEART study informed consent form. A doctoral level memb er of the research staff will then 
guide participants through  a verbal introduction of the HEART study,  informing them of the 
invitation to voluntar ily participate , reviewing study inclusion and exclusion criteria, and 
providing  a chance to ask any questions . If after this in -person review, interested participants will 
be invited to sign the HEART study consent form.  If  an interested  participant does not 
understand or agree to study requirements  after the verbal introduction and  a chance to ask 
questions,  the doctoral level research staff member conducting the orientation session will decide 
to exclude the participant from the HEART study.   
 
Upon completion of the HEART study informed consent form, participants will be given an 
additional copy of the signed informed consent form for their own records.  The signed informed 
consent forms will be stored in a binder in a double -locked cabinet at the Center for Mindfulness 
and Compassion.  Only IRB -approved study staff wil l have acces s to this cabinet.  
 
The study staff member will then create a unique Participant ID, specific to the HEART study, 
for each participant, which will be used for all data collection in the HEART study.  The form 
that contains the linking information between e ach Participant ID and each participant will be 
stored in a double -locked filing cabinet in the CMC Research Office, and will only be accessible 
by IRB -approved study staff.  The participant will also be assigned a study -specific Gmail 
address and password , which will serve as their login credentials for the smartphone activity  
tracking application . To ensure confidentiality, the Gmail address will have no identifiable 
information or information related to their Participant ID.  
 
At the end of the MINDFUL -PC orientation, participants who express interest in participating in 
the HEART study will be scheduled by one of the research assistants  to come for an in person 
45-minute Behavioral Measures visit, which will be co nducted on an individual basis.  In this 
visit participants will complete three  behavioral measures tasks , install any required smartphone 
applications, be introduced to wristband activity trackers if applicable, and be given a chance to 
ask any questions. Participants  are reminded that t hey will repeat the Behavioral measures visit  
once more during weeks 8-9 of the study.   
 
 
HEART Pilot Study Sessions : 
Concurrent Cohort:   
 
32 
  
Timing: HEART  study participants participating in the concurrent cohort will complete the 
behavioral tasks 1 week prior to MTPC Session 1 of the intervention  (Part 0) (applies to both 
waitlist and intervention arms) , and will complete daily behavioral tracking surveys during Part 
0, and for 4 weeks starting at MINDFUL -PC Study Week 5 (Part s 1 and 2).  Part 1 is study 
weeks 5 -6, and Part 2 is Study Weeks 7 -8.  Participants will complete the second behavioral 
tasks visit between Study Weeks 8 and 9.     
 
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria :  Participants must either be newly enroll ing in the MINDFUL -PC 
study or  be joining a MIN DFUL -PC primary care group after having completed the ir 6-month 
study requirements in the low-dose comparator group. Participants must have access to a 
smartphone that is compatible with the activity tracking application , participant s must be willing 
to attend the two behavioral task sessions, to use the smartphone application and/or wristband 
tracking device each day during the study collection periods, and participant must be willing to 
fill out online surveys at home.   
 
HEART Study Tasks:  Participa nts will do the following tasks on a daily basis for the duration  
of the HEART study : 
 
 Mindfulness Practice Diary:   Fill out the MINDFUL -PC weekly mindfulness practice 
diary and resource use diary daily for 1 week prior to MTPC Session 1 of the intervention 
and then for 4 weeks during Weeks 5 through 8.     
 
 Activity Tracking:  Install and use a smartphone application related to activity tracking, 
e.g., Argus  or a similar version of commercially available activity tracking app , etc. , and 
use this app every day  for 1 week prior to MTPC Session 1 of the intervention and then 
for 4 weeks during Weeks 5 through 8. The Argus App is compatible on both Android 
and iOS platforms. Participants will install any required smartphone applications during 
their f irst Behavioral Tasks  visit, with the guidance of a research study staff member. 
Participants will sign into the application using a coded  Participant ID.   During feasibility 
testing, we will assess the utility of wristband trackers. If feasible and appropriate for the 
study, the principal investigator may decide for all p articipants to also be given a 
wristband activity tracker  to wear  on the wrist each day. Data will be collected using a 
coded  Participant ID.  If they are given a wristband, then the participant  will need to 
return the wristband to the study team upon completion of the study in order to receive 
final reimbursement   
 
 Food, Activity, and Sleep Tracking (FAST) Questionnaire :  Participants will be asked 
to fill out the FAST  Questionnaire on a daily basis for 1 week prior to MTPC Session 1 
of the intervention and then for 4 weeks during Weeks 5 through 8.  This questionnaire 
will contain questions adapted from the Automated Self -Administered 24 -Hour Dietary 
Assessment Tool (AS A24) and the National Sleep Foundation Sleep Diary.    
 
 Behavioral Tasks  Session  
 
Participants will be asked to complete the Behavioral Tasks  component during an in -
person behavioral tasks session  that takes place prior to Week 1 of the MINDFUL -PC 
 
33 
 study  and then again between Weeks 8 and 9 .  This behavioral tasks session  will be 
scheduled during the orientation session to the MINDFUL -PC and HEART studies . 
During this behavioral tasks session, p articipants  will first download any required 
smartphone applications for activity tracking with the guidance of a research study staff 
member. Then, they will complete three behavioral  tasks in the following order : the 
Heartbeat Detection Task (H BDT), 5 -Trial Adjusting Delay Hypothetical Discounting 
Task ( HDT ), and Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART). Each task is described 
in brief below (see Section C.3.f.7  for more a detail ed description ):  
 
 Heartbeat Detection Task (H BDT): Participants are  asked to count their heartbeat  
during three varying time intervals (30s, 30s, 60s) .  In parallel, individuals’ heart -rate 
will be measured by Kardia Mobile technology. Participants will place their index 
and middle fingers of both hands  on top of the Kardia Mobile devic e and will be 
instructed to count their heartbeat  for a period of 30 or 60 seconds . The readings from 
this device are linked to the Kardia Mobile App, which will be on a screen faced 
away from the participant [1].  Participant data stored in the Kardia Mobile app will be 
identified with the HEART Study participant ID , which will not be linked to any 
identifying information.    
 
 5-Trial Adjusting Delay  Hypothetical Discounting Task  (HDT ): This is a brief 
delay discounting task performed on a computer that assesses an individual’s 
impulsivity by presenting a series of 5 discrete choice questions between some 
amount of a delayed commodity (in this case, dollars)  and half that amount available 
immediately ( e.g. “Gain $1000 in 3 weeks or gain $500 now”).   Individuals choose 
whether they would rather receive a smaller amount of money now, or a larger 
amount in the future [2, 3] .   
 
 Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART) : Participants will complete a series 
of computerized tests focused on sustained attention, response inhibition, and self -
regulation. They are asked to press a key in response to rapidly displayed integers (1 -
9) and withhold a response to a designated “no -go” integer [4].  
 
These tasks will be conducted in a quiet, closed, and gently lit room located at the Center 
for Mindfulness & Compassion (26 Central St, Somerville, MA 02143)  or at a CHA 
primary care location . Participants will sit on a chair with their feet flat on the floor, 
forearms on the table, and with a desktop or laptop  computer screen in front of them. The 
research sta ff member will explain each task to the participant before conducting th e trial, 
and will provide a one -minute break between each task.  
 
 
fMRI Pilot Study Informed Consent:  
Participants will be given the informed consent form for the fMRI study at the fMRI session . 
During the fMRI session, we give participants time to read the consent and answer any questions 
they might have regarding the informed consent form. We will ask the participant to sign the 
informed consent in the presence of a doctoral -level staff.  
 
Pre-fMRI Session  Preparation  Phone Call:  
 
34 
 Participants will be contacted 96 hours prior to the session and reminded to abstain from alcohol 
and cannabis for at least 72 hours and from other illicit drugs throughout the study. If a person is 
not read y to comply with this rule the PI may exclude the patient from the fMRI pilot study 
(while the patient can still participate in the main study).  
Participants will be given $10 towards the taxi fare or public transport costs to and from the 
Athinoula Marti nos Center for Biomedical Imaging. Participants can also receive free parking at 
the Martinos Center. If a participant expresses discomfort or insecurity to reach the 
neuroimaging site, study staff can offer to accompany participants to the Athinoula Marti nos 
Center for Biomedical Imaging.  
 
Pre-fMRI Session Reminder Phone C all: 
Patients will again be contacted 24 hours prior to the session and reminded to abstain from 
alcohol or cannabis  and to make sure patients are still able to come to the scheduled fMRI visit.  
 
Pre-treatment fMRI Session Visit:  
At the fMRI visit, participants will be asked to complete a salivary oral fluid toxicology test for 
alcohol and illicit drug use. For alcohol -testing we will use the One Step Alcohol Saliva Test 
Strip (Confirm Biosciences). Participants will apply saliva directly to the reaction pad for 10 
seconds. After 2 minutes the test will inform us about alcohol blood level concentration. For 
illicit drug testing, we will use the SalivaConfirm Premium - 5 Panel Instant Oral Cube Drug 
Test Kit ( Confirm Biosciences ), which tests for the use of Amphetamine and Methamphetamine 
(detects use within the last 72 hours), Cocaine (last 24 hours), Opiates (last 48 hou rs), Marijuana 
(last 14 hours) . Participants will put the sponge end of the collection stick into the mouth and 
soak into saliva for 3 minutes. If the patient is positive representing any level of intoxication with 
substances, then the patient will be excl uded immediately from the experimental fMRI study,  
and will not undergo the fMRI  scan. The excluded patient  can still participate in the main 
MINDFUL -PC study. Women will be asked  during the screening phone -call if they are pregnant 
or planning to conceive, which would result in exclusion from the fMRI study. Women of 
childbearing potential (without active contraception) are further offered to take a urine pregnancy 
test at the fMRI visit , to confirm that they ar e not currently pregnant (TestCountry's Strip 
Pregnancy Tests).  Results are available within 5 minutes. A positive pregnancy result on site will 
result in immediate exclusion from  the fMRI  study, but not from  the MINDFUL -PC study.  After 
toxicology and preg nancy testing, participants will fill in the Martinos Center Patient Screening 
Form.  This form is mandatory before every scan session. All items have been screened during 
the Group Scheduling Phone Call  so that  potential risks can been assessed, before  scheduling the 
fMRI  visit. If however the Martinos Center Patient Screening Form shows any co ntra-indications 
for fMRI , the responsible Operations Manager and Chief MR Technologist at the Martinos 
Center will be contacted immediately. In case the responsible Operations Manager can not be 
reached or cannot confirm MRI safety, the patient will be excluded immediately from the fMRI  
study, and will not be scanned.  
 
Before the fMRI measurement, study staff will place sensors and a belt on the participant to 
measure heart rate, breathing rate, and skin conductance during fMRI tasks. Participants will 
complete structural scans, a resting state scan, inhibitory control task, self -compassion task, 
diffusion tensor scan, interoceptive attention task and emotion /pain regulation task. The pain 
regulation task involves a pressure cuff which is placed on participant’s calf and is inflated for 
periods of 30 seconds to a medium intense pain, as rated by the participants (50 out of 100, with 
100 being the worst pain im aginable). After the scan, patients will answer questions regarding 
 
35 
 experiences during the task (tiredness, pain, concentration, experience during the resting state 
and tasks). Patients will also schedule a time slot for their post -treatment fMRI Session V isit. 
 
Post-treatment fMRI Session Visit:  
Patients will complete salivary testing for illicit drugs and alcohol to prevent anyone who is 
intoxicated from participating in the fMRI session. If the patient is intoxicated with alcohol or 
cannabis, then the pa tient will be asked to reschedule for the experimental fMRI follow -up 
session to prevent a wasted session; however, given the initial fMRI data collection, post -
treatment fMRI scanning will still be obtained if the patient can return in a sober state. All 
participants will need to complete the fMRI testing within 2 weeks after completion of the 
MTPC group. Patients will complete the same sequence of structural and resting state scans, an 
inhibitory control task, self -compassion task, diffusion tensor imagin g, interoceptive attention 
task and emotion/pain regulation task.  
 
C.3.e. Study Interventions : 
 
C.3.e.1. MBSR:  
Mindfulness -based Stress Reduction (MBSR) [ 32] was created by Jon Kabat -Zinn, Ph.D., in 
1979.  The program includes eight weekly classes, each 2.5 hours in duration, as well as a  7-hr 
day of silent practice .  MBSR emphasizes both ‘formal’ and ‘informal’ mindfulness meditation 
practices.  Formal methods include sitting meditation, walking meditation, body scan meditation, 
and gentle hatha yoga.  Informal practices emphasize mindfulness in daily life, and incl ude 
awareness of breathing, awareness of pleasant and unpleasant events, and purposeful awareness 
of everyday activities like eating, walking, and interpersonal communication.  MBSR involves 
weekly home assignments for both formal and informal practice.  C lasses have a common flow 
and involve group exercises, guided formal practice, and opportunities for group and individual 
dialogue about difficulties and developments of formal and informal practices.  
 
C.3.e.2. Mindful Communication:  
Mindful Communication  [33] offers a 10 -month continuation phase following MBSR for 
medical providers, which meets monthly for 2.5 hours.  This course emphasizes three major 
components: mindfulness ; narrative  medicine , “the creation and sharing of reflective stories that 
explore  the profound and meaningful experiences one has as a physician”; and appreciative  
inquiry  which focuses on examining and framing patterns of individual thinking and behavior as 
“strengths and capacities to be enhanced and extended.”  Each class has a comm on flow of 
activities maintained from MBSR, as well as an overarching theme.  Themes include 
“teamwork”, “uncertainty in medicine”, “aspiration”, and “suffering in medicine.”  
 
C.3.e. 3. Mindfulness Orientation Session:  
This hour -long informational session w ill involve both experiential and informational 
introduction sections.  The class will begin by answering the question “What is mindfulness?” 
and group leaders will offer evidence for supporting mindfulness.  Group leaders will then guide 
the class in an e xperiential session.  The orientation session is designed to foster a commitment 
to do the 30 minutes or more per day at home practice; to give the participants a ‘taste’ of the 
mindfulness practices that will be presented in the classes and to process wit h the prospective 
participant the experience of the practice; to inform the patient about the logistics of the class; to 
review the specific upcoming course schedule; to meet the specific leaders for the upcoming 
group; to learn about risks and benefits of  the MTPC program; and to give patients an 
 
36 
 opportunity to ask questions. The orientation session  will conclude with an explanation of 
internal and external resources for continuing mindfulness education, and  will offer patients a 
referral to these resources.   
 
C.3.e. 4 MTPC:  
Mindfulness Training for Primary Care (MTPC), is a modified version of MBSR  for delivery as 
group psychotherapy modality within patient -centered medical homes . MTPC offers a series of 
eight weekly, two -hour core sessions delivered in a group format with a seven hour day  of silent 
practice  between weeks 6 and 7.  MTPC will follow the same structure as MBSR, but will also 
include a weekly topic to be discussed for 20 minutes per class for ea ch of the 8 weeks  and the 
integration of a PCP illness management/health maintenance appointment to be held during week 
6-7 of the group .  The weekly themes are as follows:  
 
 
Part A: Sessions 1 -4 are primarily focused on learning to pay attention.  
Week 1: From Autopilot to Befriending the Body and Mind  
Week 2: Perception and Rediscovering “Beginner’s Mind”  
Week 3: Pleasure and Freedom in Being Present  
Week 4: Staying Present with Pain, Difficulty, Illness and Stress  
Part B: Sessions 5 -8 are focused on illn ess self -management and skills for changing health 
behaviors.  
Week 5: Allowing What Is: The Bedrock Needed to Support Change  
Week 6: Skillful Action and Skillful Communication   
Week 6 -7 Action Plan Worksheet :  The purpose of this worksheet is to support the 
patient in generating his/her own short -term action plan.  
Week 5-7 Full -Day Session: The purpose  of this 7 -hour full -day session is to integrate 
mindfulness practices learned in earlier sessions and deepen personal practice.   
Week 7: Cultivating Kindn ess towards Self and Others  
Week 8: The Rest of Your Life  
 
 
C.3.f. Measures : 
 
The Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine —Short Form (REALM -SF) [34] will be 
used to assess patient literacy levels.  This is a 7 -item word recognition test that offers a valid 
quick assessment of patient health literacy and has excellent agreement with the 66 -item 
REALM instrument in terms of grade -level assignments. Patients are instructed to read seven 
words aloud for a member of the study team.  Patients who pronounce f ewer than four of the 
words correctly read at a literacy level of 4th to 6th grade. Duration: 2 min.  
 
C.3.f.1. Baseline Battery for Patient Participants:  
A Survey of Meditation and Mindfulness Experience (SMME) will assess the participant’s 
previous experi ence with meditation and Mindfulness -based interventions, both over their 
lifetime and in the past two weeks.  This will be a brief questionnaire.  Duration: 5 min.  
 
A brief demographics survey  will note patient race, ethnicity, optional sexual and gender  
identity, primary language, income, and other quantifiable attributes.  Duration: 5 min.  
 
37 
  
Patients who note that they smoke in the demographics survey will be prompted to complete  the 
Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND)  [35] on REDCap .  This is a widely used 
self-rating scale that provides a quantitative measure of nicotine dependence and will be 
administered at the screening visit to determine level of nicotine dependence. The 6 -item scale 
includes: smoking rate, time between waking a nd first cigarette, smoking when ill, difficulty 
refraining from smoking where it is forbidden, smoking more heavily in the morning, and 
reporting that the first cigarette of the day would be the most difficult to give up. A score greater 
than or equal to 6 indicates high nicotine dependence. Duration: 3 min. 
 
C.3.f.2. Baseline Battery for PCP Participants:  
A Survey of Meditation and Mindfulness Experience (SMME) will assess the participant’s 
previous experience with meditation and Mindfulness -based interve ntions, both over their 
lifetime and in the past two weeks.  This will be a brief questionnaire.  Duration: 5 min.  
 
The Mindfulness Knowledge and Attitudes Questionnaire for Primary Care (MKAQ -PC) is 
adapted from Mindfulness Knowledge and Attitudes Questionnaire Administered to Psychology 
and Medical Students from McKenzie et al. [ 36].  This is an 8 -item scale that examines 
providers’ previous experience with and general outlook on the incorporation  of Mindfulness 
into health care.  Some of the items ask providers to rate their experience with or knowledge of 
Mindfulness from (a) nonexistent to (e) extensive.  Providers are also asked about their 
willingness to incorporate Mindfulness into patient ca re.  An example item is “To what extent do 
you think MBIs may have further potential for treating a range of other health problems? (a) 
nonexistent (b) mild (c) moderate (d) good (e) extensive.”  Duration: 5 min.  
 
A brief demographics survey  will note PCP race, ethnicity, gender, and other quantifiable 
attributes.  Duration: 5 min.  
 
C.3.f.3. Mindfulness Self -Report Battery for Patient and PCP Participants:  
The Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ)  [37] is a 39 -item scale that examines f ive 
factors that represent aspects of the current empirical conception of mindfulness.  These five 
facets include: “observing, describing, acting with awareness, non -judging of inner experience, 
and non -reactivity to inner experience.”  An example item is “I pay attention to how my 
emotions affect my thoughts and behavior.” Participants rate their degree of agreement with each 
of the items on a Likert -type scale ranging from 1 ( Never or very rarely true ) to 5 ( Very often or 
always true ), with higher scores indicating higher experience of mindfulness. Duration: 8 min.  
 
The short -form  Self-Compassion Scale (SCS -SF) [38] is an abbreviated 12 -item form of the 
original 26 -item Self -Compassion Scale.  This scale evaluates six different aspects of self -
compassion: Self-Kindness (e.g., ‘‘I try to be understanding and patient toward those aspects of 
my personality I don’t like’’), Self -Judgment (e.g., ‘‘I’m disapproving and judgmental about my 
own flaws and inadequacies’’), Common Humanity (e.g., ‘‘I try to see my fai lings as part of the 
human condition’’), Isolation (e.g., ‘‘When I feel inadequate in some way, I try to remind myself 
that feelings of inadequacy are shared by most people”), Mindfulness (e.g., ‘‘When something 
painful happens I try to take a balanced vie w of the situation’’), and Over -Identification (e.g., 
‘‘When I’m feeling down I tend to obsess and fixate on everything that’s wrong.’’).  The scale is 
scored on a 5 point Likert scale (1 = Almost never; 5 = Almost always), and negative subscale 
items are reverse scored. Duration: 4 min.  
 
38 
  
The Difficulties in Emotion Regulation (DERS) Scale [39] is a 36 -item self -report scale 
designed to assess emotional dysregulation.  The scale assess 6 aspects of emotional 
dysregulation:  non -acceptance of emotional responses (“When I’m upset, I become embarrassed 
for feeling that way”), difficulties engaging  in goal directed behavior (“When I’m upset, I have 
difficulty thinking about anything else”), impulse control difficulties (“When I’m upset, I lose 
control over my behaviors”), lack of emotional awareness (“When I’m upset, I take time to 
figure out what I ’m really feeling (reverse -scored)”, limited access to emotion regulation 
strategies (“When I’m upset, it takes me a long time to feel better”), and lack of emotional clarity 
(“I have no idea how I am feeling”).  Duration: 5 min.  
The Multidimensional Asse ssment of Interoceptive Awareness (MAIA) [40] is a 32 -item self -
report scale designed to assess multiple aspects of interoception and interoceptive awareness.  
The scale assesses 8 aspects of interoceptive awareness:  noticing (“I notice when I am 
uncomfort able in my body”), not -distracting (“I do not notice (I ignore) physical tension or 
discomfort until they become more severe”), not -worrying (“I start to worry that something is 
wrong if I feel any discomfort”), attention regulation (“When I am in conversa tion with 
someone, I can pay attention to my posture”), emotional awareness (“I notice that my breathing 
becomes free and easy when I feel comfortable”), self -regulation (“When I am caught up in 
thoughts, I can calm my mind by focusing on my body/breathing ”), body listening (“I listen to 
my body to inform me about what to do”), and trusting (“I feel my body is a safe place”).  
Duration:  5 min.   
 
C.3.f.4. Clinical Assessment Battery for Patient  Participant s : 
The Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS -21) [41] is a 21 -item scale that evaluates distress 
in the subscales of depression, anxiety, and stress.  Each subscale receives a total score that 
corresponds to a numerical value defining the aspect as mild, moderate, severe, or extremely 
severe.  Each item is  scored on a 4 point Likert scale (0 = Never; 5 = Almost Always) 
considering the participant’s experience in the past week.  An example item includes “I found it 
difficult to relax.”  Duration: 3 min.  
 
The Patient Health Questionnaire -2 (PHQ -2) [42] is a 2 -item scale that is used to screen for 
depression.  PHQ -2 asks participants to indicate the frequency with which they have experienced 
the items on the scale in the past two weeks, ranging from 0 ( Not at all ) to 3 ( Nearly every day ).  
For example, the scale  asks patients how often in the past few weeks they have felt “Little 
interest or pleasure in doing things.” A participant’s total score can be used to evaluate the 
probability that the participant expresses major depressive disorder or any depressive diso rder. 
(Note: The PHQ -2 will not be used with PCPs ). Duration: 1 min.  
 
The Perceived Stress Scale (PSS)  [43] measures the degree to which situations in life are 
stressful. Items are designed to evaluate how overloaded, unpredictable, and uncontrollable one 
finds one’s life.  Each item is scored on a 5 point Likert scale from 0 ( Never ) to 4 ( Very often ).  
An example question is, “In the last month, how often have you felt difficulties were piling up so 
high that you could not overcome them?”  Positively state d items are reverse scored before all 
scale items are summed to yield a total score. Duration: 3 min.   
 
 
39 
 The consumption subscale of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT -C) [44] 
is a 3 -item modified version of the original 10 -item AUDIT scal e, used to identify harmful 
drinking behavior or alcohol use disorders in patients.  Each question has a set of five possible 
answer choices, ranging in frequency.   For example, the question “How often do you have six or 
more drinks on one occasion?” is f ollowed by these five possible answers:  “(a) Never; (b) Less 
than monthly; (c) Monthly; (d) Weekly; (e) Daily or almost daily.”  The points allotted to each 
score are: a = 0 points, b = 1 point, c = 2 points, d = 3 points, e = 4 points.  A score of four o r 
greater indicates harmful drinking behavior or alcohol use disorder in men.  A score of three or 
greater indicates the same in women.  The greater the score, the more likely the drinking 
behaviors are affecting the patient’s health or safety.  Patient pa rticipants will complete this 
survey before they begin the study group and again after 8 weeks.  Duration: 1 min.  
 
The DSM -V Survey  of Substance Use is adapted from the DSM -5 Self -Rated Level 1 Cross -
Cutting Symptom Measure [ 45].  The 23 -item original measure is intended to be used in research 
or clinically to help clinicians rapidly identify areas of patient behavior that requ ire further 
examination.  This 11 -item adapted version includes only the domain of substance use, which 
asks three questions abo ut drinking, smoking, and substance use in the past two weeks. Items are 
rated on a 5 -point scale of frequency, from 0 ( Not at all ) to 4 ( Nearly every day ). The survey 
includes questions such as “During the past TWO (2) WEEKS , about how often did you use a ny 
of the following medicines ON YOUR OWN , that is, without a doctor’s prescription, in greater 
amounts or longer than prescribed? … Painkillers (like V icodin , Percocet, Oxycodone).” The 
answers to each item will be summed to yield a total score.  Durati on: 3 min. 
 
The Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System – Depression Short 
Form 8a (PROMIS -DSF)  [46, 47, 48] is an 8 -item scale used to assess patient -reported health 
status for depression.  PROMIS instruments are funded by the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) and used to reliably and validly measure patient -reported outcomes for clinical research 
and practic e.  Participants are asked to rate their experience of the item in the past seven days on 
a 5-point scale from 1 ( Never ) to 5 ( Always ).  With use of the PROMIS Assessment Center 
Scoring Service, a T score is generated from participant responses.  A sample item includes “I 
felt that nothing could cheer me up.” Duration: 4 min.  
 
The Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System – Anxiety Short Form 
8a (PROMIS -ASF)  [49, 50] is an 8 -item scale used to assess patient -reported health status for 
anxiety.  PROMIS instruments are funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and used to 
reliably and validly measure patient -reported outcomes for clinical research and practice.  
Participants are asked to rate their experience of the item in the past seven days on a 5 -point 
scale from 1 ( Never ) to 5 ( Always ).  With use of the PROMIS Assessment Center Scoring 
Service, a T score is generated from participant responses.  A sample item includes “My worries 
overwhelmed me.” Duration: 4 min.  
 
C.3.f.5 . Clinical Assessment Battery for PCP Participants : 
The Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS -21) [51] is a 21 -item scale that evaluates distress 
in the subscales of depression, anxiety, and stress.  Each subscale receives a total score that 
corresponds to a numerical  value defining the aspect as mild, moderate, severe, or extremely 
severe.  Each item is scored on a 4 point Likert scale (0 = Never; 5 = Almost Always) 
considering the participant’s experience in the past week.  An example item includes “I found it 
diffic ult to relax.”  Duration: 3 min.  
 
40 
  
The Perceived Stress Scale (PSS)  [52] measures the degree to which situations in life are 
stressful. Items are designed to evaluate how overloaded, unpredictable, and uncontrollable one 
finds one’s life.  Each item is score d on a 5 point Likert scale from 0 ( Never ) to 4 ( Very often ).  
An example question is, “In the last month, how often have you felt difficulties were piling up so 
high that you could not overcome them?”  Positively stated items are reverse scored before all  
scale items are summed to yield a total score. Duration: 3 min.   
 
C.3.f.6. Self -Management Battery for Patient Participants :  
The Self-Efficacy for Managing Chronic Disease Scale (SECD -6) [53] is a 6 -item scale that is 
used to evaluate a participant’s ability to self -manage care for a chronic disease. SECD -6 asks 
participants to rate their confidence in their own ability to do certain activities, on a scale from 1 
(not at all confident ) to 10 ( totally confident ).   For example, the scale asks patients t o indicate 
“How confident are you that you can do the different tasks and activities needed to manage your 
health condition so as to reduce your need to see a doctor?”  A participant’s score for the scale is 
calculated as the mean of the six items.  Durati on: 3 min.  
 
The Patient Activation Measure  (PAM)  [54] is a 13 -item scale that is designed to evaluate a 
participant’s ability to be an effective and informed manager of his or her own health and health 
care.  Participants are asked to rate their agreement w ith each statement on a 0 -100 metric where 
0 = the lowest possible activation and 100 = the highest possible activation as measured by this 
set of items.  The PAM survey generates an overall score on a 0 -100 scale for each patient, and 
can segment patients  into one of four activation levels along an empirically derived continuum.  
Statements include: “I am confident that I can follow through on medical treatments I may need 
to do at home.” Duration: 4 min.  
 
The Perceived Control Questionnaire (PCQ)  is adapted from a 5 -item perceived control 
measure from Jerant et al. [ 55] and a previously validated survey from Armitage et al. [ 56].  This 
5-item scale ask participants to rate their sense of control over chronic illness self -management 
on a 7 -point scal e from 1 ( None ) to 7 ( Total ).  Items include “How much personal control do you 
have over your self -management behaviors?”  Duration: 3 min.  
 
Action Plan Worksheet /SMART Goal Video :  Patient participants will complete the Action 
Plan Worksheet  and watch a b rief video about creating SMART goals (for example, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1 -SvuFIQjK8 ) in PT Study Week 7.  The Action Plan 
Worksheet is  a 13-item worksheet that incorporates information about SMART goals to support 
patient participants to make a goal about their health in one of 3 categories (activity 
level/exercise, diet/eating/drinking, or mindfulness meditation practice ).  Patients are en couraged 
to share this worksheet with a person who may help the patient in accomplishing the goal, and/or 
a healthcare provider .  Duration:  15  min. 
 
Patients will complete the self -report Action Plan Assessment (APA -10) questionnaire after 
filling out the  Action Plan Worksheet , at PT Study Week 7.  This survey instrument is developed 
as an adaptation of two self -determination theory scales [ 57] [58] and incorporates elements of 
shared decision -making [ 59] and self -efficacy and barrier appraisal [ 60].  This 10 -item scale 
evaluates patient behavior in the domains of self -determination, motivation, shared decision -
making, and barrier appraisal.  Participants are asked to rate their agreement with a statement on 
 
41 
 a 7-point scale from 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) to 7 ( Strongly Agree ).  A sample item includes “I 
have agreed to this action plan because I want to do it for myself.” Duration: 5 minutes.  
 
Patient self -reported Action Plan Initiation Survey (APIS -5) will be administered at post -
treatment (PT Study Wee k 8, 12, and 16 ).  This 5 -item questionnaire is adapted from a measure 
used by Guck et al. [56].  In this questionnaire, patients are asked to list their action plan goals 
generated with their PCP, and determine whether they met or did not meet each goal. Patients are 
asked to categorize their goals into one of six categories:  diet/eating/drinking, exercise/activity, 
sleep, medication, reducing substance use, and self -care. For each unmet goal, patients are asked 
to rate the cause of not meeting the goal o n an attributional rating scale using a 7 -point format. 
Higher scores indicate internal rather than external and uncontrollable rather than controllable 
attributions.  A sample item includes: “Was the cause of not meeting this goal controllable by 
you?” wh ere 1 is “Extremely controllable” and 7 is “Not at all controllable.” Duration: 5 
minutes.   Participants in the HEART pilot study in the concurrent cohort will fill this out as per 
the main study timeline.  Participants in the HEART pilot study alumni cohort will fill this out at 
the end of HEART study Weeks 4 and 5.   
 
The Three -Factor Eating Questionnaire -R18 (TFEQ -R18)  is an 18 item questionnaire that 
refers to current dietary practice and measures 3 different aspects of eating behavior: restrained 
eating (conscious restriction of food intake in order to control body weight or to promote weig ht 
loss), uncontrolled eating (tendency to eat more than usual due to a loss of control over intake 
accompanied by subjective feelings of hunger), and emotional eating (inability to resist 
emotional cues). The TFEQ -R18 consists of 18 items on a 4 -point res ponse scale (definitely 
true/mostly true/mostly false/definitely false). Responses to each of the 18 items are given a 
score between 1 and 4 and item scores are summated into scale scores for cognitive restraint, 
uncontrolled eating, and emotional eating. An example item includes “Sometimes when I start 
eating, I just can’t seem to stop.” Duration: 5 minutes.  
 
C.3.f.7. HEART Pilot Study Battery : 
 
Activity Tracking Smartphone Application:   Participants will install a free  activity tracking 
smartphone  application , which is compatible on both Android and iOS platforms. One e xample  
is the Argus application  by Azumio  or another commercially available Smartphone application 
with similar features , which can track the number of steps taken . Participants will be asked to 
carry their phone on their person (can be in a bag or pocket) during the day to enable activity 
tracking.   
 
The Argus app lication  (http://www.azumio.com/s/argus/index. html) and othe r Azumio 
applications have been included in m ultiple  NIH-funded studies, including the Big Data to 
Knowledge (BD2K) at Stanford University Mobilize Center ( http://mobilize.stanford.edu/ ), and 
has shown feasibility as  a compatible and safe method for collecting data in their clinical trials . 
We also may use wrist -worn devices offered by MD2K , which  is a NIH -funded national 
initiative to use mobile sensor data in clinical trials ( https://md2k.org/ ). Recognizing the rapid 
changes in the consumer market, we hope to keep flexibility in the activity tracking app used; 
Argus currently stands as a  good  example, and we will notify the IRB if we choose an app that is 
substant ially different  in function or safety profile . 
 
Activity Monitoring Duration: 2 minutes daily  
 
42 
  
Wristband Activity Tracker: During feasibility testing, we will assess the utility of wristband 
trackers. If feasible and appropriate for the study, the principal investigator may decide for all 
participants to also be given a wristband activity tracker to wear on the wrist each day . We are 
considering use of one of several types of wristbands:  Fitbit, Moov, Jawbone, Withings, MD2K 
Cerebrum, o r Garmin V ivosmart. Recognizing the rapid changes in the consumer market, t hese 
are examples of  what we may use and are listed here for flexibility of choice.  Study staff will 
notify the IRB if we choose a wristband tracker that is substantially different in function or safety 
profile.  Participants will be given instructions on how to wear, charge, and sync their wristband 
tracker. Data will be collected , stored, and extracted  using a coded  Participant ID.  The 
participant  will need to return the wristband in working condition to the study team upon 
completion of the study in order to receive final reimbursement. For information about 
confidentiality related to use of the wristband, please refer to section D.1a: Protection of Subject 
Privacy.  
 
Food, Activit y, and Sleep Tracking (FAST) Questionnaire : Participants will be asked to fill 
out a daily questionnaire about their food, activity, and sleep tracking. The survey is adapted  
from the Automated Self -Administered 24 -Hour Dietary Assessment Tool (ASA24) and the 
National Sleep Foundation Sleep Diary.   
 
The ASA24 was released in 2009 by the NIH and the National Cancer Institute as a web -based 
tool that enables multiple, automatica lly coded, self -administered 24 -hour recalls. This tool was 
designed for use by research participants, clinicians, patients, and students. The ASA24 asks 
detailed questions about food form, preparation, portion size, and additions using an extensive 
branch ing logic database. The ASA24 was designed to be culturally sensitive and accessible by 
individuals using assistive technologies. Features of the ASA24 respondent website can be found 
here ( https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/asa24/respondent/features.html ). A demo version of the 
respondent site can be found here ( https://asa24.nci.nih.gov/demo/ ).  
 
The FAST Questionnaire asks participants what time  they went to bed, what time they got out of 
bed, the total hours slept, any naps taken during the day, then about the timing and amount of 
alcoholic and caffeinated drink consumption. It also asks if they exercised throughout the day 
and then fur ther asks how long they performed each type of exercise.  
 
The food tracking portion asks subjects what main meals they ate in a day. For each main meal, 
subjects are asked how fast they ate, what they were doing while they ate, what food groups were 
inclu ded in their meals, and how much they ate. It also asks subjects if they ate any food outside 
of their main meals, and then asks how many times they eat each type of food.  
 
Duration: 10 minutes.   
 
Action Plan Creation – Participants in the concurrent cohort  of the HEART pilot study will 
fill out the Action Plan Worksheet, the APA -10, and the APIS -5 as regularly scheduled for the 
main MINDFUL -PC study.  Participants in the alumni cohort of the HEART study will fill out 
the Action Plan Worksheet and the APA -10 at the end of HEART study Week 3. They will fill 
out the APIS -5 at the end of HEART study Weeks 4 and 5.   
 
Action Plan Creation Duration: 20 minutes  
 
43 
 Action Plan Initiation Survey Duration: 5 minutes  
 
Behavioral Tasks  
 
Participants will be asked to complete the Behavioral Tasks component during an in -person 
behavioral tasks session that takes place prior to Week 1 of the MINDFUL -PC study and then 
again between Weeks 8 and 9.  This behavioral tasks session will be schedul ed during the 
orientation session to the MINDFUL -PC and HEART studies. During this behavioral tasks 
session, participants will first download any required smartphone applications for activity 
tracking with the guidance of a research study staff member. The n, they will complete three 
behavioral tasks in the following order: the Heartbeat Detection Task (HBDT), 5 -Trial Adjusting 
Delay Hypothetical Discounting Task (HDT), and Sustained Attention to Response Task 
(SART). Each task is described in brief below.  Each task is described in further detail below:  
 
Heartbeat Detection Task (HBDT)  [Total time:  10 minutes] : Participants are asked to count 
their heartbeat during three varying time intervals (30s, 30s, 60s).  In parallel, individuals’ heart -
rate will be measured by Kardia Mobile technology. Participants will place their index and 
middle fingers of both hands on top of the Kardia Mobile device and will be instructed to count 
their heartbeat for a period of 30 or 60 seconds.  Participants will place their h ands on top of the 
Kardia Mobile device s and then will be  given instructions on how to count their heartbeat ( e.g. 
“We will have you complete this task three times at varying time intervals. When I say ‘begin’ I 
want you to try your best to detect and coun t your heart beat. When I say ‘stop’ please let me 
know how many times you think your heart beat during the time interval. Try your best.”).  The 
readings from this device are linked to the Kardia  Mobile App, which will be on a screen faced 
away from the participant [1]. Participant data stored in the Kardia Mobile app will be identified 
with the HEART Study participant ID, which will not be linked to any identifying information.  
The Kardia Mobile app will be installed onto an iPad that is kept within the research office.   Data 
from the  Kardia mobile app will be wireless written down by hand on a handout that is filed in 
the study binder a nd then entered by a study staff member  into the secure CHA REDC ap 
database once the behavioral tasks session has been completed .    
 
 
Figure 1: Kardia Mobile device and interface . Participants place two fingers on either side 
of the Kardia Mobile Device, which will then produce a live reading of their EKG** (Image 
taken from alivecor.com) [1].   
 
44 
  
  
 
**Although Kardia Mobile can be used 
as an FDA -approved EKG , in this study, 
we will not be conducting analysis on 
participants’ heart rhythms and will not be 
able to determine whether a participant’s 
heartbeat rhythm is irregular. This task 
does not, in any way, serve as a diagnostic 
test for heart disease or heart rhythm 
abnormalities.  If the r eading does register 
any heartrate abnormalities, such as 
arrhythmia, we will not inform the 
participant of the readings as the research 
staff are not trained to deliver healthcare 
related information. We will also not  
document any information about 
abnorm alities in the database. Only heartrate will be measured.  This will be clearly stated in the 
consent form.    
 
5-Trial Adjusting Delay Hypothetical Discounting Task (HDT)  [Total time :  5 minutes].  
This is a brief delay discounting task performed on a computer that assesses an individual’s 
impulsivity by presenting a series of 5 discrete choice questions between some amount of a 
delayed commodity (in this case, dollars) and half that amount available immediately (e.g. “Gain 
$1000 in 3 weeks or gain $500  now”).   Individuals choose whether they would rather receive a 
smaller amount of money now, or a larger amount in the future  This task will be run using a 
Python  script on a designated research study laptop which will be password -secured and stored 
in a double -locked cabinet in the CMC research office, only accessible by approved study staff.  
Participants will be identified by their HEART study Participant ID, and data will be transferred 
from this laptop to a CHA -secure research drive using secure CHA w ireless [2, 3] .     
 
Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART)  [Total time:  25 minutes] . Participants will 
complete a series of computerized tests focused on sustained attention, response inhibition, and 
self-regulation. They are asked to press a key in response to rapidly displayed integers (1 -9) and 
withhold a response to a designated “no -go” integer.   This task will be run using E -Prime 
software  on the password -protected study laptop.  Participants will be identified using their 
HEART study Participant ID and data will be transferred to a CHA -secure research drive using 
secure CHA wireless [4].     
 
 
These tasks will all be conducted in a quiet, closed, and gently lit room located at the Center for 
Mindfulness & Compassion (26 Central St, Somerville, MA 02143). Participants will sit on a 
chair with their feet flat on the floor, forearms on the table, a nd with the computer screen in front 
of them. The research staff member will explain each task to the participant before conducting 
the trial, and will provide a one -minute break between each task.  
 
 

 
45 
 C.3.f. 8. Provider Resilience Battery for PCP Participants:  
The Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI)  [61] is the primary scale for assessing burnout.  This 
study will use the original measure, MBI -Human Services Survey, a 22 -item scale created for 
professionals in the human services.  This scale examines th e perspective with which 
professionals view their occupation and the people they work with.  Items are rated on a 7 -point 
Likert scale from 0 ( never ) to 6 ( every day ).  An example item is: “I worry that this job is 
hardening me emotionally.” The survey con tains subscales for examining the factors of 
emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and personal accomplishment.  Scores are summed for 
each subscale, and indicate high, moderate, or low levels of the subscale factor (for example, 
high emotional exhausti on).  Scores are usually reported as an average rating for each subscale, 
rather than a total score. Duration: 4 min.     
 
The 31 -item Workplace Wellbeing Scale (WWS)  [62] measures workplace satisfaction and can 
be used to compare data across various catego ries such as gender and occupational level.  Items 
on this scale are evaluated as four subscales: work satisfaction, organizational respect for the 
employee, employer care, and intrusion of work into private life.  Summed items for each 
subscale generate a  numerical score that corresponds to low, medium, or high levels of each 
subscale (for example, low employer care is indicated by a score between 0 -7 for the employer 
care subscale).  The WWS includes questions such as “Does your work eat into your private  
life?”  Each item is scored on a 5 -point Likert scale from 0 ( Not at all ) to 4 ( Extremely ).  Positive 
questions are reverse scored. Duration: 4 min.  
 
The Jefferson Scale of Empathy (JSE)  [63] is a 20 -item scale that evaluates self -reported 
empathy among he alth care professionals.  This study will make use of the JSE HP -version for 
practicing health care professionals.  Items are scored on a 7 -point Likert scale from 1 ( Strongly 
Disagree ) to 7 ( Strongly Agree ).  An example item includes “I try to imagine mys elf in my 
patients’ shoes when providing care to them.” Duration: 5 min.  
 
C.3.f. 9. Weekly Mindfulness Practice Diary Card:  
The Weekly Mindfulness Practice Diary Card  will be completed for the week preceding its 
administration.  Carmody et al. [ 64] emphasize s that improvements in mindfulness, symptoms, 
and wellbeing are significantly related to formal and informal mindfulness practice.   This card 
asks participants to specify the type and duration of formal mindfulness techniques they 
completed each day for t he past week, as well as the type and frequency of informal techniques 
each day.  Formal mindfulness techniques include body scan, sitting meditation, loving kindness, 
and informal mindfulness practices include techniques like connecting with breath and mi ndful 
awareness of eating.  A participant’s total practice for the week will be calculated by study 
personnel, based on the information on the diary card that will collected by group leaders 
weekly.  This will also be completed by all patient participants,  despite their group assignment, 
during the Post -Treatment Survey Session at patient study week 8, as well as during the Follow -
up Survey Session, at patient study week 36.  Participants in the MTPC group will fill out the 
practice diary on a scantron sheet, and participants in the control group will fill out the practice 
diary on an online REDCap form.  Duration: 6 min. 
 
This card will be completed each week by PCP participants in Group 1 for study w eeks 1 -8, the 
mid-study survey session, Mindful Communication months 1 -10, and the post -study survey 
session.  PCP participants in Group 2 will complete this card for the week preceding the mid -
study survey session and the week preceding the post -study sur vey session.   
 
46 
  
Patient participants in the MTPC Group and in the Waitlist Group will complete the mindfulness 
practice diary card every week for patient study weeks 1 -8, throughout their MTPC training.  
Both groups of patient participants will complete th is card for the week preceding the post -
treatment survey session and the week preceding the follow -up survey session.  Participants in the 
concurrent cohort of the HEART pilot study will also complete this survey  for 1 week prior to 
MTPC Session 1  and for four weeks during  MINDFUL -PC study weeks  5 and 9 .   
 
C.3.f.10.  Mindfulness Resources Use Survey:  
The Mindfulness Resources Use Survey  is a 7-item weekly survey that asks  about the 
frequency of use of community or mobile mindfulness resources as listed on the Community 
Resources handout given to all patients during the orientation session.  This survey asks patients 
whether they have visited local mindfulness or meditation  centers in person, whether they have 
used mindfulness guided recordings or apps online, and whether they have read any mindfulness -
related books. It also asked about some related activities where people often practice mindfulness 
such as yoga, spiritual a ctivities, and places of worship.  A patient’s total mindfulness resource 
utilization will be calculated by study personnel weekly.  This survey will be completed by every 
study participant for Study weeks 1 -8, and during the Follow -Up Survey Session at patient study 
week 36.  Participants in the MTPC group will fill out the resources diary on a scantron sheet, 
and participants in the control  group will fill out the resources diary on an online REDCap form.    
Participants in the concurrent cohort of the HEART pilot study will also complete this survey 
for 1 week prior to MTPC Session 1 and for four weeks during  MINDFUL -PC study weeks  5 
through  9.  Duration:  5 min.   
 
C.3.f. 11. Reports from Electronic Medical Records for Patient Participants:  
The Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS)  [65] is used by Center for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services to provide incentive payments that are dependent on quality measures in 
health care.  This list includes several community and behavioral health outcomes for  PCPs to 
complete and document. Patient electronic medical records reports will be generated on a 
monthly basis by the executive office of the Chief Quality Officer at CHA for several specific 
data points for all patients for the month that they enter the study and again at one year after 
entrance into the study. The PQRS variables include documentation of patient alcohol use, body 
mass index (BMI), patient health questionnaire (PHQ -2), HgAlc, LDL -C, smoking cessation 
attempts, cigarettes per day, frequency  of meat eating, blood pressure,  risky sexual behaviors, 
quantity of prescribed opioids and sedatives, and illicit drug use. If the research personnel cannot 
find patient health outcome values for the previous year, they will contact the patient’s primary 
care provider via EPIC to encourage the provider to document the current relevant PQRS quality 
variables into the medical record prior to the start of the patient’s participation in the study. After 
study week 18, study staff will again send an EPIC note t o flag PCPs to remind them about 
entering their patients’ upcoming annual health quality variables into EPIC , which will be 
assessed around week 26 . Patients who were on the waitlist will be requested to have an 
appointment at PCP office to get PQRS data d ocumented prior to return to study for new group 
orientation.  
 
Patient responses to the Patient Health Questionnaire -2 (PHQ -2) during the course of standard 
primary care and the number of current psychotropic medications prescribed will be downloaded 
to the research database  from EPIC on a yearly basis for up to 3 years after the start of the study 
 
47 
 in order to assess for longitudinal effects on depressive mood and psychiatric symptoms among 
each group.  
 
Number of medical visits  will be collected though EPIC for each patient for the year before and 
the six months  after randomization. This will include a record of the  number of visits with the 
patient’s PCP, the  number of outpatient medical visits, the number of inpatient medical stays , 
and the number of visits to the emergency department (ED).  Chronic disease self -management 
programs have been shown to reduce patient visits to the ED [ 39]. In order to account for effects 
of recent health issues and seasonality, ED visits from the  past six months and the 7 -12 month 
period prior to study entry will both be used as covariates in the analysis.  
 
Patient no -show rates will also be collected through EPIC  as frequency counts from the year 
before and the six months  after randomization. Programs emphasizing patient activation and 
empowerment have been shown to increase  attendance to scheduled patient visits  [66].In order to 
account for effects of recent health issues and seasonality, attendance rates from the past six 
months and the 7 -12 month period prior to study entry will both be used as covariates in the 
analysis.  
 
Patient action plans , created by patients and providers at the PCP visit and reported in EPIC, 
will be reviewed and collected through EPIC.  Goal -setting exercises can be used to support 
chronic illness management [ 67]. Using these data, a member of the MINDFUL -PC research 
study team will compile a coded list of patients and their action plan goals.  
 
C.3.f. 12. Satisfaction Battery for Patient Participants:  
Patient participants will complete the MTPC Program Satisfaction Survey after 8 weeks of 
participation in the study.  This 1 8-item survey contains two parts. First is a series of 12 
questions scored on a 5 -point Likert scale from 1 ( Strongly Disagree /Poor ) to 5 ( Strongly 
Agree /Excellent ), with statements such as “I found this program helpful.”  Next is a series of six 
open -ended  questions in which patients enter a written response to statements including “The 
most important thing I learned during this program.”  Duration: 5 min.  
 
C.3.f.1 3. Adverse Events Reporting Battery for Patient s:  
The Adverse Event Patient Participant Self -Report Form  will be completed at the 8-week 
survey session and 6 -month survey session s.  This form asks that parameters be described for 
each AE.  The parameters are detailed below in D.2. 
 
C.3.f.1 4. Experimental fMRI pilot study  screening  battery:  
We will phone screen  interested MINDFUL -PC group participants for fMRI eligibility, using an 
fMRI screening phone interview, including items from the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory  
(EHI) [61]. This is a 10 -item standard measurement scale used to assess the dominance of a 
person's right or left hand in everyday activities. Left -handers have less lateralization of brain 
function and can confound fMRI studies.  
 
Further eligibility que stions are based on the Martinos Center Patient Screening Form. Questions 
are related to metal implants, pacemakers, aneurism clips and other implants and stimulators that 
might be unsafe for scanning. The form will also ask about pregnancy and breastfeedi ng, past 
severe head trauma, claustrophobia or other conditions that might exclude them from 
participating in the fMRI study. We will also screen for vascular disease in the legs, such as 
 
48 
 peripheral vascular disease, lymphedema, and varicose veins, in orde r to exclude those for whom 
the cuff pain task may not be safe. The fMRI  screening form will be assessed during the phone 
call. The duration of the phone screening is 10 minutes total. The Martinos Center Screening 
Form will be acquired again before each s can session, and this will take 3 -5 minutes.   
 
We will conduct saliva toxicology  for alcohol and illicit drugs at the Martinos Center before 
each MRI session. Duration 5 min.  
 
In case a woman is not on contraception and has doubts about current pregnancy status, she will 
be given the option to conduct a urine pregnancy screen  before each MRI session. Duration 5 
min. 
 
We will conduct fMRI neuroimaging before and after the MTPC group. Each session will also  
include autonomic monitoring of heart rate, breathi ng rate, and skin conductance. Duration 90  
min. 
 
fMRI questionnaire :  Patients  who undergo fMRI neuroimaging  will be asked to complete a set 
of fMRI questions that ask about fatigue, concentration, and presence of pain before and after the 
pain cuff task (Duration:  5min).    
 
C.3.g. Instructor Experience, Fidelity, and Supervision : 
 
We have developed a detailed plan for training, monitoring and supervising staff that will deliver 
the intensive behavioral training interventions, as well as for maintaining adherence to protocol.    
All MT PC groups will be conducted by clinicians with at  least a master’s degree and successful 
completion of the MTPC training program (described below in section C.4.) Participant -
observers will be CHA primary care staff, CHA mental health clinicians, CHA mental health 
care partners , or CHA trainees .  MTPC gr oups , MTPC group leaders, and MTPC participant -
observers  will be supervised by the CMC clinical medical director (Todd Griswold, MD), and 
the intervention fidelity will be reviewed by the principal investigator (Zev Schuman -Olivier, 
MD) and expert MBSR tea cher trainers, Zayda Vallejo and Elana Rosenbaum. Group Leader s 
will be invited to participate in weekly group supervision by web conferencing with Zayda and 
Elana  while they are leading groups. MTPC sessions will be audio -recorded in order to rate 
fidelity  (measured as competence  and adherence ) to the manual, as well as to provide feedback 
to MTPC Group Leader s to prevent therapist drift.  At the end of each MTPC s ession, group 
leaders will fill out a survey of content covered in each MTPC session, rating each other for 
coverage of content.  Group Leaders will review these surveys during supervision .  A treatment 
satisfaction survey will be given at the end of group  session #8 to assess for patient impressions 
of the treatment experience and the group leader’s qualities, and these will be reviewed by the 
Research Coordinator and project manager  after the end of each group. If a group leader has 
below average scores, then the principal investigator will be notified in order to take appropriate 
corrective measures.  
 
C.3.h. Participant Withdrawal/Termination Criteria:  
Withdrawal/Termination criteria for Patient Participants:  
Participants may be discontinued from study tr eatment and assessments at any time.  Specific 
reasons for discontinuing a patient participant from this study are:  
 
49 
 1. Voluntary discontinuation by the participant who is at any time free to discontinue his or her 
participation in the study, without prejud ice to further treatment  
2. Safety reasons as judged by the investigator  
3. Severe non -compliance to protocol as judged by the investigator  
4. Incorrect enrollment (i.e., the participant does not meet the required inclusion/exclusion 
criteria) of the par ticipant  
5. Participant lost to follow -up 
6. Revealing private information about the study  
7. Active substance use disorder or intoxication during study procedures  
8. English proficiency below a 7th grade reading level  
 
Withdrawal/Termination criteria for PCP Participants:  
Participants may be discontinued from study treatment and assessments at any time.  Specific 
reasons for discontinuing a PCP participant from this study are:  
1. Voluntary discontinuation by the participant who is at any time free to disco ntinue his or her 
participation in the study, without effect on the relationship with CHA  
2. Safety reasons as judged by the investigator  
3. Severe non -compliance to protocol as judged by the investigator  
4. Incorrect enrol lment (i.e., the participant do es not meet the required inclusion/exclusion 
criteria) of the participant  
5. Participant lost to follow -up 
6. Revealing private information about the study  
7. Active substance use disorder or intoxication during study procedures  
8. PCP withdraws from pract ice at a CHA PCMH  
 
Participants who discontinue will be asked about the reason(s) for their discontinuation and the 
presence of any adverse events.  If possible, they will be seen and assessed by the Principal 
Investigator.  Serious and Unexpected Adverse events will be followed up.  
 
If participants enrolled in MTPC groups are terminated from group treatment for any reason 
(except incorrect enrollment or safety concerns that endanger the study team), then they will still 
be expected to complete their outcom e assessments, unless the participant revokes informed 
consent.   
 
C.4. Implementation plan:  
 
C.4.a. MTPC Group Leader  Training ( See Figure 2 below ): 
As explained above, this study with 2 x 2 factorial design involves both PCPs and patients as 
study participants.  In addition, CHA behavioral health specialists will receive training during the 
course of this study to become MTPC group leaders who will pr ovide MTPC groups for patient 
participants. PCMH behavioral health specialists will concurrently attend the 2.5 -hr MBSR 
group with PCPs (Group 1a), and will also attend an additional 30 -60 minute long educational 
practicum each week.  After the conclusion of the 8 -week MBSR course, behavioral health 
specialists will receive an additional 32 hours of training over two weekends to become staff 
MTPC group leaders.  For the first year following their certification, these MTPC group leaders 
will receive weekly g roup supervision led by senior mindfulness teachers with supervision from 
the medical director of the Center for Mindfulness and Compassion who is a board -certified 
psychiatrist.  
 
50 
 Figure 2 . Timeline for proposed training activities for PCP participants  
PCP Training   
Medicine 
Grand 
Rounds   Phase 1a: MBSR 
training   Phase 1b:   Phase 2: Mindful Communication  
Primary care 
providers  8 MBSR 
sessions 
(2.5 hours 
each) for 
Group 1a  MBSR 
all-day 
retreat  Weekend 
retreat for 
Group 1b  Monthly meetings for 10 months  
(2.5 hours each)  
Group Leader  
Training  
Psychiatry 
Grand 
Rounds  Phase 1: MBSR with 
PCPs   Phase 2:  
Group Leader  training  Phase 3: 
Supervision  
Behavioral health 
clinicians  8 MBSR 
sessions + 
practicum  
(3.5 hrs 
each)  MBSR 
all-day 
retreat  Weekend 
Retreat 1 
(16 hrs)  
Jan 2015  Weekend 
Retreat 2 
(16 hrs) 
Feb 2015  Weekly 
Group MTPC 
Group 
Leader  
Supervision  
(9 months, 
1.5 
hrs/week)  
         
Timeline:   10/1/2014   10/22/2014 - 
12/17/2014   1/9/2015 -
1/11/2015   1/16/2015 - 12/16/2015  
 
C.4.b. Current Implementation Staging Map:  
 
Each primary care region will be assigned a hub based on space and staffing considerations. 
During training, primary care provider champions and behavioral care leaders will be identified 
within each regional primary ca re region to support recruitment and implementation at sites in 
their region. This program aims to begin patient enrollment in September  2015 at 2 regional hub 
primary care centers with groups starting around October 2015.  After this first round of groups  
are completed, we will review the process to evaluate for improvements prior to a second round 
of groups. Additional health center group space will likely become available in  late 2015 to add 
two additional centers as group sites, as well as the potential  use of CHA hospital group rooms to 
provide MTPC groups, bringing the total to 6 PCMHs with on -site groups. We will begin 
recruitment for groups that meet the needs of cultural and linguistically diverse communities 
with several different groups for LEP pa tients starting in  late 2016.  We plan to offer MTPC 
groups in Spanish and Portuguese by early Fall 2016.  Planning for a third implementation step 
will await development of space and a further roll -out in integration of mental health into the 
patient -centered medical homes in order to expand to the full set of sites.   
 
The PCMHs included in the project will be: Cambridge [Cambridge Family Health, Cambridge 
Family Health North, East Cambridge Health Center, Windsor Street Health Center], Somerville 
[Broadw ay Health Center, Union Square Family Health, and Somerville  Hospital  Primary Care], 
MCREW [Everett Family Health Center, Revere Family Health Center, Malden Family 
Medicine Center]. Hub centers for the initial rollout are noted with asterisks. All impleme ntation 
plans are still in flux and represent our best estimation for the implementation; however, 
decisions will continue to be made in ongoing collaboration with Lynn Budlong, VP for 
ambulatory operations and primary care, as well as the team leading the  primary care behavioral 
health integration  (including  Christine C laypool, Emily Benedetto, Colleen O’Brien, and Bob 
Joseph ).  
 
Table 4. MTPC Implementation Schedule  
 
Location  Estimated Start Month  
 
51 
 First PCMH Step ( Somerville Hospital Primary 
Care and Malden Family Medicine Center ) October 2015  
Second PCMH Step (2 -4 additional Centers ) June 2016  
MTPC Groups in Portuguese and Spanish  September  2016  
Third PCMH Step (3 Final Centers)  
(And continuing to add language -specific 
patient groups)  Awaiting development of space 
and roll -out of mental health 
integration into primary care  
 
C.5. Data management and analysis:  
 
C.5.a. Data management:  
Research data will be obtained expressly for research purposes and will be in the form of 
responses to questionnaires and assessment tools.  Signed informed consent forms, and informed 
consent assessments will be stored in a double -locked filing cabinet at the Center for 
Mindfulness and Compassion.  Only IRB approved research team members will have access to  
this filing cabinet.  All other s tudy data will be collected and managed using REDCap electronic 
data capture tools hosted at The Cambridge Health Alliance [ 68].  REDCap (Research Electronic 
Data Capture) is a secure, HIPAA compliant, web -based application  designed to support data 
capture for research studies.  This platform provides the following elements: 1) an intuitive 
interface for validated data entry; 2) audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export 
procedures; 3) automated export procedures  for seamless data downloads to common statistical 
packages; and 4) procedures for importing data from external sources. The REDCap software 
was developed by Vanderbilt University and has been obtained and installed for usage at the 
Cambridge Health Allian ce.  
 
Patient level and clinician level data for this study will be stored electronically in the REDCap 
platform. Only IRB approved research team members will have access to the REDCap data 
platform. Each team member will be granted access to the REDCap da ta system through a secure 
login.  
 
C.5.b. Data Analysis:  
 
We will use SAS 9.3 to conduct analyses for each of the specific goals or hypotheses associated 
with the study’s primary aims:  
 
1. Implementation Goal : Our implementation goals are a) to implement at least two MTPC 
groups in at least 8 CHA primary care sites within two years, b) to train at least 25 
Primary care providers in Mindful Communication, c) to enroll a socioeconomically -
diverse population of p atients, and d) to enroll a culturally -diverse population of patients 
with at least 30% of patients completing the program being non -Caucasian or having a 
primary language other than English.   
 
We will examine descriptive statistics for each of the stated  implementation goals.  
 
2. PCP -Patient Relationship Hypothesis : We hypothesize greater satisfaction with the PCP -
patient relationship among patients with the combination of provider and patient 
mindfulness training compared with only one or neither training t ypes.  
 
52 
  
Mixed Effects Modeling  to evaluate for main effects of PCP mindfulness training and main 
effects of Patient training level (1 hour vs. 8 week) for each survey, as well as the interaction 
effect with relevant covariates.    
 
3. Health Outcomes Hypotheses : We hypothesize reductions in depression, anxiety and 
stress as a main effect of MTPC. Finally, we hypothesize reductions in use of 
medications prescribed for symptom reduction (benzodiazepines, opioids, etc.), overall 
improvement in markers of health maintenance and chronic illness management (i.e. 
PQRS data).  We hypothesize the highest levels of initiation and maintenance of self -
management action plans among MTPC group with Mindfulness -trained providers.  
 
Mixed Effects Modeling to evaluate for  main effects of PCP mindfulness training, main effects 
of Patient training level (1 hour vs. 8 week) for each outcome, as well as the interaction effect 
with relevant covariates.       
 
4. Provider Resilience Hypothesis : We hypothesize greater workplace well -being, reduced 
experience of burnout, and increased resiliency among providers as a main effect of 
provider MBSR + Mindful Communication training.  
 
We will use Mixed Effects Modeling to evaluate for main effects of PCP mindfulness training 
and time for ea ch survey and the interaction of the two.    
 
5. Medical Regimen Adherence Hypotheses: We hypothesize a main effect of MTPC group  
status on levels of initiation and maintenance of medical regimen health behavior change , 
as measured by the APIS -5 self -report score . The highest levels will be demonstrated 
among the MTPC group participants with mindfulness -trained providers. We hypothesize 
that total formal mindfulness practice, post -study total mindfulness score, baseline 
mindful non -judgment score, and self -compassion will be associated with successful 
initiation and maint enance of action plans.  Action plan initiation will be validated by 
increases in step count, and increases in number of active periods, changes in sleep, 
changes in mindfulness practice, and changes in nutritional habits.  
 
Using an intent -to-treat analysis, we will use logistic regression and Mixed Effects Modeling  to 
evaluate for main effects of MTPC, mindfulness -trained PCPS, and the interaction of the two on 
binary and continuous ratings of level of action plan initiation and maintenance. We will conduct 
exploratory linear regression models of post -study mindfulness and self -compassion and overall 
practice dose as independent variables with level of action plan initiation and maintenance as 
dependent variables.  
 
The experimental fMRI pilot analyses methods are described below.  
 
6. Self-Regulation Mechanisms Hypotheses: In 4 different fMRI tasks, we hypothesize (a) 
greater activation of ACC and OFC and decreased activation in the 
amygdala/hippocam pus after MTPC intervention compared to before intervention (i.e, a 
pre/post increase) in an emotional Go/NoGo inhibitory control task , as in Perez 2016  
[69], using validated emotional pictures (International Affective Pictures System, IAPS, 
[70]).The task includes 448 IAPS pictures (50% neutral and 50% unpleasant), which will 
 
53 
 be presented briefly (1.5 seconds), while participants either react (Go) or withold a button 
press reaction (NoGo), depending on abstract symbols presented on top of the pi ctures; 
(b) greater activation of mid-posterior insula after (compared to before) MTPC in a self -
compassi on task (that contrasts a self -reassurance condition with a self -criticism 
condition), as in Longe 2010 [ 71]; (c) greater insula activation during an in teroceptive 
attention task (that contrasts an interoceptive attention condition with an exteroceptive 
attention condition) as in Farb 2013[ 72], and d) increases in the rostral ACC (rACC) and 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) during the anticipation of pain  after compared 
to before MTPC and increased activation in the lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) and 
somatosensory areas during pain  after compared to before the MTPC, as in Kim 2013 
[73]. We hypothesize that all inhibitory control and interoceptive targ ets will be 
associated with higher levels of initiation of regimen adherence, while self -compassion , 
emot ion/pain regulation, and interoceptive targets will be associated with higher levels of 
regimen maintenance.  
 
We will follow current recommended method s for fMRI data analysis [ 74,75], especially in  the 
case of longitudinal data [ 76-82]. Our approach is based on a priori regions -of-interest (ROI),  a 
method more statistically powerful than whole -brain analyses since it limits the number of 
statistical tests to the voxels included in the ROI and thereby reduces Type I errors [ 83, 84]. 
Another advantage of using a ROI -based approach is that it enables precise spatial  
correspondence of the region of interest across subjects, since it does not involve normalizing 
different brains to a common atlas [87]. In this study, our ROIs are the following: OFC and 
amygdala/hippocampus  (in the emotional Go/NoGo task ), the mid -to-posterior section of the 
insula (in the self -compassion task, and emotion/pain regulation task), the anterior insula (in the 
interoceptive attention task) the DLPFC and rACC/vmPFC in the emotion/pain regulation task  
and Go/NoGo task . 
 
The fMRI data will be a nalyzed using the following standard software packages: FSL [ 85, 86], 
FreeSurfer [ 87-90], AFNI [ 91, 92], and RETROICOR [ 93] for retrospective correction of 
physiological motion artifacts using our peripheral measures of cardiac and respiratory activity 
as independent assessments of physiological noise in the blood oxygen level -dependent (BOLD) 
signal.  Following standard preprocessing steps (de -warping, slice timing correction, motion 
correction, removal of physiological noise signals), the statistical analy sis of brain activation data 
will be performed using a linear mixed effects (LME) model, following recent recommendations 
for longitudinal fMRI analysis [ 76, 79, 80]. This approach is implemented in the AFNI software  
package with the group analysis program 3dLME [ 80]. This program will be used to solve the  
LME system (via built -in optimization procedures) and test our hypotheses. Of note, the LME  
approach is more general than the commonly -used General Linear Model (GLM), AN(C)OVA, 
regression, and t-tests, while including those as special cases. The LME approach is  
recommended for longitudinal fMRI data analysis because it includes in the model the  
covariance structure of serial measurements performed in the same subject, whereas the  
commonly -used GLM model assumes that there is no such correlation, which is incorrect in the  
case of longitudinal data [ 80]. In addition, the LME framework can offer superior statistical  
power in detecting longitudinal group differences  [79, 80]. 
 
Self-Regulation hypothesis testing for the fMRI data will be performed as follows. For each of 
the 4 fMRI tasks, we will use a Linear Mixed Effects model of the BOLD signal in the ROIs 
associated with that task (described above), with 2 time points (pre - and post -intervention). The 
 
54 
 model will include the following regressors of interest: gender, age, and the following pre -
intervention scores: depression (PROMIS -DSF), anxiety (PROMIS -ASF), self -compassion 
(SCS -SF), and mindfulness (FFMQ); and the following r egressors of no interest: head motion 
parameters and cardiac and respiratory components of physiological noise. Hypothesis will be 
expressed as: Is there any significant difference between the 2 time points in the task -specific 
ROI activation during a) NoG o trials versus Go trials, b) self -reassurance versus self -criticism, c) 
Interoception -versus -Exteroception, and d) expectation of pain and pain versus rest. The null 
hypothesis will be that the ROI activation at the 2 time points are not significantly dif ferent. 
Significance testing will be done using permutation/bootstrapping methods (see [ 79, 80]). 
 
1. HEART pilot study analysis plan: The HEART pilot study aims to recruit 40 participants 
in the alumni cohort and 30  participants (10 -20 in the waitlist arm and 20 -40 in the 
intervention arm) in the concurrent cohort  for a total of 70 participants . The data would 
be examined for correlations between the action plan initiation 7 -item survey and pre -
post differences in ste p count, the number of active periods, changes in sleep duration, 
changes in mindfulness practice, and change in nutritional habits depending on which 
action plan goal was specified in the patient action plan. We will also examine the 
percentage of action plan initiation events >5 on the APIS -5 that have a corresponding 
behavioral change evidenced in the daily data collection. Finally, we will also examine 
whether the activity changes are greater in the participants who selected exercise as 
compared to thos e who selected nutrition or dietary changes and vice versa.  
 
C.5.c. Sample Size calculations:  
Using an intent -to-treat analysis with 290 patients receiving mindfulness training and 144  
patients with orientation only, there will be an 80% chance of detectin g a significant difference at  
a two -sided 0.05 significance level. This assumes that the rate of action plan initiation is 0.54 in  
orientation only (based on Guck et. al. [70]) and the rate of action plan initiation among patients  
who receive mindfulness t raining is 0.68 (based on rates of initiation and maintenance of  
meditation practice in previous pilot MBIs [ 94]). After the first twenty participants complete the  
program, an interim analysis of these pilot data may be used to refine the sample size calcul ation  
for RCT.  
 
D. Human Subjects Procedures and Confidentiality  
 
D.1. Confidentiality:  
 
D.1.a. Protection of Subject Privacy:  
All of the materials collected are for research purposes only, and data will be kept in strict 
confidence. No information will be given to anyone without permission from the subject. 
Confidentiality will be ensured by use of identification codes. All data will be identified with a 
unique numeric identification code and an acrostic that are unique to the subject. Any data 
collected before a participant discontinues the study is available for use in this research project.   
 
All research session data will be collected using standardized electronic forms on designed using 
the REDCap database hosted by Cambridge Health Alliance. REDCap (Research Electronic Data 
Capture) is a secure, web -based application designed to support data capture for research studies, 
providing an intuitive interface for validated data entry and export procedures to common 
statistical packages.  All data management will be conducted by the research team operating 
 
55 
 from CHA.  All data collection will take place under the supervision of the D r. Schuman -Olivier 
and the Data Manager. Data will only be collected by members of the research team.  
 
The name, birthday, and MRN will be entered into an initial REDCap database strictly for the 
purpose of screening and consent process. The list linking a ny personal identifying information 
with the participant’s study number and acrostic will be kept in a encrypted computer file on a 
confidential shared drive.  A unique numeric identifier and acrostic will be created for all 
participants who have completed  an informed consent and this list will be kept in a password -
protected file by the principal investigator.  All data will be linked to these identifiers and no 
direct patient identifiers will be transmitted from REDCap to SAS 9.3 for analysis.  
 
All furth er study data from survey sessions will be collected in a second REDCap database, 
which will reference this unique numeric identifier and acrostic. MTPC home practice data will 
be recorded on scantron forms, which will be scanned into a password -protected,  secure Excel 
database.  
 
Through collaboration with the CHA Quality Office and CHA information technology, we will 
generate medical record reports for participants who are in our study and this information will 
remain protected within the CHA system, and will not include any study data except name, 
MRN, and birthday.  
 
fMRI data will be collected using the same unique numeric identifier and acrostic used for the 
MINDFUL -PC study, and will be maintained on a secure database server at the collaborating 
neuroi maging site (Martinos Center). Thus, only coded data will be stored on the database of the 
collaborating site. fMRI data analysis will take place at the Martinos Center. The exception is the 
addition of the patient’s year of birth to the fMRI data. This is  necessary in case a radiologist has 
to review the brain scans for potential incidental findings (compare 
https://www.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/martinos/userInfo/safety/training_manual_082305.pdf). fMRI 
data analysis will require controlling for certain values, which will have been collected during 
the main study assessment visits (i.e., gender, age, pre -intervention levels of depression, anxiety, 
self-compassion, and mindfulness). Further, behavioral intervention results (e.g. initiation of 
regimen adherence and  regimen maintenance) will be correlated with activation in hypothesized 
brain regions. These analyses don’t require a full integration of fMRI data with the study file. 
The relevant data from the main study file will be  communicated via REDCap between the  two 
institutions , and the data will be integrated, using the MINDFUL -PC unique numeric identifier 
and acrostic. Data from the drug screenings and pregnancy test will not be added to participants’ 
health records, and will only be retained in the participan ts' research records (REDCap database 
with unique numeric identifier and acrostic). We will apply for a Certificate of Confidentiality 
with the NIH to protect this data from being disclosed in any civil, criminal, administrative, 
legislative or other proce eding.  
 
HEART pilot study data will be collected using a Participant ID (numeric identifier and acrostic) 
that is unique to the HEART pilot study.  This Participant ID will be used for all smartphone 
applications  and any other data tracking related to the HEART pilot study.  The linking 
document specifying the link between the Participant ID and the identities of the participants will 
be kept confidential and will be stored in a password -protected file on a secure CHA drive, only 
accessible by IRB -approved study staff.   
 
 
56 
 Because the data collected from the Argus app is not relating to sensitive information such as 
illegal activity or addiction, we determined it is not necessary to  require  secure Wi-Fi options for 
participants  throughout the study . However, we will inform participants about the risks of using 
unsecure Wi-Fi and encourage  them  to use only secure Wi-Fi while using the smartphone a pp.  
 
The study st aff will notify the IRB if there is a need to have communication with the device or 
application manufacturers. While all smartphones have GPS capability , the research team will 
not be accessing any information related to current patient location that can be accessed through 
the GPS dat a. Similarly, while the photo function will be used to ta ke pictures of food, the 
research team and the smartphone application will not be accessing any photos in the 
participant’s photo album. The orientation protocol will show participants how to disable the 
smartphone’s application ’s access to  GPS, the partic ipant’s photo album , and to manage updates 
and push notifications.  The study  team  will limit its use of data to only specified data points as 
outlined in the HEART study survey battery.  
 
Data collected from the Kardia Mobile App will be written down by hand on a handout that is 
filed in the study binder which is locked in a double -locked cabinet and then entered  into the 
secure CHA REDC ap database by a member of the study staff .    
 
  
Each participant will be given a HEART -study -specific  study number, which will be used as an 
identifier in the Kardia Mobile app , the SART task, and the hypothetical discounting task (HDT).  
Therefore, the software developers will not have access to any identifiable data about any of the 
participants.   
 
The SART task and HDT task will be done on a study laptop that is password secured and kept 
in a double -locked cabinet in the research office, accessible only by staff who have been IRB 
approved on the study. The data collected will be kept in an additional p assword protected file 
during retrieval and then transferred to a secure CHA drive after each study session is complete.  
 
 
D.1.b. Database Protection:  
Subject informed consent, screening forms, scantron sheets, and MTPC course documents will 
be stored in locked file cabinets within a locked office at Cambridge Health Alliance.  
 
The REDCap electronic database will be secured with password protection on s ecure CHA 
servers. Data analysts will receive only coded information that is entered into the database under 
those identification numbers.  
 
The data associated with the smartphone application, wristband tracker, and online surveys of the 
HEART pilot study will be stored only using the HEART study Participant ID in password -
protected files saved on a secure CHA drive , or on the secure REDCap database.   These coded  
data will be access ible to the associated smartphone application and wristband manufacturers, 
but these data will not be linked to participant identities. These data will be linked to the unique 
Participant ID and will not contain any identifying information.   
 
 
57 
 Access to id entifiable data will be limited to researchers directly involved in the study. All 
identifiable data will be destroyed 5 years after study completion and will not be maintained for 
future uses not specified in this research plan.  
 
D.1.c . Minimization:  
The risk of loss of confidentiality is judged to be minimal. Confidentiality will be maintained by 
numerically coding all data, disguising identifying information, and by keeping all data in the 
secure REDCap application. Any coded or de -identified data will  be maintained in password -
protected databases. Subject information will be accessible only to study staff. Information about 
study participants will not leave our institution in any form that would identify individual 
subjects. Data will be transmitted to  SAS in a pooled form with subjects identified only by 
numeric code and acrostic. In addition, we will ask group participants to agree to a group 
confidentiality agreement.  This agreement would require that information shared within the 
group remain solel y within the group. PCP information would not be shared and there would not 
be responsibility for the PI to report this to CHA management.  
 
D.1.d. Confidentiality During Adverse Event (AE) Reporting  
AE reports and annual summaries will not include subject - or group -identifiable material. Each 
report will only include the unique MINDFUL -PC numeric identifier and acrostic.   
 
D.2. Monitoring and Quality Assurance:  
Following NCCIH request, a detailed Dat a and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) was designed 
and an Independent Monitor was assigned. Please see appendix at the end of this document. 
Adverse event reporting guidelines are detailed in the DSMP and copied below.  
 
D.2.a. Definition:  
An adverse event (A E) is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject during participation in 
the clinical study. An adverse finding can include a sign, symptom, abnormal assessment (from 
vital signs or brain imaging), or any combination of these.  
A serious adverse event (SA E) is any AE that results in one or more of the following outcomes:  
Death  
A life -threatening event  
Inpatient hospitalization  
A persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
A congenital anomaly or birth defect  
An important medical event based upon appropriate medical judgment.  
D.2.b. Classification of AE Severity:  
AEs will be labeled according to severity, which is based on their impact on the patient. An AE 
will be termed “mild” if it does not have a major impact on the patient, “moderate” if it ca uses 
the patient some minor inconvenience, and “severe” if it causes a substantial disruption to the 
patient’s well -being. Of note, a severe AE and a serious adverse event (SAE) are distinct terms. 
A subject could experience a severe AE that does not meet the above -listed definition of an SAE; 
alternatively, a subject could experience a moderate AE that meets the SAE definition.  
 
58 
 D.2.c. AE Attribution Scale:  
AEs will be categorized according to the likelihood that they are related to the study intervention . 
Specifically, they will be labeled definitely unrelated, probably related, possibly related, or 
definitely related to the study intervention.  
D.2.c.1. AE Reporting and Follow -up: 
This study will comply with the reporting requirements from the Cambridge H ealth Alliance 
IRB. The PI will report to the IRB, Independent Monitor, and NCCIH any of the following 
unanticipated problems and adverse events that occur 1) during the conduct of the study, 2) after 
study completion, or 3) after subject withdrawal or com pletion:  
1. Internal adverse events that are unexpected, and related or possibly related to the 
research and that indicate there are new or increased risks to subjects;  
2. External adverse events that are serious , unexpected , and related or possibly related 
to the research and that indicate there are new or increased risks to subjects that 
require some action (e.g., modification of the protocol, consent process, or informing 
subjects);  
3. Deviation from the approved research protocol or plan wit hout IRB approval in order 
to eliminate apparent immediate hazard to subjects or harm to others;  
4. Deviation from the approved research protocol or plan that placed subjects or others 
at an increased risk of harm regardless of whether there was actual harm t o subjects 
or others;  
5. Any event that requires prompt reporting according to the research protocol or 
investigational plan or the sponsor;  
6. Breach of confidentiality or violation of HIPAA (e.g., lost or stolen laptop);  
7. Procedural error regardless of whether subjects experienced any harm;  
8. Interim analysis, safety monitoring report, publication in a peer -reviewed journal, or 
other finding that indicates that there are new or increased risks to subjects or others 
or that subjects are less likely to receive any d irect benefits from the research;  
9. Complaint by/on behalf of a research subject that indicates that the rights, welfare, or 
safety of the subject have been adversely affected or that cannot be resolved by the 
investigator;  
10. Incarceration of a research subjec t during participation in this study (which is not 
currently approved for involvement of prisoners as subjects);  
11. Noncompliance with applicable regulations or requirements or determinations of the 
IRB identified by the research team or others that indicates  that the rights, welfare, or 
safety of subjects have been adversely affected;  
12. Suspension or termination of the research, in whole or in part, based on information 
that indicates that the research places subjects at an increased risk of harm than 
previously known or recognized;  
13. Suspension or disqualification of an investigator by the sponsor, or others;  
14. Scientific misconduct ; or 
15. Any other problem that indicates that the research places subjects or others at an 
increased risk of harm or otherwise ad versely affect the rights, welfare or safety of 
subjects or others.  
 
 
59 
 D.2.c.2. Procedures for collecting and reporting unanticipated problems:  
All unanticipated problems (including AEs) will be collected by the PI or other study staff on an 
AE Tracking Log form, at the following time points: Baseline session, fMRI session (if 
applicable), on a weekly basis during the intervention (8 weeks), at post study session and at 
follow -up session, and additionally on an ad -hoc basis.  
Reports of unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others will be submitted to the 
IRB, IM and NCCIH within 5 working days/7 calendar days of the date the investigator first 
becomes aware of the problem.  
 
D.2.c.3. Reporting Unanticipated Problems that are Adverse Events:  
Any unanticipated untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence, including abnormal sign, 
symptom, or disease, that indicates that the research places subjects at increased risk of physical 
or psychological harm than previously known or recognized will be submitt ed as an AE to the 
IRB, IM, and NCCIH. The PI will provide the following information in the report:  
(1) a detailed description of the adverse event;  
(2) the basis for determining that the event is unexpected in nature, severity, or frequency;  
(3) the basis  for determining that the event is related or possibly related to the research 
procedures;  
(4) the basis for determining that the research places subjects at an increased risk of harm (i.e., a 
serious adverse event); and  
(5) whether any changes to the rese arch or other corrective actions are warranted.  
D.2.c.4. Reporting Unanticipated Problems that are not Adverse Events:  
All other unanticipated problems incidents, experiences, information, outcomes, or other 
problems that indicate that the research places subjects at an increased risk of physical, 
psychological, economic, legal, or social harm than was previously known or recognized will be 
submitted as an Other Event to the IRB. The investigator will provide the following information 
in the report:  
(1) a detailed description of the unanticipated problem;  
(2) the basis for determining that the problem is unexpected;  
(3) the  basis for determining that the problem indicates that the research places subjects at an 
increased risk of harm; and  
(4) whether any changes to the research or other corrective action are warranted.  
D.2.c.5. SAE Reporting:  
SAEs that are unanticipated, serious, and possibly related to the study intervention will be 
reported to the IRB, IM, and NCCIH in accordance with requirements.   
Unexpected fatal or life -threatening AEs related to the intervention will be reported to the 
NCCIH Program Officer within 7 days. Other serious and unexpected AEs related to the 
intervention will be reported to the NCCIH Program Official within 15 days.  
Anticipated or unrelated SAEs will be handled in a less urgent manner but will be reported to t he 
IRB, IM, and NCCIH in accordance with their requirements. In the annual AE summary, the IM 
Report will state that she has reviewed all AE and SAE reports.  
  
D.2.c.6. Monitoring and Quality Assurance:  
 
60 
 The PI and data manager will review data collection,  data completeness and accuracy as well as 
protocol compliance on a monthly basis. Study progress and safety will be reviewed monthly 
(and more frequently if needed). Progress reports, including patient recruitment, 
retention/attrition, and AEs, will be pr ovided to the Independent Monitor following each of the 
monthly reviews (see DSMP for details).  
 
D.2.c.7. Possible Risk of Suicide:  
This study will not be evaluating suicidality.  Surveys will not ask patients or PCPs about their 
thoughts of suicide, and n o data will be collected about suicidality for patients or PCPs.   
 
Behavioral care providers will evaluate potential patient participants for suicidality in a pre -
screen prior to participation in the study.  If imminent risk of suicide or danger to self o r others is 
evidenced during a screening evaluation, then the patient will be excluded from participation and 
will be referred to the emergency room or the appropriate level of care.  The PI, Zev Schuman -
Olivier, and the CMC medical director, Todd Griswold , will be contacted by page to help with 
clinical management.  
 
If a participant describes feelings of suicidality while participating in a group, the licensed 
mental health clinician present during the group will help to manage this event with the current  
standard of care, and will make immediate contact with the CMC medical director, Todd 
Griswold, and the PI, Zev Schuman -Olivier.  The participant will be referred to the emergency 
room or the appropriate level of care.  
 
We will not ask any CHA staff membe rs or PCP participants about suicidality.  However, if 
during a group, any PCPs express any kind of imminent risk to self or others or any concern that 
might affect their capacity to work, the PI, Zev Schuman -Olivier, will be present to manage this 
event. In this case, the PI would refer a PCP to the EAP or the Physician Health Services if there 
was evidence of risk of imminent patient harm or neglect.     
 
D.2.c.8. Adverse Events Communication with non -English speaking participants:  
The CHA website has the  ability to translate all pages into any language, so that any non -English 
speaking participant can read it. The CMC website will list the name of a point person for each 
language that the MINDFUL -PC program has the capacity to provide services.  Patients will be 
able to look up a point person, who is a mental health clinician fluent in each language for which 
mindfulness services will be offered.  The language point persons within CMC will be included 
as a contact on the informed consent in that language.  Point persons will be associated with the 
CMC and the MINDFUL -PC implementation project, and will be able to contact the Research 
Coordinator, who can then arrange for an interpreter to help provide services to the patient.  
 
D.2.d. Expected Risks:  
 
D.2.d. 1. Risks to Patients and PCP Participants:  
1.  Time spent learning mindfulness techniques  
 
2.  Increased anxiety due to difficulties in mental training program  
 
Mindfulness practices can sometimes cause anxiety for those who practice.  Support from the 
Group Leader and the group can help participants recognize that this anxiety is part of the 
 
61 
 process, and can help people learn to manage these feelings. If meditation and mental exercises 
are causing a worsening of anxiety for participants, they will be encou raged within groups to 
change their approach to the practice. If they are unable to find a way to practice without 
eliciting an increase in symptoms, then they may be asked to stop practicing and to meet with 
either the CMC medical director or the principa l investigator for an evaluation. The participant 
may ultimately be terminated from the study if they are experiencing an adverse reaction. These 
participants may continue to receive other treatments at CHA as part of their ongoing treatment 
plan.    
 
In some very rare cases, meditation practice can lead to a dissociative state or to psychosis[95].  
This is more likely in participants with current conditions of or a predisposition to psychosis.  
Patients experiencing active psychosis are excluded from partic ipating in this study.  If a 
participant begins to experience these feelings during his or her time in the study, then the 
participant may be asked to stop practicing and to meet with either the CMC medical director or 
the principal investigator for an eva luation. The participant may ultimately be terminated from 
the study if he or she is experiencing an adverse reaction. These participants may continue to 
receive other treatments at CHA as part of their ongoing treatment plan.  
 
3. Physical discomfort due to gentle movement aspect of training  
 
The training will involve gentle movements similar in form to hatha yoga.  Some participants 
could experience physical discomfort during this aspect of training.  If a participant feels 
discomfort, he or she will be encouraged to engage in a less straining  manner. If discomfort 
continues, then the participant will be asked to sit out of this brief element of training and 
discuss the areas of discomfort with their PCP before return to practice of physical postures.  
Severe discomfort is not expected, but cou ld possibly occur.  In this case, the participant will be 
treated for this pain, and encouraged to return to practice stationary forms of mindfulness.  
 
4. Feelings of embarrassment or anxiety when asked personal survey question.  
 
Some survey questions are  of a sensitive or personal nature, and may cause the participant to 
become upset.  In some rare cases, participants may require mental health support upon feeling 
upset by the survey questions.  A patient’s referring integrated behavioral health clinician  will be 
contacted if the patient needs additional mental health support.  The PI and CMC medical 
director will remain available to field questions from PCPs about their experience with 
mindfulness and any adverse experiences. PCPs with adverse events that  may influence their 
fitness to safely practice will be referred to the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) or 
Physician Health Services. Todd Griswold, MD, clinical supervisor of the MINDFUL -PC 
implementation project, will help to monitor and coordinate beh avioral health care for 
participants.   
 
5.  Risk of loss of confidentiality  
 
D.2.d.2. Risks to Patients in fMRI study:  
1. MRI  
The MRI system used in this study has been approved by the FDA and will be operated within 
the parameters reviewed and accepted by the FDA. MRI is not associated with any known 
 
62 
 adverse effects except in people with non -MR-compatible features such as certai n kinds of 
implants, tattoos, jewelry or other devices. Subjects will be excluded from this study if they have 
any MRI contraindication. The MR Safety Form will be administered prior to every MRI scan to 
confirm eligibility and subjects will be checked wit h a metal detector prior to entering the 
scanner. Some patients find it unpleasant or feel anxious when confined in the enclosed space of 
the scanner. Subjects will be able to converse with a staff member via a microphone and speaker 
system, and can reques t that the scan be stopped at any time for any reason. Subjects will be 
required to wear earplugs and have additional padding around their ears to prevent discomfort 
due to scanner noise (https://www.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/martinos/userInfo/safety/index.php).  
2. Pain task  
In some cases, cuff pain stimulation can result in mild bruising associated with inflation of the 
cuff. The pressure from this cuff is controlled to be within a safe and tolerable range. If 
participants feel distress while wearing the cuff, t he procedure will be stopped. Patients will be 
assessed for peripheral vascular disease, varicosities, and lymphedema prior to application of 
cuff pain to prevent the possibility of worsening of symptoms.  
3. Emotional Go/NoGo task  
This task will employ neg ative and unpleasant pictures to test the relation between emotional 
processing and attention performance, from the IAPS. Pictures include scenes of mutilations, car 
accidents, natural catastrophes, contamination or violence. For this task, we will use 50%  neutral, 
and 50% unpleasant pictures. We do not include pictures of sexual content, spiders, or snakes. 
IAPS pictures are frequently used to study emotion processes, and are also commonly employed 
in patient studies and during fMRI. However, the pictures could induce discomfort during the 
task. Patients will receive information about these pictures in the  information sheet and  informed 
consent form. They will further complete a practice task outside of the scanner, with IAPS 
pictures of similar content. Th us, any concern can be addressed already before the scan, and if 
patients feel too uncomfortable, we will decide to abstain from conducting this task in the 
scanner. The participants are further reminded in the informed consent and orally that they can 
stop any task or their participation, should they feel too uncomfortable with any of the 
procedures. After the task, participants will be asked about their current condition and mood. In 
case of enduring discomfort caused by the pictures, they are instructed  to contact the Principal 
Investigator , Dr. Zev Schuman -Olivier, at 617 -591-6056 or the Behavioral Health 
Communication Center for CHA Psychological Services (617 - 665- 1560) and the respective 
contact information is listed on the informed consent form.  
3. Possible discovery of findings related to medical imaging  
If the brain images collected in this study show what seem to be abnormalities – as judged by the 
neuroimaging post -doctoral fellow or neuroimaging consultants at the Martinos Center on the 
day of t he scan session, a radiologist will be consulted within 1 business day to review the scan, 
following standard procedures at the Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging 
(compare 
https://www.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/martinos/userInfo/safety/training_m anual_082305.pdf) . If 
the radiologist thinks there may be a medical abnormality in the scan, the subject will be 
contacted by the PI or the CMC medical director, and will be provided referrals and/or a list of 
options for follow -up medical care.   Similar ly, if cardiovascular anomalies and/or cardiac 
arrhythmias were evidenced by the vital signs recordings – as judged by the neuroimaging post -
doctoral fellow or neuroimaging consultants at the Martinos Center on the day of the scan 
 
63 
 session, the subject will  be contacted by the PI or the CMC Medical Director and referred for 
follow -up medical care.  
 
Potential risks for participants in the HEART pilot study:  
1) Feelings of embarrassment or anxiety when asked personal survey questions or due to 
behavior tracking. Some survey questions are of a sensitive or personal nature, and may 
cause the participant to become upset.   In addition, tracking behaviors related to activity, 
sleep, mindfulness  practice , or eating and drinking may cause a participant to feel 
embarrassed or become upset.  In some rare cases, participants may require mental health 
support upon feeling upset by the survey question s or behavior tracking.   A patient’s 
referring integrated behavioral health clinician will be contacted if the patient  needs 
additional mental health support.  The  study staff,  PI and CMC medical director will 
remain available to field questions from participants  about their experience with 
mindfulness and any adverse experiences.  
2) Extra time associated with completing the  behavioral task tracking .  Participants will be 
asked to spend time tracking behaviors each day during the HEART pilot study.   
3) Participants will be asked to carry their smartphone during the day  for activity tracking. 
This may cause participants inconven ience.   
4) Mild discomfort due to wristband tracker. Participants may experience mild discomfort 
when wearing the wristband activity tracker.  Participants who are experiencing 
discomfort will be encouraged to speak with study staff who will help participant s adjust 
the wristband if necessary.  If discomfort is not tolerable to participants, they will be 
encouraged to discontinue wearing the wristband at any time.  
5) Potential to impact development of mindfulness as participants enrolled in MTPC will be 
doing  the tracking during weeks 5-8 of their training.   
6) Despite efforts to prevent data breaches, any use of electronic devices and internet data 
transmission can result in a b reach of confidentiality . 
7) Eye strain from performing Behavioral computerized tasks.  
 
 
D.2.e. Potential Benefits:  
 
D.2.e.1. Benefits to Patient Participants:  
1.  Learn techniques for improved behavioral control and psychological wellbeing  
2.  Improve health maintenance and self -management of chronic illness  
3.  Greater satisfaction with the provider -patient relationship  
4.  Decrease anxiety, depression, insomnia, and pain  
5.  Reduce substance use and tobacco smoking  
6.  Reduced reliance on prescription opioids and sedatives  
7.  Feeling of greater behavioral control over risky behaviors in general  
8.  Improve quality of life, with reductions in stress and anxiety   
9.  Reduce stress associated with chronic illness  
 
D.2.e.2. Benefits PCP Participants:  
1.  Learn techniques for improved behavioral control and psychological wellbeing  
2.  Reduce  burnout and increase resiliency  
3.  Increase patient -centered communication, improve provider empathy and increase 
patient satisfaction  
 
64 
 4.  Reduce stress, anxiety, depression, and insomnia  
 
D.2.e.3. Alternatives to Participation:  
Participation in this research study is voluntary.  Patient participants can choose not to 
participate, and their decision will in no way affect the quality of care they receive at 
CHA or their working relationship with CHA; however, they will be unable to participate 
in the MT PC groups until after completion of the study if they choose not to participate in 
the study. PCPs will not be required to participate in this study, but they will need to at 
least enroll in the control group if they intend to refer patients to the study. Participants 
may elect at any point to discontinue their participation in this study.  
 
D.3. Human Subjects and Confidentiality:  
 
D.3.a Human Subjects Procedures:  
 
D.3.a.1 Equitable Selection of Subjects:  
People of all races and ethnicities will be include d in this study.  
 
D.3.b. Recruitment Procedures:  
 
D.3.b.1. PCP Recruitment :  
PCP enrollment is complete as of February 10th, 2017.  No additional PCPs will be enrolled after 
this date , and no further PCP study sessions will take place .  The study aims to enroll 50 -80 
PCPs as participants.  PCPs will be recruited through print/flyer advertisements in department 
offices and health centers, email invitations, announcements at departmental meetings, and a 
presentation at CHA medical grand rounds and family med icine grand rounds. The study aims to 
enroll at least 25 PCPs into an intervention group (Group 1) and at least 25 into a control group 
(Group 2  and 3 ). 
 
The principal investigator is not in a supervisory role for anyone in this study.  Behavioral health 
providers are not study subjects and this training program is integrated in the mental health 
integration into primary care. Therefore, mental health providers in primary care will be 
encouraged to participate in the program by their supervisor.  
 
The prima ry care providers will be encouraged to participate primarily through grand rounds 
presentations, but we will take care to inform supervisors not to pressure providers to participate 
in the Mindfulness group as it must be fully voluntary. Since this is pri marily an implementation 
project, supervisors may encourage staff to participate in the program and refer patients, but 
supervisors will be reminded that non -participation at any level cannot affect employment.  
 
D.3.b.2. Patient Recruitment : 
The study aims to enroll a total of 434 -1,000 CHA patients as participants within 18 months of 
beginning the project. Patients will be recruited through print/flyer advertisements in health 
centers, CHA marketing materials, community informational meetings , and referral by PCPs and 
other members of the health care team. In addition, we aim to develop a video introduction about 
mindfulness to be played in patient waiting areas within health centers with translations into the 
primary languages of the health c enters (Note: Once developed these videos will be provided for 
 
65 
 review by the CHA IRB prior to implementation ).  This study aims to randomize 290 patients to 
an 8-week study intervention and 144 to a control group.   
 
The HEART pilot study aims to recruit 4 0 participants in the alumni cohort and 30 -60 
participants (10 -20 in the waitlist arm and 20 -40 in the intervention arm) in the concurrent 
cohort  for a total of 70 participants (40 alumni, 20 intervention, and 10 waitlist). The absolute 
minimum total numbe r would be 47 participants and the maximum total would be 100 
participants (40 alumni, 40 intervention, and 20 waitlist).  
 
D.4.  Data Quality and Safety:  
 
D.4.a. Data Quality and Management:  
 
D.4.a.1. Description of Plan for Data Quality and Management:  
The PI and data manager will review data collection, data completeness and accuracy as well as 
protocol compliance on a monthly basis.  
 
Survey session data will be entered by subjects into REDCap. The data manager will review all 
REDCap data collection fo rms on an ongoing basis for data completeness and accuracy as well 
as protocol compliance.  
 
All scantron data will be scanned by research coordinators and files will be reviewed by the data 
manager for completeness and accuracy prior to upload to the exce l database.  
  
Any surveys completed by pencil and paper will be entered by a research assistant. We will 
conduct ongoing verification audits for entry of any data transfer from paper forms. 
Discrepancies will be corrected by data manager and/or the PI, ba sed on source documents. Any 
inconsistencies will be resolved. Exploratory analysis of data with simple range checks may be 
conducted periodically as a second audit of possible entry errors.  
 
Frequency of Review― The frequency of data review for this study  differs according to the 
type of data and can be summarized in the following Data Quality Monitoring Table.  
Table 5. MTPC Data Quality Monitoring Table  
Data type  Frequency  
of review  Reviewer  
Study progress and safety  Monthly  
 Program Manager, PI  
Data collection, data 
quality/completeness/accuracy, 
protocol compliance  Monthly  Data Manager, PI  
Subject accrual (including 
compliance with protocol 
enrollment criteria)  Quarterly  PI, Independent Monitor  
Status of all enrolled subjects, 
as of date of reporting  Quarterly  PI, Independent Monitor  
Adherence data regarding 
study visits and intervention  Quarterly  PI, Independent Monitor  
 
66 
 Data type  Frequency  
of review  Reviewer  
AEs  
 Quarterly  PI, Independent Monitor  
Protocol violations  Per occurrence  PI, Independent Monitor, 
NCCIH  
SAEs  Per occurrence  PI, Independent Monitor, 
NCCIH  
 
D.4.b. Subject Accrual and Compliance:  
 
D.4.b.1. Measurement and Reporting of Subject Accrual, Compliance With Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteria:  
Review of the rate of subject accrual and compliance with inclusion/exclusion criteria will occur 
monthly by the data manager with reports to PI every 3 months to ensure that a sufficient number 
of participants are being enrolled and that they meet eligibility criteria and t he targeted ethnic 
diversity goals outlined in the grant proposal (Targeted/Planned Enrollment Table).  
 
D.4.b.2. Measurement and Reporting of Participant Adherence to Treatment Protocol:  
Data on adherence to the treatment protocol will be collected twice w eekly by research staff and 
reviewed quarterly by the PI, the study statistician, and the independent monitor. Adherence of 
patient participants will be evaluated by attendance at MTPC groups, PCP visit, and completion 
of all study sessions. Adherence for each session will be rated on the following scale: 0 = 
absence; 1 = completed; 2 = incomplete (with comments). An explanation of study staff attempts 
to understand and address participant adherence deficits will be documented and reviewed twice 
weekly.  
 
D.4.c. Justification of Sample Size:  
The goal of the study is to determine if Mindfulness Training provided in Primary Care results in 
a greater decreases in anxiety, stress, and depression than referral to community resources. The 
study is also powered to a ssess for effects of mindfulness training on provider -patient 
relationship. The current RCT is funded by AVDF and Gold Foundation and is sufficiently 
powered to address these aims.  
 
Using an intent -to-treat analysis with 290 patients receiving mindfulness  training and 144 
patients with orientation only, there will be an 80% chance of detecting a significant difference at 
a two -sided 0.05 significance level. This assumes that the rate of action plan initiation is 0.54 in 
orientation only (based on Guck et. al.[5]) and the rate of action plan initiation among patients 
who receive mindfulness traini ng is 0.68 (based on rates of initiation and maintenance of 
meditation practice in previous pilot MBIs [6]).  
 
The experimental fMRI pilot trial will recruit primary care patients (n= max. 30 subjects) with 
anxiety or depression from the MTPC  arm using a within -subject pre/post design, which is an 
adequate size for a pilot neuroimaging trial to be able to assess an effect size of the fMRI and 
medical regimen adherence measures needed to power the trial for the UH3 phase.  
 
The HEART pilot study  is underpowere d to be able to compare between -group differences  in 
outcomes , but the primary aim s of the pilot study are 1) to demonstrate feasibility of using 
 
67 
 commercially available activity/sleep/diet trackers and online daily surveys for ecologica l 
behavior tracking in a MBI RCT and 2) to use the daily behavior tracking to validate the action 
plan goal setting process and the self -report action plan initiation measure.  To do this we aim to 
recruit the 70 participants from both the alumni and concur rent phases and then to examine the 
data for correlations between the action plan initiation 7-item survey and pre -post differences in 
step count, the number of active periods, changes in sleep duration, changes in mindfulness 
practice, and change in nutri tional habits depending on which action plan goal was specified in 
the patient action plan.  When conducting correlation analysis with 70 participants, using a= 0.05 
type 1 error rate, we would have 80% to find a correlation coefficient of 0.33. If we have lower 
than expected recruitment and only had 47 participants for correlation analysis, using a= 0.05 
type 1 error rate, we would have 80% to find a correlation coefficient of 0.4, which represent s 
moderate correlation96. We will also examine whether the act ivity changes are greater in the 
participants who select exercise as compared to those who selected nutrition or dietary changes 
and vice versa.  
 
 
D.4.d. Stopping Rules:  
This study will be stopped prior to its completion if: (1)  the intervention is associa ted with 
adverse effects that call into question the safety of the intervention; (2)  difficulty in study 
recruitment or retention will significantly impact the ability to evaluate the study endpoints; 
(3) any new information becomes available during the tr ial that necessitates stopping the trial; or 
(4) other situations occur that might warrant stopping the trial.  
 
D.4.e. Designation of an Independent Monitor:  
The Independent Monitor for this study is Dr. Paula Gardiner, MD at Boston Medical Center. Dr. 
Gardiner is not associated with this research project and thus works independently of the PI, Dr. 
Schuman -Olivier. Dr. Gardiner is not a part of the key personne l involved in this grant, and is 
qualified to review the patient safety data generated by this study because of her unique expertise 
in the area of mindfulness training for primary care patients.  
D.4.f. Safety Review Plan:  
Study progress and safety will be  reviewed monthly (and more frequently if needed). Progress 
reports, including patient recruitment, retention/attrition, and AEs, will be provided to the 
Independent Monitor following each of the monthly reviews. An Annual Report will be 
compiled and will include a list and summary of AEs. In addition, the Annual Report will 
address (1)  whether AE rates are consistent with pre -study assumptions; (2)  reason for dropouts 
from the study; (3)  whether all participants met entry criteria; (4)  whether continuation  of the 
study is justified on the basis that additional data are needed to accomplish the stated aims of the 
study; and (5)  conditions whereby the study might be terminated prematurely. The Annual 
Report will be sent to the Independent Monitor and will be forwarded to the IRB and NCCIH. 
The IRB and other applicable recipients will review progress of this study on an annual basis. 
The PI will also send copies of signed recommendations and comments from the Independent 
Monitor to the NCCIH Program Officer wit hin 1 month of each monitoring review.  
D.4.g. Study Report Outline for the Independent Monitor (Interim or Annual Reports):  
The study team will generate Study Reports for the Independent Monitor and will provide 
information on the following study parameter s: rate of subject accrual and compliance with 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, Status of all enrolled subjects, Adherence data regarding study visits 
 
68 
 and intervention, AEs, and Protocol violations. Study Report tables will be generated only from 
aggregate (n ot by group assignment) baseline and aggregate safety data for the study population. 
A separate Closed Safety Report, with masked group baseline and safety data, will be generated 
for the Independent Monitor(s) by a designated unmasked member of the team b ut will not be 
reviewed by the study team.  
 
D.5. Informed Consent  Procedures : 
Written informed consent will be obtained from each subject at entry into the study. Informed 
consent is obtained by the following process:  
D.5.a Consent for Primary Care Providers:  
PCP participants will be provided with written descriptions in English of the research study 
procedures, timeline and participant commitments electronically for review prior to starting the 
course. PCPs will be given an opportunity to email or c all the study staff for answers to any 
questions about the consent document and they will be asked to complete a consent quiz to 
ensure understanding of the most crucial points. The Principal investigator will review the 
consent quiz and verbally communica te with each PCP immediately prior to completion of pre -
treatment surveys at the start the first group.  
 
D.5.b. Consent for Patients for the main MINDFUL -PC study:  
1. Patients will complete the Informed Consent Form in -person prior to the beginning of the 
Mindfulness Orientation Visit.  The informed consent document will include a full 
description of the study procedures and associated risks. The participant will also be asked to 
complete an Informed Consent Assessment to ensure comprehension of the study proc edures, 
rights of participants, as well as understanding of the risks and benefits of the study. The 
patient will not be able to sign the document without having completely correct answers on 
the consent assessment. Trained study staff will meet with the p articipant to review the 
assessment to confirm the subject understands the study, and to answer any questions the subject 
might have.  
2. Patients who scored less than 90% on the informed consent assessment will meet 
individually with the Research Coordinator or other approved study personnel who will 
administer the Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine —Short Form (REALM -SF) 
form [7] to assess patient literacy levels.  This i s a 7-item word recognition test, which takes 
about 2 minutes, offers a valid quick assessment of patient health literacy and has excellent 
agreement with the 66 -item REALM instrument in terms of grade -level assignments. Patients 
are instructed to read sev en words aloud for a member of the study team.  Patients who 
pronounce fewer than four of the words correctly read at a literacy level of 4th to 6th grade. 
Patients with less than a 7th grade reading level in English will be excluded from initial 
groups an d from experimental fMRI pilot.  
3. The Research Coordinator and other approved study personnel will be present during the 
Informed Consent Session if patients have any questions during the consent process or the 
consent assessment. After completion, participants will be provided an addition al copy of the 
signed informed consent form for their own records. Once the participant demonstrates 
understanding of the study and agrees to participate in the study, the consent will be signed in 
the presence of the doctoral level member of the study tea m and a witness.  Participants must 
 
69 
 give written, informed consent in order to participate in the study.  Participation in the study 
is voluntary.  All participants will be notified that they are free to discontinue from 
participating in the study at any t ime.  All participants will be asked to complete and sign a 
section acknowledging that sessions will be audio -recorded for research purposes. No study -
specific procedures or investigations will be performed before the participant has signed and 
dated the I nformed Consent Form.   
 
4. The NIH Common Fund Science of Behavior Change Initiative and NCCIH will be listed as 
co-sponsors of this study in the overall initial consent document signed prior to the 
Mindfulness Orientation Visit for all participants.  If the  MINDFUL -PC study continues after 
the NIH Common Fund/NCCIH grant ends, then references to NIH Common Fund and 
NCCIH as study sponsors will be removed from the overall consent document.  No other 
intervention materials will mention NIH Common Fund and NCCI H other than the overall 
initial consent document and the neuroimaging pilot study consent document.   
 
D.5.c. Consent for Patients for experimental fMRI pilot study:  
After completion of the MINDFUL -PC consent form, the orientation session, and after being  
randomized to the mindfulness group, interested participants will be phone -screened by the 
Research Coordinator or other trained study staff based on the experimental fMRI inclusion and 
exclusion criteria during the group -scheduling phone call. Those who screened into the optional 
study are asked about any questions regarding the  information sheet, flyer, and study in general. 
At the imaging session, participants are given enough time to study the informed consent and ask 
any question regarding the fMRI pilot study . Participants will then sign the informed consent 
before any other questionnaires or neuroimaging will be administered. It will be emphasized that 
any refusal to participate will not impact current or future treatment, nor participation in the 
broader study.  
 
D.5.d.  Consent for Patients for HEART  pilot study:  
Participants are first notified of the opportunity to enroll in the HEART study during the 
MINDFUL -PC confirmation phone call to attend MINDFUL -PC orientation. Following this, at 
the in -person orientation, participants will be led through the verbal and written consent process 
for MINDFUL -PC.  Once they have signed their MINDFUL -PC consent forms, they are eligible 
for the HEART study and will be given the HEART study information packet, as  well as the 
HEART study informed consent form. A doctoral level member of the research staff will then 
guide participants through a verbal introduction of the HEART study, informing them of the 
invitation to voluntarily participate, reviewing study inclus ion and exclusion criteria, and 
providing a chance to ask any questions. If after this in -person review, interested participants will 
be invited to sign the HEART study consent form.  If an interested participant does not 
understand or agree to study requi rements after the verbal introduction and a chance to ask 
questions, the doctoral level research staff member conducting the orientation session will decide 
to exclude the participant from the HEART study.   
 
Upon completion of the HEART study informed con sent form, participants will be given an 
additional copy of the signed informed consent form for their own records.  The signed informed 
consent forms will be stored in a binder in a double -locked cabinet at the Center for Mindfulness 
and Compassion.  Only  IRB-approved study staff will have access to this cabinet  
 
70 
  
 
D.6. Reporting Changes in Study Status:  
During the funding of this study, any action by the IRB or one of the study investigators that 
results in a temporary or permanent suspension of the study will be reported to the NCCIH 
Program Official within 1 business day of notification.  
D.7. Participant Reimbursement:  
 
Participants will incur no fees as a result of participation in this study.  All study -related visits 
and will be provided to the participants at no cost; however, given this is an implementation 
project and group visits will be offered as group psychother apy, patient visits will be billed to 
their insurance companies and a co -pay may be involved. If a patient’s insurance will not cover 
their participation in the group despite PCP referral, then the principal investigator will consider 
their inclusion indiv idually on a case -by-case basis.  
 
Patient participants will receive up to $ 140 in total compensation in the form of prepaid cards or 
cash cards for participating in the MINDFUL -PC study.    
 Baseline:  Up to $20  
o Patient participants will receive one $20 prepaid card after their first session of 
surveys . 
 Week 8:  Up to $ 40 
o They will receive  a $20 card payment  after their post -study week 8 session of  
surveys .   
o Participants will receive a $20 prepaid card at Study Week 8 for completing both 
the Weekly Mindfulness Practice Diaries and Weekly Mindfulness Resource Use 
Surveys every week during Study Weeks 1 -8.  If participants only complete 6 of 8 
of the Weekly Mind fulness Practice Diaries or 6 of 8 of the Weekly Mindfulness 
Resource Use Surveys, they will receive a $15 prepaid card instead of a $20 
prepaid card.  If participants complete fewer than 6 of either of the weekly diaries, 
they will not receive compensatio n for this aspect of the study.    
 Week 26:  Up to $80  
o $20 for the 6 -month follow -up session  
o $15 for the Action Plan Study Session  
o $15 total ($ 5 each ) for the Week 9, Week 10, and Week 16 APIS -5 sessions  
o $30 completion bonus  if all study participation item s have been complete d.   
 Post Study : $15  
o They will receive $15 if they choose to do the  Action Plan Interview  
 
Participant Reimbursement for the HEART Pilot Study:  
 
Patients will not be reimbursed for data plan usage relevant to this study. The Argus app  and 
similar smartphone applications do  not transmit data continuously, so the amount of data use is 
not high and will have a small impact on data usage.  
 
  
Concurrent Cohort:   Up to $ 195 
 
71 
 $30 Behavioral Measures (pre)  
$21 Part 0:   
 $1/day each, for  
o Mindfulness tracking for 1 week ($7 total)  
o Smartphone/Accelerometer -based activity tracking for 1 week ($7)  
 $1/day for Food, Activity, and Sleep Tracking (FAST) Questionnaire for 1 week ($ 7) 
$84 Part 1 & 2    
 $1/day each, for  
o Mindfulness tracking  for 4  weeks ($28 total)  
o Smartphone/Accelerometer -based activity tracking for 4 weeks ($28 ) 
 $1/day for Food, Activity, and Sleep Tracking (FAST) Questionnaire for 4 weeks ($ 28) 
$30 Behavioral Measures (post)  
 
 
$30 High Completion Bonus:  If action plan paperwork is fully submitted and use of daily 
tracking on  > 90% of the days for each activity above, participants will receive a $50 dollar 
bonus.  
 
$20 Mid Completion Bonus:  If action plan paperwork is fully submitted and use of daily 
tracking on 75-89% of the days for each activity above,  participants will receive a $2 0 dollar 
bonus.  
 
$ 
 
To be disbursed in 3 payments:  
 Payment 1:   $30 after pre -Behavioral Measures visit  
Payment 2:   Up to $ 105 after completing Part 2   
Payment 3:  $60 after completing post -Behavioral measures visit , including the high 
completion bonus. If the participant has been given any devices (e.g. wristband sensor), 
then this payment will be disbursed only after the device is returned in working 
condition.   
 
 
D.7.a. PCP Participant Reimbursement:  
PCP Participants will incur no fees as a result of participation in this study.  All study -related 
visits and procedures will be provided to the participants at no cost.  
 
Reimbursement for transportation will not be provided to or from the study location; however, a 
van may be available for transportation for the day of silent practice day depending on location.  
 
D.7.b. Experimental fMRI Pilot Participant Reimbursement:  
Participants in the fMRI experiment will be paid $5 for completing the s creening and informed 
consent and providing toxicology and pregnancy screenings if applicable at the pre -fMRI 
session, and $5 for completing the toxicology and pregnancy screenings at the post -fMRI 
session. Participants will be paid $50 after completion of  each fMRI session. The total 
reimbursement for 2 fMRI visits and the screenings and informed consent will be $110. 
Participants will also receive free parking or $10 towards public transport or taxi costs for every 
fMRI visit.  All payments for the fMRI st udy will be in cash.  
 
72 
  
D.8. MTPC Session Quality and Protocol Adherence:  
 
Mindfulness group leaders will report on the quality of the sessions and the adherence to the 
protocol to the Program Manager or the Principal Investigator after each session. Every MTPC 
group will have an embedded unbiased observer who will rate group lea der adherence and 
fidelity to the manual. In addition, all groups will be audio recorded. A trained rater will review 
10% of group sessions for adherence, fidelity and competency. In order to prevent therapist drift, 
the program manager and/or principal in vestigator will review group adherence and fidelity 
ratings weekly. All MTPC group leaders will be asked to participate in weekly group supervision 
until they have successfully completed four 8 -week sessions.   
 
D.9. New Information:  
 
Any pertinent new inf ormation will be communicated to study participants.  In light of new 
information, participants may elect to discontinue their participation in the study.  
 
D.10. Sources of Research Materials:  
 
D.10.a. Sources of Research Materials for Patients:  
The following research material will be obtained:  
1.  Responses to surveys  
2.  EPIC electronic medical records to assess for health outcomes  
3.  Audio tapes of MTPC sessions for fidelity ratings  
 
The following data will be recorded:  
1.  Assessment measuring so cio-demographic characteristics, depression, anxiety, stress, 
mindfulness, self -compassion, relationship with primary care provider, consumption of alcohol, 
and record of substance abuse.  
2.  Medical history for the year before and year after the study, i ncluding patient alcohol use, 
body mass index (BMI), patient health questionnaire (PHQ -2), HgAlc, LDL -C, smoking 
cessation attempts and cigarettes per day, frequency of meat eating, blood pressure,  risky sexual 
behaviors, quantity of prescribed opioids and  sedatives, and illicit drug use.  
3.  Attendance of medical visits, including number of visits with the patient’s PCP, number of 
outpatient medical visits, number of inpatient medical visits, number of visits to the emergency 
department (ED), and no -show r ates for the year before and the six months after randomization.  
4.  Patient action plan, created by a patient and his or her primary care provider at the PCP visit 
and reported in EPIC electronic medical records.  
 
D.10.b. Sources of Research Materials for  Patients in fMRI study:  
The following research material will be obtained:  
1. Toxicology testing (oral fluids)  
2. Pregnancy testing (urine, females only, will be offered to female patients with childbearing 
potential)  
3. Self -report measures as administere d through a secure REDCap link  
4. fMRI  
5. Autonomic monitoring: heart rate, breathing rate, and skin conductance  
 
 
73 
 The following data will be recorded:  
1.  Toxicology results for alcohol and illicit drugs.   
2.  Qualitative HCG result  
3.  Edinburgh Handedness Inventory  
4.  fMRI BOLD signal  
5.  Recordings of heart rate, breathing rate, and skin conductance during the full fMRI session  
 
D.10.c. Sources of Research Materials for PCPs:  
The following research material will be obtained:  
1.  Responses to su rveys  
 
The following data will be recorded:  
1.  Assessment measuring depression, anxiety, stress, mindfulness, self -compassion, and 
burnout.  
 
D.10.d. Data Linkage to subjects and access to data:  
The secure web application REDCap will be used for data colle ction.  Data will be entered 
directly into REDCap by participants.  Any data entry not conducted by participants will be 
conducted only by members of the research team.  All data collection will take place under the 
supervision of the Principal Investigato r (Dr. Schuman -Olivier, MD), the Project and Data 
Manager (Richa Gawande, PhD), or the Research Coordinator, Elizabeth Pine. All fMRI data 
collection will take place under the supervision of a doctoral -level neuroimaging collaborator, 
including the Neuroim aging Consultant and Director of the Center for Integrative Pain 
Neuroimaging (Vitaly Napadow, PhD), Neuroimaging Consultant in Department of Radiology 
(Gaelle Desbordes, PhD), or the neuroimaging postdoctoral fellow (Jacqueline Lutz, PhD). 
Substitute code s will be used to label all sources of subject information and access to identifiable 
data will be limited to researchers directly involved in the study. The Project and Data Manager, 
Richa Gawande, PhD, will be responsible for coding data and exporting co ded data from 
REDCap to SAS 9.3. All identifiable data will be destroyed 10 years after study completion and 
will not be maintained for future uses not specified in this research plan.  
 
D.11. Personnel:  
D.11.a. Personnel present during study procedure:  
At least one of the following personnel will be present during study procedures:  
Zev Schuman -Olivier, MD, Principal Investigator; Richa Gawande, PhD, Program and Data 
Manager; Elizabeth Pine, BA, Research Coordinator; Angela Lozada , BA and Andrea Chen, MA 
Research Assistants  and additional Research Assistants; CHA Behavioral Health Specialists.  
 
D.11.b. Study team members responsible for the following activities:  
At least one of the following personnel will be responsible for o btaining and documenting 
informed consent/parent or guardian permission/minor assent/legally authorized representative 
permission :  Zev Schuman -Olivier, MD, Principal Investigator; Richa Gawande, PhD, Program 
and Data Manager; Elizabeth Pine, BA, Research Coor dinator; and additional Research 
Assistants.  
 
The following personnel will be responsible for providing on -going information to the study 
sponsor and the IRB :  Zev Schuman -Olivier, MD, Principal Investigator.  
 
74 
  
At least one of the following personnel will b e responsible for maintaining participant's research 
records :  Zev Schuman -Olivier, MD, Principal Investigator; Richa Gawande, PhD, Program and 
Data Manager; Elizabeth Pine, BA, Research Coordinator;  and additional Research Assistants.  
 
In addition, the e xperimental fMRI pilot study will be conducted through collaboration with the  
following people: Gaelle Desbordes, PhD, Neuroimaging Consultant; Vitaly Napadow, PhD,  
Neuroimaging Consultant, Director of Center for Integrative Pain Neuroimaging; and Jacqueli ne 
Lutz, PhD, neuroimaging post -doctoral fellow.  
 
D.11.c. Inclusion of study personnel:  
This project is a research study built on top of an implementation pilot program. The senior 
MBSR teachers, CMC faculty, and mindfulness -trained behaviorists are all p art of the underlying 
implementation program and they will not have access to study data or randomization codes. 
While behavioral health clinicians will provide some data which will be included in the 
screening and referral process, it will be MINDFUL -PC study staff under supervision from the 
principal investigator who will actually apply inclusion and exclusion criteria and send 
invitations for the study.  
 
The MINDFUL -PC study staff will include Zev Schuman -Olivier, MD (Principal Investigator); 
Todd Griswo ld, MD (CMC Medical Director and MINDFUL -PC Clinical Implementation 
Supervisor); Richa Gawande, PhD (Program and Data Manager); Elizabeth Pine, BA 
(MINDFUL -PC Research Coordinator); Gaelle Desbordes, PhD, (Neuroimaging Consultant); 
Vitaly Napadow, PhD, (Ne uroimaging Consultant); Jacqueline Lutz, PhD, neuroimaging post -
doctoral fellow and additional Research Assistants.  
 
75 
  

 
76 
 Table 3. Study Visit and Assessment Schedule for Patient Participants  
   Screen 
Visit  Consent 
Session  Pre-Treatment 
Surveys  Group 
Orientation  Week 
1-5 Week  
 6- 7 Action 
Plan  Week  
 8 
Patient Screening          
  Patient Eligibility Questionnaire  X             
  MINDFUL -PC Patient Screening 
Form# X    
       
  
Informed Consent                
  Informed Consent Form    X           
  Consent Quiz    X           
 REALM -SF%  X       
Baseline Battery        
       
  Demographics Survey#    X          
  SMME#    X          
  FTND#    X          
Mindfulness Self -Report Battery        
       
  FFMQ#    X          
  SCS-SF#    X          
 DERS#    X          
 MAIA#    X          
Clinical Assessment Battery        
       
  DASS -21#    X          
 PHQ -2#   X      
  PSS#    X          
  AUDIT -C#    X          
  DSM -V SSU#    X          
 PROMIS -ASF#    X          
 PROMIS -DSF#    X          
Self-Management Battery        
       
  SECD -6#    X          
  PAM#    X          
  PCQ#    X          
 APA -10#       X  
 APIS -5#       
       
 Action Plan Worksheet        X  
 TFEQ -R18   X      
Weekly Mindfulness Practice        
       
  Weekly Mindfulness Practice 
Diary     
   
X X  
X 
 Weekly Mindfulness Resources 
Use Survey    
  
X X  
X 
MTPC Satisfaction Survey      
    
 Satisfaction survey#               
Engagement and Adverse Event 
Reporting    
  
   
 
 Adverse Event Reporting Form                
 Participant Engagement Phone 
Call   
  X X  
X 
Patient Study Visits          
 60-minute Group Orientation       X        
 2-hour MTPC Sessions        X^ X^  X^ 
 Action Plan Study Session            X   
 7-hour Full -Day Session           X^    
 Action Plan Interview          
Visit Duration (min)  10 32 83 60 660^  684^  20 132^  
Payments at study visits ($)     20          
^ Represents surveys, events, and time durations that only apply to MTPC group participants   
% Represents surveys administered only to patients who score below 90% on the ICF assessment  
# Represents surveys and/or instruments administered through R EDCap  
* Represents surveys, events, and time durations that only apply to 6 -month waitlist participants   
 
77 
  
Table 3 (Cont’d). Study Visit and Assessment Schedule for Patient Participants  
 Post-
Treatment 
Surveys  Week  
9 Week  
10 Week 
16 Follow -up 
Surveys  Optional 
Action Plan 
Interview  Item 
Duration 
(min)  
Patient Screening  
  Patient Eligibility Questionnaire           5 
  MINDFUL -PC Patient Screening 
Form#  
      
  5 
Informed Consent   
  Informed Consent Form           20 
  Consent Quiz           10 
 REALM -SF%        2 
Baseline Battery    
  Demographics Survey#          5 
  SMME#          5 
  FTND#          3 
Mindfulness Self -Report Batter   
  FFMQ#  X    X  8 
  SCS-SF#  X    X  4 
 DERS#  X    X  5 
 MAIA#  X    X  5 
Clinical Assessment Batter   
  DASS -21#  X    X  3 
 PHQ -2#        1 
  PSS#  X    X  3 
  AUDIT -C#  X    X  1 
  DSM -V SSU#  X    X  3 
 PROMIS -ASF#  X    X  3 
 PROMIS -DSF#  X    X  3 
Self-Management Battery   
  SECD -6#  X    X  3 
  PAM#  X    X  4 
  PCQ#  X    X  3 
 APA -10#        4 
 APIS -5#  X X X X X  3 
 Action Plan Worksheet          
 TFEQ -R18  X    X  5 
Weekly Mindfulness Practice   
  Weekly Mindfulness Practice Diary   X    X  6 
 Weekly Mindfulness Resources Use 
Survey   
X    X 
 6 
MTPC Satisfaction Survey  
 Satisfaction survey#  X^      5 
Engagement and Adverse Event Reporting  
 Adverse Event Reporting Form   X    X  2 
 Participant Engagement Phone Call         5 
Patient Study Visits  
 60-minute Group Orientation            60 
 2-hour MTPC Sessions           960^  
 Action Plan Study Session           20 
 7-hour Full -Day Session           420^  
 Action Plan Interview        X  
Visit Duration (min)  85 3 3 3 92 30  
Payments at study visits ($)  40    80 15   
^ Represents surveys, events, and time durations that only apply to MTPC group participants   
% Represents surveys administered only to patients who score below 90% on the ICF assessment  
# Represents surveys and/or instruments administered through REDCap  
 
78 
  
 
Table 4. Study Visit and Assessment Schedule for HEART pilot study participants  
 
Concurrent Cohort:  
 
  
Infomed  
Consent  
 1st 
Behavioral 
Visit (Wk 0)   
Part 0  
(Wk 0)  
 Part 1  
(Wks  5 & 6)  
 Part 2  
(Wks  7 & 8)  2nd 
Behavioral 
Visit (Wks 
8-9) Item 
Duration 
(min)  
Informed Consent 
Session  x      30 
Smartphone 
app/accelerometer -
based daily activity 
tracking    daily  daily  daily   2 
FAST Questionnaire    daily  daily  daily   10 
Daily mindfulness 
practice diary    daily  daily  daily   3 
Daily mindfulness 
resource use diary    daily  daily  daily   2 
Behavioral 
Measures   x    x 20 
Visit Duration (min)  45 45 15/day 15/day 15/day 45  
Payments at study 
visits ($)   $30   $105 $60 $195 
 
 
Table 5. Study Visit and Assessment Schedule for fMRI Pilot Study Participants  
 
 
   
Screening  
 fMRI 
session  1 
 fMRI 
session  2 
 Item 
Duration 
(min)  
Group Scheduling phone screen 
call  
    
  fMRI pilot screening form  x     5 
 Edinburgh Handedness 
Questionnaire  x 
  5 
fMRI appointment         
  Informed Consent Form    x  20 
 Toxicology/Pregnancy 
screening   
x x 10 
 Autonomic measures 
electrodes/belt set -up  
x x 10 
  fMRI scan    X   X  90 * Represents surveys, events, and time durations that only apply to 6 -month waitlist participants   
 
79 
  fMRI questionnaire   X X 5 
Visit Duration (min)  10 110 110  
Payments at study visits ($)   5 + 50  5 + 50    
Travel Expenses ($)   10 or 
parking  10 or 
parking   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
80 
  
 
Choice of Smartphone Applications and Tracking Devices  
 
The HEART Pilot study is intended  to test the feasibility of using commercial behavior tracking 
smartphone applications and devices in the context of the action planning and initiation process 
of the  MINDFUL -PC study, as well as to validate with objective behavioral measures, the self -
report action plan initiation survey . We are not pilot testing the devices and applications 
themselves but a re pilot testing their use in our studies. Due to the rapid innovations  in the 
consumer market, we have left open the possibility of using other, improved but similar 
applications for activity, sleep, and diet tracking.  T he Argus App is among the current best 
possible apps for this purpose.  Below is a list of similar alternatives.   
 
We are considering the following smartphone activity tracking applications for inclusion in the 
study as alternatives to the Argus App:  
 Pedometer for Android  
 Stepz for IOS.  
 Activ8 by 2M Engineering  
We are considering use of the following activity tracking devices for inclusion in the study:  
- Fitbit  
- Moov  
- Jawbone  
- Withings  
- MD2K Cerebrum  
- Garmin Vivosmart  
  
 
81 
  
1. Bornemann, B. and T. Singer, Taking time to feel our body: Steady increases in heartbeat 
perception accuracy and decreases in alexithymia over 9 months of contemplative 
mental training.  Psychophysiology, 2017. 54(3): p. 469 -482.  
2. Hendrickson, K.L. and E.B. Rasmussen, Effects of mindful eating training on delay and 
probability discounting for food and money in obese and healthy -weight individuals.  
Behav Res Ther, 2013. 51(7): p. 399 -409.  
3. Ashe, M.L., M.G. Newman, and S.J. Wilson, Delay discounting and the use of mindful 
attention versus distraction in the treatment of drug addiction: a conceptual review.  J 
Exp Anal Behav, 2015. 103(1): p. 234 -48. 
4. Morrison, A.B., et al., Taming a wandering attention: short -form mindfulness training in 
student cohorts.  Front Hum Neurosci, 2014. 7: p. 897.  
5. Guck, T.P. , et al., Attributions regarding unmet treatment goals after interdisciplinary 
chronic pain rehabilitation.  Clin J Pain, 2008. 24(5): p. 415 -20. 
6. Margolin, A., et al., A controlled study of a spirituality -focused intervention for increasing 
motivation fo r HIV prevention among drug users.  AIDS Educ Prev, 2006. 18(4): p. 311 -22. 
7. Arozullah, A.M., et al., Development and validation of a short -form, rapid estimate of 
adult literacy in medicine.  Med Care, 2007. 45(11): p. 1026 -33. 
 
 
82 
  
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Klein, D.B., The patient -centered medical home: A future standard for american  
 healthcare? Public Administration Review, 2013.  
2.  NCQA, N.C.f.Q.A. 2014; Available from:  
 http://www.ncqa.org/portals/0/PCMH%20brochure -web.pdf .  
3.  Krasner, M.S., et al., Association of an educational program in mindful communication 
with burnout, empathy,and attitudes among primary care phys icians. JAMA, 2009. 
302(12): p. 1284 -93. 
4.   Benzo, R.P., Mindfulness and motivational interviewing: two candidate methods for 
promoting self -management. Chron Respir Dis, 2013. 10(3): p. 175 -82. 
5.  Kabat -Zinn, J., Wherever you go, there you are : mindfu lness meditation in everyday life . 
1st ed1994, New York: Hyperion. xxi, 278 p.  
6.  Cullen, M., Mindfulness -Based Interventions: An Emerging Phenomenon. Mindfulness 
 (N Y), 2011. 2(3):  
 p. 186 -193. 
7.  Black, D. Research publications on mindfulness . 2014; Available from:  
http://www.mi ndfulexperience.org/mindfo.php.  
8.  Beach, M.C., et al., A multicenter study of physician mindfulness and health care quality. 
Ann Fam Med, 2013. 11(5): p. 421 -8. 
9.   Fortney, L., et al., Abbreviated mindfulness intervention for job satisfaction, quality of 
life, and compassion in primary care clinicians: a pilot study. Ann Fam Med, 2013. 
11(5): p. 412 -20. 
10.  Beckman, H.B., et al., The impact of a program in mindful communication on primar y 
care physicians. Acad Med, 2012. 87(6): p. 815 -9. 
11.   Merkes, M., Mindfulness -based stress reduction for people with chronic diseases. Aust J 
Prim Health, 2010. 16(3): p. 200 -10. 
12.   Niazi, A.K. and S.K. Niazi, Mindfulness -based stress reduction: a non -pharmacological 
approach for chronic illnesses. N Am J Med Sci, 2011. 3(1): p. 20 -3. 
13.   Goyal, M., et al., Meditation Programs for Psychological Stress and Well -being: A 
Systematic Review and Metaanalysis. JAMA Intern Med, 2014. 174(3): p. 357 -68. 
14.   Brewer, J.A., et al., Mindfulness training for smoking cessation: results from a 
randomized controlled trial. Drug Alcohol Depend, 2011. 119(1-2): p. 72 -80. 
15.   Bowen, S. and A. Marlatt, Surfing the urge: brief mindfulness -based intervention for 
college s tudent smokers. Psychol Addict Behav, 2009. 23(4): p. 666 -71. 
16.   Bowen, S., et al., Relative Efficacy of Mindfulness -Based Relapse Prevention, Standard 
Relapse Prevention, and Treatment as Usual for Substance Use Disorders: A 
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 2014.  
17.   Garland, E.L., et al., Mindfulness -Oriented Recovery Enhancement for Alcohol 
Dependence: Therapeutic Mechanisms and Intervention Acceptability. J Soc Work Pract 
Addict, 2012. 12(3): p. 242 -263. 
18.   Ostafin, B.D., K.T. Kassman, a nd I. Wessel, Breaking the cycle of desire: Mindfulness 
and executive control weaken the relation between an implicit measure of alcohol 
valence and preoccupation with alcohol -related thoughts. Psychol Addict Behav, 2013. 
27(4): p. 1153 -8. 
                                                       
 
83 
                                                                                                                                                                            
19.   Garland, E. L., et al., Mindfulness -Oriented Recovery Enhancement for Chronic Pain and 
Prescription Opioid Misuse: Results From an Early -Stage Randomized Controlled Trial. 
J Consult Clin Psychol, 2014.  
20.   Margolin, A., et al., A preliminary study of spiritual self -schema (3 -S(+)) therapy for 
reducing impulsivity in HIV -positive drug users. J Clin Psychol, 2007. 63(10): p. 979 -99. 
21.   Pbert, L., et al., Effect of mindfulness training on asthma quality of life and lung function: 
a randomized controlled trial. Thorax, 2012. 67(9): p. 769 -76. 
22.   Hughes, J.W., et al., Randomized controlled trial of mindfulness -based stress reduction 
for prehypertension. Psychosom Med, 2013. 75(8): p. 721 -8. 
23.   Schneider, R.H., et al., A randomised  controlled trial of stress reduction for hypertension 
in older African Americans. Hypertension, 1995. 26(5): p. 820 -7. 
24.   Palta, P., et al., Evaluation of a mindfulness -based intervention program to decrease 
blood pressure in low -income African -American  older adults. J Urban Health, 2012. 
89(2): p. 308 -16. 
25.   Rosenzweig, S., et al., Mindfulness -based stress reduction is associated with improved 
glycemic control in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a pilot study. Altern Ther Health Med, 2007. 
13(5): p. 36 -8. 
26.   Miller, C.K., et al., Comparison of a mindful eating intervention to a diabetes self -
management intervention among adults with type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled 
trial. Health Educ Behav, 2014. 41(2): p. 145 -54. 
27.   van Son, J., et al., The effec ts of a mindfulness -based intervention on emotional distress, 
quality of life, and HbA(1c) in outpatients with diabetes (DiaMind): a randomized 
controlled trial. Diabetes Care, 2013. 36(4): p.823 -30. 
28.   Piet, J. and E. Hougaard, The effect of mindfulness -based cognitive therapy for 
prevention of relapse in recurrent major depressive disorder: a systematic review and 
meta -analysis. Clin Psychol Rev, 2011. 31(6): p. 1032 -40. 
29.   Caplan, B. et al., Edinburgh handedness inventory , in: Encyclopedia of Clinical 
Neuropsychology . Springer New York (2011): p.  928-928.  
30.   Black, David S., Mindfulness -Based Interventions: An Antidote to Suffering in the 
Context of Substance Use, Misuse, and Addiction.   Substance Use & Misuse, 2014.  
49(5): p.487 -491. 
31.  Arozullah, Ahsan M., et al. "Development and validation of a short -form, rapid estimate 
of adult literacy in medicine."  Medical care  45.11 (2007): 1026 -1033.  
32.   Saki F. Santorelli, Mindfulness -based Stress Reduction (MBSR): Standards of Practice.   
The Center for Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care, and Society, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, 2014.  
33.  Krasner, M., & Epstein, R., Mindful Communication: Bringing Intention, Attention, and 
Reflection to Clinical Practice . 2010.  
34. Arozullah, Ahsan M., et al. "Development and validation of a short -form, rapid estimate 
 of adult literacy in medicine."  Medical care  45.11 (2007): 1026 -1033.  
35.  Heatherton, T. F., Kozlowski, L. T., Frecker, R. C. & Fagerstrom, K. O., The Fagerstrom 
Test for Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire . Br 
J Addict, 1991. (86) p. 1119 -27. 
36.  McKenzie,  Stephen P., et al., Medical and Psychology Students' Knowledge of and 
Attitudes Towards Mindfulness as a Clinical Intervention.  EXPLORE: The Journal of 
Science and Healing, 2012. 8(6): p. 360 -367. 
37.   Baer, R.A., et al., Construct validity of the five facet mindfulness questionnaire in 
meditating and nonmeditating samples. Assessment, 2008. 15(3): p. 329 -42. 
 
 
84 
                                                                                                                                                                            
38.   Raes , F., et al., Construction and factorial validation of a short form of the Self -
Compassion Scale. Clin Psychol Psychother, 2011. 18(3): p. 250 -5. 
39.       Gratz, K.L., et al., Multidimensional Assessment of Emotion Regulation and 
Dysregulation: Development , Factor Structure, and Initial Validation of the Difficult ies 
in Emotion Regulation Scale . Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment , 
2004. 26(1): 41-54.  
40.   Bornemann, B., et al., Differential changes in self -reported aspects of interoceptive 
awareness through 3 months of contemplative training.  Front Psychol, 2015.  5: 1-17.  
41.   Henry, J.D. and J.R. Crawford, The short -form version of the Depression Anxiety Stress 
Scales (DASS -21): construct validity and normative data in a larg e non -clinical sample. 
Br J Clin Psychol, 2005. 44(Pt 2): p. 227 -39. 
42.  Kroenke , K., R.L. Spitzer, and J.B. Williams, The Patient Health Questionnaire -2: 
Validity of a Two -Item Depression Screener. Medical Care, 2003. 4 1(11): p. 1284 -1292.  
43.   Cohen, S., T. Kamarck, and R. Mermelstein, A global measure of perceived stress. J 
Health Soc Behav, 1983. 24(4): p. 385 -96. 
44.   Bradley, K.A., et al., AUDIT -C as a brief screen for alcohol misuse in primary care. 
Alcohol Clin Exp Res, 2007. 31(7): p. 120 8-17. 
45.   American Psychiatric Association, DSM 5 . American Psychiatric Association, 2013.  
46. Cella, David. "The Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
 (PROMIS): progress of an NIH Roadmap cooperative group during its first two years."   
47. Pilkonis, PA et al.  “Validation of the depression item bank from the Patient -Reported 
Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) in a three -month observational 
study.”    J Psychiatr Res.  2014 Sep;56:112 -9. 
48.  Chung, H., et al.  Assessing measurement invariance of three depression scales  between 
neurologic samples and community samples.  Qual Life Res.  2015 Aug;24(8):1829 -34. 
49. Cella, David. "The Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
 (PROMIS): progress of an NIH Roadmap cooperative group during its first two years."  
50  Schalet BD, et al. Establishing a common metric for self - 
reported anxiety: linking the MASQ, PANAS, and GAD -7 to PROMIS Anxiety. J. 
Anxiety Disord.  2014 Jan;28(1):88 -96. 
51.   Henry, J.D. and J.R. Crawford, The short -form version of the Depression Anxiety Stress 
Scales (DASS -21): construct validity and normative data in a large non -clinical sample. 
Br J Clin Psychol, 2005. 44(Pt 2): p. 227 -39. 
52.   Cohen, S., T. Kamarck, and R. Mermelstein, A global measure of perceived stress. J 
Health Soc Behav, 1983. 24(4): p. 385 -96. 
53.  Lorig, Kate R., et al. "Effect of a self -management program on patients with chronic 
 disease."  Effective clinical practice: ECP  4.6 (2000): 256 -262. 
54.  Hibbard, Judith H., et al. "Development of the Patient Activation Measure (PAM): 
 conceptualizing and measuring activation in patients and consumers." Health services 
 research  39.4p1 (2004): 1005 -1026.  
55.   Jerant , Anthony, et al. "Perceived control moderated the self -efficacy -enhancing effects 
 of a chronic illness self -management intervention."  Chronic Illness  4.3 (2008): 173 -182. 
56.   Armitage CJ, Conner M. Distinguishing perceptions of control from self -efficac y: 
 predicting consumption of a low -fat diet using the theory of planned behavior. J Appl Soc 
 Psychol 1999; 29:72 –90. 
57.  Urbanoski, Karen A., and T. Cameron Wild. "Assessing self -determined motivation for 
addiction treatment: Validity of the Treatment Entry Questionnaire."  Journal of 
substance abuse treatment  43.1 (2012): 70 -79. 
 
 
85 
                                                                                                                                                                            
58.  Ryan, Richard M., and Edward L. Deci. "Self -determination theory and the facilitation of 
intrinsic motivation, social development, and well -being."  American psychologist  55.1 
(2000): 68.  
59.  Bandura, Albert. "Self -efficacy: toward a unifying theory of behavioral 
change." Psychological review  84.2 (1977): 191.  
60.  Lorig, Kate R., et al. "Effect of a self -management program on patients with chronic 
 disease."  Effective clinical practice: ECP  4.6 (2000): 256 -262. 
61.   Rafferty, J.P., et al., Validity of the Maslach Burnout Inventory for family practice 
physicians. J Clin Psychol, 1986. 42(3): p. 488 -92. 
62.   BDI. Workplace Well -being Scale 2014 3/30/2014]; Available from: 
 http:// www.blackdoginstitute.org.au/public/research/researchtools.cfm#Workplace.  
63.  Tavakol, S., R. Dennick, and M. Tavakol, Psychometric properties and confirmatory 
factor analysis of the Jefferson Scale of Physician Empathy. BMC Med Educ, 2011. 11: 
p. 54.  
64.  Carmody, J., & Baer, R. A., Relationships between mindfulness practice and levels of 
mindfulness, medical and psychological symptoms and well -being in a mindfulness -based 
stress reduction program . Journal of behavioral medicine,  2008. 31(1): p. 23 -33. 
65.  CMS. Physician Quality Reporting System 2014; Available from: 
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality -Initiatives -Patient -Assessment -
Instruments/pqrs/index.html.  
66.  Alegría, Margarita, et al. "Evaluation of a patient activation and empowerment 
 intervention i n mental health care."  Medical care  46.3 (2008): 247.  
67.   Guck, Thomas P., et al. "Attributions regarding unmet treatment goals after 
 interdisciplinary chronic pain rehabilitation."  The Clinical journal of pain  24.5 (2008): 
 415-420. 
68.  Paul A. Harris, et al., Research electronic data capture (REDCap) - A metadata -driven 
methodology and workflow process for providing translational research informatics 
support . J Biomed Inform, 2009. 42(2): p. 377 -81. 
69.  Perez, D. L., et al.,  Frontolimbic neural circuit changes in emotional processing and 
inhibitory control associated with clinical improvement following transference -focused 
psychotherapy in borderline personality disorder . Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences , 
2016 . 70(1), p. 51–61.  
70.  Brown, Matthew RG, et al. Neural correlates of high -risk behavior tendencies and 
impulsivity in an emotional Go/NoGo fMRI task . Frontiers in systems neuroscience , 2015.  
9: p.24 . 
71.  Longe, O., et al., Having a word with yourself: neural correlates of self -criticism and 
self-reassurance.  Neuroimage, 2010. 49(2): p. 1849 -56. 
72.  Farb, N.A., Z.V. Segal, and A.K. Anderson, Mindfulness meditation training alters 
cortical representations of interoceptive attention . Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci, 2013. 8(1): 
p. 15 -26. 
76.  Kim, J., et al. Sustained deep -tissue pain alters functional brain connectivity . Pain, 2013. 
154(8): p. 1343 –51.   
74.  Poldrack, R.A., J.A. Mumford, and T.E. Nichols, Handbook of Functional MRI Data 
Analysis 2011: Cambirdge University Press.  
75.  Huettel, S.A., A.W. Song, and G. McCarthy,  Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging . 
Second Edition ed2008: Sinauer Associates.  
76.  Skup, M., Longitudinal fMRI analysis: A review of methods.  Stat Interface, 2010. 3(2): p. 
235-252. 
 
 
86 
                                                                                                                                                                            
77.  Diggle, P., et al., Analysis of Longitudinal Data . Oxford Statistical Science Series 2002: 
Oxford University Press.  
78.  Fitzmaurice, G.M., N.M. Laird, and J.H. Ware, Applied Longitudinal Analysis . 2nd 
Edition ed2011.  
79.  Bernal -Rusiel, J.L., et al., Statistical analysis of lo ngitudinal neuroimage data with 
Linear Mixed Effects models.  Neuroimage, 2013. 66: p. 249 -60. 
80.  Chen, G., et al., Linear mixed -effects modeling approach to FMRI group analysis.  
Neuroimage, 2013. 73: p. 176 -90. 
81.  Reuter, M. and B. Fischl, Avoiding asymmetry -induced bias in longitudinal image 
processing.  Neuroimage, 2011. 57(1): p. 19 -21. 
82.  Reuter, M., et al., Within -subject template estimation for unbiased longitudinal image 
analysis.  Neuroimage, 2012. 61(4): p. 1402 -18. 
83.  Nieto -Castanon, A., et al., Region of interest based analysis of functional imaging data.  
Neuroimage, 2003. 19(4): p. 1303 -16. 
84. Poldrack, R.A., Region of interest analysis for fMRI.  Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci, 2007. 
2(1): p. 67 -70. 
85.  Smith, S.M., et al.,  Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and 
implementation as FSL.  Neuroimage, 2004. 23 Suppl 1 : p. S208 -19. 
86.  Woolrich, M.W., et al., Bayesian analysis of neuroimaging data in FSL.  Neuroimage, 
2009. 45(1 Suppl): p. S173 -86. 
87.  Dale, A. M., B. Fischl, and M.I. Sereno, Cortical surface -based analysis. I. Segmentation 
and surface reconstruction.  Neuroimage, 1999. 9(2): p. 179 -94. 
88.  Fischl, B., M.I. Sereno, and A.M. Dale, Cortical surface -based analysis. II: Inflation, 
flattening, and a surface -based coordinate system.  Neuroimage, 1999. 9(2): p. 195 -207. 
89. Fischl, B., et al., Whole brain segmentation: automated labeling of neuroanatomical 
structures in the human brain.  Neuron, 2002. 33(3): p. 341 -55. 
90.  Fischl, B., et al., Sequence -independent segmentation of magnetic resonance images.  
Neuroimage, 2004. 23 Suppl 1 : p. S69 -84. 
91.  Cox, R.W., AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic 
resonance neuroimages.  Comput Biomed Res, 1996. 29(3): p. 162 -73. 
92.  Cox, R.W. and J.S. Hyde, Software tools for analysis and visualization of fMRI data.  
NMR Biomed, 1997. 10(4-5): p. 171 -8. 
93.  Glover, G.H., T.Q. Li, and D. Ress, Image -based method for retrospective correction of 
physiological motion effects in fMRI: RETROICOR.  Magn Reson Med, 2000. 44(1): p. 
162-7. 
94.  Margolin, A., et al., A controlled study of a spirituality -focused intervention for 
increasing motivation for HIV prevention among drug users.  AIDS Educ Prev, 2006. 
18(4): p. 311 -22. 
95. Rocha, T. (2014, June 25). The Dark Knight of the Soul.The Atlantic, p. 1 -
3.  Retrieved  from  http:// www.theatlantic.com/ health/archive/2014/06/the -dark-knight -
of-the-souls/372766/.  
 
96 Hulley  SB, Cummings SR, Browner WS, Grady D, Newman TB. Designing clinical research : 
an epidemiologic approach. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013. 
Appendix 6C, page 79.  