      
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wear Experience with Daily Disposable Contact Lenses 
over a Long Day  
  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Version dated 14Oct 2020
 
  
  Version 3 
  14Oct 2020 
 
1 
 Wear Experience with Daily Disposable Contact Lenses over a Long Day  
Jennifer Fogt, OD MS  
The Ohio State University  College of Optometry  
Innovation in Vision and Eye care Research Group -  iVERG  
338 West 10th Ave 
Columbus OH 43210 
Phone:  614 -292-0882 
 
 
Purpose  
The purpose of this study is to explore the performance of PRECISION1 ® lenses on long days of lens wear.   
 
Study Overview  
This open -label study is of current soft contact lens  who  wear contact lenses for longer than a typical work 
day.  Participants will be fit into PRECISION1® contact lenses , or ma y be existing PRECISION1® contact lens 
wearers.  Participants will be assessed after 1 -2 weeks of wear with a follow up visit to insure a successful 
lens fit.  Subject will then b e sent links to a survey to complete immediately about their current comfort 
and vision with lens wear and their status with digital device use at 10, 12, 1 4 and 16 hours of lens wear 
each night for 1 week .  Participants will return for a final follow -up visit including a VAS survey and the 
CLDEQ8 survey of their lens wear experienc e. 
 Background 
Soft daily wear contact lenses are used by an estimated 40.9 million adults in the United States.
1  Contact 
lenses which are worn for daily wear are considered minimal risk by the FDA, and risks to wearers are 
minimize d by proper lens care and hygiene.  Daily disposable contact lenses do not require daily cleaning 
and overnight storage, which improves the required amount of time to care for contact lenses.  In addition, daily disposable contact lenses are associated with  less lens deposits, which decreases 
associated comfort issues in lens wearers, including decreasing the risk of triggering Giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC) and/or ocular allergic responses in patients.
2  Additionally, daily disposable contact 
lens wearers are not likely to expose their lenses to water and tend to have better lens hygiene since these 
lenses do not require daily cleaning.   This is reflected in a study which found less superficial punctate 
staining and symptoms of dryness when comparing daily disposable contact lens wear with planned replaceme nt lenses.
3   The subjects in this study will be fit into PRECISION1 daily disposable contact lenses, 
which are less likely to be associated with the already minimal risks of daily contact lens wear.   Because 
of these benefits of daily disposable lenses, and the accompanying improvement in comfort, it is likely that these lenses will provide long lasting comfort and vision throughout the day.  As many people wish 
to wear  their contact lenses to work and then throughout the evening, it  is of interest to know how a lens 
performs over the course of a day into evening.  
  Version 3 
  14Oct 2020 
 
2 
  
 
Key Endpoints:  
• Subjective assessment of comfort and vision at time points of extended contact lens wear.   
• Visual Analog Scale survey of lens wear symptoms (comfort, dryness, vision)  
 
Study Time Points:  
Visit 1  will be conducted to consent the subject and determine eligibility .  Consenting will be conducted 
via phone call and REDCap and will occur before the su bject arrives on site if possible.    After consenting, 
the visit will begin with v isual acuity and an evaluation of the subject’s ocular health will occur to 
determine eligibility including positively responding to the question, “ Do you currently wear cont act 
lenses over a long day ?”  This will ensure that subjects are able and willing to participate in the study since 
long contact lens wear will be needed.  Subjects will be asked their normal morning time for inserting 
lenses and evening time for lens remo val.  Eligible subjects can be habitual wearers of PRECISION1® 
Contact Lenses  or will be fit into PRECISION1® Contact Lenses .  Participants will be fit with PRECISION1® 
Contact Lenses at this visit and will have a fit assessment and over- refraction complet ed in order to obtain 
the best fit and vision.  Upon successful fit of lenses, subjects will complete an initial survey of lens 
experience. Lenses will be dispensed to eligible participants and a second visit will be scheduled.  
Visit 2: Precision 1 f ollow -up visit  will occur approximately 1 week (±3 days) following Visit 1.  Visual acuity 
and contact lenses  fit assessment and over -refraction will be completed.  If changes to the lens are 
necessary, those changes will be made and an additional follow up visit will be scheduled.  Subjects will 
be asked their normal morning time for inserting lenses and evening time for lens removal.  Subjects who 
are new to PRECISION1® Contact Lenses will be dispensed additional lenses to wear until Visit 3.  
Five e vening survey  days :  On the morning of each survey study day,  the subject will report their  time of 
lens insertion  to study staff or  by entering the time in a RedCap survey. S tudy staff will communicate with 
participants by  send ing a link to complete a brief survey at 10, 12, 14 and 16 hours of lens wear that day  
via REDCap .  The surveys will deployed on 5 days between Visit 2 and Visit 3 that are determined at the 
time of Visit 2.  Every attempt will be made to complete the surveys on business days if possible.  
Final visit : The contact lens follow up visit  will occur approximately 1 week (±3 days) following the follow 
up visit .  Subje cts will have visual acuity, an assessment of ocular health . Subjects will then complete 
surveys about their lens wear experience.  
 
Evening Surveys will include 1 -10 forced choice grading of comfort and vision.  
End of study s urveys will include VAS scales assessing: 
Overall Quality of vision  
End of Day  Quality of vision  
Overall comfort  
  Version 3 
  14Oct 2020 
 
3 
 End of Day  comfort  
Overall dryness  
End of Day  dryness  
 
  
 
Recruitment  
Potential subjects may see posters placed on bulletin boards at The Ohio State Univ ersity or local eye care 
offices, emails to students, faculty and staff at OSU, online or paper ads, or signs on the OSU buses.  A 
search of the electronic medical records of The Ohio State College of Optometry may be done to identify 
possible subjects who  then may be contacted by email or phone with information about the study. Word 
of mouth referrals by study team members to OSU employees and friends may occur.  Emails to alumni of the OSU College of Optometry may be sent for local doctors to notify eligible potential subjects about 
the study.  
 
Inclusion criteria :  
• Ages 18 -40 
• Subjects must be current spherical contact lens wearers with longs days of lens wear  
• Subjects must have 20/25 or better distance visual acuity  with current lenses . 
• Subjects should hav e had an eye exam in the past year (self report) . 
• Good general health (defined by medication use that has not changed within the last 
month and the absence of medical conditions or treatments that are deemed 
confounding to the data as determined by the PI) . 
• Ability to give informed consent .  
• Subjects must have a working smart phone and be willing to download an app and/or 
receive and respond to texts  and emails.  
• Willing to spend time for the study .  Subjects will be required to attend t hree study visits, 
wear contact lenses on days between study visits , and must respond to communications 
on a smart phone on 5 days between visits 2 and 3 .   
• Either gender . 
• Any racial or ethnic origin . 
Exclusion criteria :  
• No current ocular inflammation or infection as assessed by the study investigator . 
 
 
Consent and Confidentiality  
  Version 3 
  14Oct 2020 
 
4 
 A team member trained in the consent process will provide the consent document for the potential 
subject to read and will review the procedures with reference to the consent form. The indivi dual is then 
provided with time to read the consent form and offered the opportunity to ask questions. The participant 
is explicitly told that they may stop participation at any time. All subjects will have the capacity to give 
informed consent. If there i s any doubt as to the subject’s ability to consent to the study, the subject will 
be excluded from the study. If the subject agrees to take part in the screening or measurement, he or she will sign and date the most recent IRB -stamped consent as will the t eam member. The subject will be 
provided with a copy of the consent form.  
The investigator team is trained in privacy issues and will be reminded of the importance of patient privacy prior to study initiation. Potential study participants will contact us after seeing advertisements, emails or 
hearing about the study by word of mouth, giving them the choice of whether or not they wish to 
participate in a study for people with dry eyes.  Privacy is protected by limiting information related to 
study recruitmen t only, and no other personal or medical information that should be private to the 
patients. The PHI needed is only for the purposes of this study. It is highly unlikely, indeed extremely remote that the dry eye symptoms or signs are related to private or personal information that should or 
would be preferred to be kept confidential to the patients. Risk factors for dry eye rarely relate to matters 
or conditions that would be personal to the patient such as personal relationships, behaviors or diseases 
that one prefers to keep private and confidential.  
 
Statistical Analysis and Power Calculation  
This small sample size was chosen for convenience as this study  as enrollment for evening participation  
may be difficult.   
Statistical analysis will include descrip tive statistics.  
 
Data Management and Security  
During the active stages of the study (recruitment to last measurement visit), all paperwork (consents, 
questionnaires and data forms) for each subject will reside in a subject folder for easy access througho ut 
the study. The folders will reside in the limited -access research area, in a locked file drawer or cupboard. 
At the completion of the study or disenrollment of a subject the paperwork in the subject’s folders will be 
reorganized into a regulatory binder  (consents, W -9s) and a data binder (questionnaire and data forms) 
and will reside in an office in the limited -access research area. When the data analysis is completed and 
the study is considered complete, the binders will be stored in the secure Department or Office Clinical 
Research Area. Paperwork (questionnaire and data forms) for individuals who participate in the baseline 
visit but are not eligible to continue the study will be stored in the study regulatory binder in an office in 
the limited -access research area. An electronic file of potential subjects and a file of enrolled subjects with 
their contact information, as well as electronic files of collected data with the subject number, will reside on a limited -access shared drive with firewall and password protection and is restricted to individuals in 
the research team. Any electronic data files that contain PHI will be destroyed at the conclusion of the 
study.  
 
  Version 3 
  14Oct 2020 
 
5 
  
Risks to Subjects and Mitigation 
Although rare, a subject could experience eye pain, cha nges in vision, continued redness or irritation of 
the eye when inserting or learning to insert a contact lens. More likely transient blurring of vision (less 
than one minute) or mild, transient (less than a minute) stinging may occur.  
Adverse Events  
All adverse events will be documented and reported under the guidelines of The Ohio State University 
Event Reporting guidelines, with any serious, unanticipated and related events being reported to the IRB, 
by the PI, within 10 days. Adverse Events informa tion will be summarized in the annual report to the IRB 
at the end of the study.  Adverse events will be assessed and determined by Dr. Jennifer Fogt.  
 
Subject Dismissal  
Subjects who, after study team member coaching, are not able to provide analyzable d ata may be 
dismissed from the study. Analyzable data is, for example, that which is obtained for the entire 
measurement interval and provides a readable eye image. Data may not be analyzable if patient isn’t able 
to stand or move freely to utilize the equi pment , to name just two causes issues. These issues are usually 
revealed at the screening assessment visit. Subjects who cannot provide analyzable data will be dismissed 
for the study. Subjects who do not keep scheduled visits within the required time fram e will be dismissed 
from the study. Study team members will make reasonable efforts to accommodate subjects’ schedules.  
 
Protocol Violations, Discontinuation  
In the event that a member of the study team or a representative of sponsor becomes aware of a m ajor 
protocol violation, the IRB shall be notified within 10 working days.   
 
  
  
References  
 1. Arita R, Mori N, Shirakawa R, et al. Meibum Color and Free Fatty Acid Composition in Patients 
With Meibomian Gland Dysfunction. Invest Opht halmol Vis Sci. 2015;56(8):4403- 4412.  
2. Hickson- Curran S, Spyridon M, Hunt C, Young G. The use of daily disposable lenses in problematic 
reusable contact lens wearers. Cont Lens Anterior Eye. 2014;37(4):285- 291.  
3. Ichijima H, Karino S, Sakata H, Cavanagh HD. Improvement of Subjective Symptoms and Eye Complications When Changing From 2 -Week Frequent Replacement to Daily Disposable Contact 
Lenses in a Subscriber Membership System. Eye Contact Lens. 2016;42(3):190- 195.  