 
Digital Literacy Promotion among Medicaid Children  v.14 8.10.2018  Title:  Digital Literacy Promotion among Medicaid Children  
 
Short Title   Digital Literacy Promotion  
Sponsor:  Vanguard  Charitable Endowment Program  
eIRB Number : 16-013524  
Protocol Date:  August 10 , 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
James Guevara MD, MPH  
Division of General Pediatrics  
The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia  
Telephone: 215 -590-1130 Fax: 267- 426-0380 
Email: Guevara@email.chop.edu  
 
 
2 
   
  
   TABLE OF CONTENTS  
  
Abbreviations and Definitions of Terms  3 
Abstract  4  
   
1 BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND RATIONALE           6 
1.1 INTRODUCTION  6  
1.2 NAME AND DESCRIPTION OF INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT OR INTERVENTION  6  
1.3 RELEVANT LITERATURE AND DATA 6  
1.4 COMPLIANCE STATEMENT  7  
2 STUDY OBJECTIVES               8 
2.1 PRIMARY OBJECTIVE (OR AIM) 8  
2.2 SECONDARY OBJECTIVES (OR AIM) 8  
3 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN              8  
3.1 GENERAL SCHEMA OF STUDY DESIGN  8  
3.1.1  Randomized Control Trial  8  
3.1.2  Video Sub-study  10 
3.1.3  Screening Phase  11 
      3.1.3.1    Randomized Control Trial  11 
     3.1.3.2    Video Sub-study  11 
3.1.4  Randomized Trial Treatment Phase (start of the study intervention)  12  
3.1.5  Video Sub-study Treatment Phase (start of the study intervention)  13 
 
   
3.2 ALLOCATION TO TREATMENT GROUPS AND BLINDING        13  
3.3 STUDY DURATION , ENROLLMENT AND NUMBER OF SITES 13  
3.3.1  Duration of Study Participation  13 
3.3.2    Total Number of Study Sites/Total Number of Subjects Projected  13 
  
3.4 STUDY POPULATION  13  
3.4.1  Randomized Control Trial  14 
     3.4.1.1    Inclusion Criteria  14 
             3.4.1.2    Exclusion Criteria  14 
3.4.2  Video Sub-study  14 
     3.4.2.1    Inclusion Criteria  14 
             3.4.2.2    Exclusion Criteria  15 
 
  
4 STUDY PROCEDURES             15 
4.1 SCREENING /CONSENTING VISIT AND STUDY VISIT 1 15  
4.2 STUDY TREATMENT PHASE  15  
5 STUDY EVALUATIONS AND MEASUREMENTS          16 
3 
   
  
   5.1 SCREENING AND MONITORING EVALUATIONS AND MEASUREMENTS  16  
5.1.1  Parent  Adversity (ACE)  16  
5.1.2  Parent Health Literacy (SAHL)  16  
5.1.3  Parent Depressive Symptoms (EPDS)  16  
5.1.4  Reading Activity (StimQ)  16  
5.1.5     Early Reading Practices Questionnaire (ERPQ)                                                                            17 
5.1.6     Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, Third Edition  (BSID -III) 17 
5.1.7     Dialogic Reading Behaviors –  Infant (DialogPR -I) 17 
5.1.8     Demographic Questionnaire  17 
5.1.9    Standard Text Messages  17 
5.1.10  Audio-recording and Videotaping of Interviews  17 
6 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS          17 
6.1 PRIMARY ENDPOINT             17  
6.2 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  18  
6.3 STATISTICAL METHODS  18  
 
 
7 SAFETY  MANAGEMENT            19 
7.1 CLINICAL ADVERSE EVENTS  19  
7.2 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  19  
  
8 STUDY  ADMINISTRATION           19 
8.1 DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT  19  
8.2 CONFIDENTIALITY  19  
8.3 REGULATORY AND ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS             20  
8.3.1 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  20  
8.3.2 Risk Assessment  20  
8.3.3 Potential Benefits of Trial Participation  21  
8.3.4 Risk- Benefit Assessment  21  
8.4 RECRUITMENT STRATEGY  21 
    8.4.1    Randomized Control Trial  21 
    8.4.2    Video Sub-study  22  
8.5 INFORMED CONSENT /ASSENT AND HIPAA  AUTHORIZATION  22  
8.6 PAYMENT TO SUBJECTS /FAMILIES  23  
8.6.1 Payments to parent for time and inconvenience (i.e. compensation)  23  
8.6.2 Gifts  23 
  
9 PUBLICATION              24 
10 REFERENCES             26 
       APPENDICES                                                                                                                       28  
 
4 
   
  
       ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS  
   
ROR   Reach Out and Read  
ACE   Adverse Childhood Experiences  
SAHL   Short Assessment of Health Literacy  
EPDS   Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale  
StimQ  
ERPQ   Measure of Cognitive S timulation Provided  in the H ome 
Early Reading Practices Questionnaire  
BSID -III 
 
DialogPR -I 
  Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, Third 
Edition  
Dialogic Reading Practices - Infant, parent -report pilot 
measure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
   
  
   ABSTRACT  
Context :   
Reach Out and Read (ROR) has become a standard evidence- based primary care practice to 
support early literacy development of young at -risk children. It utilizes board books which are 
distributed at pediatric well visits along with literacy promotion and reading modeling by 
pediatricians. However, digital reading utilizing e- books and apps for reading on electronic 
devices has become popularized. We would like to address  the important question of whether 
digital reading with e -books is as effective as reading with standard board  books on early 
development. For this 18- month investigation, we propose to recruit 100 parent -infant dyads  
from 3 CHOP primary care pediatric practices (Indian Valley , Cobbs Creek  and Roxborough). 
Healthy infants at least five months  of age who are Medicaid eligible and whose parents have 
access to smart phones and other mobile digital devices at those practices would be recruited and 
randomized 1: 1 to early literacy promotion using either 1) standard early reader  board  books or 
2) digital electronic early reader book s (e-book s). Books would be distributed at 3 time points to 
coincide with well visits up to 1 3 months of age. Outcomes corresponding t o reading behaviors 
(quantity and quality of joint reading) would be measured a pproximately 1 month after the  6, 9, 
and 12 month  well visits. C hild development would be measured when the child is between 12 
and 18 months, 30 days  of age . A subset of up to 40 parent infant dyads will be recruited to 
participate in a videotaped interaction while reading both an e- book and standard board book. 
Parent and child behaviors during the reading task will be coded and analyzed for differences 
across book type.   
 Objectives :  
1) To test the effects of digital versus standard literacy promotion on early development 
using a randomized controlled trial design . 
2) To explore the reading practices and reading activities  among children and their 
parents when comparing the use of e -books  to traditional board books . 
3) To identify themes regarding dialogical reading behaviors among parents 
participating in the Video Sub -study.  
Study Design:  
A randomized controlled trial will be conducted comparing digital versus standard literacy. 
Participants will be stratified by clinic site and randomized to receive literacy promotion using 1) 
standard  early reader board books or 2) digital electronic early reader  e-books . Randomization 
sequences will be developed by the project biostatistician usin g computer -generated random 
numbers prior to enrollment and will be placed in sealed opaque envelopes. Randomization will 
ensure equivalence between groups on measured and unmeasured characteristics and is 
6 
   
  
   considered to be the strongest protection against bias in study design.  A total of 40 participants 
will be recruited between 9 and 12 month s of age  for the videotaped interaction  and interview .  
Setting/Participants : 
In the randomized control trial, we  will recruit  and consent  one hundred eligible parent -infant 
dyads, with the infant being  between 5 and 7 months of age  at enrollment. Eligible participants 
must  have Medicaid insurance coverage, access  to one of the three CHOP Care Network 
practices (Cobbs Creek, Roxborough and Indian Valley)  for this 18- month trial. The video sub -
study will recruit up to 40 eligible parent -infant dyads. Eligible participants will be recruited 
from both the randomized control trial as well as external to the larger trial from a participating 
clinic. Eligible participants must  have Medicaid insurance coverage, access to a digital device, 
and present to one of the three CHOP Care Network practices (Cobbs Creek, Roxborough and 
Indian Valley).  
Study Interventions and Measures :  
In this intervention,  parent -infant dyads randomized to the digital arm will receive 
developmentally appropriate e -books . Those randomized to the standard arm will receive 
developmentally appropriate board books . Participants will receive either the e- book or board 
book for their 6, 9 and 12 month well visit s. The developmentally appropriate books selected for 
each of the 3 well visits are as follows: Dr. Seuss’ Hop on Pop  for the 6 month well visit, Sa ndra 
Boynton’s Barnyard Dance  for the 9 month well  visit, and Margaret Wise’ Goodnight Moon  for 
the 12 month well visit.  
In addition to the books, p arent -infant dyads  in both arms will be provided information on the 
importance of early parent -child reading activity by pediatric clinicians using the Reach Out and 
Read framework . 
We will collect standard measures  of demographics (child age, sex, race/ethnicity, maternal age, 
family structure, m aternal education level, and family  income category), maternal adversity (9 
ACE questions), maternal health literacy (SAHL), and maternal depressive symptoms (EPDS) at 
basel ine. About  1 month after the infant has, or is age -eligible for , their 6 and 9  month well visits  
we will collect measures of reading activity (StimQ  and ERPQ ). Roughly 1 month after the 
infant  has, or is age eligible for , their 12 month well visit, the infant will receive a deve lopmental 
assessment (BSID -III), along with additional measures of reading activity (StimQ, ERPQ ). They 
will additionally complete the paper -based DialogPR -I at this visit. A video recorded reading 
task will be obtained for  up to 40 participants. These participants  will be asked preliminary 
questions about their reading practices at home at the time of the video session .  
 
7 
   
  
   1 BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND RATIONALE  
1.1 Introduction  
Children who receive Medicaid  are more likely to be at increased risk for language and cognitive 
delays. Such delays can lead to poor school readiness and disparities in educational outcomes 
when compared to children from middle and upper income strata. Reach Out and Read (ROR), a 
national program which promot es parent -child reading activities for children 6 months through 5 
years of age at pediatric well child visits, has been shown to improve at -risk children’s 
expressive and receptive language development. However, children who participate in ROR still 
demon strate language outcomes that are below national averages. It is  not clear whether digital 
literacy promotion, i.e. promotion of parent -child reading with the use of e -books , is as effective 
as standard literacy promotion and if it could improve poor urban  children’s language and 
cognitive outcomes.  
The disparities  that continue to exist among language development despite literacy promotion 
efforts suggest that other barriers and factors may exist that influences  these disparities. While it 
has been demonst rated that reading to infants is imperative for appropriate language 
development, the differences between reading to children in an e -book format versus a standard 
board book format have not been explored. In a growing digital age access to e- books is ever  
present and investigating potential differences in early liter acy outcomes is beneficial for 
families and pediatricians.  
 
1.2 Name and Description of Investigational Product or Intervention  
The intervention will be an adapted version of the Reach Out and Read (ROR) Program, a 
national program that  promotes parent -child reading activities for children 6 months through 5 
years of age at pediatric well child visits. It will be adapted for use with parents of children from 
5 to 18 months , 30 days . Digital literacy  promotion  will consist of the provision of 
developmentally appropriate standard and digital books selected specifically for all well visits 
from  5 months of age onwards.  In this instance we define standard as the use of age appropriate 
board  books  in literacy promotion initiatives and digital as the use of mobile app based e -book 
versions of the same board  books . It will also include follow -up contact with the parent to 
ascertain whether or not they encountered issues with the apps functioning , rem inders to 
schedule and/or attend upcoming well visits,  and for some  parents, an interview and  video 
recorded reading task with their infant .  
1.3 Relevant Literature and Data  
Early childhood is a critical period in which young children attain developmental skills necessary 
for language function.1 Early stimulation of brain centers involved in language development 
8 
   
  
   promotes critical neuronal connections leading to growth in language functioning. Unfortunately, 
language delays are common among children under age 3 years, particularly for children residing 
in impoverished communities.2 The cause of these language delays are mu ltifactorial but in part 
result from deficits in parent -child verbal interactions.3 Twelve to sixteen percent of young 
children are estimated to have delays that affect language development.4,5 Differences between 
poor and advantaged children in language processing skills and vocabulary are evident by 18 
months of age.6 These delays contribute to social and emotional problems and result in poor 
educational and functional outcomes.7 Lifetime costs for individuals with developmental 
disabilities including language deficits has been estimate d to exceed $60 billion in 2003 U.S. 
dollars.8  
Parent -child dialogic reading represents an important source of language stimulation and is rich 
in verbal interactions that can stimulate language development.9 Studies have found parent -child 
reading to be associated with improved language functioning and better school performance.10-12 
Based on this observation, the ROR Program was established to promote parent -child reading 
activity. ROR is based in pediatric clinical settings and provides developmentally appropriate 
books to young children and encourages a discussion of the im portance of reading by pediatric 
clinicians at well child visits from 6 months through 5 years.13 Evaluations of ROR have shown 
beneficial effects on reading activity and language outcomes.14-16 These effects translate into an 
increase of 1 day/week of parent -child reading activity, a 4 -fold increased likelihood of reporting 
reading  to their child,  and a 4 to 9 point increase in expressive and receptive language scores 
respectively (a 3 -6 month  advance in language) 16 For this reason, the American Academy of 
Pediatrics has recommended that pediatric clinicians promote early literacy development 
beginning in infancy.17  
Electronic or e- books for children have grown in popularity. They come in a number of 
formats including Nooks, Kindles, and iPads as well as a number of digital apps that are used on 
smart phones and tablets. They permit children to follow along wit h stories, activate games and 
sounds, and listen to music. Their popularity may be related to parental beliefs that e -books help 
promote child intellectual development.18 However, a recent study examining reading behaviors 
and comprehension among children using e -books found that e -books were associated with fewer 
dialogic lang uage behaviors and lower reading comprehension compared to traditional books.19 
However, the study was limited by only enrolling middle to upper income preschool -aged 
children, so it isn’t clear that the findings are generalizable to younger children  from low -income 
households.  
1.4 Compliance Statement  
This study will be conducted in full accordance all applicable Chil dren’s Hospital of 
Philadelphia Research Policies and Procedures and all applicable Federal and state laws and 
regulations including 45 CFR 46. All episodes of noncompliance will be documented.  
9 
   
  
   The investigators will perform the study in accordance with th is protocol, will obtain consent and 
assent, and will report unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others in accordance 
with The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia IRB Policies and Procedures and all federal 
requirements. Collection, recor ding, and reporting of data will be accurate and will ensure the 
privacy, health, and welfare of research subjects during and after the study.  
2 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
2.1 Primary Objective  
The primary objective of the study is t o discover  the effects of language de velopment of young , 
at-risk children in digital versus standard literacy promotion using a randomized controlled trial 
design . In this instance we define standard as the use of age appropriate board  books in literacy 
promotion initiatives and digital as th e use of mobile app based e -book versions of the same 
board  books in a literacy promotion intervention.  
Specific Aim 1: To determine the comparative effectiveness  of digital literacy  promotion to 
standard literacy promotion on  early development among  young Medicaid eligible  children in the 
Philadelphia metropolitan area.  
2.2 Secondary Objectives  
Specific Aim 2: To explore the reading  behaviors and reading activities among children  and their 
parents  when comparing the use of e -books to standard  board books.  
Specific Aim 3: To identify themes regarding dialogical reading behaviors among parents 
participating in the Video Sub -study.  
Specific Aim 4: To explore the impact of digital literacy on healthcare utilization  
3 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
3.1 General Schema of  Study Design  
3.1.1  Randomized Control Trial  
We propose to test the effects of digital versus standard literacy promotion using a randomized 
controlled trial design . One-hundred e ligible parent -child dyads, with infants between 5 and 7  
months of age , who present  to one of the three CHOP Care Network practices (Cobbs Creek, 
Roxborough and Indian Valley)  will be recruited and consented to participate in this 18- month 
long study. Participants  will be stratified by clinic site and randomized to receive literacy 
promotion using 1) standard early reader board books or 2) digital electronic early reader e -
books . Randomization sequences will be developed by the study team  using computer -generated 
random numbers prior to study enrollment and will be placed in  sealed opaque envelopes. 
10 
   
  
   Randomization will ensure equivalence between groups on measured and unmeasured 
characteristics and is considered to be the strongest protection against bias in study design.  
Participants randomized to the digital arm will receiv e the e -book version of Dr. Seuss’ Hop on 
Pop for the 6 month well visit, Sandra Boynton’s Barnyard Dance  for the 9 month well visit, and 
Margaret Wise’ Goodnight Moon for the 12 month well visit . Additionally they will receive  
information on the importanc e of early parent -child reading activity by pediatric clinicians using 
the Reach Out and Read framework. The appropriate e-books will be  electronically gifted to  the 
participants . Parents must have an appropriate mobile digit al device such as a smart phone or 
tablet to download and open the digital e- book s. 
Participants  randomized to the standard arm will receive the board book versions of Dr. Seuss’ 
Hop on Pop for the 6 month well visit, Sandra Boynton’s Barnyard Dance  for the 9 month well 
visit, and Marga ret Wise’ Goodnight Moon for the 12 month well visit . Furthermore, participants 
will be provided information on the importance of parent -child reading activity by pediatric 
clinicians using the Reach Out and Read framework.  
Participants  in both study arms will be followed every 3  to 4 months until the infants are between 
the ages of 12 and 18 months, 30 days . Information on reading activities and developmental 
outcomes will be collected in concert with scheduled well child visits. Differe nces in reading 
activities and developmental outcomes will be assessed between groups using intention -to-treat 
analysis. Parents will complete measures of demographics, health literacy, and maternal 
depressive symptoms at baseline . Parents will also comple te measures of reading activity with 
their infant about 1 month after the child has, or is age -eligible for, their 6, 9, and  12 month  well 
visits . The infant will also receive a development al assessment at the second study visit which 
will happen about 1 m onth after the y have, or are age -eligible for , their 12 month well visit. At 
this time the infant should be between 12 and 18 months, 30 days  old. Secondary data to address 
these study questions does not exist, which will necessitate the collection of new data as 
proposed here. We anticipate that this collection of rich new data will support a careful 
assessment of the effects of digital vs. standard literacy promotion.   The HER will be reviewed 
for children in both arms to count the number of well child vi sits and examine their vaccination 
history.  
We anticipate collecting this data in conjunction with well child visits. In our experience, low -
income families can be difficult to reach for study visits, even with appropriate study incentives. 
By coordinating data collection with the 6, 9, and 12 month  well child visits  timeframes , we can 
increase the probability of families attending both the well visits (to receive the Reach Out and 
Read Program materials) and the study visits (to collect measures of reading activity and 
development). In a previous st udy of 2100 children enrolled in a study of developmental 
screening, we were able to achieve a >90% follow -up rate by coordinating data collection with 
well child visits. In addition, our research staff can check the clinic schedule to ensure families 
have made timely well child visit appointments and then make reminder calls to families prior to 
these visits to encourage parents to attend. Study visits will be held at a location that is preferred 
11 
   
  
   and most convenient for the parent, including but not limite d to: the  clinic , a separate CHOP -
based facility, the  Temple Infant and Child Lab, or another location based on availability and 
parent preference.  
 
3.1.2  Video Sub -study  
Up to 40 participants will be additionally recruited to participate in a n interview and  video 
recorded reading task . Participants will be recruited both from the larger RCT as well as from 
external sources (see Section 8.4). Dyads enrolled in the randomized control trial  who agreed to 
participate in the sub -study at the time of their initial con sent, and who are in the control 
(Traditional board book) arm, will be approached by telephone call , or the method of 
communication that they prefer,  immediately following the  time that they become age- eligible 
for their  9-month well visit . Participants me eting eligibility criteria and recruited external to the 
randomized control trial will be approached for participation at clinic appointments at one of the 
study sites. Participants will be continuously recruited until either the enrollment goal ( 40 dyads)  
is reached  or until saturation of themes is achieved for this qualitative sub -study . Sessions , 
lasting approximately 45 minutes,  will be held at a location that is preferred and most convenient 
for the parent, including but not limited to: the  clinic , a separate CHOP -based facility, the  
Temple Infant and Child Lab, or another location based on availability and parent preference.  
For participants recruited from the larger study, n o additional demographic data will be 
collected, as it will be accessed from t he previously reported data . Participants recruited 
externally for the sub- study will complete the demographic and screening questionnaires that 
were previously collected by the larger study participants upon enrollment. These externally 
recruited particip ants will not participate in or be consented for participation in the larger 
randomized control trial.  
On the day of the video sub -study session, all parents (regardless of whether or not they were 
recruited from within or external to the main RCT) will first be instructed to read a book with 
their child. This reading task will be video recorded by a member of the study staff. Parents will 
be asked to read to their child in the same manner that they had learned from their provider 
during their well -child check as part of Reach Out and Read . Parents will be receiving this 
instruction on dialogic reading, regardless of study arm, as part of the larger study. The selected 
book will be  Sandra Boynton’s Barnyard Dance , which is  the same book that the parti cipants 
recruited from the main RCT study will have received for their  9-month well visit. All 
participants will read the same book with electronic books provided on a tablet device. 
Participants will be randomized on the order they read the types of books  (print book, basic e -
book and enhanced e -book) .  
Following the video -recorded reading tasks, all parents will participate in a 20- minute, semi -
structured, audio -recorded interview with a member of the study staff. An interview guide will 
be developed and piloted with parents of infants prior to use within the study. In the interview, 
12 
   
  
   parents will be asked their behavior s (frequency, duration, style) and perceptions on reading to 
their infant  and whether this would vary based on using print books and electr onic books . All 
participants will be asked the same questions .  
 
3.1.3  Screening Phase  
3.1.3.1  Randomized Control Trial  
About 16% of the children seen at CHOP Primary Care Roxborough , 21% of those seen at 
CHOP Primary Care Indian Valley  and 50% of those seen at CHOP Cob bs Creek  have Medicaid. 
Children will be  eligible to participate in this study if they were born ≥35 weeks estimated 
gestational age, without neurodevelopmental disabilities or congenital malformations, with 
Medicaid insurance (proxy measure for poverty), and at least 4 months of age  at the time of 
enrollment. Children who are born premature <35 weeks  EGA,  who have neurodevelopmental 
disabilities , or who have congenital malformations are at increased risk of language delays and 
will be excluded.  In addition, we will exclude families who do not speak English or Spanish , as 
the main measures of reading activity (StimQ , Appendix 5) and language development ( Bayley 
Scales of Infant Development -III, Appendix 7)  are only available in English and Spanish.  
Potential subjects will be identified at the time of their four month well child visit using the 
electronic health record (EHR). The pediatrician or nurse overseeing the wellness visit will 
receive a notification to inquire whether the parent -child dyad would be interested in 
participating in the study. If the parent indicat es interest,  one of our research staff will be in 
contact to explain the study procedures, and arrange to meet with the parent -child dyad at a time 
before their  6 month wellness visit while the child is between 5 and 7 months of age.  Research 
staff will obtain written informed consent from participants. Participants will be randomized to 
either the digital literacy arm or the standard literacy arm based on random assignment. 
Randomization sequences will be developed by the study team  using computer -generated 
random numbers prior to study enrollment and will be placed in sealed opaque envelopes. 
Randomization will ensure equivalence between groups on measured and unmeasured 
characteristics and is considered to be the strongest protection against bias i n study design.  
 
Written i nformed consent will be obtained in person prior to any study re lated procedures being 
performed. The consenting process  will include a discussion of study rationale , procedures, 
measures, benefits, risks, and alternatives to par ticipation. After consent, subjects will either be 
assigned to the digital literacy arm or the standard literacy arm of the study. Regardless of their 
assignment, once they have consented to participate, they will complete a demographic 
questionnaire (Appe ndix 1), questionnaires about adverse childhood experiences (Appendix 2) 
and health literacy (Appendix 3) , and the Edinburgh Postnatal Depre ssion Scale (EPDS) 
(Appendix 4).  
13 
   
  
   3.1.3.2  Video Sub- study  
Children will be eligible to participate in this sub -study if they were born ≥35 weeks estimated 
gestational age, without neurodevelopmental disabilities or congenital malformations, with 
Medicaid insurance (proxy measure for poverty), and , for participants being recruited externally,  
at least 9 months and 0 days and no m ore than 12  months and 0 days at the time of enrollment. 
As in the randomized control trial, children who are born premature <35 weeks EGA, who have 
neurodevelopmental disabilities, or who have congenital malformations  will be excluded, as they  
are at incr eased risk of language delays.  In addition, we will exclude families who do not speak 
English for this sub -study , as resources are not available in this pilot to execute and code video 
data in additional languages.  
Potential subjects will be identified fro m 1) participants in the randomized control trial that 
previously consented to participate in the sub -study , were randomized into the control group 
(traditional board book arm), and are age- eligible for  their 9 month well visit, and 2) eligible 
patients recruited from the Cobbs Creek clinic who are 9 to 12 months old. For participants 
recruited external to the randomized control trial, study staff will identify eligible participants 
and, when on- site at the time of the appo intment, approach participants in person at the clinic 
before or after their appointment with the clinician. At that time, a member of our study staff will 
explain the study procedures and consent the parent and infant for participation. The consenting 
process will include a discussion of study rationale, procedures, measures, benefits, risks, and 
alternatives to participation. Once they have consented to participate, they will complete a 
demographic questionnaire (Appendix 1), questionnaires about adverse childhood experiences 
(Appendix 2) and health literacy (Appendix 3), and the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale 
(EPDS) (Appendix 4). They will also schedule the parent and child for a study visit at that time if 
the parent is able. Parents who are unable to be scheduled for participation at that time will be 
contacted by study staff via telephone to schedule the study visit.  
3.1.4  Randomized Controlled Trial Treatment Phase (start of the study 
intervention)  
Once recruited  and enrolled , the parent -child dyads w ill be randomized into either the digital or 
standard literacy arm. Parent -infant dyads randomized to the digital literacy arm will receive the 
digital e -book version of  Dr. Seuss’ Hop on Pop for the 6 month well visit, Sandra Boynton’s 
Barnyard Dance  for the 9 month well visit, and Margaret Wise’ Goodnight Moon for the 12 
month well visit . Moreover, they will receive information on the importance of early parent -child 
reading activity by pediatric clinicians.  Information on early literacy will be standardi zed and 
age-based and will be provided to parents by pediatric clinicians at the well visits . 
 
Parent -infant dyads rando mized to the standard literacy arm will receive Dr. Seuss’ Hop on Pop 
for the 6 month well visit, Sandra Boynton’s Barnyard Dance  for th e 9 month well visit, and 
Margaret Wise’ Goodnight Moon for the 12 month well visit . In addition, they will be provided  
information on the importance of parent -child reading activity by pediatric clinicians.  
14 
   
  
   Information on early literacy wil l be standardized and age- based and will be provided to parents 
by pediatric clinicians at the well visits. This conforms to the ROR National Program 
recommendations and is considered standard of care at these 3 clinics . 
To prevent contamination in which pediatric clinicians inadvertently provide books and 
instruction on reading activity to the different arms of the study, a n automated alert will appear 
on the screen of the eligible child’s EHR  at each well visit with a re minder to the health 
professional. This will ensure that books and reading instructions are consistent with their  
assigned study arm . Phone call or text message r eminders will be used  throughout the course of 
the study. The initial reminder  will be made within the first  week  to participants in the digital 
literacy arm to  verify that the participant w as able to download the e- book  if this was not already 
confirmed during the initial visit . Another reminder will be sent out about 1 month after the  
infant has, or is age -eligible for, their   6, 9 and 12 month well visit, either to remind the 
participant to complete the emailed REDCap survey , or for other study -related reminders.   
Children in both study arms will be followed every 3 to 4 months until  they are between 12 and 
18 months, 30 days . Parents  will complete study measures consisting of demographic 
characteristics, postpartum depression symptoms, health literacy, and adverse childhood 
experiences at the initial study visit. P arents  will complet e measures of reading activity at 
baseline, and via the REDCap survey sent by email , or completed  in person, about 1 month after 
the infant  has, or is age -eligible for , their 6, 9 and 12 month well visits . Differences in reading 
activities and language out comes will be assessed between groups using intention -to-treat 
analysis.  
 
Parents of children who are participating in the study will be informed of the results of their 
BSID -III testing  in writing  and/or by phone . Those whose child scores  less than 1.5 standard 
deviations below the mean will  be informed that their child 's development is within the average 
range. Parents whose child  scores 1.5 standard deviations or greater below the mean will be 
informed that their child is exhibiting dela ys in an area of their  development. In addition, we will 
recommend  that the parent inform their  child's clinician of the  result s. 
3.1.5  Video Sub -Study Treatment Phase (start of the study intervention)  
Parents and their infant who are enrolled to participate in the video recorded task will be 
observed during an unstructured reading task, using both an e -book and a standard book, in a 
pre-scheduled visit, outside of their primary care visits. They will not receive any additional 
instruction at this visit. Parents will also participate in a brief, semi -structured interview 
following the reading task.  
3.2 Allocation to Treatment Groups and Blinding  
Participants  will be stratified by clinic site and randomized to receive literacy promotion using 1) 
standard early reader board books or 2) digital electronic early reader e -books . Randomization 
sequences will be developed by the study team  using computer -generated random numbers prior 
15 
   
  
   to study enrollment and will be placed in sealed opaque envelopes , assigning participants to one 
of the two treatment arms .  
Participants in the video sub- study will also be randomized to determine the order in which they 
are asked to read the three versions of the selected book (print, basic e- book, enhanced e -book). 
As with the larger trial, r andomization sequences will be developed by the study team  using 
computer -generated random numbers prior to study enrollment and will be placed in sealed 
opaque envelopes , assigning participants to receive one of the six possible orders of the three 
book ty pes. 
3.3 Study Duration, Enrollment and Number of Sites  
3.3.1 Duration of Study Participation  
The study duration for the randomized control trial  per subject will be approximately 7 months  
following enrollment . The study duration for the video sub -study will be one day of 
participation.  
3.3.2 Total Number of Study Sites/Total Number of Subjects Projected  
The randomized control trial  will be conducted at  three CHOP Care Network Practices: 1) 
Roxborough, located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania , 2) Indian Valley located in Soud erton, 
Pennsylvania  and 3) Cobbs Creek, located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania . These sites have  been 
individually recruited to participate (see PeRC letter of support ) and ha ve agreed to participate.  
Recruitment for the randomized control trial will stop w hen approximately 100 subjects ( 100 
dyads of parent and infant) are enrolled.  Recruitment for the video -taped component will stop 
when approximately  40 participants have completed the video and interview task.  
 
3.4 Study Population  
3.4.1  Randomized Control Trial  
3.4.1.1  Inclusion Criteria  
1) English or Spanish speaking  
2) Child who is between 5 months 0 days and 7 months 0 days at time of enrollment  
and born ≥ 35 weeks estimated gestational age.  
3) Parent (if mother)  must be 15 years or older at the start of the study.  Parent (if father) 
must be 18 years or older at the start of the study.  
4) Parental permission  for the child's participation and consent of the parent for their 
participation  
5) Child with Medicaid Insurance  
16 
   
  
   6) Parent has access to a smartphone and/or tablet   
3.4.1.2  Exclusion Criter ia 
1) Children with neurodevelopmental disabilities or congenital malformation at 
increased risk of language delays  
 
3.4.2  Video Sub -study  
3.4.2.1  Inclusion Criteria  
1) EITHER enrolled in the randomized control trial and age- eligible for their  9 month 
well visit OR (for patie nts recruited externally) >9 months 0days, but <12 months 0 
days old and born ≥ 35 weeks estimated gestational age  
2) Parent (if mother)  must be 15 years or older at the start of the study.  Parent (if father) 
must be 18 years or older at the start of the stud y 
3) Parental permission  for the child's participation and consent of the parent for their 
participation  
4) Child with Medicaid Insurance  
5) Parent has access to a smartphone and/or tablet   
3.4.2.2  Exclusion Criteria  
1) Parent does not speak English  
2) Children with neurodevelopmental disabilities or congenital malformation at 
increased risk of language delays  
 
 
 
Subjects that do not meet all of the enrollment criteria may not be enrolled. Any violations of 
these criteria must be reported in accordance with IRB Policies and Procedures.  
4 STUDY PROCEDURES  
4.1 Screening/Consenting Visit and Study Visit 1  
● Identify eligible  4-month old infants at the time of their well child visit using the 
electronic health record (EHR)  
● Recruit and consent eligible parent -child dyads at or before child’s 6 month well visit . 
● Randomize parent -child dyads  into intervention and control groups . 
● Collect baseline demographic, parent adversity, and  parent  mental health information . 
17 
   
  
    
4.2 Study Treatment Phase  
● Implement an E HR alert to remind clinicians which arm (digital or standard) the  
patients  are in  at time of well visits  at 6, 9 and 12 months . 
● Provide developmentally appropriate standard books or e -books and a bookmark to 
clinicians to give to participants  at 6, 9, and 12 month well visits.  
● Parents will complete measu res of reading activity (StimQ and ERPQ) via REDCap  
survey sent to their email about 1 month subsequent to the time the child  has, or  is age -
eligible for , their  6 and 9 month  well visit s. 
● Phone calls  and/or text messages will be made to all participants throughout the study 
to remind them to schedule and/o r attend well visit , and for other study -related 
reminders.  
● Selected parents will complete a videotaped reading task at a scheduled time 
convenient to the participant and after the participant  becomes age- eligible for their  9 
month  well visit. For parents  enrolled external to the larger randomized control trial, 
this will be the only study visit completed by these participants . These participants will 
complete the study related questionnaires, including the demographic questionnaire, 
the ACE, SAHL, EPDS, S timQ and ERPQ, at the time of th is study visit.  Participants 
enrolled in the sub- study (either within the RCT or externally) will additionally 
complete the paper -based DialogPR -I at the time of their video sub -study visit.  
● Contact participant after the chi ld has, or  is age -eligible for , the 12 month well visit to 
schedule the second study visit.  
● At the second study visit, about 1 month after the child has, or is age -eligible for , the 
12 month well visit, parents will complete measure s of reading activity ( StimQ ,ERPQ  
and DialogPR -I) in addition to a measure concerning depressive symptoms (EPDS), 
and their child will receive a developmental assessment (BSID -III) administered by the 
study’s Early Childhood Assessor . 
 
18 
   
  
   5 STUDY EVALUATIONS AND MEASUREMENTS  
5.1 Screenin g and Monitoring Evaluations and Measurements 
5.1.1 Parental  Adversity (ACE)  
The 9 ACE questions query adults as to their exposure to 9 different adverse childhood 
experiences (economic hardship, domestic violence, parent mental health, discrimination, parent 
substance abuse, divorce, parent death, parent incarceration, and neighborhood violence) and are 
contained in the 2011 -12 National Survey of Children’s Health, a nationally representative 
telephone survey.  
5.1.2 Parental  Health Literacy (SAHL)  
The Short Assessmen t of Health Literacy (SAHL) is a validated measure of health literacy for 
English - and Spanish -speaking populations.  
5.1.3 Parental  Depressive Symptoms (EPDS ) 
The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) is a validated 10 -item scale for postpartum 
depression  symptoms with scores ≥9 having a sensitivity of 97% and specificity of 43% for 
major or minor depression.  
5.1.4 Reading Activity (StimQ)  
The StimQ is an office measure of cognitive stimulation at home available in Spanish and 
English, and the Read subscale of t he StimQ contains questions on the frequency of parent -child 
reading activity and the number and variety of books at home.24 Psychometric analysis of the 
StimQ shows high internal consistency (Cronbach’s Alpha=0.89) and test -retest reliability 
(r=0.84) and moderate correlation with the Bayley Scales of Infant Development (r=0.52, 
p<0.001).  
5.1.5 Reading Practices (ERPQ)  
A series of questions designed by the study team to get a better understanding of the reading 
practices between parents and their babies . 
5.1.6 Language Development (BSID -III) 
The Bayley Scales of Infant Development, Third Edition (BSID -III) is a validated, examiner -
administered assessment of cognitive, language, and motor development. It is designed for 
children 1 to 42 months of age.  
5.1.7 Dialogic Reading P ractices  (DialogPR -Infant ) 
The DialogPR -I is a pilot measure, expanding upon the DialogPR, previously validated in 
children 3- 4 years old. This series of parent self -report questions assesses parent self -reported 
dialogic reading practices. This Infant subscale is modified from  the main , validated  scale to 
19 
   
  
   incorporate non -verbal parent/child dialogic reading interactions, and will be piloted with all 
enrolled participants, either at the second study visit , or at their video sub -study  visit, whichever 
comes first .  
5.1.8 Demographic Questionnaire  
A brief set of questions used to collect demographic information about the participants.  
5.1.9 Standard Text Messages  
Standard text messages will be sent out to participants throughout the study. These text messages 
include an initial text message to welcome participants to the study, as well as text message 
reminders of upcoming well -child visits, to complete the emailed surveys, to download the e -
book (digital arm participants only), and to schedule the final study visit. A dditionally, text 
messages will be sent out to subjects who consented to participate in the videotape sub -study ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
reminding them of their study visit.  
5.1.10  Audio -recording and V ideotaping of  Interviews  
Parent -infant dyads recruited into the vid eotape sub -study will participate in a video recorded 
reading exercise and a brief, audio -recorded semi -structured interview. Parents will be 
videotaped while reading a print book and two versions (basic and enhanced) of an electronic 
book with their infant. As part of this exercise, parents will  also be audio recorded while 
participating in a semi -structured one -on-one interview with a study team member.  Videotaped 
book readings will be analyzed without transcription. Interview audio recordings will be 
transcribed by ADA Transcription ( http://www.adatranscription.com/ ). Audio recordings will be 
de-identified  and sent via their secure server , and subsequent transcripts will be saved on a 
secure server accessed  only b y members of the study team.  
 
6 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  
6.1 Primary Endpoint  
The primary endpoint for the randomized control trial will be the BSID -III scores at the  second 
study visit when the child is between 1 2 and 18 months, 30 days  of age.  
6.2 Secondary Endpoints  
Seco ndary endpoint s will be t he difference in StimQ scores , and  the information about reading 
practices and activities from the ERPQ,  collected approximately 1 month after the infant has, or 
is age -eligible for , their 6, 9, and 12 month  well visits for the randomized control trial , the 
DialogPR -I collected between 9 and 18 months, 30 days , as well as themes derived from the 
transcripts of the  video and audio -recordings  in the Video Sub- study. The Video Sub -study is 
contributing to the ma in study’s exploration of dialogic reading behaviors when comparing e -
20 
   
  
   books to standard board books, and determining the comparative effectiveness of digital literacy 
promotion to standard literacy promotion on parent -child language interaction and parent reading 
behaviors .  
6.3 Statistical Methods  
Summary statistics will be obtained, and differences between digital and standard arms will be 
assessed using intention -to-treat analysis. Cross -sectional differences in StimQ  scores between 
digital and standard groups at the  6, 9 and 12 month well visits will be assessed using t -tests. To 
determine how the effects of digital versus standard literacy is associated with language 
development, we will develop regression models usi ng longitudinal data methods that adjust for 
correlation in BSID -III scores over time and for potential confounding by demographic 
characteristics.   To explore the impact of digital literacy on healthcare utilization, the EHR will 
be reviewed to identify a  subjects’ number of well visits and their vaccination history.   
 
To determine whether parent  adversity, health literacy, and/or parent  mental health modify the 
effects of digital versus standard literacy  on language development, we will develop similar 
regression models using longitudinal data methods, but we will also fit interaction terms between 
study group and ACE score (≥4), SAHL (high or low) and EPDS score (> 10). To determine if 
parent -child reading activity mediates the association of intervention group assignment and 
language development, we will use mediation analysis with separate models regressing group 
assignment on language development, parent -child reading activity on group assignment, and 
group assignment on language development adjusted for  parent -child reading activity.  
 
Assuming a  mean cognitive subscale  on the BSID -III of 96, a  power of 0. 70, an alpha of 0.05, 
and a clinically significant difference of 7.5 points on the BSID -III between groups, we estimate 
that we will need to recruit a total sample size of 1 00 eligible children ( 50 in each group) to 
participate in the main RCT study  (Figure 1) . To attain thematic saturation in the Video Sub -
study, we will recruit up to 40 participants 9- 12 months of age. These 40 participants may be 
recruited external to the main study if we are unable to recruit up to 40 from the 100 enrolled in 
the main study in a timely fashion. All analyses will be conducted using Stata Statistical 
Software, version 13 (College Station , TX).  
Figure 1 
Assuming a mean cognitive subscale of the BSID -III, an alpha 
of 0.05, and an SD of 15.  
 
 Power  n 
0.60 80 
0.65 90 
0.70 100 
21 
   
  
   7 SAFETY  MANAGEMENT  
7.1 Clinical Adverse Events  
Clinical adverse events (AEs) will be monitored throughout the study. The m ain risks are  
disclosure of private health information (PHI)  and study responses and discomfort with 
answering sensitive questions concerning childhood trauma or depressive symptoms . 
7.2 Adverse Event Reporting  
Since the study procedures are not greater than minimal risk, SAEs  are not expected. If any 
unanticipated pro blems related to the research involving risks to subjects or others happen during 
the course of this study ( including SAEs ) they  will be reported to the IRB in accordance with 
CHOP IRB SOP 408: Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects. AEs that a re not 
serious but that are notable and could involve risks to subjects will be summarized in narrative or 
other format and submitted to the IRB at the time of continuing review. We will query 
participants concerning any disclosures of PHI at each study vi sit. We will only query 
participants once concerning childhood trauma at the baseline visit and twice concerning 
depressive symptoms at the baseline and second (final) study visit.  
8 STUDY  ADMINISTRATION  
8.1 Data Collection and Management  
All records generated d uring this study will be kept confidential in accordance with Institutional 
policies and HIPAA on subject privacy. The Investigator and other site personnel will not use 
such data and records for any purpose other than conducting the study.  
Unique identif iers will be created for each subject in the study. REDCap will be used to store the 
data.  A master list containing PHI and subject ID number will be kept separate from data forms 
(electronic and paper). The master list will be kept using password -protecte d files. These files 
will be encrypted and maintained on the CHOP secure server to ensure security.  Participants’ 
information will be stored in the REDCap database and configured to export data without PHI. 
All de -identified records will be retained forever.  De-identified data will be shared with the study 
sponsor. Stored data and patient identifiers will be kept for 6 years subsequent to the study 
completion, and possibly longer if required by the sponsor.  
Any paper copies of research instruments will be stored using the patient’s ID code and will be 
kept in the department of General Pediatrics at The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.  
 All audio and video  recordings will be destroyed within three years of data analysis completion.  
22 
   
  
   8.2 Confidentiality  
All da ta and records generated during this study will be kept confidential in accordance with 
Institutional policies and HIPAA on subject privacy and that the Investigator and other site 
personnel will not use such data and records for any purpose other than con ducting the study 
with the exception of mandatory reporting requirements for child maltreatment.  
No identifiable data will be used for future study without first obtaining IRB approval. The 
research staff will obtain a data use agreement between the provi der (the PI) of the data and any 
recipient researchers (including others at CHOP) before sharing a limited dataset (PHI limited to 
dates and zip codes).  
8.3 Regulatory and Ethical Considerations  
8.3.1 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
Monitoring of adverse events, ma inly disclosure of PHI from medical records and study 
assessment responses, will be ongoing during the intervention period until all data have been de -
identified. Participants will be asked whether they know of any breaches of confidentiality at all 
contac ts with subjects.  All non -serious adverse events including disclosure of information will 
be reported to the CHOP IRB at the time of continuing review and to the funding agency 
annually. The PI will be responsible for overseeing the monitoring plan.  Train ed research 
assistants under the supervision of the Principal Investigator will conduct monitoring of data and 
safety twice annually .  
8.3.2 Risk Assessment  
There is minimal risk for harm to the participant s in this study. Some information collected from 
the study participants on the study assessments is sensitive information and may cause the 
subjects discomfort , e.g. questions concerning childhood trauma or depressive symptoms . This 
could include assessment  of caregiver’s suicidal ideations and a screening of caregiver ’s suicide 
risk in primary care flow. The results of the  screener will be reviewed soon after completion  (See 
Appendix 4).  Dr. Marsha Gerdes, PhD, is a co -investigator and child -psychologist who has 
expertise in early child development and measurement. She will serve as the licensed 
psychologist to contact if screener is positive or suicide risk is high.  This risk is considered 
minimal and no more than what is normally associated with being in a  physician’s or mental 
health practitioner’s office. Furthermore, families incur a risk of disclosure of private health 
information to individuals not connected with this study. This could occur through inadvertent 
disclosure of PHI by research staff. This  risk will be minimized by using the study identifier on 
all study instruments and the research database as well as storing identifying information in a 
separate place than study information.  
 
Unique identifiers will be created for each subject in the stu dy. Any paper forms used will be 
stored in a locked file cabinet. REDCap will be used to store the data. A master list containing 
23 
   
  
   PHI and subject ID number will be kept separate from data forms (electronic and paper). The 
master list will be kept using pas sword -protected files. These files will be encrypted and 
maintained on the CHOP secure server to ensure security. Participants’ information will be 
stored in the REDCap database and configured to export data without PHI. All de -identified 
records will be r etained forever. De-identified data will be shared with the study sponsor.  
8.3.3 Potential Benefits of Trial Participation  
Parents or guardians of the participants in either arm  may not benefit from the digital literacy 
promotion intervention. Parents and their  children may benefit from initiating parent -child 
reading activity earlier with the potential for improved language development.  Information from 
this study could be used to generate generalizable knowledge to reshape the views on digital 
literacy initiat ives, the ROR program and provide information for other early literacy campaigns 
such as Philadelphia’s Read! By 4th and the Great Start Collaborative’s  Early to Read 
Campaign. If results from this study favor the digital book  arm, then administrators of t he ROR 
program and other local and national literacy campaigns can encourage the distribution of 
developmentally appropriate e -books in conjunction with standard books. Nationally , pediatric 
clinicians may benefit by knowing evidence of whether there is a difference in effectiveness of  
language development  in children who are read to by their parents via digital or standard book. 
This may have an impact in environments where access to books may be limited by financial, 
geographical, or time constraints  on parents . Locally, pediatric clinicians could benefit by having 
CHOP’s ROR program expanded to additional areas in the Philadelphia metropolitan area. 
Information from this study can be used by policymakers and grant funders to increase funding 
support to ex pand the ROR program and other local and national literacy campaigns to infants.  
8.3.4 Risk -Benefit Assessment  
The risks to participants are minimal and further minimized through protections. The benefits of 
parents receiving advice and materials through the support of the digital literacy promotion 
program outweigh the risks of participation. Therefore, the risk -benefit ratio is considered 
favorable.  
8.4 Recruitment Strategy 
8.4.1 Randomized Control Trial  
We will have an EHR r ecruitment prompt sent only to potentially eligible children with 
Medicaid at their 4 month well visit at the CHOP Primary Care Roxborough, PA , CHOP Primary 
Care Cobbs Creek  and CHOP Primary Care Indian Valley. Parents who are conceivably 
interested in par ticipating will be contacted by research staff. Research staff will briefly explain 
the study procedures , guided by the information set forth in the approved consent form . This 
includes reading the inclusion criteria to the potential participant, and askin g whether or not this 
individual is interested in participating.  Research staff will then  schedule a time to meet with the 
parent in person . This will happen at a time before their infant’s 6 month well visit  in order to 
obtain informed consent , confirm that all of the inclusion criteria are met,  and randomize the 
24 
   
  
   participant into either the digital or standard book group. In the event that the research staff is 
unable to confirm that all inclusion criteria are met after the participant has been enrolled,  the 
participant will no longer be able to participate.  Additionally, potentially eligible 5 to 7 month 
olds that have been identified by study staff on EPIC as potentially eligible by screening via 
review of the medical record, may be approached in person  before or at the time of their 6 month 
well visit. These potentially eligible participants will be screened, consented and enrolled into 
the study prior to the child’s time with the provider.  
We may  also hang recruitment flyers in the hallways at both cli nics giving information about the 
study and contact information for the study coordinator in case they are interested and we miss 
their names in the screening  process . 
8.4.2 Video Sub- study  
Participants previously screened for the randomized control trial will b e made aware of the video 
sub-study at the time of consent and can elect at that time to include the video sub -study in their 
consent procedure. These participants will be contacted once they have become age- eligible for 
their 9-month well child visit to s chedule the video sub -study visit.  
Additionally, infants and parents not previously enrolled in the randomized control trial 
presenting to the Cobbs Creek site will be approached to participate in the video sub -study. 
These participants will be identified  by study staff on EPIC as potentially eligible by screening 
via review of the medical record . Study staff will screen and consent these participants in person 
prior to the child’s time with the provider.  
8.5 Informed Consent/Assent and HIPAA Authorization  
Following the screening via review of the medical record, eligibility for study participation will 
be explained, either in person or via phone. During the research staff visit subsequent to the 
screening  process , written informed consent will be completed . Research staff will discuss the 
study aims, procedures, risks and benefits, alternatives to participation, and confidentiality 
protocols with the parent . Research staff will speak to the parent  about the voluntary nature of 
participation and provide the pote ntial subject with the opportunity to ask questions about the 
study and its risks and benefits. Parents who consent to participate and who give parental 
permission for the child’s participation, will sign two copies of the informed consent form : one 
will b e kept for study purposes and the other will be provided to the consenting parent. I n order 
to give parental permission for the child to participate, the consenting mother must be at least 15 
years old, or the consenting father must be at least 18 years ol d. Parents will be provided with 
plenty of time to ask questions and to decide whether they want to participate. Parents will be 
explicitly instructed that they are free to choose to participate and that their decision to 
participate will not affect the health care they or their children receive at participating practices.  
Similarly, Spanish -speaking participants will be contacted and recruited to participate in the 
main RCT only (Parent who does not speak English is part of the Exclusion criteria for eligibility 
25 
   
  
   to participate in the Video Sub -study ;see section 3.4.2.2) either in person or via phone by a 
Bilingual member of the study team. When it is time to consent the participant, an interpreter 
will be present and will carry out the Spanish Short Form Consent process with the Spanish -
speaking subject.  
Participants  in the randomized control trial who agree to participate in the video  sub-study  will 
provide their consent by indicating whether or not they would be  willing to participate in this  
additional study visit in a section of the consent form for the randomized control trial. 
Participants recruited for the video sub -study who are enrolled external to the larger trial will 
complete a consent form at the time of enrollment. This consent will be for participation limited 
to the video sub -study.  Study staff will follow the procedures outlined above to consent 
participants into this sub -study. Of note, non- English speaking participants will not be enrolled 
in the sub- study (see exclusion criteria), as it is infeasible at this time to conduct and analyze 
these qualitative data in languages other than English.  
 
8.6 Payment to Subjects/Families  
8.6.1 Payment s to parent for time and inconvenience (i.e. compensation)  
All participants  will be paid up to $70 total for their participation. They will receive $ 20 upon 
completion of the i nitial study visit. They will then receive $ 5 upon completion of  each of the 
two surveys emailed to them . At the second (final) study visit,  they will receive $ 40. All 
payments will be made in the form of pre -paid, CHOP -issued debit cards.   
Participants recruited to participate in the video -taped reading task will receive an additiona l $50 
pre-paid card at the completion of the visit.   
8.6.2 Gifts  
Participants  will receive  three books over the course of the study, one for  each well visit ( 6 
months, 9 months and 12 months ).  All parents  will receive a small  non-monetary  gift of a Reach 
Out and Read tote bag filled with 3 additional books  to thank them for participating at the en d of 
the final study visit . Participants in the video sub -study will receive an additional book at the 
time of their participation.  
 
9 PUBLICATION  
We propose a multipronged dissemination strategy for this study that will have the goal of 
distributing study results to scientific audiences, lay audiences, policy audiences, and parents. If 
funded, we will work with the Strategy Team at Policylab at CHOP  to implement this 
26 
   
  
   dissemination strategy. We will present findings from this study at the Pediatric Academic 
Societies annual meeting, where pediatric clinicians, early literacy experts, and Reach Out and 
Read advocates attend. We will also develop  as ma ny as 3 peer-reviewed manuscripts for 
publication  and target them to pediatric and child health journals in order to reach a clinical and 
scientific audience. One manuscript will report the overall results of the randomized controlled 
trial of digital literacy promotion vs. standard literacy promotion. A second  paper will detail the 
analyses of the video recorded data, while a potential third  will cover the methodology of 
validating parent reported data to the observed video -taped behaviors.  
To reach lay an d policy audiences with findings from this study, we will place a summary of the 
results of the study on the Policylab website ( http://policylab.chop.edu/  ) and tweet the results to 
our Policylab twitter follow ers. This latter group is a diverse group of individuals from policy, 
advocacy, government, and clinical fields. We will also prepare an Evidence- to-Action (ETA) 
policy brief, which attempts to capture the policy implications of the study findings. ETA briefs, 
which are developed at Policylab, are mailed and/or emailed to policymakers and child health 
advocates on our distribution list.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
   
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 REFERENCES  
1 National Research Council and Institute of Medicine. From neurons to neighborhoods: 
the science of early childhood development. Committee on Integrating the Sci ence of 
Early Childhood Development. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2000.  
 
2 American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Children with Disabilities. 
Developmental surveillance and screening of infants and young children. Pediatrics. 
2001;108(1):192- 196. 
 
3 Hart B, Risley TR. Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young 
American children. Baltimore, MD: Paul Brookes Publishing Company; 1995.   
 
4 Rosenberg SA, Zhang D, R obinson CC. Prevalence of developmental delays and 
participation in early intervention services for young children. Pediatrics. 
2008;121:e1503- 1509.  
 
5 Boyle, C., P. Decoufle, et al. (1994). “Prevalence and health impact of developmental 
disabilities in US c hildren.” Pediatrics.;93:399- 403. 
 
6 Fernald A, Marchman VA, Weislederissue A. SES differences in language processing 
skill and vocabulary are evident at 18 months. Dev Sci. 2013;16:234- 238. 
 
7 American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Children with Disabil ities. The 
pediatrician's role in the development and implementation of an Individual Education 
Plan (IEP) and/or an Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP). Pediatrics. 1999;104:124-
127. 
 
28 
   
  
   8 CDC. Economic costs associated with mental retardation, cerebral pals y, hearing loss, 
and vision impairment - United States 2003. MMWR. 2004;53(3):57- 59. 
 
9 Hoff-Ginsberg E. Mother -child conversation in different social classes and 
communicative settings. Child Dev. 1991;62:782- 796. 
 
10  Payne AC, Whitehurst GJ, Angell aL. The ro le of home literacy environment in the 
development of language ability in preschool children from low -income families. Early 
Child Res Q. 1994:427- 440. 
 
11 Weinberger J. A longitudinal study of children's early literacy experiences at home and 
later literacy development at home and school. J Res Reading. 1996;19:14- 24. 
 
12 Senechal M, Lefevre J, Thomas EM, Daley KE. Differential effects of home literacy 
experiences on the development of oral and written language. Reading Res Q.  
1998;33:96- 116. 
 
13 Klass P, Needlman R, Zuckerman B. Reach Out and Read Program Manual, 2nd Ed. 
Boston, MA: Reach Out and Read National Center, Boston Medical Center; 1999.  
 
14 Needleman R, Fried LE, Morley DS, Taylor S, Zuckerman B. Clinic -based intervention 
to promote literacy. Am J Dis Child.  1991;145:881 -884. 
 
15 High P, Hopmann M, LaGasse I, Linn H. Evaluation of a clinic -based program to 
promote book sharing and bedtime routines among low -income urban families with 
young children. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1998;152:459- 465. 
 
16 Mendelsohn AL, Mogilner LN, Dreyer BP, et al. The impact of a clinic -based literacy 
intervention on language development in inner -city preschool children. Pediatrics. 
2001;107:130- 134. 
 
17 Council on Early Childhood. Policy Statement: Literacy promotion: an e ssential 
component of primary care pediatric practice. Pediatrics. 2014;134:404 -409. 
 
18 Garrison M, Christakis D. A teacher in the living room? Menlo Park, CA: The Henry J. 
Kaiser Family Foundation;2005.  
 
19 Parish -Morris J, Mahajan N, Hirsh -Pasek K, Golinkoff  RM, Fuller Collins M. Once upon 
a time: Parent -child dialogue and storybook reading in the electronic era. Mind Brain 
Educ. 2013;7:200- 211. 
 
 
29 
   
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX  
See attached . 