Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 1 of 32
Protocol Title:
Understanding and Intervening  with Heavy 
Drinking Among Patients with  HIV and  
HCV: Clinical Trial
Protocol Number:
7649
First Approval:
08/22/2018
Expiration Date:
07/08/2021Version Date:
07/01/2020
Clinic:
Leiber Research Clinic
Contact Principal Investigator:
Jennifer Elliott
Email: Elliott@nyspi.columbia.edu
Telephone: 646-774-7953Co-Investigator(s):
Deborah Hasin, PHD
Research Chief:
Myrna Weissman, PHD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
I am submitting an  annual continuation  without modifications 
Division & Personnel
Division
What Area Group does the PI belong to?Epidemiology & Population ScienceWhat Division/Department does the  PI belong  to?
Division of Translational  Epidemiology
Within the division/department, what Center  or group are you affiliated with, if  any? 
Substance Dependence Research  Group
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 2 of 32
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
consultant:  Scott  Friedman, MD, Mount  Sinai
Application for Continuation of Research
Status
Current Status  of Study: 
All research interventions were completed. Only data analysis is ongoing.
Summary of  Experiences  to Date
Please provide a summary  of scientific progress of  the study and the experience of research participants,  to 
date. This requirement is designed to allow for  the investigator and  the IRB to  reassess the study’s  risks  and 
benefits in terms  of developments in the  field, changing practice patterns, and  new  IRB policies and  
procedures.Recruitment and data collection are now complete. We had  45 individuals consent into the trial  and 31 
participants complete one  or more study sessions. We have just completed  data  collection. Although  we 
would have liked  to continue recruitment to reach our n=60 goal, we were delayed in finding a  clinic and 
launching data collection,  had delays in recruitment  efforts, and were only  able to  recruit  about half of the 
desired sample size. The  data have  not yet been analyzed, but anecdotally, participants  have told us that they  
have found  the study to  be helpful in decreasing  their drinking. Although these comments often came  from 
intervention participants,  even some control participants  expressed  appreciation  for the study, which  got 
them to think about  their  drinking. We are requesting  this continuation for data analysis only.
Funding
Have there  been  any changes in funding status since the prior  approval? 
NoHave the principal  investigator and other investigators made all required disclosures of financial  interest  in 
the study sponsor/product?Yes
Summary
Have there  been  any study findings, recent literature, or untoward events occuring here or at other sites in  
the past  year which  might  affect the analysis of the  safety, risks or benefits of study participation? 
YesPlease indicate how the  new information affects  the study's  risk/benefit analysis and comment on whether 
consent form changes  are necessary. 
COVID-19 would raise risks  for in-person data collection. Because of this, all study sessions have been 
conducted remotely,  consistent with NYSPI  guidelines, in  response to  the pandemic.  No participant 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 3 of 32
activities have been done in-person  since  the NYSPI directive  to shift  to remote data collection. Data 
collection is now complete. No changes to the CF are indicated given that risks were minimized through  a 
shift to remote research  and because  data collection is now complete.
Have there  been  any serious adverse events  (serious and/or unanticipated  problems  involving risks to  
subjects or others  at this  site which occured in the  past year)?  
NoHave all study staff with a  significant role in the design or implementation  of the human subject components 
of this study  received required training in human research subject protections?
YesIs the study covered by a certificate of confidentiality? YesCertificate expiration date (mm/dd/yyyy) 
NA
Overall Progress
Approved sample size5 formative / 5 pretest / 80 trial
Total number  of participants enrolled to date
5 formative / 7 pretest enrolled  (5 completed baseline) /  45 trial
Number of participants  who  have completed the study to date 
5 formative / 5 pretest / 31 trial  (31 completed  1 or more  study appts, 14 withdrawn/discontinued before 
baseline as  detailed below, data collection now closed)
Have there  been  any significant deviations  from the anticipated study recruitment, retention or completion 
estimates? YesDescribe actions taken or  planned to address  these  problems. 
For the trial we  anticipated consenting  n=80 participants of which n=60 would complete baseline. However 
due to delays in finding a clinic and  in recruitment,  and the impending end-of-grant,  we were only  able to  
consent n=45  into the study, of whom n=31 completed at least one  study session.  Although we made every 
effort to  maximize our recruitment, we were unable  to recruit  more in  the timeframe  of grant funding.
Comments / additional information The K23 grant was originally funded through 1/30/20,  was extended to  6/30/20 in  a first  NCE, and is now  
extended until 9/30/20 through  a second  NCE. Although this  will allow for time for data analysis, it does not 
accommodate continued recruitment.
Sample Demographics
Specify populationformative research - HIV/HCV co-infected  heavy drinkers
Total number  of participants enrolled from this population to  date  
5 consented /  5 engaged in study sessions
Specify population  #2
pretest - HIV/HCV  co-infected heavy  drinkers
Total number  of participants enrolled from this population to  date  
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 4 of 32
7 consented /  5 engaged in study sessions
Specify population  #3
trial - HIV/HCV co-infected heavy drinkersTotal number  of participants enrolled from this population to  date  
45 consented / 31 engaged in study sessions
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown 
Formative Research  Participants (n=5) 
  African Am/Black
 Hispanic/Latino
White
 Other/Multiple
Total 
Male  5  0  0  0  5
 Female  0  0  0  0  0
 Transgender
 0  0  0  0  0
 Total  5  0  0  0  5
 
 Pretest Participants  (n=7)
  * One participant discontinued study.** One participant was  withdrawn  from the  study. 
  African Am/Black
 Hispanic/Latino
 White
 Other/Multiple
Total 
Male  6*  0  0  0  6
 Female  1**  0  0  0  1
 Transgender
 0  0  0  0  0
 Total  7  0  0  0  7
 
Trial Participants (consented n=45)
 * n=5 discontinued from study, n=2 withdrawn from study.
** n=2  discontinued from study, n=1 withdrawn from  study.
*** n=1  discontinued from study, n=3 withdrawn from  study.
African Am/Black
Hispanic/Latino
White
Other/MultipleTotal
Male 24* 6*** 2 0 32
Female 11** 1 0 0 12
Transgender
1 0 0 0 1
Total 36 7 2 0 45
Summary of  Current Year's Enrollment and  Drop-out  
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 5 of 32
Number of participants  who  signed consent  in the past year
45Did the investigator  withdraw participants from the study? 
YesCircumstances of  withdrawal:
Participants consent into the study before completing final  eligibility  screening; their participation  in the 
study is contingent on passing this final screening.  Therefore, meeting  exclusion criteria at this point 
requires withdrawing them from  study  participation.
Trial: One participant was disqualified  from the study after health information request confirmed  that 
participant did  not have a history of Hepatitis  C infection (an inclusion  criterion), despite participant’s  initial 
self-report. Five participants were disqualified  based  on high-risk exclusion criteria,  as assessed after 
consent per  protocol (n=4 were at  risk for alcohol withdrawal and n=1 affirmed  anti-psychosis  medication).  
Risk was assessed according to protocol, appropriate resources were provided, and no emergency referrals  
were needed.Did participants  decide  to discontinue study involvement? 
YesCircumstances of  discontinuation:
Trial: Eight participants consented into the study but could not be  scheduled for their baseline appointment 
despite repeated efforts to contact them and  in many cases repeated no-shows.  Aside from  these 8 
participants who  did not attend baseline  and the 6 withdrawn from  the study (enumerated  above),  all 
participants completed baseline. Efforts  were made  to retain participants following  baseline, but  some were 
lost to  follow-up because they either  could  not be reached, no-showed, or chose not to attend. However, 31  
completed at least one  study session. Data  collection is now closed.
Procedures
To create the protocol summary form,  first indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Psychiatric Assessment
   Collection of Biological  Specimens
   Psychotherapy Trial
   Audio or Videotaping
   Internet-based Data Collection  or Transmission
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Adults
   Individuals with HIV/AIDS
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 6 of 32
   Substance Users
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?NoIs the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
YesSelect the number of external  sources of funding that  will be applicable to  this study
Funding Source #1
Is the PI  of the grant/contract the same  as the PI of the IRB protocol? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract is currently fundedSource of FundingFederalInstitute/AgencyNational Institute  on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
Grant NameUnderstanding and intervening  with heavy  drinking among patients with HIV and HCV
Grant NumberK23AA023753Select one of the followingSingle SiteBusiness OfficeRFMHDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
No
Study Location
Indicate if the  research  is/will be conducted at any  of the  following
   NYSPI
   Other Columbia University Medical  Center  Facilities
This protocol  describes research conducted  by the  PI at other facilities/locations
No
Lay Summary of Proposed  Research 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 7 of 32
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
Among patients  with HIV,  especially those also infected with  HCV, heavy drinking is associated  with  
significant risks to health. However, little is known about how to best  intervene  with co-infected heavy 
drinkers, a particularly high risk group for  whom targeted  intervention  has not been  developed. Therefore, I  
propose to test a  newly developed drinking-reduction intervention for patients  with both HIV and  HCV, 
which combines components of successful interventions developed for HIV and for liver disease patients.We will recruit 80 HIV/HCV co-infected drinkers  from HIV primary care in  order to ensure 60 eligible and 
enrolled trial participants,  which should yield an adequate final sample  size of  45 participants completing 
the study. Participants will be randomly assigned to an intervention or control condition, while ensuring that equal numbers of individuals with alcohol use  disorder are assigned to  each  condition. The intervention 
condition will receive brief  in-person  sessions  with a  counselor  and will be asked to  use a smartphone app  
daily to keep track  of drinking  and other health  behaviors for two months. The intervention  sessions will 
include information about HIV, HCV and  alcohol, and the counselor will give the participant information 
about their liver function  and alcohol use to try to motivate them  to drink less. The control  condition will 
simply be asked to drink less  and will be given pamphlets with general information on HIV, Hepatitis C, 
and drinking from educational websites on HIV/HCV  co-infection.  We will then evaluate whether the 
intervention condition was more effective at reducing drinking than the control condition.
Background, Significance  and Rationale
Background, Significance and RationalePatients with HIV have  high rates of heavy  drinking and alcohol problems,  and face serious medical  
consequences from this  use. Some research  suggests that alcohol  can increase viral  load and decrease CD4 
(cluster of  differentiation  4; e.g.,  T helper  cells) count, although this literature is conflicting.  It also increases 
risk for liver  damage, as does hepatitis co-infection,  making liver disease a leading cause  of death  for 
patients with HIV.  Patients  with alcohol problems are also less adherent to antiretroviral therapy (ART), and 
some intentionally skip ART  to try to avoid  hepatotoxic effects of combining ART with alcohol. Some  
studies also show alcohol's  interference with other aspects of engagement in  HIV care.
Approximately 25% of  HIV-infected patients are co-infected with HCV. Although HCV alone  can lead  to 
liver damage, HIV  accelerates this  progression,  as does heavy drinking. Further, individuals with HCV who 
drink heavily may be less likely to access  HCV  medication.  Despite serious health risks  associated with  
alcohol use, some research suggests that  HIV/HCV patients drink more than HIV mono-infected patients. 
Growing recognition of alcohol-related harm in HIV patients has stimulated the development  of drinking 
reduction interventions for HIV-infected heavy drinkers,  some of which have been successful. Some 
interventions for  HCV mono-infected drinkers  and liver disease patients have also shown promise. Yet we 
know of  no successful  interventions that target HIV/HCV  co-infected  patients,  a group with  elevated 
drinking and particularly high consequences  of drinking.  Interventions for HIV patients  address HIV health 
but do not address liver  fibrosis, which is an urgent  threat to  survival for co-infected patients. Interventions 
for liver  disease patients  discuss  fibrosis to motivate  drinking reduction,  but neglect HIV and important 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 8 of 32
topics such as ART adherence.  Given  that the drinking interventions for HIV and liver  disease  patients both 
effectively target drinking in medical patients, albeit  through attention to  different  medical  issues, such 
approaches can and  should be integrated  to provide an intervention that best  meets the needs of patients with 
both HIV and HCV, a  particularly high-risk group.
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
The aim is to pilot test a  newly adapted intervention  for HIV/HCV  co-infected patients that integrates 
features from  existing interventions for HIV  patients and liver disease patients.
 
Primary Hypothesis: 
At end-of-treatment (60 days) and  30 days after treatment (90 days), mean drinks per drinking day will be  
lower in the  intervention (Clinician's Guide + HealthCall for HIV/HCV) than in  the educational  control  
condition.
Secondary Hypotheses: 
At end-of-treatment (60 days) and  30 days after treatment (90 days), other  measures of alcohol use (drinking 
frequency, maximum  quantity, frequency of  binge drinking and intoxication) with  be lower, and  readiness  
to change drinking  and self-efficacy to change drinking will be higher, in  the intervention  (Clinician's Guide 
+ HealthCall for  HIV/HCV) than  in the educational control condition.
Exploratory analyses:
Determine whether intervention efficacy  differs between these with and  without alcohol  dependence, and 
between those with and  without alcohol use disorder. 
Description of Subject Population
Sample #1
Specify subject  population
Formative Research  - HIV/HCV co-infected heavy drinkers
Number of completers  required to accomplish study aims
5Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain  required number  of completers
5Age range of subject  population
18-99 (inclusive)
Sample #2
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 9 of 32
Specify subject  population
Pretest - HIV/HCV co-infected heavy drinkersNumber of completers  required to accomplish study aims
5Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain  required number  of completers
5Age range of subject  population
18-99 (inclusive)
Sample #3
Specify subject  population
Trial - HIV/HCV co-infected heavy drinkersNumber of completers  required to accomplish study aims
We will recruit 80 participants to ensure that  60 meet eligibility criteria and agree to  participate. A final 
sample size  of 45 (assuming 75% retention  from 60 enrolled patients)  is adequate  for detecting large 
differences (d=0.85) with 80% power.Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain  required number  of completers
80Age range of subject  population
18-99 (inclusive)
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
I will recruit  co-infected patients regardless of gender  and race/ethnicity. We recently  conducted a brief 
survey at the CUMC/NYP  HIV clinic, which provides data on the expected demographic breakdown of the 
co-infected patients at  this clinic.  For those with HIV/HCV, 80% were male, 18%  female, and  2% 
transgender, a  realistic  approximation of what to expect for this  study. Of  these co-infected participants  
(who were  invited to endorse as many racial/ethnic identities as applied), 56% identified  as Black, 26% as 
Hispanic, 15% as White, 10% as Native  American, and 8% as Other, again  a realistic approximation  of what 
we can expect in the proposed study. We  are also expecting  to recruit co-infected patients through 
RecruitMe, Craigslist, and newspaper advertisements which will expand our recruitment catchment  area to 
the entire  NYC  area  and reflect greater diversity.
This largely mirrors nationally  representative data published by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC)  on HIV-infected injection drug users  (a close approximation  of the HIV/HCV co-infected  
population), wherein 19% were female and 81%  male, with a very  similar racial/ethnic breakdown (48% 
Black, 27% Hispanic/Latino, 20% White, 5% other/multiple races).  Therefore, we can  have confidence that 
our results will be  generalizable to the HIV/HCV co-infected population at large.
Description of subject population
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 10 of 32
The following table describes the types of participants that will be  a part of each sample population. Each 
type of participant  reflects the four  recruitment  methods we will use to  identify patients  for this study (see 
Recruitment Procedures). 
 
Study PopulationRecruitment 
MethodTypes of Participants Formative 
ResearchPretest Trial
(1)Patients who present to the CUMC/NYP  clinic for 
care and are identified as  potentially  eligible  by 
the recruiter  and referred to the research team for  
formal screeningX X X
(2)Patients  identified  as potentially  eligible by the 
recruiter from a database  (of previous  participants  
interested in clinic research) and referred to 
research team for formal screeningX X X
(3)Interested  patients  who call the research team  
directly  for formal screening after referral from 
flyers or  advertisements.X X X
(4)Interested  patients in the NYC area who self-refer 
through RecruitMe and  agree to be contacted  by 
the research team for formal  screening.  X
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Participants will be  recruited in the following settings:
 
(1) at an HIV primary care clinic  where they are receiving treatment (Comprehensive  Health  Program, New 
York Presbyterian Hospital, Harkness Pavilion, 180 Fort  Washington,  6th Floor, New  York, NY 10032) and
 
(2) through  advertisement on RecruitMe, an  online based recruitment tool, where interested potential 
participants can provide their contact information to the research team for formal screening. 
- A flyer  will be distributed at various  HIV clinics and social service agencies and  a listing will be posted on 
Craigslist as well  to direct patients to this RecruitMe posting.
- We will also advertise  in the AM New York and Metro New York newspapers in  effort  to increase 
visibility and expand recruitment efforts  further  in the NYC area (please see attached advertisement text).
- A Google ad  will also  be run to target potential participants who  search for key  words related  to our study 
(please see attached google ad  example).
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 11 of 32
How and by whom  will subjects be approached  and/or recruited? 
We will use four recruitment  methods to identify  potentially eligible participants  as described below.  Once 
identified, all potentially  eligible participants  will be  formally screened by the research  coordinator.
 
An existing study recruiter who is  employed by the Columbia University Department of Infectious Diseases 
(Christian A. Vivar Ramon, uni=cav2138 through 07/26/19; replaced by Megan K.  Urry, uni=mku2102) 
regularly screens patient medical records  as they  present to the clinic for care and approaches them for 
various studies being  conducted in the Comprehensive  Health  Program. The recruiter is able to  approach 
patients about their interest in various  studies by speaking with participants  directly or speaking with  the 
patient's providers who gauge the  patient's interest  before the recruiter meets with  them  for screening.
 
For our study the recruiter will maintain a tracking list of all potentially  eligible  co-infected  HIV and 
Hepatitis C  clinic  patients which will ensure  our recruitment efforts  are comprehensive and not  redundant. 
The recruiter will maintain  this list through preliminary screening of clinic medical records and will use it to 
track patients who:
- have already screened for the study,
- have already enrolled in the study,
- have yet to be screened and have  an upcoming scheduled clinic visit  (cross referenced with the clinic's 
scheduling list)  where they can be screened.
- have yet to be screened, but  do not have an upcoming scheduled clinic visit.
 
 (Recruitment  method  1) - patients who present at the clinic  for care, where one  of two scenarios will  occur:
The recruiter will approach  potential participants by  review  of their  medical  records and  gauge their 
interest by briefly explaining  the study. If they are interested, the potential  participant will fill  out a  
Consent-to-Contact Form that  will be given to the research coordinator.  The recruiter will then call  
the research coordinator, who will conduct a brief phone screen  (see script) immediately  to 
determine eligibility,  or call the participant  within one week to  complete  screening if  preferred.  If 
eligible, the research  coordinator will coordinate a  time with the  participant to obtain informed 
consent and finalize screening as detailed further in the Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria. 
The recruiter will manage a calendar using the tracking list described to  record  when potentially 
eligible co-infected patients  are scheduled for a clinic visit. The calendar will contain  no PHI so that 
the research coordinator  can use it to determine  when  she should  speak with scheduled  patient's 
provider. When speaking with  the provider,  the research coordinator will request  that the provider  
gain the patient's verbal consent to allow the research coordinator to meet with the patient for an  on-
site screening during their visit. If verbal consent  is obtained, the research coordinator will explain  
the study, complete the brief phone screen in-person, and  schedule the informed consent either  
directly afterward  or at  mutually agreeable time. If a patient  misses their scheduled visit, the 
recruiter will  mail out an opt-in letter (described  in recruitment method 3) to  gauge  the patient's 
interest instead. 
(Recruitment method  2) - patients from the database of previous participants of clinic  research  who have 
agreed to be contacted for  future studies
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 12 of 32
The recruiter is also able to  maintain  a database of patients who  have participated in other studies 
and have agreed to be  contacted for future  studies at the clinic. The recruiter will review  the database  
and identify patients who may be potentially eligible. 
The recruiter will use the Recruiter Phone Script and Verbal Consent form  to call the patient and 
assess their interest in the study. 
If interested, the  recruiter will gain verbal consent  from the potential  participant using the form  and 
provide it  to the  research coordinator to conduct  a brief phone  screen (see script)  to determine  
eligibility
If eligible, the research  coordinator will schedule an informed  consent  appointment at the clinic and  
then finalize screening.
The recruiter may  also provide interested potential  participants the contact information for research study 
staff, so that interested potential participants  may  call the research coordinator directly for initial phone 
screening after obtaining  verbal consent.  
 
(Recruitment Method 3) - Referrals via flyers  in CUMC/NYP clinic
In addition, we  will advertise the  study  to patients  through  flyers in the waiting room  of the  
CUMC/NYP clinic.
We will also utilize an  opt-in  letter (see  attached) which will be  mailed out by the recruiter to 
patients who may  be potentially eligible,  but do not have a  scheduled upcoming clinic  visit where 
they can be screened in-person. We  will include  a copy of the Key Information page  of the Informed 
Consent so  that patients  have a chance  to learn  more about the study and if  interested, may contact 
the research coordinator  directly  for screening. 
We will also distribute the flyers during  staff meetings where we will describe the study to  make the 
staff aware  that some of  their patients may be  participating and invite referrals.  
Patients who self-refer from these  methods will call the research coordinator, whose number is 
provided on the  flyer. 
During the call the research coordinator will request verbal  consent  and conduct a brief phone  screen 
(see script)  to determine eligibility.
If eligible, the research  coordinator will schedule an informed  consent  appointment at the clinic and  
then finalize screening.
(Recruitment Method 4 - for trial only) -  RecruitMe  - web-based advertisement to patients  in NYC metro 
area
If they are found eligible, the potential participant  will provide  their  contact information (name, 
email, phone number).
Once contact  information is obtained,  the research coordinator will call  the participant and request 
verbal consent using the RecruitMe Phone  Screening and Script to conduct a  brief phone screen to  
determine eligibility.
If the potential participant is found eligible, they will be scheduled  for an informed consent 
appointment at  the NYSPI  offices  and will finalize  screening.
Those who call the research coordinator  directly and who are  not CUMC/NYP patients, will also  be 
directed to the  study's website to complete prescreening through  RecruitMe.
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 13 of 32
Flyers will be distributed to various  HIV clinics and social  service  agencies  in the NYC area to 
inform potentially  eligible participants of the study and  to direct them to our RecruitMe posting.  
Permission from sites will be obtained  and documented to  the IRB prior to  posting. If requested, we 
will visit the clinics and  agencies/organizations to speak with  providers  about the study to help 
increase its  visibility. We will also allow providers to  include information about our study and  flyer  
in announcements and  newsletters they produce and publish  as part of their outgoing materials. 
Additionally we will allow providers  to post our flyers at their agencies  and clinics where they 
would be accessible to  interested potential  participants who  would be directed on how to  screen 
further for eligibility.
In addition  to the  flyer distribution, we will post a listing on Craigslist  to advertise recruitment  for 
our study. The listing will direct interested  potential participants to visit RecruitMe or to call directly 
to complete screening (please see  attached  Craigslist listing example).
To further  maximize our recruitment efforts, we will also  place  advertisements in the AM New York  
and Metro New York newspaper and  place  targeted Google  ads in an effort to reach  our target 
population. 
We will also include the  research team's phone number in the flyer, newspaper  advertisements,  
Craigslist listing,  and Google ad  which will allow potential participants to  call us directly for 
screening, in order  not to  exclude  those without internet access and/or the computer literacy required 
to use RecruitMe. We  will follow the  "RecruitMe  Phone  Screening  and Script"  for such participants 
and will conduct  risk assessment according  to the  RecruitMe protocol  for outside patients  (not 
affiliated with CUMC/NYP).
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
Please see  above  for our recruitment  process, including recruitment through an  official recruiter  at the 
CUMC/NYP clinic, use of flyers,  advertisements in the newspapers, opt-in letters, and referrals from 
providers. The study  will also be advertised on the internet through RecruitMe, a web-based recruitment 
tool, to reach  patients  of other clinics  who are  eligible in  the NYC area, as described above.
 
 To inform  potential participants of the RecruitMe advertisement, we will post flyers (see attached)  in 
various HIV clinics and agencies throughout  the NYC area  as well as a  listing  in the volunteers section of 
Craigslist.org, targeted  Google ads, and advertisements in  the AM New York and  Metro New  
York newspapers. See attached  confirmations from each approved location:
 
* Hep Free NYC  (https://hepfree.nyc/category/research/) – a  network of providers in  NYC dedicated to 
improving health outcomes for people  at risk for or living with  Hepatitis B and  C
 
* Callen-Lorde Community Health Center
- Callen-Lorde: 356 West 18th St, New York, NY 10011 
- Callen-Lorde Bronx: 3144  3rd Ave, Bronx, NY 10451
-  Thea Spyer Center: 230 West 17th St,  New  York, NY 10011
 
* Montefiore Medical Center - The Center  for Positive Living/Infectious  Diseases Clinic 
- Family  Care Center, 3rd Floor 3444 Kossuth Avenue Bronx, NY 10467
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 14 of 32
* Cornell Clinical Trials Unit- Chelsea Clinic:  53 West 23rd Street,  6th Floor  New  York, NY 10010
- Uptown Clinic: 525 East  68th Street,  Baker  24 New York, NY 10065
 
* Alliance for Positive Change
- The Alliance  Headquarters: 64 W. 35th St, 3rd Floor, New York,  NY 10001
- The Alliance  CASA Washington Heights: 2036 Amsterdam Ave, New York,  NY 10032
- The Alliance  Keith  Haring Harlem Center: 315 East 104th St,  East  Harlem,  NY 10029
- The Pelham  Grand:  1870 Pelham Parkway  South, Bronx, NY 10461
- The Alliance  Luis  & Lillian  Outreach  Center:  150 First  Avenue,  New York, NY 10009
- The Alliance  Lower East Side Harm Reduction  Center: 25 Allen St, New  York, NY 10002
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
YesDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
YesPlease provide the NCT Registration Number[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
No
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name the subject group/sub sampleTrial - HIV/HCV co-infected heavy drinkers  (PRIMARY  SAMPLE: see below  for modifications  used in 
formative and pretest work)Create or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them
Please note:  The trial will be the primary  sample  used  to assess intervention efficacy  of this study. The study  
start up consisting of  the formative research and pretest used modifications of this  primary  criteria as 
explained below.
  
Inclusion Criteria: Determined  by:
(1)* Age 18 through  99 (inclusive)
(2)* HIV infection
(3)*Ever been diagnosed with HCV infection  
(regardless  of treatment  status;  including 
active or remitted  infection)Recruitment method 1 & 2: Recruiter who will check patients'  medical chart 
Recruitment method 3 &4: Research  
coordinator at time of  phone screen 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 15 of 32
(4)Recent (last 12  months) liver panel results 
availableRecruitment method 1 & 2: Recruiter may  
note status of  (4) if available  
All methods : research coordinator will 
query at  time  of phone screen  . 
(5)During prior 30 days, ≥4 drinks in one 
day at least once**
(6)* Can speak and  read in English
(7)*Current and regular HIV  care in the NYC 
metro  areaAll methods:  Research coordinator at time 
of phone screen
 *Items (1), (2), (3), (6),  and (7) will also be determined at prescreening for participants  enrolled through 
RecruitMe. 
**We define  heavy drinking  as 4+ drinks (regardless  of gender), following the precedent  of a recent 
drinking reduction trial in HIV primary care (Hasin et al., 2013, PMID: 23432593).
 
We do NOT  require prior drinking reduction or cessation as an  inclusion criterion. Requiring participants to 
cut down or stop drinking to be  eligible for the  study  defeats the purpose  of the study, which  is to  provide an 
intervention to help participants make this change. The intervention uses  screening and  brief  intervention to 
increase motivation,  desire, and effort to decrease drinking among those  who are not help-seeking but  who 
are at high risk for  drinking-related  harm. Participants will be informed that  this study is designed to help 
them drink  less;  therefore, they can choose  not to participate if they find this disagreeable.
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them
Exclusion Criteria: Determined by:
(1)Participation in ongoing 
HealthCall study at 
Montefiore HospitalAll methods : Research  coordinator at  time of phone screen 
will ask about  their  participation in that research study.
(2)Potential participant has  
definite plans to leave the 
greater New  York 
metropolitan area during 
study periodAll methods:  Research coordinator who will ask if they have 
definite plans to leave  the NYC  area in the next four  months 
at time of phone screen.
(3)Potential participant  is 
psychotic,  suicidal, or 
homicidalMethod 4: Research coordinator and PI at time of phone screen. 
 
All methods : All participants who provide  informed  consent 
also complete a brief electronic high-risk screening.  The 
research team member  will review  these  results in-session to 
determine risk  status (described further  below).
(4)Potential participant is at-
risk for developing 
alcohol withdrawal 
symptomsAll methods:  Research team member who will conduct a 
modified  CIWA-Ar assessment if participant reports regular 
heavy drinking  (see below).
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 16 of 32
 
To determine (3)  participants will be  assessed through a  high-risk screening and the research team will take 
appropriate steps to ensure that all potential participants can  be referred  immediately  to care if they identify  
having psychotic, suicidal, or homicidal  behaviors.
 
Potential participants identified through  RecruitMe (recruitment method 4) will complete high risk 
screening twice:
 
1. At time  of phone screening to minimize risk of including at-risk participants. Potential participants will 
only be invited to schedule an informed consent session  if they pass  screening. 2. At time of informed 
consent  to  ensure that such participants do not have any recently developed risk symptoms.  If these 
participants report being  at risk, they will be promptly referred  to the PI  who  will be on-site. 
Unlike participants recruited  directly  from the  CUMC/NYP HIV clinic, which  is within the CUMC campus 
where the NYSPI  offices  are located, participants  identified through RecruitMe have established HIV care  
elsewhere outside of  this campus. It will be important to  ensure that participants identified through 
RecruitMe are  managed immediately if they report risk symptoms because it will be logistically difficult  for 
the research team to provide hands-on, immediate referral to their providers, such as is the case for participants recruited directly  from the clinic (please see further below for details). Participants identified 
from RecruitMe will be informed  during phone screening that  they will be asked questions  to assess whether 
they may be in  danger  to themselves or others and  if so, a  referral to  emergency or crisis services may be 
made. 
 
Participants identified through recruitment method 1, 2, or 3 will also be patients of the CUMC/NYP clinic. 
If they report risk after  completing screening at time of informed consent, the research  staff  member  will 
immediately alert clinic  staff about ineligible  participants due  to suicidal/homicidal ideation  or psychosis, so 
that these issues can be  appropriately managed. This  risk assessment  will be conducted at the  CUMC/NYP 
clinic, allowing  for prompt and immediate referral. The clinic  has a same day “walk- in” provider  available 
for emergency referrals  Monday-Friday (when recruitment will occur), as well as dedicated mental  health  
providers including  a psychiatrist and social  workers. We will utilize these resources in  the event of an 
emergency during the screening assessment  and will also speak with  the participant’s primary provider if  
possible
 
The following screening  questions consisting of items  from The Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM (SCID) Psychotic Screen module and Addiction Severity  Index (ASI) items for suicide (also  
adapted for homicide), will  be asked of participants to  determine  this high-risk  status  during  the screening 
following the  informed consent. The  steps described below detail the procedures that  will take place in  case 
a participant identifies such risk.
   
PSYCHOSIS:
Question:In the past  12 months, did a doctor  or 
other health  professional tell you that  
you had schizophrenia or a psychotic 
illness  or episode?In the past  12 months, has a 
doctor or other health  
professional  given you 
medication for schizophrenia or 
a psychotic illness or episode?
Score: 0 = No 0 = No
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 17 of 32
1 = Yes 1 = Yes
SCORING/MANAGEMENT:
Participant identified  
from CUMC/NYP 
clinic  (recruitment 
method 1,2,3)In-person high  risk screen following informed consent:
An affirmative response to either item will exclude the  participant  from  
the study and require  referral to the  clinic.
Participant identified  
from RecruitMe 
(recruitment method 
4)At time  of phone screen:
If a participant answers “Yes” to either items above, the research  
coordinator will  inform the PI immediately and encourage the 
participant to contact their treating provider  about any questions or  
concerns or to call 911 in case of an emergency. If the potential participant is  clearly  presenting psychotic symptoms and appears  at risk 
during the call, the PI will speak with the  participant and conduct  a 911 
three-way call to ensure that they are connected to emergency crisis  
services immediately.
In-person high  risk screen following informed consent:
An affirmative response to either item will exclude the  participant  from  
the study. If  the participant is at immediate risk and presents with  active 
psychotic symptoms, the  staff member conducting  the session,  will 
inform the PI  immediately who will confirm  risk and  participant  will be  
walked over to the Comprehensive Psychiatric Emergency Program/Department @  CUMC - 630 West 168th Street New York, NY 
10032 for immediate care. If participant is not at immediate risk or does 
not present with psychotic symptoms, they will be provided crisis referrals and encouraged  to call NYC Well  or their provider for further 
care.
SUICIDE:
Item:Choose the one statement that best describes the way  you have been feeling  
during the past 2 weeks including today.
Score: Statement:
0 I don’t have any thoughts of killing myself
1*I have thoughts of killing myself but I would not carry them  out
2*I would like  to kill myself
3*I would kill myself  if I had the chance
SCORING/MANAGEMENT:
Anything above a 0 will require a  discussion with the  research  staff  member,  who  will gather 
more information to determine the participant’s ideation and intent, and  who  will draft a clinical  
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 18 of 32
note documenting  this discussion, outcome, and action taken. 
In-person high  risk screen following informed consent:
1*Individuals endorsing a  1 but  who clearly demonstrate no intent will be 
allowed to continue in the study but will also be referred to  the clinic  
providers. Individuals  endorsing a 1 but who verbally state intent will be  
excluded from the  study  and referred to their  providers.
2*Individuals who endorse  a 2 will be referred immediately to  their 
provider, and the PI will be notified immediately of this  occurrence. The 
participant will  be excluded from  the study unless the research 
coordinator and provider agree that the participant  demonstrates no 
intent.Participant  
identified 
from 
CUMC/NYP 
clinic 
(recruitment  
method  
1,2,3)
3*Individuals endorsing a  3 will be excluded from the study,  referred 
immediately to  their provider,  and the PI will be notified immediately of 
this occurrence.
At time  of phone screen:
If a participant scores a  (1) (2) or (3)  they will be ineligible, and  staff will inform 
the PI immediately. PI  will determine if participant is at immediate  risk of 
harming themselves by confirming if they  have current thoughts  and intent to  
carry out the act. If so,  the PI will conduct a three-way call to NYC  Well  (Crisis 
Intervention) 1-888-692-9355. If the participant  sounds to be in  immediate  
danger, a three-way call to 911 emergency services  will be  made instead by the 
PI. If a participant  presents as having  thoughts  of self-harm, but is not  at 
immediate risk  (does not have current  thoughts or intent), the participant will be 
encouraged to  call NYC Well (Crisis  Intervention)  on their own to be  connected 
to care.
In-person high  risk screen following informed consent:
1*Individuals endorsing a  1 but  who clearly demonstrate no intent will be 
allowed to continue in the study but will also be referred to  the PI. If 
participant does not have intent, they will be  encouraged to  seek further 
care from  their provider or encouraged  to call  NYC Well and  provided 
with referrals.  Individuals endorsing a 1 but who verbally state intent will 
be excluded from  the study and  referred  immediately to  the PI  for an  in-
person discussion and  the participant will be walked over to  the 
Comprehensive Psychiatric Emergency Program/Department for immediate care.
2*Individuals who endorse  a 2 will be referred immediately to  the PI for  an 
in-person discussion  and excluded from  the study unless  the PI  agrees 
that the participant demonstrates no intent.  If intent is present,  the 
research staff member will  escort  the participant  to immediate care as 
described above.Participant  
identified 
from 
RecruitMe  
(recruitment  
method 4)
3*Individuals endorsing a  3 will be excluded from the study,  referred 
immediately to  the PI  and the research staff member will escort the 
participant to immediate care as described  above.  
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 19 of 32
 
 
HOMICIDE:
Item:Choose the one statement that best describes the way  you have been feeling  during  
the past  2 weeks  including today.
Score: Statement:
0 I don’t have any thoughts of killing anyone
1* I have thoughts of killing someone but I would not carry them  out
2* I would like  to kill someone
3* I would kill someone if I had the chance
SCORING/MANAGEMENT:
Identical to the  scorning/management of  the suicidality question for all recruitment methods.
 
If participants are found  to be eligible following  the high-risk screening, they will be assessed  for criterion 
(4) where we will follow  the example  set by previous studies  using HealthCall  in the research  group. We 
will use an initial gateway question to assess regular heavy drinking followed by a modified CIWA-Ar instrument to assess alcohol withdrawal  symptoms in the past  30 days to determine  if the participant may be 
at such risk during participation in the intervention  (“In the past 30 days, did you drink 4 or more drinks a 
day, on 8 or more days?”). The following  steps and procedures will be taken  below.
 
SCORING/MANAGEMENT– An affirmative response, requires  the participant to  be assessed using the 
CIWA-AR instrument (modified to measure symptoms in  the past 30 days). Participants who have a  score 
of 10 or more and report having 2 or more co-occurring symptoms  will be  ineligible and referred to  seek  
alcohol detox.  Participants recruited  from the CUMC/NYP clinic, will  be brought  to the attention of  their  
providers, while  participants identified  through RecruitMe will be encouraged to speak to their providers 
and given a referral guide for alcohol treatment services. Participants who do not  meet this  exclusion  will be 
eligible to participate in the study.
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria #2
Name the subject group/sub sampleFormative Research  - HIV/HCV co-infected heavy drinkers - Sample 1
Create or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them 
All inclusion criteria described for the trial  participants apply to the formative research  participants except 
for criterion (4).  Liver panel  results are not needed in order  to get participants' feedback on the intervention 
content. Formative research phase participants are  not enrolled in  the trial itself.
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 20 of 32
All exclusion  criteria described above  for the trial participants apply to the formative research participants, 
except for criteria (1) and (4). 
- Formative research participants can be  included regardless of their  previous participation in  HealthCall,  
given that their outcomes will not be used  to determine intervention  efficacy. 
-This criteria (4) was introduced  later  in the  study  for additional  participant protection.
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria #3
Name the subject group/sub samplePretest - HIV/HCV co-infected heavy drinkersCreate or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them 
All inclusion criteria described for the trial  participants (sample  3) apply to pretest participants (sample 2).
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them 
All exclusion  criteria described for the  trial participants apply to the  pretest  participants  except for criterion 
(4), which was introduced  later in the study for additional participant protection.
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) NoWaiver or alteration of consentYesWaiver of documentation of consent YesWaiver of parental consent No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
NoDescribe procedures  used  to obtain consent  during  the screening  process 
We have requested  a waiver for  the study recruiter  to obtain  verbal consent from potential participants, 
identified through the database  (recruitment method 2), to  provide their contact information to the study 
staff (described in the recruitment  procedures)  so that the research coordinator may  conduct  a brief phone 
screen. We have  previously requested a waiver for this brief phone screen  conducted  by the research 
coordinator to  determine eligibility for participants recruited through  methods 1 and 2. Participants  recruited 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 21 of 32
through methods 3 and  4 do not require  such a waiver as they are considered  self-referrals where  the 
participant contacts the research coordinator directly to screen  further  for the study.
Describe Study Consent Procedures
The study recruiter will screen potential  participants' medical records (recruitment method 1) as they appear 
at the clinic for  care or  (recruitment  method  2) through the database described in  the recruitment  procedures. 
For potential  participants identified  through recruitment method (1) the recruiter will approach potentially 
eligible participants and  explain the study, have the participant complete a Consent-to-Contact Form, and 
call our research  coordinator for those who  are interested. Additionally, screening may also take place on-
site at the clinic if providers  gain interested potential  patient's verbal consent to have the research 
coordinator meet them  for screening. The research coordinator will ask several  screening questions  by 
phone (if applicable) (see Inclusion/Exclusion criteria section) and will also  ask for voluntary demographic 
information. If  likely eligible, the  research  coordinator will come on site to  the clinic, obtain written  
informed consent, and then conduct  the final screening for  risk (psychosis, suicidality, homicidality, alcohol 
withdrawal symptoms), providing  further  referrals if needed. This will provide the final determination for 
eligibility. This screening/consent  session will take  place the day of the participant's appointment if 
possible, at a time  convenient for  the participant and  provider, in  an available office in the  clinic.  If the  
referral cannot  be made on that day,  a later  appointment will be scheduled for screening/consent to  be 
conducted at the clinic. For  recruitment method (2),  the recruiter will use the Recruiter  Phone Screen and 
Verbal Consent (see  script) to call  the potential  participant, assess their  interest  in the study, and obtain 
verbal consent to allow the research coordinator to contact the potential participant and conduct the phone  
screen described above (or the  potential  participant can call the research  coordinator directly for the phone 
screen). If likely, eligible, the research  coordinator will schedule the potential participant for an appointment 
at the clinic and will obtain written  consent and conduct final screening for risk (psychosis, suicidality, 
homicidality, alcohol withdrawal symptoms)  for final  determination for eligibility as described  above. 
Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Consent Form
Justification for Waiver or Alteration  of Consent
Waiver of consent is requested for the  following
Waiver of consent is requested for (1)  the verbal  consent documented by study recruiter  allowing  research  
coordinator to  contact  potential participant for  brief  phone screening, (2) the  brief phone  screening  
conducted by the research  coordinator after  the potential participant is identified by the recruiter  through 
medical records.
Explain why your research can  not be practicably carried out  without the waiver or  alteration
(1) Waiver for Recruiter Phone Script and Verbal Consent (used for recruitment method 2)
This waiver is required because the role  of the CUMC recruiter  is limited to  only  recruitment and referral,  
after which further screening can  only be conducted by this NYSPI study team. This  waiver will allow the 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 22 of 32
recruiter to  obtain verbal consent over the  phone from potential participants identified through  the database 
(described in the  recruitment methods) so that the  research coordinator can contact them for further 
screening. This further screening will be conducted by phone and  requires  the waiver of consent described  
in (2).
 
(2) Waiver for Phone Screening and Script (waiver applicable for recruitment method  1 and 2)
The recruiter will identify  potentially eligible  participants by their medical records, and  will introduce  the 
study and assess interest. The recruiter works for the clinic in this screening capacity and is not  assigned 
formal research activities for this study (such as completing the screening process or obtaining informed consent). The research  coordinator is responsible  for these research tasks, but  is located in another building 
and will not be immediately available, especially because the recruiter will be approaching  potential  
participants during brief pockets of time (i.e., before  their appointment, after their appointment but  before  
lab testing). Therefore,  the screening must be done immediately by phone by the research coordinator  (after 
receiving verbal consent). This brief screening will consist  of a short list of simple questions,  with  the more 
intensive risk  assessment  conducted later, after informed consent,  when the research coordinator  is on-site  at 
the clinic and able to facilitate prompt referral in the instance of risk.
Describe whether and how subjects will be  provided with  additional pertinent information  after participation
(1) Waiver for Recruiter Phone Script and Verbal Consent (used for recruitment method 2)
The waiver described  for the verbal  consent documented by the recruiter welcomes potential participants  to 
inquire about any questions they have  for the recruiter before consenting  to be  contacted by study staff for a 
phone screen. After providing this consent,  potential participants are  encouraged  to learn more about the 
study during the phone  screen where  they  will be able to ask questions and provided information on 
participation expectations if they are found eligible.  
 
(2) Waiver for Phone Screening and Script (waiver applicable for recruitment method  1 and 2)
Given that the  phone screening for  eligibility conducted by the research coordinator  consists  of a short list 
of simple questions, there  is no further  pertinent information that  needs to  be given after participation. The 
important information is  that the questions will be used to assess eligibility; this  is stated  before the 
screening is conducted and before the  potential participant is asked to give verbal consent. In  case the 
potential participant  has any further questions that we have not anticipated, we have  included a  prompt 
asking for  questions before the verbal consent is requested.
Waiver of Documentation of Consent
Would the consent form signature be the only link between the subject’s identity and the research data?YesIs breach of confidentiality the main study risk?NoDescribe the study component(s) for which  waiver  of documentation is  requested.
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 23 of 32
We are requesting  a waiver of documentation for  the verbal  consent  obtained by the provider for potentially 
eligible patients as described in recruitment  method 1. We described that the research coordinator  would be 
using the calendar  of upcoming scheduled co-infected patient  visits  (withheld of  PHI) to  speak with  the 
provider directly before  a patient visit and request that  they  gain the patient's verbal  consent  to meet with  the 
research coordinator during their visit for an in-person screening. 
In order  to protect  the identities of potential participants  and to prevent a  potential breach  of 
confidentiality, the  research coordinator currently does  not collect PHI at time of  screening unless 
the potential participant is found to be eligible or if their  consent to  contact is obtained and  
documented previously by the recruiter. If the provider were to  document  such verbal  consent,  it 
would create  an unnecessary  link between  the subject's identity  and screening data where none  has 
been created previously  or will be created  for other participants who  screen for the study in  the 
future.
Requiring the provider to document  such  verbal  consent would not  only  be time  consuming, but 
would also be  redundant as the research coordinator would meet face-to-face with the  interested  
potential participant  shortly after for screening  at which time she would obtain and  document  verbal  
consent from the participant again.
Although we request a waiver of documentation for the verbal consent obtained by the provider,  the 
research coordinator would  still continue  to obtain verbal consent at  time of screening as described 
previously and  will continue to ensure that  participants are  given the opportunity  to make informed  
decisions. 
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Elliott, JenniferHasin, Deborah, PHD
Lerias, DoukessaRadecka, OlgaType in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Mahnoor Ali (see CITI training uploaded) 
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this study
STUDY START-UP:  FORMATIVE  RESEARCH  AND PRE-TEST
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 24 of 32
Formative research will involve sitting down with 5 participants, reviewing intervention content, letting them try  out the smartphone app, and  inviting  their  feedback on the intervention  (content, session 
style/approach, smartphone content). We will discuss adaptations made for HIV/HCV, and  content  relevant 
to HCV infection, and  invite their feedback on whether it is useful  and understandable. Feedback will be 
used to finalize  intervention content. Formative research participants  will be  contacted post-study 
participation by  phone  to retrospectively collect demographic information  to ensure that  such data is 
collected consistently  and recorded for  future  descriptive  reporting  purposes. These participants have  agreed  
to be contacted  by study staff for future research  and will be  given  an opportunity  to choose to disclose  
requested demographic information on a voluntary  basis.
 
A pre-test will  involve running 5 participants through the  60-day  intervention,  and inviting feedback in the  
same topic areas as in formative feedback.  We will monitor the  assessments and  smartphone app for any  
technical problems  that can be  fixed prior to the  trial itself. We will use this  pre-test to make finishing 
touches to  our intervention and study protocol,  and finalize the content of both.
 
TRIAL PROCEDURES  
 
(1) Explanation of the study and consent
Individuals who appear potentially eligible by the  CUMC/NYP clinic recruiter's screening of the medical  
records or  screening through database  (recruitment  method 1 and 2 as described in the recruitment 
procedures) and report interest in participating will speak briefly  with the research coordinator  by phone,  
who will be trained in human subjects’ protections  and will ask several simple questions to determine  
inclusion/exclusion criteria. Individuals who call as a self-referral  via flyer or  provider (recruitment method 
3) will call the research  coordinator directly to complete this described phone screening. The research  
coordinator will  meet potential participants  at the clinic to obtain  informed consent and conduct additional 
screening for alcohol use disorder  status (needed for randomization), as well  as psychosis, suicidality, and 
homicidality, and  risk of  developing alcohol  withdrawal symptoms  (final  exclusion criteria). Participants 
ineligible due  to psychosis,  suicidality, homicidality,  and/or being at risk of developing alcohol  withdrawal 
symptoms will  be immediately brought to the attention of clinic providers so that they can be appropriately 
managed; will  receive  brief advice on alcohol reduction, and referral for help with  alcohol abuse if  desired 
or clearly indicated. Eligible  participants  will be scheduled  for a  baseline  session  at either  the clinic  or the  
NYSPI offices (722 W168th St  2nd Floor offices [Substance Dependence Research Group] New  York, NY 
10032), pending space constraints.
 
In order  to obtain participants’ health information  from their medical records, clinic staff advised that  their 
standard practice of  disclosing health  information requires written authorization from participants in  
accordance to HIPAA and  CUMC procedures.  To comply with this  requirement, eligible participants who  
are patients of the  CUMC/NYP clinic will sign an authorization form  at time of informed  consent  allowing 
clinic staff  to disclose requested health  information from medical records to research  team. 
 
Individuals who appear potentially eligible after  being  identified  through RecruitMe  (recruitment method 4),  
will complete  a phone screening with the  research  coordinator to determine  inclusion/exclusion criteria. If 
found eligible a member of the research team* will meet potential participants  at the NYSPI offices to 
obtain informed  consent as described  above. Participants found to be ineligible due  to psychosis,  suicidality, 
homicidality, and/or risk of developing  alcohol withdrawal symptoms will be immediately brought to the 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 25 of 32
attention of the PI  and will be escorted to the  Comprehensive Psychiatric Emergency  Program/Department 
@ CUMC - 630 West 168th Street New York,  NY 10032 for immediate  care. Participants found to be 
ineligible due  to being at risk of developing  alcohol  withdrawal symptoms  will be  encouraged to speak  to 
their providers and provided a  referral  list to seek  alcohol treatment services.  Eligible participants will be 
asked to obtain  their medical record information from their providers,  as it is required to  conduct the study 
baseline session. Participants will be asked  to bring a copy of their lab reports (of results  requested  in the 
health information request form)  from their provider's  office or will be  provided  a double-sided document 
with the health  information request form on one side and a letter to  their provider informing them  why the 
information is requested  and how to complete the form (see  attached). Participants will be  scheduled for 
baseline once they  can provide such lab  reports or agree to a  date by which they will have completed  the 
health information request form.   
 
* Please note  the research  team includes: the  PI, the research coordinator,  and two study counselors all  of 
whom are also persons designated to discuss  and document consent for this study. 
 
(2) Randomization
After participants  complete the screening assessment, the research  team member will be able to determine 
alcohol use disorder status from the  responses. The research team  member will provide the counselor  or PI 
with the participant identification number (ID; assigned consecutively) and  alcohol use  disorder  status. The 
counselor or  PI will then  randomize participants using pre-determined blocked lists created by a 
biostatistician, in order to balance treatment  groups across alcohol use disorder status  (the research 
coordinator will  not randomize in order  to remain blind to condition). Randomization  lists were generated 
(in R software)  and provided by biostatistician  Adam  Ciarleglio,  PhD  on May 4, 2018.
 
(3) Intervention and  Control  groups
Prior to scheduled  baseline appointments  and once written HIPAA compliant authorization is obtained from 
participants recruited from  CUMC/NYP, research staff will request clinic staff to  record and  report  
participants’ health information  from  their medical records (see measures table  for requested indicators) and 
will request any  updates to this health information prior to  follow-up appointments.  Participants identified 
from RecruitMe will be asked  to assist in collecting their medical record information  from their providers  
before scheduling the baseline appointment and prior to  any follow-up appointments. Participants  will be 
randomly assigned to the one of the following  conditions  which will be facilitated by a  study counselor*  
(approximately 30 participants each, 60 total):
 
* Please note:  the PI  will substitute for the role  of study counselor  or research coordinator to meet staffing 
needs when  other research team  members  are not available.
 
-Intervention condition.  The intervention is  an adaptation of the National Institutes  of Health  (NIH)  
Clinician’s Guide (CG; NIAAA, 2007) in conjunction with  the previously tested HealthCall smartphone app 
program (Hasin et al.,  2013; Hasin et  al., 2014). Participants assigned to this  group will be  scheduled for a 
brief meeting (~20 minutes) with a counselor to discuss alcohol use, liver function, and  HIV  medication  
adherence. The counselor will give the participant  feedback on risks  related to their drinking and alert them 
of elevations  in liver inflammation  according to indicators obtained from their  medical  records,  help  set a 
drinking goal,  and make suggestions to help with reducing alcohol  use, if  the participant  chooses. The 
participant will  also receive a pamphlet  on drinking, HIV, and  HCV. They will then be introduced to  
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 26 of 32
HealthCall, a smartphone app designed  to help keep  track of their drinking, reasons for drinking/abstaining,  
medication adherence,  drug use, condom use during sex, and mood, through  short daily use*. The 
participant will  be provided with a study smartphone equipped with  a calling  plan and access to  HealthCall 
during the time of the study. Participants  will be shown how to  use HealthCall  and will have the  chance  to 
practice using it. Over the next 30 days, participants will  be asked to use HealthCall  daily.  Each use lasts  2-3 
minutes. At the  end of the 30 days, participants will meet with a  counselor  for a  10-minute interview.  At the 
interview, participants  will be given a graph showing the results of HealthCall daily use and the counselor 
will explain and  discuss the graph. The  counselor  will also ask about any changes in  alcohol use and give 
feedback on drinking. Participants  will then be  asked to  continue using HealthCall for the next 30 days. At 
the end of  those 30 days the counselor will meet with participants for another 10-minute interview to go 
over the  updated graph, and to discuss alcohol use and goals.
 
*Components of HealthCall  (questions reference yesterday's behavior):
-Greeting 
-Whether alcohol was consumed (yes/no)  
-Type of  alcohol consumed (beer, malt liquor, wine, hard liquor, pre-mixed coolers)
-Size of alcohol unit consumed  (for conversion to standard drinks) 
-Quantity of alcohol units consumed
-Level of desire to drink
-Commitment to reducing  drinking
-Whether participant thought about sessions with counselor and  drinking reduction  goal
-Reasons for drinking or  not drinking
-Offer to view drinking graph
-Use of other  drugs (yes/no; how many times)
-What proportion of HIV medication was taken  
-Reasons HIV medication was taken  or missed 
-Alcohol interference  with medication  adherence
-Any sexual activity (yes/no); if yes,  whether  they  used  a condom
-Overall perceived health, stress level,  anger, depression,  rating of day overall
-Drinking reduction tip
-Thank participant, invite them to call counselor if needed and  continue  using app
 
-Control condition.  At baseline, participants will receive brief advice  to decrease drinking and a  request  to 
spend 20  minutes in the  session,  observed  by the counselor, reviewing an  educational pamphlet on drinking, 
HIV, and HCV. At 30 and  60 days, participants  will be asked about their drinking, and again  receive  advice  
to decrease drinking. This condition will provide (a) similar exposure time as CG+HealthCall at baseline, (b) brief counselor  contact at 30 and  60 days, (c)  the same  message  to decrease drinking, and (d) access to 
health information. However, the control condition, a realistic approximation  of standard-of-care  in many 
places, does  not provide  in-depth  counselor  sessions with feedback informed  by liver indicators and 
HealthCall data, the  active components of  CG+HealthCall for HIV/HCV. This condition was chosen  to 
indicate if  CG+HealthCall  for HIV/HCV is an improvement over standard-of-care, an  important distinction 
to determine if it warrants further study and eventual dissemination.
 
 -Assessments will precede counselor sessions, and will occur at baseline, 30 days, 60 days, and 90 days (90 days is assessment-only and includes no counselor sessions for either condition). Assessment  questionnaires 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 27 of 32
will be self-administered electronically with the exception of the Timeline Followback and assessment of alcohol use disorder and  dependence, which will be  administered by the research coordinator or  a research  
team member. The research coordinator/team member  will supervise all assessments and answer questions 
as needed. Efforts will be made  to keep the research coordinator/team member blind to condition to  
minimize potential bias in assessment.-Breath and urine samples  will be collected  at all  assessment periods, although  participants  may refuse to 
provide them  without jeopardizing study involvement. Submitted papers  using this  data  may  receive 
requests to examine the  association between biological (breath, urine) markers with self-reported use. 
Although breathalyzer and  urine  test methods are subject to  limitations,  they are less expensive and 
disruptive to participants' lives than other methods of  biological assessment (such as alcohol ankle bracelets) 
and provide some data that  can be used to validate participants' self-reports  (i.e.,  the blood alcohol content  
[BAC] would be  expected to be positive at a  higher rate for daily drinkers; the urine tests  would be  expected 
to yield positive  results at  higher rate among those with higher  frequency of drug use). This  method  also 
provides comparability  with other HealthCall studies conducted by the Substance Dependence Research  
group.Study appointments may  occur at either the CUMC/NYP clinic or the NYSPI offices, depending on space 
availability. Study appointments that occur at the NYSPI offices  (address specified above),  will take  place  
in the research coordinator's study office or another study room if needed. The participant will be set  up at a 
computer desk  with  a chair where  they  can comfortably complete  tablet assessments.  If the participant 
agrees to provide  urine and breathlyzer samples, the  breathalyzer test will be  conducted  in the study room 
and the participant will be escorted to the nearest  private restroom to collect  the urine specimen, while the  
research coordinator or member of the  research  team waits  outside of  the restroom. Study appointments  
conducted at the clinic will  be set up similarly (using research rooms or  "talk rooms")  depending on the 
space constraints. These rooms  are set up similarly  to the NYSPI office study rooms and have a desk and  
chair available to the  participant.
 
Although study visits  may occur  at the NYSPI offices, the close proximity of the NYSPI offices to the 
CUMC/NYP clinic (i.e.,  five-minute walk) will facilitate prompt referral and escort to the clinic in  the case 
of risk or emergency for  participants who have  established care there. (Such emergencies are not  anticipated 
given that risk screening  will occur  at the screening appointment, which  will be held on site at the clinic.) 
For participants who have established care elsewhere, Comprehensive  Psychiatric Emergency 
Program/Department @  CUMC - 630 West 168th Street New York, NY 10032 is also  located in this  area 
allowing staff to escort participants in case  of risk of emergency. Only study staff  will be engaged in 
research activities with participants at the clinic (please note that the recruiter will only be  identifying 
potential subjects  and introducing the  study  to them).
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Criteria for Early Discontinuation  
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 28 of 32
Loss of the study smartphone.
 
Suicidality, homicidality,  and psychosis are  not part  of our ongoing assessment battery and are assessed 
only at screening. However, it is possible that the research  coordinator or counselor could observe signs  of 
psychosis, or that they  could hear  the participant make a  comment about suicidality or homicidality  during  
study appointments.  In the event  of evidence of suicidality, homicidality, or psychosis,  or concern that the 
participant's life is in acute danger, the research coordinator or counselor will proceed as described:  (1) 
providers of participants  referred from the  CUMC/NYP clinic will be  immediately alerted so  that they may 
manage their  patients.  When study appointments are conducted at the NYSPI offices, participants  
considered at risk will be  referred  and escorted to the clinic  site located a brief 5-minute walk away from  the 
NYSPI offices. For  participants identified  from RecruitMe, the PI  will be  immediately alerted so  that she 
may assess the participant and if considered at  risk, the participant will be escorted to the Comprehensive  
Psychiatric Emergency Program/Department @  CUMC - 630 West  168th Street New York,  NY 10032, 
which is also  located a brief 5-minute walk away  from the NYSPI offices. If  it is clear that the participant is 
in acute distress,  he/she will be discontinued  from the study. If deemed to be  not at risk, they will be 
permitted to continue participation.
 
The PI's mentors and co-investigators  Deborah  Hasin, PhD, and Efrat Aharonovich, PhD, have conducted 
several previous studies of HealthCall  with HIV participants  (N>600).  Although they have disqualified 
participants who  may be at risk of  developing alcohol withdrawal symptoms from participating, they have 
not discontinued  participation early  in participants whose drug or alcohol use changes because  some  
fluctuation in alcohol or drug use is common  in early  stages of recovery and because these participants 
generally don’t seek or accept referral  to further treatment. Rather,  if alcohol or drug use worsens,  they offer 
brief advice to  decrease dangerous behavior  and referral to relevant treatment facilities (e.g., Alcoholics  
Anonymous [AA],  rehabilitation,  therapy)  and encourage participants  to follow through,  and offer them  the 
option of remaining in the study, allowing participants the possibility  of benefiting subsequently from  the 
treatment. For participants whose medical issues require  hospitalization,  they offer the option to  resume  
participation in  the study after they are discharged from the medical hospitalization. Referral in  case of 
emergency is facilitated by the proximity to the  clinic and emergency services, as outlined above.  These 
procedures, which  will be used for the  present  study, are  designed to maximize protection and benefit to  the 
participants, while enabling  us to observe  what happens to  study participants  after referral to  additional drug 
and alcohol treatment, or after their  return from  medical hospitalization. If  the participant reports unsafe  
sexual behavior, they  will also receive brief  advice  to decrease dangerous behavior but  will not be  removed  
from the study.
Blood and other Biological Samples
Please create or insert  a table describing  the proposed collection  of blood or other biological specimens
Participants will be  asked to use a breathalyzer to determine BAC, and to provide  urine samples for drug 
testing. No blood samples  will be collected,  although HIV and liver function  indicators will be collected 
from participants' medical  records (see assessment table). Participants  recruited  from  CUMC/NYP will sign 
a “HIPAA Compliant Authorization for Release of Medical Information  and Confidential  HIV Related 
Information”, so  that clinic staff can disclose and collect information from  medical  records to  research 
team. Participants identified  from RecruitMe will be  asked to assist in collecting their medical chart 
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 29 of 32
abstracted HIV  and liver function indicators  from their providers before  being scheduled for their baseline 
sessions.
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the  instruments  that will be used for assessment
Please see  attached  amended measures/assessment  table.
Please attach copies, unless  standard  instruments are used
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?NoTreatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
Participants will not receive additional  intervention at end of study.
 
After the 90 day follow-up evaluation, if participants are seeking additional treatment, they will be 
encouraged to  speak with social workers at the clinic, and/or will be referred to  other alcohol treatment 
programs in the  institution  or elsewhere in participant’s communities.
Clinical Treatment Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternativesThere will be two conditions  in the trial. One will consist  of the in-person Clinician's Guide  (tailored for 
HIV/HCV) with HealthCall.  The other  is an educational control  condition. Other accepted psychosocial 
methods to treat drinking  and alcohol problems are  cognitive behavioral therapy, motivational interviewing, 
and self-help groups such as AA.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
Data can be linked to participants’ identity. Data will  not include identifying information and  will be 
identified by a subject ID  number only. All data will be entered  and maintained in a secured clinical  trials 
electronic database and coded with a unique identifier assigned to each participant. Identifying information linked with subject study ID numbers will be kept in separate secured files in locked cabinets and will be  
available only to selected clinic and research staff  members who need to  interact  with the participants and/or 
track study progress. This information  will also be  available to State  and institutional  regulatory  personnel 
(who may review records as part of routine  audits).
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 30 of 32
Participants are heavy drinkers. Therefore, it is possible  that their drinking may become problematic at some 
point during the  study.  However, the intervention  (and even the advice/education control condition) is likely 
to minimize the  risk of  such an occurrence, as compared with patients not  enrolled in  the study (who are 
likely receiving no intervention to decrease drinking). Efforts will be  taken to  monitor for adverse events 
and refer  participants to needed care, as discussed below.
Participants may  experience discomfort during assessment, in responding to  questions  about alcohol, liver 
disease, or  HIV, perhaps by realizing  as a result of  the assessment that  their drinking is harming  their health. 
However, this is a  legitimate concern  and during the study  such distress may help motivate them to reduce 
their drinking which  will be beneficial  to them. We  will take  steps to minimize the risk of discomfort,  but 
participants will  have the  option  to discontinue  participation or skip distressing questions.
Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
-Recruitment procedures  will ensure  that participants understand and  agree  to the informed consent (e.g., 
research coordinator or research team  member  will discuss content, informed consent will include  quiz).
-Participants will be informed of alternative treatments for  alcohol problems and provided referrals as 
indicated or  requested, and encouraged to speak with their HIV providers and/or social workers at the clinic 
about their needs, questions, and concerns.-While every  possible step will be  taken to minimize risk of discomfort occurring in the first  place,  consent 
documentation will make it clear that  participants  may refuse to continue with  the study  at any time or may 
refuse to answer particular questions without penalty.
-The clinical status of  participants will be reviewed regularly during weekly supervision  of the study 
counselor with the  PI. Any adverse events will be  evaluated to  determine if the participant should be 
removed from the study and/or referred for  more intensive treatment, and  will be promptly  reported to the 
IRB.-Confidentiality will be  protected by various means, including coded records, password protection, 
encryption of  electronic data, and storing signed consent forms in  locked cabinets.
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect confidentiality
In the trial, all records  will be kept confidential. All paper  records  and material with  identifying  
information will be  kept in a locked  filing cabinet  at the HIV clinics while participants  are involved in  the 
study, and then  transferred to a locked filing cabinet in our offices at Psychiatric  Institute (722 West 168th  
Street, Suite 228  or 241). Identifying information (including name and  phone number) for all potential 
participants prior to enrollment will  be destroyed  if they decide  to not complete further screening  or are 
found to not be  eligible.
 
Access to HealthCall on the smartphone is secured with a personal pin  number  known only to  the 
participant and study personnel (as necessary). After  participants complete their daily responses  to 
HealthCall, the information is automatically transmitted in  encrypted form, without personal identifiers, to a 
password-protected server. Study data on this  server will only  be accessible by the  Principal Investigator 
and study personnel. Access to these  data  is protected through two levels of login/password security.  If data  
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 31 of 32
uploading is not immediately possible because  no wi-fi connectivity is available, then uploading is 
reattempted when wi-fi connectivity becomes  available.
 
HealthCall data consists entirely of numeric codes  keyed to  alphanumeric indexes that are not  of human-
readable value. All electronic data  from the  participants’ HealthCall application data entry will be saved  to 
the database  without their names or other  identifying information.
 
Electronically stored data from study assessments and  other  study data  will not  include identifying
information and  will be identified  by a subject ID number only.  The database linking participants’ names to 
IDs will be securely stored and independent of other study databases.Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
Yes, we have already received a Certificate  of Confidentiality
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
Direct Benefits to Subjects
Participants in the  intervention condition may  benefit by decreasing their drinking, as the intervention was 
adapted from other evidence based, effective interventions. However, it is also possible that they will not benefit from  the intervention.
Although the control  condition will receive  brief advice and educational materials,  this will likely not be  
substantially different  than standard-of-care.
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
YesPlease describe  and indicate total amount and schedule of  payment(s).  
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
Participants will receive round-trip MetroCard  at all appointments to compensate  travel (value: $5.50). 
Participants will receive compensation in ClinCard payments and  will be compensated according to  the 
phase of the study they enroll in and what  appointment they attend.
 
Participants enrolled in the formative  research  will receive a  total  of $25 for their  one-session  commitment.
 
Participants enrolled in the pre-test can earn up to a total of $95 and  a smartphone or $195.
- $10 at consent/enrollment
- $25 at baseline 
- $25 at 30-day assessments
- $35 and a smartphone or  $135 at  60-day assessments (please see below)
Protocol Summary  Form
7649
Elliott, Jennifer
Page 32 of 32
 
 Participants enrolled in the trial can earn  up to a  total  of $180 and a smartphone  or $280.
- $20 at consent/enrollment
- $40 at baseline
- $40 at 30-day assessments
- $40 and a smartphone or  $140 at  60-day assessments (please see below) 
- $40 at 90-day assessments 
 
Participants in the  intervention condition may  keep the smartphone used in the study or receive $100 in 
ClinCard payment if they choose to return it. Control participants will also be  offered either a smartphone or 
$100 in ClinCard payment.  Intervention  participation  will not be incentivized, as intervention in clinic 
settings is  not paid.
References
ReferencesHasin DS, Aharonovich  E, Greenstein E. (2014). HealthCall for the smartphone: technology  enhancement 
of brief  intervention in HIV alcohol  dependent patients. Addict Sci  Clin Pract., 17, 9.
Hasin, DS, Aharonovich  E, O'Leary A, Greenstein E, Pavlicova  M, Arunajadai S, Waxman R, Wainberg M, 
Helzer J,  Johnston B. (2013). Reducing  heavy drinking in  HIV primary  care: a randomized trial of brief 
intervention, with and without technological enhancement. Addiction, 108, 1230-40.National Institute  on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2007). Helping Patients  Who Drink Too  Much: A  
Clinician's Guide. Accessed 2/2/18 at https://www.niaaa.nih.gov/guide.
Uploads
Upload the entire grant application(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of recruitment  materials/ads to be reviewed
Upload a copy of Certificate of ConfidentialityUpload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
hipaa 8-17-18.pdfUpload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study
Form #PP2: HIPAA Authorization for Research 4.14.14 New York State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI)  
Authorization to Use or Disclose Health Information  during a Research Study  
Protocol Number:  Principal Investigator:  
Name o
f Study:  
Bef
ore researchers can use or share any identifiable health information  (“Health Information ”) about you  as part of the 
above stud
y (t
he “Research”), the New York State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) is required to obtain your authorization. Y ou agree  
to allow the following individuals and entities to use and disclose H ealth Information  about you as described below:  
• New York S
tate
 Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) , your doctors and other health care providers,  if any, and
• The Prin
cipal Inv
estigator and  his/her staff (together “Researchers”).   Researchers may include staff of NYSPI, the New  York
State Office of Mental Health (OMH), Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene, Inc. (RFMH), and Columbia University (CU) ,
provided such staff is a part of  the study, and
• Providers of service s for the Research at CU, NYSPI and/or RFMH,  such as MRI or PET,  or  Central  Reference Laboratories 
(NKI), if indicated in the consent form.
1. The Hea
lth Information that may be used and /or disclosed for this Research includes:
All i
nformation collected during the Research as told to you in the Informed Consent Form .   
Health  Information in your  clinical research record which include s the resul ts of  physical exam s, medical and 
psychiatric hi
story, laboratory or diagnostic tests, or H ealth Information relating to a particular condition that is related  to 
the Research.  
Additional information may include:  
2. The Hea
lth Information listed above may be  disclosed to:
Researchers  and their staff at the following organizations involved wi th this Research : 
The S
ponsor of t
he Research , 
and it
s agents and contractors (together, “Sponsor”); and  
Repr esentatives of regulatory and government  agencies, institutional review boards, representatives of the Researchers 
and their institutions to the level needed  to carry out their responsibilities  related to the conduct of the research .   
Private laboratories and other persons and organizations that analyze your health information in connection with 
this study 
Othe
r (family members or significant others, study buddies,  outside agencies  etc.)  Specify:  
3. By giv
ing permission to release your  Health Information as described  above, you  unders tan d that your  Health
Information may be
 disclosed to individuals or entities which  are not required to comply with the federal and state privacy laws
which govern the use and disclosure of personal Health Information  by NYSPI.    This means that on ce your  Health
✔
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA)
✔
New York State Psychiatric Institute/Columbia University
✔
Health information in your medical chart which includes the results of laboratory/diagnostic tests and medication history relating to your HIV and Hepatitis C infections. 
✔
✔
✔
Understanding and intervening with heavy drinking among patients with HIV and HCV: Clinical trial 
Jennifer C Elliott, PhD
7649
Form #PP2: HIPAA Authorization for Research 4.1.14  Information  has been disclosed to a third party which does not have to  follow these laws (e.g., a drug company or the Sponsor  
of the Research), it may no longer be protected  under the HIPAA or NYS Mental Hygiene Law requirements but is  subject to the 
terms of the consent form and may be subject to other state or federal privacy laws or regulations .  
4. P
lease note that:
• You do not have to sign this Authorization  form, but if you do not, you may not be able to participate in the study or
receive study related care .  You may change your mind at any time and for any reason. If you do so, you  may  no
l
onger be
 all
owed to participate in the study.  I f you withdraw  this Authorization the  research staff and  the Sponsor, if this
is sponsored research, may still use or disclose Health  Information  containing identifying information they already have
collected about  you as needed  to maintain the reliability of the research.   Any reques t to withdraw this  Authorization
must  be made in writ
ing to  (enter name and contact inf ormation  below):
• W
hile the Research is going on , you may not be allowed to review the Health Information in your clinical research
record that has been created or collected by NYSPI .   When this research has been completed  you may be allowed to  see
t
his information.  If it is needed  for your care, your H ealth Inform ation will be given  to you or your  Doctor .
5. T
hi
s Authori
zation does not have an end date.
6. Y
ou will be given a copy of this form after you have signed it.
I
 agree to the use and disc losure of Health Information about me as described above:  
__
________________________________________                _____________________  
Signature of Participant / Legal Representative    Date  
________
____________
__________________  
Printed Name of Participant  
__
____________________________________  
Relationship of Legal Representative to Participant (if applicable) 
We also ask you or your legal representative to initial the statements below:  
I
 have received a copy of the NYSPI/OMH  Notice of Privacy Practices. 
Jennifer C Elliott, PhD; 1051 Riverside Drive, Box 123, New York NY 10032