QAID 2102634.001 - 3547  
 
 
 
 
 
  Final Protocol 
 
A Non-Interventional Study to Generate Real-World Evidence on the 
Cardiovascular Safety of CONTRAVE® in the United States (U.S.)  
 
   Prepared for  Michael Kyle, M.D. Currax Pharmaceuticals LLC +1 800 793 2145 mkyle@curraxpharma.com  
 
 Exponent contact  David Dore, Pharm.D., Ph.D. Exponent Inc. +1 508 654 5104 ddore@exponent.com  
 
 January 26, 2023 
 Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 2 of 29 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1 RESPONSIBLE PARTIES 4  
1.1 Sponsor and Primary Sponsor Contact 4  
1.2 Principal Investigator a nd Author of Record 4  
2 DRUG DESCRIPTION 5  
3 ABSTRACT 6  
4 RATIONALE AND BACKGROUND 8  
5 RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND OBJECTIVES 9  
6 RESEARCH METHODS 10  
6.1 Study Design 10  
6.2 Settings 10  
6.3 Inclusion Criteria 10  
6.4 Exclusion Criteria 11  
6.5 Variables 14  
6.5.1 Exposure 14  
6.5.2 Outcomes and follow-up 15  
6.5.3 Covariates 17  
7 DATA SOURCES 19  
7.1 Arcadia Data Research 19  
7.2 Datavant Death Data 19  
8 STUDY SIZE AND STATISTICAL POWER 20  
8.1 Study Size 20  
8.2 Ranges of Statistical Power for MACE 20  
9 DATA MANAGEMENT 21  
9.1 Descriptive Statistics 21  
9.2 Missing Data 22  
9.3 Crude Incidence Rate Difference (IRD) a nd Incidence Rate Ratio (IRR) Estimates
 22 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 3 of 29 
9.4 PS Matching Weights 23  
9.5 Estimation of Adjusted IRD and IRR Estimates 23  
9.5.1 Intention-to-Treat Analysis 23  
9.5.2 As-Treated Analysis 24  
9.5.3 Statistical Model for Cohort Analysis 24  
9.6 Quality Control 25  
10 LIMITATIONS OF THE DATA AND RESEARCH METHODS 26  
10.1  Electronic Health Data 26  
10.2  Unmeasured Patient Risk Factors 26  
11 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 26  
12 MANAGEMENT AND REPORTING OF ADVERSE EVENTS 26  
13 PLANS FOR DISSEMINATION AND COMMUNICATING STUDY 
RESULTS 27  
14 REFERENCES 28  
 
 
 
  
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 4 of 29 
1 RESPONSIBLE PARTIES 
1.1 Sponsor and Primary Sponsor Contact 
Currax Pharmaceuticals LLC 
155 Franklin Rd, Suite 450 
Brentwood, TN  37027 
Contact: Michael Kyle, M.D. 
+1 215 704 0475 
mkyle@curraxpharma.com  
 
1.2 Principal Investigator  and Author of Record 
David Dore, Pharm.D., Ph.D. 
Principal Scientist 
Exponent Inc. 
1075 Worcester Street, Natick, MA 01760 U.S.A. 
+1 508 654 5104 
ddore@exponent.com 
    
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 5 of 29 
2 DRUG DESCRIPTION 
The product of interest is a fixed-dose combinati on of naltrexone hydrochloride (HCl), 8mg, and 
bupropion HCl, 90mg, for oral use via extended-re lease oral tablet. The product is marketed 
under the trade name CONTRAVE® in the United States (U.S.). It is a combination of an 
opioid antagonist (naltr exone) and an aminoketone  antidepressant (bupropi on). Each constituent 
active ingredient is available separately  in various doses and formulations.  
Following conventions within previous docum ents, hereafter we refer to the product 
CONTRAVE® as the branded product, under regulation. Use of CONTRAVE® or concomitant 
initiation of its constituent active ingredients, naltrexone and bupropion, w ill be referred to as 
NB within this protocol. 
CONTRAVE® is indicated as an  adjunct to a reduced-calorie  diet and increased physical 
activity for chronic weight management in adu lts with an initial body mass index (BMI) of: 
 30 kg/m2 or greater (obese) or 
 27 kg/m2 or greater (overweight) in the pres ence of at least one weight-related 
comorbidity (e.g., hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, or dyslipidemia).1  
 
CONTRAVE® is recommended to be initiate d according to a dose- escalation schedule 
beginning with one tablet each morning in week one and increasing to up to two tablets twice 
daily beginning in week four.  
 
The labeled contraindications include known allergy to any ingredient within CONTRAVE®; 
uncontrolled hypertension; seizure disorders; an orexia nervosa or bul imia; undergoing abrupt 
discontinuation of alcohol; use of benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or antiepileptic drugs; chronic 
opioid use; and taking currently, or within the past 14 days, a monoamine  oxidase inhibitor.  
 
As specified in the product labeling under Warnin gs and Precautions and Limitations of Use, the 
effect of CONTRAVE® on cardiovascular morbidity  and mortality has no t been established. 
Additionally, the safety and effe ctiveness of CONTRAVE® in co mbination with other products 
intended for weight loss, including prescrip tion drugs, over-the-counter drugs, and herbal 
preparations, have not been esta blished. In this protocol, we propose to evaluate the potential 
effects of NB on cardiovascular endpoints. 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 6 of 29 
3 ABSTRACT 
Title: A Non-Interventional Study to Generate Real-World Evidence 
on the Cardiovascular Safety of CONTRAVE® in the United States (U.S.)  
Background and Rationale: The fixed-dose co mbination of naltrexone 8mg and bupropion 
90mg extended-release oral tablet is marketed under the trade name CONTRAVE® in the U.S. In this protocol, we propose to generate real-world eviden ce (RWE) from electronic health 
records (EHR) and linked cl aims data to assess the 
cardiovascular safety of CONT RAVE® and all NB in usual 
clinical practice. 
Research Question and Objectives: The main objective of this study is to compare the incidence of 
the primary endpoint (major ad verse cardiovascular events 
[MACE]) between initiators of NB  and initiators of an active 
comparator, lorcaserin (1.0).  
The study will also compare the incidence of the secondary 
endpoint (each component  of MACE) between initiators of NB 
and initiators of lorcaserin , overall and across subgroups of 
interest (1.1) 
This study includes three additi onal objectives to support the 
assessment of the robustness of the results for the primary and 
secondary endpoints: 
 To assess the comparability  of the results from the 
same EHR data to the resu lts of the 2018 randomized 
clinical trial assessing ca rdiovascular endpoints among 
lorcaserin users, in a manner consistent with the Randomized Controlled Trials Duplicated Using Prospective Longitudinal In surance Claims: Applying 
Techniques of Epidemio logy Initiative (RCT 
DUPLICATE) (2.0); 
 To quantify differences in  cardiovascular safety 
endpoints between the 2018 trial and the results of this EHR study (2.1); 
 To conduct other sensitivity analyses, including a self-
controlled, case-crossover analysis to quantify the 
potential effect of NB on MACE (2.2). 
Study Design: Retrospective,  new-user cohort study. 
Population: The primary study population in cludes initiators of NB or the 
active comparator, lorcaserin.  
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 7 of 29 
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the main objective will 
ensure that only new users are included, and that the NB and comparison groups are comparable  on risk factors for MACE 
after application of propensity  score (PS) matching weights. 
Inclusion and exclusi on criteria for the additional objectives 
will align with those used in the 2018 trial assessing cardiovascular endpoints among lorcaserin users, insofar as the data support a comparab le replication.  
Variables: The key variables are initiation of NB, initiation of lorcaserin 
(active comparator),  time on treatment, and the endpoint of 
MACE. The individual compone nts of MACE will also be 
quantified. Covariates will be derived from clinical 
measurements, past medical hist ory, diagnoses, observations, 
and prescription records. Multiple imputation will be applied to address missing data, coupled with PS analyses to address 
confounding. 
Data Sources: EHR and linked claims da ta from Arcadia Data Research. The 
data currently cover approximate ly 75 million people in the 
U.S. 
Study Size: There are approximately 37, 000 apparent NB initiators in the 
Arcadia data.  
There are approximately 16,000 appa rent lorcaserin initiators. 
Data Analysis: Descriptive statistics of  the study cohorts, multiple imputation 
of missing covariates, estimati on of crude incidence rates of 
MACE among initiators of NB, a nd adjusted incidence rates of 
MACE after applying PS matching weights will be calculated (1.0 and 1.1). Analogs to inten tion-to-treat and per-protocol 
cohort analyses will be conducted. The analysis will also follow the principles of the RCT DUPLICATE Initiative (2.0 and 2.1) to assess the concordance between findings in an EHR study to those in the lorcaserin cardiovascular safety endpoints 
trial. In addition, we will conduct a case-crossover study to assess the effects of NB on MACE  (2.2) and other sensitivity 
analyses.  
Milestones: Start of Data Collection   September 2014 
End of Data Collection  Februar y 2020 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 8 of 29 
4 RATIONALE AND BACKGROUND 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  approved  CONTRAVE® on September 10, 
2014, for chronic weight management in  obese adults (body mass index [BMI] ≥30 kg/m2) and 
in those who are overweight (BMI ≥27 kg/m2) with at least one weight-related comorbidity 
(e.g., hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, or  dyslipidemia). CONTR AVE® is used as an 
adjunct to a reduced-calorie diet and increa sed physical activity. The labeling indication 
includes two Limitations of Use, one of whic h states that the effe ct of  CONTRAVE® on 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality has not be en established. Since 2014, real-world data 
(RWD) on NB have accumulated through use in clin ical practice and afford an opportunity to 
generate RWE on the drug’s safety profile. This  protocol proposes the generation of RWE from 
EHRs and linked claims data to assess the cardiovasc ular safety of NB in us ual clinical practice.  
 
We also include several additional objectives; prime among them is asse ssing the comparability 
of findings using RWD to those generated from a clinical trial. RWD studies are often more 
cost-effective and feasible comp ared to their RCT counterparts.  When sufficiently calibrated, 
RWD studies can reach similar conclusions to  RCTs and can contribute meaningfully to 
evidence generation for therapeutics in real-world clinical practice2,3. The RCT DUPLICATE 
Initiative supports this goal a nd was created to quantify differences between RCT findings and 
corresponding RWD replications, to understand the types of research questions suitable for 
RWD, and to understand the methods that should be used for such studies. Comparisons to 
trial results can help to assess and quantify th e presence of (potential) biases in RWD studies.  
This protocol was developed in accordance with  regulatory guidance, draft and international 
society guidelines, and frameworks for obser vational database studies involving RWE4-6. 
  
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 9 of 29 
5 RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND OBJECTIVES 
The study will assess whether patients who initiate tr eatment with NB are at an elevated risk of 
MACE compared with patients who initiated trea tment with lorcaserin, an active comparator 
chosen to reduce potential confounding7,8. Lorcaserin was approved in the U.S. under the brand 
names BELVIQ® and BELVIQ XR ® for the same indication as NB, and withdrawn from the 
market due to cancer safety concerns in 20209-11. Lorcaserin is not believed to have adverse 
effects on cardiovascular outcomes. The CAME LLIA-TIMI 61 trial was a comparison of 
lorcaserin relative to placebo in overweight and obese patients with cardiovascular disease and 
cardiovascular disease risk factor s. The trial found no difference in the rate of cardiovascular 
events12. 
 
The study’s main objective is to compare the incidence of the primary endpoint (MACE) 
between initiators of NB and in itiators of lorcaserin (1.0). The study will also compare the 
incidence of the secondary endpoint, consisting of each component  of MACE, between initiators 
of NB and initiators of lorcaserin , across the following subgroups (1.1): 
 Patients with obesity (i.e., most recent BMI measurement ≥30 kg/m2); 
 Patients with a diagnosis of hype rtension, regardless of BMI; 
 Patients with a diagnosis of type 2 di abetes mellitus, regardless of BMI; 
 Patients with a diagnosis of dys lipidemia, regardless of BMI. 
 
The study’s additional objectives aimed at te sting the robustness of  the methods are: 
 To assess the comparability of findings fro m an EHR study to those of a 2018 clinical 
trial, aligning with the RCT DUPLICATE Initiative (2.0); 
 To quantify differences in car diovascular safety endpoints be tween the clinical trial and 
the results of this EHR study (2.1); 
 To conduct other sensitivity analyses, incl uding a self-contro lled, case-crossover 
analysis to quantify the potential effect of NB on MACE (2.2). 
  
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 10 of 29 
6 RESEARCH METHODS 
6.1 Study Design 
A retrospective cohort study design will be used for the main object ive and endpoints. Initiators 
of NB will be identified between September 2014 and February 2020. Contemporaneously, we 
will identify all lorcaserin users between 2012 and 2020. A self-controlled, case-crossover 
design will be used for the sensitivity analysis (2.2). 
 
6.2 Settings 
The cohorts for all study objectives will be draw n from a large EHR data source, representing a 
geographically diverse patient population. The data will include diagnoses, procedures, 
medications (prescribed and administered), clinic al measures (biometric and laboratory values), 
and observations derived from clinical notes. A subset of the populat ion will have linked, 
adjudicated claims data availabl e to support sensitivity analyses.  
EHR data, generated from routine clinical care offer timely clin ical information not typically 
available in claims databases, including info rmation on patient attrib utes, observations from 
physicians’ notes, patient symptoms and history, diagnostic information, and planned and actual 
treatments, and prescription medicines not covered by health plans (e.g., CONTRAVE®). 
Notably, EHR data include measures of BMI for descriptive analysis  and evaluation as a 
potential confounder and effect modifier. Th ese EHR data will be linked to proprietary 
information from First Databank to  identify medications of interest accurately, including NB. 
 
6.3 Inclusion Criteria 
For the main objective (1.0, 1.1), patients are el igible if they meet the following inclusion 
criteria: 
 Have at least one prescrip tion for NB between Septem ber 2014 and February 2020, 
including concurrent prescr iptions (within 15 days) for naltrexone and bupropion; or 
have at least one prescr iption for lorcaserin;  
 Have at least 180 days of da ta available prior to cohor t entry with no evidence of 
prescriptions or dispensings  of NB or lorcaserin; 
 Have at least one BMI value available in the 180 days prior to cohort entry, inclusive of 
the index date; 
 Have documentation of at least one outpatient  medical visit 180 or more days prior to 
cohort entry, and at least one healthcare interactio n in the 180 days prio r to cohort entry; 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 11 of 29 
 Are at least 18 years of ag e on the cohort entry date. 
 Of note, having at least one BMI value is the only inclus ion criterion that is  potentially missing 
within the EHR. Documentation of at least one outpatient medical visit more than 180 days 
prior to cohort entry, and at le ast one healthcare interaction in the 180 days  prior to cohort entry 
is required. This criteria will faci litate the inclusion of individuals who appear to have sufficient 
engagement with an Arcadia-cont ributing health system and woul d have enough clinical data to 
meet the study objectives.  
 
For the comparability study (2.0 and 2.1), incl usion criteria will be based on the CAMELLIA-
TIMI 61 trial, insofar as the information is  available in the data. Examples include: 
 BMI ≥27 kg/m
2; 
 Age ≥40 years with history of documented my ocardial infarction (MI) or ischemic 
stroke >1 month prior to ba seline, peripheral artery dise ase, revascularization or 
significant unrevascularized cor onary arterial stenosis;   
 Women age ≥55 years or men age ≥50 years who have type 2 diabetes mellitus without 
established cardiovascular disease but at  least one cardiovascular risk factor 
(hypertension, dyslipidemia, calc ulated creatin ine clearance ≥30 to ≤60 mL/min, or  
urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio ≥30 µg/mg)13. 
 
The full list of inclusion criteria are incl uded in the CAMELLIA-TIMI 61 publication and 
protocol12. 
Where variables are not available in the EHR or claims data, we will search for suitable proxies 
based on the literature and the recommendations  of a U.S.-licensed physician consultant.  
For the case-crossover study (2.2), patients are e ligible if they meet the following inclusion 
criteria: 
 Experience a MACE event (“inde x event”) after September 2014; 
 Have at least one prescrip tion or dispensing of NB pr ior to the index event; 
 Are at least 18 years of age at  the time of the first prescription/dispensing of interest. 
 
6.4 Exclusion Criteria 
For the main objective, patients are not eligible if  they have a diagnosis of any of the following 
conditions in the 180 days be fore the cohort entry date: 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 12 of 29 
 Epilepsy; 
 Bulimia; 
 Anorexia nervosa; 
 Surgical procedure for weight loss.  
 
Patients also must not have been  prescribed opioids or monoamine  oxidase inhibitors in the 180 
days before entry into the cohort.  
Patients with prescriptions for both NB and lor caserin will be randomly assigned to a baseline 
treatment group to preserve sample size and mitigate selection bias.  
Patients are not eligible for inclusion in the comparability study if they have any of the 
following, as feasibly measured in the Arcadia data, including: 
 Congestive cardiac failure; 
 Known left ventricular ejection fraction <20%; 
 Moderate or higher pulmonary hypertension ; 
 Known severe valvular disease;  
 Moderate renal impairment, severe renal impairment, or end-stage renal disease; 
 Severe hepatic impairment; 
 Use of other products inte nded for weight loss;  
 Use of, within 1 month prior to baseline , more than one other serotonergic drug 
including, but not limited to: 
o Selective serotonin re uptake inhibitors;  
o Serotonin norepinephrine  reuptake inhibitors;  
o Tricyclic antidepressants; 
o Bupropion; 
o Triptans; 
o St. Johnʼs Wort and tryptophan; 
o Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, linez olid, dextromethorphan, lithium; 
o Tramadol, antipsychotics or other dopamine antagonists; 
 Use of drugs known to increase the risk for cardiac valvulopathy w ithin 6 months prior 
to baseline including, but not limited to:  o Cyproheptadine; 
o Amoxapine; 
o TCAs; 
o Mirtazapine; 
o Pergolide; 
o Ergotamine; 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 13 of 29 
o Methysergide; 
o Cabergoline; 
 History or evidence of clinically signif icant disease (e.g., ma lignancy, cardiac, 
respiratory, gastrointestinal, re nal or psychiatric disease);  
 Use of lorcaserin HCl within 6 months prior to screening;  
 Hypersensitivity to lorcaserin HCl or any of the excipients. 
 
The full list of exclusion criteria are incl uded in the CAMELLIA-TIMI 61 publication and 
protocol12. 
Similar to the exclusion criteria for the primary ob jective, patients with any of the diagnoses or 
prescriptions for opioids and/or monoamine oxidase inhibitors in the 180 days prior to the index 
event date will be excluded from the case-crossover analysis. 
 
  
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 14 of 29 
6.5 Variables 
6.5.1 Exposure 
Initiation of NB and lorcaserin will be identifi ed using Hierarchical Ingredient Code Lists 
(HICLs) from First Databank. If necessary, indivi dual searches of National Drug Codes (NDCs) 
and free-text strings wi ll also be used. See Figure 1  for visual depiction of the study design.  
 
Figure 1. NB safety study design 
 
 
  

Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 15 of 29 
For the cohort, among the subset of patients w ith EHR data whose records can be linked to 
health insurance claims, we will assess the conc ordance between receiving a prescription for NB 
and lorcaserin (in the EHR) and filli ng the prescription (in the claims).  
 
The time of entry into the NB cohort will be the date of firs t prescription for those taking  
CONTRAVE®, the date of the second overlapping  prescription of naltrexone or bupropion in 
the case of concomitant use of naltrexone and bupr opion, or the date of first prescription for 
lorcaserin from date of approval in the U.S. to withdrawal from the market, as applicable. 
 
In the case-crossover study, a 90-day hazard window will immediately precede the index event 
date within which the occurrence of a prescrip tion or dispensing will define exposure status. 
Similarly, a 90-day referent window will preced e the hazard window, with exposure status 
designated comparably. A 30-day washout window  between the hazard and referent windows 
will be used to mitigate any carryover e ffects from the prior exposure. Please see Figure 2  for a 
visual depiction of the case-crossover study design.  
 
Figure 2. Case-cros sover study design 
 
 
6.5.2 Outcomes and follow-up 
  
The primary study endpoint is MACE, defined as the composite of:  
 
 Medically attended non-fatal acu te myocardial infarction; 
 Medically attended non-fatal stroke;  
 Cardiovascular-related death. 
 The secondary endpoints are: 
 
 Individual components of MACE , analyzed separately, as (1) medically attended non-
fatal acute myocardial infarction; (2) medi cally attended non-fatal stroke; and (3) 
cardiovascular-related death. 

Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 16 of 29 
In accordance with the CAMELLIA-TIMI 61 trial,  the comprability study will examine safety 
endpoints for the secondary obj ectives (2.0 and 2.1).  
 
The safety endpoint was de fined as a composite of: 
 
 Cardiovascular death; 
 Myocardial infarction; 
 Stroke12.  
 
For all study objectives, information on myocardi al infarction and stroke will be obtained from 
the EHR data, while information on death will be obtained from Datavant . Datavant compiles 
mortality data from government s ources, obituaries, newspapers, an d claims data for more than 
90% of the U.S. population. Cause of death will be ascertained from the subset of individuals 
whose records can be linked to death certificates; otherwise, diagnoses adjacent to death will be 
identified, as feasible, using information from the EHR (e.g., cardiovascular-related 
hospitalizations or emergency department vis its immediately preceding date of death).  
 
A U.S.-licensed physician consultant, blinded to exposure, will review the detailed 
chronological listing of indivi dual-level EHR data (and claims, where relevant) of a randomly 
selected subset of apparent MACE cases to determine whether MACE occurred. The 
adjudication process will compare the operati onal definition of MACE in the EHR to the 
physician’s professional judgement and the occurrence of MACE in the EHR and claims data. If 
the initial EHR-based definiti on of MACE does not meet a pre-specified threshold for 
concordance, then adjustments to  the initial list of diagnoses a nd procedure codes will be made 
to improve the accuracy of the operational definition of MACE14,15.  
 
Follow-up time will be calculated separately for each study endpoint. Patie nts will be followed 
starting the day after initial exposure until the first of the following censoring events: (1) the 
study endpoint of interest, (2) deat h (for those who do not have the endpoint of interest), or (3) 
end of available data for those who do not have the event of interest (i.e., censoring due to end 
of available EHR data). Person-time will be ca lculated by summing the days from cohort entry 
(day 0) to the date of the first relevant censoring event. 
 
To test the robustness of assumptions about th e date of censoring, analyses with differing 
censoring definitions will be perf ormed, and estimates compared:  
 
 To assess whether the censoring date needs to  be adjusted, the physician consultant will 
review a random sample of pa tient health profiles to determine whether there is a clear 
indicator of censoring. Insofar as there appear s to be a clear indicator of censoring, the 
physician will record this date (blinded to expos ure), and this information will be used to 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 17 of 29 
adjust the censoring date. Ind eed, this information may be tr eated as an annotation for a 
machine learning model. 
 To account for a patient still being on the in surance plan but not accessing the healthcare 
system, adjust the end of follow-up to be 6 months, 1 and 2 years following their last 
healthcare encounter in the EHR.   
 To assess the reliability of our method for computing time until censoring in the EHR, 
compare follow-up times in the EHR to those observed in the claims enrollment files 
using a subset of those with  EHR and claims data.   
 To test robustness of the me thod for computing follow-up tim e in the EHR, compute the 
distribution of follow-up times based on en rollment spans within the subset of 
individuals with claims and EHR data a nd apply the median follow-up time within 
populations with particul ar health profiles.  
 To implement a more specific definition of follow-up time, assume that a last healthcare 
encounter with a primary care provider, endoc rinologist, or geriatri c care provider in 
combination with no death information is the end of enrollment.  
6.5.3 Covariates 
A range of demographics will be assessed for each patient at cohort entry, including the 
following: 
 
 Age; 
 Sex; 
 Race/ethnicity. 
 
A set of comorbidities will be assessed in th e 180 days before cohort entry, including the 
following: 
 
 Acute myocardial infarction; 
 Stroke; 
 Dyslipidemia; 
 Type 2 diabetes mellitus; 
 Transient ischemic attack; 
 Hypertension; 
 Heart failure; 
 Unstable angina; 
 Peripheral vascular disease; 
 Coronary heart disease; 
 Cerebrovascular disease; 
 Chronic kidney disease; 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 18 of 29 
 Sleep apnea; 
 Mood disorders. 
 A set of concomitant medications will be assessed in the 180 days before cohort entry, including 
the following: 
 
 Medications that affect cardi ovascular outcomes, including: 
o Antihypertensives; 
o Statins; 
o Anticoagulants; 
o Antiplatelets; 
o Antihyperglycemics. 
 
 Other medications listed in the  C ONTRAVE® Prescribi ng Information Drug 
Interactions, including: 
o Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; 
o Tricyclic antidepressants; 
o Antipsychotics; 
o Beta-blockers; 
o Type 1C antiarrhythmics (e.g ., propafenone and flecainide); 
o Digoxin; 
o Antiplatelets. 
 
A set of relevant laboratory test results and biometric values will be assessed during the 180 
days before cohort entry, including the following:  
 
 BMI; 
 Blood glucose or HbA1c; 
 Liver function; 
 Dyslipidemias; 
 Resting heart rate; 
 Respiratory rate; 
 Systolic blood pressure; 
 Diastolic blood pressure; 
 Glomerular filtration rate/serum creatinine. 
 
Where multiple values are available, the most r ecent will be selected. Where no value is present, 
multiple imputation procedures will be used to generate a va lue under the assumption that the 
values are missing at random.  
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 19 of 29 
7 DATA SOURCES 
7.1 Arcadia Data Research 
The study will use EHR data and linked claims data  from Arcadia, which has assembled one of 
the largest EHR datasets available to lif e science organizations, currently covering 
approximately 75 million individu als in the U.S. Arcadia partners with health systems and 
payers to create a centralized, physically integr ated EHR system that has nationwide coverage 
and integrates clinical data from multiple electr onic medical records within and across health 
systems via their Master Patient Index, a proprietary person-mat ching technology th at identifies 
distinct patients acro ss disparate data sources16. The typical research extract includes patient 
demographics, encounters, appoint ments, provider data, charges,  assessments, immunizations, 
health maintenance and medical history, orders /results, vitals, insurance, prescriptions and 
active medications, problem lists, and allergy information. 
Arcadia’s EHR data are sourced from large in tegrated delivery networks, academic medical 
centers, ambulatory, primary care, core hospitals , and other providers. Arcadia’s de-identified 
dataset for research includes a mix of populations  representing individuals with commercial 
insurance, along with Medicare a nd Medicaid coverage. Adjudicated  claims data from multiple 
payers are available for approxima tely 46% of the EHR patients. 
 
7.2 Datavant Death Data 
We will link data from Arcadia to death data from Datavant, a private U.S. data curator, 
specializing in organizing health data17. Datavant’s mortality databa se contains information on 
deceased individuals in the U.S. and Canada18. Datavant’s Death Index contains information on 
individual deaths incl uding year and month of death, ge nder, and cause of death, where 
available. Information is obtaine d from the Social Security Admi nistration’s Death Master File 
in addition to private obituaries, newspapers  and claims data, and is updated on a weekly 
basis18,19. In 2018, information was present for just over 2.4 million deaths18.  
In order to de-identify records,  names, addresses, and social security numbers are removed in 
addition to modifications such as changing a pe rson’s date of birth to  year of birth alone19. 
Datavant’s proprietary technology adds encrypted tokens  to each record, constructed from the 
underlying personally identifiable  information. Since these tokens correspond to unique 
individuals, they can be used to link death information to other health-related datasets. 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 20 of 29 
8 STUDY SIZE AND STATISTICAL POWER 
8.1 Study Size 
According to the most recent available data from Arcadia (delivered to Exponent November 
2022), ~37,000 patients had an apparent initiation of NB. Of those patients ~64% had linked, 
adjudicated claims data at some  point in time. Seventy percent of apparent initiators were 
women. 
 
8.2 Ranges of Statisti cal Power for MACE 
In a similar population of overweight/ obese individuals, Ritchey et al.20 found that the incidence 
rate of MACE was estimated at 2/1,000 pers on-years among individuals unexposed to weight 
loss drugs (95% confidence interv al [CI], 1.85–2.17). Guided by this  estimated inci dence rate of 
MACE, Figure 3  describes a range of plausible estimate s for the statistical power of the NB 
safety study.  
 
  
 
     
 
    
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 21 of 29 
Figure 3. Range of power estimates for the endpoint of  MACE in the NB safety 
study  
 
This Figure was generated using a genera l cohort power calculation methodology.  
Abbreviation: NB, Naltrexone and Bupropri on; PY, person-years; RR, relative risk 
 
Assuming an incidence rate of MACE of 2 per 1,000 years of follow-up within this study, and 
that there are ~37,000 initi ators of NB, it appears that we have  greater than 80% power to detect 
a relative risk of 2.0.  
 
9 DATA MANAGEMENT 
9.1 Descriptive Statistics 
Descriptive statistics will be used to summarize each covari ate by treatment group for all study 
objectives. For dichotomous variables, we will report the number and proportion of patients 
with each covariate. For categorical variable s, we will report the number and proportion of 
patients in each level of the covariate. For continuous variab les, the mean and standard 
deviation will be estimated. Standardized differe nces in means and proportions will be used to 
assess covariate balance between  weighted treatment groups.  

Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 22 of 29 
9.2 Missing Data 
Some biometric variables within the EHR (e.g., la boratory values, such as HbA1c) are expected 
to be missing in a non-random way. We will em ploy multiple imputation methods to address 
missing covariate data at baseli ne by creating standard interval s (e.g., within periods of one, 
three or six months) for ascertainment of im portant missing values. If multiple results are 
available in an interval, we w ill select the valid observation that  is most proximal to the cohort 
entry date. 
 Consistent with our previous res earch on missing data within EHRs
21,22, we will then use 
multiple imputation methods to impute missing values within in tervals with no observed values 
for a given patient. To account for the uncerta inty of imputed values, we will produce 10 
complete datasets to quantify within- and betw een-dataset variance and to correct standard 
errors. That is, the full analysis will be conducte d within each of the 10 complete datasets, the 
results will be averaged across the datasets, and th e measures of statistical uncertainty (e.g., CIs) 
corrected for the imputati on. Because of the number of possi ble covariates requiring imputation, 
we will use a fully conditional sp ecification of the multiple im putation procedure (i.e., chained 
equations), which does not requir e the stringent assumption that some models make about the 
joint distribution of missing covariates23. 
 
The multiple imputation procedur e reduces the potentia l for missing data bi as at the population 
level and relaxes the assumptions necessary to interpret results as  unbiased estimates. Dr. Dore 
designed and successfully conducted a cohort study with a large EHR using these techniques, 
and the results of that study were similar to trial results of the same comparisons21.  
 
 
9.3 Crude Incidence Rate Differen ce (IRD) and Incidence Rate Ratio 
(IRR) Estimates 
The incidence rate for each group is the cumulative number of observed endpoint events, 
divided by the total person-years of follow-up. Th e crude IRD is the absolute difference in the 
observed incidence rate between initiators of NB a nd initiators of lorcaserin, with no adjustment 
for differences in patient ch aracteristics between groups. Th e crude IRR is the relative 
difference (i.e., ratio) in the obser ved incidence rate of initiators  of NB, divided by the observed 
incidence rate for initiators of lorcaserin, wi th no adjustment for differences in patient 
characteristics between groups. 
 
 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 23 of 29 
9.4 PS Matching Weights 
PS matching weights will be used to cont rol for confounding betw een treatment groups24,25. A 
logistic regression model will be used to estimate  the predicted probability of treatment with NB 
versus treatment with lorcaserin, conditional on pr e-specified covariates. Each patient’s PS, or 
predicted probability from the model, will be th e probability that the pa tient received NB. The 
complement of each patient’s PS (i.e., 1-PS) will be the probability that the patient received 
lorcaserin. Each patient will be assigned a matc hing weight, which is a function of their PS and 
the treatment received. The numerator of the ma tching weight is the smaller of the PS or the 
complement of the PS (1-PS). The denominator is the PS if the patient received NB, and it is 1-
PS if the patient received lorcaserin. For example,  a patient with a PS value of 0.6 (1-PS = 0.4) 
who received NB would have a ma tching weight of 0.4/0.6 or 0. 667. These weights will be used 
in regression models to account for confounding.  
 
Similar methods will be used to generate propensity score weights within the CAMELLIA-
TIMI 61 comparability cohort. Co variates will include demographi cs, calendar time of treatment 
initiation, comorbidities, medications, cardiovascular procedures, and indicators of health care 
utilization as proxy for overall disease st ate, care intensity, and surveillance.  
 
Matching weights are the weighti ng analog of 1:1 PS matching, but  include the entire eligible 
patient population, are more statis tically efficien t than matching, and pr oduce better balance on 
covariates. Thus, matching weights standardize the distri bution of patient characteristics to the 
area of common support (or empirical equipoise26) in which patients could have reasonably 
received either treatment. 
 
9.5 Estimation of Adjusted  IRD and IRR Estimates 
This study will include analogs of intention-to -treat (ITT) and per-protocol analyses, in 
accordance with clinical trial conventions. Both  analyses estimate the effect of NB on the 
incidence of MACE relative to comparators, but differ in the handli ng of person-time, as 
described below. We adopt the term ITT a nd refer to the per-pro tocol analogue as the as-treated  
analysis.  
 
9.5.1 Intention-to-Treat Analysis 
The ITT defines each day of follow-up for ever yone according to their exposure status at the 
time of cohort entry (e.g., initiation of NB). Clas sification of person-time in the ITT analysis is 
subject to exposure misclassificati on as individuals discontinue tr eatment or switch to the other 
study drug before their end of follow-up. In cont rast, the ITT estimate preserves the balance in 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 24 of 29 
baseline covariates that will be achieved through PS matching weights because individuals 
remain in the cohort to which they were assign ed at baseline, when the PS weights are applied. 
The results from this approach are best interpre ted as providing an estima te of the effect of 
starting treatment – or intending to start tr eatment – on the rate of the outcomes.  
 
9.5.2 As-Treated Analysis 
The ITT analysis will be juxtaposed with analys es of person-time classified by actual exposure 
to NB and lorcaserin, grouped into categories of current, recent, and past use. These person-time 
classifications estimate the effect of being on (o r off) the treatment on the rate of the outcomes. 
Such estimates are often desirabl e for drug safety questions becau se they avoid misclassification 
of exposure that arises in ITT analysis; how ever, the balance introduced at baseline by PS 
matching weights may deteriorat e as patients switch non-randomly  among different study drugs. 
Therefore, the ITT and as-treated  analyses are best interpreted together. 
 
To obtain the hazard ratios necessary to compare trial results to those obtained through use of 
RWD, we will use an ITT analysis for the primary analyses, and as-treated for sensitivity 
analyses, as was done in th e CAMELLIA-TIMI 61 trial. 
 
9.5.3 Statistical Mode l for Cohort Analysis 
 
For all primary study objectives, weighted Poisso n models will be used to estimate IRDs and 
IRRs (and 95% CIs), adjusted for all covariates included in the PS m odel. Robust variance 
estimators will be used to account for the weig hting. Analyses will be conducted amongst the 
overall NB cohort and also strati fied by initiators of CONTRAVE ® and those with overlapping, 
concomitant use of Nalt rexone and Bupropion.  
 
For the secondary objective of assessing the comp arability of findings in a RWD cohort with the 
lorcaserin clinical trial, we will conduct a time -to event analysis in the propensity-score matched 
cohort. We will produce hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals using a weighted Cox 
proportional-hazards model with the stra tification factor as a covariate. 
 
Additionally, informed by previous work in the RCT DUPLICATE Initia tive, we will examine 
the following metrics in concert to assess the comparability in findings between the 
CAMELLIA-TIMI 61 trial and findings in the data:  
 
 Regulatory agreement, which is the ability  of the study using RWD to replicate the 
direction and magnitude of the RCT; 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 25 of 29 
 Estimate agreement, defined as a HR from the replication study that was within the 95% 
CI for the RCT estimate; 
 Standardized difference between  the RCT and replication effect estimate, with a p-value 
< 0.05 considered stat istically significant. 
 
 
Conditional logistic regression mo dels will be used to compare the odds of exposure to NB in 
the hazard window to the odds of exposure in the referent window (i.e., od ds ratio) for the case 
cross-over design.  
 
9.6 Quality Control 
The study will be carried out according to Expone nt’s Quality Management System (QMS), 
with specific procedures being consistent with the International Society for 
Pharmacoepidemiology’s Gu idelines for Good Pharma coepidemiology Practices 
(http://www.pharmacoepi.org), as well as the FDA Best Practice Guidance document 
(http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComp lianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/)4-6,27. In 
particular, the QMS at Exponent ensures that  processes and deliverables are documented, 
reviewed, and validated in sufficient detail to allow for subseque nt re-examination or 
replication. Exponent’s quality management system is independe ntly assessed against the most 
recognized and comprehensive in ternational standard for qua lity management systems, ISO 
9001. Exponent complies with the ISO 9001:2015 standard; the ISO 17025:2017 standard; U.S. 
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 10, Part 50, Appendix B; U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, 
Title 10, Part 21; and the respective advertisi ng policy for each registration, accreditation, and 
approval. 
 
The core project team will consist of at least one  Principal Scientist who will provide scientific 
oversight of the study, a senior epidemiologist  who will manage day-to-day aspects of the 
scientific conduct of the study, research analyst(s), and a pr oject manager. Project management 
is integrated into the project team and supports  the development of the project plan, monitoring 
timelines and budgets, s ecuring appropriate study resources,  and facilitati ng completion of 
contracted deliverables. In addition, Exponent  staff members will support the project team by 
providing review and quality assu rance of documents and programs  associated with the conduct 
of the study, including assurance of appropriate data confidentiality, storage, and management.  
 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 26 of 29 
10 LIMITATIONS OF THE DATA AND RESEARCH METHODS 
10.1 Electronic Health Data 
All EHR databases and healthcare registries have  certain inherent limitations because the data 
are collected for clinical patient management, administration, and other non-research purposes. 
EHR data represent the intent of the prescriber  through the written prescr iption for a medication; 
they do not indicate that a me dication was filled, consumed, or taken as prescribed.  
The EHR data will not include healthcare encounters or prescrip tions from providers that do not 
contribute to the EHR aggregating entity (Arcadia ). This can result in under-capture of some 
medication exposure. In addition,  patients prescribed medications  may not have them dispensed 
and may not consume them as prescribed even wh en they are dispensed. This can overestimate 
some patients’ actual medication exposure.  
 
10.2 Unmeasured Patient Risk Factors 
In this study, robust PS adjustment relies on accu rate measurement of risk factors for MACE. 
As such, the lack of important risk factors can introduce unmeasured confounding, where these 
risk factors remain imbalanced between groups  after PS adjustment. The use of an active 
comparator will mitigate some unmeasured conf ounding, because it shares  the same indication 
as NB28. Self-controlled designs are not subject to measured or unmeasured confounding by 
factors that do not vary over the observation wi ndow. Therefore, the case-crossover study will 
help inform the extent to which residual confounding may affect the cohort analysis. 
11 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 
Confidentiality of patient records will be maintain ed at all times. All analyses will be performed 
in accordance with applicable laws and regul ations. All study reports will only contain 
aggregated results and will not identify indivi dual patients or physicians. At no time during the 
study will Currax, Exponent, or any consulta nts on the study receive patient-identifying 
information. 
12 MANAGEMENT AND REPORTING OF ADVERSE EVENTS 
For this study using previously collected a nd deidentified electroni c healthcare data, the 
research team does not anticipat e any new adverse events to be identified. If, however, new 
adverse events are found during the course of  the study, they will be vetted through the 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 27 of 29 
pharmacovigilance processes at Currax Pharm aceuticals LLC and reported to regulatory 
authorities, as appropriate. 
 
13 PLANS FOR DISSEMINATION AND COMMUNICATING 
STUDY RESULTS 
A report of the findings of this study will be  presented to FDA upon finalization of study output. 
Additionally, Currax Pharmaceuticals LLC intends fo r the research team to publish the results in 
a peer reviewed journal expeditiously and in keeping with ISPE GPP (2015) and authorship 
guidelines presented by the International Co mmittee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) 
recommendations (2019).  
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 28 of 29 
14 REFERENCES 
1. Contrave Prescribing Information. ( https://contrave .com/contrave-pi/ ). 
2. Franklin JM, Patorno E, Desai RJ, et al . Emulating randomized c linical trials with 
nonrandomized real-world ev idence studies: first result s from the RCT DUPLICATE 
initiative. Circula tion 2021;143(10):1002-1013. 
3. Merola D, Young J, Schrag D, Lin KJ, Robert N, Schneeweiss S. Oncology Drug 
Effectiveness from Electronic Health Record  Data Calibrated Against RCT Evidence: 
The PARSIFAL Trial Emulation. Cl inical Epidemiology 2022;14:1135-1144. 
4. Administration FaD. Framework fo r FDA’s Real-World Evidence Program. 
(https://www.fda.gov/media/120060/download ). 
5. Administration FaD. Real-World Data: Assessing Electronic Health Records and 
Medical Claims Data To Support Regulator y DecisionMaking for Drug and Biological 
Products Guidance for Industry. ( https://www.fda.gov/media/152503/download ). 
6. Administration FaD. Submitting Document s Using Real-World Data and Real-World 
Evidence to FDA for Drug and Biological Products Guidance for Industry. ( https://www.fda.gov/me dia/124795/download ). 
7. Schneeweiss S, Patrick AR, Stürmer T, et  al. Increasing levels of restriction in 
pharmacoepidemiologic database  studies of elderly and comparison with randomized 
trial results. Medical care 2007;45(10 SUPL):S131. 
8. Suissa K, Schneeweiss S, Kim DW, Pato rno E. Prescribing trends and clinical 
characteristics of patients starting antiobe sity drugs in the United States. Diabetes, 
Obesity and Metabolism 2021. 
9. BELVIQ Prescribing Information.  Revised 4/2018. Available from: 
https://www.belviq.com/pdfs/Belviq _Prescribing_information-pdf.pdf . Accessed May 
30, 2021. 
10. BELVIQ Prescribing Information. 
(https://www.belviq.com/pdfs/Belv iq_Prescribing_information-pdf.pdf ). 
11. FDA requests the withdrawal of the weight -loss drug Belviq, Belviq XR (lorcaserin) 
from the market: Potential risk of  cancer outweighs the benefits. 
https://www.fda.gov/me dia/135189/download : U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 
2020. 
12. Bohula EA, Wiviott SD, McGuire DK, et al. Cardiovascular safety of lorcaserin in 
overweight or obese patients. New Engla nd Journal of Medicine 2018;379(12):1107-
1117. 
13. Valente MA, Hillege HL, Navis G, et al. The Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology 
Collaboration equation outperforms the Modifi cation of Diet in Re nal Disease equation 
for estimating glomerular filtration rate in  chronic systolic he art failure. European 
journal of heart fail ure 2014;16(1):86-94. 
14. Cutrona SL, Toh S, Iyer A, et al. Validati on of acute myocardial infarction in the Food 
and Drug Administration's Mini-Sentinel  program. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 
2013;22(1):40-54. (In eng). DOI: 10.1002/pds.3310. 
15. Davis LA, Mann A, Cannon GW, Mikuls TR, Reimold AM, Caplan L. Validation of 
diagnostic and procedural codes for identificat ion of acute cardiovascular events in US 
veterans with rheumatoid arthritis. EGEMS 2013;1(3). 
Confidential Information 
CONTRAVE® Cardiovascular Safety Study, Final Protocol  
January 26, 2023 Page 29 of 29
 
16. Arcadia. Aggregate Pop. Health Data. 2021 ( https://arcadia.io/pr oducts/aggregate-your-
data/ ). 
17. Datavant. Health and Data Analytics. ( https://datavant.com/s olutions/health-data-
analytics/ ). 
18. Du M, Hou J, Hsu B, et al. Incorporating Datavant’s Death Index in Mortality Analysis. 
(https://www.soa.org/globalassets/a ssets/files/resources/research-
report/2021/population-mortality-
comparisions.pdf#:~:text=Datavant%2C %20Inc.%2C%20a%20private%20U.S.%20com
pany%20specializing%20in,databases%2 C%20can%20be%20aggregated%20and%20m
odeled%20for%20analysis .). 
19. Datavant. Mortality Data in Healthcare  Analytics Sourcing Robust Data in a HIPAA-
Compliant Manner. ( https://datavant.com/wp-
content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2018/09/White -Paper_-Mortality-Dat a-in-Healthcare.pdf ). 
20. Ritchey ME, Harding A, Hunter S, et al. Cardiovascular safety during and after use of 
phentermine and topiramate. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 
2019;104(2):513-522. 
21. Loughlin AM, Qiao Q, Nunes AP, et al. Effe ctiveness and tolerabil ity of therapy with 
exenatide once weekly vs basal insulin am ong injectable-drug-naïv e elderly or renal 
impaired patients with type 2 diabetes in the United States. Diabetes, Obesity and 
Metabolism 2018;20(4):898- 909. DOI: 10.1111/dom.13175. 
22. Nunes AP, Loughlin AM, Qiao Q, et al. Tole rability and effectiven ess of exenatide once 
weekly relative to basal insulin among type  2 diabetes patients of different races in 
routine care. Diabetes Therapy 2017;8(6):1349-1364. 
23. Lee KJ, Carlin JB. Multiple imputation fo r missing data: fully c onditional specification 
versus multivariate norma l imputation. American journal of epidemiology 
2010;171(5):624-632. 
24. Harder VS, Stuart EA, Anthony JC. Propens ity score techniques and the assessment of 
measured covariate balance to test causal  associations in psychological research. 
Psychological methods 2010;15(3):234. 
25. Brookhart MA, Schneeweiss S, Rothman KJ, Glynn RJ, Avorn J, Stürmer T. Variable 
selection for propensity score models . American journal of epidemiology 
2006;163(12):1149-1156. 
26. Lee BK, Lessler J, Stuart EA. Weight tr imming and propensity score weighting. PloS 
one 2011;6(3):e18174. 
27. (ISPE) ISfP. Guidelines for Good Pharmacoepidemiology Practices (GPP). 
(https://www.pharmacoepi.org/reso urces/policies/guidelines-08027/ ). 
28. Seeger JD, Nunes A, Loughlin AM. Using RW E research to extend clinical trials in 
diabetes: an example with impl ications for the future. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism 
2020;22:35-44. 
 