Version	date:	30JULY2017			Study	Title:	Comparison	of	Breath-Enhanded	and	T-Piece	Nebulizers	in	Children	with	Acute	Asthma		NCT	02566902		Document	type:	IRB	approved	study	protocol		Document	date/most	recent	update:	30	July	2017		Initial	IRB	approval	date:	August	28,	2015		IRB	Continuing	review	approval	dates:	August	16,	2016,	August	14,	2017				
Version	date:	30JULY2017		Research	Proposal	for	Review	Seton	Institutional	Review	Board		I. Title	Comparison	of	Breath-Enhanced	and	T-Piece	Nebulizers	in	Children	with	Acute	Asthma		II. Investigators	 (co-investigators),	 Study	Team	 Members,	 and	 Institutional	Affiliations	Principal	Investigator:	Matthew	Wilkinson,	MD		The	University	of	Texas	at	Austin,	Dell	Medical	School		Dell	Children’s	Medical	Center	of	Central	Texas		Austin,	TX			Co-Investigators:	Michael	Gardiner,	MD	The	University	of	Texas	at	Austin,	Dell	Medical	School		Dell	Children’s	Medical	Center	of	Central	Texas		Austin,	TX		III. Source	of	Funding	This	 study	 has	 received	 funding	 from	 the	 2014	 Scientific,	 Education	 and	 Research	Foundation	of	UTSW	Austin	Research/Fellow	Grant	(SERF-RG)	in	the	amount	of	$4997	to	cover	equipment	and	gift	cards	for	patient	enrollment	incentive.				The	Dell	Children’s	Medical	Center	Pediatric	Emergency	Medicine	Fellowship	will	fund	any	further	expenses	incurred.		IV. Hypothesis,	Research	Questions,	or	Goals	of	the	Project	The	 objective	of	 this	 study	is	 to	evaluate	 the	 efficacy	of	 two	 different	 nebulizers.	 	We	hypothesize	 that	 albuterol	 delivered	 with	 a	 breath-enhanced	 nebulizer	 will	 lead	 to	statistically	greater	improvement	in	FEV1	when	compared	to	an	equivalent	dose	delivered	via	 a	 standard	 t-piece	 nebulizer.	The	 primary	 aim	 will	 be	 to	 study	 changes	 in	forced	expiratory	 volume	 in	 one	 second	 (FEV1)	 in	 patients	 presenting	 to	 an	 urban	 pediatric	emergency	department	with	a	moderate	to	severe	acute	asthma	exacerbation	when	utilizing	these	two	nebulizers.		Secondary	aims	will	include	evaluation	of	hospital	admission	rates,	emergency	department	(ED)	length	of	stay	(LOS),	changes	in	asthma	severity	scores,	vital	sign	changes,	medication	side	effects,	and	total	quantity	of	albuterol	given	in	the	ED.		A	distal	aim	of	the	study	will	be	to	perform	a	cost	analysis;	though	we	will	likely	need	further	clinical	trials	utilizing	multiple	dose	administration	in	order	to	accurately	analyze	cost.					V. Background	and	Significance	Acute	 asthma	 exacerbation	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 frequent	 reasons	 for	 children	 to	 visit	 the	emergency	department.		According	to	the	2011	Centers	for	Disease	Control	and	Prevention	National	Health	Interview	Survey,	there	are	7.1	million	children	living	with	a	diagnosis	of	
Version	date:	30JULY2017	asthma.1	Among	the	surveyed	children,	58%	had	at	least	one	asthma	attack	within	the	prior	year.1	In	2010,	640,000	children	under	15	years	old	visited	an	emergency	department	for	asthma	 related	 reasons.1			The	 treatment	 of	 asthma	 accounts	 for	 a	 large	 portion	 of	 our	national	healthcare	expense	with	an	estimated	annual	cost	of	$56	billion,	of	which	children	account	for	a	significant	portion.1		Advances	in	the	ability	to	safely,	effectively,	and	efficiently	treat	asthma	exacerbations	have	the	potential	to	improve	outcomes,	patient	flow,	and	the	productivity	of	pediatric	emergency	departments.		Current	standard	of	care	treatment	of	acute	asthma	includes	administration	of	 an	 inhaled	 short	 acting	 β2-agonist	 (SABA),	systemic	 glucocorticoids,	 and	 correction	 of	hypoxemia.2	While	it	has	long	been	accepted	that	the	use	of	inhaled	SABA	is	efficacious,	the	optimal	route	of	administration	has	been	controversial.		Despite	several	studies	showing	that	metered	dose	inhalers	(MDI)	with	spacer	are	likely	as	effective	as	nebulizers,	ED	physicians	in	the	United	States	have	been	reluctant	to	change	their	practice.3-8			Fueled	 by	 the	 ongoing	 investigation	 into	 the	 ideal	 mechanism	 of	 inhaled	 SABA	 delivery,	nebulizer	technology	has	continued	to	advance	over	the	past	several	decades.	Studies	using	in-vitro	lung	models	and	in-vivo	healthy	controls	have	shown	newer	nebulizer	technologies	to	aerosolize	more	medication	with	droplet	sizes	in	the	ideal	respirable	range,	increasing	the	efficiency	of	drug	delivery	and	improving	lung	deposition.9-14			It	is	unknown	whether	these	results	will	translate	into	improved	clinical	outcomes.		Newer	 generation	nebulizers	 include	 breath-actuated	 and	 breath-enhanced	 nebulizers.		Breath-actuated	nebulizers	function	via	a	piston-activation,	which	initiates	nebulization	only	during	 patient	 inhalation,	 enhancing	 medication	 delivery	 and	 reducing	 waste.	 	 The	drawbacks	of	breath-actuated	nebulizers	 include	 their	 high	 cost,	 significantly	 longer	nebulization	 times,	 and	 occasional	 non-activation	when	 a	 patient	 is	 unable	 to	 generate	significant	inspiratory	force	to	initiate	nebulization,	which	is	a	significant	problem	in	the	pediatric	 population.14,15	Breath-enhanced	 nebulizers,	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 continuously	nebulize	medication	and	gain	their	advantage	via	an	aerosol	holding	chamber	and	a	one-way	valve	system	that	directs	exhaled	air	away	from	the	nebulizer	chamber.		This	technology	minimizes	medication	loss	upon	exhalation,	and	allows	nebulized	aerosol	to	build	up	in	the	chamber	 prior	 to	 the	 next	 breath	 cycle,	 thus	 delivering	 a	 bolus	 dose	 of	 medication	 on	inhalation.12-14		Newer	technology	nebulizers	have	not	been	widely	accepted	into	clinical	practice	largely	due	to	healthcare	comfort	with	existing	practices,	lack	of	clinical	trials	evaluating	efficacy	in	sick	patients,	and	concerns	regarding	the	cost	of	these	newer	nebulizers.			Despite	the	benefits	that	 have	 been	 demonstrated	 in	 healthy	 subjects	 and	 lung	 models,	 few	 studies	 have	evaluated	 these	 newer	 technology	 nebulizers	 in	 pediatric	 patients	 presenting	 with	 acute	asthma	exacerbations.		One	randomized	controlled	trial	of	pediatric	patients	demonstrated	decreased	 symptom	scores,	 respiratory	 rates,	and	 lower	 admission	rates	 with	the	use	of	breath-actuated	nebulizers	compared	to	t-piece	nebulizers.15	We	were	only	able	to	identify	one	 study	 which	 analyzed	 spirometry	 data	 in	 pediatric	 patients	 with	 newer	 nebulizer	technologies.16	In	 this	 study,	 patients	 receiving	 inhaled	 terbutaline	 showed	greater	FEV1	improvement	using	a	breath-actuated	device	as	compared	to	a	constant	flow	nebulizer.			
Version	date:	30JULY2017		To	our	knowledge,	the	efficacy	of	breath-enhanced	compared	to	t-piece	nebulizers	on	airway	obstruction	as	 determined	 by	 spirometry	 has	 not	 been	 evaluated	 in	 children	 with	 acute	asthma.		There	is	an	ongoing	study	at	our	institution	(principal	investigator	is	Dr.	Wilkinson)	that	is	evaluating	ED	LOS	in	pediatric	asthma	patients	when	placed	on	a	breath-enhanced	versus	t-piece	nebulizer	treatment	pathway.		Dr.	Wilkinson’s	study	is	not	evaluating	FEV1	or	other	spirometric	data	to	measure	airway	obstruction	or	the	efficacy	of	a	single	treatment.		Measurement	 of	 FEV1	has	 been	 used	 throughout	 other	 asthma	 literature	as	 a	 reliable	measure	 of	 airway	 obstruction	 and	 effectiveness	 of	 treatment	 in	 patients	 with	 acute	asthma.16-19	FEV1	measurement	has	been	recommended	by	the	National	Heart,	Lung,	and	Blood	 Institute	 (NHLBI)	 as	 a	 means	 of	 assessing	 the	 degree	 of	 airway	 obstruction,	 and	response	to	therapy	in	acute	asthma.2	In	their	2007	guidelines,	the	NHLBI	recommended	routine	FEV1	measurements	in	all	patients	presenting	for	acute	asthma	exacerbations,	as	this	measure	is	a	more	reliable	indicator	of	severity	of	exacerbations	than	severity	of	symptoms.2	Additionally,	 FEV1	is	 more	 useful	 than	 peak	 expiratory	 flow	 (PEF)	 due	 to	 the	 ability	 to	evaluate	flow-volume	loops	and	distinguish	poor	effort	and	restrictive	lung	diseases	from	asthma-related	obstruction.20-22	For	all	of	these	reasons,	we	feel	it	is	pertinent	to	study	this	breath-enhanced	 nebulizer	 technology	 in	relation	 to	 clinical	 spirometric	data	 in	 order	 to	demonstrate	clinical	efficacy.		VI. Research	Method,	Design,	and	Proposed	Statistical	Analysis	This	 study	 will	 be	 a	 blinded	 observer,	 randomized,	 controlled	 trial	 comparing	 breath-enhanced	nebulizer	albuterol	therapy	with	nebulized	albuterol	administered	via	a	t-piece	nebulizer.				The	study	site	will	be	the	Dell	Children’s	Medical	Center	Emergency	Department,	an	urban	pediatric	ED	with	approximately	80,000	visits	per	year,	of	which	than	3000	visits	are	due	to	asthma	 related	 issues.		The	 patient	 population	 will	 include	 children	 with	 previously	diagnosed	asthma,	aged	≥	6	years	to	<	18	years	old,	presenting	to	our	pediatric	ED	with	breathing	difficulty	or	cough,	and	found	to	have	an	initial	FEV1	less	than	70%	predicted	based	on	NHANES	III	study	data	(moderate	to	severe	exacerbation).	2,15,23	Patients	will	be	excluded	from	the	study	if	they	have	no	clinical	evidence	of	exacerbation	by	asthma	scoring	(PAS	score	of	0),	have	preexisting	chronic	lung	disease	besides	asthma,	have	congenital	heart	disease,	have	neuromuscular	disease,	have	a	suspected	intrathoracic	foreign	body,	have	an	allergy	or	other	contraindication	to	a	study	medication,	or	have	severe	breathing	difficulty	requiring	immediate	resuscitation.									Subject	Eligibility:	Inclusion:	
Version	date:	30JULY2017	1. Age	≥	6	years	and	<	18	years	2. History	of	physician	diagnosed	asthma	3. Presenting	to	ED	with	acute	asthma	exacerbation	4. Parent	or	guardian	speaks	English	or	Spanish.	Exclusion:	1. PAS	score	of	0	2. Initial	FEV1	greater	than	70%	predicted	3. Patient	unable	to	perform	acceptable	initial	spirometry	4. Pregnancy	or	breast-feeding	5. Immediate	resuscitation	required	6. Chronic	lung	disease	(other	than	asthma)	7. Congenital	heart	disease	8. Neuromuscular	disease	9. Suspected	intrathoracic	foreign	body	10. Allergy	or	other	contraindication	to	study	medication		Subjects	will	be	identified	in	triage	and	will	be	screened	and	enrolled	by	a	member	of	the	study	team	(P1).		A	research	nurse	will	be	available	for	6-8	hours	per	day	to	serve	as	the	primary	 enrolling	 personnel	 during	 these	 hours.	 	 Additionally,	 each	 of	 the	 pediatric	emergency	medicine	fellows	and	several	pediatric	emergency	medicine	attending	physicians	will	be	trained	and	certified	for	enrollment,	and	will	enroll	subjects	during	evenings,	nights,	and	weekends.		We	anticipate	having	study	personnel	available	at	a	minimum	of	18	hours	per	 day	 for	 enrollment.	 	The	 P1	 personnel	 will	 assess	 the	 potential	 subject	 and	 screen	potential	 subjects	 for	 inclusion	 and	 exclusion	 criteria	 as	 detailed	 above.	 	 As	 a	 part	 of	screening,	 the	 P1	 personnel	 will	 perform	 baseline	 spirometry	 measurements	 prior	 to	consent.		Spirometry	is	a	minimal	risk	procedure	that	is	performed	as	standard	of	care	in	many	 emergency	 departments	 nationwide	 (either	 as	spirometry,	 or	PEF	measurements).		Performing	spirometry	prior	to	consent	will	expedite	screening,	and	for	children	who	have	FEV1	greater	than	70%	predicted	or	those	unable	to	perform	acceptable	spirometry,	this	will	allow	them	to	be	excluded	and	their	asthma	treated	more	promptly.		This	will	avoid	excluded	children	having	to	undergo	consent	prior	to	being	excluded	and	receiving	treatment	for	their	acute	 asthma.	 	Consent	 will	 be	 obtained	 from	 the	parent	 or	guardian	 of	 all	 patients,	 and	assent	obtained	from	patients	who	are	at	least	7	years	of	age.		If	required	prior	to	study	enrollment,	supplemental	oxygen	may	be	administered	to	maintain	oxygen	saturation	>	90%	if	there	is	evidence	of	hypoxemia	on	continuous	pulse-oximetry.		If	there	is	a	delay	of	greater	than	15	minutes	due	to	the	consent	process,	a	unit	dose	(2.5mg)	of	albuterol	may	be	given	with	a	standard	t-piece	nebulizer	up	to	3	times	as	needed.		Patients	requiring	this	unit	dose	of	 albuterol	 will	 still	 be	 eligible	 for	 enrollment	 so	 long	 as	 they	 meet	 enrollment	 criteria	following	this	therapy.	Following	consent,	the	P1	personnel	will	record	an	initial	set	of	vital	signs	 (temperature,	 heart	 rate,	 respiratory	 rate,	 blood	 pressure,	 and	 peripheral	 pulse	oximetry),	and	record	baseline	asthma	scores	using	multiple	previously	validated	asthma	severity	 scores	(PAS	 and	 PASS).24,25	At	 this	 point,	 study	 patients	 will	 be	 randomized	 to	receive	 treatment	 with	 either	 the	 experimental	 (breath-enhanced)	 or	 control	 (t-piece)	nebulizer.		Randomization	will	be	performed	with	a	computerized	randomization	process.		Pre-assigned	opaque	envelopes	will	be	used	in	order	to	conceal	randomized	assignments,	preventing	 any	 knowledge	 of	 patient	 assignment	 to	 the	 enrolling	 personnel.	 	 A	 second	
Version	date:	30JULY2017	member	of	the	study	team	(P2)	will	open	the	subject’s	randomized	folder	that	will	dictate	the	 appropriate	 therapy	 arm.	 P2	 will	administer	 a	 single	5mg	 dose	 of	 albuterol	 via	 the	appropriate	nebulizer	as	determined	by	randomization.		P1	will	be	blinded	to	the	treatment	arm,	whereas	P2	will	not	be	blinded.		Following	15	minutes	of	therapy	-	sufficient	time	for	both	treatment	arms	to	be	complete	-	P1	will	perform	a	post-treatment	assessment	of	the	subject	including	a	repeat	set	of	vital	signs,	pulse-oximetry,	asthma	scoring,	and	spirometry	measurements.					Patients	 randomized	 to	 the	 “control”	 arm	 will	 receive	 therapy	 with	 our	 standard	 ED	nebulizer,	 the	 Hudson	 RCI®	Micro	 Mist®	nebulizer	 (Teleflex	 Medical®,	 Research	 Triangle	Park,	NJ).		The	treatment	will	be	preferentially	administered	with	a	mouthpiece.	Patients	unable	or	unwilling	to	use	a	mouthpiece	(as	determined	by	the	P2)	will	receive	therapy	with	a	simple	mask	(Hudson	RCI®,	Teleflex	Medical®,	Research	Triangle	Park,	NJ).			Patients	 randomized	 to	 the	 “experimental”	 arm	 will	 receive	 therapy	 with	 a	 NebuTech®	HDN®,	Breath-Enhanced	High	Density	Jet	Nebulizer	(Salter	Labs®,	Arvin,	CA).		Treatments	will	be	preferentially	administered	with	a	mouthpiece.	Patients	unable	or	unwilling	to	use	a	mouthpiece	(as	determined	by	the	P2)	will	receive	therapy	with	a	mask.		The	NebuTech®	HDN®	allows	for	a	proprietary	vented	mask,	which	still	utilizes	the	breath-enhanced	features	of	the	system	(I-GuardTM	Valved	Aerosol	Delivery	System,	Salter	Labs®,	Arvin,	CA).				Spirometry	 measurements	 will	 be	 taken	 using	 a	 handheld	 spirometer	 which	 has	 been	validated	in	healthy	controls	(NDD	EasyOne®).26	In	keeping	with	the	most	recent	American	Thoracic	 Society	 guidelines,	 participants	 will	 asked	 to	 perform	 a	 minimum	 of	 3	 and	maximum	 of	 8	 forced	 expiratory	 maneuvers	 in	 order	 to	 obtain	 3	 adequate	 samples	 as	determined	by	the	device.27	Based	on	prior	data,	more	than	8	attempts	at	spirometry	may	result	in	patient	fatigue	which	will	artificially	decrease	the	patient’s	performance	on	lung	function	testing27.		The	highest	recorded	FEV1	will	be	used	for	analysis.		Flow-volume	loops	will	 be	 evaluated	 by	 a	 pulmonologist	 in	 order	 to	 assess	 adequacy	 of	 spirometry	measurements	for	all	patients,	and	those	with	inadequate	loops	will	be	excluded	from	FEV1	analysis.		The	pulmonologist	involved	will	be	blinded	to	therapy	arm.		A	member	of	the	research	team	will	collect	baseline	data	from	the	subject’s	guardian.		Data	will	be	recorded	on	a	standardized	form	and	will	include	subject	demographics	(including	age,	ethnicity,	primary	care	provider),	baseline	home	therapies,	and	assessment	of	baseline	asthma	 severity,	nature	 and	 duration	of	current	symptoms,	 and	treatments	 prior	 to	 ED	arrival.		Following	the	post-treatment	assessment,	the	P1	(blinded)	study	personnel	will	be	asked	to	predict	which	nebulizer	was	utilized	in	the	study,	in	order	to	evaluate	adequacy	of	blinding.		Following	completion	of	the	experimental	stage	as	detailed	above,	patients	will	be	released	to	receive	standard	of	care	therapy	as	determined	by	the	assigned	attending	ED	physician.		We	 anticipate	 that	 the	 majority	 of	 patients	 will	 receive	 care	 according	 to	the	 DCMC	ED	asthma	pathway,	 including	 administration	 of	inhaled	 ipratropium	 bromide	 and	an	 oral	systemic	glucocorticoid.		However,	some	patients	may	be	treated	off	of	the	ED	pathway,	and	variability	in	subsequent	therapy	is	possible.		Data	will	be	recorded	on	a	standardized	form	
Version	date:	30JULY2017	regarding	subsequent	therapy	through	the	remainder	of	the	patients’	ED	course.		Patients	who	 are	 admitted	 to	 the	 hospital	 will	 be	 treated	 according	 to	the	standard	 of	 care	 as	determined	 by	the	inpatient	 attending	 physician.	Following	 disposition	 from	 the	 ED,	 no	further	data	will	be	obtained	from	patients.		Sample	Size	Treatment	groups	will	be	analyzed	on	an	intention-to-treat	basis.		The	primary	outcome	for	this	study	is	change	in	FEV1	from	initial	presentation	to	reassessment.		By	evaluating	data	from	previously	performed	studies,16,18	we	have	conducted	a	sample	size	calculation	using	an	 estimated	 baseline	 initial	 FEV1	of	 55%	 predicted,	 and	 an	 estimated	 10%	 FEV1	improvement	 with	 standard	 of	 care.	 	The	 calculations	were	 performed	 using	STATA	 13	statistical	software	(StataCorp,	LP,	College	Station,	TX).	In	order	to	detect	an	improvement	differential	of	5%	(absolute)	between	treatment	arms,	with	a	power	of	0.80	and	alpha	of	0.05,	we	will	need	64	patients	enrolled	in	each	arm.		It	has	been	shown	previously	that	as	few	 as	 35%-65%	 of	 patients	 with	 severe	 asthma	 exacerbations	 are	 able	 to	 successfully	perform	 peak	 expiratory	 flow	 or	 spirometry.22,28	However	 other	 studies	 have	 not	 had	significant	 difficulty	 with	pediatric	subjects	 performing	 spirometry.15	Several	 of	 these	studies	evaluated	patients	as	young	as	5	years	old.		Due	to	the	inconsistency	of	data,	and	the	fact	that	we	will	be	enrolling	patients	6	years	and	older,	we	estimate	that	with	sufficient	coaching,	approximately	60%	of	patients	in	this	study	will	be	able	to	successfully	complete	interpretable	 spirometry.	 	Based	on	 this,	we	will	 need	 to	 enroll	213	 patients	 in	 order	 to	obtain	 interpretable	 data	 on	 128	 patients.	 	 We	 will	 perform	 ongoing	 flow-volume	 loop	analysis	of	obtained	data	in	order	to	adjust	our	total	enrollment	goal	based	on	the	percentage	of	subjects	with	interpretable	data	sets.		Statistical	Analysis	The	primary	outcome	of	change	in	FEV1	will	be	compared	between	the	two	groups	using	a	two-tailed	 t-test,	 or	 non-parametric	 equivalent	 if	 the	 data	 is	 non-normally	 distributed.		Baseline	 group	 characteristics	 will	 be	 summarized	 in	 a	 table	 with	 means	 and	 standard	deviations	 for	 continuous	 data,	 percentages	 for	 categorical	 data,	 and	 medians	 with	interquartile	ranges	for	ordinal	data.		Secondary	 outcomes	 for	 this	 study	 will	 include	 hospital	 admission	 rates,	emergency	department	(ED)	length	of	stay	(LOS),	changes	in	asthma	severity	scores,	vital	sign	changes,	medication	side	effects,	and	total	quantity	of	albuterol	given	in	the	ED.		Analysis	of	these	variables	will	be	completed	using	appropriate	statistical	analysis	depending	on	the	nature	of	the	data	(t-test	for	continuous,	chi	square	of	Fisher’s	exact	test	for	categorical,	and	Mann-Whitney	U	test	for	ordinal).	Non-parametric	tests	will	be	used	when	appropriate.		Finally,	if	significant	baseline	differences	in	the	groups	occur,	linear	multivariable	regression	analysis	of	the	primary	endpoint	will	be	performed	to	adjust	for	potential	confounders.			VII. Human	Subject	Interactions	a. Sources	of	Potential	Participants	
Version	date:	30JULY2017	Subjects	will	be	screened	for	enrolment	if	they	present	to	the	DCMC	ED	with	signs	of	an	acute	asthma	exacerbation.	The	nursing	staff	at	triage,	as	well	as	Pediatric	Emergency	Medicine	study	personnel	will	identify	potential	research	subjects.		In	addition,	a	full	time	research	RN	will	be	available	to	assist	with	identification	and	enrollment	of	potential	subjects,	if	funding	allows	 as	 mentioned	above.	Subjects	 that	 meet	 all	 inclusion	 and	 exclusion	 criteria	 and	consent	to	participate	will	be	enrolled.		b. Procedure	for	Recruitment	of	Participants	All	 patients	 who	 have	 physician-diagnosed	 asthma	 will	 be	 triaged	 upon	 arrival	 to	 the	emergency	department,	and	will	be	evaluated	by	a	triage	nurse.		Upon	identification	of	a	patient	 with	 previously	 diagnosed	 asthma	 who	 is	 presenting	with	 breathing	difficulty	or	cough,	the	triage	nurse	will	contact	study	personnel,	either	in	the	form	of	the	research	nurse	(if	 available)	 or	 other	 study	 personnel	 who	 are	 available	 within	 the	 ED.	Additionally,	research	personnel	may	identify	subjects	through	periodic	monitoring	of	the	ED	tracking	board	from	the	research	office.	Study	personnel	will	approach	the	parent	or	guardian	for	potential	study	enrollment.		As	a	part	of	screening	for	inclusion	and	exclusion	criteria,	study	personnel	 will	 briefly	 explain	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 research	 project	 and	 perform	baseline	spirometry	measurement	prior	to	obtaining	informed	consent.		Performance	of	this	minimal	risk	study	is	considered	by	many	to	be	standard	of	care	in	acute	asthma,	and	will	expedite	screening	of	patients	if	performed	prior	to	consent.		c. Procedure	of	Obtaining	Informed	Consent	Potential	subjects	and	their	parent	or	guardian	will	have	the	nature	of	the	research	study	as	well	as	potential	risks	and	benefits	of	enrollment	explained	by	study	personnel.		Consent	will	be	obtained	from	the	parent	or	guardian	of	all	subjects,	and	assent	obtained	from	subjects	who	are	at	least	7	years	of	age.		A	consent	form	written	in	English	or	Spanish	will	be	provided	to	the	parent/guardian	based	on	their	preferred	language.		A	Spanish	interpreter	will	be	utilized	as	needed	to	answer	questions	and	ensure	clear	understanding	of	expectations	after	enrollment.		Subjects	and	parents	will	be	given	adequate	time	to	consider	enrollment,	and	questions	will	be	encouraged	and	answered	prior	to	enrollment.			d. Research	Protocol	It	 will	 be	 explained	 to	 subjects	 and	 guardians	 that	 if	 enrolled	 in	 the	 study,	 that	 study	participation	 will	 involve	receiving	 an	albuterol	 therapy	 with	 either	 the	 control	 or	experimental	nebulizer,	assigned	randomly,	and	performing	follow-up	spirometry	testing	after	treatment.		It	will	be	explained	that	all	of	these	therapies	will	occur	within	the	DCMC	ED,	and	will	take	approximately	20	minutes	from	start	to	finish.	Subjects	will	be	informed	that	if	medically	necessary,	other	treatments	will	be	given,	and	that	following	participation,	that	standard	of	care	treatment	for	their	condition	will	be	performed.		A	detailed	description	of	the	research	protocol	is	provided	in	section	VI	above.		e. Timeline	This	study	is	expected	to	begin	enrollment	in	July	2015	and	run	through	June	2017,	though	target	dates	may	need	to	be	adjusted	based	on	ongoing	analysis	of	enrollment	rate,	as	well	as	the	percentage	of	patients	able	to	successfully	provide	spirometry	data.	Data	cleaning	and	analysis	will	be	completed	by	August	2017.	The	target	abstract	completion	data	is	November	
Version	date:	30JULY2017	2017,	followed	by	manuscript	writing	and	submission.			DCMC	ED	sees	approximately	3000	visits	for	asthma	annually.		With	research	staff	available	at	a	minimum	of	18	hours	per	day,	we	expect	to	have	no	issue	achieving	adequate	enrollment	for	this	study	within	a	two-year	period.		f. Privacy	and	Confidentiality	of	Participants	Study	 subjects	 will	 be	 assigned	 a	 unique	 identification	 number	 to	 protect	 their	confidentiality	through	the	course	of	the	study	period.		A	list	linking	subjects	and	identifiers	will	be	maintained	in	a	locked	cabinet	behind	a	locked	door	in	the	research	office.	Subject	identity	will	remain	strictly	confidential	and	will	only	be	accessible	by	the	research	team,	unless	disclosure	is	required	by	law.		g. Confidentiality	of	Research	Data	Throughout	the	duration	of	the	study,	an	electronic	database	will	be	maintained	in	a	secure,	password-protected,	 firewalled	 shared	 drive	 with	 access	 restricted	 to	 the	 research	 staff	working	directly	on	data	analysis.		Paper	records	including	data	collection	forms	containing	patient	identifiers,	copies	of	a	patient’s	medical	chart,	or	other	records	containing	protected	health	information	(PHI),	will	be	maintained	in	a	study	folder	identified	by	study	ID	numbers.		These	folders	will	be	kept	in	a	locked	cabinet	located	in	a	locked,	badge-controlled	facility.		Once	the	database	has	been	compiled	and	completed,	PHI	will	be	removed	such	that	the	only	link	 between	 the	 study	 ID	 number	 and	 the	 patient	 will	 be	 a	 key,	 which	 will	 be	 stored	separately	from	the	study	database.		Data	stored	on	the	internal	memory	of	the	handheld	spirometer	will	only	be	identified	by	the	patient’s	study	ID	number	without	other	PHI.		All	patient	identifiers	will	be	removed	following	data	collection	and	analysis.		All	study	records	will	be	maintained	at	least	as	long	as	required	by	law.		The	data	from	this	study	may	be	published,	but	subject	identities	will	not	be	disclosed.		h. Research	Resources	Research	personnel	will	consist	of	Pediatric	Emergency	Medicine	(PEM)	Fellowship	faculty,	PEM	fellows,	and	the	PEM	Fellowship	research	nurse/coordinator.	All	of	the	research	efforts	of	 these	 people	 are	 reimbursed	 through	 the	 standard	 academic	 pay	 mechanism	 of	 the	fellowship.	No	additional	resources	will	be	required.	Equipment	costs	will	be	covered	by	the	SERF	 grant.	 Any	 additional	 costs	 will	 be	covered	 by	 the	 PEM	 Fellowship	 seed	 fund	 (if	needed).		VIII. Potential	Risks	and	Alternatives	There	is	a	potential	risk	to	patients	of	loss	of	confidentiality.		This	risk	is	minimized	utilizing	the	 methods	 described	 above.	 	 If	 the	 experimental	 nebulizer	 shows	 decreased	 efficacy	compared	 to	 the	control	 arm,	 subjects	 may	 experience	 less	 bronchodilation,	 and	subsequently	 may	 require	 more	 subsequent	 doses	 of	 albuterol,	 or	 other	 adjunctive	therapies.	 	 There	 is	 no	 reason	 to	 believe	 that	 patients	 in	 the	 experimental	 group	 will	experience	greater	discomfort	than	those	patients	in	the	control	group.		Data and safety Monitoring: This study involves 2 FDA approved nebulizers that have been used clinically for decades. The medication doses are similar to those used by children in the home setting. For these 
Version	date:	30JULY2017	reasons this study is considered very low risk and equivalent to the ED standard of care for non-study patients.  Despite this, a	Data	and	Safety	Monitoring	Plan	will	be	in	place	for	ongoing	evaluation	of	the	safety	of	this	study.		 The DSMP will consist of the PI (Dr. Wilkinson) and the Co-I (Dr. Gardiner) reviewing any reported adverse events within 24 hours of occurrence. Additionally, at the midpoint of the study (subject #107), there will be a scheduled interim analysis. During this analysis we will analyze group difference with regards to adverse event and admission rates. If, during either of these reviews, new information is discovered that would change the risk profile of the study, enrollment will be suspended and the IRB will be notified to help determine a course of action. 		IX. Potential	Benefits	The	potential	benefit	of	this	trial	is	the	possibility	of	a	better	understanding	of	the	effect	of	breath-enhanced	nebulizer	technology	on	the	treatment	of	acute	asthma.		Additionally,	if	we	are	able	to	demonstrate	significant	benefit	of	 this	new	technology,	this	may	enhance	the	treatment	of	future	pediatric	patients	with	asthma,	at	home	or	in	the	emergency	department.		The	 potential	 benefit	 of	 this	 study	 to	 the	 individual	 study	 patient	 is	 largely	 unknown.		Patients	who	are	randomized	to	the	experimental	arm	of	the	study	may	experience	greater	bronchodilation	due	to	improved	medication	delivery;	however,	this	benefit	is	likely	minimal	given	that	this	study	is	evaluating	only	a	single	dose	of	albuterol.		X. Sites	or	Agencies	involved	in	the	research	project	Research	activities	will	be	carried	out	exclusively	at	Dell	Children’s	Medical	Center.		XI. Review	by	another	IRB	Not	applicable.		XII. Citations	1.	American	Lung	Association,	Epidemiology	and	Statistics	Unit.	Trends	in	Asthma	Morbidity	and	Mortality.	2012.	http://www.lung.org/finding-cures/our-research/trend-reports/asthma-trend-report.pdf.	2.	National	Asthma	Education	and	Prevention	Program.	Expert	Panel	Report	3	(EPR-3):	Guidelines	for	the	Diagnosis	and	Management	of	Asthma-Summary	Report	2007.	J	Allergy	Clin	Immunol.	2007;120(5	Suppl):S94-S138.	doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2007.09.043.	3.	Cates	CJ	CJRB.	Holding	chambers	(spacers)	versus	nebulisers	for	beta-agonist	treatment	of	acute	asthma	(Review).	December	2012:1-101.	4.	Tien	I,	Dorfman	D,	Kastner	B,	Bauchner	H.	Metered-dose	inhaler:	the	emergency	department	orphan.	Arch	Pediatr	Adolesc	Med.	2001;155(12):1335-1339.	5.	Mason	N,	Roberts	N,	Yard	N,	Partridge	MR.	Nebulisers	or	spacers	for	the	administration	of	bronchodilators	to	those	with	asthma	attending	emergency	departments?	Respiratory	Medicine.	2008;102(7):993-998.	
Version	date:	30JULY2017	doi:10.1016/j.rmed.2008.02.009.	6.	Osmond	MH,	Gazarian	M,	Henry	RL,	Clifford	TJ,	Tetzlaff	J,	PERC	Spacer	Study	Group.	Barriers	to	Metered-dose	Inhaler/spacer	Use	in	Canadian	Pediatric	Emergency	Departments:	A	National	Survey.	Academic	Emergency	Medicine.	2007;14(11):1106-1113.	doi:10.1197/j.aem.2007.05.009.	7.	Scott	SD,	Osmond	MH,	O'Leary	KA,	et	al.	Barriers	and	supports	to	implementation	of	MDI/spacer	use	in	nine	Canadian	pediatric	emergency	departments:	a	qualitative	study.	Implementation	Sci.	2009;4(1):65.	doi:10.1186/1748-5908-4-65.	8.	Mandelberg	A,	Tsehori	S,	Houri	S,	Gilad	E,	Morag	B,	Priel	IE.	Is	nebulized	aerosol	treatment	necessary	in	the	pediatric	emergency	department?	Chest.	2000;117(5):1309-1313.	9.	Newnham	DM,	Lipworth	BJ.	Nebuliser	performance,	pharmacokinetics,	airways	and	systemic	effects	of	salbutamol	given	via	a	novel	nebuliser	delivery	system	(“Ventstream”).	Thorax.	1994;49(8):762-770.	10.	Newman	SP,	Pitcairn	GR,	Hooper	G.	Efficient	drug	delivery	to	the	lungs	from	a	continuously	operated	open-vent	nebulizer	and	low	pressure	compressor	system.	European	Respiratory	….	1994.	doi:10.1183/09031936.94.07061177.	11.	Devadason	SG,	Everard	ML,	Linto	JM,	Le	Souëf	PN.	Comparison	of	drug	delivery	from	conventional	<I>versus</I>	“Venturi”	nebulizers.	European	Respiratory	Journal.	1997;10(11):2479-2483.	doi:10.1183/09031936.97.10112479.	12.	Ho	SL,	Kwong	WT,	O'Drowsky	L,	Coates	AL.	Evaluation	of	four	breath-enhanced	nebulizers	for	home	use.	J	Aerosol	Med.	2001;14(4):467-475.	doi:10.1089/08942680152744677.	13.	Rubin	BK,	Fink	JB.	The	delivery	of	inhaled	medication	to	the	young	child.	Pediatr	Clin	North	Am.	2003;50(3):717-731.	14.	Hess	DR.	Aerosol	delivery	devices	in	the	treatment	of	asthma.	Respiratory	Care.	2008;53(6):699–723–discussion723–5.	15.	Sabato	K,	Ward	P,	Hawk	W,	Gildengorin	V,	Asselin	JM.	Randomized	Controlled	Trial	of	a	Breath-Actuated	Nebulizer	in	Pediatric	Asthma	Patients	in	the	Emergency	Department.	Respiratory	Care.	2011;56(6):761-770.	doi:10.4187/respcare.00142.	16.	Lin	Y-Z,	Huang	F-Y.	Comparison	of	breath-actuated	and	conventional	constant-flow	jet	nebulizers	in	treating	acute	asthmatic	children.	Acta	Paediatr	Taiwan.	2004;45(2):73-76.	
Version	date:	30JULY2017	17.	Colacone	A,	Afilalo	M,	Wolkove	N,	Kreisman	H.	A	comparison	of	albuterol	administered	by	metered	dose	inhaler	(and	holding	chamber)	or	wet	nebulizer	in	acute	asthma.	Chest.	1993;104(3):835-841.	18.	Schuh	S,	Johnson	DW,	Stephens	D,	Callahan	S,	Winders	P,	Canny	GJ.	Comparison	of	albuterol	delivered	by	a	metered	dose	inhaler	with	spacer	versus	a	nebulizer	in	children	with	mild	acute	asthma.	The	Journal	of	Pediatrics.	1999;135(1):22-27.	19.	Wilkinson	M,	Bulloch	B,	Garcia-Filion	P,	Keahey	L.	Efficacy	of	racemic	albuterol	versus	levalbuterol	used	as	a	continuous	nebulization	for	the	treatment	of	acute	asthma	exacerbations:	a	randomized,	double-blind,	clinical	trial.	J	Asthma.	2011;48(2):188-193.	doi:10.3109/02770903.2011.554939.	20.	Aggarwal	AN,	Gupta	D,	Jindal	SK.	The	Relationship	Between	FEV1	and	Peak	Expiratory	Flow	in	Patients	With	Airways	Obstruction	Is	Poor.	Chest.	2006;130(5):1454-1461.	doi:10.1378/chest.130.5.1454.	21.	Eid	N,	Yandell	B,	Howell	L,	Eddy	M,	Sheikh	S.	Can	peak	expiratory	flow	predict	airflow	obstruction	in	children	with	asthma?	Pediatrics.	2000;105(2):354-358.	22.	Schneider	WV,	Bulloch	B,	Wilkinson	M,	Garcia-Filion	P,	Keahey	L,	Hostetler	M.	Utility	of	portable	spirometry	in	a	pediatric	emergency	department	in	children	with	acute	exacerbation	of	asthma.	J	Asthma.	2011;48(3):248-252.	doi:10.3109/02770903.2011.555036.	23.	Hankinson	JL,	Odencrantz	JR,	Fedan	KB.	Spirometric	reference	values	from	a	sample	of	the	general	U.S.	population.	Am	J	Respir	Crit	Care	Med.	1999;159(1):179-187.	doi:10.1164/ajrccm.159.1.9712108.	24.	Qureshi	F,	Pestian	J,	Davis	P,	Zaritsky	A.	Effect	of	nebulized	ipratropium	on	the	hospitalization	rates	of	children	with	asthma.	N	Engl	J	Med.	1998;339(15):1030-1035.	doi:10.1056/NEJM199810083391503.	25.	Gorelick	MH,	Stevens	MW,	Schultz	TR,	Scribano	PV.	Performance	of	a	novel	clinical	score,	the	Pediatric	Asthma	Severity	Score	(PASS),	in	the	evaluation	of	acute	asthma.	Acad	Emerg	Med.	2004;11(1):10-18.	doi:10.1197/j.aem.2003.07.015.	26.	Barr	RG,	Stemple	KJ,	Mesia-Vela	S,	et	al.	Reproducibility	and	validity	of	a	handheld	spirometer.	Respiratory	Care.	2008;53(4):433-441.	27.	Standardization	of	Spirometry,	1994	Update.	American	Thoracic	Society.	Am	J	Respir	Crit	Care	Med.	1995;152(3):1107-1136.	doi:10.1164/ajrccm.152.3.7663792.	28.	Gorelick	MH,	Stevens	MW,	Schultz	T,	Scribano	PV.	Difficulty	in	obtaining	peak	expiratory	flow	measurements	in	children	with	acute	asthma.	Pediatr	Emerg	
Version	date:	30JULY2017	Care.	2004;20(1):22-26.		