VP-VEC -162-2102 Amdt. #4 Vanda Pharmaceuticals  
Confidential  Final  18May 2018 
1 TASIMELTEON 
AMENDMENT # 4 VP-VEC-162-2102 
A MULTICENTER, RANDOMIZED, DOUBLE -BLIND,  
PLACEBO-CONTROLLED, PARALLEL PROOF OF 
CONCEPT STUDY TO EVALUATE THE EFFECTS OF 
MULTIPLE ORAL DOSES OF TASIMELTEON AND 
MATCHING PLACEBO IN TRAVELERS WITH JET 
LAG DISORDER 
 
Clinic
al Study Protocol  
Vanda Pharmaceuticals  Inc. 
2200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Suite 300 East  
Washington, DC  20037 
Tasimelteon  
VP-VEC -162-2102 
Phase 2  
128352 Author (s
):  
Document T ype: 
Sponsor:  
Study P roduct:  
Protocol  Number: 
Study P hase:  
IND Number:   
Date:   18 May 2018 
Status:  F INAL 
Number of Pages: 84 

VP-VEC -162-2102 Amdt. #4 Vanda Pharmaceuticals  
Confidential  Final  18May 2018 
3 Name of Sponsor/Company:  
Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc.  
Name of Investigational Product:  
Tasimelteon/VEC -162 
Name of Active Ingredient:  
Tasimelteon/VEC -162 
Title of Study: 
A multicen ter, randomized, double -blind, placebo- controlled, parallel proof-of- concept study to 
evaluate the effects of  multiple oral doses of tasimelteon and matching placebo in travelers with 
Jet Lag Disorder  
Study center(s): Multicenter (US A and EU)  
Studied period:  
Estimated date first subject enrolled:  Aug 2016 
Estimated study duration: approximately 4-6 weeks  
Screening: ≥ 3 weeks, Randomization: 4 days/3 nights Phase of development: 
Phase 2  
Number of subjects (planned): Up to 90 eligible subjects will be ra ndomized and assigned to 
20 mg tasimelteon  or placebo in a 1:1 ratio.  Treatment assignments will be made according to a 
randomization schedule.   
Diagnosis and main criteria for inclusion/exclusion:  
Males or females 18 -75 years of age, inclusive, who dem onstrate sleep disturbances associated 
transmeridian travel in study VP -VEC -162-0101. 
Investigational product, dosage and mode of administration:  
Tasimelteon will be administered orally as a dose of 20 mg.  Tasimelteon dosage form will be 
size 1, dark blue, opaque, hard gelatin capsules with two white bars on the capsule body and 
cap, and filled with white to off-white powder. 
Duration of treatment: 
3 nights 
Reference therapy, dosage and mode of administration: 
Placebo capsules will be provided in siz e and appearance identical to those containing 
tasimelteon and will be administered orally  
VP-VEC -162-2102 Amdt. #4 Vanda Pharmaceuticals  
Confidential  Final  18May 2018 
4 Objectives: 
Primary  Objectives:  
1.To assess the effects of tasimelteon 20  mg on nighttime sleep parameters as measured
by Polysomnography (PSG) after transmeridian travel .
Secondary Objectives:
1.To assess the effects of tasimelteon  20mg on nighttime objective parameters.
2.To assess the effects of tasimelteon  20mg on nighttime subjective parameters.
3.To assess the effect of tasimelteon  20mg on a daytime objective paramete r.
4.To assess the effects of tasimelteon  20mg on daytime subjective parameters.
5.To assess the effects of tasimelteon  20mg as measured by a combined scale of nighttime
and daytime symptoms.
Overall Design:  
This is a multicenter, international, randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled, parallel 
proof-of-concept t rial to investigate the efficacy  and safety of multiple 20 mg oral doses of 
tasimelteon and matching placebo in male and female travelers with Jet Lag Disorder  (JLD) .  
Subjects will be recruited at sites throughout the United States of America (USA)  and those that 
meet inclusion/exclusion criteria will be flown from the USA to Europe experiencing a 5-8 hour 
time zone change.   

VP-VEC -162-2102 Amdt. #4 Vanda Pharmaceuticals  
Confidential  Final  18May 2018 
5 This study will be divided into 2 phase s: the screening  phase and the randomization phase.    The 
screening phase consists of the screening visit  a visit to re -confirm inclusion/exclusion criteria 
and to conduct the baseline evaluations, and the initial travel period  to Europe .   The 
randomizati on phase consists of a 3 -night/4 day double-blind evaluation period in the new time 
zone, and the return travel period to the USA.   T he screening visit and the travel period will be 
separated by approximately 3 weeks.  Baseline evaluations will occur  appr oximately  three days 
(± 1 day) prior to the transmeridian  flight.    Subjects meeting all entry criteria for the study will 
enter the randomization phase.  Eligible subjects will be flown to Europe on a commercial non -
stop, transatlantic, over-night flight.    Subjects will reside in a clinical site in Europe for 4 days 
and 3 nights.  During the evaluation period, subjects will be instructed to take the study 
medication 30 minutes (± 15 min) prior to bedtime and attempt to sleep for 8 hours.   Bedtime 
will be  determined by their habitual bedtime in the originating time  zone.   For example, if a 
subject has a habitual bedtime of 22:00 pm they will be put to bed at 22:00 pm in the new time 
zone.   A PSG will be performed each night beginning the first night in t he new time zone.  On 
Day 4, subjects will be discharged from the study clinic after completing all required study 
procedures and will participate in supervised guided tours.  On Day 5, subjects will take a return 
flight to the USA.  Post -travel, subjects will also be instructed to maintain a sleep schedule 
allowing for an 8-hour sleep opportunity including a bed time consistent with that used while in domicile in Europe (± 1 hour).   Throughout the study the subject’s sleep pattern will be 
monitored with a n actiwatch and through patient reported sleep diaries. 
Criteria for evaluation:  
Efficacy:  
The primary efficacy variable is TST in the first 2/3 of the night after flying across 5 -8 time 
zones.  A comparison will be made between subjects treated with tasimelteon 20 mg and 
placebo.  
Other variables include, PGI -S, TST 2/3, TST fn, LPS, WASO, SE, TST s, SL, SQ s, KSS, and JLQ. 
Safety:  
T
he safety and tolerability measures will include the recording of adverse events (AEs) 
including suicida l ideation and behavior, clinical laboratory evaluations, vital signs, and 
electrocardiograms (ECGs).   
Statistical Methods:  
 The primary efficacy variable is TST in the first 2/3 of the night after flying across 5 -8 time 
zones.  Nigh ttime sleep  will be assessed by analysis of co variance, with treatment group, clinical 
site, baseline and time zone as a main effect.  A comparison will be made between the subjects 
treated with tasimelteon 20 mg and placebo. The primary efficacy analysis will be based on the 
ITT population.  
The stat
istical analyses will be detailed in the Statistical Analysis Plan.  