 
 
Low- dose ketamine infusions for 
perioperative pain management in 
patients undergoing laparoscopic gastric 
bypass  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
November 12, 2019  
Page 1 of 10  
Gorlin/Ketamine   12Nov2019   V4  CONFIDENTIAL    
 
 
 
 
Low-dose ketamine infusions for perioperative pain management in patients 
undergoing laparoscopic gastric bypass  
 
 
PI:  Andrew W. Gorlin, M.D.  
Sub-I(s): David M. Rosenfeld, M.D. 
Statistician: Matthew R. Buras  
IRB#:  17-000301  
 
 
Initial Version:  09Dec2016 
Revised:  15Feb2017 V2 
Revised:  28Mar2018 V3 
Revised:  12Nov2019  V4
Page 2 of 10  
Gorlin/Ketamine   12Nov2019   V4  CONFIDENTIAL   Introduction 
This document is a protocol for a human research study. This study will be carried out in 
accordance with the applicable United States government regulations and Mayo Clinic research policies and procedures.  
 
 
Background  
Obesity has become a public health crisis in the developed world, especially in the 
United States. According to the CDC, more than one- third (36.5%) of adults in the 
United States are obese as defined by a BMI greater than or equal to 30. A 2013 study 
estimated that 6.6% of the US population is morbidly obese (BMI > 40) (Sturm) Negative health consequences of obesity include cardiovascular disease, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), systemic hypertension, pulmonary hypertension, diabetes, musculoskele tal problems and various malignancies (Adams BJA 2000). Given the 
severe health consequences of obesity and the difficulty that many patients have maintaining a healthy weight, surgical management of obesity has become an effective therapeutic option for m any patients with morbid obesity (Elder Gastroenterology 2007).  
 
The Roux -en-Y gastric bypass is considered the “gold standard” for weight loss surgery 
and it is frequently performed laparoscopically. It involves anastomosing the proximal portion of the stomach to the jejunum, bypassing most of the stomach and duodenum and restricting food intake (Ogunnaike A&A2002). Despite the efficacy and overall safety of weight reduction surgery, obese patients pose significant challenges for perioperative physicians and are at higher risk for adverse events postoperatively, especially pulmonary complications (Adams BJA 2000).  
 
Obese patients have increased oxygen consumption, increased CO2 production, reduced lung FRC and reduced chest wall compliance all of which puts  them at risk for 
hypoxemia and hypercarbia particularly in the postoperative period (Adams BJA 2000). Opioids and other central nervous system depressants commonly administered perioperatively may potentiate these gas exchange problems and increase risk f or 
adverse event.  
 
Most concerning, however , is the association between obesity and obstructive sleep 
apnea (OSA) which is a risk factor for perioperative respiratory depression as well as respiratory arrest and death (Chung A&A2008, also multiple case reports). Up to 70% of patients undergoing bariatric surgery have OSA (Frey Obes  Surg  2003).  OSA is a 
disorder characterized by reduced tone in the upper airway muscles during sleep  which 
causes periodic airway obstruction with subsequent apnea and oxygen desaturation.  
Obese patients are at particular risk of developing OSA at least in part due to fat deposits in the pharyngeal walls leading to reduced airway diameter (Romero Chest 2010). In addition, as discussed above, obese patients are more vulnerable to 
disordered gas exchange and have less reserve for tolerating brief periods of obstruction.  
 
OSA patients are especially vulnerable to apneic events postoperatively due to surgical stress, the residual effects of anesthesia, disruption of the normal sleep cycle and  
Page 3 of 10  
Gorlin/Ketamine   12Nov2019   V4  CONFIDENTIAL   exposure to central nervous system depressants (Benumof Curr Op Anesth 2004). 
Opioids in particular are problematic as they cause respiratory depression and have been shown to depress the muscle tone of the upper airway  (Craven 2007, White J 
Physiol 2009). However, poorly managed abdominal pain may itself compromise respiratory effort resulting in hypoventilation. Clinicians are often confronted with the challenge of balancing the risks of opioid therapy versus the respiratory consequences suboptimal pain control. Non- opioid analgesics such as acetaminophen and NSAIDs 
can be helpful and have little effect on the respiratory system or OSA (Chung). Other drugs such as dexmedetomidine and gabapentin have also shown promise for reducing perioperative opioids, though both drugs are also central nervous system depressants and it is unknown what effect they may have on airway muscle tone during sleep (Chung).  
 
Ketamine is an NMDA antagonist that, at high doses (>1mg/kg), induces dissociative anesthesia with minimal effects on ventilation and airway reflexes (Gorlin). Low dose ketamine infusions (<0.3mg/kg/hour) have proven efficacy for reducing pain scores as well as reducing post -operative opioid consumption in a wide variety of surgical 
procedures (Gorlin JAnesthClinPharm 2016 ). Furthermore, even at anesthetic doses, ketamine has no negative effect on pharyngeal muscle tone (Drummond BJA 1996).  
For these reasons, low dose ketamine may be an ideal analgesic adjunct for patients undergoing gastric bypass. Sollazzi et al demonstrated lower PACU pain scores and 
opioid consumption in patients undergoing gastric bypass who received a combined ketamine/clonidine infusion in the operating room (Sollazzi SurgObesRelDis2009).  
However, to our knowledge, there have been no studies looking at combined intraoperative and postoperative ketamine infusions for gastric bypass.  
 
Our hypothesis states that in laparoscopic gastric bypass patients intraoperative ketamine infusion combined with continuation for twenty -four hours post -surgery 
provides superior pain control and decreases post -operative opioid use versus standard 
non-ketamine therapy.  
 
Study Objectives  
 
Primary Objective  
• To assess the efficacy of a standardized bolus and infusion dose of 
intravenous ketamine on perioperative opioid requirements in gastric bypass surgical patients.  
 
Secondary Objective  
• To assess the efficacy of a standardized bolus and infusion dose of intravenous ketamine on perioperative pain scores, patient satisfaction  with pain 
management , and length of stay in hospital in gastric bypass surgical patients. To 
assess the safety and tolerability of intravenous ketamine by examining presence of post -operative nausea and vomiting, prurit us, sedation, agitation, 
halluc inations, delirium, and adverse respiratory events.  
Page 4 of 10  
Gorlin/Ketamine   12Nov2019   V4  CONFIDENTIAL   Study Design and General Description  
 
• Randomization after consent is obtained to either ketamine or  standard 
therapy  
 
• Standard therapy group study  protocol  
o Calculation of ideal body weight (IBW) – see calculator  
o Pre-operative dexamethasone 4mg IV 
o Pre-operative midazolam 1- 2mg IV for anxiolysis at discretion of 
anesthesiologist  
o Induction of anesthesia 
 Propofol 2- 3mg/kg IV (IBW) at discretion of  anesthesiologist  
 Fentanyl 1mcg/kg IV  (IBW)  
 Neuromuscular blockade with succinylcholine and/or rocuronium  at 
the discretion of the  anesthesiologist  
 Orotracheal  intubation  
o Maintenance of anesthesia  
 Sevoflurane/rocuronium  
 Additional doses of fentanyl 0.5- 1mcg/kg (IBW) at discretion of 
anesthesiologist  
o Emergence from  anesthesia  
 Acetaminophen 1g IV unless  contraindicated  
 Ketorolac 30mg IV unless  contraindicated  
 Ondansetron 4mg IV unless  contraindicated  
 Suggamedex  2mg/kg or 4mg/kg dose (Actual BW) depending on 
twitch response per drug manufacturer’s recommended  protocol  
o Post- operative  analgesia 
 Hydromorphone PCA 0.2mg/8 min 
 Acetaminophen 1g IV Q8 ATC x 3 additional  doses  
 Ketorolac 15mg IV Q6 ATC x 3 additional  doses  
o Other post -operative care as per usual surgical  routine  
 
• Ketamine therapy group 
o Ketamine 0.3mg/kg (IBW) bolus with induction 
o Ketamine infusion 0.2mg/kg/hr . (IBW) initiated after induction  
and terminated after 24 hours  
o Ketamine infusion will not be titrated  
Page 5 of 10  
Gorlin/Ketamine   12Nov2019   V4  CONFIDENTIAL   o Ketamine infusion may be terminated if the patient is having  side-effects 
relating to the drug; Pain Service will follow the patient and assist with 
troubleshooting and determining the need for infusion termination  
o The remainder of care will be identical to the standard therapy  group 
 
Number of Subjects  
 
We will enroll up to 45 subjects to attain our goal of 17 subjects per group for a total of 34  
accrued subjects .  This is to ensure our goal is met based on the randomization list, as 
well as to account for any withdrawals that occur throughout the study.  
 
 
Primary Study Outcome 
 
Total cumulative perioperative opioid dose measured in morphine equivalents from 
induction of anesthesia until 48 hours after  induction of anesthesia.  
 
Secondary Study Outcomes  
 
Visual analog pain scores measured from PACU arrival until 48 hours after induction of anesthesia. PONV and prurit us recorded from PACU arrival until discharge from 
hospital. Length of stay in hospital will be recorded.  Patient satisfaction with pain management will be measured by questionnaires that patients complete at  the time of 
discharge  and at the postoperative visit  with the surgeon or via telephone about 30 
days after surgery.  
 
Primary Safety Outcomes  
 
There will be c areful and continuous monitoring, intervention and recording of 
hemodynamics, sedation, agitation, hallucinations, delirium, and adverse respiratory events.  
Standardized nursing procedures will be used including vital signs, RASS sedation scores, according to standard intensive post -surgical requirements. Standardized 
single dose regimen for ketamine.  
 
Data  
• Pre-operative  data 
o Age 
o Gender  
o Height, weight, BMI 
o ASA classification 
o Medical  problems  
o Surgical  history  
o Home  medications  
o Home  CPAP?  
o Allergies  
Page 6 of 10  
Gorlin/Ketamine   12Nov2019   V4  CONFIDENTIAL   o Presence of active chronic pain? If so, what is  it? 
o Currently taking opioids on a daily basis for the past 1 month or greater? If 
so, quantitate daily dose in morphine equivalents  (ME) 
 
• Post -operative  data 
o Total opioid dose in ME from OR to discharge 
 May look separately  at OR, PACU,  1st 24 hours,  2nd 24 hours  
o Pain scores over course of hospitalization  
 May look separately at PACU, 1st 24 hours, 2nd 24 hours  
o PONV  
 Need for additional anti -emetics during hospitalization  
o Prurit us 
 Need for anti -histamines during hospitalization 
o Sedation  
 Average RASS scores 1st 24 hours  
 Any episodes of ( -)3 or worse RASS  
 Any evidence of sedation in nursing notes  
o Agitation  
 Average RASS scores 1st 24 hours  
 Any episodes of (+) RASS scores  
 Any evidence of agitation from nursing notes  
o Hallucinations  
 Ketamine drip  d/c 
 Review nursing and Pain Service  notes  
o Delirium  
 Ketamine drip  d/c 
 Review nursing and clinical  notes  
o Adve rse respiratory  events  
 Rapid response events  
 Naloxone  administration  
 Change in level of care (intermediate or  ICU) 
 Review of nursing notes and clinician progress  notes  
o Length of Stay  
 Hours  
o Use of CPAP while inpatient. Y/N  
o Patient satisfaction  with pain management  questionnaires  
 First questionnaire will be completed by the patient a t the time of 
discharge  from the hospital.  
 Second questionnaire will be completed by the patient  at the 
posto perative visit with the surgeon or via phone contact wit h the 
patient  on or around 30 days after surgery  if there has been no 
postoperative visit.  
Page 7 of 10  
Gorlin/Ketamine   12Nov2019   V4  CONFIDENTIAL   Subject Selection Enrollment and Withdrawal 
Inclusion Criteria  
• Patients > or equal to18 years old and < 70 years old undergoing laparoscopic 
gastric by pass at Mayo Clinic  Arizona  
• BMI > or equal to 35  
• Consent obtained as per Mayo Clinic  policy  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 
• Intolerance to ketamine 
• History of schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder or other psychiatric  diagnosis 
with psychotic  features  
• Presence of unstable cardiovascular disease. (The presence of acute coronary 
syndrome, unstable angina, hypertension emergency, acute TIA or  stroke.) 
• Presence of acute elevation of intracranial or intraocular  pressure  
• Presence of seizure disorder  
• History o f substance abuse or addiction  
• Creatinine >  1.5 
• End-stage liver disease 
• Pregnancy  
 
• Patients with chronic pain and/or chronic opioid therapy:  
o In order to more closely replicate the study patient population of interest 
we will not exclude this patient  population  
o However, we will exclude patients taking >50 morphine equivalents (ME) 
per day for greater than 1 month prior to surgery  
 
 
Subject Recruitment, Enrollment and Screening 
Appointment calendars will be screened. Those eligible will be consented by physician 
or study coordinator either in POE or Surgery Clinic.  
 
 
Study Procedures  
• Patient Consent  
o Patients who appear to meet the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion 
criteria will be invited to participate in this study.  The study will be explai ned 
to the patient , including risks and benefits  by the Study Coordinator , and one 
of the physicians, if available.  
Page 8 of 10  
Gorlin/Ketamine   12Nov2019   V4  CONFIDENTIAL   o Each patient who agrees to participate will be required to sign and date an 
informed consent document prior to any study -specific testing and 
procedure.   A copy of the signed and dated consent will be provided to the 
patient.  
 
• Method for Assigning Patients to Treatment Groups   
o If the patient meets inclusion/exclusion criteria and consents to participate in the study, t he m orphine equivalents will be calculated by one of the 
investigators.   
o The REDCap database will be completed with the inclusion/exclusion criteria and morphine equivalents.  REDCap will provide the randomization group for the patient.  
o The randomization group will be conveyed to the study team by the Study 
Coordinator.  
 
• Data Collection and Monitoring  
o All required data is  collected during the hospitalization from the electronic 
medical record.   
o The floor nurses will follow the already existing ketamine guidelines for Pain 
Service and stopping criteria.   
o The investigators will carefully monitor the subject during hospitalization for 
any adverse events.  
 
• Discharge from the H ospital  
o At the time of discharge from the hospital, t he patient will complete the 
Patient Satisfaction with Pain Management at Discharge questionnaire.   
 
• Postoperative  Visit 
o At the postoperative visit with the surgeon, the Patient Satisfaction with Pain 
Management questionnaire at Post -op Visit  will be complet ed by the patient.  
If no postoperative visit is scheduled, this will be done via telephone contact  
on or around 30 days after surgery .  We will allow a window of 30 -60 day s in 
case there is difficulty reaching the patient ..   
 
• Adverse events  
o Adverse events  will be captured and monitored for the first 30 days following 
surgery to ensure patient safety.  
• Data Entry into REDCap  
o The residents will complete data entry into the REDCap database.  
 
 
Page 9 of 10  
Gorlin/Ketamine   12Nov2019   V4  CONFIDENTIAL   Time Frame  
Enrollment will be completed within 48 months.  
 
Statistical Plan  
 
Sample Size and Power Calculation  
Our primary hypothesis is to check if the new management will keep patient to get less 
“48 hours morphine equivalent (mg)“. A sample size of 17 in each group will have 80% power to detect a probability of 0.746 that an observation in new management group is less than an observation in control group using a Wilcoxon (Mann- Whitney) rank -sum test 
with a 0.050 one- sided significance level. In other words, we will arrange the total doses 
at 48 hours of patients from smallest to biggest. If 13 or more out of first 17 comes from the new management group, we will claim a success. 
 
Statistical Methods  
Basic patient characteristics,  using mean+ SD or median (range) for continuous variable 
and frequency (% percentage) for categorical data, will be summarized in a table. 2- group 
t-test, Wilcoxon rank sum test, Pearson Chi -square test or Fisher exact test will be used to 
compare the two kinds of management when appropriate. The “48 hours morphine equivalent  (mg)” will be compared between the two groups using Wilcoxon Rank sum test. 
A p-value less than 0.05 will be treated as statistical significant. All statistical analyses will 
be performed by SAS version 9.4 software (SAS institute Inc, Cary  NC). 
 
Adverse Event Reporting Period  
For this study, the follow -up period is defined as 30 days following surgery . 
 
Medical Monitoring  
It is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator to oversee the safety of the study. This 
safety monitoring will include careful assessment and appropriate reporting of adverse 
events. Medical monitoring will include a regular assessment of the number and type of 
serious adverse events  
 
 
Data Security and Confidentiality  
All electronic data will be stored in a password- protected database (RedCap). The data 
storage will be restricted to facility computers that are password protected. Relevant clinical information will be reported only with collective data with no identities revealed.  
 
Study Monitoring Plan 
Subjec ts will be closely monitored for adverse events  during  treatment.  All study - 
related AEs must be followed until resolution or stabilization. The investigator will allow 
adequate time for such monitoring  activities.  
 
Page 10 of 10  
Gorlin/Ketamine   12Nov2019   V4  CONFIDENTIAL   Funding Source  
The study is funded by Mayo Clinic.  
 
References  
 
Adams, J. P., and P. G. Murphy. "Obesity in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care." British Journal of 
Anaesthesia 85.1 (2000): 91- 108. 
 
Benumof, Jonathan L. "Obesity, Sleep Apnea, the Airway and Anesthesia." Current Opinion in 
Anaesthesiology 17 (2004): 17- 21. 
 
Chung, Sharon A., PhD, Hongbo Yuan, PhD, and Frances Chung, FRCPC. "A Systemic Review of 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Its Implications for Anesthesiologists." Ambulatory Anesthesiology 107.5 
(2008): 1543- 563. 
 
Craven, R. "Ketamine." Anaesthesia 62 (2007): 48- 53. 
 
Drummond, G. B. "Comparison of Sedation with Midazolam and Ketamine: Effects on Airway Muscle Activity." British Journal of Anaesthesia 76.5 (1996): 663- 67. 
 
Elder, Katherine A., and Bruce M. Wolfe.  "Bariatric Surgery: A Review of Procedures and Outcomes."  
Gastroenterology 132.6 (2007): 2253- 271. 
 
Frey, William C., MD, FCCP, and John Pilcher, MD, FACS. "Obstructive Sleep- Related Breathing 
Disorders in Patients Evaluated for Bariatric Surgery." Obesit y Surgery 13 (2003): 676- 83. 
 
Gorlin, Andrew W., David M. Rosenfeld, and Harish Ramakrishna. "Intravenous Sub- anesthetic Ketamine 
for Perioperative Analgesia." Journal of Anaesthesiology Clinical Pharmacology 32.2 (2016): 160- 67. 
 
Ogunnaike, Babatunde O., Stephanie B. Jones, Daniel B. Jones, David Provost, and Charles W. Whitten. 
"Anesthetic Considerations for Bariatric Surgery." Anesthesia & Analgesia 95.6 (2002): 1793- 805. 
 
Romero- Corral, Abel, MD, Sean M. Caples, DO, Francisco Lopez -Jimenez, MD, MSc, and Virend K. 
Somers, MD, PhD, FCCP. "Interactions Between Obesity and Obstructive Sleep Apnea: Implications for 
Treatment." Chest 137.3 (2010): 711- 19. 
Snijdelaar, D.G., H. B. Cornelisse, R. L. Schmid, and J. Katz. “A randomised, controlled study of peri - 
operative low doses(+) -ketamine in combination with postoperative patient -controlled s(+) -ketamine and 
morphine after radical prostatectomy.” Anaesthesia 59.3 (2004): 222- 28 
 
Sollazzi, Liliana, M.D., Cristina Modesti, M.D., Francesca Vitale, M.D., Teresa Sacco, M.D., Pierpaolo Ciocchetti, M.D., Anna Sara Idra, M.D., Roberto Maria Tacchino, M.D., and Valter Perilli, M.D. "Preinductive Use of Clonidine and Ketamine Improves Recovery and Reduces Postoperative Pain after Bariatric Surgery." Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases 5.1 (2009): 67- 71. 
 
Sturm, R., and A. Hattori. "Morbid Obesity Rates Continue to Rise Rapidly in the United States."  
International Journal of Obesity 37.6 (2012): 889- 91. 
 
White, David P. "Opioid -induced Suppression of Genioglossal Muscle Activity: Is It Clinically Important?"  
The Journal of Physiology 587.14 (2009): 3421- 422. 