A Tailored, Peer -delivered Intervention to Reduce Recurring Opioid 
Overdoses  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Consent approval  date: 8/8/201 8  
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 2 of 13 
 
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI - Medical  
CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH STUDY  
Participant Consent  
 
Study Title:  A Tailored, Peer -delivered Intervention to Reduce Recurring Opioid Overdoses  
 
UC IRB Study #:  Sponsor Name:  The National Institute on Drug 
Abuse (NIDA)  
 
Investigator Information:  
Theresa Winhusen, PhD  513-310-0442  
Principal Investigator Name    Telephone Number 24 hr Emergency Contact  
 
Subject Name: ______________________________  Date of Birth: _____/_____/____  
 
 
INTRODUCTION :  
 
A biomedical or health -related research  study is performed to answer specific questions about 
a disease.    
 
Before you agree to participate in this research study, it is important that you be told the 
purpose, procedures, benefits, risks, discomforts, and precautions of the research. You 
shoul d also be told what alternative procedures are available to you if you do not participate in 
the research study.  The informed consent document is a written summary of this information. 
Be sure to ask questions while you read this consent document and ask questions if there is 
anything that you do not understand.   
 
Your participation in this research study is entirely voluntary.  
 
You may choose either to take part or not to take part in this research study. If you decide to 
take part, you may decide to le ave the study at any time. Leaving the study will not result in 
any penalty or loss of benefits to you.  
 
The researcher and sponsor of this study do not promise that you will receive any benefits 
from this study.  
 
 WHY IS THIS RESEARCH BEING DONE?  
 
The p urpose of this research study is to compare two approaches to reducing the risk of 
future opioid overdoses in individuals experiencing a non -fatal opioid overdose. The first 
approach entails providing the individual with a NARCAN® kit, which can be used to  help 
reverse an opioid overdose, and written information about overdose and substance use 
disorder treatment. The second approach expands upon the first approach by also providing a 
telephone, peer -based intervention to the individual.  
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 3 of 13 
 
WHY HAVE YOU BEEN ASKED TO TAKE PART IN THIS RESEARCH STUDY?  
 
You are being asked to take part in this research study because you are at least 18 years old  
and you report having been treated for an opioid overdose in the last 6 months.  
 
 
 HOW LONG WILL YOU BE IN THE RESEAR CH STUDY?  
 
You will be in the research study for approximately 12 months.  It will take about 2.5 years 
before all volunteers have finished and the study is complete.  
 
The researcher may decide to take you off this research study at any time. Reasons for 
withdrawal may include study funding being stopped or your failing to follow important 
instructions given by the investigator.  
 
You may withdraw from the study at any time. If you decide to stop participating in the study, 
we encourage you to talk to the research team first . Another reason to tell the researcher  that 
you are thinking about stopping is to discuss what follow -up care and testing could be most 
helpful to you.  
 
You may be contacted in the future by representatives of the University of Cincinnati who are 
interested in asking you survey questions about your participation in this research study. If 
you choose to participate in the survey, your responses will be used for quality assurance 
purposes only.  
 
 
WHO IS CONDUCTING THE RESEARCH STUD Y?  
 
The person in charge of this research study is Theresa Winhusen, PhD of the University of 
Cincinnati (UC) Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience – Addiction Sciences 
Division.  There may be other people on the research team helping at di fferent times during 
the study.  
 
Medical monitoring  for the study is provided by  Michael Lyons, MD.  
 
 
HOW MANY PEOPLE WILL TAKE PART IN THE RESEARCH STUDY?  
 
About 80 people will take part in this study at UC Addiction Sciences Division . 
 
 
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 4 of 13 
WHAT IS INVOLVE D IN THE RESEARCH STUDY?  
 
1.  SCREENING /BASELINE  
If you decide to volunteer and sign this consent form, you will start screening procedures that 
help us to see whether or not this study is suitable for you.  Screening procedures will take 
approximately 1 hour and 15 minutes to complete. The things that w ill happen during screening 
are done only for this research study and are not part of any other routine healthcare you may 
receive . For screening, you will be asked to : 
• Answer questions about your alcohol and drug use, about things that can increase the 
risk of overdose, knowledge about overdose risk, and your knowledge, interest in, and 
barriers to getting treatment;  
• Answer basic questions about your gender, race, and ethnicity;  
• Provide contact information for people who can help us locate you in the futur e and sign 
a release of information for them  
• Provide a urine sample to screen for drug use.  
 
If after completing the screening process you are found to be eligible, this means that you can 
take part in the study if you choose to do so.  If you are found to be ineligible, this means that 
you cannot take part in the study.  Either way, you will receive $50 for your time and effort for 
completing the entire screening process.  
 
2.  RANDOMIZATION  
If you are eligible and agree to take part in the study, y ou will be "randomized" into one of the 
study groups described below. Randomization means that you are put into a group completely 
by chance. It is like flipping a coin . 
 
If you are randomized to the control condition, you will receive contact information about local 
Medication Assisted Treatment (MAT) programs, educational information about Opioid 
Overdose (OOD) and about MAT, and a NARCAN® Nasal Spray kit; all of which will be 
provided during the enrollment visit.  
 
If you are randomized to the experimenta l condition, you will receive contact information about 
local MAT programs, educational information about OOD and about MAT, and a NARCAN® 
Nasal Spray kit; all of which will be provided during the enrollment visit. You will receive a set 
of three personali zed reports, and you will be scheduled to receive the Tailored Telephone 
Intervention delivered by Peers to Prevent Recurring Opioid Overdoses (TTIP -PRO) 
intervention within about 2 weeks following your enrollment into the study.   
 
3.  TTIP -PRO   
If you ar e randomized to the experimental condition, you will receive the TTIP -PRO 
intervention which consists of two parts: 1) a 30 -minute telephone intervention delivered by a 
trained Peer Interventionist; and 2) a set of three personalized reports, including a r eport on 
your personal risk factors for experiencing another OOD.  The call will be recorded and stored 
long enough for an expert trainer to review the call for quality assurance purposes, after which 
the file will be deleted.  
 
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 5 of 13 
 
 4.  FOLLOW UP  
You will co mplete a follow -up phone call in week 3 with research staff and in -person follow -up 
visits with research staff at 3, 6 -, and 12 -months following enrollment, regardless of how you 
are randomized.  
  
Follow -up Phone Call  
The week 3 phone call will last approx imately 25 minutes. You will be asked to complete an 
interview to assess your knowledge about overdose risk, your interest in treatment, barriers to 
getting treatment, how you have been feeling since your enrolled in the study, and your 
feedback on the int ervention you received following randomization.   
 
In-Person Visits  
You will be asked to come for follow -up visits 3, 6, and 12 months following your enrollment into 
the study.  At each of these visits you will be asked to:  
• complete questionnaires and interviews about how you have been feeling since the last 
study contact, your recent alcohol and drug use, whether or not you have had any 
additional overdoses, whether or not you have enrolled in MAT for opioid use disorder, 
and whether  the NARCAN® Nasal Spray kit you received was used to help reverse an 
overdose;  
• provide releases of information for medical records to confirm enrollment in MAT;  
• provide a urine sample to screen for drug use.  
 
At the month 3 and month 6 follow -up visits, you will also be asked to confirm/update information 
for people who can help us locate you in the future.  
 
At the month 12 follow -up visit, you will also be asked to complete a questionnaire about your 
personal overdose risk.  
 
Each follow -up visit will last approximately 40 minutes.  
 
If you are currently or become a prisoner (including being in jail or prison, being on probation 
or parole, or being under house arrest or electronic monitoring), we would still like to find out 
how you are doing. There fore, if necessary , we will make an effort to collect follow -up data from 
you over the phone or in person.  Please note that your continued participation, in this event, 
will have no effect on your criminal case, or release or parole from jail or prison, o r probation 
case.  
 
WHAT ARE THE RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS OF THE RESEARCH STUDY?  
 
Breach of confidentiality : As with any study, there is a potential risk of loss of confidentiality. 
To maintain confidentiality, all study records and data will be secured, and information 
collected by the study will not be shared with your healthcare provider(s). Additionally, as 
described below, a Certificate of Confidentiality has been obtained for the study.  
 
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 6 of 13 
Emotional Discomfort : You may also experience some emotional disco mfort from answering 
sensitive and/or personal questions. You may experience embarrassment in answering 
questions about your knowledge of MAT and opioid overdose. You can choose to not answer 
questions that you find to be too uncomfortable, or you may choo se to withdraw from the 
study if you find participation too stressful.  
 
Improper administration of the intervent ion by the Peer Interventionist :  The Peer 
Interventi onists will be provided with  your first name and your phone number in a secure 
manner. As such, there is a chance of improper administration of the intervention. In order to 
prevent this , we will train and grade the Peer Interventionist candidates before allowing them 
to perform the intervention(s).  
 
Side Effects of NARCAN® Nasal Spray : 
NARCAN® Nasal Spray is an FDA -approved medication  indicated for the emergency 
treatment of known or suspected opioid overdose.  The primary side effect of NARCAN® is 
sudden opioid withdrawal symptoms.  In someone who has been using opioids regularly, 
opioid withdrawal symptoms can happen suddenly after receiving NARCAN® Nasal Spray 
and may include  the following : 
   
Body aches  Diarrhea  Increased heart rate  
Fever  Runny nose  Sneezing  
Goose bumps  Sweating  Yawning  
Nausea or vomiting  Nervousness  Restlessness or Irritability  
Shivering or trembling  Stomach cramping  Weakness  
Increased blood pressure    
 
ARE THERE BENEFITS TO TAKING PART IN THE RESEARCH STUDY?  
If you agree to take part in this research study, there may not be a direct medical benefit to 
you. We hope the information learned from this research study will benefit other opioid 
overdose patien ts in the future.  You may directly benefit from study participation in that you 
will receive information about risks for overdose, the signs of overdose, how to respond to an 
overdose, and factors that can reduce the risk of an overdose. You may also benef it from 
receiving  a NARCAN® Nasal Spray kit.  
 
WHAT OTHER CHOICES FOR CARE ARE THERE?  
You may choose not to participate in this study. Choosing not to participate will not result in 
any pen alty or loss of benefits to you.  
 
WHAT IS A CERTIFICATE OF CONFIDENTIALITY?  
To further protect your privacy, the researcher s have obtained  a Certificate of Confidentiality 
from the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). With this certificate, the 
researchers may not disclose info rmation (for example by court order or subpoena) that may 
identify you in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other 
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 7 of 13 
proceedings. Disclosure will be necessary, however, upon request of DHHS for audit or 
program eval uation purposes.  
 
A Certificate of Confidentiality does not prevent you from voluntarily releasing information 
about yourself or your involvement in this research.  
 
Even with the Certificate of Confidentiality, if the investigator learns about abuse of a  child or 
elderly person or that you intend to harm yourself or someone else, or about certain 
communicable diseases, they will report that to the proper authorities. If keeping information 
private would immediately put you or someone else in danger, the r esearchers would release 
information to protect you or another person.  
 
AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION  
You will receive a copy of this signed and dated consent form.  
 
You will be told about any new information from this or other studies that may affect your  
health, welfare, or willingness to stay in this study.  
 
WHAT ARE YOUR COSTS TO BE IN THIS STUDY?  
You will not be charged for assessments related to this study. However, you and/or your third 
party payer (insurance, Medicaid, etc.) will still be responsib le for costs related to substance 
use treatment and other healthcare costs not directly associated with this study.  
 
WILL YOU BE PAID TO PARTICIPATE IN THIS RESEARCH STUDY?  
If you receive payments for being a part of this research study, you may be asked to complete 
an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) form. The amount you receive may count as income and 
may affect your income taxes. Your social security number will be required to complete the 
IRS form.  
 
You will be paid up to $220 for your time and travel costs related to taking part in this study.    
Payments will be made to you with a prepaid debit card. The payment will be loaded onto 
your card within one business day of the completion of your visit.  A  schedule of the payments 
is below:  
 
Visit  Amount  
Enrollment/Randomization  $50  
Week 3 Follow -up Call  $20  
3-Month Follow -up Visit  $50  
6-Month Follow -up Visit  $50  
12-Month Follow -up Visit  $50  
TOTAL  $220  
 
Details of the system are explained on an additional information sheet.  
 
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 8 of 13 
WHAT COMPENSATION IS AVAILABLE IN CASE OF INJURY?  
In the event that you become ill or injured from participating in this research study, emergency 
medical care will be provided to you. The National Institute on Drug Abuse  OR the University 
of Cincinnati will decide on a case by case basis whether to reimburse you for your out of 
pocket health care expenses.  
 
WHAT ARE YOUR RIGHTS AS A PARTICIPANT?  
You may choose either to take part or not to take part in this  research study. If you decide to 
take part, you may decide to leave the study at any time. Leaving the study will not result in 
any penalty or loss of benefits to you.  
 
The investigators will tell you about new information that may affect your health, welfare, or 
willingness to stay in this study.  
 
If you have questions about the study, you will have a chance to talk to one of the study staff 
or your regular doctor. Do n ot sign this form unless you have had the chance to ask questions 
and have received satisfactory answers.  
 
Nothing in this consent form waives any legal rights you may have nor does it release the 
investigator, the sponsor, the institution, or its agents from liability for negligence.  
 
HOW WILL INFORMATION ABOUT YOU BE KEPT PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL?  
Every effort will be made to maintain the confidentiality of your medical and research records 
related to this study.  Agents of the University of Cincinnati, and the sponsoring company, the 
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) , the monitor, the auditor, the Institutional Review 
Board (IRB), and other regulatory authority(ies)  will be granted direct access to your origi nal 
medical and research records for verification of research study  procedures or study data 
without violating your confidentiality, to the extent permitted by the ap plicable laws and 
regulations. By signing this consent form, you or your legally authorize d representative are 
authorizing such access. The data from the study may be published; however, you will not be 
identified by name. Your identity will remain confidential unless disclosure is required by law.  
  
Authorization to Use and Disclose Health Inf ormation  
A federal regulation known as the Privacy Rule gives you certain rights concerning the privacy 
of your health info rmation. Researchers covered by this regulation are required to get your 
authorization (permission) to use and disclose (share with others) any health information that 
could identify you. You should have received a Notice of Privacy Practices when you received 
health care services here.  If not, let us know and a copy will be given to you.  
 
If you sign this informed consent form, you are giving permission for the use and disclosure of 
your health information for pu rposes of this research study. You do not  have to g ive this 
permission. Your health care outside of the study, payment for your health care, and your health 
care benefits will not be affected if you choose not to sign this form.  However, if you do not 
sign this form, you will not be able to participate in  the study.  
  
 
 
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 9 of 13 
Who Will Use and Disclose My Health Information? The study doctor and research staff (the 
study team) may use your health information to conduct, review, and deter mine the results of 
the study. The study team may also use your information to prepare reports or  publications 
about the study. However, your name will not appear in any report or publication without your 
permission.   
  
What Health Information will be Used and Disclosed? The study team will record your 
medical history, the treatm ent you receive, and the results of examinations and tests done 
during the study on study forms. Representatives from the groups identified below may need to 
look at your medical records to make sure that the information on the study forms is correct or 
that the study was conducted properly. Your medical records may include other health 
information about you and may include documents that directly identify you.  Reviews like that 
will take place at the study center or where the medical records are stored an d can take place 
after the study is over.  
  
Who Will Receive My Health Information? Your study information or medical records (as 
described above) or both may be shared with the following people or groups:  
  
• The study sponsor or its representatives, incl uding companies it hires to provide study -
related services   
• UC Institutional Review Board and any other committees responsible for overseeing 
the research  
• Staff of the UC Human Research Protection Program  
• Federal and State agencies, such as the Department  of Health and Human Services 
(DHHS), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and other US and non -US government 
bodies that oversee or review research  
 
Will My Information be Protected by the Privacy Rule After it is Disclosed to Others?   
UC and UC Health  are required by the Privacy Rule to pr otect your health information. After 
your information is shared with others, such as the study sponsor, it may no longer be protected 
by the Privacy Rule. The people who receive this information c ould use it in ways not discussed 
in this form an d could disclose it to others. The sponsor will use and disclose your information 
only for research or regulatory purposes or to prepare research publications.  In addition to 
using it for this study, the sp onsor may reanalyze the study data at a later date or combine your 
information with information from other studies for research purposes not d irectly related to this 
study. The goal of any such research would be to learn more about drugs , devices  or diseas es 
or to help design  better studies in the future. When using your information in these ways, the 
sponsor may share it with regulatory authorities, other researchers, its business partners, or 
companies it hires to provide research -related services.   
  
What Happens if I Leave the Study Early?  If you stop participating in the study early for any 
reason, the study team will tell the sponsor why. If the study team asks you to come to any 
more study visits and you agree, the study team will send the sponsor i nformation from those 
visits as well.  All information collected about you may continue to be used and disclosed.  
  
Will My Authorization Ever Expire?  This Authorization does not have an expiration date.  
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 10 of 13 
The study team may need to correct or provide missing information about you even after your 
study participation is over and a review of your medical records may also take place after the 
study is over.  
  
May I Take Back My Authorization? You have the right to take back (revoke) your 
Authorization at any time by writing to the person in charge of this research study whose 
information is listed on the front of this form.  If you revoke your Authorization,  the study team 
will not collect any new health information about you.  However, they can continue to use and 
disclose any already -collected information if that is necessary for the reliability of the study.  The 
sponsor can also still keep and use any inf ormation  that it has already received. If you revoke 
your Authorization, you can no longer continue to participate in the study.  
  
May I Look At My Study Information? You have a right to see and make c opies of your 
medical records. However, to ensure the validity  of the study, you will need to wait to see your 
study records until the study is completed.  
 
 
WHO DO YOU CALL IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS OR PROBLEMS?  
If you have questions, concerns, complaints and/or suggestions about this research study or 
to report a research -related injury, please contact the researcher Theresa Winhusen, PhD at 
513-310-0442  or a member of her staff.   
 
Please call the University of C incinnati Institutional Review Board at 513 -558-5259 (Monday – 
Friday 8 am to 5 pm) if you:  
• Think the research has hurt you.  
• Have general questions about giving consent or your rights as a research participant in 
this research study.  
• Have questions, conc erns, complaints and/or suggestions about the research.  
• Cannot reach the research team or you want to talk to someone else.  
 
To report complaints or concerns to an independent agency in an anonymous and confidential 
manner, please call the Research Compli ance Hotline at 1 -800-889-1547.  
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 11 of 13 
Comprehension Quiz  
 
 
1.  My participation in this study is entirely voluntary.     T F 
 
2. I may be randomly assigned to be contacted by a Peer Interventionist.  T F 
 
3. My participation in this study will last for approximately 12 months.   T F 
 
4. If randomized, I will be given a NARCAN® nasal spray kit.    T F 
 
5. This procedure is guaranteed to stop me from overdosing again.   T F 
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 12 of 13 
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI - Medical  
CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH STUDY  
 
Study Title:  A Tailored, Peer -delivered Intervention to Reduce Recurring Opioid Overdoses  
 
UC IRB Study #:  Sponsor Name:  National Institute on Drug 
Abuse (NIDA)  
 
Investigator Information:  
Theresa Winhusen, PhD  513-310-0442   
Principal Investigator Name    Telephone Number 24 hr Emergency Contact  
 
I have read or someone has read to me, this Informed Consent Document which describes 
the purpose and nature of this research. I have had time to review this information and have 
been encouraged to ask questions. I f I do not participate or if I discontinue my participation, I 
will not lose any benefits or any legal rights.  My participation in this research is completely 
voluntary. I have received (or will receive) a copy of this signed and dated form for my records  
and future reference. I have been given the information about the use and disclosure of my 
health information for this research study.   
 
I give my consent to participate.  
 
I authorize the release of information concerning treatment relating to  drug abuse  to the parties 
listed in the authorization section of this consent for the purposes described above.  
 
 
  
Participant         Date  
 
PERSON OBTAINING CONSENT  
I have read this form to the participant and/or the participant has read this form. An 
explanation of the research was given and questions from the participant were solicited and 
answered to the participant’s satisfaction. In my judgment, the participant h as demonstrated 
comprehension of the information.  
 
  
Signature and Title of Person Obtaining     Date  
Consent and Identification of Role in the Study  
 
IRB #: 2016 -6635  
 
 
 Approved:  
8/8/2018  
Do Not Use After:  
8/7/2019  
 
 
   Page 13 of 13 
Please indicate below whether you want us to notify your primary care physician or your 
specialist of your participation in this study.  
 
____I want  the researcher to inform my primary care physician/specialist of my participation 
in this study.  
___ I do not  want  the researcher to inform my primary care physician/specialist of my 
participation in this study.  
___I do not have a primary care physician/specialist.  
___The researcher is my primary care physician/specialist.  
 
 
___________________________________________ __________________________  
Participant        Date  
 
 
 