IRB-HSR# 21411: Randomized Controlled Trial of Wound Closure Techniques in Orthopaedic 
Surgery  
Version Date: 07-29-22 
Page Number: 1 of 8  PROTOCOL  
 Background    
1. Provide the scientific background, rationale and relevance of this project.   
There are many surgical wound closure methods commonly used in orthopaedic  surgical 
practice today. These usually involve a combination of braided and monofilament sutures in the 
subcutaneous fascia and fat as well as the subcuticular layers of the skin. The methods chosen 
by surgeons vary widely even amongst partners at the sam e institution for many reasons, 
including training background and conflicting re ports in the literature about optimal 
techniques . In some cases, these closure techniques can be time consuming and associated 
with increased rates of poor cosmetic outcomes or  complications .1–4 Wound management has 
also become an increasingly important factor in patient satisfaction.5 There have been new 
wound closure products to reach the market (Zipline - Camp bell, CA and Clozex - Wellesley, 
MA), claiming to increase the speed of closure , improve patient satisfaction  and dec rease the 
rate of complications.4,6–9 These products are FDA approved and both utilize an adhes ive 
backed film to adhere to the skin along with a proprietary mechanism  to promote  skin 
apposition and reduce tension during the healing process. They have been shown to be safe 
and effective treatment options and have been adopted in many practices.10 
Our stud y aims to compare a traditional wound closure using both braided and 
monofilament sutures to the newer wound closure systems. By determining which method 
provides superior results, we will improve patient outcomes and satisfaction. The study also 
aims to a ssess health care value by exploring the costs associated with each closure technique. 
In addition to material expenses associated with the traditional sutures, we seek to explore if 
there is a significant difference in the time required to perform each wo und closure method. 
Every minute of anesthesia and operating room utilization is associated with costs borne by the 
patient and the health care system. By finding which closure method is the fastest and 
associated with the best outcome we can improve healt hcare value.  
Our primary objective outcome measure will be an assessment of surgical scar 
characteristics using the Stony Brook Scar Evaluation Scale (SBSES) which has been validated in 
the assessment of surgical scars in the first year after surgery .11,12 Secondary outcome 
measures will include adverse events related to the surgical wound, surgical time for closure, a 
patient satisfaction score and physician satisfaction score.  
Objectives/Hypothesis  
The objective of this study is to compare commo nly performed wound closure methods in 
patients undergoing orthopaedic surgical proc edures. The primary outcome measure  is SBSES 
score . Secondary outcome measures include wound adverse events , surgical time, patient 
satisfaction scores , surgeon satisfactio n scores  and to determine any difference in the costs 
associated with each of the wound closure techniques . Our null hypothesis is that there will be 
no significant difference in terms of wound complication rates, patient satisfaction and surgeon 
satisfact ion scores.  
 
Study Design: Biomedical  
1.  Will controls be used?  YES 
IRB-HSR# 21411: Randomized Controlled Trial of Wound Closure Techniques in Orthopaedic 
Surgery  
Version Date: 07-29-22 
Page Number: 2 of 8 ►IF YES, explain the kind of controls to be used.  
The control will include an all -suture based wound closure consisting of braided Vicryl 
suture in deep fascia/fatty layers followed by monofilament 3-0 Monocryl subcutaneous 
suture and running 3 -0 prolene subcuticular suture.  
 
2. What is the study design?  
Randomized control study  
 
3. Does the study involve a placebo?  
NO 
Human Participants  
Ages:  18+ 
Sex:  Male and Female  
Race:  All 
 
Subjects  
1.  Provide target # of subjects (at all sites) needed to complete protocol.  
Surgical subjects : 30 
Clinicians : 10 
 
2.  Describe expected rate of screen failure/ dropouts/withdrawals from all sites.   
Surgical subjects:   About 36% 
Clinicians : 0 
 
3.  How many subjects will be enrolled at all sites?    
Surgical subjects: 83 
Clinicians : 10 
 
4.  How many subjects will sign a consent form under this UVa protocol?     
Surgical subjects:  83 
Clinicians : 10  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
1.  List the criteria for inclusion   
Surgical Subjects:  
• Age 18+  
• Patient scheduled to undergo elective orthopaedic surgical procedure with a minimum 
anticipated incision length of 3 cm.  
• Willingness and ability to comply with scheduled visits and study procedures.  
 
Clinicians : 
IRB-HSR# 21411: Randomized Controlled Trial of Wound Closure Techniques in Orthopaedic 
Surgery  
Version Date: 07-29-22 
Page Number: 3 of 8 • Attending surgeons, physician assistants an d trainees (fellows and residents) in the 
orthopaedic surgery department  
• Willingness to comply with randomization and study protocols  
 
2. List the criteria for exclusion  
Surgical subjects:  
• Revision Surgery  
• Compromised wound healing (autoimmune disorder, chr onic steroids  ) 
• Pregnant women, fetuses, neonates, children, prisoners, cognitively impaired, 
educational or economically disadvantage, non -English speaking subjects.  
• Currently taking Immune modulating (DMARD) medications will exclude patient from 
particip ation in study  
• Currently taking Chronic Steroids  
Clinicians : 
• None  
 
3. List any restrictions on use of other drugs or treatments . 
Statistical Considerations  
1. Is stratification/randomization involved?    YES 
►IF YES, describe the stratification/ randomization scheme.  
Simple randomization will be used.  A random number generator will be used to devise 
a list to assign study numbers to treatment groups, ensuring that there will be equal 
numbers assigned to each group.  No other variables will be use d for stratification.  For 
each study number, the treatment assignment will be placed into an envelope by the 
clinical trials coordinator and sealed.   
 
There will be no blinding of subjects or personnel involved in the study once the 
envelope with group a ssignment has been opened.   
 
The statistician doing the randomization and the clinical trial coordinator will be the only 
ones with access to the master treatment assignment list.   
 
►IF YES, who will generate the randomization scheme?  
_____ Sponsor  
__X__ UVa Statistician : Wendy No vicoff  
_____ UVa Investigational Drug Service (IDS)  
_____ Other :  
 
2.  What are the statistical considerations for the protocol?  
Primary outcome variable: SBSES scores will be assessed at scheduled post operative visits. The 
minimal clinically important difference will be defined as 1 point. The null hypothesis is that 
IRB-HSR# 21411: Randomized Controlled Trial of Wound Closure Techniques in Orthopaedic 
Surgery  
Version Date: 07-29-22 
Page Number: 4 of 8 there will be no difference between the SBSES scores  between treatment groups (one -way 
ANOVA).   
Secondary outcome variables: patient satisfaction with appearance of scar (on scale of 1 -10), 
physician satisfaction with the technique/device  (on a scale of 1 -10), and presence or absence 
of adverse events (including infection and reoperation).  For the s caled scores, descriptive 
statistics will be calculated, and means between groups will be compared (one -way ANOVA).  A 
count of the adverse events per group will be tallied.   
 
3.  Provide a justification for the sample size used in this protocol.   
Based on research from Agarwala and Vijayvargiya (2019), average SBSES  is 4.4 (SD = 0.73)  for a 
post -operative orthopaedic surgical incision .  If we are using a one -way ANOVA, alpha = 0.05, 
and power = 0.80, we would have the following sample sizes required for each group based on 
various differences between groups.   
  
Difference in means between groups  Standard deviation  Sample size required (for each group)  
2 0.73  4 
1.5 0.73  6 
1 0.73  10 
0.5 0.73  43 
 
We will be enrolling up to 20  patients per group to ensure that we will have 10 patients for 
analysis in each group.   
 
4.  What is your plan for primary variable analysis?  
Primary outcome variable: SBSES score .  A one -way ANOVA will be employed to compare mean 
scar assessment scores  between groups.   
 
5.  What is your plan for secondary variable analysis?  
Secondary outcome variables: patient satisfaction with appearance of scar (on scale of 1 -10), 
physician sa tisfaction with the technique/device (on a scale of 1 -10), and presence or absence 
of adverse events (including infection and reoperation).  For the scaled scores, descriptive 
statistics will be calculated, and means between groups will be compared (one -way ANOVA).  A 
count of the adverse events per group will be tallied.   
 
Cost  analysis between approaches will be assessed using the  following  metrics:  the cost of 
operating room time per minute will be multiplied by the time for closure and added to the cos t 
of materials to determine a total cost for each approach.   The average costs for each approach 
will be compared using a one -way ANOVA to determine if there are significant differences in 
costs.   
 
6. Have you been working with a statistician in designing this protocol?  
IRB-HSR# 21411: Randomized Controlled Trial of Wound Closure Techniques in Orthopaedic 
Surgery  
Version Date: 07-29-22 
Page Number: 5 of 8 YES 
IF YES, what is their name?   
Wendy Novicoff  
 
7.  Will data from multiple sites be combined during analysis?  NO 
Study Procedures -Biomedical Research  
1.  What will be done in this protocol?    
Patients who meet above inclusion criteria and provide informed consent will be 
enrolled in the study.  All members of the research team that will be assisting with the surgical 
closure (including attending surgeons, fellows, residents and/or physician ass istants) will 
receive full training in the application of both the Clozex and Zipline devices to insure uniform 
experience among participants. The clinicians  performing the closure are also investigators in 
this research and may opt  out of participating in  this study.  There are no pre -operative study 
procedures  for the patients , aside from a review of inclusion and exclusion criteria  and 
enrollment .  
On the day of surgery, the enrolled subject will be randomized into one of three study 
groups.  The randomiz ation will occur during surgery, pr ior to wound closure. The circulating 
nurse will open an envelope, which will determine the randomization group for the subje ct. 
This will allow operating room staff the time to assemble the appropriate materials for clos ure 
depending on participant’s group assignment  without any delay  to standard of care . The 
subjects’ randomization into a treatment group is not expected to significantly increase the 
time of the operation or duration of anesthesia. The wound closure will proceed as follows:  
 
1. Any deep fascial layers will be closed with braided Vicryl suture as indicated and 
according to standard of care.  
2. The subcutaneous fat will be closed using 3 -0 Monocryl in inverted, interrupted fashion  
according to standard of car e.  
3. The circulator will then start a timer that will run until the wound is completely closed.  
A. If randomized to the Control group : Closure will proceed with a running 3 -0 
Prolene subcuticular suture with escape stitches.  
B. If randomized to the Clozex treatment  group : Closure will proceed with 
application of the adhesive device according to manufacturer’s 
recommendations  
C. If randomized to the Zipline treatment  group : Closure will proceed with 
application of the adhesive device according to manufacturer’s 
recommendations  
4. If at any time, the surgical provider (attending surgeon, fellow, resident, PA) determines 
that the device in the test group has failed (i.e. adhesive failure, device breakage), s/he 
may elect to proceed with suture closure and study cross over shall be recorded.  
5. At the conclusion of the wound closure, the timer will be stopped and the operative 
time will be recorded.  
 
IRB-HSR# 21411: Randomized Controlled Trial of Wound Closure Techniques in Orthopaedic 
Surgery  
Version Date: 07-29-22 
Page Number: 6 of 8 Dressings will then be applied in standard fashion including 4 x 4 gauze, webril wrap and 
ACE bandage  and sp linting as indicated . The team member who performed the wound closure 
(attending surgeon, fellow, resident or PA) will fill out the survey on satisfaction with the 
closure (scale 1 – 10) and note any complications or confounding factors (challenging incisi on 
pattern or application problems). The subject will be discharged with standard wound care 
instructions to keep the surgical dressing in place for 3 days and then to replace it with clean 
sterile dressings. The subjects will be cautioned not to submerge their wound underwater for at 
least 2 weeks following surgery , as per standard protocol . 
Initial follow up  will occur at a standard time interval within  14 – 17 days  after surgery, 
at which point Prolene sutures will be cut and removed and Clozex/Zipline devices will be 
removed. An assessment of the wound will take place by the  same  attending surgeon  who 
performed the procedure using the Stony Brook Scar Evaluation Scale (SBSES) using the below 
rubric  (scale 0 – 5). 
 
Category   Points  
Width  > 2 mm  0 
 ≤ 2 mm  1 
Height  Elevated/ depressed in relation to surrounding skin  0 
 Flat 1 
Color  Darker than surrounding skin  0 
 Same color or lighter than surrounding skin  1 
Hatch marks/Suture marks  Present  0 
 Absent  1 
Overall appearance  Poor  0 
 Good  1 
 
A brief survey will then be completed by the study participant to rate their satisfaction 
with their surgical scar on a 1 – 10 scale. The physician or physician assistant seeing the subject 
in follow up will document the presence or absence of adverse even ts (including infection and 
reoperation).  
 
 The SBSES assessment, adverse event monitoring and patient satisfaction will be 
recorded at a second standard of care follow up  visit between 10 – 14 weeks after surgery . The 
subject will be released from the stu dy after the final standard of care  follow up  visit occurs,  
and will no longer need surveillance or monitoring.  
 
Cost  analysis between the groups  will be assessed using the above statistical approach . 
To carry out this analysis, we will obtain: 1. Cost for all materials needed for wound closure , 2. 
Amount of time (in minutes and seconds) needed to close  the wound (start time = all supplies 
are gathered to close the wound, and stop time = wound is decl ared fully closed) , and 
3. Operating room costs  (including overhead)  per minute . 
IRB-HSR# 21411: Randomized Controlled Trial of Wound Closure Techniques in Orthopaedic 
Surgery  
Version Date: 07-29-22 
Page Number: 7 of 8  
2. If this protocol involves study treatment, explain how a subject will be transitioned from 
study treatment when they have completed the ir participation in the study.   
The pa tients that are involved in the study treatment groups will have the same post 
operative management as the control group. At the 2 week visit, the devices (Clozex or 
Zipline) will be removed and all groups will have the same wound care instructions.  
 
Subj ect Compliance with Study Procedures  
1.  Explain how the study team will monitor the subject for compliance with the study 
procedures.  
Participants in the study will have the same post -operative instructions as all 
patients undergoing elective orthopaedic surgical intervention with the exception of a 
brief survey completed at the post -operative visits. Their participation in the study does 
not require any additional active steps or procedures to be completed. Thus, compliance 
in the study will o nly require observing basic post -operative wound care instructions 
and returning for routine follow ups.  
 
2.  Describe criteria for when a subject is considered to be non -compliant with study 
procedures.    
A study subject would be considered non-compliant if they were to remove the sutures 
or devices on their own, fail to return for at least 2 post -operative wound check visits or 
fail to complete the required survey.  
Bibliography  
1.  Risnes I, Abdel noor M, Tore Baksaas S, Lundblad R, Svennevig JL. Sternal wound 
infections in patients undergoing open heart surgery: Randomized study comparing 
intracutaneous and transcutaneous suture techniques. Ann Thorac Surg . 2001. 
doi:10.1016/S0003 -4975(01)03102 -2. 
2.  Karabay O, Fermanci E, Silistreli E, et al. Intracutaneous versus transcutaneous suture 
techniques: comparison of sternal wound infection rates in open -heart surgery patients. 
Tex Heart Inst J . 2005.  
3.  Lazar HL, McCann J, Fitzgerald CA, Thompson J, B ao Y, Cabral HJ. Novel adhesive skin 
closures improve wound healing following saphenous vein harvesting. J Card Surg . 2008. 
doi:10.1111/j.1540 -8191.2007.00563.x.  
4.  Grottkau BE, Rebello G, Merlin G, Winograd JM. Coaptive film versus subcuticular suture: 
Comparing skin closure time after posterior spinal instrumented fusion in pediatric 
patients with spinal deformity. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) . 2010;35(23):2027 -2029. 
doi:10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181c8ad82.  
5.  Backes M, Schep NWL, Luitse JSK, Carel Goslings J, Schepe rs T. The effect of 
postoperative wound infections on functional outcome following intra -articular calcaneal 
fractures. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg . 2015. doi:10.1007/s00402 -015-2219 -5. 
6.  Kuo F, Lee D, Rogers GS. Prospective, randomized, blinded study of a n ew wound closure 
film versus cutaneous suture for surgical wound closure. Dermatologic Surg . 
2006;32(5):676 -681. doi:10.1111/j.1524 -4725.2006.32140.x.  
IRB-HSR# 21411: Randomized Controlled Trial of Wound Closure Techniques in Orthopaedic 
Surgery  
Version Date: 07-29-22 
Page Number: 8 of 8 7.  van de Gevel DFD, Hamad MAS, Elenbaas TWO, Ostertag JU, Schönberger JPAM. Is the 
use of Steri -StripTM S for wound closure after coronary artery bypass grafting better than 
intracuticular suture? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg . 2010;10(4):561 -564. 
doi:10.1510/icvts.2009.222190.  
8.  Ko JH, Yang IH, Ko MS, Kamolhuja E, Park KK. Do zip -type skin -closing devices show better 
wound status compared to conventional staple devices in total knee arthroplasty? Int 
Wound J . 2017;14(1):250 -254. doi:10.1111/iwj.12596.  
9.  Kerrigan CL, Homa K. Eval uation of a new wound closure device for linear surgical 
incisions: 3M steri -strip s surgical skin closure versus subcuticular closure. Plast Reconstr 
Surg . 2010;125(1):186 -194. doi:10.1097/PRS.0b013e3181c2a492.  
10.  Chen HH, Tsai WS, Yeh CY, Wang JY, Tang  R. Prospective study comparing wounds closed 
with tape with sutured wounds in colorectal surgery. Arch Surg . 2001. 
doi:10.1001/archsurg.136.7.801.  
11.  Agarwala S, Vijayvargiya M. Concealed cosmetic closure in total knee replacement 
surgery – A prospectiv e audit assessing appearance and patient satisfaction. J Clin Orthop 
Trauma . 2019;10(1):111 -116. doi:10.1016/j.jcot.2017.11.002.  
12.  Singer AJ, Arora B, Dagum A, Valentine S, Hollander JE. Development and validation of a 
novel scar evaluation scale. Plast  Reconstr Surg . 2007;120(7):1892 -1897. 
doi:10.1097/01.prs.0000287275.15511.10.  
 