​Ketamine Lactation Protocol 
Date: December 19, 2019 
Title: ​The Pharmacokinetics of Ketamine in the 
Breast Milk of Lactating Women: Quantification of 
Ketamine and Metabolites
Sponsor: The Ketamine Research Foundation 
Clinical Coordinator: Phil Wolfson MD, 
Principle Investigators: Rob Cole MD, Melissa Whippo, 
LCSW ClinicalTrials.gov ID:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Ketamine Lactation Protocol 
 
Sponsor: The Ketamine Research Foundation 
 
 
Clinical Coordinator: Phil Wolfson MD, 
Principle Investigators: Rob Cole MD, Melissa Whippo, 
LCSW 
 
Title: ​The Pharmacodynamics of Ketamine in the Breast Milk 
of Lactating Women: Quantification Over 3 Half-Life Intervals o f 3 
Hours Each 
 
 
Protocol: PP1
 
 
 
Purpose​: There is no available data on presence and concentration of ketamine in  
breastmilk. There are statements in the literature made as to the safety of the use of  
ketamine in lactating women ​, ​ though these are unsupported ​.
​ This information is pertinent 
for the treatment of women who are lactating who may have depression, PTSD,  
postpartum depression, and other emotional difficulties and would benefit from ketamine  
treatment. The objective of this study is tto …. o measure the presence and concentration 
of ketamine in breastmilk 
 
Background 
 
Ketamine was developed as an anesthetic agent, by Parke Davis, in the search for  
analogs resulting from recognition of the anesthetic properties of phencyclidine, the first drug  
developed in the arylcyclohexylamine structure during the late 1950s ​,​ 1960s​.​ This drug was 
marketed as Sernyl and in addition to anesthesia ​,​ was also noted to cause significant increase 
in blood pressure and often prolonged postsurgical emergence delirium, even to the point of  
unmanageable ​,​ and at times​,​ violent ​,​ ‘manic behavior’​.​ Ketamine was developed clinically in 
the mid 1960s and was a successful anesthetic agent with fewer adverse effects than the  
parent compound. It was dubbed a ‘dissociative anesthetic’ by the wife of Edward Domino, the  
primary research clinician, as a solution to the descriptive puzzle offered by the drugs novel  
effects. Ketalar, ketamine’s brand name, was approved by the FDA in 1970 for use in children,  
adults, the elderly and animals as an anesthetic agent. During the Vietnam War, ketamine  
became widely used as a field anesthetic administered to wounded soldiers because of its fast  
onset and quick recovery period and its property of maintaining or elevating blood pressure in  
trauma situations. 
Ketamine’s potential to treat different psychological or psychiatric problems  
commenced in 1974 in Argentina as an adjunct for antidepressant psychotherapy (Fontana  
1974)​.​ In Mexico​,​ the psychiatrist Salvador Roquet introduced ketamine to patients in group 
settings as a component of his approach to psychedelic psychotherapy (Kolp et al. ​,​ 2007)​.​ And 
then he brought ketamine to the attention of investigators at the Maryland Psychiatric  
Research Center, Stan Grof and Bill Richards among them. Ketamine’s versatility extends to  
analgesia and, for example, was used to treat patients who were at the scene of the 2005 
London underground bombings ​.​ Following this awful act of terrorism, paramedics in the UK 
were authorized to possess and administer ketamine for pain relief.  
Ketamine is currently listed as one of the two injectable medicines under general  
anesthetics in the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines. The Model List designates  
medications determined “satisfy the health care needs of the majority of the population; they  
should therefore be available at all times in adequate amounts and in the appropriate dosage  
forms, and at a price that individuals and the community can afford” (WHO Technical Report  
Series 2000). 
 
Pharmacology 
Ketamine is available in two enantiomers: the S (+) and the R ( −) configurations ​. 
Most pharmacological preparations include an equimolar racemic mixture of the two  
enantiomers. 
Although racemic ketamine has the broadest worldwide use, S(+)-ketamine is available  
in some European countries like Denmark, Finland, Germany and the Netherlands and will  
come to market as a patented nasal preparation for psychiatric use in latte 2018.  
Ketamine’s putative action is as an N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) glutamate  
receptor antagonist​.​ Multiple routes of administration are utilized by practitioners treating 
depression and other psychiatric conditions, each with its own unique pharmacokinetics, have  
been investigated in the treatment of depression, including intravenous, intramuscular,  
intranasal, sublingual, anal, and oral delivery. Ketamine’s antidepressant activity is believed to  
stem from its antagonism of NMDA receptors, which are widely expressed in the brain. When  
NMDA receptors on gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic neurons are antagonized,  
downstream glutamatergic neurons are disinhibited. This increased glutamatergic activity  
impacts neural signaling, synaptic plasticity, and connectivity.  It is posited based on animal  
models that ketamine-induced synaptic potentiation and proliferation may play a key role in  
eliciting antidepressant effects ​.​ Ketamine also impacts other neurotransmitter systems, 
affecting cholinergic, opioidergic, monoaminergic, and GABAergic function.  
The bioavailability of Intramuscular ketamine is similar (93 -95%) to IV ketamine  
(Clements et al​,​ 1982)​.​ Intranasal ketamine has been used in anesthesia and found to have a 
favorable pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile relative to oral and rectal  
administration (Costantino et al ​,​ 2007)​.​ In a blinded, randomized, controlled trial of 20 MDD 
patients ​,​ 5​0​ mg of intranasal ketamine was found to elicit only mild side effects and produced 
significant antidepressant activity within 24 hours of administration (Lapidus et al ​,​ 2014). 
Estimates of intranasal absorption are variable ranging from 30-50%, with the lower figure  
seeming more the case in clinical practice. In several studies, Sublingual and Oral ketamine  
have a calculated bioavailability of about 30 % and 20 %, respectively (Lara et al, 2013; Paslakis  
et al, 2010). Again, in clinical practice, these percentages appear to be lower—20-30% for  
sublingual preparations and perhaps 10% for the oral administration. Of 27 patients with MDD  
given variable​,​ escalating doses of sublingual ketamine ​,​ 20experienced antidepressant efficacy 
(Lara et al, 2013). A retrospective review of 20 hospice patients receiving a single 0.5mg/dose 
of ketamine, given orally for 22 found significant antidepressant efficacy (Iglewicz, 2015).  
Ketamine is water and lipid soluble ​.​ It is absorbable by IV, intramuscular, intranasal, 
subcutaneous, epidural, oral, and rectal routes of administration. Differences in the effects of  
ketamine are entirely determined by the degree and rapidity of absorption. Ketamine’s  
relatively low binding capacity to plasma proteins leads to rapid brain uptake and distribution  
(Weber et al ​.​ 2004)​.​ The differences in bioavailability are due to gastrointestinal absorption 
and first-pass metabolism ​.​ Th ​e α​ -elimination phase half-life is only 11 minutes, while ​the β​ - 
elimination phase is about 2 ​.​5 hours (Wieber et al.,1975). 
Ketamine undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism. It is N-demethylated by  
cytochrome P45 ​0​ enzymes in liver microsomes into NK and other metabolites (Hijazi and 
Boulieu 2002) ​.​ The principal isoform responsible for demethylation is CYP3A4, with minor 
contributions by CYP2B6 and CYP2C9 (Hijazi and Boulieu 2002). NK plasma levels are about  
three times higher after oral administration than after IV administration ​.​ The metabolites of 
nor-ketamine primarily undergo renal excretion; about 91 % of ketamine is excreted in the  
urine as metabolites, and 1–3 % is found in the feces (Chang and Glazko 1974) ​.​ Parenteral 
ketamine (as hydrochloride) is rapidly distributed throughout the body into widely perfused  
tissues, including the brain. It is likely 
excreted into breast milk and does cross the placenta ​.​ However ​,​ it was posited to have 
no clinically relevant or adverse effects on neonates (Little et al., 1972). As this was early work  
and related to anesthesia, this remains an open issue for often repeated psychiatric use by  
pregnant or lactating mothers. 
Ketamine’s tolerability and safety have been demonstrated over almost 5 decades. It  
has been used as an anesthetic for adults and children since the 1960s and has been used in  
neuropsychiatric research for more than two decades. Anesthetic doses from 1 to 3 mg/kg are 
considered to be very safe (Wan et al​.​ 2015)​.​ Subanesthetic doses of ketamine (from 0.1 to 2 
mg/kg) have been associated with transient side effects including neurocognitive, sensory-  
motor, and hemodynamic changes ​.​ A pooled data study from three different clinical trials of 
subanesthetic IV ketamine administration in MDD patients found that adverse effects  
common within the first four hours of administration included dizziness ​,​ derealization ​,​ and 
drowsiness. Whether these are truly to be considered ‘adverse’ or are part and parcel of  
ketamine’s actual effects that result in the antidepressant and/or therapeutic benefits is the  
subject of much debate. One third of all patients experienced transient hemodynamic  
changes, particularly elevated blood pressure. There have been no cases of persistent  
neuropsychiatric sequelae, medical effects, or increased substance abuse in clinical practice.  
Route of administration and dose provided will also affect tolerability. While there have been  
multiple reports of dissociative and psychotomimetic effects of ketamine with IV and IM  
preparations, a trial of sublingual ketamine in 27 MDD patients reported no such side effects  
(Lara et al. ​,​ 2013)​.​ A trial of intranasal ketamine also found only small increases in dissociative 
symptoms (Lapidus et al., 2014) ​. 
A cautionary here in that increasing dosages of ketamine through any route of  
administration will result in an increase in dissociative effects.  
Ketamine has been approved by regulatory bodies worldwide for use as an  
anesthetic and an analgesic in both human and veterinary medicine. Ketamine was classified  
in 1999 as a Schedule 3 substance. Off label use has been a constant in ketamine’s history.  
 
 
Summary of Research Design: ​This study will be conducted with 4 lactating women 
who agree to postpone breastfeeding and provide samples of their milk. Ketamine’s half-life  
is variously placed at 2 and a half to 3 hours. The most reliable data puts ketamine’s half-life  
at 2.1 hours and for the metabolite—norketamine at 1.2 hours—this from a ketamine study  
in children indicating the safety of this medicine (Herd et al 2002). Samples will be collected  
prior to injection for baseline measurement, and timed at 3, 6, and 9 hour  
intervals--choosing the maximum half-life  duration. Two dosages will be administered:  
0.5ml/kg and 1.0ml/kg. administered Intramuscularly (IM). Each administration will be  
separated by a minimum of 3 days and preferably one week. 
 
The study subjects participants to greater than minimal risk because the protocol design  
calls for administration of IM ketamine. While the safety of IM ketamine administration  
is well established over decades of use, participants will be provided with full  
information on risks. 
 
SEE PACKAGE INSERT FOR THIS MANUFACTURER—ATTACHED. 
 
The IM route confers rapid onset—2-5 minutes for effect and a reliable  
approximate 95% absorption of ketamine ​.​ The dosage range for a 50 kg woman amounts 
to 25-50mg and for a 70kg woman 35mg-70mg ​,​ both quantities well within commonly 
used therapeutic administration of IM ketamine for depression and other psychiatric  
diagnoses (Dore et al, 2019)​. 
 
While psychiatric use of ketamine may well exceed 1. ​0​ mg/kg ​,​ blood concentrations of 
ketamine for anesthetic use have tended to follow a linear pattern of concentration, enabling  
estimates of concentration in breast milk, should there be a decision to exceed 1.0mg /kg IM in  
clinical practice. 
 
Inclusion Criteria 
Obtained by Interview/Self-Report 
•Age 21-45 
•• Postpartum with established lactation for a minimum of 3 months.  
•• Ability to pump breast milk and to provide a reservoir for infant feeding prior  
to the study; or acceptance of bottle feeding by the infant. 
•• In good health—normal BP/P; afebrile-temp ascertained; review of systems  
by MD; absence of diagnosed illnesses. 
•• Not pregnant--Pregnancy tested for before each administration by urine assay.  
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
•• Hypertension with a BP greater than 145/90 
•• Subjects must be offAbsence of all psychiatric medications specifically;  
medications and supplements, or evaluated by the PI for non-interference  
•• No alcohol or other substances such as marijuana for 72 hours or more.  
•• Weight <50kg or > 90kg ​. 
•• Pregnancy 
 
Method of Subject Identification and Recruitment 
Two of the investigators have close connections to practicing OB/GYNs, one being one  
of these himself; and the other has a practice with postpartum women in part at a local  
university medical school. As only 4 subjects will take part, with the possibility of drop-out  
requiring further recruitment this ‘n’ is compatible with the outreach potential of the  
Investigators. Lactating patients and staff in both situations will be approached for an initial  
screening conversation. 
 
No advertising is involved. 
 
 
Procedures 
Initial screening for participation will be conducted by an investigator, via telephone.  
The IC and Intake form will be emailed/mailed  to a potential participant based on  
the suitability for admission to the study as per the screening determination. ​ The intake 
form assesses current and previous illnesses, psychiatric conditions, medications, 
supplements and emergency contacts, etc. 
Review of the Intake form will occur prior to the formal Intake Interview to be  
performed at the site.  This review will again determine potential eligibility.  
The intake Interview at the site will take place with two investigators present  
and will take as long as necessary to review the protocol, the IC, the information on  
the actual Intake form, and to determine admission to the study. ​ This will enable 
Investigators to screen potential subjects prior to enrollment—as is our general 
practice. The Informed Consent will be provided along with the Intake Form for 
review by the subjects prior to making a decision to proceed with the study intake 
process.  Subjects will discuss, and make a decision to sign, or not, the 
 Informed Consent. 
HIPAA confidentiality will be maintained throughout. Subjects will be given a numerical  
designation for all materials, other than the written forms discussed herein. All written and  
confidential materials will be stored in a locked file on premises available only to the  
Investigators. 
 
Preliminary lab tests, BP and PR and an initial pregnancy test will be performed ​.  
 BP and PR will be performed at 1 hour post-administration to assess peak impact on 
cardiovascular status. 
 
This study will assess if the rapid elimination of ketamine facilitates a short and  
tolerable suspension of breastfeeding. If the study determines that significant amounts of  
ketamine remain in breast milk after 9 hours and 3 intervals, a decision will be made to add  
further intervals for assessment. The collection at 3 hour intervals will continue until  
ketamine levels are undetectable. 
 
No hazardous substances or procedures are involved 
 
 
Pumping of breast milk will be performed by the subjects, collected, and preserved as  
per the lab’s criteria. Every attempt will be made to collect milk in volume. The study will  
provide a pump for collection to each participant 
 
Subjects may stay at the clinic for the duration of the collection ​,or may be provided                  
with instructions and collection materials for at home pumping if the duration is prolonged               
beyond 9 hours ​.​ As much as possible, tThe samples will be collected by the next day. 
 
Subjects will refrain from eating and drinking 3-4 hours before receiving ketamine,  
this to prevent stomach contents that may contribute to nausea, and reduce any risk of  
aspiration. Subjects are permitted one cup of coffee if they are caffeine dependent ​,​ or juice 
or water at 3-4 hours prior. Subjects will provide consent for fasting prior to its initiation  
verbally and later fully in person at the clinic. 
 
A urine pregnancy test will be conducted prior to each administration of ketamine.  
 
A first subject in the study will have milk collected at ​0,​ 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 hours to 
determine if these intervals are sufficient to characterize a basic pharmacodynamic profile.  
If there is a negligible quantity in the samples as the time frame proceeds, the lab will not  
analyze subsequent samples. Once determined, the study will proceed with the remaining 3  
subjects at the intervals projected from the first subject 
 
Two dosages will be administered: 0.5ml/kg and 1.0ml/kg. Intramuscularly (IM) ​. 
Each administration will be separated by a minimum of 3 days and preferably one week.  
Each session will follow the same process and procedure as described herein and ocur at  
the study site. 
 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE TIMING CHART 
HOUR PROCEDURE 
-30 minutes Arrives at Study Site 
Pregnancy Test 
Review of IC and Fasting with Consent 
 
-!5 BP, HR, Review of Systems 
 
0 Hour Zero Time Pump 
 
15 IM 0.5mg/kg; or Second Session 1.0mg/kg 
 
15-60 Support for Subject who is reclining on sofa 
with eyeshades and ambient music 
 
1 hour BP, HR 
 
1-3 hours Support for subject and integration of 
experience 
 
3 hours BP, HR, Second Pump 
 
3-6 hours Subject relaxing at Study Site 
 
6 hours Third Pump 
 
9 hours Fourth Pump 
 
12 hours Fifth Pump if necessary (as per procedure) 
 
Home Milk has been quantified for volume at each 
pump and an aliquot labelled, saved and 
refrigerated. 
If subject has gone home earlier—at 6 hours 
or later, subject will be contacted to pump at 
the assigned intervals and an aliquot 
refrigerated for pickup and delivery to the 
clinical lab for analysis.  
 
 
Safety​: Administration of ketamine will occur in office premises and with standard of  
care safety equipment available. This includes CPR trained personnel, ambu bag, defibrillator  
and a suction device. MDs will be present on site throughout and will administer the injections.  
 
Injections are provided with a 25 gauge, 1 inch needle using ketamine in a sterile  
100mg/ml concentration ​. ​ Total volume of ketamine fluid will be less than 1 cc. Occasionally,  
there may be a slight bleed from the injection site. There may be mild ache at the injection site  
for up to a few hours ​.
​ Injections are intra-muscular and into the deltoid or buttocks regions. 
 
Subjects will be provided in advance for preliminary screening with our standard 
intake form to assess current and previous illnesses, psychiatric conditions, and emergency 
contacts, etc. This will enable Investigators to screen potential subjects prior to 
enrollment—as is our general practice. The Informed Consent will be provided along with the 
Intake Form for review by the subjects prior to making a decision to proceed with the study 
intake process. 
At Intake, subjects will discuss, and make a decision to sign, or , the Informed 
Consent. 
HIPAA confidentiality will be maintained throughout. Subjects will be given a 
numerical designation for all materials, other than the written forms discussed herein. All 
written and confidential materials will be stored in a locked file on premises available only to 
the Investigators. 
No hazardous substances or procedures are involved 
 
Methods 
Quantitative analysis of ketamine will be performed by Alan Wu PhD ​,​ Professor of 
Laboratory Medicine at UCSF School of Medicine and Kara Lynch at UCSF.  
 
1.1) Lab will prepare a standard for analysis of ketamine and its principle 
metabolite norketamine In breast milk. The half-life of ketamine is 2.1 hours ​,​ and 
that of norketamine 1.2 hours (Herd et al 2007). The study will view the half-life as  
being a conservative 3 hours. 
Subjects will refrain from eating and drinking 3-4 hours before receiving ketamine,  
this to 
prevent stomach contents that may contribute to nausea, and reduce any risk of  
aspiration. Subjects are permitted one cup of coffee, juice or water at 3-4 hours prior if they  
are caffeine dependent. PROVIDED IN LAST VERSION 
1.1) A urine pregnancy test will be conducted prior to each administration of 
ketamine. 
2.1)  
3.2) A first subject in the study will have milk collected at ​0,​ 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 hours to 
determine if these intervals are sufficient to characterize a basic pharmacodynamic  
profile. If there is a negligible quantity in the samples as the time frame proceeds, the  
lab will not analyze subsequent samples. Once determined, the study will proceed with  
the remaining 3 subjects at the intervals projected from the first subject ​.​ The lab will 
process the samples from the first subject as rapidly as possible to enable continuation  
of the study. Breast milk will be collected until ketamine levels are undetectable. If  
significant amounts of ketamine are found in samples from the 3 subsequent subjects  
at the last interval determined by the profile of the first subject, additional time frames  
for collection will be added. If necessary, the process will be repeated to fully document  
pharmacokinetics. 
As real time testing of ketamine content in breastmilk is not possible,  
the first subject will be the exemplar for the timing of the resumption of  
breast feeding based on the data obtained, such as not detectable at 9 hours,  
hence breast feeding may resume ​.​ For that first subject ​,​ breast feeding may 
resume at 18 hours​,​ which corresponds to 9 half-lives for ketamine, 4 
half-lives being the accepted timing for the absence of a molecule. This will be  
confirmed by lab testing as quickly as possible for the first subject.  
 
1.3) Pumping of breast milk will be for a full expression so as not to influence 
concentrations in subsequent sampling intervals. The volume of breast milk will be  
quantified for each expression. 
 
1.4) Milk will be refrigerated in sterile containers and aliquots of one ounce will be               
brought to the lab refrigerated as soon as possible. A second aliquot of each               
expression will be frozen in the event of loss or spoilage of the first aliquots ​,site to be                   
determined. 
 
1.5) Each aliquot will be labelled with coded subject designation, concentration of 
ketamine administered, date, and interval. The lab will be provided with the actual  
quantity of ketamine administered to each subject at the ​0.​5 and 1.0mg/kg levels and 
the weight of each patient in kgs. 
1)  
1.6) The Lab will provide the data to KRF in formats suitable for journal publication. 
 
INTAKE FORM ATTACHED 
AS PREVIOULSY INDICATED THERE ARE NO QUESTIONNAIRES BEING 
ADMINISTERED— THIS WAS DELETED FROM THE PRIOR REVISION 
 
Inclusion Criteria 
• Age 21-45 
Postpartum with established lactation for a minimum of 3 months. 
Ability to pump breast milk and to provide a reservoir for infant feeding prior to the 
study; or acceptance of bottle feeding by the infant. 
In good health—normal BP/P; afebrile-temp ascertained; review of systems by MD; 
absence of diagnosed illnesses. 
Not pregnant--Pregnancy tested for before each administration by urine assay. 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
Hypertension with a BP greater than 145/90 
Absence of all psychiatric medications specifically; medications and supplements, or 
evaluated by the PI for non-interference 
No alcohol or other substances such as marijuana for 72 hours or more. 
Weight <50kg or > 90kg. 
Pregnancy 
 
 
 
Potential Adverse Effects 
•• Nausea and vomiting—a less than 5% incidence of intolerability to  
ketamine. 
 
 
•• Transient hypertension—BP will be monitored. In clinical practice ​,​ and 
in this age group ​,​ this has not occurred with any frequency. 
 
 
•• Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic and subjects have a high likelihood of  
experiencing dissociative effects during the first two hours following ketamine’s  
administration. Generally, the major impact occurs in the first hour, with full  
recovery to baseline by 3 hours. The Investigators have conducted thousands of  
sessions in which dissociative effects are part of the ketamine assisted  
psychotherapy (KAP) approach, including at much higher doses than those being  
administered in this study ​.​ Subjects may experience, an altered mental state in 
which there is an imaginative stream of associations, sensations and imagery.  
There can be anxiety accompanying a shift from ordinary reality. The  
Investigators have specialized in developing a transformative psychotherapy  
with utilization of this state and are fully equipped and experienced in dealing  
effectively with this state. Subjects will be prepared for the possibility of this  
• experience. Administration will be conducted in the same 
comfortable setting in which KAP sessions are routinely provided. Investigators  
are continually present throughout the time frame of this experience, however  
long it may persist. Subjects will remain in the office until fully recovered and  
will have a ride home and will not drive themselves. 
 
 
•• Agitation—may occur transiently with dissociative effects. Subjects will remain  
in the clinical setting until ketamine’s influence has passed and they are safe to leave ​. 
We have never had to treat agitation, as it passes, and reassurance and support have  
been sufficient to enable attainment of calmness. In the event of unusual agitation  
that is a risk to the patient, sublingual lorazepam can be administered ​.​ With over 50​0 
patients and several thousand ketamine sessions, this has never occurred.  
 
 
•• Safety in operating machinery and driving—Subjects will have rides home when  
ready to leave. 
 
 
•• No long term negative effects involving administration of ketamine in these  
dosages and frequencies have been reported in vast numbers over many decades of  
use. 
A follow-up formal telephone session will occur at 4 weeks after the second  
administration. Questions will focus on any adverse effects on subjects or infants,  
difficulties in resuming breast feeding, psychological difficulties and insights not  
discussed in the prior 4 weeks of follow-up availability ​.​ Throughout the study, subjects 
will be reachable by their cell phones for emergency and consultative contact with the  
Investigators--who will have developed an on-call schedule. 
 
Potential Benefits to Subjects 
Ketamine administered in this clinical environment may well contribute to a sense of  
well-being and an exploration of consciousness ​.​ If emotional issues arise these will be fully 
processed. The Study Staff are skilled psychotherapists, versed in the practice of ketamine  
assisted psychotherapy. 
Subjects may well feel they are contributing to the benefit of women who have  
postpartum symptoms and disorders. 
 
Method of Subject Identification and Recruitment 
Two of the investigators have close connections to practicing OB/GYNs, one being 
one of these himself; and the other has a practice with postpartum women in part at a local 
university medical school. As only 4 subjects will take part, with the possibility of drop-out 
requiring further recruitment this ‘n’ is compatible with the outreach potential of the 
Investigators. 
No advertising is involved. 
 
Screening Script: ​The Ketamine Research Foundation is conducting a study of the 
presence and concentration of ketamine in breast milk following two administrations of  
ketamine by injection intramuscularly. This study is in preparation for use of ketamine as an  
assisted psychotherapy for women suffering with postpartum depression. If you agree to  
participate, ketamine will be 
administered to you on two separate occasions based on your body weight. You would spend at  
least 10 hours at our comfortable offices in San Anselmo under the supervision of MDs and  
psychotherapists. You would need to pump breast milk on at least 3- 4 occasions at 3 hour  
intervals. You will be asked to fast for 3-4 hours prior to administration of ketamine to reduce the  
possibility of nausea which may occur and does occur in a small percentage of patients who  
receive ketamine. ​ ​ The effects of ketamine may would last for up to 2 hours, one hour of which  
can be expected to be a significant altered state and you would be lying down for the experience.  
Payment for participation includes cost of transportation and an initial stipend on acceptance  
into the study of $100, and on completion a second $100 stipend. Ketamine is known for its  
safety and positive effects on depression and other emotional difficulties. This is not about  
psychotherapy, but you will receive full attention for any emotional experiences you may  
encounter. You will be able to have a person of support present and your child as well. You will  
not be able to breast feed during the study session. To qualify, you need to be in good health,  
between the ages of 21 and 45, have been lactating for at least 3 months, not be on medication,  
and have normal blood pressure.  
To be interviewed for the study, please email to ​ke ​tamine.research@gmail.com. 
Thanks for your consideration! 
Phil Wolfson MD—Director 
 
Informed Consent 
All study subjects will have full capacity to consent. The Informed Consent will be mailed  
to subjects for their review prior to enrollment. The IC will be presented to subjects by the staff ​, 
reviewed for subjects understanding of the IC and what is involved in the study, for discussion  
and questions and clarification ​.​ Subjects may elect to withdraw from the study prior to 
receiving the first and second injections—without consequence. The IC is attached.  
Study subjects will be fully aware that they will not breast feed infants for the period of  
the study so as not to expose infants to ketamine in breast milk.  
 
Costs to the Subject and Reimbursement for Participation 
Subjects will not bear any costs and will be reimbursed for travel expenses to the Study  
Site. Subjects will receive a stipend of $200 for participation--$10 ​0​ paid on enrollment and $100 
paid at conclusion of the second event. 
 
Data Analysis 
As data is accumulated by the laboratory ​,​ it will be presented as both absolute 
quantities and graphed. Subject data will be correlated with concentration in breast milk  
according to age, body weight, dosage, volume of milk collected, length of breast feeding to  
the time of the study—months. 
 
Data Storage and Confidentiality 
Data will be inputted at the site into an Excel digital format with a matrix with subjects  
as specified above ​.  ​No identifying data will be inputted and the study will be fully HIPPA  
compliant ​. ​ Subjects will b
e coded as follows: 1A ​,​ 2B, 3C, 4D, and so on if more than 4 subjects 
are included in the Study. Access to this data will be restricted to Investigators and stored on a  
limited access backup disc. ADDED Written materials will be stored at the study site in a locked  
file cabinet, with access controlled by the Clinical Coordinator.  
 
Potential Treatment for a Research Related Injury 
Should a research related injury occur, subjects will have full support of the  
Investigators for treatment based in depth, frequency and duration on the nature of that  
injury.  Subjects have full access to the investigators by phone and email and will be  
contacted in follow-up directly at 4 weeks after the last ketamine session.  
The study will secure insurance specific to the possibilities arising to subjects as a result  
of their participation in the study--which will include medical coverage.  
The IC includes language pertinent to arbitration should that be necessary to determine  
the responsibility of the study for an injury should it occur and there be a dispute.  
 
 
 
References 
Carr DB, Goudas LC, Denman WT, Brookoff D, Staats PS, Brennen L, et al. Safety and  
efficacy of intranasal ketamine for the treatment of breakthrough pain in patients with chronic  
pain: a randomized ​,​ double-blind ​,​ placebo-controlled ​,​ crossover study​.​ Pain​.​ 2004; 
108(1–2):17–27. 
 
Chang T, Glazko AJ (1974) Biotransformation and disposition of ketamine ​.​ Int 
Anesthesiol Clin 12(2):157–178 
 
Clements J, Nimmo W, Grant I (1982) Bioavailability, pharmacokinetics, and analgesic  
activity of ketamine in humans. J Pharm Sci 71(5):539–542 
 
Costantino HR ​,​ Illum L​,​ Brandt G​,​ Johnson PH, Quay SC (2007) Intranasal delivery: 
physicochemical 
and therapeutic aspects. Int J Pharm 337(1):1–24 
Dore J, Turnipseed B, Dwyer S, Turnipseed A, Andries J, Ascani G, Monnette C,  
Huidekoper A, Strauss N​,​ Wolfson P ​.​ ​Ketamine Assisted Psychotherapy (KAP): Patient 
Demographics, Clinical ​ ​Data and Outcomes in Three Large Practices Administering Ketamine  
with Psychotherapy. ​J Psychoactive Drugs ​.​ 2019 Mar 27:1 ​-​10​.​ doi: 
10.1080/02791 ​0​72.2019.1587556 ​.​ [Epub ahead of print] 
PMID: 30917760 
. 
Fine PG. Low-dose ketamine in the management of opioid nonresponsive terminal  
cancer pain. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1999; 17(4):296–300​.​ [PubMed: 10203883] 
 
Fitzgibbon EJ, Hall P, Schroder C, Seely J, Viola R. Low dose ketamine as an analgesic  
adjuvant in difficult pain syndromes: a strategy for conversion from parenteral to oral  
ketamine. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2002; 23(2):165–70 ​.​ [PubMed: 11844639] 
Fontana A (1974) Terapia atidepresiva con ketamine. Acta Psiquiatr Psicol Am Lat  
20:32 ​Herd DW​,​ Anderson BJ​,​ Holford NH ​(2007) Modeling the norketamine metabolite in 
children 
and the implications for analgesia. ​Paediatr Anaesth. ​Sep;17(9):831-40. 
 
Hijazi Y ​,​ Boulieu R (2002) Contribution of CYP3A4 ​,​ CYP2B6​,​ and CYP2C9 isoforms to 
N-demethylation of ketamine in human liver microsomes ​.​ Drug Metab Dispos 
30(7):853–858 
 
Iglewicz A, et al. Ketamine for the Treatment of Depression in Patients Receiving  
Hospice Care: A Retrospective Chart Review of Thirty-One Cases ​.​ Psychosomatics. 
2015; 56(4): 329–337 
 
Irwin SA, Iglewicz A. Oral ketamine for the rapid treatment of depression and anxiety in  
patients receiving hospice care. J Palliat Med ​.​ 2010; 13(7):903–8 ​.​ [PubMed: 20636166] 
 
Irwin SA, Iglewicz A, Nelesen RA, Lo JY, Carr CH, Romero SD, et al. Daily oral ketamine  
for the treatment of depression and anxiety in patients receiving hospice care: a 28-day  
open-label proof of-concept trial ​.​ J Palliat Med ​.​ 2013; 16(8):958–65 ​.​ [PubMed: 23805864] 
 
Jansen, K. ​Ketamine: Dreams and Realities ​2004 MAPS 
 
Kannan TR, Saxena A, Bhatnagar S, Barry A. Oral ketamine as an adjuvant to oral  
morphine for neuropathic pain in cancer patients ​.​ J Pain Symptom Manage ​.​ 2002; 
23(1):60–5. [PubMed:11779670] 
 
Krystal JH. Ketamine and the potential role for rapid-acting antidepressant  
medications. Swiss Med Wkly ​.​ 2007; 137(15–16):215–6 ​.​ [PubMed: 17525875] 
Lapidus KA, Levitch CF, Perez AM, Brallier JW, Parides MK, Soleimani L, Feder A,  
Iosifescu DV, Charney DS, Murrough JW (2014) A randomized controlled trial of intranasal  
ketamine in major depressive disorder ​.​ Biol Psychiatry 76(12):970–976 
 
Lara DR, Bisol LW, Munari LR (2013) Antidepressant, mood stabilizing and procognitive  
effects of very low dose sublingual ketamine in refractory unipolar and bipolar depression. Int J  
Neuropsychopharmacol 16(9):2111–2117 
 
Little B, Chang T, Chucot L, Dill W, Enrile L, Glazko A, Jassani M, Kretchmer H, Sweet A  
(1972) Study of ketamine as an obstetric anesthetic agent ​.​ Am J Obstet Gynecol 
113(2):247–260 
 
Lossignol DA, Obiols-Portis M ​,​ Body JJ​.​ Successful use of ketamine for intractable 
cancer pain. Support Care Cancer ​.​ 2005; 13(3):188–93. [PubMed: 15480820] 
 
Matthew S, Zarate C. Ketamine for Treatment Resistant Depression. 2016 Adis  
 
Paslakis G, Gilles M, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Deuschle M (2010) Oral administration of the  
NMDA receptor antagonist S-ketamine as add-on therapy of depression: a case series.  
Pharmacopsychiatry 43(1):33 
 
Subramaniam K, Subramaniam B, Steinbrook RA. Ketamine as adjuvant analgesic to  
opioids: a quantitative and qualitative systematic review ​.​ Anesth Analg​.​ 2004; 99(2):482–95 
 
Wan L, Levitch C, Perez A, Brallier J, Iosifescu D, Chang L, Foulkes A, Mathew S,                 
Charney D, Murrough J (2015) Ketamine safety and tolerability in clinical trials for              
treatment-resistant depression​.​ J Clin Psychiatry 76(3):247–252 
 
Weber F, Wulf H, Gruber M, Biallas R (2004) S-ketamine and s-norketamine plasma  
concentrations after nasal and iv administration in anesthetized children. Paediatr Anaesth  
14(12):983–988 
 
Wieber J, Gugler R, Hengstmann J, Dengler H (1975) Pharmacokinetics of ketamine  
in man. Anaesthesist 24(6):260–263 Zarate CA, Singh JB, Carlson PJ, 
 
Wolfson P ​,​ Hartelius ​,​ G​,​ The Ketamine Papers MAPS 2016 
 
 
 
Appendix A 
1.Treatment Options 
 
 
• 2. Anesthesia 
 
• 3. Ketamine 
 
• 4. Breastfeeding Warnings 
Print Share 
 
Ketamine use 
while 
Breastfeeding 
 
Drugs containing Ketamine: Ketalar, LidoProfen, MKO Melt Dose 
Pack, MKO Troche 
 
Medically reviewed ​by Drugs.com. Last updated on Dec 12, 2018. 
 
 
• 
 
• 
 
• 
 
• 
 
• 
 
• 
••More 
Ketamine Levels and Effects 
while Breastfeeding 
Summary of Use during Lactation 
 
Breastmilk levels of ketamine have not been measured after 
administration to humans. Minimal data indicated that ketamine use in nursing 
mothers may not affect the breastfed infant or lactation. Until more data are 
available, ketamine 
should only be used with careful monitoring during breastfeeding. 
Alternate agents are preferred. 
 
Drug Levels 
 
Maternal Levels. Relevant published information was not found as of the 
revision date. 
 
Infant Levels. Relevant published information was not found as of the 
revision date. 
 
Effects in Breastfed Infants 
 
Four mothers who received epidural analgesia with lidocaine and 
bupivacaine for cesarean section also received general anesthesia with ketamine 
and midazolam (dosages not specified). Their infants were either breastfed or 
received their mother's breastmilk by bottle. No adverse effects were reported in 
the infants.[1] 
 
Effects on Lactation and Breastmilk 
 
A pregnant woman sustained 28% body surface area burns near term. 
She underwent an emergency cesarean section on her due date under ketamine 
anesthesia. Although the infant required vigorous resuscitation, the infant began 
breastfeeding immediately. The infant had transient jaundice that resolved in a 
few days.[2] 
 
A study compared women undergoing cesarean section who received 
either placebo or S-ketamine (esketamine) 0.5 mg/kg intramuscularly, followed 
by a continuous infusion of 2 mcg/kg/minute for 12 hours. This low dose was 
used to enhance analgesia and reduce residual pain rather than to provide 
anesthesia. All women received intraspinal bupivacaine 8 to10 mg and sufentanil 
5 mcg for analgesia, as well as midazolam 0.02 mg/kg intravenously before the 
S-ketamine or placebo injection. Postoperatively, patients received 
patient-controlled intravenous morphine for 24 hours, followed by 
acetaminophen, oral ketorolac and a single dose of ondansetron 8 mg 
intravenously as needed. Of the 56 patients enrolled in the study (28 in each 
group), 13 in each group were contacted at 3 years postpartum. Patients who 
received placebo reported breastfeeding for an average of 10.5 months and 
those who received S-ketamine 
reported breastfeeding for an average of 8 months; however, the 
difference was not statistically significant.[3] 
 
A randomized, double-blind study compared the effects of intravenous 
propofol 
0.25 mg/kg, ketamine 0.25 mg/kg, ketamine 25 mg plus propofol 25 mg, 
and saline placebo for pain control in mothers post-cesarean section. A single 
dose was given immediately after clamping of the umbilical cord. The time to the 
first breastfeeding was 58 minutes in those who received placebo, 31.9 minutes 
with 
ketamine and 25.8 minutes with propofol plus ketamine. The 
time was significantly shorter than the other groups with the 
combination.[4] 
 
APPENDIX B—INTAKE FORM 
 
 
 
 
DATE: 
The Ketamine Research Foundation 
STUDY INTAKE FORM 
 
 
 
Confidential Client Information 
 
Welcome to our Study. 
Please fill out the following as completely as possible. 
This information is confidential. 
 
•1.
Name:  
 
 
•2. Address: 
Street/PO box 
 
 
•3. City: State:
Zip/Postal Code:  
 
•4. Home Phone:
Cell Phone: Work:   May I leave a message?  
 
Email:_  
 
•5. SS#:  
 
•6. Age: Birth date:
Gender:   Do you identify as 
transgender?   
 
•7.
Education (grade/degree completed, any post secondary):   
 
•8. Current 
Occupation:   
 
•9.
Person to alert in the event of a medical emergency:   
 
Address: _  
 
Relationship to you: Phone:   
 
•10. Family Doctor:
Phone:  
 
 
• 11. Relationship status (circle one): Single  Married  Partnered 
Separated  Divorced  Widowed If not married, are you currently in a relationship? ​¨ ​Yes  ​¨ ​No
If yes, fo r h
ow long? 
 
•12. Spouse’s/partner’s 
name: Phone:  
 
 
•13.
Children (gender, age):  
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX C 
FOLLOW-UP CALL AT 4 WEEKS 
Fundamentally, this is an open conversation with subjects to ascertain the  
aftermath effects of the two ketamine sessions. 
Questions  that are included will focus on: 
 ​Any adverse effects on subjects or infants​: Have you felt or noticed and problems 
with your physical state; or your emotional state since your ketamine sessions?  If so, do you 
attribute these to your ketamine experiences.  
Were there positive effects that you have noted? 
Have you noticed any changes in your infant since your ketamine experiences? Do 
you attribute these to ketamine? 
Difficulties in resuming breast feeding ​: Did you have any difficulties with your infant 
as a result of the suspension of breast feeding?   How long did this last if there were 
problems?  Do you have a view of how long suspension of breast feeding is tolerable to you? 
To your infant? 
   
              Have you experienced any psychological difficulties or insights you have not 
discussed in the prior 4 weeks of follow-up? 