Identifiers:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   Unique Protocol ID:   P00004862    Secondary IDs:    1R01AA021904-01 Brief Title: Computerized Alcohol Screening for Children and Adolescents (cASCA) in Primary Care   Document Title:  Brief Summary and Abstract: Computerized substance use Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (C-SBIRT) for children and adolescents in primary care  (Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan) Document Date:   November 13, 2018 
11/13/2018   1  
Title of Project:  Computerized substance use Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to 
Treatment (C -SBIRT) for children and adolescents in primary care  
 
This prot ocol reflects the combination of two separate protocol s with  the foll owing tit les: 
1. Computerized Alcohol Screening for Children and Adolescents (cASCA) in Primary Care  
2. Computer Adaptation of Screening, Brief MET Intervention to Reduce Teen Drinking  
 
 
PI: John R. Knight, MD  and Sion K Harris, PhD  
 
Brief Summary/Abstract  
The primary goal of this project is to develop a computerized screening program for primary care 
offices that is based on the NIAAA‟s new Alcohol Screening Guide for Children and Adolescents and 
assess its ps ychometric properties among nine - to 20-yr-old primary care patients. There is 
substantial evidence supporting the effectiveness of screening and brief intervention among adult 
primary care patients, primarily in the reduction of harmful drinking.1-7 However, there have been f ew 
studies of alcohol screening and brief intervention conducted among adolescents seen in busy 
primary  care settings.8 This project will develop and validate a new computerized Alcohol Screening 
for Children and Adolescents (cASCA) program which incorporates the age -specific screening 
questions of the NIAAA Guide and includes the CRAFFT and AUDIT as secondary risk/problem 
assessments. We will add tobacco screening , because tobacco use is the leading cause of cancer -
related mortality in the US , as well as screening for marijuana and other drug use so as to create a 
comprehensive screening tool that includes all major substances that adolescents use .17 
 
 
Specific Aims/Objectives  
The primary aims of this project relate to psychometric testing of th e new computerized alcohol 
screening system based on the NIAAA guide . These include the following:  
1. Assess the sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values of the „any 
drinking/number of drinking days‟ and „friends‟ questions of the cA SCA in identifying past -year use 
as determined by the Timeline Follow -Back Calendar (TLFB), and for identifying any problem use, 
abuse or dependence as determined by the AUDIT, CRAFFT and a structured psychiatric 
diagnostic interview (computerized DISC -IV, Youth Version) at baseline (criterion validity).   
2. Assess the test -retest reliability of the cASCA in measuring drinking frequency categories and in 
classifying patients into Low, Medium and High risk categories.  
3. Assess the degree to which the „any drink ing/number of drinking days‟ and „friends‟ questions 
predict drinking, “binge” drinking, and any problem use, abuse or dependence at 12 -mos follow -
up.  
4. Assess the degree to which the „any drinking/number of drinking days‟ item of the cASCA predicts 
drug us e risk as measured by the TLFB (any use and frequency), tobacco use as measured by 
the Hooked on Nicotine Checklist (screen for potential nicotine dependence), drug use disorders 
as measured by the Drug Abuse Screening Test for Adolescents, and the degree to which it 
predicts other mental health problems as measured by the Pediatric Symptom Checklist -17 Youth 
self-report at baseline and 12 -month follow -up. 
5. Compare the psychometric properties of the cASCA  across subgroups, including: age, gender, 
race/ethnicity, practice type, provider type, and patient risks (e.g., those with/without friends who 
drink); and explore the possible effects of the cASCA system on drinking during the 12 -month 
follow -up period.  
 
Additionally, the NIAAA guide recommends that providers deliver a brief intervention in response to 
the screening results. Therefore, a secondary aim  of this project will be to pilot -test a computer -
facilitated Brief Intervention  (BI) component using a ra ndomized design comparing three groups: 1) 
11/13/2018   2 screening with treatment as usual and all follow -up assessments [cASCA/TAU -ALL]; 2) screening with 
brief intervention and referral to treatment [Computerized Screening, Brief Intervention, Referral to 
Treatment (C-SBIRT)  and; 3) a screening/TAU Minimal -Assessment arm in which participants will 
complete the screening and a minimal validation assessment at baseline, and no further assessments 
until the last follow -up at 12 months [cASCA/TAU -MA]. Because extensive a nd repeated assessment 
may itself help to change behavior, we have added this third arm to have a comparison group that 
minimizes this exposure. The BI component consists of patients viewing on the computer, 
immediately after the screening, their score and  level of risk for a substance use problem, as well as 
several interactive pages of science and true -life stories about the health risks of substance use. 
Clinicians are then given the screen results and suggested talking points for a few minutes of brief 
counseling during the visit. Finally, patients identified as having problematic substance use, as 
defined by any positive response on the RAFFT items of the CRAFFT screen and any past -12-month 
substance use,  will be given a “prescription” to complete a bri ef web -based computerized Motivational 
Enhancement Therapy (cMET) program and return for a follow -up visit in one month. The cMET 
program consists of exercises founded on Motivational Interviewing principles that are designed to 
enhance a teen’s intrinsic motivation to change their substance use. Participants will be asked to 
complete this program in two sessions from home or another private computer sometime within the 
subsequent month. In this pilot study, we will a ssess feasibility and acceptability of t he C -SBIRT 
system and estimate its effect size on underage drinking. Only participants ages 1 4-20 will be eligible 
to be randomized to receive the web -based cMET intervention, if screen -positive for problematic 
substance use. Participants ages 9 -11 will on ly complete the screening program and be randomized 
to either all TAU with all follow -up assessments or TAU -MA. Feasibility : rates of clinician provision of 
brief advice and referral to the cMET program; teen completion of the cMET exercises, cMET 
sessions  1 and 2; Acceptability : adolescent and provider satisfaction; Effect Size Estimate  1: We will 
examine effects separately for participants who report any past -12-month alcohol use at baseline and 
those who do not, as we fou nd in a prior study that the inte rvention effect can be quite different in 
these two groups . We will compare time to first alcohol use post -visit, and rates of alcohol use across 
the three study arms over the 12 -month follow -up period. Effect Size Estimate 2: compare  time to first 
use post -visit and  rates of alcohol use across three study arms over a 9 -month follow -up period for 
those screen -positive for problematic substance use: C -SBIRT + cMET vs. cMET only  vs. Control - 
cASCA/TAU -ALL. Hypothesis : Effect Size Estima te 1: Among 12 - to 18 -yr-old  primary care patients, 
those receiving C -SBIRT will have longer time to first alcohol use following their visit, lower rates of 
any alcohol use, days of alcohol use, drinks per drinking day, and days of he avy episodic drinking, 
than those receiving treatment as usual.  Effect Size Estimate 2: Among 14 -20-yr-old primary care 
patients, those receiving the cMET program will have longer time to first use pos t-visit, and lower 
rates of any alcohol use, days of al cohol use, drinks per drinking day and days of heavy episodic 
drinking, than those receiving treatment as usual.  
 
Pilot -testing of cMET by Behavioral Health Providers After initial pilot -testing which found low rates 
of cMET  completion among participants asked to complete it on their own after leaving their baseline 
visit, we now propose to conduct a small formative research project to explore the 
feasibility/acceptability of use of the cMET program by behavioral health clini cians in the primary care 
setting to provide a brief intervention to patients at high risk for a substance use disorder. The cMET 
program could help to promote intervention implementation fidelity, and, with its computer interactivity, 
may enhance patient interest and engagement in the session. There will be two methods of 
recruitment: 1) The program will be introduced to eligible participants by their behavioral health 
provider, and completed during two clinical appointments with this provider , and 2) pati ents on the 
Research Participant Registry at the Adolescent Medicine Clinic  who expressed willingness to be 
contacted for future studies and meet age -related eligibility criteria will receive information about the 
study and an invitation to participate via  email. If interested  and eligible , these patients will make an 
appointment with the behavioral health provider at the Adolescent Medicine Clinic  and complete the 
program during two clinical appointments with this provider. We will examine the following as 
indicators of feasibility and acceptability: 1) the number of invited participants that consent to 
11/13/2018   3 participate; 2) the rate of completion of each activity within each session; 3) the number that complete 
both program sessions; 4) participant feedback about  the cMET program and their visit on post -
session questionnaires; 5) time required to complete each session; and 6) a semi -structured 
debriefing interview with participating behavioral health providers at the end of the pilot project. We 
will use a continu ous improvement process throughout the project using feedback from patients, 
providers, and our research staff to identify an implementation model that is feasible and acceptable, 
and shows promise for testing in a subsequent efficacy trial.  
 
 
2. Backgrou nd and Significance   
The costs of treating substance use disorders in the US are estimated at over $6 billion annually19, 
Substance use usually begins during adolescence; thus, by identifying and treating substance use 
problems early, substantial cost savings may be achieved and product ive years of life gained. 
Universal screening of adolescents in primary care is a promising strategy for identifying substance 
use before more problems develop, and when brief interventions are more likely to be effective. There 
is substantial evidence sup porting the effectiveness of screening and brief intervention among adult 
primary care patients, primarily in the reduction of harmful drinking 2-8. It is still unknown, however, 
whether these findings can  be generalized to younger patients, as there have been few studies 
conducted to date among adolescents in primary care9. Substance use is highly prevalent among U.S. 
adolescents and strongly linked to the leading causes of death: accidents, homicides and suicides.1 It 
is also associated with a myriad of other serious health problems, making primary care medical offic es 
promising venues for screening and early intervention.1, 20 -23 Greater than ¾ of adolescents see a 
physician yearly, and have trusting, longitudinal relationships with their providers.24,25 Recognizing this 
opportunity, the American  Academy of Pediatrics  recommends that all adolescents receive substance 
use screening as part of routine care.26, 27 However, adherence to this guideline is poor: less than 50% 
of pediatricians report screening all adolescents for substance use28 and performed screenings are 
often of low quality, e.g., f ail to use a structured screening or ask questions about impaired driving 
risks.29,30, 31 Barriers identified by providers include lack of time and personnel to perform the 
screening, unfamiliarity with screening tools, lack of training in how to manage positive screens, and 
lack of effective interventions.15 The problem is compounded by the current paucity of scientific 
evidence. While recommending alcohol Screening, Brief Intervention and R eferral to Treatment 
(SBIRT) for adults, the U.S. Preventive Services Taskforce found that the “evidence is insufficient” to 
recommend for or against SBIRT for adolescents.9 Changing this situation requires the development 
and testing of new medical office strategies that increase the freq uency and quality of screenings, 
assist providers in managing screening results, do not impede clinic flow or add to providers‟ time, 
and are shown to be effective in reducing patients‟ substance use.32, 33 A validated computerized 
Alcohol Screening for Adolescents and Children (cASCA) based on the NIAAA alcohol screening and 
brief intervention guide for youth will provide an additional tool to address this need and has the 
potential to  reduce youth alcohol and drug use and associated health -risk behaviors, prevent serious 
conseq uences, and greatly lessen the later burdens of high treatment costs and human suffering .   
 
3. Preliminary Studies    
The PI and his investigative team have conducted a portfolio of research studies on medical office 
screening for adolescent substance abus e over the past 15 years. 10-16 We developed the CRAFFT22 
by combining similar items from the extant research literature, added the word “ever” to each question 
to enhance sensitivity to detect use, and expanded the scope of screening to include both alcohol and 
drugs, and tested the items among 99 adolesc ent clinic patients ages14 -18. We arranged the six 
items based on the first letters of key words in each item (Car, Relax, Alone, Forget, Family/Friends, 
Trouble), created the mnemonic acronym CRAFFT to aid recall of the items, and simplified the 
scoring ( score equals the number of “yes” responses). Convergence between the CRAFFT and 
scores on a similar but longer measure, PICS (Personal Involvement with Chemical Scale23), was 
high (r = 0.84). We then assessed criterion validity in a general adolescent clinic sample of 538 14 -18 
yr olds using  two criterion standards: the 17 -item Substance use/Abuse scale of the Problem -Oriented 
11/13/2018   4 Screening Instrument for Teenagers  24, a measure designed to assess problem SU and the potential 
need for treatment, and the Adolescent Diagnostic Interview (ADI),25 a structured diagnostic interview 
that yields DSM -IV diagnoses of alcohol/drug  abuse and dependence. Sensitivity/specificity analyses 
indicated that a CRAFFT score of 2 was the optimal cutpoint for identifying any problem use 
(sensitivity=0.76; specificity=0.94; positive predictive value [PPV]=0.83; negative predictive value 
[NPV]=0 .91), any disorder (sensitivity=0.80; specificity=0.86; PPV=0.53; NPV=0.96) and dependence 
(sensitivity=0.92; specificity=0.80; PPV=0.25; NPV=0.99). The CRAFFT score also demonstrated 
severity scale -like properties with the PPV increasing linearly with hig her CRAFFT score. Validity was 
not significantly affected by age, gender, or race/ethnicity.  
 
We next measured the prevalence of positive screens among >2000 12 -18-yr-old patients from a 
practice -based research network in New England,26 assessed teens‟ preferences for substance use 
screening (they favored computer or paper questionnaires),27 identified common barriers to provider 
screening, designed a computer -facilitated Screening and Brief Advice (cSBA) protocol in response, 
and compared it to Treatment As Us ual (TAU) among 2096 adolescents in the USA and 539 in the 
Czech Republic.28 The cSBA protocol doubled provider screening and brief advice rates in the USA 
and quadrupl ed them in the CZR. The cSBA system also showed promise for reducing adolescent 
substance use, particularly alcohol use in the USA and marijuana use in the CZR. As a result of this 
work, the CRAFFT screening and advice algorithm has become the standard of care for pediatric 
primary care practice and has been widely integrated into both print and online clinical encounter 
forms. It has been published in professional pediatric policy statements29and practice guides30-32, in 
the Bright Futures toolkit and encounter forms31, in textbooks33, 34, and review articles5, 35. It has been 
translated into more than 10 other languages including Chinese, Japanese, Haitian Creole, Czech3 
and Spanish.  
 
However, in one research study we found that some adolescents were confused by the questions if 
they had never used substances. We therefore added lifetime a nd past -12-month use questions and 
instituted a skip pattern for all but the CAR question in CRAFFT. We are currently conducting a small 
study to validate a brief -screen frequency item for drug use. Since the publication of the NIAAA Guide, 
we have planned  to modify our approach to make the two screening algorithms completely consistent 
with one another. In this project, we will validate both the peer use and drinking frequency quick -
screen items for alcohol use, which is more harmful to youth than all othe r drugs combined and for 
which our computerized SBA system showed large and significant effects.  
 
 
4. Design and Methods  
a. Study Design  
This is a prospective validation study which assesses test -retest reliability and concurrent and 
predictive validity over a 12 -month follow -up period. In addition, this is a pilot randomized controlled 
trial of a computer -facilitated brief intervention (C-SBIRT) to reduce alcohol use rates among 
adolescent primary care patients. All participants will complete the screening and baseline validation 
measures for the psychometric study. Participants  ages 12 -20 will then be randomized into  three 
study arms for t he randomized controlled trial: 1) screening with treatment as usual [cASCA/TAU]  
(n=595) ; 2) screening with the computer -facilitated Brief Intervention, Referral to Treatment [C -SBIRT]  
(n=850) ; and 3) a screening/TAU Minimal -Assessment arm (n=255) in which  participants will complete 
the screening and a minimal validation assessment at baseline, and no further assessments until the 
last follow -up at 12 months [cASCA/TAU -MA] (see study flow diagram).  Because extensive and 
repeated assessment may itself help t o change behavior, we have added this third arm to have a 
comparison group that minimizes this exposure. Participants ages 9 -11 will be randomized into 
cASCA/TAU and cASCA/TAU -MA only.  All participants will complete the final 12 -month follow -up 
while only those in the first two groups will complete the 3, 6, and 9 month follow -up assessments. In 
addition, to assess test -retest reliability, we will consecutively invite 150 participants to complete a re -
test of the screening program through secure web -based a ccess from home or other private computer 
11/13/2018   5 within 2 weeks of baseline. Test -retest participants will be asked to report on the same period at both 
baseline and re -test, so as to avoid their covering two different time periods in the test and retest.  We 
will exclude participants assigned to the “minimal -assessment” (cASCA/TAU -MA) and brief 
intervention arms from being invited to do the re -test, the first to minimize the number of assessments 
that the minimal -assessment arm completes, and the second because receipt of an intervention could 
change participants’ responses due to potential social desirability bias . This study will involve 
participants completing the consent/assent process and screening before the visit, which we 
anticipate will take no more than  10 min total, and the remaining baseline assessment after the visit. 
We have found in prior studies that this does not interfere with clinic flow. We also have a strong track 
record of working with clinic sites to meet their unique needs and our study rec ruitment goals. 
Participants will receive a $15 merchandise gift card for completion of the baseline visit, $10 for the 
retest, $10 each for the 3 -, 6-, and 9 -month assessments, and $ 15 for the 12 -month follow -up, or a 
maximum total ranging from $ 30 (basel ine and 12 -month only) to $70 (all possible assessments, 
including re -test).  
 
From  September 15, 2016  – January 27, 2017 , all participants were  invited to complete the Baseline 
Questionnaire, for which they were  compensated $15. However, only High -Risk participants 
(determined by screening to have problematic substance use) will be followed up and invited to 
complete 3 -, 6- and 9 -month questionnaires. Participants will receive $10 for the 3 - and 6 -month 
questionn aires and $15 for the 9 -month questionnaire. We no longer administer ed the retest .Thus, 
participants recruited during this phase can receive up to $50 for completing all portions of the study.  
 
High Risk participants were  randomized into the cASCA/TAU gro up, into the C -SBIRT/cMET group or 
into the cMET -only group. Compensation for participants who complete the cMET program is as 
follows: $15 gift card if they complete Session 1 in the clinic during the Baseline visit, or $10 if they 
complete Session 1 as h ome; $10 for Session 1; $15 for the one -month follow -up visit with their 
clinician, for a total of $35 -40 in addition to the$50 for the other study activities.  
 
 
Initial Pre -Test Phase:  Before beginning the full study, we will first pre -test our computeri zed 
screening and brief intervention program, as well as all study assessments in a small group of youth 
ages 9 -18 in order to assess clarity, comprehension, and functionality, and we will refine all materials 
as needed . We will invite up to 15 youth, or 5  from each age group: elementary school (ages 9 -11), 
middle school (ages 12 -14), and high school (ages 15 -18). We will recruit them from local schools and 
from participating clinics.  
 
Randomization Scheme:  In this multi -site study, the computerized Study Management System will 
randomly assign participants within each site to one of three study arms using a weighted  block 
scheme developed and successfully implemented in our previous studies.25 Block factors of gender, 
age group, and past -3-months heavy episodic drinking will be implemented, with randomly permuted 
block sizes, and weighted to the 35% cASCA/TAU -MA, 15% cASCA/TAU -ALL, and 50%  C-SBIRT , 
arm-proportion objectives of the study.69 This system ensures  balance across participant demographic 
factors and the three conditions in order to maximize efficiency in group comparisons, while 
maintaining investigation blindness prior to assignment.  
 
From  September 15, 2016  – January 27, 2017, participant follow -up was conditioned on their risk 
level for a substance use disorder, as determined by screening. All participants were  invited to 
complete the Baseline questionnaires. However, only High Risk participants (those determined to 
have problematic substance use ) will be invited to complete 3 -, 6- and 9 - month follow -up 
questionnaires. The study groups will be designed as follows:  
 
1) cASCA/TAU -MA – Treatment -as-Usual with Baseline Questionnaire only .  
11/13/2018   6 2) cASCA/TAU -ALL – Treatment -as-Usual with Baseline Questionnaire, 3 -, 6- and 9 -month 
follow -ups (to be completed on the computer or over the phone) . 
3) C-SBIRT + cMET – Computerized Screening and Brief Intervention, with Baseline 
Questionnaire, 3 -, 6- and 9 -month follow -ups (to be completed on the computer or over the 
phone). These patients will view their risk level and the brief intervention, as described above. 
In addition, they will be invited to complete the cMET program during the next month 
(described in more detail b elow). These participants will be asked to return for a follow -up visit 
with their clinician about one -month after the baseline visit.  
4) cMET only – Baseline Questionnaire, 3 -, 6- and 9 -month follow -ups (to be completed on the 
computer or over the phone). In  addition, the se partcipants  will be invited to complete the 
cMET program during the next month (described in more detail below). These participants will 
be asked to return for a follow -up visit with their clinician about one -month after the baseline 
visit. 
 
b. Patient Selection  
We will recruit approximately 30 primary care providers from offices affiliated with the New England 
Partnership for Substance Abuse Research (NEPSAR), and a youth sample, using age by gender 
stratification, of 1700 nine - to 20 -y/o primary care patients coming for routine primary care at one of 
the participating physicians‟ offices.  The broad age range covers the screening groups in the NIAAA 
guide – late elementary school (ages 9 -11), middle school (ages 12 -14), and high school (age s 15-
20). We are extending our recruitment age group to include those 19- to 20  years old as they 
constitute a pediatric primary care patient population with a high prevalence of hazardous alcohol use, 
and would thus benefit from a brief MET intervention a ddressing problematic alcohol use. Eligible 
patients must have an email address and internet access at home, school, or library, and must 
provide informed assent/consent. We will exclude any who are unable to read or understand English, 
living away at coll ege at the time of the recruitment visit, unavailable for computer/telephone follow -
ups, or judged by the provider to be medically or emotionally unstable at time of visit.  Adolescents do 
not have to have ever used substances to participate. NEPSAR is a pr actice -based research network 
founded by Dr. Knight in 2003. NEPSAR has recently affiliated with the Pediatric Practices of 
Children‟s Hospital Boston (PPOC), comprising  75 pediatrician offices in eastern Massachusetts with 
more than 200 physicians who car e for more than 300,000 infants, children, and adolescents.  We 
have also added the Children‟s Hospital Primary Care Center, which includes 30 providers and 
42,000 visits per year, and with an estimated 5000 patients 9 -18 years old. The greatest threat to 
validity of studies such as this one is slow recruitment and  inadequate sample size. Over the course 
of our previous research we have successfully recruited more than 30 outpatient practices, 100 
primary care providers, and more than 6,000 adolescents. Practices have included the spectrum of 
places adolescents rece ive routine care: adolescent clinics, general pediatrician offices, family 
medicine offices, and school -based health centers. We will work with providers who see on average at 
least eight nine - to 18 -y/o patients/week and provide informed consent to partic ipate in this study. We 
will exclude medical students, residents, and fellows from the study as we have found in a prior study 
that the provider brief advice intervention was less effective when delivered by less experienced 
clinicians.17 
 
We will advertis e the study through posters and brochures in clinic waiting rooms as a “Substance 
Use Prevention Study”, clearly indicating youth need never to have used alcohol or drugs to be 
eligible. The site Research Assistant (RA) will compare the clinic appointment list with an age -by-
gender recruitment table, flag the records of potential participants and mail introductory letters about 
one month before their visit describing the study purpose and procedures and confidentiality 
protections to both adolescents and pa rents/guardians.  The RAs will then call them within two weeks 
prior to the visit, briefly describe the study and invite interested youth to arrive at the clinic at least 30 
minutes before their scheduled visit. Upon arrival, we will obtain informed assent/ consent . If time 
allows, we will also approach eligible patients in the waiting room before their visit. For those <12 
years -of-age we will obtain parental consent and adolescent assent. For those 12 -17 years -of-age we 
11/13/2018   7 will obtain informed assent but are r equesting a waiver of parental permission. We will obtain informed 
consent from all 18 -20 year old participants.  
 
c. Study Treatments and Exposures/Predictors  
Upon assent/consent, all participants will self -complete the computerized Alcohol Screening for 
Children and Adolescents (cASCA) prior to seeing their provider (see attached Study Flow Diagram). 
The cASCA program begins with age -dependent screen questions which determine participant risk 
level. Participants randomized to the C-SBIRT  arm will then view a) their screening score and  risk 
level,  and (b) several interactive web pages of science and true -life stories about substance use risks, 
all of which we have found in previous studies to take less than 5 minutes. Additionally, (c) provide rs 
will be given their screening results and bullet points to guide 2 -3 minutes of brief counseling, and, (d) 
if the patient has problematic substance use, as defined by any positive response on the RAFFT 
items of the CRAFFT screen and any past -12-month su bstance use , s/he will receive  a referral to a 2 -
session computer motivational enhancement therapy (cMET) intervention available on the secure 
website www.myvyou.com . Patients can complete these sessions in the clinic or on a computer at 
home. A stylized picture or “avatar” of the provider will  guide the patient through the activities on the 
program. Patients randomized to the cASCA/TAU or cASCA/TAU -MA conditions will c omplete only 
the screening questions before their visit, and their provider will not receive the  computerized screen 
results. However, many providers already conduct screening  and provide  brief advice and arrange 
follow -up as part of routine practice so pa rticipants in the TAU conditions may receive some of the 
same information during the visit as those in the C -SBIRT group.  
 
Description of the cMET Intervention : Motivational Enhancement Therapy (MET) is a type of 
structured intervention infused with the pr inciples and techniques of Motivational Interviewing (MI), a 
client -centered, semi -directive counseling style that is characterized by collaboration, compassion and 
accurate empathy, acceptance and affirmation, and evocation of a client’s own values and id eas (“MI 
Spirit”). The flow of a MI -based intervention typically consists of first “engaging” a client in a working 
alliance based on trust and partnership, assessing and reviewing the concern, followed by a 
“focusing” of the alliance towards client -center ed change goals (“setting the agenda”), using an 
“evoking” communication style throughout (e.g., asking open -ended questions, using reflective 
listening, “rolling with resistance” and avoiding argument). Throughout the consultation, periodic 
summarization of the discussion helps to reinforce the client -centered nature of the discussion, and 
information/ advice  can be offered when the client invites it or gives permission. This relational 
foundation then serves as the platform on which the following core MI/M ET strategies (or change 
mechanisms) are implemented: 1) helping clients review their values and life goals, and pros and 
cons of continuing substance use, with the aim of “developing a discrepancy” between their goals and 
their substance use, and of creat ing a “decisional balance” tilted toward recognition of the costs of 
use; 2) eliciting clients’ own “change talk” or reasons, and self -efficacy, for behavior change; and 3) 
creating a specific change plan for each goal. These MI strategies align with widel y-known theoretical 
models of behavior influence, i.e., the Health Belief Model, Social Cognitive Theory, and Trans -
Theoretical Model (TTM) of Change, in which key mediators of behavior change include perceptions 
about problem severity and the value of har m reduction (“importance”), perceptions about self -efficacy 
for change (“confidence”) and barriers to action, and expectancies about the outcomes of the change. 
These factors contribute to the “stage of change,” as outlined in the TTM, at which a client ma y 
present (e.g., “pre -contemplation” or “action”), which can both moderate the effectiveness of MET, 
and change in response to MET.  
 
Our MET approach involves sequential completion of highly -structured therapeutic tools over two 
sessions over 2 -4 weeks.  To develop our initial clinician -delivered MET we made substantial 
adaptations to strategies proven effective among adults, including assessment and feedback, 
negotiation and goal setting, decisional balance, creating a goals -behavior discrepancy, and follo w-up 
and reinforcement.  Our adaptation involved creating structured tools and exercises that cover risks 
and problems more relevant to adolescents (e.g., school issues, parent and family concerns), are fun 
11/13/2018   8 and engaging, and that provide concrete prompts a nd visualization of options as teens may have 
more difficulty with abstract thinking. For example, the “Values Card Sort” is one such tool which was 
designed to help develop a discrepancy between teens’ goals/values and their substance use 
behavior. In thi s exercise, adolescents are given a stack of cards on which are written different “goals” 
or “values” such as “To go to college” or “To have a lot of money.” They then sort the cards into 
“extremely important to me,” “not important to me,” and “not sure” p iles. The clinician then reviews the 
“extremely important” values with patients in a discussion about whether substance use aligns or 
conflicts with their values.We adapted the clinician -delivered MET to be self -administered on the 
computer (cMET). We have  given the cMET program the “brand” name “ myVYou,” a more teen -
friendly name that denotes its use as a tool for “re -view-ing” one’s goals and behaviors.  
 
Below is an outline of the exercises included in the myVYou program, and descriptions of some 
activities and language used:  
 
Session 1  
 
Introductory Pages:  myVYou begins with a welcome page providing an introduction to the program 
and navigation instructions.  This is followed by a section of pages called “What Do I Like?” where 
teens can personali ze myvYOU by choosing an avatar to represent themselves and identifying 
interests, hobbies, pets, sports, extracurricular activities and future college/career plans. The last few 
introductory pages establish an understanding of treatment by 1) explaining t he purpose of myVYou 
(“to explore together the impact that tobacco, alcohol, or drugs may be having on your life and 
health”); 2) explaining the limits of confidentiality (“all information is confidential unless we detect a 
serious safety risk”); and 3) ex plain the ground rules of the therapeutic alliance (“any decision to 
change is up to you”). The clinician’s avatar appears on each screen and gives instructions and 
feedback as the patient goes through the program.  
 
Exercise #1:  “What’s Important to Me?”  Patients are presented with a set of swirling “cards,” each 
with a brief phrase describing a value or goal (i.e. “To get into a good college,” “To be trustworthy,” 
“To do well in sports”) and one -by-one “grabs” them with their mouse and places them in one of three 
possible piles – “Very important to me,” “Somewhat important to me,” “Not important to me.” They 
then indicate whether their substance use helps or interferes with reaching each of the goals they 
chose as “Very important.”  
 
Exercise 2:   “Pros & Cons” A teen is shown balancing on a skateboard while, one at a time, paper 
airplanes fly in from either side and open up to reveal a “Pro” of use (i.e. “Drinking helps me relax,” 
“Marijuana helps me forget my problems”) or a “Con” (i.e. “I get sick or fe el hung over when I drink,” 
“Marijuana makes me lazy.”). (Fig. 3) Patients check those that apply to them and the airplanes land 
on the ground in the “Pro” pile or the “Con” pile. The clinician avatar comments on the relative size of 
the piles (“Wow, it lo oks like the cons outweigh the pros.”) Pros and cons are presented separately for 
each substance.  
 
Exercise 3: “Draw the Line” Patients see a female teen with a can of spray paint standing in front of a 
wall with a line painted on it. The clinician avatar  asks them to choose a number between 0 -10 
indicating how important it is for them to change their use, after which the girl paints the number on 
the wall. The clinician avatar then asks “Why didn’t you choose a lower number?” and  patients choose 
a suggest ed response or type in their own. The next screen has a male teen asking how confident 
they are that they can change their use , again prompting a choice between 0 -10.  
 
Exercise 4: “What Have I Experienced?” Patients are presented with scenes of a city str eet, a school, 
inside a house, and a park and field. Clicking on a red square by a specific picture opens a box with a 
brief phrase describing a scenario, i.e. “Fighting with parents,” “Getting kicked off a sports team or 
11/13/2018   9 club.” Patients click a box to say  they have experienced this, and  at the end of the exercise they are 
shown all the scenarios they endorsed.  
 
Exercise 5: “Take 2” In this tool, the clinician avatar invites patients  to make a “Change Plan .” Patients 
are then shown a set of colored fan bla des which open up to reveal lists of activities and people that 
could support their plan. They check a box for those they would find helpful or type in their own idea. 
Those not ready to make a change plan are asked to consider possible situations that wou ld indicate 
a need to change .   
 
Session 2  
 
“Take 2” Review : Patients review their initial change plan, enter information about successes and 
setbacks, have an opportunity to enter revised goals and plans and again choose people and 
activities to support their plans. As in Session 1, those not ready to make a chang e are asked to 
consider possible situations that would indicate a need to do so. Clinicians are again notified by 
myVYou of their patient’s session completion, they review the completed work, and send a response 
back to the patient."  
 
Participants who are randomized to the cMET intervention will receive a $15 gift card for completing 
Session 1 in the clinic, or a $10 gift card for completing Session  1 outside of the clinic. They will 
receive $10 for completing Session 2 outside of the clinic and $15 for ret urning to the clinic for a 1 -
month follow -up appointment with their clinician.  cMET intervention participants can therefore receive 
an additional $ 35-40 in gift cards for their participation.  
 
 
Pilot -testing of cMET by Behavioral Health Providers  
This formative research project  will involve patients in the Boston Children’s Hospital 
Adolescent/Young Adult Medical Practice that are referred for behavioral health services  or recruited 
through the Research Participant Registry at the Adolescent Medicine Cl inic. Participant eligibility 
requirements include: 1) being ages 12 -20 yrs, 2) able to read and understand English, 3) used any 
substance in the past month, and 4) medically and emotionally stable at time of visit as determined by 
their clinician. During a visit, participating behavioral health providers will ask whether an eligible 
patient would be interested in learning about a research study in which they will try out and give 
feedback about a computer program (called “ myVYou”) over 2 visits, and then will provide them with 
an information flyer. If the patient is interested, the provider will ask him/her to arrive 15 minutes early 
to their next appointment so that a research study assistant can meet them, provide more information 
about the study and con fidentiality protections, and obtain written assent from patients ages 12 -17 or 
informed consent from patients aged 18 -20. We currently have an IRB -approved waiver of parental 
consent for patients aged 12 -17 years.  
 
During the initial visit for all partic ipants, providers will conduct substance use screening using a tablet 
computer program, entering responses directly into the program. This information will automatically be 
imported into the myVYou program which will be tailored to address each patient’s s ubstance(s) used.  
At each of the two study visits, the provider will log -in to the secure study website ( www.myVYou.org ) 
and guide the patient through the completion of each exercise, with discussion and reflection at  each 
step. Participants will be scheduled for the second session to occur within 4 weeks. Prior to the 
second visit, providers will be able to log -in to the myVYou website to review patients’ responses to 
exercises during the first session.  At completion  of each visit, participants will complete a brief paper 
questionnaire about their impressions of the program and visit, and receive a $ 30 merchandise gift 
(Amazon or Target) card (for a total of $ 60 for both visits).  
 
 
d. Definition of Primary and Secondary Outcomes/Endpoints  
11/13/2018   10 Our primary outcomes/endpoints will be the following: 1) cASCA screening sensitivity, specificity, 
positive and negative predictive values in identifying current (baseline), and risk for future (12  months 
later), tobacco, alcohol, drug use prevalence, frequency and severity (as measured by the Timeline 
Follow -Back Calendar interview, the Hooked on Nicotine Checklist, the Alcohol Use Disorders 
Identification Test, the CRAFFT screen, the NIMH Diagnost ic Interview Schedule for Children -IV, and 
the Drug Abuse Screening Test for Adolescents); and 2) test -retest reliability measured within 2 
weeks.  
 
In addition, our secondary outcomes will be 1) determination of C -SBIRT’s acceptability and feasibility 
for use with adolescent primary care patients and providers, and 2) estimation of an initial effect size 
comparing C -SBIRT vs. TAU rates of past -90-day alcohol use at 3 -, 6-, and 9 -month follow -ups. 
Specifically, we will examine rates of any initiation or ces sation of alcohol use, days of alcohol use, 
drinks per drinking day, and days of heavy episodic drinking.  Secondary outcomes will include 
initiation and cessation of any alcohol use, “binge” drinking, and substance -related driving (for those 
of driving age ) and riding (all ages) at each follow -up. 
 
Pilot -testing of cMET by Behavioral Health Providers   
We will examine the following as indicators of feasibility and acceptability: 1) the number of invited 
participants that consent to participate; 2) the rate of completion of each activity within each session; 
3) the number that complete both program session s; 4) participant feedback about the cMET program 
and their visit on post -session questionnaires; 5) time required to complete each session; and 6) a 
semi -structured debriefing interview with participating behavioral health providers at the end of the 
pilot project. We will use a continuous improvement process throughout the project using feedback 
from patients, providers, and our research staff to identify an implementation model that is feasible 
and acceptable, and shows promise for testing in a subsequen t efficacy trial.  
e. Data Collection Methods, Assessments and Schedule  
Recruitment Data:  Using a computer -based recruitment form, we will record the date of the visit and 
patient‟s date of birth (the computer calculates age and then deletes the DOB); gend er; grade in 
school; race/ethnicity; socioeconomic status (number of parents living in the household and highest 
educational level of parent(s)); the name of the visit provider; the reason for the visit (i.e., well care, 
urgent care, follow -up visit, other ), and patient status (i.e., established vs. new patient for that 
practice). The form will note any reasons for study exclusion, the response to the invitation to 
participate, and any reasons for refusal, and ask those who are ineligible and those who refu se for 
permission to keep these data. We will later use these data to identify possible differences between 
the study population and groups of excluded and refusing patients.  
 
Contact Information:  The contact information, including at least three telephone  numbers (home, 
work, cell, parent cell/work, or friend cell/home), mailing address, and email addresses. The study 
management system will store the contact information in a separate encrypted “logbook” file, 
which will not be part of the study data file, but will be used to schedule and conduct follow -up 
measurements.  
 
Baseline Assessment Battery: Following completion of the cASCA, all C -SBIRT and 
cASCA/TAU -ALL participants will complete a baseline study assessment battery consisting of the 
following widel y-used, validated measures described below. We have selected economical 
measures and scales to promote the likelihood of study participation, minimize the risk of the study 
interfering with clinic flow, and to make follow -up data collection easier, thereby  aiding study 
retention. All measures will be self -administered on the computer, with an audio -assisted version 
available (with headphones), except for the Timeline Follow -Back Calendar interview which will be 
conducted by trained research assistants. Part icipants are free to skip questions they do not want 
to answer. They will be prompted twice by the computer to complete a skipped item, and then 
11/13/2018   11 allowed to proceed to the next item if they try to skip a third time. The cASCA and baseline 
assessment battery  will be administered in a private location at the clinic.  
x Brief Substance Use History questionnaire  (3-6 min completion time depending on extent of use) :  
o The assessment battery will begin with a brief self -administered, branching questionnaire 
that separately records any (yes/no) lifetime, past -12-months, and past -3-months use of 
alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and other drugs. In addition, for each substance ever used, 
we will ask for age of first use.   
o We will ask the Marijuana Source Items in order t o examine changes in marijuana source 
which may impact accessibility and usage rates. We will also ask questions about 
electronic vapor products because there is  more and more reported use of these products 
among participants.  
x Timeline Follow Back Calendar  (TLFB) (5 -15 min completion time depending on use) : Trained 
research assistants (RA) will then confidentially conduct with all participants a past -12-months 
Timeline Follow -Back (TLFB) interview assessing the number of days used, and amount used on 
those days, of alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, non -medical use of Rx/OTC medications, and other 
drugs. We considered separately recording each illicit drug (e.g., MDMA, cocaine), but rejected 
this because of low use rates in our previous studies and the additional time required. The TLFB is 
a reliable and valid calendar -based data collection method, generally conducted by personal 
interview, used extensively in substance use studies of both adults and adolescents to measure 
self-reported frequency and quantity of su bstance use during a defined time period.16, 60 -64 By 
utilizing a calendar and specific memory aids to enhance recall, it can generate relatively precise 
estimates of us e of each substance assessed. We will use the TLFB as the criterion standard to 
test the validity of responses to the screening item on drinking days, and will be able to determine 
the number of “binge” drinking days (as defined by the NIAAA age - and gende r-specific 
guidelines). One or two sips of alcoholic drinks taken during family or organized religious events 
(e.g., communion) will not be recorded. RA training to conduct the interview will include reading of 
instructional materials, observation of a vid eotaped demonstration, and a series of practice 
interviews with observation and feedback until a prescribed level of competence is achieved. 
Throughout the recruitment period, study investigators will periodically observe and use structured 
forms to rate R As on interview technique. RAs who fail to achieve an acceptable rating will receive 
retraining and increased monitoring.  
x Substance Use Severity measures (15 -20 min depending on severity) : Patients reporting any 
alcohol  use on the TLFB will also complete t he 1) Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test13, 65 -70 
(10 items) and 2) CRAFFT screen10, 12, 13 (6 items) to identify any problem use (with or without a 
diagnosis); and the 3) Alcohol Abuse/Dependence Module of the computerized, audio -assisted, 
self-interview NIMH Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children -IV (Voice C -DISC IV), Youth 
Version71, 72 to identify alcohol abuse or dependence. These three mea sures will serve as criterion 
standards for examining the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative 
predictive value of the 2 -item cASCA in predicting problem alcohol use or alcohol disorders. We 
chose the C -DISC -IV because of its a ppropriateness for youth as young as 9 yrs old. Additionally, 
participants reporting any tobacco  use on the TLFB will complete the 10 -item Hooked on Nicotine 
Checklist73-76, while those reporting any drug use will complete the 28 -item Drug Abuse Screening 
Test-Adolescent (DAST -A)77, 78, both brief measures of substance use severity.  
x The Importance/Confidence of Change questions and the Contemplation Ladder (1 -2 minutes): 
These measures will allow us to  assess whether our cMET  intervention affects patient ratings of 
the importance of changing their substance use behavior, their level of confidence to change their 
behavior,  and their readiness to change.  
x Personal Consequences of Substance Use questions (1 -2 minutes): Previous st udies of brief 
interventions to address adolescent substance use found that substance use -related 
consequences tended to decline more than substance use consumption outcomes. This measure 
will assess substance use -related consequences.  
x Perceived Availabili ty/ Perceived Risk of Harm  (3-5 minutes):  These questions come from the 
national Monitoring the Future survey and will allow us to compare our sample's data to national 
11/13/2018   12 data.  
x Riding/Driving Risk  (5 min): All participants will complete a 10 -item measure on past-90-day 
Riding with an impaired driver, or Driving while impaired (if driving age). If any Riding risk is 
reported, participants will be asked about the characteristics of the impaired driver (Someone who 
lives with you? (yes/no), A member of your fami ly? (yes/no), An older adult? (yes/no), Someone 
close to your age? (yes/no)), but purposely avoid asking any identifying information to protect the 
privacy of parents/legal guardians or other potential secondary subjects.  
x Peer Chemical Environment (2 min):  To assess construct validity of the “friends‟ drinking” item on 
the screening questions , we will administer a 5 -item self -report measure derived from the widely 
used Personal Experience Inventory (PEI)45. Respondents are asked to agree or disagree (4 -point 
Likert  response scale) with 5 statements about their peers‟ alcohol and drug attitudes and 
involvement (e.g., “The kids I hang around with think it‟s okay for kids to drink alcohol” and “Some 
kids I hang around with have trouble at school due to using drugs or a lcohol”). 
x Sibling Substance Use  (2 min) : Also from the PEI, these 4 items assess the alcohol and drug 
involvement of brothers and sisters (e.g., “I have a brother or sister who uses alcohol or drugs with 
me”). 
x Family Pathology (5 min) : This 8 -item scale fr om the PEI measures family problems and 
parents‟/guardians‟ alcohol/drug use (e.g., “I have a parent who gets drunk or high” and “I have a 
parent whose use of alcohol or other drugs worries me”).  
x Behavioral and Mental Health:  To assess the sensitivity/spec ificity of the screen in identifying 
youth with behavior problems and other psychiatric disorders (e.g., externalizing disorders, 
internalizing disorders, ADHD), we will administer the Pediatric Symptom Checklist – 17, Youth 
self-report version. This is a 3-minute 17 -item measure that is a validated and widely -used 
screening measure for child and adolescent psychiatric disorders . 
x Modified Heartland Forgiveness Scale and questions to identify spirituality/religiosity (2-4 
minutes): In a prior cross -sectional  study, of about 300 adolescent primary care patients, we found 
that, among multiple religiosity and spirituality measures, forgiveness had  the strongest 
association with decreased adolescent alcohol use. The current study, with its much larger sample 
size, will allow us to determine replicability of this finding, as well as examine the effect 
prospectively.  
 
 
Post -Visit Checklist: To assess t he degree to which screening and brief intervention is being 
implemented by providers during a visit, participants in all groups will be asked to complete a brief 2 -
min post -visit checklist immediately following their provider encounter documenting what qu estions 
about alcohol and other drugs they were asked by their provider, and what advice or counseling they 
received.  
 
 
Test-Retest:  To assess test -retest reliability of the cASCA items, during the first three months of 
recruitment we will recruit up to 1 50 participants from the cASCA/TAU -ALL arm  only (block -stratified 
by age group [9 -11, 12 -15, 16 -18, 19 -20] and gender) to complete the cASCA (reporting on the same 
12-month time period as at baseline) by logging into the secure study website no later than two weeks 
from their baseline assessment. Research assistants (RA) will contact participants by email and 
phone one week after their baseline visit prompting them to complete the retest within the week. The 
email will provide the secure link to the questio nnaire, and the unique user ID and password for 
logging in. If a participant does not have an email address, s/he will be called with the log -in 
information. We will make reminder calls to participants who have not yet completed the retest within 
3 days of  the email. We will continue sampling and recruitment until we have 150 retest completions. 
Participants will also complete a computerized self -administered past -12-months TLFB at this time 
which will allow us to assess agreement between RA interview and c omputer self -administration 
modes. If we find high agreement between responses on the computerized self -administered TLFB 
11/13/2018   13 and the baseline RA interview, we will use the computerized self -administered TLFB rather than a 
phone interview for follow -up data co llection. The self -administered mode offers greater privacy, and 
prior studies have indicated that adolescents may under -report substance use in phone interviews 
compared to computer -assisted self -interviewing (CASI) or self -administered paper -pencil surve ys.80-
83 If we find inadequate agreement between the RA interview and computer self -administered modes, 
we will use RA interviews to collect follow -up TLFB data to maintain mode homogeneity.  
 
Beginning September 15, 2016 , we will no longer be administering the Test -Retest to participants.  
 
Follow -up Assessments: We will collect data on alcohol, tobacco, and other drug use 
frequency/quantity during the 12 -month follow -up period using the TLFB. The TLFB administration 
mode (computer self -administered or phone interview) used will be determined by the results of the 
initial comparison of the interview and computer self -administered modes (see Test -Retest section 
above).  In addition to the TLFB, a ll of our follow -up assessments to reflect our baseline assessment 
battery, so that data can be compared across all measurement time points . If we use phone 
interviews, w e will use procedures to minimize risks to confidentiality and/or validity in telephone 
interviews (e.g., setting advance appointments so adolescents can be in a private place), and RAs will 
begin the phone interview with questions that assess level of privacy (e.g., “Where are you right now? 
Who else is there with you? Can anyone overhear our conversation?”) to complete a past -90-day 
TLFB, as well as the Riding/Driving Risk items, at 3, 6, and 9 months. If a participant misses one of 
these follow -ups, the next assessment will ask about the entire time period from the last TLFB 
completion; e.g., if a participan t does not complete the 3 -month TLFB, the 6 -month TLFB will ask 
about the entire 6 -month time period since the baseline assessment . The 3 -, 6-, and 9-month follow -
up assessments will help us to maintain ongoing contact with the participants so as to enhanc e their 
retention in the study out to 12 months, and will also help to maximize accuracy and completeness of 
data over the 12 -month follow -up by giving us multiple opportunities to reach a participant during the 
follow -up period. The every -3-months assessm ents will also allow us to collect data, whenever 
possible, using shorter recall periods. We have previously shown 90 days to be a reliable recall period 
for adolescents (Levy S et al., ACER, 2004;28(8):1256 -1261).  At 12 months follow -up, participants will  
complete the same assessment battery as at baseline.  The contact schedule for 3, 6, 9 and 1 year 
follow -ups is outlined below:  
Day 0: Initial Patient email and text message about follow -up assessment  due 
If no response, the following are sent until assessment is completed:  
Day 3: Reminder  Patient email and SMS ; Parent email  
Day 5: RA phone call  
Day 9: Reminder  Patient email and SMS  
Day: 11: RA phone call  
Day 15: Reminder Patient email and SMS ; Parent email  
Day 17: RA phone call  
Day 21: Last reminder  Patient email and SMS  
Day 23 -30: RA phone calls as needed  
11/13/2018   14 Beginning September 15, 2016, we will shift to a 3 -, 6- and 9 -month follow -up schedule for High -Risk 
patients; Low - and Medium -Risk patients will not be followed up. Efforts to retain these participants 
will adhere to the same follow -up contact schedule as outlined above.  
 
Pilot -testing of cMET by Behavioral Health Providers  
Participants will be be asked to complete the cMET program during two clinic visits with  a behavioral 
health provider. They will receive a reminder phone call prior to each scheduled visit. If required visits 
have not been scheduled or a scheduled appointment is missed, attempts to follow -up with the 
participants will be made via alternating emails or phone calls every 4 d ays for a total of three weeks, 
at which point they will be considered lost to follow -up. Once both cMET sessions and the follow -up 
questionnaires are complete, no additional follow -up will be required.  
User experience and acceptability/feasibility:  
Adolescents.  Participants receiving cMET will complete a brief user feedback survey about the 
program immediately after completion of each cMET session , which assesses their user experience 
and satisfaction with the program (e.g., clarity of instructions, ease of use, overall liking of the 
design/animation, respectfulness, usefulness, most positive and negative aspects, suggestions for 
improvement). In addition, we will record any questions or problems users have as they go through 
the cMET  program, and the  program will automatically record 1) time to complete each exercise and 
the session as a whole; 2) which MET tools/components were completed; and 3) all the selections 
made by the participant during the exercise including their importance and confidence r atings; their 
change goals, if any; and the number and types of strategies and supports for change included on the 
change plan. At the 9 -month measurement we will also ask adolescents to give overall feedback on 
helpfulness, and satisfaction with, the cMET  system as a whole, including the provider -patient 
communication system and monthly messages.  
 
Providers.  At the end of recruitment, we will ask providers to complete a brief exit questionnaire 
which assesses their demographics (gender, type of provider [ attending, nurse practitioner, physician 
assistant, etc.], years of practice), experience with using the cASCA and cMET programs, how they 
tended to use the screening results, if at all; the advice they usually gave their patients, if any; and 
their usual follow -up plan for patients in the TAU arm.  
 
Pilot -testing of cMET by Behavioral Health Providers  
As noted above, adolescent participants will complete a substance use screening questionnaire 
during their visit with the behavioral health provider. They wil l also complete demographics questions, 
and a brief user feedback paper questionnaire after completion of each study visit, which assesses 
their user experience and satisfaction with the program (e.g., clarity of instructions, ease of use, 
overall liking o f the design/animation, respectfulness, usefulness, most positive and negative aspects, 
suggestions for improvement). The program will automatically record 1) time to complete each 
exercise and the session as a whole; 2) which MET tools/components were com pleted; and 3) all the 
selections made by the participant during the exercise including their importance and confidence 
ratings; their change goals, if any; and the number and types of strategies and supports for change 
included on the change plan . We will  also conduct a semi -structured debriefing interview with 
participating behavioral health providers after each cMET session and at the end of the pilot project.  
 
g. Study Timeline  
 
Phase 1:  During Phase 1 of this project (10/1/13 -5/31/14), we will develop all necessary study 
materials, including all computer programs, such as the c -ASCA program and study management 
system. In addition, we will identify and work with all of our partner clinic  sites to create a feasible 
implementation plan, obtain all IRB approvals needed for the study, and hire and train all research 
staff. Finally, we will conduct a pre -testing of all study materials with a small sample of 15 youth (5 
elementary, middle, and high school students) prior to beginning fully study implementation.  
 
11/13/2018   15 Phase 2:  Before recruitment begins, we will hold orientation meetings at each practice, explain the 
purpose and procedures of the study, and obtain informed consent. We will provide a on e-session 
training to providers at each practice that includes a demonstration of the computer program, a review 
of a sample Provider Report, and viewing a video that shows a pediatrician giving 2 -3 min of brief 
advice to a patient using the provided talki ng points.  Patient recruitment and measurement will then 
continue throughout Phase 2 (6/1/14 -1/31/1 7). 
 
5. Adverse Event Criteria and Reporting Procedures  
Given the nature of the study, we anticipate few if any adverse events. We could receive complaints 
related to the time spent on study measurements or visits, or undesired clinical outcomes 
(alcohol/drug use or other risk behaviors), which would not be dir ectly due to the interventions under 
study. If we determine during the course of the study that an adolescent or someone else is at serious 
risk of harm, we will notify the provider per the Safety Protocol. (See below.) We do not anticipate any 
serious adv erse events, such as medical complications or deaths, as a result of this study. It is 
possible that a death or occasional emergency room visit or hospitalization will occur, however, it is 
highly unlikely that any of these will be study -related. Nonethele ss, we will establish an ad -hoc study 
Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB), to review any serious alcohol -related motor vehicle 
crashes, injuries, emergency room visits, hospitalizations, arrests, or deaths, should they occur. Dr. 
Grace Chang, an addict ion psychiatrist with expertise in substance abuse treatment, will chair the 
DSMB, and the DSMB will include representatives from the participating NEPSAR practices. We will 
report any serious adverse events immediately to Dr. Chang for review and to the C hildren‟s Hospital 
Boston Committee on Clinical Investigations (IRB) and the IRB of the involved site. We will summarize 
AEs and SAEs in the annual report to NIH, but notify NIH project officers immediately if the DSMB or 
IRB judges any SAE to be study -related.  
 
Safety Protocol: We have established a structured safety protocol to further protect participants‟ 
welfare. We define an emergency  safety risk as one where the participant reports an intention to 
harm self or others. In an emergent situation, the R A will immediately end the study procedures and 
notify a medical care provider that the participant may be a danger. We anticipate few emergency 
safety risks in the proposed study; however a patient could spontaneously reveal suicide risk which 
would trigg er the safety protocol. We define a non-emergency  safety risk as one in which the 
participant reports high levels of substance use, such as drinking twice the binge amount for their age 
category, daily use of alcohol or marijuana, use of a drug other than marijuana on more than six 
occasions, or three or more episodes of Driving/Riding, during the past -3-months. In non -emergency 
situations, the RA may allow the participant to complete the measurement but must notify the 
provider, site PI, or Dr. Knight with in 1 working day. The provider or PI will review the case and 
determine if further evaluation or treatment is necessary. We will not ask questions about child abuse 
or neglect during our study measurements or provider brief advice sessions. However, if a p articipant 
spontaneously reports this information to study personnel, we will report the information to the 
provider, who will conduct a further assessment, and notify child protection authorities as appropriate 
and required by state law. We will review th is safety protocol with all site PIs, providers and site 
personnel at the study orientation and during monthly Steering Committee conference calls.  
 
We will train all RAs in the safety protocol during initial and periodic training -review meetings. As part 
of the informed assent/consent process, the RA will inform youth that, in the event of a safety risk, we 
will notify the provider or site Principal I nvestigator (PI), who will speak with them further. The provider 
or site PI may in turn decide to inform the participant‟s parent(s) of safety risks or the need for 
specialty treatment. We inform youth that we cannot make absolute assurances or provide the m with 
specific guidelines on parental notification. We explain that these decisions must be individualized and 
based on the best clinical judgment of their provider at the time. We do assure youth that we will make 
every effort to inform them whenever par ental notification of a safety risk is required, and to include 
them in a discussion regarding the exact details to be released.  Although parents could legally 
demand the release of study information for minor participants, in our previous research with ov er 
11/13/2018   16 5000 adolescents, we have had only one such request. In this instance the PI, Dr. Knight, met with 
the parent, explained the risks of a breach of confidentiality, and offered the parent a comprehensive 
substance use evaluation as an alternative, which t he parent accepted. We have  obtain ed a 
Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of Health to provide additional protection for 
participants. This certificate protects the investigators against being compelled to release confidential 
information to any law enforcement personnel.  
 
Pilot -testing of cMET by Behavioral Health Providers  
The same safety procedures described above will be followed. If an RA becomes aware of any 
potential safety concerns, s/he will report it within 1 working day t o the patient’s behavioral health 
provider, the behavioral health provider’s supervisor, and study PI’s (Knight and Harris). If any safety 
concerns arise during the clinical visit with the behavioral health provider, the provider will notify her 
supervisor  and the study PI’s. The providers and Dr. Knight will review the case and determine if 
further evaluation or treatment is necessary. If a participant spontaneously reports information about 
child abuse/neglect to a study staff person, we will report the information to the pro vider who will 
conduct a further assessment, and notify child protection authorities as appropriate and required by 
state law. We will review this safety protocol with providers at a study orientation for the 
Adolescent/Young Adult Medical Practice.  
 
 
6. Data Management Methods  
We will use a Study Management System (SMS) which uses tablet computers for data collection at 
each site with periodic data upload to a server located within the secure firewall of Boston Children's 
Hospital (BCH). The system has t he following features: (a) A menu driven user interface specific to 
the investigation that provides an overview of the study and each study participant‟s status; (b) 
Protocol management and reminder prompts to promote protocol adherence (e.g., prompts for RAs to 
make reminder calls and posttest appointments); (c) Data integrity features (range and logic checks) 
and context sensitive help; (d) Status variables that permit ongoing tracking of participant status in the 
study; (e) Edit reports for missing, out -of-range and illogical responses; (f) Regular reports of subject 
accrual and pre -specified aggregate data; (g) Use of transactional databases until data for particular 
forms or participants are finalized and ready for transfer to the study master file; (h)  Secure master 
files; (i) Daily server back -up, data security and confidentiality with access to both the client and 
server and permitted functions (e.g., making changes to data) controlled by administrator password; 
and (j) Automatic audit trail capabilit y that tracks changes to data and keeps track of system users. 
The Data Manager (DM) encrypts all tablet computers with HIPAA compliant, BCH -managed PGP 
Universal Server software. The system automatically uploads all study related data except for 
identifyi ng information weekly to the BCH server using encrypted SSL protocol VPN tunnels. The 
server generates reports for recruitment, retention and IRB progress reports. The server also 
manages study manager software updates for the client tablet computers. We w ill monitor recruitment 
and retention monthly with this system, which rapidly detects any practice sites that are outliers, and 
work intensely with any sites that are falling behind study targets.  
 
7. Quality control methods  
We will conduct a study orient ation with providers prior to beginning recruitment in which we will 
present the NIAAA screen guide, demonstrate cASCA and review the study protocol. Patients  will 
complete an adherence checklist (Post -Visit Checklist) at the end of the medical visit that records 
whether each part of the screening and brief advice was performed, and its perceived quality. We will 
periodically analyze results from the Post -Visit Checklists to identify study sites and providers who do 
not adhere to the protocol; offer retrain ing and monitoring; and drop from the study any who do not 
improve.  
 
The CeASAR Director of Data and Technology will monitor participant recruitment and produce 
regular recruitment reports which will be reviewed at monthly study meetings.  We will hold init ial 
11/13/2018   17 training meetings with site providers and Research Assistants before recruitment starts, and hold 
follow -up meetings to ensure adequate recruitment.  
 
8. Data Analysis Plan:  
We will initially calculate univariate statistics (frequencies, means, medians)  to characterize the 
demographics, substance use, and environmental risk profiles of our study sample. To evaluate 
potential selection and non -response bias, we will compare the demographics of participants and 
those who were eligible but did not participa te in the study, when data are available, and compare the 
demographics of participants who were retained through the 12 -months follow -up and those who were 
lost to follow -up. 
 
Psychometric analyses  
To address our psychometric study aims, we will conduct th e following analyses:  
Aims 1, 3, and 4:  For elementary school -aged youth (9 -11 yrs), we will examine validity of the lifetime 
“any drinking” item by comparing participant responses on the cASCA to responses on the Brief 
Substance Use History (BSUH) questi onnaire (lifetime use and age of initiation of use, if any) in the 
confidential study assessment battery. We will calculate sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive 
values (PPV) and negative predictive values (NPV) for the cASCA item in identifying an y lifetime use. 
For youth  ages 12-20 yrs, we will examine validity of the cASCA past -year “number of drinking days” 
item in two ways. We will compute intra -class correlation coefficients (ICC)86 assessing agreement 
between the two continuous variables of total past -year number of days reported on  cASCA and on 
the TLFB. In addition, we will recode past -12-months TLFB data into a dichotomous 0 days/1 or more 
days of past -year-drinking variable and calculate sensitivity and specificity of the cASCA item to 
detect any past -12-month drinking on the TLF B. We will also create 4 additional dichotomous TLFB 
variables based on the NIAAA cumulative number -of-days risk thresholds or “cut -points”87, i.e., <5 vs. 
>6 days, <11 vs. >12 days, <23 vs. >24 days, and <51 vs. >52+ days. We will compute 
sensitivity/specificity of the  cASCA item to predict these thresholds of use on the TLFB for the sample 
overall, and for each NIAAA -specified age group (9 -11, 12 -15, 16, 17, 18 -20 yrs). Finally, we will 
assess the degree to which the cASCA “any drinking/number of drinking days” item pr edicts any 
problem alcohol use  as defined by a screen -positive on either the AUDIT (score >213) or CRAFFT 
(score >212) or meeting criteria for an alcohol use disorder on the C -DISC -IV (PPV for problem use); 
an alcohol use disorder  as determined by the C -DISC -IV (PPV for disorder ); any past -year tobacco 
use and tobacco problem  as identified by the TLFB and the HONC (score >1 indicates potential 
nicotine dependence); any past -year drug us e and drug problem  as identified by the TLFB and DAST -
A; and any other behavioral/psychiatric problem or disorder  as identified by the Youth DPS. We will 
compute both concurrent  risk estimates (baseline data) and future  risk estimates (12 -months follow -up 
data) for each. For the cASCA “friends‟ drinking” item, we will recode responses to the 5 -item Peer 
Chemical Environment scale into a single dichotomous “any agree” (respondents agreed to any of the 
5 statements) vs.”all disagree” (respondents disagreed wi th all statements) variable. We will examine 
convergent  validity by computing a Cohen‟s kappa coefficient88, 89 for the level of agreement between  
the cASCA “friends” item and the concurrent dichotomous Peer Chemical Environment variable at 
baseline. For 14 -20 yr olds, we will recode responses to the cASCA “friends‟ usual number of drinks” 
item into two categories, “has binge -drinking friends” (base d on the NIAAA -specified binge drinking 
thresholds90) and “no binge drinking friends.” Using the same binge drinking thresholds, we will also 
compute an “any past -year binge drinking”/”no past -year binge drinking” variable using TLFB 
responses. We will then compute sensitivity, specifi city, PPV, and NPV of the cASCA friends‟ binge -
drinking item to predict participants‟ past -year binge drinking at baseline, and at 12 -months follow -up. 
 
Aim 2:  We will compute Cohen‟s kappas for evaluating 1 -2 week test -retest agreement on cASCA 
responses regarding any lifetime drinking (ages 9 -11 yrs), any past -year drinking (12 -20 yrs), any 
drinking friends (9 -20 yrs), and any binge drinking friends (14 -20 yrs). We will calculate ICC‟s for 
agreement on past -year number of days of drinking and number of usual drinks by friends, as well as 
agreement in risk categorization (low, medium, high) as defined by the NIAAA guide.  
11/13/2018   18  
Aim 5:  We will examine the degree to which  the psychometric properties of the cASCA items are 
consistent across adolescent demographic subgroups (gender, age group, race/ethnicity) and 
practices. We will compute our reliability and validity statistics described above for each subgroup and 
study si te, and compute 95% confidence intervals around each statistic, using bootstrap resampling to 
generate them when necessary.91, 92 Non-overlapping 95% CI‟s will indicate significant differences in 
the performance of the cASCA items between groups.  
 
Intervention acceptability/feasibility/efficacy  
We will conduct all group analyses using intention -to-treat groups. The analysis of C -SBIRT 
intervention effects will include data for 12 - to 18 -year-old patients only, as we did not test the 
intervention among 9 -11 year -olds, and we are recruiting  19- and 20 -year-olds solely for the cMET 
pilot study.  We will compare our experimental groups on all baseline measures to assess whether the 
study randomization scheme produced equivalent groups. Any variables me eting a p -value<0.20 in 
baseline group comparisons will be entered as covariates in multivariable modeling of the intervention 
effect. We will then use backward stepwise elimination of non -significant variables in all our 
multivariable modeling (using an i nclusion criteria of p <0.10) to produce the most parsimonious final 
models. We will adjust our variance estimates to account for our multi -site cluster sampling design 
using Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE), and observed differences will be considere d 
statistically significant at p<0.05. We will compare results of our outcomes analyses conducted with 
and without imputed missing data. We will use predictive multivariable regression modeling to obtain 
imputed data.  
 
Feasibility/Acceptability: We will as sess feasibility and acceptability of the C-SBIRT  system, and 
particularly with the cMET program, by measuring patient and provider engagement and satisfaction. 
The cMET  system tracks patient and provider login, session duration on a page -by-page basis, and 
logs user responses and messages sent and received to/from patients and providers. This will enable 
us to determine the percentage of patients assigned to cMET that ac tually utilize the system, and to 
what degree they complete each page. For all myVYou patients, we will use the clinic schedule to 
track how many appointments they have with their clinician or a social worker over the course of the 
study’s 1 -year period . This will provide us with additional information to determine feasibility and 
acceptability of the program. We will analyze patient and provider satisfaction results both 
quantitatively and qualitatively to identify features, content that are particularly h elpful or in need of 
improvement, and to identify common themes regarding use of the system.  
 
Pilot -testing of cMET by Behavioral Health Providers   
We will calculate the participation rate among those eligible and invited, characterize participant 
demogra phics, and examine response frequencies for items on the user feedback paper 
questionnaire  completed after each study visit . We will also 1) calculate the mean ( +SD) time required 
to complete each exercise and each  session as a whole; 2) examine the rate o f completion of each 
session ; and 3) characterize the selections made by participant s during the exercise including their 
importance and confidence ratings; their change goals, if any; and the number and types of strategies 
and supports for change that wer e selected.  
 
Estimate of effect size :  We will  examine the intervention effect on alcohol use (primary outcome) 
and use of cannabis and other drugs (secondary outcome), we will conduct the following  analyses  
stratified by whether they reported past -12-month use of the substance at baseline : 1) using the 
Timeline Follow -back data for the full 12 -month follow -up period, we will conduct Cox Proportional 
Hazard modeling to com pute adjusted hazard ratios for comparison of time to first use  of alcohol (or 
drugs) post -visit between those receiving C -SBIRT vs. TAU (those receiving all follow -up 
assessments) . In this multivariable analysis, we will control for any variables on which  the groups 
differed at baseline. Because of the availability of calendar -based use data across the full 12 months 
of follow -up, we have the unique ability to conduct this time -to-event analysis. 2) we will also use 
11/13/2018   19 multiple logistic regression modeling wi th GEE (to account for within -site clustering) to compute 
adjusted relative risk ratios  comparing  group rates  at follow -up of  any drinking, any heavy episodic 
drinking, any tobacco, cannabis , or other drug use, and any substance -related driving (for those of 
driving age) and riding (all ages) risk  with any identified potential confounders entered as covariates in 
the model. We will also examine the intervention effect on frequency  and intensity  of alcohol use at 
follow -up, as indicated by the past -90-days number of drinking days, and the average number of 
drinks per drinking day. As these variables are likely to have data distributions that are highly skewed 
and overdispersed, we w ill conduct GEE modeling specifying a negative binomial distribution and log 
link to compute adjusted incidence rate ratios.   
 
9. Statistical Power and Sample Considerations  
Aims 1, 3, 4 and 5: We will obtain measures of sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of the first two 
questions of the cASCA.  Based on prior studies, 12-14 we estimate that sensitivity and specificity of the 
frequency item for identifying past year use will be very high ( > .90).  For identifying problem use 
(including an alcohol disorder) we estimate specifi city to be much lower (> .50)., With these 
assumptions, 75% retention at 12 months and 95% confidence intervals, a low and high estimate of 
the  minimum detectable difference (MDD) can be made.93 We note that a proportion of .50 yields a 
theoretical maximum (or worst case) MDD compared to proportions closer to 0.0 or 1.0.  These MDD 
values (see table 1 below) are adequate to identify important age and gender differences in the 
sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of these two questions.  
 
Table 1: Minimum Detectable Differences in Sensitivity, Specificity, PPV and NPV for various 
group sizes and values.  
 
Aim 2:  We will assess the test -retest reliability of the first two cASCA  questions using the kappa and 
ICC.  Based on data from a prior reliability study using similar questions,16 we estimate kappa 
agreement for use/no use to be > .80 with precision (e.g. + 95% CI) > .07.  For the re liability of the 
frequency categories of the two questions, based on similar questions in the prior study, we estimate 
the ICC to be > .90 with precision > .03. These values, if realized, will provide strong evidence for the 
reliability of these questions.  
 
10. Study Organization:  
John R Knight MD, Principal Investigator; Sion Kim Harris PhD CPH, Co-Principal  Investigator; Lon 
Sherritt MPH, Director of Research Technology; Melissa Weiksnar  MBA , Project Manager; Sarah 
Bliss BA, Erin Gibson MPH, Project Coor dinators; Sarah Copelas  BA, Clinical Research Coordinator; 
Jessica Tauber BA, Kateryna Kuzubova MA, Jesse Boggis BA, Madeline Beauregard BA, David 
Butterworth BA, Jill Finlayson BA , Jordan Levinson , Research Assistants ; Paula Carroll, Intern .  
 
Pilot -testing of cMET by Behavioral Health Providers  
Current team : John R Knight MD, Principal Investigator; Sion Kim Harris PhD CPH, Co -Principal 
Investigator; Lon Sherritt MPH, Director of Research Technology; Erin Gibson MPH, Project 
Coordinator; Jordan  Levinson , Research Assistant.  Minimum Detectable 
Difference (MDD) for:  Group Size  MDD for Low Value  
(.50 is “worst case”)  MDD for High Value 
(.90) Baseline by gender  500 4.4%  2.6%  Baseline by year of age  100 10.0%  6.0%  12-Month by gender  375 4.9%  3.1%  12-Month by year of age  75 11.3%  7.3%  
11/13/2018   20  
References  
 
1. Eaton DK, Kann L, Kinchen SA, et al. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance -- United States, 2005. 
MMWR. 2006;55(SS -5):(SS -5). 
2. Fleming MF, Barry KL, Manwell LB, Johnson K, London R. Brief physician advice for problem 
alcohol drinkers. A randomized controlled trial in community -based primary care practices. 
JAMA. Apr 2 1997;277(13):1039 -1045.  
3. Bertholet N, Daeppen JB, Wietlisbach  V, Fleming M, Burnand B. Reduction of alcohol 
consumption by brief alcohol intervention in primary care: systematic review and meta -
analysis. Archives of Internal Medicine. 2005;165(9):986 -995. 
4. Grossberg PM, Brown DD, Fleming MF. Brief physician advice  for high -risk drinking among 
young adults. Ann Fam Med. Sep-Oct 2004;2(5):474 -480. 
5. Fleming MF, Mundt MP, French MT, Manwell LB, Stauffacher EA, Barry KL. Brief physician 
advice for problem drinkers: long -term efficacy and benefit -cost analysis. Alcohol Clin Exp 
Res. Jan 2002;26(1):36 -43. 
6. World Health Organization Brief Intervention Study Group. A cross -national trial of brief 
interventions with heavy drinkers. American Journal of Public Health. 1996;86:948 -955. 
7. Fleming MF, Balousek SL, Gros sberg PM, et al. Brief physician advice for heavy drinking 
college students: a randomized controlled trial in college health clinics. Journal of Studies on 
Alcohol and Drugs. 2010;71:23 -31. 
8. Babor TF, McRee BG, Kassebaum PA, Grimaldi PL, Ahmed K, Bray J.  Screening, Brief 
Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT): toward a public health approach to the 
management of substance abuse. Subst Abus. 2007;28(3):7 -30. 
9. U.S. Preventive Services Taskforce. Screening and Behavioral Counseling Interventions i n 
Primary Care to Reduce Alcohol Misuse. Available on -line: 
http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/uspstf/uspsdrin.htm . Accessed 10/22/2009. In: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality US Department of Health and Human Services, ed2004.  
10. Knight JR, Shrier LA, Bravender TD, Farrell M, Vander Bilt J, Shaffer HJ. A new brief screen 
for adolescent substance abuse. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. Jun 
1999;153(6):591 -596. 
11. Knight JR, Goodma n E, Pulerwitz T, DuRant RH. Reliabilities of short substance abuse 
screening tests among adolescent medical patients. Pediatrics. Apr 2000;105(4 Pt 2):948 -953. 
12. Knight JR, Sherritt L, Shrier LA, Harris SK, Chang G. Validity of the CRAFFT substance abus e 
screening test among adolescent clinic patients. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. Jun 
2002;156(6):607 -614. 
13. Knight JR, Sherritt L, Harris SK, Gates EC, Chang G. Validity of brief alcohol screening tests 
among adolescents: a comparison of the AUDIT, POSIT, CA GE, and CRAFFT. Alcohol Clin 
Exp Res. Jan 2003;27(1):67 -73. 
14. Knight JR, Sherritt L, Gates E, Harris SK. Should the CRAFFT substance abuse screening test 
be shortened? J Clin Outcomes Manag. 2004;11(1):19 -25. 
15. Van Hook S, Harris SK, Brooks TL, et al. The “Six T‟s”: Barriers to screening teens for 
substance abuse in primary care. Paper presented at: Pediatric Academic Societies 2005; 
Washington, DC.  
16. Levy S, Sherritt L, Harris SK, et al. Test -retest reliability of adolescents' self -report of 
substanc e use. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2004;28(8):1236 -1241.  
17. Harris S, Csemy L, Sherritt L, et al. Computer -facilitated substance use screening and brief 
advice for teens in primary care: an international trial. Pediatrics. Jun 2012; 129(6): 1072 -
1082.  
18. Subst ance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Office of Applied Studies. The 
DASIS Report: Alcohol and Drug Services Study (ADSS) Cost Study.  Rockville, MD2004.  
19. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Smoking: A 
Report of the Surgeon General.  Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
11/13/2018   21 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention 
and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health;2004.  
20. Adrian M, Barr y SJ. Physical and mental health problems associated with the use of alcohol 
and drugs. Subst Use Misuse. Sep-Nov 2003;38(11 -13):1575 -1614.  
21. Chang G, Sherritt L, Knight JR. Adolescent cigarette smoking and mental health symptoms. J 
Adolesc Health. Jun 2 005;36(6):517 -522. 
22. DuRant RH, Smith JA, Kreiter SR, Krowchuk DP. The relationship between early age of onset 
of initial substance use and engaging in multiple health risk behaviors among young 
adolescents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1999;153(3):286 -291. 
23. Kulig JW. Tobacco, alcohol, and other drugs: The role of the pediatrician in prevention, 
identification, and management of substance abuse. Pediatrics. 2005;115(3):816 -821. 
24. Newacheck P, Brindis CD, Cart C, Marchi K, Krwin C. Adolescent Health Insu rance Coverage: 
Recent Changes and Access to Care. Pediatrics. August 2, 1999 1999;104(2):195 -202. 
25. Harris SK, Woods ER, Sherritt L, et al. A youth -provider connectedness measure for use in 
clinical intervention studies.  . Journal of Adolescent Health.  2009;44(2 Suppl):S35 -36. 
26. Elster A, Kuznets N, eds. AMA Guidelines for Adolescent Preventive Services (GAPS) . 
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1994.  
27. Hagan J, Shaw J, Duncan P, eds. Bright Futures Guidelines for Health Supervision of Infants, 
Children, and Adolescents: Third Edition . Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of 
Pediatrics; 2008.  
28. American Academy of Pediatrics. Periodic Survey of Fellows #31:  Practices and Attitudes 
Toward Adolescent Drug Screening.  Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 
Division of Child Health Research;1997.  
29. Millstein SG, Marcell AV. Screening and counseling for adolescent alcohol use among primary 
care physicians in the United States. Pediatrics. 2003;111:114 -122. 
30. Hingson RW, Heeren T, Winter MR. Age at drinking onset and alcohol dependence: age at 
onset, duration, and severity. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160(7):739 -746. 
31. Sung M, Erkanli A, Angold A, Costello EJ. Effects of age at first substance use and psychiatric 
comorbidity on the development of substance use disorders. Drug & Alcohol Dependence. 
2004;75(3):287 -299. 
32. Butler SF, Chiauzzi E, Bromberg JI, Budman SH, Buono DP. Computer -Assisted Screening 
and Intervention for Alcohol Problems in Prim ary Care. Journal of Technology in Human 
Services. 2003;21(3):1 -19. 
33. Daniels V, Somers M, Orford J, Kirby B. How can risk drinking amongst medical patients be 
modified? The effects of computer screening and advice and a self -help manual. Behavioural 
Psychotherapy. 1992;20(1):47 -60. 
34. Belamarich PF, Gandica R, Stein RE, Racine AD. Drowning in a sea of advice: pediatricians 
and American Academy of Pediatrics policy statements. Pediatrics. Oct 2006;118(4):e964 -
978. 
35. Thomas JW, Grazier KL, Ward K. Econo mic profiling of primary care physicians: consistency 
among risk -adjusted measures. Health Serv Res. Aug 2004;39(4 Pt 1):985 -1003.  
36. Bock B, Niaura R, Fontes A, Bock F. Acceptability of computer assessments among ethnically 
diverse, low -income smokers. American Journal of Health Promotion. 1999;13(5):299 -304. 
37. Deehan A, Templeton L, Taylor C, Drummond C, Strang J. Are practice nurses an unexplored 
resource in the identification and management of alcohol misuse? Results from a study of 
practice nurses i n England and Wales in 1995. Journal of Advanced Nursing. 1998;28(3):592 -
597. 
38. Israel Y, Hollander O, Sanchez -Craig M, et al. Screening for problem drinking and counseling 
by the primary care physician -nurse team. Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Res earch. 
1996;20(8):1443 -1450.  
39. Knight JR, Harris SK, Sherritt L, et al. Adolescents' preferences for substance abuse screening 
in primary care practice. Substance Abuse. 2007;28(4):107 -117. 
11/13/2018   22 40. Harris SK. Computer -facilitated substance use screening and brief advice for teens in primary 
care: an international trial. In Press. 2011; 
http://ceasar.org/isbirt/materials/cSBA_Outcomes_Manuscript.pdf . 
41. Schwartz RH, Wirtz PW. Potential substance abuse. Detection among adolescent patients. 
Using the Drug and Alcohol Problem (DAP) Quick Screen, a 30 -item questionnaire. Clinical 
Pediatrics. 1990;29(1):38 -43. 
42. Rahdert ER, ed The Adolescent Assessment/Refer ral System Manual.  DHHS Publication No. 
(ADM)91 -1735 ed: US Dept Health Human Services (PHS) Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental 
Health Administration; 1991.  
43. Babor T, de la Fuente J, Saunders J, Grant M. AUDIT: The Alcohol Use Disorders 
Identification Test : Guidelines for use in primary health care.  Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Health Organization;1992.  
44. Winters K, Stinchfield R, Fulkerson J, Henly G. Measuring alcohol and cannabis use disorders 
in an adolescent clinical sample. Psychol Addict Behav. 1993; 7(3):185 -196. 
45. Winters K, Stinchfield R, Henly G. The Personal Experience Inventory test and manual.  Los 
Angeles: Western Psychological Services;1988.  
46. Winters K, Stinchfield R, Henly G. Further validation of new scales measuring adolescent 
alcohol a nd other drug use. J Stud. Alcohol. 1993;54:534 -541. 
47. Winters K, Henly G. Adolescent Diagnostic Interview (ADI) Manual.  Los Angeles: Western 
Psychological Services;1993.  
48. Knight JR, Harris SK, Sherritt L, et al. Prevalence of positive substance abuse  screens among 
adolescent primary care patients. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2007;161(11):1035 -1041.  
49. American Academy of Pediatrics CoSA. Screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment 
for pediatricians. Pediatrics. 2011;128(5):e1330 -e1340.  
50. Jellinek M, Patel BP, Froehle MC, eds. Bright Futures in Practice: Mental Health -- Volume I. 
Practice Guide . Arlington, VA: National Center for Education in Maternal and Child Health; 
2002.  
51. Jellinek M, Patel BP, Froehle MC, eds. Bright Futures in Practice: Mental Health -- Volume II. 
Tool Kit . Arlington, VA: National Center for Education in Maternal and Child Health; 2002.  
52. Levenberg P, Elster A. Guidelines for Adolescent Prevetive Services (GAPS):  Clinical 
Evaluation and Management Handbook . Chicago: American Medical Association; 1995.  
53. Knight JR. Substance abuse in adolescents. In: Parker S, Zuckerman B, Augustyn A, eds. 
Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics: A Handbook for Primary Care, second edition . New 
York: Lippincott Williams & Wil kins; 2005.  
54. Dhalla S, Zumbo BD, Poole G. A review of the psychometric properties of the CRAFFT 
instrument. Curr Drug Abuse Rev. 2011;4(1):57 -64. 
55. Winters KC, Kaminer Y. Screening and assessing adolescent substance use disorders in 
clinical populations. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008;47(7):740 -744. 
56. Csemy L, Knight JR, Starostova O, Sherritt L, Kabicek P, Van Hook S. Adolescents substanc e 
abuse screening program: experience with Czech adaptation of the CRAFFT screening test. 
Vox Pediatriae. 2008;8(6):35 -36. 
57. Lenhart A, Purcell K, Smith A, Zickuhr K. Social media & mobile internet use among teens and 
young adults (available on -line: http://pewinternet.org/Reports/Social -Media -and-Young -
Adults.aspx) . Washington, D.C.2010.  
58. Rojas NL, Sherrit L, Harris S, Knight JR. The role of parental consent in adolescent substance 
use research. J Adolesc Health. Feb 2008;42(2):192 -197. 
59. Center for Adolescent Substance Abuse Research CsHB. Example Human Subjects Research 
Protocol 2011; http://www.ceasar.org/isbirt/materials/Example_Human_Subjects_Protocol.doc . 
60. Sobell LC, Sobell MB. Timeline followback: a technique for assessing self -reported alc ohol 
consumption. In: Litten RZ, Allen JP, eds. Measuring alcohol consumption: psychosocial and 
biochemical methods.  Totowa, NJ: Humana; 1992:41 -72. 
61. Sobell L, Sobell M. Alcohol Timeline Followback User's Manual.  Toronto: Addiction Research 
Foundation;1 995. 
11/13/2018   23 62. Sobell LC, Brown J, Leo GIS, M.B. The reliability of the Alcohol Timeline Followback when 
administered by telephone and by computer. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 1996;42:49 -54. 
63. Lewis -Esquerre JM, Colby SM, Tevyaw TO, Eaton CA, Kahler CW, Monti  PM. Validation of the 
timeline follow -back in the assessment of adolescent smoking. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 
2005;79:33 -43. 
64. Hjorthoj CR, Hjorthoj AR, Nordentoft M. Validity of Timeline Follow -Back for self -reported use 
of cannabis and other illici t substances - systematic review and meta -analysis. Addict Behav. 
2011;In press.  
65. Saunders JB, Aasland OG, Babor TF, de la Fuente JR, Grant M. Development of the Alcohol 
Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT): WHO Collaborative Project on Early Detec tion of 
Persons with Harmful Alcohol Consumption --II. Addiction. 1993;88(6):791 -804. 
66. Babor TF, Higgins -Biddle JC, Saunders JB, Monteiro MG. AUDIT: The Alcohol Use Disorders 
Identification Test: Guidelines for use in primary health care. Second Edition.  Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization, Department of Mental Health and Substance 
Dependence;2001.  
67. Bohn MJ, Babor TF, Kranzler HR. The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT): 
validation of a screening instrument for use in medical s ettings. J Stud Alcohol. 
1995;56(4):423 -432. 
68. Chan -Pensley E. Alcohol -Use Disorders Identification Test: a comparison between paper and 
pencil and computerized versions. Alcohol Alcohol. Nov-Dec 1999;34(6):882 -885. 
69. Chung T, Colby SM, Barnett NP, Roh senow DJ, Spirito A, Monti PM. Screening adolescents 
for problem drinking: performance of brief screens against DSM -IV alcohol diagnoses. J Stud 
Alcohol. 2000;61(4):579 -587. 
70. Reinert D, Allen J. The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT): A review of recent 
research. Alcoholism Clin Exp Research. 2002;26(2):272 -279. 
71. Shaffer D, Fisher P, Lucas CP, Dulcan MK, Schwab -Stone ME. NIMH Diagnostic Interview 
Schedule for Children Version IV (NIMH DISC -IV): description, differences from previous 
versions, and reliability of some common diagnoses. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
2000;39(1):28 -38. 
72. Schwab -Stone ME, Shaffer D, Dulcan MK, et al. Criterion validity of the  NIMH Diagnostic 
Interview Schedule for Children Version 2.3 (DISC 2.3). J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
1996;35:878 -888. 
73. Difranza JR, Sweet M, Savageau JA, Ursprung WW. The assessment of tobacco dependence 
in young users of smokeless tobacco. Tob Control. 2011;In press.  
74. O'Loughlin J, Difranza J, Tyndale RF, et al. Nicotine -dependence symptoms are associated 
with smoking frequency in adolescents. Am J Prev Med. 2003;25(3):219 -225. 
75. O'Loughlin J, Tarasuk J, Difranza J, Paradis G. Reliability o f selected measures of nicotine 
dependence among adolescents. Ann Epidemiol. 2002;12(5):353 -362. 
76. Wheeler KC, Fletcher KE, Wellman RJ, Difranza JR. Screening adolescents for nicotine 
dependence: the Hooked On Nicotine Checklist. J Adolesc Health. Sep 20 04;35(3):225 -230. 
77. Martino S, Grilo CM, Fehon DC. Development of the Drug Abuse Screening Test for 
Adolescents (DAST -A). Addict Behav. 2000;25(1):57 -70. 
78. Yudko E, Lozhkina O, Fouts A. A comprehensive review of the psychometric properties of the 
Drug Abuse Screening Test. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2007;32(2):189 -198. 
79. Lucas CP, Zhang H, Fisher PW, et al. The DISC Predictive Scales (DPS): Efficiently screening 
for diagnoses. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2001;40(4):443 -449. 
80. Aquilino WS. Intervie w mode effects in surveys of drug and alcohol use: a field experiment. 
Public Opin Q. 1994;58:210 -240. 
81. Currivan D, Nyman A, L., Turner CF, Biener L. Does telephone audio computer -assisted self -
interviewing improve the accuracy of prevalence estimates o f youth smoking? Evidence from 
the UMass Tobacco Study. Public Opin Q. 2004;68(4):542 -564. 
11/13/2018   24 82. Fowler FJ, Stringfellow VL. Learning from experience: estimating teen use of alcohol, 
cigarettes, and marijuana from three survey protocols. Journal of Drug Issu es. 2001;31:643 -
664. 
83. Gfroerer JD, Hughes AL. Collecting data on illicit drug use by phone. In: Turner Cf, Lessler JT, 
Gfroerer JD, eds. Survey Measurement of Drug Use: Methodological Issues.  Vol DHHS 
Publication Number 92_1929. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office; 1992:277 -295. 
84. Babor TF, Kranzler HR, Lauerman RJ. Early detection of harmful alcohol consumption: 
comparison of clinical, laboratory, and self -report screening procedures. Addict Behav. 
1989;14(2):139 -157. 
85. Winters KC, Stinchfield RD, Henly GA, Schwartz RH. Validity of adolescent self -report of 
alcohol and other drug involvement. Int J Addict. 1990;25(11A):1379 -1395.  
86. Shrout PE, Fleiss JL. Intraclass correlations: uses in assessing rater reliability. Psychological 
Bulletin. 1979;86(2):420 -428. 
87. National Institut e on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Alcohol Screening and Brief Intervention 
for Youth: A Practitioner's Guide . Washington, D.C.: National Institutes of Health, Department 
of Health and Human Services; 2011.  
88. Cohen J. A coefficient of agreement for nomin al scales. Educational and Psychological 
Measurement. 1960;20:37 -46. 
89. Cohen J. Weighted kappa: nominal scale agreement with provision for scaled disagreement or 
partial credit. Psychological Bulletin. 1968;70(4):213 -220. 
90. Donovan JE. Estimated blood alcohol concentrations for child and adolescent drinking and 
their implications for screening instruments. Pediatrics. 2009;123(6):e978 -981. 
91. Carpenter J, Bithell J. Bootstrap confidence intervals: when, which, what? A practical guide for 
medical statis ticians. Stat Med. 2000;19(9):1141 -1164.  
92. Platt RW, Hanley JA, Yang H. Bootstrap confidence intervals for the sensitivity of a 
quantitative diagnostic test. Stat Med. 2000;19(3):313 -322. 
93. Desu MM, Raghavarao D. Sample size methodology. In: Mellor B, ed. Statistics in Medicine.  
Vol 11. Boston: Academic Press; 1990:562 -563. 
 