 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Promoting Smoking Cessation in Lung Cancer Screening through Proactive Treatment 
(PROACT)  
Funding Agency: HSR&D  
Principal Investigator: Steven B. Zeliadt  
9/29/21 
 
 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 2 of 27 
  
Abstract  
VA Medical Centers are beginning to offer eligible Veterans lung can cer screening following 
national recommendations including the US Preventive Services Task Force’s “B” 
recommendation for annual screening. 1  Preliminary evidence from the VA Lung Cancer 
Screening Demonstration Projec t suggests that 900,000 Veterans will be eligible for screening 
and over half will be current smokers with a long history of smoking. 2 3  It is critical that offering 
screening to  current smokers reinforces the importance of cessation and does not reduce 
motivation to quit. 4, 5  Providing cessation support as part of lung cancer screening is mandated 
for reimbursement by Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services, and is recognized by VA as 
a critical component of delivering high quality care. Integrating cessation counseling 
challenging, in part because of limited time and clinic resources, but also because  of many 
current smokers’ misperception that screening provides a “protective” effect. 6 In the National 
Lung Screening Trial, primary care providers offering screening adequately addressed smoking 
cessation with only 10% of current smokers. 7  
The PROACT trial will evaluate the value of providing proactive support to current smokers as 
part of participating in lung cancer screening including behavioral and pharmacotherapy 
support. Cessation support guidelines have emphasized the importance of providing both 
behavioral and pharmacotherapy support at every opportunity. Cessation support will be 
integrated with the reporting of screening results. In our pilot study of the proactive tel ephone 
counseling component of the proposed intervention, we increased participation in behavioral 
cessation treatment to 44% among participants who received proactive counseling from 11% 
among control patients who did not receive proactive counseling, and  quit rates more than 
doubled to 19% in the proactive group from 7% in the control group. 8 Screening patients often 
report being motivated to participate in screening to find out how much smoking has harmed 
them. 6 The proactive care activities are designed to convert this level of patient engagement 
into an opportunity to encourage cessation. Integrating the proactive cessation treatment 
approach into the screening process ensures  that all screening patients are offered cessation 
support by default, and removes the precondition of providing pharmacotherapy support only to 
patients who agree to set a specific quit date. Over 14 trials 9 have sho wn that providing 
pharmacotherapy support to all current smokers using an opt -out approach (rather than 
requiring patients to request treatment) significantly increases quit rates, and providers have 
begun adopting opt -out approaches to offering tobacco tr eatment. 
The PROACT trial is a  pragmatic randomized trial targeting  the care of current smokers who are 
participating in lung cancer screening at VA Providence (Rhode Island) and VA NY Harbor.  
Primary care p roviders at VA Providence and VA NY Harbor will b e randomized to provide their 
patients either proactive  cessation support or unstructured  cessation support (as usually 
provided during lung cancer screening ). The proactive  cessation support  will ensure that 
patients receive more elements of care that are  currently available in VA but are not always 
systematically provided, specifically including telephone counseling from VA Quitline counselors 
and pharmacotherapy support recommended by VA’s national formulary. The primary endpoint 
is biochemically confirm ed 7-day abstinence 12 months after screening. Based on prior trials 
and our pilot data, the trial is powered to detect an improvement in quit rates from 9% with 5A’s 
counseling and unstructured treatment to at least 18% with proactive treatment.  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 3 of 27 
 Figure 1 : Study Overview  
  

Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 4 of 27 
 List of Abbreviations  
Provide a list of all abbreviations used in the protocol and their associated meanings.  
5As – Guidelines for recommended a pproach to providing counseling about tobacco use: Ask 
about tobacco use at every visit, Ad vise all tobacco users to quit, Assess readiness to quit, 
Assist tobacco users with a quit plan, Arrange follow -up visits  
 
BAA - Business Associate Agreement  
CDW - Corporate Data Warehouse  
CIS - Cancer Information Services  
COIN - Center of Innovation  
CT- Computerized tomography  
FDA - Federal Drug Administration  
FHCRC  - Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center  
HSR&D - Health Services Research and Development  
ISO - Information Security Officer  
JAMA - Journal of the American Medical Association  
JLV – Joint Legac y Viewer  
LCS – Lung cancer screening  
LSI - Local Site Investigator  
Lung -RADS - Lung  Imaging Reporting and Data System  
MI - Motivational Interviewing  
NIH - National Institute of Health  
NRT - Nicotine Replacement Therapy  
PCP – Primary care provider  
SAE - Severe Adverse Events  
VAPSHCS - VA Puget Sound Health Care System  
VHA - Veteran Health Administration  
VINCI - VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure  
VistAWeb – Portal accessible through CPRS , user interface for VA electronic health record  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 5 of 27 
  
 
 
Contents  
Protocol Title:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  6 
1.0 Study Personnel  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  6 
2.0 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  7 
3.0 Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  8 
4.0 Resources and Personnel  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 9 
5.0 Study Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  12 
5.1 Study Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  12 
5.2 Recruitment Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  18 
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  ................................ ................................ ..........................  20 
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ...............................  21 
5.5 Study Evaluations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  22 
5.6 Data Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  23 
5.7 Withdrawal of S ubjects ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 23 
6.0 Reporting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  24 
7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ ...............................  24 
8.0 Communication Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  25 
9.0 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  26 
 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 6 of 27 
  
Protocol Title:  Promoting Smoking Cessation in Lung Cancer 
Screening through Proactive Treatment (PROACT)  
 
1.0 Study Personnel  
 
 
Principal Investigator  
Steven Zeliadt, PhD MPH  
Associate Director, Seattle/Denver Center of Innovation for Veteran -Centered and  
   Value -Driven Care  
VA Puget Sound Health Care System  
Research Associate Professor, Department of Health Services, University of Washington  
 
Co-Investigators  
Linda Nici, MD  
Pulmonologist, Chief of Pulmonary and Cri tical Care Section  
Providence VA Medical Center, Rhode Island  
Professor of Medicine, Brown University  
 
Daniel Becker, MD, MS  
Assistant Professor of Medicine (Clinical), NYU School of Medicine, New York U niversity 
Section Chief, Hematology  and Oncology, VA -NYHHS  
VA New York Harbor Health Care System  
 
David Au, MD , MS 
Pulmonologist, Director of Seattle/Denver Center of Innovation for Veteran -Centered and  
  Value -Driven Car e 
VA Puget Sound Health Care System  
Professor of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington  
 
Laura Feemster, MD MS  
Pulmonologist, Associate P rofessor, School of Medicine, University of Washington  
VA Puget Sound Health Care System  
 
Collaborators:  
Jaimee Heffner, PhD  
Clinical Psychologist  
Assistant Member  
Fred Hutchinson Cancer  Research Center  
 
2.0 Introduction  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 7 of 27 
  
Smoking  remains  the leading  preventabl e cause  of death  and morbidity  among  
Veterans . Cigarette smoking  is responsible  for over 440,000  deaths  annually  and adds  $193  
billion  in direct  health  care expenditures  and productivity  losses  each  year in the U.S. Over  
50% of ever-smokers  in the U.S. population  have  been  able to successfully  stop smok ing. 10 
Quit rates  among  Veterans  are lower  than the general population , which  has been  attributed  
to demographic  and socio -economic  factors  including  lower  social  suppor t, higher  levels  of 
addiction  to nicotine,  co-occurring addictions  such  as alcohol  addiction,  military  trauma  and 
post-traumatic  stress  disorder .11,12 
 
Tobacco treatment is effective but underutilized . Connecting smoke rs to pharmacotherapy 
and behavioral support has been shown  to increase quit rates.13 Although VA has pioneered a 
wide range of cessation services , they are not fully utilized.14,15 While VA has very high rates 
(>80%) of primary  care providers following Public Health Service guidelines for addressing 
smoking cessation  during clinic visits, including the 5A’s , fewe r than 10% of smokers utilize  
pharmacotherapy or other smoking cessati on aids.16,17 This is similar to a recent review of 
Medicaid and Medicare data , which found that only 7.6% of current smokers received a 
prescriptio n or order for a nicotine dependence medication.18 Cessation medications have be en 
firmly established as a critical component of successfully quitting.19, 20 The value of  
pharmacotherapy support  may be especially  important for Veterans who current ly smoke 
beca use of their high levels of nicotine dependence. 11,23  
 
No model exists for integrating cessation c ounseling into lung cancer screening.  The 
National Lung Screening Tria l (NLST) struggled with providing smoking cessat ion support to its 
trial enrollees  during the screening process . Primary care providers in the NLST were instructed 
to follow the 5As in a ddressing smoking cessation when offering screening. However , only 10%  
of current smokers received adequate support. 7 Two recent reviews have highlighted the lack of 
knowledge about how best to offer smoking cessation  support in the context of lung cancer 
screening, one noting that a pr oactive approach may be preferred in which all s mokers seeking 
lung cancer screening receive access to cessation support regardless of their reported 
motivation to set a quit date. 21 To our knowledge, no studies have investigated proactive 
cessation support or proa ctive telephone counseling as part of delivery of lung cancer screening 
services. The pragmatic PROACT trial will fill this knowledge gap,  and the findings from the trial, 
which utilizes the national VA Quitl ine, will provide important guidance for how VHA  can 
implement proactive smoking cessation support in the context of lung cancer screening across 
all VHAs.  
 
Rationale for including or ex cluding certain populations . The study targets providers who 
have orde red LCS CT scans for Veterans. No provider  subje cts will be excluded from the 
pragmatic trial on the basis of gender, race, age, or ethnicity. Vulnerable subject populations will 
not be targeted for inclusion, but pregnant providers will not be excluded fr om participating.  
 
Patients of these providers who are current smokers participating in lung cancer screening will 
be approached for participating in survey evaluation activities. No patient subjects will be 
excluded on the basis of gender, race or ethnic ity. Vulnerable subject po pulations including 
minorities, prisoners, or institutionalized individuals will not be targeted for inclusion. The age 
criteria for lung cancer screening of 55 -80 and the smoking history criteria of 30+ pack -year 
history of smoki ng will limit eligibility of pregnant women, and  if pregnant women meet the 
eligibility criteria for screening they will not be eligible to participate in the study.  No children 
(anyone under the age of 18) will be eligible to be included in  the subject po pulation. Patient 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 8 of 27 
 subjects with severe behaviora l disorders (identified by ICD -10 codes as specified in IRQ) will 
be excluded.  
3.0 Objectives  
 
Objectives . We will test the value of systemati cally providing evidence -based tobacco 
treatment using a pragmatic tri al of providers whose patients receive lung canc er screening in 
two VA Medical Centers – New York Harbor and Providence. Currently providers are 
encouraged to ask patients about their re adiness to quit and use their judgement to arrange 
treatment (5As fram ework: Ask, Advise, Asses, Assist, Arrange). Pro viders have many 
resources to support cessation, including the VA Quitline (1 -855-QUIT -VET) for behavioral 
counseling support and VA formu lary guidelines for smoking cessation pharmacotherapy.  
Providers will be randomized to two study arms. In one arm, Pro viders will not receive any 
additional guidance from the study team about how to effectively utilize available VA resource. 
This arm is la beled as the unstructured  care arm.  
The study team will develop a pro active, automated structure in which all VA reso urces are 
combined into a template that is proactively activated by a patient’s screening results letter. This 
template will reflect pharm acy ordering instructions and other pathways activities in place at th e 
study site. This will be considered proactive  care. Primary care providers offering proactive  
smoking cessation care will be provided guidance to offer cessation pharmacotherapy  to all  
current smokers when notifying the patient of the results of their sc reening test. Patients of 
providers in the proac tive care arm will also uniformly receive  proactive telephone outrea ch from 
VA Quitline counselors, which will review the screening result s letter and any provided 
pharmacotherapy. Each local screening progra m will send a standardized letter notifying the 
patient that they will be proactively contacted by a telephone counselor. This letter will be in 
addition to any individualized letters/te lephone reporting of results of their screening test by the 
patient’s provider.   
The primary aim of this trial is to:  
 
1. Conduct a pragmatic randomized trial among smokers participating in lung cancer screening 
comparing  proactive smoking cessation care  with unstructured care .  We will assess the 
differences between the two c are approaches on 7-day smoking abstinence 12 mo nths after 
receipt of screening . Assignment of providers to the two care arms will continue until the 
study is on track to have 540 patien ts responding (270 responders per arm) to the 12 -month 
survey. Based o n our preliminary findings in a pilot study of p roactive care, and related trials 
in other populations of smokers, we hypothesize that smoking abstinence 12 months after 
screening will b e twice as high (18%) in the proactive group compared to expected 
abstinence rates in the unstructured group (9%).9 
 
The secondary aims are to:  
2a. Assess whether proactive  smoking cessation care  impacts three psycholo gical and two 
behavioral change processes derived from health behavior  change theory, including: (a) 
motivation, (b) p erceived susceptibility to the harmful effects of smoking, (c) self -efficacy for 
quitting, (d) likelihood of making a quit attempt, and (e ) likelihood of utilizing 
pharmacotherapy.  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 9 of 27 
 2b. Assess acceptance of an d satisfaction with the  proactive care  approach among providers 
referring Veterans for lung cancer screening.  
2c. Monitor the costs of implementing the  proactive  care approach including intervention staff 
effort, provider  time, costs of telephone counselin g and pharmacotherapy costs.  
 
4.0 Resources and Personnel 
Coordinating Center . The majority of research activities, which include primarily survey 
evaluation activities and medical record re view, will be conducted at the Seattle/Denver HSR&D 
Center of Innovati on (COIN) in Seattle, which will serve as the st udy Coordinating Center. The 
Coordinating Center will identify eligible provider  participants by querying the  Corporate Data 
Warehouse and identifying patients who have  lung cancer screening tests ordered.  After 
identifying  providers  historically performin g lung cancer screening at the two study sites , the 
Coordinating Center will  send them an information sheet describing the study, includin g the 
randomization process and procedures for declining participation  in the study, via mail, email , 
and Lync instant  message .  
In collaboration with providers  and lung cancer screening care providers, the Coordinating 
Center will work with local coordina tors at the two study sites to structure care for the proactive 
care arm. The local coordinator will be notified by th e Coordinating Center of each provider’s 
randomization assignment.  Following randomization, providers assigned to the proactive arm 
will b e sent an email notifying them of which arm they are assigned to  and w hat intervention  
activities  to expect going forw ard. They will receive a similar notification email after ordering 
their first lung cancer screening  test, following the start of the stud y. No notifications will be sent 
to providers in the unstructured arm.  Providers will remain randomized to a single st udy arm for 
the duration of the trial. If a new provider orders a lung cancer screening test for the first time, 
he or she will be approac hed similarly recognizing that the care of the patient that alerted th e 
Coordinating Center to the provider’s identity  may not be influenced by the study if the opt -out 
consent and randomization process cannot occur before the screening test is performed.  
Once providers have been randomized, we will monitor for prospective patients referred for 
screening. The Coordinatin g Center will review all prospective patients for study eligibility, 
confirming the patient is documented in the EHR as a current smoker.   
 
For providers assigned to the proactive arm, local coordinators wil l review prior cessation 
medication history in e ach patient’s chart and enter a note to the provider recommending 
providing cessation medication as patients are receiving their screening  results. Local 
coordinators will follow national and local VA treatme nt guidelines in recommending a cessation 
medica tion to the provider ( https://www.publicheal th.va.gov 
/docs/smoking/cessationguidelinepart2_508.pdf# ).  Study cli nicians (Au, Feemster , Becker ) will 
be available  to local coordinators to answer any questions with interpreting VA treatment 
guidelines. Local coordinators will be trained by the study team to follow local protocols for 
ordering medications, such as order ing templates created by local pharmacists. The proactive 
note to the provider will provide a summary of clinical logic and confirm that the coordinator 
assessed any potential contraindi cations, such as unstable angina or serious arrhythmia. Local 
coordina tors will also be available to providers to help  facilitate all proactive care activities, 
including refill monitoring for prescribed cessation medications.  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 10 of 27 
 Once a screening result lett er has been mailed, the Coordinating Center will send contact 
informat ion for each participant in the proactive care g roup to the VA Quitline counselors for 
proactive telephone counseling. The study will contract with the VA Quitline , operated out of the 
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,  to perform the proactive teleph one counseling 
services and collect information about participation in telephone counseling sessions, including 
the number of sessions completed.   
The Coordinating Center will extract ba seline demographic and clinical characteristics of 
participants from t he Corporate Data Warehouse at the time of scree ning, including 
documenting screening results and confirming that the screening test did not identify findings 
suspicious for malignancy r equiring immediate biopsy/attention. Approximately 2 -4% of patients 
have such findings, and will be withdrawn from the  study and will not receive any further study 
activities.  
 
At 3 months and 12 months following screening, the Coordinating Center will con duct an 
evaluation survey to collect outcome data. Telephone follow -up will be conducted by the 
Coordinating Center to  increase response rate for the surveys. Additional clinical and outcome 
data will be extracted at 12 months from the Corporate Data Wareh ouse.  
 
All data analyses will be performed by the Coordinating Center.  
 
Study Staff Table  
Name  Location  Role  PHI Recru iting Consent  Survey 
Admin  Data 
Analysis  
Steven Zeliadt, 
PhD MPH  Seattle  PI Yes No No No Yes 
David Au, MD  
MS Seattle  Co-I 
Clinician  Yes No No No Yes 
Laura Feemster, 
MD MS Seattle  Co-I 
Clinician  Yes No No No Yes 
Spencer Hildie  Seattle  Project 
Coordinator  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Peter Rise, MS  Seattle  Data Analyst  Yes No No No Yes 
Lawrence 
Swanson , BA Seattle  Database 
Administrator  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
 
Data Use Agreemen ts (DUAs) . DUAs w ill be executed with th e VA National Corporate Data 
Warehouse (CDW) r epository and CAPRI/JLV  for access and use of data and subject records.  
Data will be obtained electronically from the VA National Corporate  Data Warehouse (CDW) 
reposito ry, which the stu dy team will access via  the VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure  
(VINCI) platform . Variables from the CDW will be used to identify referral for lung cancer 
screening and current smoking status at the ti me of screening.   Patient cont act information, 
including phone number,  will be accessed for proactive telephone counseling, and mailing 
address information will be used for inviting participants to complete the 3 - and 12 -month study 
surveys. Social securit y numbers will be used for res earch staff to lo ok up patient medical 
records in CAPRI/JLV  as well as to enter notes into CPRS. SSNs are also required by the VA 
R&D Purchasing and Fiscal Office to process checks for payments.  
 
The Coordinating Center staff will obtain CAPRI /JLV access f ollowing VHA proc edures that 
serve as an  agreement to adhere to conditions of electronic health records access and use 
stipulated by VA Health Information Access (HIA) .  The purpose of accessing patient records is 
to confirm i nformation identified in CDW n otes about comorb idities and exclusion c riteria to 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 11 of 27 
 ensure  patient s are appropriate to contact (i.e., no reported difficulty communicating by 
telephone. If verified,  that patient would not be approached ).  
 
Contracted Services.  We will enter into a contract  with the Seattle -based Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center’s Cancer Information Service (CIS)  to provide individualized smoking 
cessation counseling to the patients in the proactive care arm of the study. This will facilit ate 
careful tracking of servic es provided and c ost estimates.  The CIS is an NCI -funded national 
telephone clearinghouse of cancer information serving individuals who have questions about 
cancer prevention and treatment. They are knowledgeable, caring, and experienced at 
explaining medi cal information. Their service s are confidential. The CIS operates  both the 
general information line (1 -800-4-CANCER)  which helps counsel patients about diagnosis and 
treatment options, and the NCI's Smoking Quitline (1 -877-44U-QUIT), which provides free 
cessation informat ion and support to smok ers who wish to quit free of charge.  
 
The CIS also contracts nationally with VHA to provide the VA Quitline (1 -855-QUIT -VET) which 
is free to all Veterans. We  will contract with CIS to  develop a database  to track uti lization and 
cond uct counseling calls.  They will use the database to provide information about completed 
telephone sessions, treatment fidelity, and cost of service provision.  Veteran s’ contact 
information will be sent by sec ure fax to the CIS team  once they are identifie d as patients  of 
provid ers randomized to the proactive care arm. The telephone counselors will make 3 attempts 
to reach each Veteran, leaving voicemails with a specific telephone number that will reach a VA 
Quitline counselor who is traine d in the study co unseling activities. (S ee National telephone 
counselor introductory script ). 
 
The VA Quitline counselor will attempt to provide 2 sessions of individualized smoking cessation 
therapy, and will repeat the 3 -attempt protocol to conduct the 2nd session.  A Ve teran can decline 
participation in the counseling activity. (See  National telephone counselor introductory script ). 
 
The VA Puget Sound Healthcare System is purchasing services from Cancer Information Service 
at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, and will enter into a D ata Use Agreement to 
facilitate and allow the exchange of PHI between these two entities.  The DUA will follow ORD 
policies regarding data exchange with Non -Federal Entities and will requ ire approval by the 
Privacy Of ficer and ISO at VA Puget Sound, and aut horities at the Fred Hu tchinson Cancer 
Research Center  (see https://ww.research.va.gov/resources/policies/default .cfm). 
 
The VA Quitline routi nely records coun seling calls for qualit y assurance purposes. We have 
applied for a waiver of informed consent to obtain patient data from these quality assurance 
recordings, in order to conduct a fidelity evaluation of a samp le of the calls.  
 
5.0 Study Procedures  
 
5.1 Study Design  
 
Study design . We are proposing a pragmatic cl uster-randomized trial comparing usual lung 
cancer screening care to a proactive approach, which will integrate smoking cessation support 
into lung cancer sc reening. Providers will be randomiz ed to one of two care groups. The 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 12 of 27 
 randomization protocol will en sure that provide rs with large panel sizes, and therefore high lung 
cancer screening volume,  will be distributed between the two groups. The two provider car e 
groups will be called proactive  and unstructured . The proactive  group will receive guidance 
about  providing proact ive cessation support that utilizes supplemental counseling from national 
counselors at the VA Quitline. The unstructured  care group will no t receive any additional 
support. All current primary care providers w ho may have patients eligible  for lung cancer 
screening will be block randomized at the beginning of the study  by panel size, as this is a 
surrogate for prior LCS screening volume . New primary care providers will be rando mized when 
they are first hired and  become eligible to order LCS  at one of the st udy sites . Although national 
lung cancer screening recommendations highlight integrating cessation support for current 
smokers (and reimburs ement of lung cancer screening by M edicare is contingent on 
documentat ion that cessation support wa s provided), ther e are currently no established 
methods for how cessation support should be integrated into the delivery of screening care. The 
proactive car e activities are designed to reflec t guidelines from the broader prima ry care setting 
based on deca des of evidence t hat both behavioral and pharmacotherapy support should be 
routinely provided to patients. Additionally, the study focuses on testing a proac tive care 
approach that has potenti al for broad dissemination national ly across VA, including centr alized 
proactive telephone counseling using VA Quitline counselors and providing cessation 
pharmacotherapy in accordance with VA formulary guidelines. We wil l standardize study 
activities as m uch as possible to ensure they are provided uniformly, however, as this is a 
pragmatic trial of care as it is delivered in actual practice, providers  may vary how they deliver 
the intended proactive and unstructured care components.  
At the beginning of the  study, the Coordinating Center, lo cated in Seattle, will access  
retrospective Co rporate Data Warehouse (CDW) patient data to identify providers who have 
ordered lung cancer screening CTs in the past. These data will be f rom CDW accessed through 
VINCI and will be used to review provider lun g cancer screening volume and  provider’s 
histo rical use of cessation medications ordered at the time of lung cancer screening. 
Throughout the study, the Coordinating Center will also pro spectively identify patients 
schedu led for lung cancer screening by sc anning CDW twice weekly. The Coordinating Cent er 
will confirm the scheduled patient’s eligibility criteria, including current smoking status  through 
CAPRI/JLV . A local clinical coordinat or based at either of the intervent ion sites (NY Harbor or 
Providence,  RI) will be notified when pa tient eligibility  is confirmed and the ordering provider is 
identified. The local coordinator will work with the provider subjects at the intervention sites to 
adapt study guidance to the lung  cancer screening clinical pathways  in use at each of the 
interv ention sites.  On ce a patient’s screening results are available, the study team will confirm 
continued eligibility (e.g. no indication of a highly suspicious  finding requiring biopsy).  
For pa tients of providers assigned to the  proactive study group, the l ocal coordinator will review 
the patient’s cessation medication history  in CAPRI/JLV . If the patient is not currently being 
provided cessation support medica tion, the coordinator will enter a note for the provider about 
the rec ommended medication indicated  by VA formulary guidelines.  
For those patients receiving proactive care,  once the screening results are available and 
patients are confirmed to meet eligib ility criteria , including not havin g findings requiring 
immediate foll ow-up (e.g. LungRADS 4 or 5),  each local scree ning program will send a 
standardized letter notifying the patient that they will be proactively contacted by a telephone 
counselor. This le tter will be in addition to any ind ividualized letters/telephone repor ting of 
results of their scre ening test by the  patient’s provider.    
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 13 of 27 
 For those patients receiving proactive care, the Coordinating Center will forward information 
about the non-suspiciou s screening result , s to the VA Qui tline via secured fax.  A VA Quitlin e 
counselor will attempt to p rovide two sessio ns of proactive telephone support.   
Three months after the date of the screening procedure, the Coordinating Center will invite 
patient part icipants to participate in an evalu ation survey. A second evaluation s urvey will be 
sent to the pat ient at 12 months . Participants will be compensated $25 for each returned 
evaluation survey.   
Dem ographic, clinical and administrative smoking cessation info rmation available in from the 
Corporate Data Warehouse will be extract ed for all invited patients, including those who do not 
complete the evaluation surveys.  
Provider p articipan ts in the proacti ve arm will be sent a short evaluation survey via email. The  
survey will assess providers’ evaluation of the value of proactive ca re. If providers offer lung 
cancer screening to multiple patient, the survey will only be sent once per quart er. 
As a pragmatic trial, provider part icipants in the proactive arm will be sent periodic study status 
update s via email . These emails  will includ e study level feedback on cessation medication 
prescription rates and reminders to continue proactiv ely pres cribing the recommen ded 
medications . It will also include general study update s as well as feedback  by patients provided 
to the local coordinators , coordinating center  and Quitline counselors that will be of interest to 
providers  and help them unde rstand ho w patients are resp onding to partici pating in the stu dy.  
Cost and reso urce a ssessment . Cost and resource data will be collected as part of the stu dy, 
including the cost of provided pharmacotherapy, additional medication fills, and cost of 
telepho ne counse lor contact. A waiv er of informed consent to collect this information o n all 
study participants is requested.  
Risks associated with provider assign ment to interv ention. The risks associated with the 
study activities are minimal. All patient partic ipants ar e current smokers, and VA and US 
Public Health Services guideline recom mend c linicians provide cessation support at all clinic 
visits and as part o f lung cancer screening.  
 
The difference in risks associated with behavioral counseling between the  unstruct ured and 
proactive arms are minor.  In the unstructured arm, patients r eceive  about cessation 
counseling by their provider and are provided with th e VA Quitline’ s telephone number (1 -
855-QUIT -VET) as a free resource for telephone counseling. In th e proacti ve arm, subjects 
are proactively contacted by telephone counselors to r eceive  this same support. The 
proactive counseling calls may be associated w ith the follow ing risks: 1) annoyance from 
proactive counseling outreach, or 2) increased anxiety or  worry re lated to discussion s around 
lung cancer screening results and smoking c essati on with VA Quitline telephone counselors. 
We will mitigate this risk b y having the V A Qu itline caller remind subjects that participation in 
the proactive calls is volunta ry. Notab ly, in the pilot st udy 89% of Veterans indicated they 
were completely o r some what satisfied with the proactive telephone counseling calls, with 1 
individual repo rting they were neither satisfied or dissatisfied, and 2 participants declining to 
respond.  
 
The difference in ris ks associated with pharmacotherapy support between t he uns tructured 
and proactive arms is also minimal. Although guidelines indi cate all smoke rs should be 
offered pharmacotherapy support at every visit, this happens infrequently . A recen t review 
found that  only 7.6% of current smokers received a cessation p harmac otherapy order 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 14 of 27 
 following a primary care visit, 18 and fewer than 10% of smokers participating in screening in 
the NLST received such  an order .17  Patients  who a re current smokers should be 
appropriately provided with s moking cessation support as they participate in lung cancer 
screening,  although this  doesn’t consistently happen. A potential risk of this study is that 
current smokers r eceiving care from providers  in the unstructured care group who are eligible 
for behav ioral counseling or pharmacologic cessation support will not receive i t. Another 
potential risk is that providers in the proactive care group will perceive that the study  is 
assum ing responsibility for providing cessation support and the quality of s upport  offered by 
providers will decrease.  The primary difference between th e study arms i s encouraging 
providers assigned to proactive care to remove the precondition to provi ding 
pharmacotherapy that th e patient set a quit date and offer pharmacotherapy to all  screening 
participants who are current smokers. This is intended to r esult in more patients in the 
proactive care arm receiving pharmacotherapy and  may be associated wit h 1) inap propriate 
use of ce ssation medications, or 2) risks associated with us e of ce ssation medications. We 
will encourage providers to follow VHA formula ry guidelines for recommending 
pharmacotherapy including assessment of contraindications, and all or ders are required to be 
signed by a primary care provider  associated with the p atient . The local coordinator will 
review patients’ medication history as wel l as any poten tial medication risk factors and  
provide a note in CPRS with a summary for the provide r to assi st in assessing pot ential 
contraindications and facilitating adherenc e to VHA  formulary guidelines.  
 
We also note that following publication of a large double -blind, placebo controlled trial 
specifically designed to assess risks of cessation phar macothera pies including the nicotine  
patch, varenicline and buprop ion, 22 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has 
determined  the risk of serious side effects on mood, behavior, or thinking with the stop -smoking  
medicine s varenicline and b upropion is lower than previously suspected and removed a black 
box warning previously placed on varenicline. The risk of these mental health side effects was 
equivalent among all forms of medications in the trial. The results o f the tri al confirm that the  
benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the risks  of these medicines, so the main risk in this 
study is that cessation rates will  be lower amon g one of the study arm s. 
 
Risks associated with survey and administrative data collect ion. The main potential 
research risk to patient subjects is loss of confide ntiality o f personal information, including CDW 
data, information present in the ir electronic patient medical records, information collected by the 
VA Quitline counselors, or infor mation sh ared via the study survey.  We will take multiple 
precautions to pr otect conf identiality while working with primary and secondary data, as well as 
extra precauti ons with the collection and exchange of subject data with CIS.  
 
Potential risks to pat ient subj ects may also inclu de emotional distress from responding to survey 
questions,  which might cause confusion or make them uncomfortable. Patients may also feel 
pressure to participate in the survey unwillingly because they mistakenly fear their acces s to 
services might be affec ted if they do not complete the survey. We will reiterate what will also be 
provided in writing in the information sheet: that t heir decision not to participate in the survey will 
be kept confidential, and will in no way affect their acc ess to services or the quality of care they 
receive at the VA.  
 
Minimization of risk . We will obtain IRB approval prior to initiating any study act ivities. Prior  to 
study commencement, all members of the research team will complete trainings in hu man 
subje ct protection and e thical research practices, as required by IRB.  Approvals from the VA 
Information Security Officer (ISO), VA Privacy Officer (PO ), and Researc h and Development 
Committee at all sites will also be obtained prior to commencing res earch.  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 15 of 27 
  
Protection against emotional distress. All patients will have discu ssed lung cancer screening 
with their provider and have been determined by their  provider to b e eligible and appropriate for 
screening. To avoid the possibility of the patient mist akenly th inking they are bei ng contacted by 
the national telephone counselor  because t hey might have lung cancer, the counselor will 
remind the individual o f the reason f or the call and include a clarifying statement to assure 
patients this is not the reas on they a re being contacted.   We will emphasize their participation in 
the p roactive c all from the VA Quitline is being offered by the VA as an option and t heir 
participa tion in the call is voluntary. We will reassure them their refusal to participate will  in no 
way affect their medi cal care or access to services at the VA.  All n ational co unselors are 
trained in assessing risks to subjects and will be remind ed to be sensi tive to expression of 
significant distress around topics of cancer and smoking.  Simil arly, whe n we contact patien ts 
with 3 - and 12 -month surveys, we will remind them in th e accompanying letter that receipt of 
surveys does not in any way indi cate that they  have lung cancer, and that their participation in 
the survey is voluntary.  
 
Protectio n against  risks of missing c ontraindications to cessation medications. All study 
perso nnel will be trained in VHA formulary guidelines for recommended cessa tion medicatio ns 
including potential contraindications. A primary care provider  associated with the patient  will 
confirm the app ropriateness of all medications suggested by the  study. Th e provider will be 
required to review and sign the order for the sugge sted medicatio n before it is dispensed.  
Additionally, the study team will work closely with pharmacy  provider s at each of the st udy sites 
who are aware of the study activities and will a lso provide additional review of medications prior 
to dispensing.  A s tudy clinician  (Drs. Feemster or Au) will be available to the all study personnel 
for additional gui dance if necessary. Although  the local coordinator will enter a recommendati on 
in the note, the provider may opt for an alternate treatment type within the VA formulary ( or 
none at all).  
 
Detailed VA educational materials will accompany all cessation medi cations a nd are provided 
by the clinical pharmacy when the medications are s ent. These  materials will remind patients of 
any potential contraindications. Ad ditionally, VA  Quitline counselors will have copies of all 
instructions and will review these medica tion inst ructions and potent ial contraindications with 
each subject based on  the type of medication provided. Quitline counselors will help patients 
formula te questions t o ask their provider about any medication use, and if necessary contact the 
study team  directly  and notify a study  clinician (Drs. Feemster or Au) with any potent ial 
concer ns about medications. The study clinician will contact the patient’s p rovider as 
appropriate. 
 
Protection of data.  Study staff will execute Data Use Agreements with CDW a nd CAPRI/ JLV 
prior to use of  any repository data, and comply with the stipul ations out lined in the agreement 
contracts. Strict data protection protocols at the Coordinati ng C enter will be implemented to 
protect the confidentiality of the data, in accordanc e with th e Center of Innovat ion for Veteran -
Centered and Value -Driven Care ( COIN) data  security policy. Only IRB -approved project staff 
will have access to study data. Al l data at the Coordinating Center will be maintained on a COIN 
secure -access drive in permissio n-restricted folder s only accessible to project staff. At no time 
will copies  of data will be placed on laptops, computer desktops, hard drives, po rtable media, or 
any other form of media or hardware. Please see the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  for more  
details about how data will be protected and subject confidentiali ty will be  maintained.  Any data 
included in manuscripts or publications stemmin g from this st udy will be presented as aggregate 
data only, and in a way that no individual could be  identifi ed.  At the end of the study, after all 
manuscripts are published, all identi fiable files and crosswalks will be destroyed in accordance 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 16 of 27 
 with VA po licy - Records  Control Schedule 10 -1. Electronic media used to store all data will be 
cleaned or des troyed so  the data is not re trievable. As a result of these measures, we do not 
expect  any invasion of privacy or breach of confidentiality.  
 
Protection aga inst risk: Dat a and Safety Monitoring Plan .  VA Informatics and Computing 
Infrastructure (VINCI), in  conjunct ion with our COIN D atabase Administrator, will facilitate the 
secur e, electro nic data transfer from the VA data repertories, including CDW, and Vit al Status 
data to COIN servers. Study staff will execute Data Use Agreements with CDW and CAPRI/JLV  
prior to use of any reposito ry data, and comply with the stipulations outl ined in the agreement 
contracts.  
 
We will protect the confidentiality of VA patie nt data throug h a number of procedures.  We will 
limit our acquisition of identifiable information t o the min imum amount of info rmation necessary 
to link subject data, obtain c ontact inf ormation for recruitment of subjects, and collect pertinent 
data neces sary to comple te the study aims. To ensure confidentiality and protection of subject 
data, data will  only be analyzed and stored  electronically on secure servers at the COIN. T he 
study t eam will be trained and reminded to not save copies of data on laptops  or portable 
media. Only secure VA remote access will be used to access the data.  Anti -virus protec tion is 
maintained on all se rvers and workstations at the COIN office.  All workstatio ns and servers are 
physically secured in locked offices, reside behind  the VA firewa ll, and fully participate in 
Windows NT security. We will store the identifier crosswa lk in a s eparate data file l ocation, 
accessible only by the COIN Database Ad ministrato r and study PIs. Access to the study data 
folder will be restricted to  those VA stud y project staff approved by our local VA IRB. The data 
study folder will be further sa fe-guarde d against unauthori zed access by network user login 
authentication controls.  In no case will patient identifiers or data be provided to any person  or 
entity out side the IRB -approved project team, and we will ensure that all study results are 
presented in a way that no indiv idual can be identified.  
 
In order to ensure Vet eran conta ct data is protected as it is provided to the VA Quitline, we will 
utilize a secure fax line to send instructions to VA Quitline for contacting patients of providers in 
the proact ive care group. Thi s will be reviewed by the VA Puget Sound Privacy  Officer a nd 
described in the Data Use Agreement between VA Puget Sound and the VA Quitline.  
 
The VA Quitline will follow current procedures for protecting data with two exception s. The VA  
Quitline currently  conducts quality assurance by having senior sta ff listen to a sample of calls. 
The study team will develop a fidelity tool for the VA Quitlin e/Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center staff to use as part of this quality assuranc e process  and report the sum mary results of 
the fidelity tool. No audio reco rdings wil l be removed from VA Quitline facility. The VA Quitline 
will provide a  CD of partici pation records (number of completed calls/length of calls). 
Instructions for providing  this dat a will be included in the Data Use Agreement between VA 
Puget Sound  and the V A Quitline/Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. This CD will 
includ e only a coded  study ID provided by the Coordinating Center and no other identifying 
information. Th e CD will  be sent by certifi ed US mail.     
 
Upon completion of the research project, t he PI in conjunction with the VA Information Security 
Officer (ISO), a nd in accordan ce with VA policy, will ensure that study data containing sensitive, 
confidential info rmation w ill be sanitized an d removed from all servers, desktops, removable 
storage de vices, etc. We will follow Records Control Schedule 10 -1 and destroy s tudy materials  
6 years after completion of the study. When any study personnel are no longer a part of the 
research team, the PI  will remove that person’s access to all study d ata and no tify the VA 
Information Security Officer of such action. COIN Informat ion Technology  personnel will be 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 17 of 27 
 responsible for maintaining COIN servers where study data will be k ept, and will move, backup 
and remove study data from servers and control ac cess to da ta stored on COIN servers. The PI 
will request termination of data acc ess rights for  study personnel who are no longer part of the 
study team.  All study team personnel w ith acces s to sensitive pati ent data will stay current on 
their VA approved informatio n security training and VA approved privacy policy training.  
 
Any dat a included in manu scripts or publications stemming from this study will be presented as 
aggregate da ta only, and in a way that n o individual could be identified.  Current and fu ture use 
of the data will require approval of a written protocol by both the inv estigator’s co ntrolling IRB as 
well as their local R&D committee.  In no case will patient identifie rs or dat a be provided to an y 
person or entity outside the IRB -approved proj ect team, and we will ensure that all study results 
are presented in a way that no individual can be identified.  
 
Analysis of risk vs. potential benefit . The benefits outweigh the  risks in volved, especially 
given that this is a study assessing the effecti veness of an implementation strategy (using 
proactive notes to providers and a c entralized tel epho ne counseling resource) in promoting the 
adoption of what is considered high quali ty care b ut often is not rou tinely provided to patients 
due to limited clini cal time.  
 
Subjects receiving proactive care will receive support related to scr eening and hel p 
understanding their screening result, counseling about smoking cessation services an d support  
for use of cessati on medications. The counseling sessions provided  by the VA  Quitline 
counselors may help patients crystallize their thoughts and feelings about  lung cancer screening 
and the health benefits of smoking cessation. The study also en courages providers to provid e 
cessation medication, and participants could b enefit by receiving and using these medications. 
The intervention could have a p ositive influe nce on subjects’ health behaviors, such as 
connecting them to additional smoking cessa tion serv ices such as group counseling or 
additional telephone counseling. P otential b enefits could also come from the overall contribution 
of the study fin dings to care for future Veterans and help improving the healthcare field in 
general. Possible study  findings  could lead to impl ementation of improved care practices and/or 
services, whi ch may include expansion of smoking cessation services through increas ed 
understandi ng and funding allocation for smoking cessation resources and heightened public 
awaren ess of th e health benefits o f smoking cessation.  
 
5.2 Recruitment Methods  
 
Number of S ubjects Needed.  
Patients . We will assess CDW and CAPRI/JLV  records fo r up to 15,000  patients (~10,000 to 
identify retrospective LCS orders, and ~5,000 to identify prospe ctive LCS  orders) who were 
offered lung cancer screening at NY Harbor and Pr ovidence t o identify potential provider 
participants. Of these subjects, only cu rrent smokers will be approached. We anticipate 
approaching up to 1,350 eligible potential subjects (mailing them a study invita tion packet) to 
invite them to participate in th e survey. In order to ensure non -missing data are available on a 
sufficiently po wered study sa mple , recruitment will continue until 270 subjects have completed 
the 12 -month assessm ent surve y in each of the ca re arms (total target n = 540).  
Providers . We e xpect to r ecruit approximately 300 providers, 180 from Providence, RI 
and 120 fr om NY Harbor, in order to reach 540 patients (completed surveys).  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 18 of 27 
  
Identification and Recruitment o f Subject s.  
Providers.  We w ill obtain a Waiver of Informed Consent for recr uitment to  facilitate the 
identification of primary care providers ordering LCS CT scans at th e NY  Harbor and 
Providence VAs. At the beginning of the study, the study team will exa mine hist orical CDW data 
to identify providers who have previously ordered L CS tests. Providers who meet eligibility will 
then be contacted via mail, then e mail, and fina lly by Lync/Skype for Business instant message 
and given the recruitment materials. An y new pro viders who are hire d at VA NY Harbor or 
Providence  and are eligible  to order a LCS CT scan , who were not identified by the historical 
review , will be similarly r ecruited when they are first identified.   
Patients . We will obtain a HIPAA Waiver and Waiver of  Informed Consent f or recruitment to 
facilitate the identification of provide rs’ eligible patients. The study team will query the CDW 
twice weekly  over 5 quarter s (15 months)  to identify study providers’ recently ordered LCS CT 
scans at the NY Har bor and P rovidence, RI VAs. Upon discovery that a screening CT has been 
ordered, the study team will review the patient’s chart to assess for eligibility/in eligibility cr iteria 
and, if patient is eligible , enter patient information into a tracking system. At 2.5 mo nths 
following thei r LCS, we will confirm subject eligibility crite ria, inclu ding non -urgent LCS result,  
and obtain mailing address information in  the electronic  medical record. Current smokers 
receiving unstructured or proactive care who meet gen eral elig ibility criteria according to the 
National Center for Health Promot ion and Di sease Prevention Guidelines  for lung cancer 
screening (including age,  comorbidity, a nd other health history eligibility criteria , as detailed 
below in Inclusion and Exclu sion Crit eria) will be conta cted by mail at 3 months following their 
LCS. Th e study pa cket will include an Information Sheet  (included in Appendix ) and the printed 
survey  (included in Appendix ). If the mailed survey has not been received  by the study team  
within 10  days, telephone fo llow-up will be initiated.  We will conduct  five attempts  to complete  
the telephone  version  of the survey  (one call per day; see appendix conta ining follow -up 
telephone script for unreturned surveys).  If no telephone contact can be made,  we will mail a 2nd 
attempt of the full survey. We will conduct a 3rd mailing of a shorter survey focusing on the 
primary outcomes to subjects who d o not complete  the full survey  within 14 days of the 2nd 
mailing. This 3rd mailing will be followed by three additional phone at tempts, with the  goal of 
completing the abbrevia ted survey  over the phone if the subject is willing.   Please refer to the 
teleph one script  for patient callers requesting additional information or to opt -out of calls  
(included in  Appendix ) for language to a nswer potential questions from patients regardin g 
privacy and legal concerns. We will offer to mail the patient a copy of the No tice of Privac y 
Practices upon request. We will use an “Address  Service Requested” envelope, for aut omatic 
forwarding to new mai ling addresses. The same schedule  of mailing and  phone cal ls will be 
followed for the 12 -month survey.  Subjects who do not resp ond to the 3 -month survey will be 
mailed a 12 -month survey, altered to include some of the questions  from the  missing 3 -month 
survey (included in attachments) .   
Payment s to Subj ects.  Subjects will  be informed as part of the initial information sheet when 
the surveys are mailed that they will receive  a $25 check for complet ion of each su rvey (at 3 
and 12 months after lung cancer screening).   
The information sheet also clar ifies that the study team and VA Pharmacy are working together 
to ensure that any co-payments for medications received as part of the study will be paid by 
study funds and not by t he partic ipant.  
 
5.3 Inform ed Consent Procedures  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 19 of 27 
 Providers  
 
Waiver of writt en documentatio n of informed consent  for provider participation . Providers 
who o rder lung canc er screening tests are the target for this pragmatic study . Based on recent 
estimates of lung c ancer screening par ticipation at VA NY Harbor and VA Providence, 
approximately 300  providers have ordered lung cancer screening procedures for 2000 -4000  
Veterans . The purpose of the pragmatic trial is to test a structured approach to supporting 
providers t o better integrate smoking cessation as part of reporting screening  results to pat ients.  
A high level of participation of all VA providers who ord er lung cancer  screening tests is critical to 
this pragmatic trial as the goal is to answer if this structure d support is both f easible to implement 
and effective at improving patient outcome s. We have designed an opt -out approach to help lead 
to a wide ra nge o f provide r participation, as requiring providers to opt -in to study participation 
would potenti ally bias  the results or mak e them generalizable only to a small subset of p roviders 
and no t VA overall.  
 
We will send all primary care providers who are or derin g lung ca ncer screening tests a letter and 
Information Sheet  in the postal mail to their office  mailing address.  We will  then send a copy of the 
letter and  Information She et via email , and finally  follow up via Lync/Skype for Business  (instant 
message , with link to  Information Sheet  and invitation letter in PDF format  attached ). In each 
communicatio n, we wil l make clear that i f we do not hear back from them, they will be en rolled in 
the s tudy.  
 
Patients  
 
A Waiver of Informed Consent is requested for admini strative medi cal record review of 
historical provider screening volumes . In order to ensure bal ance in r andomization by pro vider 
volume (as some providers order hundreds o f screening CTs  per year and other providers order 
only one or two), we are requ esting access to patient screening data between 1/1/2013 and 
12/31/2017.  We will need to access tho usands of  records in the Cor porate Data Warehouse as 
NY Harbor and Providenc e have screened  an estimated 2000 -4000 Veterans. It is impracticable 
to obtain c onsen t for all  patients in the database, and the risk for loss of confidentiality is minimal.   
 
A Wa iver of I nformed Consent  is requested to review administrative medical recor d data in 
the C DW for all prospective patients offered lung cancer screening aft er pr ovider 
random ization . Patients who participate in lung cancer screening after their provider is  
randomiz ed to one of the tw o study arms who meet eligible criteria will be considered stud y 
participants. This record review will be used to identify these  patients and invite them to participate 
in survey activities to evaluate outcomes of the care they received.   This waiver also includes 
reviewing medical record data for all participants who  do (and do not) respond to the 3 - or 12 -
month survey in order to  docu ment pote ntial differences between patients who complete the 
survey and those who do not (e.g. age/comor bidity) , and to con duct an administrative assessment 
of administrat ive cessation outcomes such as subsequent documentation by the provider  in the 
medica l record of continued smoking or cessation.  
 
Alteration of Informed Consent Process. We are req uesting a  waiver of document ation of 
informed consent for survey participati on. We will mai l participants an evaluation survey at 3 
months and 12 months aft er the screeni ng CT scan; we are requesting that returning the survey 
serve as a substitute for docu mentation  of informed consen t. Requiring participants to complete a 
written informed consen t document in addition to the survey would be unnecessarily burde nsome . 
 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 20 of 27 
 Study pers onnel training . All study staff have been trained and will remain current with the  VA 
requi rements for Human S ubjects Protections and Good Clinical Practices.    
 
 
5.4 Inclus ion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
 
Inclusion Criteria  
 
Providers  
• All provid ers w ho schedu le patients for an LCS at NY Harbor and Providence, RI VA 
systems will be eligible  
Patients  (assessed via patient information in CAPRI/ JLV) 
• Offered LCS by a prima ry care provide r at NY Harbor and Providence VA systems 
and scheduled for a LCS visit.  
• Meets eligibility criteria according to the National Center for Health Promotion and 
Disease  Preventi on guidelines (age ≤ 80; history of smoking  > 30 pack -years)  
• Curre nt smoker and eligible for at least one cessation medication on VA Formulary.  
• There ar e at lea st 3 business days between the date the lung cancer screening test 
order is identified  by the C oordinating Center and when it is scheduled. This is 
necessary to a llow the study team time to confirm that there are no exclusionary 
criteria and enter proactiv e study notes prior to the result of the screening test being 
available to the orderin g provide r. 
• Ability to speak  and understand English (no language disability noted in VHA medical 
record) and communicate by telephone (no deafness or diffic ulty h earing o n 
telephone is noted in VHA medical record)  
• Phone number and mailing address present i n VHA med ical record  
 
 
Exclu sion Criteria  
 
Providers  
• Provider currently syst ematically provide s cessation medication to all current 
smokers.  
 
Patients  (asse ssed v ia patie nt information in CAPRI/ JLV) 
• Patients with urgent findings requiring biopsy/immediate attention  on the screening 
CT will be excluded. These patients will not be s ent any study surveys, and no 
information will not be provided to the VA Quitlin e for patients  of proactive arm 
providers. (LCS results are anticipated to identify highly suspiciou s finding s requiring 
immedia te attention for suspected malignancy among <4% of participants).  
• Patients receiving active therapy for cancer, except skin canc er 
• Diagnosis o f pancreatic, esophageal, or liver cancer – or life expectancy < 6 months  
• Prior diagno sis of lu ng cancer  
• Indicatio n in chart review of difficulty communicating or  participating in telephone 
counseling sessions , per patient and PCP notes enter ed in electron ic medical record . 
• Patients with evidence in CDW of ICD10 codes for severe behavioral disorders  will 
be excluded. These include: Manic/ bipolar disorder severe – F30.2, F31.1 -6; 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 21 of 27 
 Dissociative/conver sion disorders  – F44; Paranoid/Unstable personality disorder – 
F60; Mental retardation – F70-F79; Pe rvasive s peech/language deve lopment 
disorders – F84. 
• Patients with cognitiv e impairment  and/or  dementia (including ICD10 codes G31.84; 
F01-F03) 
• Pregnant or subjects repor ting they may be pregnant  
• Tempo rary beginning 12/ 12/2019 : Patients assigned to  primary care providers  at 
New York Harbor in the proactive arm who have a “Non-exempt ” co-pay status and 
are not already currently being prescribed smoking cessation medications , will be 
excluded  until mechanis ms w ith clinical pharmacy  have been established to ensure 
these patients do not receive a co -pay.  
 
5.5 Study Evaluations  
 
Patient evaluations . The study team will query CDW twice weekly to identify scheduled  LCS 
tests at t he NY  Harbo r and Providen ce VAs. Eligibility for lung cancer screening requires the 
patient’s provider  conduct a thorough  assessment of a patient’s smoking hist ory to ensure they 
have smo ked at least 30 pack -years over their  lifetime. Current smokers who meet g eneral  
eligibility c riteria for lung cancer screening including age,  comorbidity, and other health history  
eligibility criteria, will be approached . 
Upon identifying LCS screening pa tients, study staff at the Coordinating Center will enter them 
into a trac king d atabase, recor ding informa tion such as the date they were screened or are 
scheduled to be screened. We will extract information about their screening  results, including 
withdra wing those few individuals (<4%) who are identified with highly suspicious  findings who 
are no  longer eligible for participation in the study evaluation. For subjects receiving pro active 
care, we will extract information about me dications provided by the p rovider, and date their 
contact information was provided to the VA Quitlin e.  
The tracking sys tem will prompt Coordinating Center staff at 2.5 months following the date of 
the pati ent’s LCS test . We will re -confirm their eligibil ity, reviewing any changes to their 
screening results associated with repeat tests in CDW, and  will m ail a 3-month assess ment  
survey using the mailing address information in the EMR . If the mailed survey has  not been 
received by the study team within 10 work days, telephone follow -up will be initiated. We will 
conduct five attempts to complete the telepho ne ver sion of the su rvey (one call per day). If no 
telephone contact can be made, we will mail a 2nd attem pt of the full survey. We will conduct a 
3rd mail ing of a shorter survey foc using on the primary outcomes to subjects who do not 
complete the full sur vey wi thin 14 days o f the 2nd ma iling. This 3rd mailing will be followed by 
three additional phone attempt s, with the goal of completing the abbreviated su rvey over the 
phone if the subject is willing .   Please refer to the Telephone Script (included in Ap pendix ) for 
language  to answ er potential questions from patients regarding privacy and legal concerns. We 
will offer to mail the patient a copy of the Noti ce of Privacy Practices upo n request. We will use 
an “Address Service Requested” envelope, for automa tic fo rwarding to ne w ma iling addresses.  
The same schedule of mailing and phone ca lls will be followed for the 12 -month survey.  
Subjects who do not respond  to the 3 -month survey will  be mailed a 12 -month survey, altered to 
include some of the questions fro m the missing 3 -mont h survey (included in attachments) , 
unless they have contacted the study team requesti ng to opt out from further contact .  
 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 22 of 27 
 Provider Ev aluations . A brief email survey will be sent to providers p articipating in the study. 
The main purpose of this brief survey (see Appe ndices ) is to captur e any perceptions by 
providers that the study is adding to their workload or saving th em time, and to g ive providers an 
opportunity to share their experiences abo ut the study with the study team. If providers have 
offered LCS to more th an one  patient, they  will only receive this survey once per quarter.  
 
5.6 Data Analysis  
 
Sample size deter mination.  Our tar get sample size of 2 70 respondents per arm with complete 
12-month outcome information was selected to have sufficient (80%) power to detect  a doubling 
of abstinence rates (Relative Risk = 2) using a multilevel random effects model with pat ients 
clustered b y randomized provider . The assumed intraclass correlation c oefficient for the 
provider clustering effect is assumed to be 0.01.  Powe r is b ased on a two -sided test with type -1 
alpha error rate of 0.05%. Due to randomization, we do not anti cipate needing to  adjust for 
patient covariates.  
 
Intent -to-treat (ITT) ana lysis We will utilize an intent -to-treat approach and include all 
particip ants w ho meet study eligibility criteria and are assigned to a study arm, regardless of 
whether they parti cipated in all of  the care components of that arm (e.g. declined proactive 
telephone counseling). Our primary analysis will focus on participants for whom w e have 
complet e 12-month abstinence (target n=2 70 per arm).  
 
Missing outcome data . For secondary an alyses, w e will e xamine outcomes for all eligible 
screening patients who are  current smokers offered screening by a participating randomized 
provider during  the study per iod. This analysis will include patients who do not participate in the 
survey assessme nt of cessation o utcomes. We will perform two secondary analyses.  The first  
will assume that patients who do not participate in the survey assessment  (e.g. missing 
absti nenc e outcomes ) will be considered continued smokers, which is a typical intent -to-treat 
approach for c essation trials.  We do not anticipate differential missing data across study arms.  
Second, we will address potential missing cessati on dat a by requestin g a HIPA A waiver and 
waiver of informed consent to review EMR data for all  eligible pa tients to estimat e an 
administrative assessment of cessation, based on Healt hFactors data and whether patients 
report quitting at a subsequent visit o r when  they return f or annua l lung cancer screening. The 
methods developed by McGinnis et al, will be used  to construct thi s administrative cessation 
variable.  
 
(Note, due to COVID pandemic changes in lung cancer scre ening utilizati on and study 
enrol lment timelines, the missing data protocol using EMR data was adapted for the primary 
outcome. See the Statistical Analysis Plan .) 
 
All data will be mai ntained and analyzed at the Seattle offices of the Seattle/Denver Center o f 
Innovation for Vet eran-Centered and Value -Driven Care. Dr. Zeliadt will oversee all project staff 
conduc ting data analysis activities. See below for descrip tion of data and privacy  protections at 
our Center of Innovation.  
 
5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects  
 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 23 of 27 
 Patient participants  may be withdrawn without their consent if they no longer meet the study 
eligibility crit eria (e.g. their LCS test or a short -term follow -up test identifies lung can cer or a 
highly suspicious finding, or if the subject becomes pregnant whi ch is unlikely given  the age 
eligibility for LCS). A participant may also be withdrawn if either of the re sponsible VA clinician s, 
Drs. Au or Feemster , deem s it appropriate to ensure  that no harm occurs to the subject.   
Both patient and provider participa nts ma y withdraw fro m the study at any time without incurring 
any consequences. Participants may notify th e study team or Principal Investigator at any time 
to withdraw from the stud y. Contact information will be provided in all communications, including 
on the Information Sh eet and survey mailings provided to all participants. Language 
emphasizing the freedom  to withdraw at any point during the study will be i ncluded on 
communication s with study participants.  
 
6.0 Reporting  
 
Collection of Safety Information. The stu dy activities do not involve any invasive procedure, 
and it is not anticipated that serious adverse events or unanticipated problems will occur , 
includi ng events that would tri gger suspension of research . However, in the rare chance such 
an incident does o ccur, all seri ous adve rse events and unanticipated problems will be reported 
according to regulatory  and reporting requirements outlined in the VHA Hand book 1058.01 
within 5 bu siness days of the incident.  The Coordinating Center will complete and su bmit a n 
Unanticipate d, Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Report form or Problem Report for each incident to 
the VA Human Subjects Boards as per the regulatory requi rements at each site and  the study 
protocol.  
 
The project coordinator will be responsible for repo rting relevant infor mation to the PI on a 
weekly basis.  Any clinical or data safety concerns will be repo rted to the PI and responsible VA 
clinician within 2 4 hours. If the PI is un available, the project coordinator will contact an available 
Co-Investigat or (Dr. Becker , Dr. Au, Dr. Feemster). The PI will determine whether the event is a) 
serious or non -seriou s and b) anticipated or unanticipated. The PI will e nsure that any 
necessary  actions are taken immediately to address the current patient situation, a nd the n will 
decide if the team needs to make any changes in the protocol and/or consent forms to prevent 
future occurrences or better inform future participa nts. Any deviation to pr otocol or safety 
concerns resulting from the study will be communicated by  the p roject coordin ator via the 
submission of an Unanticipated, Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Report form o r Problem Report 
to the VA IRB as per the VHA regula tory requirements and pr otocol, w ithin 5 business days of 
an incident.  
Method of Collection of Saf ety In formation. If the study is made aware of any Adverse 
Events through notification by a study particip ant, VA Quitline Counselor, or email/contact from 
a study provider, the proj ect coordinator will be responsible for completing the above safety & 
regulatory  report forms (i.e., SAE forms), which the PI will sign prior to submission. Adverse 
Events will be reported to the VA Human Subject Review Board using the appropriate Central 
IRB forms . 
Frequency of Safety Data Collection. Oversight of project activ ities and data by th e PI will 
begin immediately.  Collection of CDW data will begin as soon as IRB approva l is obtained.  
Twice -weekly lists of potential subj ects will be continued u ntil target recruitment goals are met. 
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 24 of 27 
 Any event that adversely affects pa rticip ant safety wil l be recorded as soon as possible after it 
occurs and be reported within 24 hours to t he PI.  
Notification of Subjects of Findings Affectin g Health and Welfare . This study does not 
involve any invasive procedure, and it is not anticipate d that  any findings identified by the study 
(e.g. survey results) will require notification.  
 
7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  
 
PHI.  Protected Health Information and personal identifying  information will be obtained from 
existing sources (Corporate Data Wareho use, C APRI/JLV) and from patient subjects. Names, 
social security numbers, birthdates, ages, appointment d ates, treatment dates, date of CT 
screenings, teleph one numbers, and patient  addresses will be obtained. Limited screening data 
will be entered into a n elec tronic subject  tracking database that will be maintained on secure 
servers at the COIN at VA Puget S ound. The tracking database will be used to log subj ect 
recruitment and comp letion of surveys. The tracking database will include subject name, SSN, 
address , phone number , date they were offered lung cancer screening by their VA provider, and 
date of recei pt of lung cancer screening. The tracking database w ill also serve as the cr osswalk 
between the subject name and the study ID sequentially assigned by  proje ct staff. Data  
collected as part of this study (subject responses to surveys) will include a study I D with no 
other patient identifiers, and will be sto red separately from the tracking/ crosswalk data.  
 
Data security.   Data collection, storage and m anagem ent for this r esea rch project will adhere to 
all applicable VA policies, the VA Puget Sound Health C are System’s Automated Information 
Systems Security Policy, and the establis hed Data Security Policy of the Seattle/Denver COIN. 
All electronic study data – includin g pro tected health information  and de -identified analysis files 
– will be stored in secure,  password protected folders and/or SQL databases on the Seattle 
HSR&D networ k. Access will be restricted to the study team. Protected health informati on wil l 
not be discl osed , copied, transmitted by email, or transmitted in total or in part to anyone not 
connected with the approved protocol and not approved  by the VA (via a Data U se Agreement, 
if necessa ry) to access the identifiers.  
 
All electronic st udy da ta will be in secu red and stored in electronic files on the COIN’s secure 
servers at VA Puget Sound.  Files will be secured behind the VA firewall with s trong password 
protectio n restrictions in accordance with VA policy. Access to study files will be  restricted to 
study  staff only. The data collected in this study will be used solely for the purpose desc ribed in 
the study protocol.  
 
At no time will copie s of data will be placed  on laptops, computer desktops, hard drives, portable 
media, or any other form o f media or har dwar e. Screening data for potential subjects identified 
in Corporate Data Warehouse da ta repository will be transferred and stored in elec tronic format 
to the VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI) server using secure serve r-to-
server, passwor d-protected media/ technology. Data Use Agreements between project staff and 
repositor ies will be executed prior to all data access. The h istorical and screening CDW data will 
remain within our designated VINCI workspace environment, wh ich wi ll be restrict ed to 
approved project staff only. The VINCI workspace will be accessed remotely from workstations 
located within COIN offices at VA Puget  Sound.  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 25 of 27 
  
Hardcopies of all study data (such as survey responses) will be kept in locked file cabi nets i n 
COIN offices . CDs containing participation records obtained  from VA Quitline will also be stored 
in locked file cabinets in COIN offices, and will be labeled only with a code d study ID (no patient 
identifiers).  
 
The PIs, co -investigators, and proje ct coo rdinator will be respo nsible for monitoring data and 
study activities. Any deviation from the data s ecurity or privacy rules will be immediately 
reporte d to the Database Admini strator, Privacy Officer and Information Security Officer. Study 
investiga tors w ill access dat a to identify prospective patients offered lung cancer screening on 
an ongoing (approx imately weekly) basis. The project team will hold re gular, biweekly meetings  
to provide updates and review analyses. Additional, ad hoc meetings will be sch eduled to 
discuss spec ific findings or challenges.  
 
Upon completion of the research project, the PI  in conjunction with the VA Information Security 
Officer (ISO), and in accor dance with VA policy, will ensure that, study data containing sensitive, 
confide ntial informat ion will be sanitized and removed from all servers, desktops, removable 
storage device s, etc.  in accordance with Records Control Schedule 10-1.  When any study 
personnel are no longer a pa rt of the research team, the PI  will remove that  perso n’s access to 
all study data and notify the VA Information Security Officer of such action. COIN Inf ormation 
Technology personnel will be responsible fo r maintaining COIN serve rs where study data will be 
kept, and will move, backup and remove study d ata fr om servers and  control access to data  
stored on COIN servers. All study team personnel with access t o sensitive patient data will stay 
current on their VA approved information security training and VA approved privacy policy 
training.  
8.0 Communication P lan 
 
Each site (NY H arbor and Providence) will submit and obtain R&D approvals. We anticipate NY 
Harbor an d Providence R&D committees will provide guidance ab out requirements for ann ual 
review and/or submitting presentations/manuscripts prior to publicatio n. 
The project manag er at the Coordinating Center in Seattle will be the point of contact for 
ensuring tha t any changes to the protocol or any Serious Adverse  Events or Unanticipated  
Problems will be promptly will be responsible for managing local R& D pape rwork and assisting 
with IRB paperwork.  
Dr. Zeliadt assumes primary responsibility for oversight of study  logistics; formative evaluation, 
fielding and analy zing survey data; conduc t of qualitative interviews; synthesis of formative 
evaluation findings in to fee dback reports.  Dr. Zeliadt will provide oversight of the Project 
Manager. Dr. Zeliadt will assume re sponsibility for ensuring the study meets overall pr oject 
deadlines and adhe res to the proposed timeline; communication with study team members and 
particip ants about stu dy events and results; and timely reporting of study findings internally to 
operationa l stakeholders, VA researchers and the scientific co mmunity.  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 26 of 27 
  
9.0 References  
 
1.  Moyer V, Force P. Screening for lung cancer: U.S. Preventive Services T ask Fo rce 
recommenda tion statement. Annals of internal medicine . 2013;160(5):330 –8. doi:10.7326/M13 -
2771.  
2.  Jackson GL, King HA, McNeil RB, et al. Evaluatio n of the VA Lung Cancer Screening 
Clinical Demonstration Project – Report Submitted to the Veteran s Affa irs Office of the Unde r 
Secretary for Health . Durham, NC: Veterans Affairs Center for Health Service s Research in 
Primary Care and National Center for H ealth Promotion and Dise ase Prevention  
3.  Kinsinger L, Anderson C, Kim J, et al. Implementation o f Lung  Cancer Screen ing in the 
Veterans Health Administration. JAMA Internal Medicine . 2017;177(3):399 –406. 
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.9022.  
4.  Fucito LM , Czabafy S, Hendricks P S, Kotsen C, Richardson D, Toll BA. Pairing smoking -
cessation services wit h lung  cancer screen ing: A clinical guideline from the Association for the 
Treatment of Tobacco Use and De pendence and the Society for Research on Nicotine an d 
Tobacco. Cancer . 2016; 122(8):1150 –9. doi:10.1002/cncr.29926.  
5.  Piñeiro B, Simmons V, Palmer A,  Corre a J, Brandon T . Smoking cessation interventions 
within the context of Low -Dose Computed Tomography l ung cancer screening: A systematic 
review. Lung Canc er. 2016;98:91 –98. doi:1 0.1016/j.lungcan.2016.05.028.  
6.  Zeliadt SB, Heffner JL, Sayre G, et al. Attitu des and percep tions about smoking 
cessation in the context of lung cancer screening. JAMA Internal M edicine . 2015;175(9):1530 –
7. doi:10.1001/jamainternm ed.2015.3558.  
7.  Ostrof f J, Copeland A, Borderud S, Li Y, Shelley D, Henschke C. Readiness of Lun g 
Canc er Screening S ites to Deliver Smoking Cessation Treatment: Current Practices, 
Organizational Priorit y, and Perceived Barriers. Nicotine & tobacco resear ch : official journal of  
the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco . 2015;18(5):1067 –75. 
doi:10.1093/ntr/ntv177.  
8.  Zeliadt S, Greene P, Krebs P, et al. A Proactive Telephone -Delivered Risk 
Communication Intervention for Smo kers Participating in Lun g Cancer Screening: A Pilot 
Feasibility Trial. J Smok Cessat . 2017:1 –8. doi:10.1017/jsc.2017.16.  
9.  Wu L, Sun S, He Y, Zeng J. Effect of Smoking Reduction Therapy on Smoking 
Cessation for Smokers without an Intention to Quit: An U pdated Systematic Review and Meta -
Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. International Journal of Environmental Research  and 
Public Health . 2015;12(9):10235 –10253. doi:10.3390/ijerph120910235.  
10.  Garrett B, Dube S, Trosclair A, Caraballo R, Pechacek T , for and (CDC) C. Cigare tte 
smoking - United States, 1965 -2008. MMWR supplements . 2011;60(1):109 –13. 
11.  McFall M, Saxon A, Thaneemit -Chen S, et al. Integrating smoking cessation into mental 
health care for post -traumatic stress disorder. Clinical Trials . 2007;4(2):178 –189. 
doi:10.1177/1740774507076923.  
12.  Brown D. Smoking Prevalence among US Veterans. Journal of General I nternal 
Medicine . 2010;25(2):147 –149. doi:10.1007/s11606 -009-1160 -0. 
13.  Stead L, Koilpillai P, Fanshawe T, Lancaster T. Combined ph armacotherapy and 
behavio ural interventions for smoking cessation. The Cochrane Library . 2016;3:CD008286. 
doi:10.1002/14651 858.CD008286.pub3.  
14.  Kelly M, Sido H, Rosenheck R. Rates and correlates of tobacco cessation service use 
nationally in the Veteran s Health Administration. ; 2016:183. doi:10.1037/ser0000076.  
Zeliadt PROACT 9/29/21 VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version  10/26/2012  Page 27 of 27 
 15.  Sherman S, Takahashi N, Kalra P, et al. Care coordination to increase referrals to 
smoking cessation telephone counseling: a demonstration project. The American journal of 
managed care . 2008; 14(3):141 –8. 
16.  Farmer M, Rose D, Riopelle D, Lanto A, Yano E. Gender Differences in Smoking and 
Smoking Cessation Treatm ent: An Examination of the Organizational Features Related to Care. 
Women’s Health Issues . 2011;21(4):S182 –S189. doi:10.1016/j.whi.20 11.04.018.  
17.  Yano E, R ubenstein L, Farmer M, et al. Targeting Primary Care Referrals to Smoking 
Cessation Clinics Does N ot Improve Quit Rates: Implementing Evidenc e‐Based Interventions 
into Practice. Health Services Research . 2008;43(5p1):1637 –1661. doi:10.1111/j.1475 -
6773.2008.00865.x.  
18.  Jamal A, Dube SR, Malarcher AM, Shaw L, Engstrom MC. Tobacco use screening and 
coun seling during physician office visits among  adults --National Ambulatory Medical Care 
Survey and National Health Interview Survey, United States, 2005 -2009. MMWR Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report supplements . 2012;61(2):38 –45. 
19.  Hollands GJ, McDermot t MSS, Lindson -Hawley N, Vogt F, Farley A, Aveyard P. 
Interventions to increase adherence to medications for tobacco dependence. The Cochrane 
database of systematic reviews . 2015;2:CD009164. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD009164.pub2.  
20.  Stead LF, Lancaster T. C ombined pharmacotherapy and behavioural int erventions for 
smoking cessation. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews . 2012;10:CD008286. 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD008286.pub2.  
21.  Jonk Y, Sherman S, Fu S, Hamlett -Berry K, Geraci M, Joseph A. National tren ds in the 
provision of smoking cessation ai ds within the Veterans Health Administration. The American 
journal of managed care . 2005;11(2):77 –85. 
22.  Anthenelli R, Benowitz N, West R, et al. Neuropsychiatric safety and efficacy of 
varenicline, bupropion, and nicotine patch in smokers with and witho ut psychiatric disorders 
(EAGLES): a double -blind, randomised, placebo -controlled clinical trial. The Lancet . 
2016;387(10037):2507 –2520. doi:10.1016/s0140 -6736(16)30272 -0. 
 