 
 
A Psychotherapy Development Study for Internet Gaming  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol & Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
IRB Approval Version: 3/23/2020  
Page 1 of 23
GAM Version 3/20Protocol: A psychotherapy development study  for internet gaming
Principle Investigator: Kristyn Zajac, Ph.D.
Abstract
The fifth edition  of the Diagnostic  and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM-5) introduces 
Internet gaming  disorder (IGD) as a Substance-Related and Addictive Disorder  in Section 3, Conditions  for 
Further Study. Although research is in the nascent  stages,  existing studies demonstrate that IGD is associated 
with psychosocial distress  including suicidality, and adverse  vocational  and educational outcomes in youth.   
Internet gaming  disorder also shares  substantial  overlap  with substance use, and it primarily affects 
adolescents, who rarely seek treatment on their own. Parents more often express concerns about their child’s  
game playing  behaviors, and data suggest that parents  can have strong influences on it. This psychotherapy 
development study will evaluate feasibility, acceptability,  and effect sizes of a behavioral intervention  designed  
to help parents  reduce gaming problems in their children. Sixty concerned parents and their children will 
complete parental  and self-report inventories and structured diagnostic interviews regarding the child’s gaming 
behaviors, substance  use and psychosocial  functioning. Participants  will be randomized to either a control  
condition consisting  of referral for mental  health  issues and family support services  or to the same plus a 6-
week family-based behavioral intervention  designed  to assist with better  monitoring and regulating the child’s  
game playing  behaviors and encouraging and rewarding alternatives to game  playing.  Gaming  and other 
problems will be assessed pre-treatment,  mid-treatment,  at the end of treatment, and at a 4-month follow-up.  
This study  is unique  in evaluating initial psychometric properties of a parental version of a measure that uses 
the DSM-5  criteria for IGD in a clinical sample, and it will also assess  associations of IGD with substance use, 
psychological symptoms,  and family  functioning over time.  Most importantly, this study will be the first 
randomized trial of an intervention designed to reduce gaming problems, and results  are likely to guide  future  
research and treatment  efforts  related  to this condition.
Specific aims  
Internet gaming  disorder (IGD) affects  about  1%-2%  of the population,  and primarily adolescent males.  
This grant application  represents the first randomized study of treatments for IGD. 
There are four important  and timely  reasons why a study of interventions for youth with gaming 
problems is necessary. First, this condition is gaining international attention  with its recent  inclusion  in the 
DSM-5. Second,  IGD shares  extensive  overlap with substance use disorders with respect to comorbidity,  risk 
factors and presenting features. Third, IGD is associated with adverse consequences  that parallel many  of 
those related to substance use disorders, such as poor school performance and serious physical and mental  
health outcomes  including suicidality.  Finally, efficacious treatments for this condition may reverse  or minimize  
its adverse effects,  and youth who are still living with their families can benefit from parental support in 
reducing gaming  problems. Although  clinicians  are already treating this condition  primarily in specialized 
residential programs, there  are no systematic evaluations of interventions designed to reduce gaming 
problems and no empirically  based guidelines for clinicians treating this condition  on an outpatient  basis.  
 We adapted principles  and theories of behavioral and family-based  interventions  for substance use 
disorders for IGD. In this pilot study, 60 parents and their children with IGD will be randomly assigned  to one of 
two conditions: referral to services for related conditions,  or the same  plus a 6-week  behavioral family 
intervention in which parents and children will meet weekly with a therapist to learn to monitor  game playing, 
restructure the environment to be less conducive toward playing, set realistic goals related to frequency of 
game playing, and encourage  and reward  behaviors  incompatible with game playing. Sessions  will also focus  
on improving parent-child  communication.  Parents  and children will complete evaluations assessing gaming, 
substance use, attention problems, and psychosocial  functioning pre-, mid-, and post-treatment and 4 months 
later. 
Specific aims are:
1.To evaluate  the feasibility  and acceptability of this intervention. The proportion  of participants who 
complete 6 sessions  will be determined, along  with parent  and child satisfaction ratings of the treatment. 
We will consider the treatment feasible and acceptable if we are able to recruit  the full sample and 70% or 
more of the families  complete treatment and express moderate  to high levels  of satisfaction overall and 
with the majority of the session  topics. IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 2 of 23
GAM Version 3/202.To examine  the effect size of the intervention in reducing  gaming. Parent and child reports of 
frequencies and durations of game  playing will be compared over time between conditions  to derive effect 
size estimates. We hypothesize that the behavioral family intervention will reduce the frequency and 
duration of game playing episodes  relative  to the control condition.  We also expect that a lower  proportion  
of youth in the intervention condition will meet current DSM-5 criteria  for IGD following treatment.
 
Exploratory aims are to examine putative  mechanisms of change including structural  changes in the 
home environment, frequencies of monitoring gaming, participation in alternate  activities,  and family 
communication and functioning. If we can identify potential  mechanisms of change for gaming behavior, we 
can focus subsequent psychotherapy development efforts on addressing those processes more directly.  
We will also assess the effect  size of the intervention on secondary outcomes including  indices  of 
substance use, attention problems, depression, sleep,  psychosocial  functioning and quality of life. We expect  
that the intervention  will result in improvements along some  or most  of these domains if it yields  benefits  in 
reducing gaming.  
In addition, we will evaluate concordance between  parent and child reports  on measures of gaming  and 
gaming problems. These data will help inform development  of diagnostic and assessment tools for IGD.  
If the intervention is feasible and acceptable  and medium or larger  effect sizes are noted for decreasing 
gaming, we will propose a larger scale, longer-term study after modifying the intervention  based  on 
experiences with this pilot study.  Even  in the absence of treatment-specific effects,  these results  will provide 
valuable information  about how gaming and psychosocial functioning change over time and about  the 
relationship between gaming and other addictive behaviors (i.e., substance abuse) in a clinical  population.  
Further, the study has the potential  to shed light on important mechanisms of change  for youth behaviors in the 
context of a family-based  addiction treatment, an area understudied in substance  abuse  treatment  as well. 
Given increasing scientific interest in IGD, this novel study  is timely  and critical for addressing  concerns related 
to this emerging public health issue.
Background  and significance
          The vast majority of children  play video or electronic  games. A nationally  representative  study of US 
youth ages 8-18 years found that 88% played games  electronically,  68% played  at least  weekly, and 23% daily 
(Gentile, 2009). On the 2013 Youth Risk Behavior  Surveillance System, 41% reported using computers for 
non-school work and gaming an average  of >3 hours per day (Kann et al., 2014). Although  most  video game 
playing is harmless, excessive play can lead to psychosocial and even medical problems such as game-
induced seizures  and deaths  (BBC, 2005;  Chuang, 2006; Reuters, 2007). Although very few cases  rise to 
these extremes, governments of some  Asian  countries have declared  problem game  playing to reach  epidemic 
proportions. Providers  have established specialized  treatment clinics around the world,  including in the US.  
            The  American  Medical Association  (2007) called for consideration of a condition  related to excessive  
gaming as a mental disorder, and the 5th edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(DSM-5; APA, 2013) includes Internet gaming  disorder (IGD)  as a Substance-Related and Addictive Disorder 
in Section 3, “Conditions for Further  Study.”  This designation recognizes the personal and public health 
significance of the condition, and it encourages further research  of its diagnosis, comorbidities, and biological 
underpinnings, as well as its natural progression and treatment.  This study will address many  of these issues. 
Diagnosis. The DSM-5 lists 9 criteria  for IGD, and an international group (Petry  et al., 2014) suggests  their 
operationalization. Ko et al. (2014) administered clinical interviews based on the DSM-5 criteria  to young adults  
in Taiwan: those with current gaming problems; those with past problems; and those  who never had problems. 
Meeting >5 criteria best distinguished  those with “normal” levels of play from those with problems, and the 
specific criteria  had adequate to good  diagnostic accuracy,  providing  support for the DSM-5 classification 
system. We (Rehbein et al., 2015) developed  a screening instrument, Video Game  Dependency  Scale  
(VGDS), based on DSM-5 criteria and administered it to 11,003  students;  it had excellent reliability and 
discriminant validity. This study  will be the first to evaluate the psychometrics of a parental  version  of the 
VGDS, and it will assess concordance between parent and child reports  of symptoms  and diagnosis. IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 3 of 23
GAM Version 3/20Risk factors. Although an understanding of IGD is in early  stages, male gender is clearly a risk factor.  
Regardless of how gaming problems are classified, studies ubiquitously find higher rates  of game  playing and 
problems in males than females (Choo et al., 2010; Desai  et al., 2010; Mentzoni et al., 2011). In our DSM-5 
evaluation of IGD (Rehbein et al., 2015), 2.0%  of males  had IGD versus  0.3%  of females. Younger age is 
consistently associated  with gaming as well. Using less stringent classification systems than the DSM-5,  Festl 
et al. (2013) found a 7.6% prevalence rate of gaming problems  for youth under 19 years and a 3.7%  rate for 
those 20 and older. Mentzoni et al. (2011)  noted that 15.4% of males aged  16-21 years,  and 9.7% of males 
aged 22-27,  had gaming  problems; rates  in other  age groups, and for females of all ages, were under 3%. 
Gaming problems are also linked to drug use, and particularly illicit drug use. In a study of over 4500  
students, boys who used  marijuana, nicotine,  and alcohol  were  substantially more  likely to report  problems  with 
gaming than non-users (Van  Rooij et al., 2014). In a survey  of nearly 2000 video game players, Porter  et al. 
(2010) found no differences  between those with and without gaming problems in terms of alcohol use, but 
those with gaming  problems  were more likely to use illicit drugs.  Walther  et al. (2012)  evaluated over 2500  
students and found no association between  alcohol  and nicotine use and gaming but a positive  relationship 
with marijuana use. In CT, where  the proposed study will be conducted, Desai et al. (2010) surveyed over 
4000 high school students,  and 4.7%  of the video game  players  reported  problems  with their playing; although 
drinking did not differ  based on gaming problems, problem  gamers  more often used nicotine and illicit drugs. 
Substance use and gaming may also share a neurobiological basis,  with fMRI studies finding some  similar  
deficits in pre-frontal cortex functioning  (e.g., Chen  et al. 2014;  Han et al. 2010; Kim et al. 2015; Ko et al. 2013, 
2105).  
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), social  anxiety, depression and suicidality are related to 
IGD as well. In cross sectional  studies,  persons  with gaming problems have greater  ADHD symptoms  (Choo  et 
al., 2010; Gentile, 2009; Rehbein et al., 2010) and depression  (Desai  et al., 2010; Mentzoni et al., 2011; van 
Rooij et al., 2010) and lower sociability and social competence  than those without (Festl et al., 2013; Lemmens  
et al., 2009; Lo et al., 2005; Rehbein et al., 2010). In a prospective  study  of over 1,300 youth, Swing et al. 
(2010) found game  playing  correlated with more attention  problems  initially, and this relationship persisted 
throughout a 13-month period. Among over 700 youth, heavy game  playing was associated with an increase  in 
depression over the one-year study  period,  and greater  depression  predicted more  game  playing  as well as 
withdrawal from sports  and other  activities (Romer et al., 2013). Gentile et al. (2011) followed over 3000 
students for 2 years  and found  that as gaming became  more pronounced, depression, anxiety, and social  
phobia symptoms increased while school performance suffered. Excessive  gaming  is also related to suicidality 
(e.g., Messias et al., 2011;  Rehbein et al., 2010), further underscoring its public health  significance. 
Thus, drug use and psychological symptoms are correlated with and likely involved in the development 
of IGD and/or  arise  from it. However,  the few available longitudinal studies reported upon natural changes  over 
time. They did not address how treatment impacts changes  in gaming and related problems. 
Treatments. Reviews of treatment for IGD (King et al., 2011; Petry  et al., 2015;  Winkler et al., 2013) find few 
randomized trials exist. Most interventions  involve  intensive multi-modal therapy provided in residential  care 
(Cash et al., 2012; Koo et al., 2011; Rumpf et al., 2014; Shek et al., 2009). Few patients, and typically the most  
severe, seek residential care. This level of care is also expensive, and it is likely more  cost-effective to provide 
effective outpatient  services to individuals before problems become severe enough  to warrant residential care. 
Young (2007)  describes cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) to treat outpatients  with Internet problems 
more generally,  i.e., not limited to gaming. In a non-randomized evaluation, most of 114 adults  who received  
this treatment reduced symptoms by the 8th session, and improvements  were maintained through a 6-month 
follow-up. In one of the only randomized trials, Du et al. (2010) assigned 56 youth in Shanghai to 8 sessions of 
CBT or a no treatment control.  Internet use decreased  similarly in both groups, but those assigned to CBT had 
improvements in time management skills and reductions in psychological symptoms relative to controls. Jager  
et al. (2012) describe an ongoing study in Germany comparing CBT to a wait-list control. That study  will be the 
first large  scale randomized study  of treatment for “Internet  addiction,”  but it is not limited  to persons with 
gaming problems, who differ substantially from those  with general “Internet addiction” in terms of 
demographics, comorbidities,  severity  and course (Kiraly et al., 2014;  Ko et al., 2007; Li et al., 2014;  van Rooij  
et al., 2010).   IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 4 of 23
GAM Version 3/20This study  focuses on developing  an intervention specifically for gaming,  the Internet-based activity  
most likely to lead to clinically significant problems  (Kiraly  et al., 2014;  Ko et al., 2007; Li et al., 2014;  van Rooij  
et al., 2010).   IGD is conceptualized similarly to other  common problems in adolescence, including substance 
use disorders,  and these  disorders are strongly influenced by family systems  and respond well to approaches 
that target  family interactions  and improve  both monitoring and contingencies around the problem behaviors 
(Hogue & Little, 2009; NIDA, 2014). Further, few youth  or young  adults seek  mental health treatment generally  
or addictions  treatment specifically (Alegria et al., 2011; SAMHSHA 2009ab). More often, parents express  
concerns, and decades of research on adolescent substance abuse treatment demonstrate  the strongest 
evidence base for family-based interventions (Tanner-Smith et al., 2013; Waldron & Turner, 2008).  Therefore, 
this study will focus on treating  parents  along  with their children. 
Similar to the substance  abuse field, parental  involvement, particularly monitoring and supervision, can 
have strong  influences on children’s game playing (e.g.,  Lin et al., 2009; Young, 2009). Allowing video  game 
systems in a child’s bedroom  relates  to more  frequent  playing (Roberts  & Foehr, 2008) and greater use of 
violent and mature-rated games  (Olson  et al., 2007). Parental guidelines related to playing time are inversely  
associated with excessive  playing as well. Carlson et al. (2010) surveyed 7,415 youth and found those who 
reported their parents  had well-defined rules regarding playing were less likely to play excessively than those 
whose parents did not. In addition, frequent monitoring  of behaviors is associated with improved outcomes  
along many  dimensions  (e.g.,  Michie  et al., 2012;  Steinberg et al., 2013). In a longitudinal study  of parental 
monitoring of children’s  media usage  including  game playing,  greater monitoring had benefits  on academic 
performance, social functioning  and sleep (Gentile  et al., 2014). The intervention  we developed teaches 
parents, as well as children, to monitor game playing  and to establish and maintain clear  expectations.  It 
provides communication skills training and also assists  parents in restructuring home environments to be less 
conducive toward  game playing  and to encourage other  recreational activities.  Borrowing from effective  
behavioral family interventions for substance use disorders  (Meyers et al., 1998; Miller et al., 1999;  Stanger  et 
al., 2009; Waldron  et al., 2007), the treatment  also encourages use of positive contingencies for non-game  
playing behaviors. In an uncontrolled study of brief family  therapy for IGD, Han et al. (2012) found 
improvements in family cohesion were related to decreases in gaming  along with increases in caudate  nucleus 
activity in response to affection stimuli, suggesting  a role for family  therapy and a possible biological 
mechanism underlying response  to it.
This stage  1 pilot study is designed to assess feasibility, acceptability  and effect  sizes  of a family  based 
behavioral intervention for reducing  gaming in youth. Consistent with guidelines  for psychotherapy 
development (Carroll & Onken, 2005;  Onken  et al., 2014; Rounsaville et al., 2000), it incorporates  all 
components of Stage 1 research such as identifying a target population and outcomes, outlining therapeutic 
procedures based  on theoretical models, and specifying and measuring potential  change mechanisms. As 
such, this study  will provide  a strong  foundation for informing future research and clinical  treatment with this 
population. 
This study  is innovative on several levels: 1) it is the first randomized  trial of an intervention  specifically 
directed toward  IGD; 2) it examines potential mechanisms of change,  including  environmental changes 
(removal or relocation of devices in the home) and monitoring  gaming, participation  in alternate  activities, and 
family functioning and communication;  3) it assesses comorbidities of gaming, substance  use, and related 
conditions and evaluates  changes in these symptoms over time; and 4) it is the first to evaluate  psychometric 
properties of a parental assessment tool based on the DSM-5  IGD criteria,  a critical aspect for diagnoses of 
youth. Results will provide  valuable  information on the nature, course, and treatment of this new “addictive 
disorder.” 
Preliminary studies. This team has extensive  experience in areas of direct relevance to this proposal. First, 
Dr. Petry  has received  nearly 20 years of continuous  NIDA  funding to develop  and evaluate behavioral 
therapies for drug use disorders. She was also awarded the first NIH grant for treatment of another non-
substance addictive disorder-- gambling  disorder. Her work on gambling  is internationally renowned  (see 
biosketch). 
Second, Dr. Petry has adapted behavioral therapies  for use with adolescents and youth (e.g., DP3-
DK097705; Godley  et al., 2014;  Petry  et al., 2009,2015bc)  and is joined by adolescent  clinical  psychologists: 
Drs. Zajac and Chang. Dr. Chang  has 15 years’  experience treating adolescents in family therapy, and Dr. IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 5 of 23
GAM Version 3/20Zajac has a NIDA-funded K23 to evaluate behavioral therapy for transition age youth with drug use disorders. 
She also served as the director of an adolescent substance abuse clinic at the Medical University of SC. 
Dr. Cash  and Ms. Rae are leading authorities  on treating IGD. They founded  the first residential 
program dedicated to treating this condition  and recognize the need for earlier,  family-based interventions. As 
consultants, they will provide  invaluable input to the therapy manual and advice on clinical  issues. 
Finally, Dr. Petry was at the forefront of efforts  for including  IGD in the DSM-5.  As the primary 
representative to the APA Substance-Related Disorders  Workgroup with expertise in behavioral addictions, 
she led the subcommittee on non-substance addictions  and wrote  the text for this condition  that the Board  of 
Directors approved and included in the DSM-5  (APA, 2013; Petry & O’Brien, 2013). Dr. Petry also collaborates  
internationally with experts in IGD (Petry et al., 2014, 2015a;  Rumpf  et al., 2015) and has edited a book (Petry, 
2015). 
Approach
Subjects will be recruited by ads directed at parents, e.g., “Has your child developed problems from playing 
video games too much?” Staff will inform callers that the study involves both parent and child participation. 
Inclusion criteria are: (1) parent/guardian  of a 10-19 year old residing in the same  household >8 months/year; 
and (2) child meets DSM-5 IGD criteria  by self-report or by parent report  (see below and Human  Subjects). 
Exclusion criteria are parent or child has a significant  other  mental health condition  that may impact  response 
to treatment (active suicidality, psychosis), and parent or child is unable to attend 6 sessions over 8 weeks. 
Child age range spans early  to late adolescence, and residential criteria ensure the child lives primarily 
with the target parent  (allowing  for visitation of divorced parents, but not boarding  students). The child must  
meet DSM-5  IGD criteria via the self-reported or parent-reported VGDS or semi-structured interview. The self-
report version of the VGDS has established psychometric properties (Rehbein et al., 2015) and we have found 
evidence of validity of the parent-version of the VGDS  in our current  pilot study, as evidence  by concordance 
between the parent VGDS and a clinical interview administered  by doctoral level clinicians.  
Informed consent.  Persons who call and appear eligible will be invited to an in-person assessment, at which 
we will obtain written  informed consent from parents and children aged 18 years;  those <18 will provide assent. 
Assessments. Staff will administer instruments with established psychometric properties (when available) to 
assess study entry criteria, hypothesized  mechanisms of action,  and outcomes. Most  measures will be 
collected at baseline (BL), week  4, post-treatment, and a week 24 follow-up. There are some exceptions. The 
demographic interview will be administered at BL only. The AUDIT, DUDIT, BRIEF, BIS-11 (parent and child 
versions), SRS, and the DERS will be administered at BL and post-treatment  only.  The SCID, TLFB, and the 
T-ASI will be administered  at BL, post-treatment, and week 24 only.  Abbreviated versions of some  measures 
will be administered  at the follow-ups. Some variability in the scheduling of the follow-ups will be allowed to 
account for variability  between families in how quickly  they complete the 6 sessions of therapy.  
Both parents may participate and will complete the parental assessments (est. 2 hours), and both 
(when available) can participate  in the therapy, consistent with how family therapy is typically provided. Both 
parents and children  will complete a therapy satisfaction form post treatment. Children and parents will receive 
$30 in gift cards for completing the baseline assessment  and the 4 week follow-up and $50 in gift cards  for the 
post-treatment and 24 week  follow-up  interviews (up to $160/family member).
Family members  may complete their follow-up measures through  the survey function of REDCap in 
advance of their in-person  meetings. When the research  assistant calls to schedule the follow-ups, participants 
will be given  the option of receiving the survey link through e-mail, receiving a paper  copy  of the assessments 
by mail,  or completing the measures when they arrive for their in-person meeting. The week 4 assessment  can 
be completed in its entirety  by the participant at home through REDCap  or the mail, unless the participant 
prefers an in-person meeting. Study  visits may be completed over the phone if needed. 
Parents will provide: 
basic demographics, including age, SES, gender, and education of parents and child, and indices of the 
child’s school functioning: grades,  tardiness, absences and disciplinary issuesIRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 6 of 23
GAM Version 3/20modified Treatment  Service  Review (TSR;  McLellan  et al., 1992) questionnaires about  histories  and 
current treatments received (of the child).  Additional questions specific  to treatment  for video game  
addiction treatment  will be administered at all time points. 
Parents will provide  data about their own psychological  symptoms (Brief Symptom Inventory [BSI]; 
Derogatis, 1992)  
emotional regulation  (Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale [DERS]; Gratz & Roemer, 2004). 
Parents’ perceptions of their child’s gaming  will be evaluated by a revised  VGDS  (Rehbein et al., 2015),  
which includes items about types and locations of all gaming  devices  in the home  and frequencies with 
which they monitor their child’s gaming behaviors.
a semi-structured  clinical interview  using DSM-5  criteria (SCID; Petry et al., 2014), assessed over past 
year and past 2 months at BL and past 2 months  at other time points. 
Parents will complete  a TimeLine Follow-Back (TLFB; Sobell & Sobell, 1990) of the child’s gaming, time 
spent watching  others  play online (e.g., YouTube, Twitch),  and sleep
Child’s participation  in extracurricular activities will be assessed  via a checklist  from the Michigan  Study 
of Adolescent Life Transitions study (MSALT;  Eccles & Barber,  1999)
A modified version of the Parenting Style Index (Steinberg, Lamborn,  Dornbusch, & Darling, 1992), 
which includes a checklist of types  and frequencies with which they use tangible  rewards  (money, 
goods) and verbally praise their child 
the Brief Family Assessment Measure (BFAM;  Skinner  et al., 1995,  2000) 
Perceived Social Support Scale  (PSSS; Procidano & Heller, 1983). 
Child Behavior Checklist  (CBCL;  Achenbach, 2001), an index of child competencies and internalizing  
and externalizing symptoms
Conners’ Parent  Rating Scale —Revised (CPRS-R; Conners, 2008), a measure of emotional and 
behavioral problems, including ADHD. 
Parents will assess their own quality of life via the Quality  of Life Inventory (QoL: Frisch et al., 1992)  
quality of life of their child using the caregiver version of the Questionnaire for Measuring Health-related  
Quality of Life in Adolescents (KINDL-R;  Ravens-Sieberer, 2000). 
AUDIT (Saunders et al., 1993) a brief questionnaire about their own alcohol use  
DUDIT (Hildebrant,  2105) a brief questionnaire about their own substance use 
parent  version  of the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive  Functioning  (BRIEF; Guy et al., 2004) will 
evaluate executive  function of their child
the Social Responsiveness Scale, a brief autism  spectrum screen  (Constantino et al., 2003) 
the Barrett Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-11),  a measure of their own impulsivity  (Patton,  Stanford,  & 
Barratt, 1995)
Children will complete parallel instruments: 
VGDS (Rehbein et al., 2015), including items about types and locations of gaming devices in the home,
DSM-5 based clinical interview  for IGD (SCID; Petry et al., 2014); 
TLFB  of days and durations of play, time spent watching others play online (e.g.,  YouTube, Twitch), 
and sleep
participation in extracurricular activities via the MSALT assessment (Eccles & Barber,  1999) and school 
functioning. 
A modified version of the Parenting Style Index (Steinberg, Lamborn,  Dornbusch, & Darling, 1992), 
which includes a checklist of types  and frequencies of tangible  rewards  (money, goods) and verbal 
praise provided by parents will be administered
indices of social support and family communication  including the PSSS
BFAM
Teen Addiction Severity Index (Kaminer et al., 1999); 
Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory for Children  (Beidel et al., 1995); 
Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depressed Mood scale (Radloff, 1977); 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index  (Buysse et al., 1989). 
the Youth Self-Report (Achenbach,  1991) of emotional and behavioral problems, IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 7 of 23
GAM Version 3/20DERS (Gratz  & Roemer, 2004), 
quality of life KINDL-adolescent version  (Ravens-Sieberer, 2000)
the adolescent version of the Barrett Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-11),  a measure of their own impulsivity 
(Patton, Stanford, & Barratt, 1995)
Randomization. After  baseline,  families  will be randomized via a computerized algorithm (Stout et al., 1994) to 
groups below. Groups will be stratified  by child age (<15 or over),  sex, and parents participating (one vs. both). 
A. Referral for care. Therapists will explain that gaming problems  often co-occur with other mental health  
problems, and effective  treatment for the latter may reduce gaming as well. Therapists will refer parents to 
local support groups  such as Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services  and National Association for 
Mental Illness support  groups. Adolescents will be referred for appropriate services as well, e.g., depression, 
social anxiety, ADHD,  or substance use depending  on co-occurring problems. 
B. Referral plus Behavioral therapy will consist of referral for other services plus 6 family sessions (adapted 
from Petry, unpublished; Appendix). In Session 1, therapists will review baseline  information,  refer for other  
services, and orient participants to treatment. They will remind  parents that although they cannot prevent 
playing entirely, they can better understand why and when their child is playing and alter their reactions toward  
it, which may decrease the extent of play and problems. Therapists will describe methods to re-arrange the 
home to better monitor and be less conducive toward playing; this may include altering locations of or 
removing some (or all) gaming devices  from the home. Therapists will review  a tracking form and instruct 
parents how to and benefits of closely monitoring their child’s playing. Children will be asked to keep  their own 
log as well.
Session 2 will focus on goal setting for gaming, ranging from 0 to <12 hrs/week (Council on 
Communications and Media, 2013). It will begin with a review of past weeks’ logs. Therapists will troubleshoot 
difficulties with monitoring and concordance of child and parent logs. They  will review patterns of play to 
identify high-risk times  and days, and circumstances that may have impacted playing. Therapists will outline 
norms related to game playing and media use in general to guide selection and maintenance of reasonable  
goals. 
In session 3, therapists  will review logs and how actual gaming aligned or not with goals. Therapists will 
also introduce the concept  of replacing  high-risk game  playing times with alternate  activities.  The parent, and 
child, will review  a list of recreational activities the child does  or may enjoy. At least  2-3 activities will be 
identified to occur at high risk gaming  times in the upcoming week.  Over the next week,  participants  will 
continue recording  gaming and times in which parents  encouraged alternate  activities  and the child’s 
responses. 
Session 4 will review goals in light of increasing alternate activities,  and therapists will introduce the 
concept of rewarding non-game playing behaviors  this session. They  will outline possible rewards,  and parents 
will develop a concrete  plan to reward their child for not playing during high-risk  times in the next week.  
Session 5 will continue discussions of rewards  for non-gaming playing behaviors. Therapists will review  
rewards provided and encourage  continued  rewarding  of non-game playing and other positive behaviors in the 
future. The session  will focus on communication styles, and the parent and child will role play assertive 
communication skills, especially as they relate  to game playing.  
Session 6 will review progress and discuss long-term goals.  Therapists will remind  parents to continue  
to monitor play,  offer alternatives  to play, and reward  non-gaming behaviors to prevent relapse. The therapist  
will help parents  to problem solve any barriers to successful implementation  of the behavior plan.
        Six sessions will be scheduled about  once per week over 8 weeks, allowing for missed or re-scheduled 
sessions. The goal will be to complete 6 sessions over 8 weeks;  no reschedules will occur  after week  12. 
Sessions may be completed over the phone if needed. 
Study visits and follow-up assessments will be scheduled as described above and we have many 
procedures in place  to schedule and complete visits as planned (e.g.,  collection of contact  information,  
reminder calls and cards, etc.). However, some flexibility is required to protect participants from unnecessarily 
limiting study procedures to a specific  calendar day. If a participant misses an appointment, research staff will 
attempt to contact  and reschedule, but we anticipate late and missed appointments.  IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 8 of 23
GAM Version 3/20Training and therapists: Treatment will be conducted by Drs. Zajac, Chang, and a post-doctoral fellow.  
Training and supervision will consist of didactics, role plays and review  of audiofiles of role-plays and actual 
sessions. Tapes will be rated for general skills and intended content by a modified Yale Adherence 
Competence Scale (YACS; Carroll  et al., 2000). Therapists  will begin  treating patients once they score good or 
better on YACS items on role plays. Once recruitment begins, we will ask participants to consent for 
audiotaping, although they may participate in the study without taping (see Human  subjects). If YACS item 
ratings on tapes fall below a mean  of “good,”  additional  training  and supervision  will occur.   Drs. Chang and 
Zajac have already  met these adherence levels as part of a previous study  using the same intervention. Any 
additional therapists will be trained  and supervised  by either  Dr. Zajac  or Chang. 
Design considerations:
Why this control condition? We considered other control conditions but elected this one because  it allows for 
evaluation of follow-up effects  (unlike  waitlist conditions), controls for some expectancy effects  (unlike no 
treatment controls), and increases ability to ascertain benefits  of the behavioral  family therapy  if they exist. A 
therapist attention control condition is premature in Stage  1 research (Rounsaville et al., 2000), but represents 
an important next step if we note benefits  in this pilot trial. 
Why not focus on abstinence? Abstinence  from gaming will be encouraged for youth who are willing to 
consider a short-  or long-term  (or indefinite) goal of no game  playing.  Although  we expect that many  parents 
will desire that their child refrain entirely  from playing, most children probably will not share this goal. To avoid 
alienating youth  in these situations, therapists  will review “normal”  play (Gentile, 2009) and negotiate 
reasonable limits between  parents  and youth using recommended guidelines  (Council on Communication 
Media, 2013), which may include an initial period of no gaming. Therapists will also encourage parents and 
youth to re-arrange the home environment to be less conducive  toward gaming (e.g.,  removing gaming 
equipment from bedrooms) and to better identify and monitor play (e.g., by setting timers or parental  controls) 
especially for devices  that can be used for purposes beyond  gaming (i.e., computers, smartphones).  
Why this duration? A 6-week  intervention allows for coverage of topics thought  important for altering  gaming 
behavior (Council on Communication Media,  2013). It is long enough  to demonstrate  change  if it is efficacious  
and but not so long that topics will become redundant.  It is also within the range  of other brief family-based  
therapies (e.g., Coatsworth et al., 2001), and an even shorter  3-week (5 session) family intervention has shown  
promise in decreasing gaming (Han et al., 2012). Given the treatment’s emphasis on developing parenting  
skills, the 6-week protocol allows time between  sessions  for parents to practice new skills at home  and 
problem solve barriers  to implementation. If this IGD treatment is efficacious in reducing gaming problems, it is 
likely that best practices will be to integrate it alongside other evidence-based  treatments to address co-
occurring substance use and mental  health disorders. However, the purpose of the current  study is to evaluate 
the feasibility,  acceptability, and preliminary  effect  size for this IGD approach. If parents or children recommend 
more or fewer  sessions  in the therapy satisfaction questionnaire, subsequent  studies can alter the duration.
Data analysis
Enhancing reproducibility. Instruments chosen are reliable and valid, although some  gaming specific  
instruments are new, and this study  will assess their psychometric properties  (see below). Careful  training of 
evaluators will precede study initiation,  and assessment interviews will be audiotaped  and rated for reliability  
when participants  agree  to taping (see Human Subjects; >90% of participants  agree to taping in our trials). 
Evaluators blind to treatment conditions will conduct assessments, and obtaining information from multiple 
sources (parent and child)  will allow for assessment of concordance between reports (see below).
Primary aims. We will examine baseline (BL) indices and other services received during treatment using the 
Treatment Service Review,  and any differences between groups that relate to outcome can be used as 
covariates in subsequent analyses. Analysis  will be conducted on an intent-to-treat basis,  using all randomly 
assigned subjects. We will evaluate during treatment (BL to post-treatment) and longer-term (follow-up) effects.
Aim 1: To evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of this intervention,  the proportion assigned  to the 
intervention who complete  all 6 sessions will be examined, as will parent and child ratings of satisfaction. 
Aim 2: To examine  the effect size of the intervention on reducing game playing days and durations of 
play, we will analyze  TLFB  data collected  at each assessment period, with the greater report of parent or child IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 9 of 23
GAM Version 3/20used for each day. Hierarchial linear models (HLM; Gibbons et al., 1993; Raudenbush & Byrk, 2002) will 
compare differences  between  groups over time.  HLM is specifically  designed for repeated measures designs 
with missing data, allowing for intra-subject serial correlation and unequal variance and covariance structures 
over time by incorporating  available trend  data for each individual  with information on the group from which the 
subject is drawn. Maximum likelihood estimation enables  analyses  to be performed for the full trial without 
having to drop subjects  with incomplete data,  and both continuous and dichotomous variables can be 
analyzed. The model will include factors representing group, time, and their interaction,  along with any 
important covariates.    
We will also compare  proportions of subjects by group who are no longer gaming problematically, i.e., child 
reports no current DSM-5 IGD criteria  and/or <5 criteria, and parent confirms no more problems for the most 
conservative approach.  Logistic regressions  will include  important  demographics and baseline  indices of 
distress and severity of problems in Step 1. Step 2 will add treatment to determine if it adds unique  variance in 
predicting outcomes  after controlling for baseline  indices.  
Power analyses.  This pilot is designed to assess feasibility,  acceptability, and effect sizes. Thirty subjects per 
group are sufficient to address  the former, to estimate effect  sizes,  and to detect moderately large differences 
of Cohen’s (1988) d = 0.65 with Type I error rate =.05, Type II error rate =.20, and power [1-] = .80. If 
medium or larger effect sizes are noted, a larger randomized trial will be proposed  to assess long-term 
efficacy. 
Exploratory aims are to evaluate potential mechanisms of actions of the intervention including: changes  in 
number and location of gaming devices in the home, frequency of monitoring child’s game  playing (via self 
reports in both groups,  and confirmed by completed logs in Group B), child’s  participation in alternate  activities 
(ACC), and parental rewarding of child behaviors and family communications (PSSS,  BFAM scores).  Following  
recommendations of Morgenstern and Longabaugh (2000) for assessing mediation, Model 1 examines 
whether the treatments engender  differential outcomes on gaming  indices  (i.e., Aim 2 above). Model 2 will test 
if potential mediators change differentially over time by condition. For these analyses, a composite indicator for 
each construct will be utilized (e.g., summary  scores of number/location of gaming devices, monitoring 
frequencies, ACC, PSS and BFAM scores). Model  3 will examine  partial  correlations between  post-treatment 
scores on these indices  and gaming outcomes, after controlling for baseline scores.  If these  three models 
show significant effects, the final model  will assess associations between  these  variables and gaming 
outcomes. Step 1 of this model will include baseline scores of the potential  mediator(s).  In step 2, treatment 
group will be entered,  and in step 3, post-treatment scores of the mediator(s)  will be included, and resulting 
predictive power  of treatment condition examined.  If treatment  is no longer significant and the post-treatment 
mediation term is significant, criteria for full mediation are met. Although we do not expect to find full mediation 
with this sample size, potential mediators with medium or higher effect sizes in Models  2-3 will be considered 
for future evaluation  and inclusion in this intervention, if main effects of treatment are noted (Aim 2). 
We will also assess effect sizes on secondary  outcomes, e.g., substance use, psychosocial functioning 
and symptoms, sleep,  and quality of life. HLM,  outlined  above,  will compare groups over time on these indices. 
Finally,  we will evaluate the psychometric properties of a semi-structured  diagnostic  interview based  on 
the DSM-5  IGD criteria as well as the parent  version  of the VGDS. Briefly, internal reliabilities of symptoms and 
diagnostic criteria will be calculated  using  Cronbach’s alpha.  Parent and child reports on self-report and 
interviews will be compared  using  Shrout and Fleiss intraclass correlations for continuous variables and 
Kappa's for diagnostic assessments,  with respect  to endorsement  of specific  criteria  and diagnosis.  For both 
parent and child versions, we will also examine correlations with TLFB  gaming behavior and other  indices  as 
we did previously (Rehbein et al., 2015)  to determine convergent validity. Thus,  this project allows for initial 
psychometric evaluation of a parent report measure and a structured clinical interview  for IGD in youth. 
Future directions. This study  will inform future research and treatment for IGD. In terms of assessment and 
diagnosis, psychometrically robust assessment tools  are critically needed for research in epidemiological and 
clinical samples, and this study is a step toward developing and validating such tools. 
In terms of treatment, if the intervention is feasible and acceptable and leads to changes in gaming 
beyond that of the control condition, we will propose  a larger scale,  longer-term study. We can modify  the 
intervention based  on experiences by removing unhelpful sessions, and adding to those  that appear to lead to 
clinically important  changes and that show promise for mediating changes in gaming. Even  in the absence  of IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 10 of 23
GAM Version 3/20treatment-specific effects, these results will provide  valuable  information about how gaming and psychosocial 
functioning change  over time. Given increasing  scientific, clinical, and public interest in this condition, this study 
is timely and critical for addressing diagnostic and clinical  concerns related to this new “addictive disorder.”
Human Subjects
1.RISKS TO THE SUBJECTS
a.Human Subjects  Involvement and Characteristics.
i.Inclusion Criteria.
Subjects will be 60 parents/guardians  and their children. The inclusion criteria  for the families 
are: the parent is the legal guardian of a 10-19 year old residing in the same  household >8 
months/year with the child, and the child meets DSM-5 IGD (APA, 2013) criteria by parent or child 
report. 
This age range for children spans early to late adolescence.  Although we considered including 
younger or older  children,  interventions may differ substantially for children at more  extreme ends of 
the age spectrum.  In particular, younger children  may benefit more  from complete removal of gaming  
devices as they may not need  them for school work assignments,  and older children will be less likely 
to be living  with parents  and thereby  may not benefit from an intervention aimed at both parents and 
children. The proposed  age range spans that which will be most likely to benefit  from a family 
intervention. 
The residential criterion ensures that the child lives primarily with the participating  parent so that 
changes in the parent’s behaviors are more likely to impact the child’s gaming behaviors. This 
criterion allows for regular  and frequent visitation of children  to homes of divorced parents. However, 
if custody is equally split between parents  and only one participates in the intervention, then changes 
in one parent’s  behaviors are going to be less likely to impact changes  in gaming behaviors than if the 
child resides the majority  of the time with the participating parent. This living requirement also 
ensures that the child resides  with the parent most of the year, because children boarding away  at 
schools, for example, will be less likely to benefit  from this intervention than those who reside 
primarily with their participating parent(s). When two parents/guardians are available, both will be 
encouraged to participate in the treatment,  but to enhance generalization of the interventions  we felt it 
impractical to mandate  participation of both parents/guardians.
Gaming will be defined by playing video  games  on any electronic  device  including  computers, 
smartphones, televisions, tablets, and gaming  consoles or handheld devices (Xbox, Nintendo, Wii, 
etc). Consistent with the DSM-5  description of IGD (APA, 2103), the gaming  need not be over the 
Internet, but the vast majority of individuals with IGD play primarily Internet-based games (e.g.,  
Rehbein et al., 2010). Responses from the child or parent that indicate the child meets DSM-5 criteria 
for IGD via the VGDS  or semi-structured  interview  of DSM-5 criteria will qualify the family for study 
participation because best methods for diagnosis are not yet well established. The DSM-5  criteria 
(APA, 2103; Ko et al., 2014;  Petry et al., 2014)  and the VGDS (Rehbein  et al., 2015) have some  
established psychometric properties. These criteria  allow  for a broad range of participation and mirror 
issues present  when families present for treatment, while  still ensuring  sufficient homogeneity in the 
sample that clinically significant  harms  have arisen from gaming. 
   ii. Exclusion Criteria. 
Participants will be excluded if parent or child has a significant major other mental  health  
condition that may impact  response to treatment (including but not limited to active  suicidality, 
psychosis, bipolar disorder), or parent or child is unable to attend 6 weekly  sessions over 8 weeks.
Individuals with major acute psychiatric  illnesses that may impact  ability  to participate in the 
study may not participate.  Anyone with active suicidal intentions, psychosis, or bipolar symptoms, for 
example, will be referred  for appropriate psychiatric care.  If symptoms  subside and patients are 
receiving appropriate  psychiatric care, they may be reconsidered for participation in this study  when 
stable. Parents or children  with other  mental  disorders (substance  use disorders, depression, anxiety, 
attention deficit  hyperactivity  disorder) may participate,  as these other conditions are common  among 
those with IGD. Participants will be referred  for treatment  of these conditions as indicated. Receipt of IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 11 of 23
GAM Version 3/20other mental  health treatment before and during the study period will be documented in the Treatment  
Services Review, and any differences in mental health services  that occur  between groups and relate 
to outcomes can be controlled  in analyses.  
If either parent or child is unable to attend  sessions regularly over the next two months, they 
cannot participate, or will be reassessed  for eligibility after returning from extended vacations or while 
away. 
   iii. Ineligible Patients.
Some patients will choose not to enroll or will not qualify for this study. They  will be referred  to
other facilities (e.g., other substance abuse  treatment clinics or detoxification  services,  mental  health
treatment facilities) as appropriate.
iv. Treatment Clinics,  Services,  and Patient  Population.
Patients will be recruited  primarily  from advertisements  and word of mouth referrals directed at 
parents in the greater Hartford,  CT, area,  e.g., ““Worried about how much your child plays  video  
games?” We have  successfully recruited hundreds of persons with gambling disorder, a disorder with 
a lower base rate than IGD, into clinical trials  using  similar techniques (e.g.,  Petry  et al., 2006). The 
study team  will ensure  that the opportunity to participate in this project  is made maximally available  to 
populations at-risk  for Internet gaming disorder. To do this, we will systematically  distribute flyers  and 
place ads widely to ensure that we are not over-sampling from a single population. For example, we 
will share our flyers with school counselors  in both affluent and disadvantaged areas  and run ads in 
local papers and on radio stations that have  wide distribution areas. Past research indicates that 
males will likely be overrepresented in our sample,  and less is known  about  the prevalence of IGD in 
different racial/ethnic  and socioeconomic groups. However, we will regularly (i.e., after every  10 
participants recruited) evaluate the distribution  of gender, race/ethnicity, and socioeconomic  status of 
our sample  and make adjustments  to our recruitment efforts based on these results.  
We will also advertise the study at health  fairs and at local programs that provide adolescent 
substance abuse  prevention and intervention and at schools. 
Treatment will be provided at the University  of Connecticut School  of Medicine, located just 
outside of Hartford,  CT, with easy access by highway and bus lines to local communities. Given the 
lack of any specific treatment for IGD in this densely populated region, we anticipate  no difficulties 
recruiting 60 families into this study.  
b. Sources of Materials .  Research material includes  parent and child self reports from interviews, 
questionnaires, and observation of patients by study  staff.   None of these materials  will be available to 
legal, educational, or employer representatives. Data  obtained for research purposes  will be at no cost 
to patients. 
c. Potential Risks.  Risks associated with participation in this research  study include:
i.Disappointment if not assigned to one’s preferred treatment group;
ii.Discomfort from being asked questions about gaming, alcohol and drug use, and psychosocial 
problems;
iii.For those assigned  to the brief family  behavioral intervention,  standard discomforts associated  
with participating in family therapy, including disagreement or discord. 
iv.Potential breach of confidentiality.
v.For those  assigned  to the brief family  behavioral intervention, potential  discovery  of illegal  
behaviors on the part of the youth due to increased parental  monitoring of Internet activity.
2.ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION  AGAINST  RISKS
a.Recruitment and Informed Consent.
Informed Consent : A trained research staff member (Bachelors level or above), under supervision of the PI, 
will obtain  informed consent. All potential subjects  will receive an explanation of this study  protocol, its 
potential risks and benefits,  and alternative  treatment available.   Following resolution of any questions,  
parents/guardians and adult children (i.e., age 18) who agree to participate will be asked to sign the study IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 12 of 23
GAM Version 3/20consent form and HIPAA document.  A  signed  copy of the consent and HIPAA  forms will be given to each 
participant.  Assent will be obtained from children under the age of 18, and both child and parent must 
agree to participate prior to collection of study  data or randomization to a condition. As noted  above, 
individuals who choose not to participate  or who are deemed ineligible will be referred  for other services as 
indicated. 
An audiotaping  section  within the consent  form will be utilized  for recording of interactions between  
research staff and study  patients, including baseline and follow-up interviews  and therapy sessions. These  
audiofiles are utilized  only for quality control procedures,  to rate staff according to set standards  in 
interview and treatment administration. Patients may participate in the study even if they do not choose to 
allow audiotaping  (in our prior and ongoing studies, less than 5% of patients refuse audiotaping, and in this 
case both child and parent  must agree or taping  will not occur). The audiotaping consent  section  will 
explain that the purpose is to rate the staff member’s interviewing and treatment administration  skills.
b. Protection Against  Risks .  The following  will protect against potential risks:
i.Random group assignment is used, and about  half of families  will be assigned to the referral  alone 
condition and half to the referral plus brief family  behavioral therapy condition. These proportions  will be 
outlined in the informed consent  form, and patients will be made aware that they have about a 50% 
chance of being  assigned  to the family behavioral therapy condition.  Patients may voluntarily end study  
participation if they are dissatisfied with their assignment.
ii.The interviews and sample collections are brief, patients may skip questions or take a break if 
uncomfortable, and the particular instruments  chosen are intended to minimize discomfort.
iii.A trained and supervised doctoral level therapist will deliver the intervention. Discord or disagreements 
between children  and parents  will be addressed in therapy,  and one full session of the treatment is 
devoted toward  improving communication skills. 
iv. All data will be coded by number, not name,  and a "key" form will be kept in a separate locked file 
cabinet.  No information will be provided  about  the patients enrolled in this study  to anyone outside of 
the clinical and research teams, except in emergency situations (e.g., patient deemed a threat  to 
him/herself or others) or as required by law (e.g., child abuse/neglect). The study  therapists are all 
doctoral level with substantial experience handling crises. If a therapist learns of potential  
abuse/neglect, they will notify the Connecticut Department of Children  and Families (DCF)  as required 
by law. If a therapist  has concerns about potential  suicidal or homicidal  ideation,  the therapist will 
conduct a comprehensive  risk assessment  and, if deemed necessary, the participant will be transported 
immediately to the emergency  room  for acute  evaluation  and treatment. Within  the research context, 
research assistants  may also hear indications of risk of harm  to self or others or abuse/neglect. RAs will 
be well-trained on how to handle these situations.  Specifically, the RA will immediately contact the PI, 
study coordinator,  or study therapist who will assess safety and manage the crisis  directly  or instruct  
the RA on how to address risk, including (if necessary) arranging  for transportation to an emergency 
room or reporting concerns about abuse  or neglect to DCF. 
Audio data will be collected digitally, will be stored  on a password protected secure server, and 
destroyed at the end of the study;  only research  personnel will review the audio files for training, 
supervision, and adherence monitoring purposes. As noted earlier,  an audiotaping section within the 
consent form will be used in the study,  and patients  may participate in the study without allowing 
audiotaping. All audio files will be labeled by number, not name, and the “key” form will be kept 
separate in a locked file cabinet.
v.It is possible that the increased  monitoring  of Internet activity  that is part of the behavioral treatment  
may lead to uncovering illegal Internet  activity  on the part of the youth. During the informed consent  
procedure, youth  and parents  will be informed of this risk. It will also be made  clear  to the parents and 
youth that any information  disclosed to the research team  that indicates that the patient  is a threat to 
him/herself or others will be reported  as required by law to the Connecticut  Department of Children and IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 13 of 23
GAM Version 3/20Families (DCF). See 2biv above for details.  It is possible that other behaviors (e.g.,  buying/selling 
drugs, gambling)  that are illegal but do not require mandated reporting may be uncovered by increased 
parental monitoring. Although these situations do not represent  a threat to confidentiality, they may lead 
to loss of the patient’s privacy and could  cause increased conflict in the parent-child relationship. This 
risk is similar to that in adolescent substance abuse treatment, when parents are encouraged to 
increase monitoring  through  random urine drug screens and room  searches. This risk will be mitigated 
by 1) as noted  above, informing both parent  and youth about this potential risk as part of the informed 
consent procedure;  2) closely  following mandated reporting laws in handling this information; 3) 
teaching skills in treatment (e.g., communication)  that can help parents and youth  negotiate conflict  
situations; and 4) provision of individualized referrals to help address any conflict or symptoms  that 
persist. Of note, these  risks are similar  to those that would occur in outpatient family-based treatment  in 
the community, which commonly  focuses  on increased parental monitoring and supervision of 
children’s behaviors.
c.Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others.   
The anticipated benefits to participants in the study include careful evaluation of the child’s  game 
playing, substance use and psychosocial  and family  functioning, and a potential for reducing  their game 
playing. Parents  and children will each receive  $30 in gift cards for the intake and 4 week  follow-up and 
$50 for the post-treatment and 4-month follow-ups. Total compensation is up to $160  per family member.  
Benefits to society include a potential improvement in the effectiveness of treatment for Internet gaming 
disorder.
d.Importance of the Knowledge  to be Gained.  The potential risks of these  treatments are minor compared to 
the risk incurred by Internet gaming disorder. The risk/benefit ratio appears favorable.
Detailed Data and Safety Monitoring Plan
1. Brief description of the protocol: This study  will be one of the first clinical  trials examining  the efficacy of a 
brief family-based  intervention for Internet gaming  disorder (IGD), which  has been introduced as a Substance-
Related and Addictive Disorder in Section 3, Conditions for Further Study, in the fifth edition of the Diagnostic  
and Statistical Manual  for Mental Disorders (DSM-5). This psychotherapy development study will evaluate  
feasibility, acceptability, and effect sizes of a behavioral intervention  designed to help parents reduce gaming 
problems in their children.  Sixty  concerned parents and their children will complete  parental  and self-report 
inventories and structured diagnostic interviews regarding  the child’s gaming behaviors, substance use and 
psychosocial functioning. Participants will be randomized to either  a control  condition  consisting of referral for 
mental health issues and family support services or to the same  plus a 6-week family-based behavioral 
intervention designed to assist with better monitoring and regulating the child’s game playing behaviors and 
encouraging and rewarding alternatives  to game  playing. Gaming  and other problems will be assessed pre-
treatment, mid-treatment,  at the end of treatment, and at a 4-month  follow-up.  This study  is unique  in 
evaluating initial psychometric properties  of a parental version of a measure that uses the DSM-5 criteria for 
IGD in a clinical sample, and it will also assess associations of IGD with substance  use, psychological 
symptoms, and family functioning over time. Most  importantly, this study will be the first randomized trial of an 
intervention designed to reduce gaming problems, and results are likely  to guide future research and treatment 
efforts related to this condition.
2. Primary and secondary outcome measures: Primary  dependent variables are: a) feasibility of the 
intervention as evidenced by the proportion of patients assigned to the intervention who complete all 6 
sessions as well as parent and child ratings of satisfaction and b) number of game playing days  and durations 
of play. Secondary analyses will examine proportions of subjects by group  who no longer meet  diagnostic 
criteria for IGD, substance use, psychosocial functioning and symptoms, sleep, and quality of life.
3. Inclusion/exclusion criteria. Study inclusion  criteria  are: (1) parent/guardian of a 10-19 year old residing  in 
the same  household >8 months/year; and (2) child meets DSM-5 IGD criteria  by self-report or parent report.IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 14 of 23
GAM Version 3/20Exclusion criteria are: (1) parent or child has a significant other  mental health condition  that may impact 
response to treatment (active suicidality,  psychosis),  and (2) parent or child is unable to attend 6 sessions  over 
8 weeks. Only minimal exclusion criteria will be used to ensure that the sample  is as representative of 
adolescents with IGD as possible. Because  autism spectrum disorders, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder,  
and other  learning  or developmental disorder conditions are common  among adolescents with IGD, individuals 
with these conditions  will 
not be excluded  unless their disorder is so severe that it is likely to impact their ability  to participate in the 
treatment. 
4.  Sample  size. Participants will be sixty parents and their children. This pilot is designed to assess feasibility, 
acceptability, and effect sizes. Thirty subjects per group are sufficient to address the former, to estimate  effect 
sizes, and to detect moderately large  differences of Cohen’s (1988) d = 0.65 with Type I error rate α =.05, Type 
II error rate β =.20, and power [1- ß] = .80. If medium or larger  effect sizes are noted, a larger randomized trial 
will be proposed to assess long-term  efficacy.
5. List of participating  enrolling clinics. Patients will be recruited from the greater Hartford, CT area. 
Treatment will be provided at the University  of Connecticut School  of Medicine and other  community  sites if 
transportation becomes  a barrier.
6. Projected  timetable. Project  start-up, including programming  the interviews in the REDCap system and 
training of a research assistant and study therapists,  will occur during the first month following receipt  of the 
award. In addition, initial review of the therapy manual by the consultants  will occur during  month  1. 
Recruitment efforts will begin in month 2 and continue through  month  18 of the award. The final participants  
will be recruited  in month 18 to allow for the 4 month follow-up and for data analysis and manuscript 
preparation. 
7. Target population distribution (e.g., women, minorities, etc). IGD primarily affects 
adolescent males. Thus,  we expect that males will be overrepresented among the children participating in the 
study. We expect to recruit both mothers and fathers,  but we expect that mothers  will participate in the study 
more often than fathers  will. Less is known  about  the prevalence of IGD in different racial/ethnic and 
socioeconomic groups.  The study team will ensure that the opportunity  to participate in this project  is made  
maximally available to populations at-risk for IGD. To do this, we will systematically distribute flyers and place  
ads widely to ensure that we are not over-sampling from a single population. For example, we will share  our 
flyers with school counselors  in both affluent and disadvantaged areas  and run ads on the Internet, in local 
papers and on radio stations that have  wide distribution areas. 
8. Data acquisition and transmission. Instruments chosen are reliable and valid,  although  some  gaming 
specific instruments are new,  and this study will assess their psychometric properties. Careful training of 
evaluators will precede study initiation,  and assessment interviews will be audiotaped  and rated for reliability  
when participants  agree  to taping (see Human Subjects; >90% of participants  agree to taping in our trials). 
Evaluators blind to treatment conditions will conduct assessments, and obtaining information from multiple 
sources (parent and child)  will allow for assessment of concordance between reports (see below).
9. Data entry methods . Procedures for data processing, management,  and analysis are developed and 
refined. Interviews  will be administered by a trained  research assistant, who will enter data via a laptop 
computer using REDCap, a secure  online data entry platform. The interview is programmed to check data at 
the time of entry to ensure  that entered values are within the specified range and that items are not 
inappropriately skipped. 
10. Data analysis plan. We will examine baseline (BL) indices and other  services  received during treatment 
using the Treatment  Service Review, and any differences between  groups that relate to outcome  can be used 
as covariates in subsequent analyses. Analysis will be conducted on an intent-to-treat basis,  using all randomly 
assigned subjects. We will evaluate during treatment (BL to post-treatment) and longer-term (follow-up) effects.IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 15 of 23
GAM Version 3/20Aim 1: To evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of this intervention,  the proportion assigned  to the 
intervention who complete  all 6 sessions will be examined, as will parent and child ratings of satisfaction. 
Aim 2: To examine  the effect size of the intervention on reducing game playing days  and durations of 
play, we will analyze TLFB data collected  at each assessment period, with the greater report of parent or child 
used for each day. Hierarchial linear models (HLM; Gibbons et al., 1993; Raudenbush & Byrk, 2002) will 
compare differences  between  groups over time.  HLM is specifically  designed for repeated measures designs 
with missing data, allowing for intra-subject serial correlation and unequal variance and covariance structures 
over time by incorporating  available trend  data for each individual  with information on the group from which the 
subject is drawn. Maximum likelihood estimation enables  analyses  to be performed for the full trial without 
having to drop subjects  with incomplete data,  and both continuous and dichotomous variables can be 
analyzed. The model will include factors representing group, time, and their interaction,  along with any 
important covariates.    
We will also compare proportions of subjects by group who are no longer gaming problematically, i.e., 
child reports no current DSM-5  IGD criteria  and/or <5 criteria,  and parent  confirms no more  problems for the 
most conservative approach. Logistic regressions will include important demographics  and baseline  indices of 
distress and severity of problems in Step 1. Step 2 will add treatment to determine if it adds unique  variance in 
predicting outcomes  after controlling for baseline  indices.  See section 4 above for power analysis.
Exploratory aims are to evaluate potential mechanisms of actions of the intervention including: changes 
in number and location of gaming devices in the home, frequency  of monitoring child’s game playing (via self 
reports in both groups,  and confirmed by completed logs in Group B), child’s  participation in alternate  activities 
(ACC), and parental rewarding of child behaviors and family communications (PSSS,  BFAM scores).  Following  
recommendations of Morgenstern and Longabaugh (2000) for assessing mediation, Model 1 examines 
whether the treatments engender  differential outcomes on gaming  indices  (i.e., Aim 2 above). Model 2 will test 
if potential mediators change differentially over time by condition. For these analyses, a composite indicator for 
each construct will be utilized (e.g., summary  scores of number/location of gaming devices, monitoring 
frequencies, ACC, PSS and BFAM scores). Model  3 will examine  partial  correlations between  post-treatment 
scores on these indices  and gaming outcomes, after controlling for baseline scores.  If these  three models 
show significant effects, the final model  will assess associations between  these  variables and gaming 
outcomes. Step 1 of this model will include baseline scores of the potential  mediator(s).  In step 2, treatment 
group will be entered,  and in step 3, post-treatment scores of the mediator(s)  will be included, and resulting 
predictive power  of treatment condition examined.  If treatment  is no longer significant and the post-treatment 
mediation term is significant, criteria for full mediation are met. Although we do not expect to find full mediation 
with this sample size, potential mediators with medium or higher effect sizes in Models  2-3 will be considered 
for future evaluation  and inclusion in this intervention, if main effects of treatment are noted (Aim 2). 
We will also assess effect  sizes on secondary outcomes, e.g., substance use, psychosocial functioning 
and symptoms, sleep,  and quality of life. HLM,  outlined above,  will compare groups over time on these indices. 
Finally,  we will evaluate the psychometric properties of a semi-structured  diagnostic  interview based  on 
the DSM-5  IGD criteria as well as the parent  version  of the VGDS. Briefly, internal reliabilities of symptoms and 
diagnostic criteria will be calculated  using  Cronbach’s alpha.  Parent and child reports on self-report and 
interviews will be compared  using  Shrout and Fleiss intraclass correlations for continuous variables and 
Kappa's for diagnostic assessments,  with respect  to endorsement  of specific  criteria  and diagnosis.  For both 
parent and child versions, we will also examine correlations with TLFB  gaming behavior and other  indices  as 
we did previously (Rehbein et al., 2015)  to determine convergent validity. Thus,  this project allows for initial 
psychometric evaluation of a parent report measure and a structured clinical interview  for IGD in youth.
11. Quality assurance plan: All research staff will be thoroughly trained and supervised regarding 
administration of interviews and completion  of all necessary forms. Some  measures will be entered directly into 
REDcap, an online data entry  system  that allows for direct input of data. REDCap  allows for restriction  of 
response values  to insure that responses entered are valid and fall within  the specified range. REDCap also 
prompts interviewers if responses  are missing, thus greatly improving the accuracy of data collection.  Finally, 
REDCap allows for direct download of complete data into a variety of software programs, including Excel  and 
SPSS.IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 16 of 23
GAM Version 3/20In addition, the project coordinator reviews at least 5% of the entered  data for accuracy.  Research  
assistants regularly audio-record their research interviews, and the project coordinator or other study staff 
listens to these recordings to insure accuracy  of administration  of interviews  and recording of data in REDcap. 
If any specific variables are found  to be consistently  problematic, the project  manager  and research assistant  
will implement a specific training action plan to resolve the problem. The project  manager  is responsible  for 
study documentation, including data correction and electronic data files. Prior to the conduct of the final 
analyses, the raw data will undergo extensive  examination by the PI or project coordinator.  
12. Reporting  mechanisms of AEs/SAEs to the IRB, FDA, and NIDA. Types of SAEs in this population are 
as follows: (a) onset  of clinically  significant suicidal ideation, intent or action; (b) onset of clinically significant 
homicidal ideation, intent  or action;  (c) deterioration  of mental status  to an extent that requires inpatient 
hospitalization or overnight stay at an acute treatment facility.  All SAEs  will result  in the completion of an SAE 
Form within 48 hours to the Project Coordinator. Deaths and possibly study related SAEs will be reported 
immediately to the PI and within 72 business  hours to the NIH project officer. We will follow our IRB’s standard 
policy on reporting of SAEs,  which is to report all serious,  unexpected  related to possibly related AEs to the 
IRB within 5 working  days.
An Adverse Events Monitoring Form will be adapted from one being used in our ongoing trials. This form 
collects detailed information about  all adverse events,  how they were handled, and their potential  relationship 
to study participation. The procedures for SAE reporting also include written  documentation using the clinical 
notes related to the adverse event and specific forms  detailing  the event  with a sign-off by appropriate 
supervisory personnel.
Other adverse  events, such as suicidal ideation  that does not require hospitalization, will also be recorded 
on an Adverse Events  Monitoring Form. Clinically significant increases in gaming or other  problems detected at 
follow-ups will result in referrals for further  treatment. 
An ongoing database  of adverse events will be maintained by the study coordinator.  About once per 
month, in research team meetings, all events that occurred in the previous month will be reviewed.  In addition 
and according  to university policy, the local IRB maintains records  of adverse events, and records  are sent to 
NIH per policy.  Aggregate  data on reports of adverse events are reviewed on at least an annual basis  by the 
IRB for study continuation  according  to their established policies. Any temporary or permanent  suspension of 
patient accrual will also be reported to NIH. We anticipate that unexpected and possibly  study-related  SAE’s 
will be rare, because patients  will be receiving a psychosocial intervention.
13. Reporting  mechanism of IRB actions  to NIDA. The PI will be responsible for informing NIDA of any 
actions taken by the Institutional Review Board as a result of its regular or special reviews  of the project . 
14. Report of changes or amendments to the protocol. The PI will receive approval from the NIDA project 
officer prior to making any major changes to the study protocol (unless  there is an immediate safety  concern)  
and also provide timely reporting to the NIDA Project Officer of any changes in the IRB approval  status,  and 
other major problems or issues that could have a significant impact on participants. 
15. Trial stopping rules. A decision to discontinue  the study will be based  primarily on serious 
adverse events (SAEs).  The study  will be stopped  if unexpected and possibly study-related  SAEs  occur  in 15% 
or more  of the study sample or the trial appears  futile to continue  (e.g.,  unacceptably high rates of study refusal 
or withdrawals).
16. Conflict of interest. The PI and the research  team do not have  any conflicts  of interest  to report. 
17. Potential risks and benefits for participants. The risks associated  with participation in this research  
study are minimal but include: (1) disappointment  if not assigned  to one’s preferred treatment group; (2) 
discomfort from being asked questions about  gaming,  alcohol and drug use, and psychosocial problems; (3) 
for those  assigned to the brief family behavioral intervention, standard  discomforts  associated  with participating 
in family  therapy, including disagreement or discord. (4) potential breach of confidentiality;  and (5) for those  IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 17 of 23
GAM Version 3/20assigned to the brief family behavioral intervention, potential  discovery  of illegal  behaviors  on the part of the 
youth due to increased  parental monitoring of Internet activity.
The following  will protect  against  potential risks:
(A) Random  group assignment is used, and about half of families will be assigned to the referral  alone 
condition and half to the referral plus brief family  behavioral therapy condition. These proportions  will be 
outlined in the informed consent  form, and patients will be made aware that they have about a 50% chance of 
being assigned  to the family behavioral therapy condition. Patients may voluntarily end study participation if 
they are dissatisfied  with their assignment.
(B) The interviews and sample  collections are brief, patients may skip questions  or take a break if 
uncomfortable, and the particular instruments  chosen are intended to minimize discomfort.
(C) A trained  and supervised doctoral level therapist will deliver the intervention. Discord or disagreements 
between children and parents  will be addressed in therapy, and one full session of the treatment is devoted to 
improving communication  skills.  
(D) All data will be coded by number, not name, and a "key" form will be kept in a separate locked file cabinet.  
No information  will be provided about  the patients  enrolled in this study to anyone outside of the clinical  and 
research teams, except  in emergency situations (e.g., patient deemed a threat  to him/herself or others)  or as 
required by law (e.g., child abuse/neglect). The study therapists are all doctoral level with substantial 
experience handling crises. If a therapist learns  of potential abuse/neglect, they will notify  the Connecticut 
Department of Children and Families (DCF) as required by law. If a therapist  has concerns about potential 
suicidal or homicidal ideation, the therapist will conduct a comprehensive  risk assessment and, if deemed 
necessary, the participant will be transported immediately to the emergency room  for acute evaluation  and 
treatment. Within the research context,  research assistants  may also hear indications of risk of harm to self or 
others or abuse/neglect. RAs will be well-trained on how to handle  these situations. Specifically, the RA will 
immediately contact the PI, study  coordinator, or study therapist who will assess safety  and manage the crisis 
directly or instruct the RA on how to address risk, including (if necessary)  arranging  for transportation to an 
emergency room  or reporting concerns about  abuse  or neglect to DCF.  
All audiorecordings will be stored digitally on a password protected  secure server and destroyed  at the 
end of the study; only research personnel will review the recordings for training, supervision, and adherence 
monitoring purposes. An audiorecording  section within the consent form will be used in the study, and patients  
may participate in the study  without  allowing audiorecording.  All audio files will be labeled by number, not 
name, and the “key” form will be kept separate in a locked file cabinet.
(E) It is possible that the increased monitoring of Internet activity that is part of the behavioral  treatment may 
lead to uncovering  illegal Internet activity on the part of the youth. During  the informed consent procedure, 
youth and parents  will be informed of this risk. It will also be made clear to the parents and youth that any 
information disclosed to the research team that indicates that the patient  is a threat to him/herself or others will 
be reported as required by law to the Connecticut  Department of Children and Families (DCF). See 17D above 
for details.  It is possible that other behaviors (e.g.,  buying/selling drugs, gambling) that are illegal but do not 
require mandated reporting may be uncovered by increased parental monitoring. Although these situations do 
not represent a threat to confidentiality, they may lead to loss of the patient’s privacy and could cause 
increased conflict in the parent-child  relationship. This risk is similar to that in adolescent substance abuse  
treatment, when parents  are encouraged  to increase monitoring through  random urine drug screens  and room 
searches. This risk will be mitigated by 1) as noted  above, informing both parent and youth about this potential 
risk as part of the informed consent procedure; 2) closely following mandated reporting laws in handling  this 
information; 3) teaching  skills in treatment (e.g., communication) that can help parents and youth negotiate 
conflict situations; and 4) provision of individualized referrals to help address any conflict  or symptoms that 
persist. Of note, these  risks are similar  to those that would occur in outpatient family-based treatment  in the 
community, which commonly focuses on increased parental monitoring and supervision  of children’s 
behaviors.IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 18 of 23
GAM Version 3/2018. Collection and reporting of SAEs.  See  Section  12.  
19. Management of SAEs  or other study risks. As noted above, SAEs will be documented and reported on a 
regular basis to the project director, the PI, the IRB, and NIDA  as indicated. Discussions of SAEs  will occur 
during monthly  meetings between  the study staff and the PI will be available to have more frequent meetings 
about SAE reporting as needed. During the monthly  meetings,  the PI and research staff will examine and 
discuss any SAEs and AEs over the past month  as well as patterns of AEs and SAEs  that have occurred over 
the course of the study. Other information related to study risks, including retention data and any participant 
complaints, will also be reviewed and discussed during these meetings. This information will guide decision 
making about whether recruitment should continue unchanged, whether a protocol amendment  is needed to 
mitigate risks, or whether  recruitment needs to be stopped pending further investigation. If the study needs to 
be stopped due to safety concerns, the IRB and NIDA will be promptly  informed within  72 hours.  
20. Plans for interim  analysis of efficacy data. Because sample  size is relatively modest  (i.e., effect sizes 
are unlikely to be large enough to detect differences during  interim  analyses) and safety  risk is quite low, we 
are not planning  to conduct a preliminary  analysis of accumulating efficacy and safety data by treatment 
assignment.
21. Responsibility for data and safety monitoring. The Principal Investigator,  Co-Investigators,  other study 
personnel, and the Institutional Review Board (IRB)  will provide safety oversight for the project.  The PI, Co-Is, 
and study personnel will review safety data about monthly and make any decisions about modifications or 
stoppage of the trial as noted  in section 19. The PI will also be responsible for conducting a literature search on 
treatments for IGD annually to identify  any findings  that might  influence study procedures or conduct.  The PI 
will report any information related to unanticipated risks or new information  that might  change the risk-benefit 
ratio to the IRB and NIDA Project Officer.  This information may come from the current  study  or new findings 
from other studies. Any changes in the protocol or consent as a result of this information will be promptly  
reported to the NIDA Project Officer. 
22. Frequency of DSM reviews: The PI meets about monthly will research staff to monitor study progress.  
The informed consent process, fidelity to inclusion and exclusion criteria,  and the integrity of the overall data 
and safety monitoring  plan are also reviewed in these  meetings. Problems  identified  during monitoring will lead 
to an immediate corrective  plan and possible reporting to the IRB and NIDA Project  Officer, depending  on the 
problem. 
23. Content  of DSM Report. Reports  will include data that inform progress of the study, including baseline 
demographics, adverse events  data,  and accrual status. In addition,  a database of AEs and SAEs will be 
maintained by the study coordinator. About once per month, in the research team  meetings, all adverse events 
will be reviewed  that occurred over the prior month,  as well as over the course  of the trial. In addition, the local 
IRB maintains records of AEs and SAEs. All SAEs are reviewed and records sent to NIDA  and the IRB per 
their standard policies.  
A DSM  report  will be sent to NIDA  on an annual  basis, at the same  time as the Annual Non-Competing 
renewal. The categories  include: 1) description  of any non-administrative changes  in the study protocol; 2) 
baseline sociodemographic  characteristics  of new enrollees; 3) any new quality assurance problems or 
changes; 4) any new regulatory issues; 5) summary of all AEs/SAEs  and any related changes to the consent 
form or study  protocol; 6) any significant protocol violations and deviations, and any corrective actions 
undertaken to eliminate  future occurrences; and 7) summary of the literature  review  conducted in the prior year 
to assess for any newly reported  risks associated with IGD interventions. 
ReferencesIRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 19 of 23
GAM Version 3/20Achenbach, T. M. (1991). Manual for the youth self-report and 1991 profile.  Burlington,  VT: University of VT. 
Achenbach, T. M. (2001). Challenges and benefits of assessment, diagnosis, and taxonomy for clinical practice  and 
research. The Australian and New Zealand Journal  of Psychiatry, 35(3), 263-271.
Alegria, M., Carson, N. J., Goncalves,  M., & Keefe, K. (2011).  Disparities in treatment  for substance use disorders and co-
occurring disorders for ethnic/racial minority  youth.  Journal of the American  Academy of Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 50(1), 22-31.  
American Medical Association. Report of the Council on Science and Public Health. 2007.  Available at: 
http://psychcentral.com/blog/images/csaph12a07.pdf
American Psychiatric Association.  (2013).  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual  of Mental  Disorders,  (DSM-5®).  Washington,  
DC: American Psychiatric Association. 
BBC News. (2005). South  Korean dies after gaming  session. Available  at: 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/4137782.stm (accessed 25 June 2012).
Beidel, D. C., Turner, S. M., & Morris, T. L. (1995). A new inventory to assess  childhood social anxiety and phobia: The 
social phobia and anxiety  inventory for children. Psychological Assessment, 7(1), 73. 
Buysse, D. J., Reynolds,  C. F., Monk, T. H., Berman, S. R., & Kupfer, D. J. (1989). The Pittsburgh sleep quality index: A 
new instrument for psychiatric  practice and research. Psychiatry Research, 28(2), 193-213. 
Carlson, S. A., Fulton, J. E., Lee, S. M., Foley, J. T., Heitzler, C., & Huhman, M. (2010). Influence of limit-setting  and 
participation in physical activity on youth screen time. Pediatrics, 126(1), e89-96.  
Carroll, K. M., Nich, C., Sifry, R. L., Nuro, K. F., Frankforter, T. L., Ball, S. A., … Rounsaville, B. J.  (2000). A general 
system for evaluating therapist adherence and competence in psychotherapy research in the addictions. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence, 57, 225-238.
Carroll, K. M., & Onken,  L. S. (2005). Behavioral  therapies for drug abuse.  American  Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1452-
1460.
Cash, H., Rae, C. D., Steel, A. H., & Winkler, A. (2012). Internet addiction:  A brief summary of research and practice. 
Current Psychiatry Reviews, 8(4), 292-298.  
Chen, X., Wang,  Y., Zhou, Y., Sun, Y., Ding, W., Zhuang, Z., . . . Du, Y. (2014). Different resting-state  functional 
connectivity alterations in smokers  and nonsmokers with internet gaming addiction.  BioMed Research International, 
2014, 825787.
Choo, H., Gentile, D., Sim, T., Li, D. D., Khoo, A., & Liau, A. (2010). Pathological  video-gaming among Singaporean 
youth. Annals of the Academy of Medicine,  Singapore, 39(11), 822-829.
Chuang, Y. (2006). Massively multiplayer  online  role-playing game-induced  seizures:  A neglected  health problem  in 
internet addiction. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 9(4), 451-456.
Coatsworth, J. D., Santisteban, D. A., McBride, C. K., & Szapocznik, J. (2001). Brief Strategic Family Therapy versus 
community control: Engagement, retention, and an exploration of the moderating  role of adolescent symptom  
severity. Family  Process, 40(3), 313-332. 
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical Power Analysis  for the Behavioral Sciences.  Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Conners, K. C. (2008). Conners 3rd edition.  Toronto,  Ontario, Canada: Multi-Health Systems.
Constantino, J. N., Davis,  S. A., Todd, R. D., Schindler, M. K., Gross, M. M., Brophy, S. L., … & Reich,  W. (2003). 
Validation of a brief quantitative measure of autistic traits:  Comparison of the Social Responsiveness Scale wit hthe 
Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised. Journal of Autism  and Developmental  Disorders, 33, 427 – 433. 
Council on Communications and Media. (2013). Policy statement: Children, adolescents, and the media. Pediatrics,  
132(5), 958-961.
Derogatis, L., & Spencer, P. (1992). The Brief Symptom Inventory: Administration, Scoring, and Procedures Manual. 
Baltimore, MD: Clinical Psychometric Research. 
Desai, R. A., Krishnan-Sarin,  S., Cavallo, D., & Potenza,  M. N. (2010). Video-gaming  among high school students:  Health 
correlates, gender differences, and problematic  gaming. Pediatrics, 126(6), e1414-1424.
Du, Y. S., Jiang, W., & Vance, A. (2010). Longer term effect of randomized, controlled group  cognitive  behavioural 
therapy for Internet addiction in adolescent students in Shanghai. The Australian and New Zealand Journal of 
Psychiatry, 44(2), 129-134.
Eccles, J. S., & Barber, B. L. (1999). Student  council,  volunteering,  basketball,  or marching band: What kind of 
extracurricular involvement matters? Journal of Adolescent Research, 14, 10-43
Festl, R., Scharkow, M., & Quandt, T. (2013). Problematic computer game use among adolescents, younger and older 
adults. Addiction, 108(3), 592-599. 
Frisch, M. B., Cornell, J., Villanueva, M., & Retzlaff, P. (1992). Clinical validation of the quality of life inventory. A measure 
of life satisfaction for use in treatment  planning and outcome assessment. Psychological  Assessment, 4(1), 92-101. 
Gentile, D. (2009). Pathological video-game  use among youth ages 8 to 18: A national study. Psychological Science, 
20(5), 594-602. 
Gentile, D.A.,  Choo, H., Liau, A., Sim, T., Li, D., Fung, D., & Khoo, A. (2011) Pathological  video game  use among  youths: 
a two-year longitudinal study. Pediatrics, 127, e319-29.IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 20 of 23
GAM Version 3/20Gentile, D. A., Reimer,  R. A., Nathanson, A. I., Walsh, D. A., & Eisenmann,  J. C. (2014). Protective  effects  of parental 
monitoring of children's media use: A prospective study. JAMA  Pediatrics, 168(5), 479-484.
Gibbons, R. D., Hedeker,  D., Elkin,  I., Waternaux, C., Kraemer,  H. C., , . . . Watkins, J. T. (1993). Some conceptual and 
statistical issues in analysis of longitudinal  psychiatric data: Application  to the NIMH treatment of depression 
collaborative research program dataset.  Archives of General  Psychiatry, 50(9), 739-750. 
Godley, M.D., Godley, S.H., Dennis, M.L., Funk, R.R., Passetti, L.L., & Petry,  N.M. (2014)  A  randomized trial of assertive 
continuing care and contingency management  for adolescents  with substance use disorders.  Journal  Consulting & 
Clinical Psychology, 82(1),  40-51.
Gratz, K. L., & Roemer, L. (2004). Multidimensional assessment of emotion regulation and dysregulation: Development, 
factor structure, and initial  validation of the difficulties  in emotion regulation scale.  Journal of Psychopathology and 
Behavioral Assessment , 26(1), 41-54.
Guy, S. C., Gioia, G. A., & Isquith, P. K. (2004). BRIEF-SR: Behavior rating  inventory of executive function--self-report 
version: Professional manual. Psychological Assessment Resources.
Han, J. W., Han, D. H., Bolo,  N., Kim, B., Kim, B.N., Renshaw, P..F. (2015)  Differences in functional  connectivity between 
alcohol dependence  and internet gaming disorder. Addiction Biology, 41, 12-19. 
Han, D. H., Hwang, J. W., & Renshaw, P. F. (2010).  Bupropion sustained  release treatment decreases craving for video 
games and cue-induced  brain  activity in patients with internet video game addiction. Experimental  and Clinical  
Psychopharmacology, 18(4), 297-304.
Han, D. H., Kim, S. M., Lee, Y. S., Renshaw,  P. F. (2012). The effect of family therapy on the changes in the severity of 
on-line game play and brain activity in adolescents with on-line  game  addiction.  Psychiatry  Research,  202(2), 126-
131.
Hildebrand, M. (2015). The psychometric properties of the drug use disorders identification test (DUDIT): A review of 
recent research. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment,  53, 52-59. 
Hogue, A., & Liddle, H. A. (2009). Family‐based treatment  for adolescent substance abuse:  Controlled  trials and new 
horizons in services research. Journal of Family Therapy,  31, 126-154.
Jäger, S., Müller, K. W., Ruckes, C., Wittig, T., Batra,  A., Musalek, M., . . . Beutel, M. E. (2012). Effects  of a manualized 
short-term treatment  of internet and computer game addiction (STICA): Study  protocol  for a randomized controlled  
trial. Trials, 13(43),  43.  
Kaminer, Y., & Burleson,  J. A. (1999). Psychotherapies for adolescent substance abusers:  15-month follow-up  of a pilot 
study. The American  Journal  on Addictions, 8(2), 114-119.
Kann, L., Kinchen, S., Shanklin, S. L., Flint, K. H., Kawkins, J., Harris, W. A,… Zaza  S. (2014). Centers for Disease  
Control and Prevention (CDC). Youth risk behavior  surveillance--United  States, 2013. Morbidity  and Mortality  Weekly 
Report, 63 Suppl  4:1-168.
Kim, H., Kim, Y. K., Gwak, A. R., Lim, J., Lee, J., Jung, H. Y., . . . Choi, J. (2015). Resting-state  regional  homogeneity as a 
biological marker for patients with internet gaming disorder: A comparison with patients  with alcohol use disorder and 
healthy controls. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 60, 104-111. 
King, D. L., Delfabbro,  P. Griffiths, M. D., & Gradisar, M. (2011). Assessing clinical trials  of internet  addiction treatment: A 
systematic review and CONSORT evaluation. Clinical Psychology  Review, 31, 1110-1116.  
Király, O., Griffiths, M. D., Urbán, R., Farkas, J., Kökönyei, G., Elekes Z,… Demetrovics, Z. (2014). Problematic internet 
use and problematic  online  gaming  are not the same: Findings from a large  nationally representative adolescent 
sample. Cyberpsychology Behavior and Social Networking, 17(12), 749-754.
Ko, C., Hsieh,  T., Wang,  P., Lin, W., Yen, C., Chen, C., & Yen, J. (2015). Altered gray matter density and disrupted 
functional connectivity of the amygdala  in adults with internet gaming disorder. Progress in Neuro-
Psychopharmacology and Biological  Psychiatry, 57, 185-192. 
Ko, C., Liu, G., Yen, J., Yen, C., Chen, C., & Lin, W. (2013). The brain activations for both cue-induced gaming  urge and 
smoking craving among subjects comorbid  with internet  gaming addiction  and nicotine dependence. Journal of 
Psychiatric Research,  47(4), 486-493. 
Ko, C., Yen, J., Chen, S., Wang, P., Chen,  C., Yen, C. (2014).  Evaluation of the diagnostic  criteria of Internet gaming 
disorder in DSM-5  among  young  adults  in Taiwan. Journal  of Psychiatric Research,  53, 103-110. 
Ko, C. H., Yen, J. Y., Yen, C. F., Lin, H., & Yang, M. (2007). Factors predictive for incidence and remission of internet  
addiction in young adolescents: A prospective study. Cyberpsychologly Behavior, 10(4), 545-551.
Koo, C., Wati, Y., Lee, C. C., & Oh, H. Y. (2011). Internet-addicted kids and South Korean  government  efforts: Boot-camp 
case. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social  Networking, 14(6), 391-394. 
Lemmens, J. S., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2009). Development and validation of a game addiction  scale for 
adolescents. Media Psychology,  12(1), 77-95. 
Li, Y., Zhang,  X., Lu, F., Zhang, Q., & Wang, Y. (2014).  Internet addiction  among  elementary and middle  school students 
in China:  A nationally representative sample  study.  CyberPsychology, Behavior  and Social Networking,  17(2), 111-
116. 
Lin, C. H., Lin, S. L., & Wu, C. P. (2009). The effects  of parental  monitoring and leisure boredom on adolescents’  Internet IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 21 of 23
GAM Version 3/20addiction. Adolescence, 44, 993–1004.
Lo, S., Wang, C., & Fang,  W. (2005). Physical interpersonal relationships  and social anxiety among  online game players. 
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 8(1), 15-20. 
McLellan, A. T., Alterman, A., Cacciola, J., Metzger, D, & O'Brien,  C. (1992). A new measure  of substance abuse 
treatment. Initial  studies of the Treatment Services Review. Journal of Nervous and Mental  Disease, 180, 101-110.
Mentzoni, R. A., Brunborg, G. S., Molde, H., Myrseth, H., Skouverøe, K. J. M., Hetland, J., & Pallesen, S. (2011). 
Problematic video game use: Estimated  prevalence  and associations with mental and physical health. 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14(10), 591-596.  
Messias, E., Castro,  J., Saini, A., Usman,  M., & Peeples, D. (2011). Sadness, suicide, and their association  with video 
game and internet overuse  among  teens:  Results from the youth  risk behavior survey  2007 and 2009. Suicide and 
Life Threating Behavior,  41(3),  307-315.
Meyers, R. J., Miller,  W. R., Hill, D. E., & Tonigan, J. S. (1998). Community reinforcement and family training  (CRAFT): 
Engaging unmotivated drug users in treatment.  Journal  of Substance  Abuse, 10(3), 291-308.
Michie, S., Whittington, C., Hamoudi, Z., Zarnani, F., Tober, G., & West,  R. (2012).  Identification of behaviour change 
techniques to reduce excessive alcohol  consumption.  Addiction,  107(8), 1431-1440.  
Miller, W. R., Meyers, R. J., & Tonigan, J. S. (1999). Engaging the unmotivated in treatment for alcohol problems: A 
comparison of three strategies for intervention through family members. Journal of Consulting and Clinical  
Psychology, 67(5), 688-697. 
Morgenstern, J., & Longabaugh, R. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral treatment  for alcohol dependence: A review of evidence 
for its hypothesized mechanisms  of action. Addiction, 95, 1475–1490.
National Institute on Drug. (2014). Principles  of Adolescent Substance Use Disorder Treatment:  A Research-based Guide . 
United States of America.
Olson, C. K., Kutner, L. Warner, D. E., Almerigi, J. B., Baer, L., Nicholi, A. & Beresin,  E. (2007). Factors correlated with 
violent video game  use by adolescent  boys and girls. Journal  of Adolescent  Health, 41, 77-83. 
Onken, L. S., Carroll, K. M., Shoham, V., Cuthbert, B. N., Riddle, M. (2014).  Re-envisioning clinical science: Unifying the 
discipline to improve the public  health. Clinical Psychological Science, 2, 22-34.
Patton, J. H., Stanford, M. S., & Barratt,  E. S. (1995). Factor structure of the Barratt Impulsiveness  Scale. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 51, 768 – 774. 
Petry, N.M.  (2015). Behavioral Addictions: . DSM-5  and Beyond.  Oxford, UK: Oxford  University Press. 
Petry, N.M.,  Alessi, S.M., Barry, D., & Carroll, K.M. (2015d)Standard magnitude prize reinforcers can be as efficacious  as 
larger magnitude reinforcers in cocaine-dependent  methadone patients. Journal  of Consulting  and Clinical  
Psychology, 83(3), 464-472.
Petry, N. M., Cengiz,  E., Wagner, J. A., Weyman, K., Tichy, E., & Tamborlane, W. V. (2015b). Testing for rewards: a pilot 
study to improve  type 1 diabetes management in adolescents.  Diabetes Care, 38, 1952-4.
Petry, N. M. & Gonzalez-Ibanez, A. (2015c) Internet gambling in problem  gambling college students.  Journal of Gambling  
Studies, 31(2), 397-408.
Petry, N. M., & O'Brien,  C. P. (2013). Internet gaming disorder and the DSM‐5. Addiction, 108(7), 1186-1187. 
Petry, N. M., Rehbein, F., Gentile, D. A., Lemmens, J. S., Rumpf,  H. J., Mossle, T., …& O'Brien,  C. P. (2014). An 
international consensus  for assessing  internet gaming disorder  using the new DSM-5  approach. Addiction, 109, 
1399-1406.  
Petry, N. M., Rehbein, F., Ko, C. H., & O'Brien, C. P. (2015a). Internet Gaming  Disorder in the DSM-5. Current Psychiatry 
Reports, 17, 72-81.  
Petry, N. M., Weinstock,  J., Morasco, B., & Ledgerwood,  D. M. (2009). Brief motivational interventions  for college student 
problem gamblers. Addiction, 104, 1569-1578.  
Porter, G., Starcevic, V., Berle, D., & Fenech, P. (2010). Recognizing problem video  game  use. Australian  and New 
Zealand Journal  of Psychiatry, 44(2), 120-128. 
Procidano, M. E., & Heller, K. (1983). Measures of perceived social support  from friends  and from family: Three  validation 
studies. American  Journal  of Community  Psychology, 11(1), 1-24. 
Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D scale a self-report depression scale  for research in the general  population. Applied  
Psychological Measurement, 1(3), 385-401. 
Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical linear models: Applications  and data analysis methods.  Thousand 
Oaks,CA:Sage Publications. 
Ravens-Sieberer, U., & Kindle-R, B. M. (2000). Questionnaire for measuring health-related quality  of life in children  and 
adolescents. revised version manual. 
Romer, D., Bagdasarov, Z., & More, E. (2013).  Older  versus newer media  and the well-being  of united states youth: 
Results from a national longitudinal panel. Journal of Adolescent Health, 52(5), 613-619. 
Rehbein, F., Kliem,  S., Baier, D., Mößle,  T., & Petry, N. M. (2015). Prevalence of internet gaming  disorder in German 
adolescents: Diagnostic contribution of the nine DSM‐ 5 criteria in a state‐wide representative sample. Addiction,  
110(5), 842-851. IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 22 of 23
GAM Version 3/20Rehbein, F., Psych, G., Kleimann, M., Mediasci, G., & Mößle, T. (2010). Prevalence and risk factors of video game 
dependency in adolescence: Results of a German nationwide survey. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social 
Networking, 13(3), 269-277. 
Reuters. Online addict  dies after “marathon” session; 2007.  Available at: http://www.reuters.com/article/2007/02/28/us-
china-internet-addiction-idUSPEK26772020070228.
Roberts, D. F., & Foehr, U. G. (2008). Trends in media use. The Future of Children,  18(1), 11-37. 
Rounsaville, B. J., Carroll, K. M. & Onken, L. S. (2000). A stage model of behavioral therapies research: Getting started 
and moving  on from stage 1. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 8, 133-132.
Rumpf, H. J., Tao, R., Rehbein, F., & Petry, N. M. (2015). Internet  Addiction: A future addictive disorder? In Petry, N. M. 
(Ed.), Behavioral Addictions: DSM-5  and Beyond. New York,  NY: Oxford University  Press. 
Rumpf, H. J., Vermulst, A. A., Bischof, A., Kastirke, N., Gürtler,  D., Bischof,  G., … Meyer, C. (2014). Occurrence of 
internet addiction  in a general population sample: A latent class analysis.  European Addiction Research,  20(4), 159-
166.
Saunders, J. B., Aasland, O. G., Babor, T. F., De la Fuente, Juan R., & Grant, M. (1993). Development of the alcohol use 
disorders identification  test (AUDIT). WHO collaborative project on early  detection of persons with harmful alcohol 
consumption-II. Addiction-Abingdon, 88, 791-804. 
Skinner, H., Steinhauer, P., & Santa-Barbara, J. (1995). Family Assessment Measure–III manual. North Tonawanda, NY: 
Multi-Health Systems.
Skinner, H., Steinhauer, P., & Sitarenios, G. (2000). Family assessment measure (FAM)  and process model  of family 
functioning. Journal  of Family  Therapy, 22(2), 190-210.  
Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1990). Self-report issues in alcohol abuse: State  of the art and future  directions. Behavioral  
Assessment. 
Stanger, C., Budney, A. J., Kamon, J. L., & Thostensen, J. (2009).  A randomized trial of contingency  management  for 
adolescent marijuana abuse and dependence. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 105(3), 240-247. 
Steinberg, L., Lamborn, S., Dornbusch, S., & Darling, N. (1992). Impact  of parenting practices  on adolescent 
achievement: Authoritative, parenting, school  involvement, encouragement to succeed. Child Development, 63, 
1266-1281. 
Steinberg, D. M., Tate, D. F., Bennett, G. G., Ennett, S., Samuel‐Hodge, C., & Ward, D. S. (2013). The efficacy of a daily 
self‐weighing weight  loss intervention using smart scales and e‐mail. Obesity, 21(9), 1789-1797.  
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSHA). (2009a). Results from the 2008  National 
Survey on Drug  Use and Health:  National Findings. Rockville, MD: Office of Applied  Studies.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSHA). (2009b). The NSDUH Report: Treatment for 
Substance Use and Depression among  Adults, by Race/Ethnicity.  Rockville, MD: Office of Applied Studies.
Shek, D., Tang, V., & Lo, C. (2009). Evaluation of an internet addiction treatment program for Chinese adolescents in 
Hong Kong. Adolescence, 44(174), 359-373. 
Stout RL, Wirtz PW, Carbonari JP, Del Boca FK. Ensuring  balanced distribution of prognostic factors  in treatment 
outcome research. J Stud Alcohol Suppl.  1994;12:70-5..
Swing, E. L., Gentile,  D. A., Anderson, C. A., & Walsh, D. A. (2010). Television and video game  exposure and the 
development of attention problems.  Pediatrics, 126(2), 214-221. 
Tanner-Smith, E. E., Wilson,  S. J., & Lipsey, M. (2013). The comparative effectiveness of outpatient treatment for 
adolescent substance abuse: a meta-analysis. Journal  of Substance  Abuse  Treatment, 44, 145-158.
Van Rooij., A. J., Kuss, D. J., Griffiths,  M. D., Shorter, G. W., Schoenmakers, M. T., & Van de Mheen, D. (2014). The (co-
)occurrence of problematic video  gaming, substance use, and psychosocial problems in adolescents. Journal of 
Behavioral Addictions, 3(3), 157-165.
Van Rooij, A. J., Schoenmakers, T., Van de Eijnden, R. & Van de Mheen, D. (2010). Compulsive internet  use: The role of 
online gaming and other  internet applications. Journal of Adolescent Health, 47, 51-57.  
Waldron, H. B., Kern-Jones, S., Turner, C. W., Peterson, T. R., & Ozechowski, T. J. (2007). Engaging  resistant 
adolescents in drug abuse  treatment. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment,  32(2), 133-142. 
Waldron, H. B., & Turner,  C. W. (2008). Evidence-based psychosocial treatments for adolescent  substance abuse. 
Journal of Clinical Child  and Adolescent  Psychology, 37(1), 238-261.
Walther, B., Morgenstern, M., & Hanewinkel, R. (2012). Co-occurrence of addictive behaviors: Personality  factors related 
to substance use, gambling and computer gaming. European Addiction Research, 18, 167-74. 
Winkler, A., Dörsing, B., Rief, W., Shen, Y., & Glombiewski, J. A. (2013). Treatment  of internet addiction:   A meta-
analysis. Clinical  Psychology Review,  33(2), 317-329. 
Young, K. S. (2007). Cognitive behavior  therapy with internet addicts:  Treatment outcomes and implications. 
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 10(5), 671-679. 
Young, K. S. (2009). Understanding online gaming addiction and treatment issues for adolescents. American  Journal of 
Family Therapy,  37, 355–372.IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020
Page 23 of 23
GAM Version 3/20IRB Review
IRB NUMBER: 17-028-2
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 03/23/2020