Version	1/29/2015	1	 Reduction	of	Hip	Arthroscopy	Post-operative	Pain	Using	Ultrasound-guided	Fascia-iliaca	Block			Investigators	&	personnel		• Principle	Investigator:	1Eugene	Kim,	MD	• Co-Investigators:	2Jason	Folk,	MD;	2John	M.	Tokish,	MD;	1Suzanne	Renfro,	MD;	Steve	Lysak,	MD;	Kimberly	 Balogh,	 MD;	 Jarod	Motley,	 MD;	 Steven	 Samoya,	 MD;	 Randall	 Wilhoit,	MD;	 Mark	Mathis,	MD			1Greenville	Anesthesiology,	PA	2Steadman	Hawkins	Clinic	of	the	Carolinas,	Greenville	Health	System				
Version	1/29/2015	2	Protocol	Summary	Title	of	Study:	Reduction	of	Hip	Arthroscopy	Post-operative	Pain	Using	Ultrasound-guided	Fascia-iliaca	Block		Study	Type:	Postmarket	Primary	Investigator:	Eugene	Kim,	MD	Primary	Endpoint:	Quantify	the	difference	in	pain	in	patients	who	have	received	a	pre-operative	FI	block	versus	those	receiving	no	block	Secondary	&	Tertiary	Endpoints:	• Secondary	 endpoint:	 Quantify	 the	 difference	 in	 opioid	consumption	 in	 patients	 who	 have	 received	 a	 pre-operative	 FI	block	 versus	 those	 receiving	 no	 block	(local	 anesthetic/Noropin	(30cc	of	0.5%)	joint	injection	only).	• Tertiary	endpoints:	Assess	differences	in	episodes	of	PONV,	time	in	PACU,	and	proportion	of	unplanned	admissions		Design:	Prospective,	randomized,	two-arm,	single-blind	study	Length	of	Study:	3M	follow-up	Sample	Size:	95	subjects			Schedule	of	Events		BL	Proc	2W	6W	3M	Informed	Consent	√	-	-	-	-	Inclusion/Exclusion		√	-	-	-	-	Surgical	Details	-	√	-	-	-	Physical	Exam-ROM	√	-	√	√	√	Visual	Analogue	Scale	(VAS)	√	-	√	√	√	Adverse	Event	Assessment	-	√	√	√	√				
Version	1/29/2015	3		Abbreviations	and	Acronyms	FI	=	fascia	iliaca	US	=	ultrasound	PONV	=	post-operative	nausea	and	vomiting	PDNV	=	post-discharge	nausea	and	vomiting	PACU	=	post-anesthesia	care	unit		Introduction	/	Background		Hip	 arthroscopy	 can	 be	 a	 very	 painful	 procedure	 causing	 patients	 distress	 in	 the	 immediate	post-operative	period	and	beyond.	As	more	and	more	procedures	are	planned	on	an	outpatient	basis,	the	pain	associated	with	hip	arthroscopy	can	result	in	unplanned	admission	of	a	patient	who	expected	to	be	discharged	home	after	their	procedure.	Currently,	opioids	are	the	mainstay	of	treatment	for	pain	control	 after	 hip	 arthroscopy.	 Various	 adjuncts	 have	 been	 tried	 in	 the	 past	 including	 multimodal	analgesia,	hip	joint	injections,	and	peripheral	nerve	blocks	typically	involving	the	lumbar	plexus	and	the	femoral	nerve.	Studies	of	blocks	of	the	lumbar	plexus	using	the	posterior	approach	have	shown	good	results	 with	 reduction	 in	 patients’	 pain	 scores	 and	 opioid	 consumption.	However,	 because	 of	 the	invasiveness	 and	 possible	 complications	 of	 the	 posterior	 approach	 to	 the	 lumbar	 plexus,	 the	 anterior	approach	called	the	fascia	iliaca	(FI)	block	is	an	attractive	alternative.	Furthermore,	earlier	studies	of	the	FI	block	were	performed	without	benefit	of	visual	guidance	for	needle	insertion.		With	the	advent	of	ultrasound	guidance,	the	FI	block	may	be	placed	with	a	greater	degree	of	success	than	in	previous	years	when	 ultrasound	 guidance	 was	 not	 utilized	 during	 the	 placement	 of	 FI	 block.	 The	 aim	 of	 the	 present	study	is	to	determine	if	ultrasound	guided	FI	blocks	can	reduce	the	pain	scores	and	opioid	consumption	of	hip	arthroscopy	compared	to	an	opioid-only	regimen	using	a	randomized	controlled	trial	comparing	these	outcomes	in	patients	getting	preoperatively	placed	FI	blocks	versus	patients	not	receiving	a	block.	A	significant	improvement	in	pain	control	and	opioid	consumption	in	FI	patients	compared	to	controls	could	provide	a	basis	for	increased	utilization	of	FI	blocks	for	this	procedure	with	the	attendant	benefits.	Other	 outcomes	 assessed	 include	 unplanned	 admission,	 PONV	 and	 PDNV	 from	 decreased	 narcotic	usage,	and	decreased	time	in	the	PACU.		• Primary	 objectives:	Quantify	the	 difference	 in	 pain	 score	 and	 opioid	 consumption	 in	 patients	who	 have	 received	 a	 pre-operative	 FI	 block	 versus	 those	receiving	no	 block	(local	 anesthetic	joint	injection	only).	• Secondary	objectives:	Assess	differences	in	episodes	of	PONV,	time	in	PACU,	and	proportion	of	unplanned	admissions	compared	to	patients	with	joint	injection	only	• Hypothesis:	 Pre-operative	 placement	 of	 an	 ultrasound-guided	 fascia	 iliaca	 block	 in	 patients	undergoing	hip	arthroscopy	will	result	in	reduced	pain	scores	and	opioid	consumption	compared	to	patients	receiving	an	opioid-only	regimen.	• Secondary	hypothesis:	Pre-operative	placement	of	an	ultrasound-guided	fascia	iliaca	block	in	patients	undergoing	hip	arthroscopy	will	result	in	fewer	episodes	of	PONV,	reduced	time	in	 PACU,	 and	lower	 rates	 of	 unplanned	 admissions	 compared	 to	 patients	 receiving	 an	opioid-only	regimen.	Study	Methodology		• Study	Description	
Version	1/29/2015	4	• Design:		Randomized	controlled	trial	• Blinding:		• 	Blinded:	Data	analyst	• 	Unblinded:	patient,	surgeon	and	anesthesiologist	• Location:	Greenville	 Health	 System	 (Patewood	 Outpatient	 Hospital	 and	 Hillcrest	Memorial	Hospital)	• Sample	 size:		Sample	 size	 estimates	 are	 based	 on	 the	 assumptions	 of	 a	 large	 clinical	effect	size	(>.40)	seen	at	5	follow	up	points	for	the	primary	outcome	measure	of	pain.	Using	a	fixed	effects,	special,	main	and	interactions,	analysis	of	variance	testing	(ANOVA)	with	 a	 power	 of	 0.80	 and	 an	 alpha	 of	 0.05,	 we	 estimate	 the	 need	 for	 86	 subjects	 to	achieve	statistical	significance.	To	account	for	loss	of	follow	up,	we	will	target	10%	more	subjects,	thus	95	total	participants.	 	 		• Study	population	• Subjects	 		• Recruitment:	 Consecutive	 patients	 undergoing	 hip	 arthroscopy	 will	 be	 enrolled	 in	 the	study		• Inclusion	criteria:	• Scheduled	for	outpatient	hip	arthroscopy	by	Dr.	Folk		• ASA	1-3	• Ages	18-65	• Exclusion	criteria:	• Prior	surgery	on	ipsilateral	hip	• ASA	4-6	• Chronic	 narcotic	 usage	 over	 6	 months	 or	 more	 than	 the	 equivalent	 of	 20mg	 of	morphine	per	day	• Current	or	prior	placement	of	a	spinal	cord	stimulator	or	intrathecal	pump	for	pain	control	purposes	• Allergy	to	amide	local	anesthetics	• Contraindication	to	regional	anesthesia	• BMI	>	40		• Females	who	are	pregnant	or	plan	to	get	pregnant	during	the	course	of	the	study	
Version	1/29/2015	5	• Study	procedure		At	the	pre-operative	clinic	appointment,	patients	will	be	recruited	into	the	study.		Informed	consent	will	be	obtained	from	the	patient	by	the	study	doctor.	 	 The	nature	of	the	experiment	will	be	explained,	specifically	 that	 the	patient	 agrees	 to	 be	 randomized	 to	 receive	 a	 block	prior	 to	 the	 operation	or	 to	receive	the	joint	injection	at	the	conclusion	of	the	surgery	as	an	adjunct	to	general	anesthesia.	 	 If	the	patient	agrees	to	enter	into	the	study,	the	patient	will	be	randomized	by	use	of	a	computer	generated	randomization	program	at	the	time	of	enrollment	in	the	clinic.		Currently,	the	standard	of	care	at	the	Steadman	Hawkins	Clinic	of	the	Carolinas	is	to	offer	surgical	patients	a	block	as	an	analgesic	option.	 	 FI	blocks	are	not	ordered	by	the	doctor	without	a	request	by	the	patient.		If	patients	do	not	receive	a	FI	block,	they	will	receive	a	local	anesthetic	intraoperatively	by	the	surgeon	at	the	close	of	the	procedure,	which	is	also	currently	the	standard	of	care	for	hip	surgery.			On	the	day	of	surgery,	all	patients	will	receive	multimodal	analgesia	with	an	oral	preoperative	cocktail	consisting	of	acetaminophen	15mg/kg	up	to	a	maximum	of	1000mg,	celebrex	400mg,	lyrica	75mg,	and	oxycontin	10mg	unless	they	are	allergic	to	any	of	the	components.	Both	block	(B)	and	non-block	(NB)	patients	 will	 receive	 pre-operative	 midazolam	 1-5	 mg	 as	 needed	 for	 procedural	 sedation	 (B)	 or	pre-operative	anxiety	(NB)	respectively.		Patients	to	be	blocked	will	receive	not	less	than	50	ml	and	up	to	60	mL	of	0.35%	ropivicaine	at	a	dose	of	3	mg/kg	(with	adjuvants	of	100	mcg	clonidine	[per	60	mL]	and	epinephrine	1:400,000)	placed	using	a	17	gauge	3.2”	B-Braun	Tuohy	needle	under	ultrasound	guidance	using	a	SonoSite	S-Nerve	machine	with	a	15-10	MHz	38	mm	probe	using	a	caudad	to	cephalad	in-plane	approach.	(A	70kg	patient	would	receive	all	60	mL	of	the	block	solution	and	210mg	of	ropivicaine	total).		The	blocks	will	be	placed	exclusively	by	a	selected	group	of	anesthesiologists,	who	have	been	trained	in	the	technique.		Patients	who	are	randomized	to	no-block	will	receive	a	single	injection	of	Noropin	in	the	joint	space.		General	anesthesia	will	be	conducted	in	a	standard	fashion	for	all	patients.	General	anesthesia	with	an	endotracheal	 tube	 will	 be	 induced	 with	 IV	 fentanyl	 2	 mcg/kg,	 lidocaine	 50mg,	 propofol	 2	 mg/kg,	 and	rocuronium	0.6	mg/kg	unless	another	plan	is	chosen	at	the	discretion	of	the	attending	anesthesiologist.	Maintenance	 of	 anesthesia	 will	 be	 done	 with	 O2:air	 FIO2	 50%,	 isoflurane	 end-tidal	 concentration	 of	0.7-1.4%,	 and	 tidal	 volumes	 of	 7-10	 mL/kg	 with	 a	 respiratory	 rate	 to	 maintain	 an	 end-tidal	 carbon	dioxide	 concentration	 of	 30-40	 mmHg.	 Fentanyl	 will	 be	 given	 in	 25-50	 mcg	 increments	 for	 HR	 or	 BP	greater	 than	 20%	 over	baseline.	 No	 long	 acting	 intra-operative	 opioids	 will	 be	 administered	 and	 only	fentanyl	will	be	used.	Ephedrine	in	5-10	mg	increments	or	neosynephrine	in	80-160	mcg	increments	will	be	 used	 to	 treat	 hypotension	 at	 the	 anesthesiologist's	 discretion.	 A	 minimum	 of	 20mL/kg	 of	 IV	crystalloid	 will	 be	 administered	 during	 the	 surgery.	 Ondansetron	 4	 mg	 IV	 will	 be	 administered	 to	 all	patients	approximately	30	minutes	prior	to	emergence	for	PONV	prophylaxis.		Post-operatively	in	the	recovery	room,	hydromorphone	will	be	used	as	a	first	line	opioid	for	pain	given	in	0.2-0.5	mg	increments	to	an	initial	maximum	of	4	mg.	Nausea	will	be	treated	in	a	stepwise	fashion	with	promethazine	6.25	 mg	 IV	 as	 a	 first	 line	 agent.	 Second	 line	 will	 be	 a	 repeat	 dose	 of	 promethazine	 15	minutes	after	the	first	dose,	followed	by	diphenhydramine	6.25	mg	IV	15	minutes	later	PRN.	Pain	scores	will	be	recorded	initially	upon	arrival	to	the	PACU	and	thereafter	until	the	patient	is	discharged	from	the	PACU.	 All	 episodes	 of	 nausea	 and	 vomiting	 will	 be	tallied.	 Total	 recovery	 time	 in	 the	 PACU	 will	 be	recorded.	If	a	patient	is	otherwise	ready	for	discharge	but	remains	in	the	PACU	due	to	a	non-medical	issue	 (i.e.	 bed	 hold),	 the	 time	 at	 which	 the	 patient	 could	 have	 otherwise	 been	 discharged	 will	 be	
Version	1/29/2015	6	recorded	as	the	PACU	end	time	for	the	purposes	of	the	study.	Any	unplanned	admissions	will	be	noted.	All	opioids	administered	intraoperatively	and	in	the	PACU	will	be	recorded	and	converted	to	morphine	equivalents.		Patients	 will	 be	 followed	 in	 the	study	 surgeon’s	clinic	 office	 per	 his	 standard	 protocol	 at	 2	 weeks,	 6	weeks,	and	3	months	post-operatively.	 	 Pain	scores	will	be	evaluated	at	this	time.	 	 Clinical	outcome	measures	and	range	of	motion	of	the	patients’	hips	will	be	collected	at	this	time	as	well.	 	 Any	adverse	reaction	from	the	block	will	be	noted	and	recorded	at	all	times	from	the	administration	of	the	block	and	at	 each	 clinic	 follow	 up.	 	 Any	 signs	 or	 symptoms	 of	 numbness	 in	 the	 distribution	 of	 the	 fascia	 iliaca	block	will	be	noted.	 			• Primary	endpoint:	Quantify	the	difference	in	pain	in	patients	who	have	received	a	pre-operative	FI	block	versus	those	receiving	no	block.	• Secondary	 endpoint:	 Quantify	 the	 difference	 in	 opioid	 consumption	 in	 patients	 who	 have	received	a	pre-operative	FI	block	versus	those	receiving	no	block.	• Tertiary	 endpoints:	 Assess	 differences	 in	 episodes	 of	 PONV,	 time	 in	 PACU,	 and	 proportion	 of	unplanned	admissions			• Risks	/	benefit	• Risks	associated	with	FI	blocks	are	the	following:	Overall	the	procedure	has	a	very	low	risk	profile.	The	location	of	the	injection	means	the	risk	of intravascular	 injection,	 local	 anaesthetic	 toxicity,	 and	 mechanical	 nerve	 damage	 is	 extremely	low. Good	 aseptic	 technique	 will	 minimize	 the	 risk	 of	 infection.	 The	 injection	 of	 a	 large	 volume	 of	local anaesthetic	ensures	 good	 spread	 and	 reduces	 the	 risk	 of	 failure.	 The	 risk	 of	 local	anaesthetic	 toxicity	 is highest	 within	 the	 first	 15	 minutes	 after	 injection,	 which	 makes	 close	monitoring	mandatory. 	• The	 potential	 benefit	 is	improvement	 in	 pain	 control	 and	 opioid	 consumption	 in	 FI	 patients.	 	The	knowledge	gained	from	this	study	will	also	be	used	in	future	patients	with	this	condition.	
Version	1/29/2015	7	• Statistical	Analysis		The	study	incorporates	four	dedicated	follow	up	points	beyond	baseline:	a)	perioperative	(1	to	5	days),	b)	2	weeks,	c)	6	weeks,	and	d)	3	months.	The	primary	outcome	measure	(pain)	will	be	analyzed	using	a	fixed	effects,	special,	main	and	interactions,	analysis	of	variance	testing	(ANOVA).	Opioid	consumption	will	 be	 analyzed	 using	 a	 Pearson	 chi	 square	 or	 parametric	 equivalent	 (depending	 on	 final	 coding).	Tertiary	end	points	will	be	captured	using	an	ANOVA	for	continuous	measures	(once	tests	of	normality	are	completed),	 or	 Kruskal	 Wallis,	 whereas	 re-admission	 rates	 will	 be	 analyzed	 using	 a	 Pearson	Chi-square.	A	p	value	of	0.05	will	be	considered	statistically	significant	for	all	findings.	Intention	to	treat	and	last	value	carried	forward	will	be	integrated	for	all	analyses.	 	 				References	Abdelmawgoud	A,	Rashwan	S.	(2012).	The	analgesic	efficacy	of	continuous	fascia	iliaca	block	vs	continuous	psoas	compartment	block	after	hip	surgery:	A	comparative	study.	 	Egyptian	Journal	of	Anaesthesia,	28,	183-187.	Ahsan,	Z.	S.,	Carvalho,	B.,	&	Yao,	J.	(2014).	Incidence	of	failure	of	continuous	peripheral	nerve	catheters	for	postoperative	analgesia	in	upper	extremity	surgery.	The	Journal	of	Hand	Surgery,	39(2),	324–9.	doi:10.1016/j.jhsa.2013.11.011	Barreveld,	A.,	Witte,	J.,	Chahal,	H.,	Durieux,	M.	E.,	&	Strichartz,	G.	(2013).	Preventive	analgesia	by	local	anesthetics:	the	reduction	of	postoperative	pain	by	peripheral	nerve	blocks	and	intravenous	drugs.	Anesthesia	and	Analgesia,	116(5),	1141–61.	doi:10.1213/ANE.0b013e318277a270	Beckmann	JT,	Aoki	SK,	Guyette	S,	Swenson	J.	(2012).	A	Staged	Approach	to	Analgesia	After	Hip	Arthroscopy	Using	Multimodal	Analgesia	and	Elective	Ultrasound	Guided	Fascia	Iliaca	Block.	E-Poster	#909.	International	Society	of	Hip	Arthroscopy	Annual	Meeting.	Bruce,	B.	G.,	Green,	A.,	Blaine,	T.	A.,	&	Wesner,	L.	V.	(n.d.).	Brachial	Plexus	Blocks	for	Upper,	38–47.	de	Leeuw	MA,	Zuurmond	WWA,	Perez	RSGM.	(2011).	The	Psoas	Compartment	Block	for	Hip	Surgery:	The	Past,	Present,	and	Future.	Anesthesiology	Research	and	Practice,	2011,159541.	Dold,	A.	P.,	Murnaghan,	L.,	Xing,	J.,	Abdallah,	F.	W.,	Brull,	R.,	&	Whelan,	D.	B.	(2014).	Preoperative	femoral	nerve	block	in	hip	arthroscopic	surgery:	a	retrospective	review	of	108	consecutive	cases.	The	American	Journal	of	Sports	Medicine,	42(1),	144–9.	doi:10.1177/0363546513510392	Hughes,	M.	S.,	Matava,	M.	J.,	Wright,	R.	W.,	Brophy,	R.	H.,	&	Smith,	M.	V.	(2014).	Interscalene	Brachial	Plexus	Block	for,	1318–1324.	Ko,	S.	H.,	Kang,	B.	S.,	&	Hwang,	C.	H.	(2013).	Ultrasonography-	or	electrophysiology-guided	suprascapular	nerve	block	in	arthroscopic	acromioplasty:	a	prospective,	double-blind,	parallel-group,	randomized	controlled	study	of	efficacy.	Arthroscopy :	The	Journal	of	Arthroscopic	&	Related	Surgery :	Official	Publication	of	the	Arthroscopy	Association	of	North	America	and	the	International	Arthroscopy	Association,	29(5),	794–801.	doi:10.1016/j.arthro.2013.01.011	Koh,	J.	L.,	Levin,	S.	D.,	Chehab,	E.	L.,	&	Murphy,	G.	S.	(2013).	Neer	Award	2012:	cerebral	oxygenation	in	the	beach	chair	position:	a	prospective	study	on	the	effect	of	general	anesthesia	compared	with	regional	anesthesia	and	sedation.	Journal	of	Shoulder	and	Elbow	Surgery	/	American	Shoulder	and	Elbow	Surgeons	...	[et	Al.],	22(10),	1325–31.	doi:10.1016/j.jse.2013.01.035	
Version	1/29/2015	8	Krych	AJ,	Baran	S,	Kuzma	SA,	Smith	HM,	Johnson	RL,	Levy	BA.	(2014).	Utility	of	multimodal	analgesia	with	fascia	iliaca	blockade	for	acute	pain	management	following	hip	arthroscopy.	Knee	Surgery	Sports	Traumatology	Arthroscopy,	22(4),	843-847.	Prospective,	A.,	&	Trial,	P.	(2014).	Nerve	Block	of	the	Infrapatellar	Branch	of	the	Saphenous	Nerve	in	Knee	Arthroscopy,	1465–1472.	Selection,	E.	(2014).	Lower-Extremity	Peripheral	Nerve	Blocks	in	the	Perioperative	Pain	Management	of	Orthopaedic	Patients,	167,	1–13.	Shariat	AN,	Hadzic	A,	Xu	D,	Shastri	U,	Kwofie	K,	Gandhi	K,	McCally	CM,	Gratenstein	K,	Vandepitte	C,	Gadsden	J,	Unid	D.	(2013).	Fascia	Iliaca	Block	for	Analgesia	After	Hip	Arthroplasty.	Reg	Anesth	Pain	Med,	38,	201-205.	Srikumaran,	U.,	Be,	S.,	Ew,	T.,	Mt,	F.,	&	Jh,	W.	(2014).	Upper-Extremity	Peripheral	Nerve	Blocks	in	the	Perioperative	Pain	Management	of	Orthopaedic	Patients,	197,	1–13.	Wada,	T.,	Yamauchi,	M.,	Oki,	G.,	Sonoda,	T.,	Yamakage,	M.,	&	Yamashita,	T.	(2014).	Efficacy	of	axillary	nerve	block	in	elbow	arthroscopic	surgery:	a	randomized	trial.	Journal	of	Shoulder	and	Elbow	Surgery	/	American	Shoulder	and	Elbow	Surgeons	...	[et	Al.],	23(3),	291–6.	doi:10.1016/j.jse.2013.11.022			