 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAMS Relational Agent System (CAMS -RAS) for Suicide Prevention  
1R43MH108222 -01A1  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: December 10, 2015  
  
 Study Title: CAMS Relational Agent System (CAMS-RAS) for Suicide Prevention 
Phase I Small Business Innovation Research Grant | National Institute of Mental Health 
Principal Investigators: Linda Dimeff, PhD & David Jobes, PhD, ABPP 
Institutional Review Boar d: Behavioral Health and Research Collective (BHRC), Seattle, WA 
 
PROJECT ABSTRACT / INTRODUCTION  
Every 13 minutes, someone in the United States (US) chooses to end his or her life, resulting in over 40,000 
suicides in the US each year. The economic cost of suicide in the US was $34.6 billion annually in 2005; when 
adjusted for present day inflation, the economic toll rises to $42.2 billion1. The combined cost of medical and 
work loss is estimated at $34.6 billion annually2. In 2011, 487,700 people were treated in emergency 
departments ( EDs) for self-inflicted injuries 3. Beginning in 1999 with the Surgeon General’s Call to Action to 
Prevent Suicide4, millions have been devoted annually – both publicly (approximatel y $40 million from NIH) 
and privately (approximately $20 million from American Foundation for Suicide Prevention) – to prevent 
suicide5. Yet despite this significant and sustained effort, there is no evidence of a decrease in suicides or 
suicide attempts in the US5.  
 
Our overarching goal is to create a tool that could reduce suicide rates, increase delivery of efficacious suicide 
interventions, and decrease overall costs associated with suicidal behaviors. With this in mind, we intend to: (1) 
develop and scientifically validate a relational agent for suicidal patients that delivers Collaborative Assessment 
and Management of Suicidality (CAMS), an efficacious and cost-effective intervention developed by David 
Jobes, PhD, ABPP; and (2) to create an integrated software system (CAMS Relational Agent System; CAMS-
RAS) tha t assists medical personnel by synthesizing the CAMS intervention findings into an easy-to -interpret 
report and providing empirically-derived clinical decision support ; integrates into the health care system’s 
electronic health record (EHR); enhances the patient’s coping capability by including psychoeducational skills 
training modules for use during and after hospitalization; and automates the delivery of caring contacts, a n 
efficacious and brief suicide prevention intervention provided after discharge. Our initial target will be EDs, as 
they are often the initial point of contact and where personnel must make the decision whether to hospitalize or 
discharge the suicidal patient. We will also conduct testing in other medical and outpatient mental health 
settings to ensure public health impact and commercial success.  
 
SPECIFIC AIMS: 
The concept for this project emerged from an invited NIMH/AHRQ-sponsored workshop, Mental Health and 
Health IT: The Way Forward  (April 26-27, 2010) that sought to promote the use of innovative technologies to 
advance mental health treatments and to improve treatment accessibility, utilization and outcomes for those 
suffering from mental illness. There, Brian Jack, MD presented Project RED (Reengineered Discharge) and 
“Louise,” a discharge planning nurse relational agent (avatar) designed to reduce hospital readmissions by 
improving discharge planning. Use of “Louise” reduced hospital readmissions by 30%. Importantly, 74% of 
patients who used “Louise” preferred her over a human nurse or physician. We wondered whether a relational 
agent like “Louise” could be used in EDs to facilitate a suicide risk assessment and intervention for the nearly 
half-million suicidal patients admitted annually to EDs, as well as other medical and clinic settings. Given the 
limited training in evidence-based suicide assessment, intervention, and risk management among ED and 
other medical personnel, such a tool, if effective, could significantly increase the proportion of suicidal patients 
who receive a cost-effective, evidence-based suicide intervention 
 
Project Vision: Our overarching goal is to create a to ol that could reduce suicide rates, increase delivery of 
efficacious suicide interventions, and decrease overall costs associated with suicidal behaviors. With this in 
mind, we intend to: (1) develop and scientifically validate a relational agent for suicidal patients that delivers 
Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality (CAMS), an efficacious and cost-effective 
intervention developed by David Jobes, PhD, ABPP ; and (2) to create an integrated software system (CAMS 
Relational Agent System; CAMS-RAS) that assists medical personnel by synthesizing the CAMS intervention 
findings into an easy-to -interpret report and providing empirically-derived clinical decision support ; integrates  
into the health care system’s electronic health record (EHR); enhances the patient’s coping capability by 
including psychoeducational skills training modules for use during and after hospitalization; and automates the 
delivery of caring contacts6-10, an efficacious and brief suicide prevention intervent ion provided after discharge. 
Our primary target will be EDs, as they are often the initial point of contact and where personnel must make the 
decision whether to hospitalize or discharge the suicidal patient. To ensure the broadest possible public health 
and commercialization impact, we will simultaneously conduct testing in psychiatric inpatient settings, on 
medical floors where patients are receiving medical treatment for injuries sustained during a suicide attempt, 
and in outpatient mental health clinic s. 
 
 
 
  
 Phase 1 study aims include: 
 Aim 1:  Create a CAMS-RAS Advisory Board to advise team in its development and to ensure it aligns 
well with the needs and system requirements of hospitals and outpatient clinics treating suicidal 
patients and optimizes workf low to achieve successful commercialization and public health impact. 
 Aim 2 : Iteratively design and develop “Dr. Dave” (named and modeled after CAMS treatment 
developer, David Jobes, PhD), a socially and emotionally intelligent relational agent that can 
successfully perform the CAMS in the ED and other hospital departments; also design and develop 
prototypes of all other features planned for Phase II including: clinical decision support, optional risk 
management assessments, and non-demanding caring contacts.  
 Aim 3 : Conduct feasibility tests (usability, acceptability, and satisfaction) of CAMS-RAS (including “Dr. 
Dave”) with primary target end-users including: suicidal patients admitted to the ED, inpatient 
psychiatry, or medical floors (n=8, resulting from five onsite days at a local hospital) , as well as 
hospital-based administrators (n=8), medical personnel (n=12), and peer advocates (n=7); outpatient 
suicidal clients (n=20)  and outpatient administrators & clinicians (n=10).  
 
BACKGROUND & SIGNIFICANCE  
Suicide Remains a Significant Public Health Problem.  Suicide is currently the tenth leading cause of death  
among Americans of all ages2. Over 40,600  suicides occurred in the US in 2012 – one suicide every 13 
minutes3 – and more than a million adults in the U.S. reported suicide attempts3. In 2012, 483,596 people were 
treated in EDs for self-inflicted injuries (primarily suicide attempts), of whom 332,833 pe ople were hospitalized 
3. In 2012, t he lifetime cost of self -inflicted injuries in the U.S. was $33 billion11, including $1 billion for medical 
treatment and $32  billion in lost productivity11. The estimated annual cost of completed suicide was $34.6 
billion, with each completed suicide costing over $1M2. A third of those who suicide test positive for alcohol, 
and nearly a quarter test positive for opiates12. The depression and despair leading an individual to consider 
suicide are profound, characterized by hopelessness about alternatives to end emotional pain. Family, friends, 
and co-workers also experience uniquely painful consequences following a loved one’s suicide13-16 and are 
often plagued by stigma17,18. Despite numerous public health initiatives and billions spent to combat 
suicide11,19,20, the annual national suicide rate in the U S continues to rise1.   
 
Further, most clinicians and ED personnel are unprepared or unwilling to treat suicidal patients21-24. For 
example, only 40% of psychology training programs21,22, 111 and a third to half of psychiatry residency 
programs25,26 provide training on suicide risk assessment and management. Unwillingness to treat arises from 
concern about making decisions that have life and death consequences, distress associated with the prospect 
of losing a patient, and/or fear of malpractice litigation21,24. Within the ED, while medical personnel are often 
confident in their ability to screen for suicidality, they are significantly less confident in their ability to assess 
severity of risk, counsel patients, and generate safety plans. Numerous studies also highlight that negative 
biases about suicidal patients exist among ED medical personnel111 which may decrease the willingness of 
suicidal patients to openly communicate about their reasons for wanting to die and their intentions111. 
 
Treatments to Reduce Suicide Attempts and Suicides Do Exist.  Linehan27 recently summarized published 
findings from all available suicide-specific randomized controlled trials (N=43). Overall, outpatient psychosocial 
interventions show considerably more promise compared  to inpatient hospitalization or pharmacotherapy7,9,27-
32. Brief caring contacts via mail or phone were highly successful brief interventions that prevent ed death by 
suicide6-10. Specifically, those who receive a caring note from the hospital following discharge were nearly 10 
times less likely to attempt suicide compared to contr ols in one study6; in others, those who received caring 
contact were nearly half as likely to attempt or complete suicide in the future7-10.  
 
CAMS is an Efficacious , Cost -Effective  and Easy -to-Transport  Intervention . CAMS was developed by 
David Jobes, PhD , ABPP  for use by clinicians in engaging, assessing, and treating  suicidal patients33,34.  
CAMS uses a c hart-ready documentation tool called the “Suicide Status Form” (SSF) to serve as a clinical 
roadmap guiding assessment, treatment planning, and ongoing tracking of risk and outcome/disposition of 
care. The assessment information gathered via the SSF then informs a suicide -specific and problem-solving 
focused treatment plan including stabilizing the patient and identifying and treating the drivers of suicidality. 
Subsequent sessions begin with updating the SSF, and addressing the suicide -related issues and drivers. 
Each session ends with  updating the CAMS treatment plan and crisis plan .  
 
Seven non-randomized trials35-41 and one RCT42 across multiple treatment settings provide evidence that 
CAMS reduces suicidality. For example, two within-subjects pilot studies demonstra ted rapid reductions of 
suicidal ideation on repeated measures of suicidal patients37,38. In one, Arkov et al.38 reported significant 
improvements on the SSF for 27 community mental health participants. In the other, Ellis et al.37 reported large 
effect sizes on a range of outcome variables, including hopelessness and psychological pain, as well as a 50% 
  
 drop on self-perceived risk of suicide among an inpatient sample. In a quasi-experimental comparison group 
clinical trial with 56 suicidal US Air Force personnel, Jobes et al.41 found that patients receiving CAMS resolved 
suicidal ideation in significantly fewer sessions (M = 7.3) compared to care-as -usual (CAU) patients (M = 11.4). 
Moreover, CAMS patients had significantly fewer, and spent less time in, ED visits and primary care medical 
appointments compared to CAU patients by the six month assessment. Recently , Comtois and her 
colleagues42 conducted an RCT that investigated the feasibility of CAMS within a “Next-Day Appointment” 
outpati ent treatment setting. Suicidal patients (N=32) were randomly assigned to CAMS or a CAU control 
condition. While patients in both conditions improved overall, CAMS patients had significantly larger and 
sustained decreases in suicidal ideation, as well as significantly greater gains  in overall symptoms and hope. 
Further more, CAMS subjects reported significantly higher satisfaction at the 12-month follow up .  
      
Innovative Technologies Can F acilitate the Dissemination and Delivery of CAMS to Improve Reach and 
Public Health Outcomes. A substantial and growing body of research has emerged on the use of innovative 
technologies (IT) to improve mental health outcomes43-45 using mobile technology46-50, computerized 
CBT45,47,51,52, and computer-assisted therapy53. Advances in computer science have allowed researchers to 
build relational agents who can deliver dialog based health and mental health interventions directly to 
patients54,55. While their use is novel, findings are promising. When agents give humans social cues, humans 
react as they would to a human56; they can be as engaging as humans57. In the area of mental health , users 
both accept and like agents, which enhance patient interactions with health interventions58,59. In EDs, a virtual 
discharge nurse (“Louise”) was well accepted and liked, and significantly reduced hospital readmissions60,61. 
One relational agent is currently being investigated as a non-threatening provider of psychoeducation and 
referrals for veterans with PTSD or depress ion54. 
 
RESEARCH & DESIGN METHODS  
The CAMS Relational Agent System is highly innovative in what it seeks to do and how it seeks to do it. We 
know no other project of its kind – one that uses a relational agent with highly vulnerable and distressed 
patients to perform an exquisitely sensitive clinical intervention. If we are able to build a relational agent that 
acutely suicidal patients find acceptable in delivering CAMS during a suicidal crisis and in the context of an ED, 
we will significantly add to the research literature on what is possible to achieve with relational agents in mental 
health. More importantly, we will be one step closer to solving a significant public health pr oblem through 
increased access to an efficacious, cost-effective suicide prevention intervention. 
 
CAMS-RAS “Transports” Dr. Jobes to the Suicidal Patient & Medical Providers 24/7. Rather than training 
all hospital medical personnel and outpatient clinic providers who treat suicidal patients to become proficient in 
suicide assessment and management procedures, and adherent in delivery of CAMS, CAMS-RAS will ensure 
the reliable and consistent delivery of CAMS to suicidal patients. Health professionals will receive clinical 
decision support consistent with best-practice and the latest research findings on predictors of suicide risk will 
aid personnel in deciding whether to hospitalize a patient.  
 
The CAMS-RAS Platform will be Designed to Maximize Public Healt h Impact. First, we will design and 
build the platform and all CAMS -RAS features for ease of expansion to other settings and for other languages 
(a Spanish version of CAMS-RAS is planned for Phase III), and cultures (building a team of culturally diverse 
avatars to join “Dr. Dave”). Second, CAMS-RAS will be designed to incorporate other empirically-supported 
suicide prevention interventions, like use of non-demanding caring contacts in this project. Third, we will design 
it to integrate within the setting’s workflow  and to integrate into EHR s (versus as a stand-alone “silo”). Both 
aspects are imperative to increase the probability that large systems will adopt its use. Finally, CAMS-RAS will 
be offered as an additional product within our WILLOW product line of treatment delivery tools designed for 
use in health maintenance organizations and their EHRs (www.willow.technology). Our building of commercial 
partners, as well as development of the marketing and sales strategy for WILLOW, will speed successful 
commercialization of CAMS-RAS and thereby its public health impact.   
 
CAMS-RAS Directly Addresses the NIMH Strategic Plan by Strengthening Public Health Impact of 
NIMH-Supported Research (Objective 4): To ensure that efficacious interventions generated through NIMH 
and other funding are “used by patients, families, healthcare providers, and the wider community involved in 
mental health care”62, CAMS- RAS address es all elements of NIMH Objective 4 : It is an innovative method to 
facilitate the dissemination and implementation of an evidence-based practices (Strategy 4.1); and we will 
thoroughly (in Phase II and III) evaluate this new technology for information dissemination (Strategy 4.2) . 
Finally, we will expand our network of meaningful relationships with key stakeholder organizations (Strategy 
4.3) to include HealthPartners/Regions Hospital and Harborview Medical Center. (Current organizations 
partnering with EBPI in developing the Willow product line include Allina Healthcare, Group Health 
Cooperative, and Oregon State Hospital). 
  
  
 Overview. Our overarching goal is to develop a socially and emotionally intelligent relational agent (“Dr. Dave”) 
and software system for suicidal patients and their treatment providers that: (1) facilitates the delivery of an 
evidence-based approach to suicide assessment and management, (2) in tegrates naturally treatment 
providers’ workflow, and (3) streamlines the clinical assessment, intervention, and care of suicidal patients in 
diverse settings. Our primary Phase I target are EDs, as they are th e initial point of contact for suicidal patients 
and face the important decision of whether to hospitalize or discharge the patient. To ensure the broadest 
possible public health and commercialization impact, we will simultaneously conduct testing in psychiatric 
inpatient settings, on medical floors where patients are receiving medical treatment for injuries sustained 
during a suicide attempt, and in outpatient mental health clinics. 
 
In Phase I, we propose to develop and test key elements of the CAMS Relational Agent System (CAMS-RAS), 
including “Dr. Dave” who will engage suicidal patients in a 15 -minute suicide risk assessment using a portion of 
the CAMS Suicide Status Form (SSF). We also will develop and test the basic designs for all other features 
plann ed for Phase II including: clinical decision support (content and graphical layout); optional suicide risk 
assessment modules; non-demanding caring contacts ( a brief intervention for post-discharge) ; and brief skills-
based behavioral interventions to dec rease acute distress (e.g., paced breathing, progressive muscle 
relaxation, distraction strategies, etc) . CAMS content will be developed in close collaboration with treatment 
developer Dr. Jobes, and CAMS research collaborator, Katherine Comtois, PhD, MPH. “Dr. Dave” will be built 
by Christine Lissetti, PhD in her Affective Social Computing Laboratory in The School of Computing and 
Information Sciences at Florida International University. Consistent with the novelty and complexity of this 
project, Phase I outcomes will include: usability (e.g., Can target end-users easily use all elements of the 
system?); satisfaction (e.g., Do suicidal patients like “Dr. Dave” and wish to engage with him; are the caring 
contacts messages from Dr. Dave viewed positively?); and acceptability (e.g., Do suicidal patients, treatment 
providers, and administrators find CAMS-RAS acceptable?). In the event of a successful Phase I, we will 
proceed to Phase II to complete all elements of CAMS-RAS, including necessary training (for provid ers) and 
systems implementation materials (for administrators) to ensure the successful use of CAMS-RAS . We will 
then conduct a RCT comparing CAMS-RAS to care-as -usual in hospitalized and outpatient suicidal patients. In 
addition to use of Phase I outcome variables, Phase II client outcome variables will include: decreases in 
suicidal ideation, suicidal attempts, and hopelessness; and increase in perceived reasons to live. Provider 
outcomes variables will include: increased self-efficacy in intervening with suicidal patients; system-level 
outcomes will include cost-effectiveness.  
 
Rationale for Phase I Scope . While the CAMS-RAS has the potential for significant public health impact, 
there are a number of unknowns. For example, will suicidal patients respond  favorably to “Dr. Dave”? Will they 
like him enough to welcome and benefit from caring contact brief interventions  delivered from him at a later 
date? Table 1 provides a summary of many of our questions. After much consideration, we decided to focus 
Phase I on the most basic questions: Can we successfully build a relational agent that acutely suicidal patients 
will find acceptable for purposes of performing a suicide risk assessment and intervention? Furthermore, can 
we link it to a broader system that will meet the needs of medical personnel and their administrators? 
 
Product Description. The CAMS-RAS, when Phase I and II are completed, will consist of the following 
components: “Dr. Dave” (the relational agent); clinical decision support to help medical personnel determine 
the patient’s suicide risk and whether hospitalization is indicated; non -demanding brief intervention caring 
contacts; optional modules for more in-depth assessment of behavioral risk factors for suicide (drug/alcohol 
abuse12; intimate partner violence63, etc.), psychoeducational coping skills training, including evidence-based 
behavioral skills for assisting patients in regulating their emotions and tolerating distress (e.g., diaphragmatic 
breathing, paced breathing, progressive muscle relaxation, etc.); training tools to teach personnel how to use 
CAMS-RAS; and a systems architecture design document illustrating a step-wise approach to integrating 
CAMS-RAS within systems’ EHRs. This document will illustrate how information provided by the patient to “Dr. 
Dave” will flow into the EHR so medical personnel can readily access it. The design document will also 
illustrate where the clinical decision support will reside. Table 2 provides a provisional description of several 
key CAMS-RAS features for Phase I and Phase II.  
 
The centerpiece of the CAMS-RAS system is “Dr. Dave”, a relational agent, or avatar, that will deliver the SSF 
to assess the user’s suicide risk; “Dr. Dave” will communicate using Text-to -Speech while the patient answers 
by typing in free responses or selecting from multiple-choice items. “Dr. Dave” will respond empathically, with 
verbal and non-verbal expressions. The computer codes the user’s responses to quantitative items and 
collates qualitative responses into a clinically useful summary that includes intervention recommendations for 
review by the clinical team.  
 
Formative Evaluation: Usability, Satisfaction, and Acceptability Studies.  Because the success of any 
system rests on whether end-users like, can easily use, and find it acceptable, we will solici t extensive input 
  
 from target end -users and stakeholders throughout the Phase I process. Often referred to as user-centered 
design64,65, we use a rigorous iterative process of development in which end-users join each development 
cycle, using and giving feedback on prototypes, to ensure product design successfully meets their needs. We 
will iterate on all CAMS-RAS features as often as necessary to ensure usability, satisfaction, and acceptance, 
and to optimize workflow among medical personnel who use CAMS -RAS. Each iterative phase of development 
will involve testing with no less than five individuals, allowing the development team to validate hypotheses and 
themes, and to guard against outliers.  
 
Participants, Settings, and Recruitment. Primary target end-users include: 1) suicidal patients currently 
admitted to EDs, psychiatric inpatient units, and medical floors (n=8; gathered during a total of five onsite days 
at a local hospital ); 2) hospital medical personnel who treat suicidal patients (n=12); 3) hospital administrators 
(n=8); 4) hospital-based peer advocates (n=7); 5) outpatient mental health clinicians and administrators (n=10); 
and 6) suicidal individuals currently receiving outpatient mental health services (n=20). All research 
participants will be 18 years or older. Hospitalized suicidal patients will be initially invited to participate in the 
study by the ED’s Chief, onsite coordinator, or their designee (“onsite contact”); outpatient suicidal clients will 
be invited to participate by their outpatient clinician. To ensure external validity, Phase I exclusion criteria will 
be limited to the following criteria: (1) acutely psychotic and thus unable to provide informed consent ; (2) 
severely agitated (as deemed by physician, nurse, or outpatient therapist); and (3) not fluent in English as the 
initial “Dr. Dave” will be English-speaking. (We will create a Spanish-speaking “Dr. Dave” in Phase III). 
Prospective medical personnel, outpatient clinicians, administrators, and stakeholders who wish to participate 
as subjects will learn about the project from their onsite coordinator. Inclusion criteria for non-patient 
participants will include English fluency. Those interested in participating will be referred to the research team 
for consenting. Hospital patients will be recruited from Harborview Medical Center (Seattle, WA). Hospital 
medical personnel, administrators, and other stakeholders will be recruited from Harborview and Health 
Partners/Regions Hospital (St. Paul, MN). Outpatient mental health clinic administrators and therapists will be 
recruited from Portland DBT Institute (PDBTI; Portland, OR), DBT Center of Michigan (Holt, MI), and Mid-
Valley Behavioral Care Network (Portland, OR). Suicidal outpatients will be recruited from PDBTI.  
 
No less than 50% of hospital clients and medical personnel will be recruited from  Harborview’s ED because the 
ED is the initial point of entry for many suicidal patients admitted to a hospital. Additionally, EDs face the 
weighty decision of whether to hospitalize or discharge the patient (e.g., stigmatization of the patient, high 
healthcare costs associated with psychiatric hospitalization, risks of a completed suicide). Finally, the acute 
nature of the suicidal crisis when patients are in the ED allows us to design CAMS-RAS to appropriately 
incorporate the complexity of the tasks ED staff face as we build “Dr. Dave” and to determine the research 
procedures that will be required for a successful Phase II trial. 
 
Procedures. Patient Participants : For efficiency and safety in recruiting, consenting, and testing hospitalized 
and outpatient suicidal patients, we will establish specific dates in which Drs. Dimeff or Koerner (both licensed 
clinical psychologists with expertise in treating suicidal patients) will be onsite to conduct testing. Hospital 
onsite visits (five days total) will coincide with the work schedule of our onsite contacts to ensure that eligible 
suicidal clients are informed of the study and, if interested, directly introduced to study staff. We will then 
conduct the informed consent process. PDBTI suicidal outpatients will learn about the study from their clinician. 
Those wishing to participate will contact study research assistant (RA) via the phone for purposes of screening 
and informed consent. The RA will describe the study, answer questions, and conduct informed consent. After 
providing consent, an appointment with Dr. Dimeff or Dr. Koerner will then be arranged at PDBTI. Before 
conducting the user-testing, Dr. Dimeff or Dr. Koerner will administer the demographics measures; following 
the testing, participants will be asked to complete a usability measure and a brief semi-structured interview. 
Measures may be completed verbally, using paper/pencil or an online method as directed by the onsite contact 
to ensure patient safety. Expected duration of the study session after informed consent (e.g., user-testing, brief 
measures completion, and semi-structured interview) is 45 to 90 minutes, d epending on the task, extent of 
participant feedback, and capacity of participant. Subjects will be compensated $50 for their time. Non-Patient 
Participants:  After learning of the study from the onsite contact, those interested in participating will contact our 
offices via phone or email to schedule a brief screening interview with the RA. Those meeting study criteria will 
then be sent (via email or fax) the informed consent form for review during the telephone call. The RA will 
review informed consent; those providing verbal consent will return the signed informed consent via fax, scan, 
or standard mail. An appointment with study staff will be scheduled at a mutually convenient time, either 
remotely or in-person, depending on what is most efficient and the content being reviewed. Remote sessions 
will occur via the telephone and Join.Me, a free online screen-sharing service. All assessments will be 
conducted online. Expected testing length is 45 to 90 minutes; subjects will be compensated $50. During 
Phase I, use of “Dr. Dave” will be under the guidance and instruction of study staff. Thus Phase I 
participants will require no training in the use of “Dr. Dave.”  
 
  
 End-User Testing. Patient-Participants. Special attention will be paid to their reactions to “Dr. Dave’s” emotive 
and communicative expressions, as well as the helpfulness and genuineness of the non-demanding caring 
contacts messages. In addition to usability and acceptability, considerable emphasis will be placed on users’ 
interest in “engaging” with “Dr. Dave”, the extent to which they feel connected to and understood by him, and 
their degree of interest in receiving non-demanding caring contacts from him. Early on in the process of 
product development, feedback will primarily be derived by showing subjects low-fidelity representations of “Dr. 
Dave” and conducting a semi-structured interview done by Dr. Dimeff or Dr. Koerner. The interview will be 
guided by questions like those in Table 2. The intent of this interview is to understand the user’s likes, d islikes, 
and preferences. Once the first “Dr. Dave” prototype is built, to aid in our understanding of design problems 
that interfere with intended use we will begin a “talk out loud” process where users will verbalize their thoughts 
and actions in real-ti me as they interact with the software system. We will conduct the semi-structured 
interview after this process to better understand their comments and preferences. Service Professional & 
Stakeholder Participants. The testing process is identical to the patient testing method described above with 
the following exceptions: considerably less emphasis will be placed on “Dr. Dave” and content of the caring 
contacts; emphasis will instead be placed on workflow integration, the content and layout of the clinical 
decision support, and risk management considerations (for administrators). These subjects may be asked to 
provide input and guidance on more than one occasion during the developmental process. (They will be 
compensated $50 for each point of contact).   
 
Assessment Instruments-Patients. The Demographic Questionnaire-Brief (DDQ- B)66 obtains limited, 
essential demographic data. The Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9)67 is a brief nine-item multiple-choice, 
self-report measure68 used as a screening and diagnostic tool. Non-Patients:  The Demographics 
Questionnaire (DQ)69 obtains a wide range of demographic data about healthcare providers. The Usability, 
Satisfaction and Acceptability Questionnaire (USAQ) is a brief face-valid, self-report measure that the PI 
derived from the System Usability Scale70,71 and has successfully used in previous studies. Items are rated on 
a five-point Likert scale (1 = poor; 3 = good; 5=excellent). The USAQ will include open -ended questions to 
better understand what was most/least helpful with respect to each category as well as additional items to 
measure users’ acceptance of the avatar .  
 
Data Management Procedures. Participants will be assigned a participant identification number which will be 
used to label all data collected. A single list of participant names linked with ID numbers will exist in a 
password-protected electronic file stored securely and accessible only to study staff. Research staff must use 
their names and passwords to access the storage site itself. Signed copies of participant consent forms will be 
stored in a locked file cabinet in a locked office at the EBPI site, accessible only to the PIs and research team 
or electronically on a secure, password protected site with maximum protections. Participant ID numbers will 
not appear on consent forms.  
 
Data Analysis. Qualitative data will include  written feedback from participants and annotations from 
investigators noting: likes,  dislikes, confusion, suggestions for improvement, misunderstandings, and potential 
unintended consequences. Qualitative data will be analyzed u sing a grounded theory approach (a data-
reduction method for qualitative data used to generate and test hypotheses from the ground up)72. Data from 
the USAQ  will determine feasibility: USAQ scores below a 3.5 on a five-point Likert scale will indicate a need 
for improvement. An aggregated mean score of 3.5 or higher will support feasibility.  
 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 
Because our patient participants will be currently acutely suicidal and/or recently hospitalized because of 
suicidality, there is a higher probability than usual for the study procedures to cause emotional distress. (It is 
equally possible that engagement with Dr. Dimeff or Koerner and turning their mind to another topic will serve 
as a distress tolerance/coping strategy, and in the moment of their participation, reduce their anguish). Even 
with this sensitive population, we believe the risk to be low for several reasons. First, the department chair or a 
designee will determine who is sufficiently stable to engage in the interview process. They will r ule out those  
patients they believe to be at considerable imminent risk and/or so agitated that engagement in the study  
protocol could cause harm to them or the interviewers. Second, both Dr. Dimeff and Koerner are highly 
experienced in interacting with acutely suicidal patients and as such, will be able to gauge whether to reduce 
the length/scope of the interview, discontinue the testing, and/or teach these patients distress tolerance 
strategies (e.g., paced breathing, distraction techniques). Third, it is likely that for the majority of individuals, 
engagement doing the research trial will function as a distraction from either the events resulting in their 
suicidality and/or from unpleasant elements of their hospitalization. 
 
  
 The most distressing portion of the testing for patients may be at the beginning, when asked to complete the 
PHQ -9 to assess their psychological distress. Importantly, items from both of this measure are similar to those 
commonly and routinely asked of suicidal clients upon admission. The Suicide Short Form (SSF) also involves 
the individual reflecting on the "drivers" for suicide as well as their "reasons for living". 
 
Other potential risks common to participants are minimal. Some participants may feel discomfort as they 
provide feedback on the relational tool and answer the questionnaires because they are hesitant to criticize the 
tool that we have developed. Because patients will be referred to the study by a service professional that they 
have received treatment from, they may feel some pressure to participate. Non-patient participants may also  
feel a similar pressure to participate as they will receive the recruitment materials from their 
supervisors/administrators. There is also the potential risk of loss of confidentiality. 
 
There is no known physical, social, economic, or legal risk from participating for patients and non-patients. 
There are no known alternative procedures to assess this information.  
 
The primary alternative to participating in the research is to elect not to participate in the research. Patient 
refusal to participation will not affect their treatment and provider refusal to participate will not affect their 
employment. Participants will be informed that they have the right to refuse to participate or to discontinue 
participation at any time. 
 
Protections against Risk:  
The primary risk to participants is relevant only to client participants and involves the potential for the study 
procedures to engender emotional distress or further increase their suicidality. As mentioned earlier, these 
risks are minimized by the design of the study: clients will be referred by our onsite contacts who know each 
patient’s clinical presentation, we will have limited contact with the client (45 -90 minutes), the primary focus of 
and assessment and user testing will be the relational agent, and the patient will be receiving treatment at the 
time of the user test. Additionally, Drs. Dimeff and Koerner, who will be conducting the user tests, are experts 
in treating suicidal patients. In the event that they determine that the study procedures are causing or 
increasing distress or suicidal ideation in a particular client they will stop the user immediately and inform the 
patient’s care team. Drs. Dimeff and Koerner will collaborate closely with  co-I Dr. Kate Comtois throughout the 
study to ensure proper management of high-risk situations. Dr. Comtois has been conducting assessment and 
clinical trial research with suicidal individuals for more than 15 years and has taught over 25 research 
assistants to conduct these interviews and assess and manage risk during suicide risk assessments. She has 
been a member of the NIMH Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) since 2001 as well as serving on two other 
DSMBs for clinical trials with high-risk participants. As overall PI for study, Dr. Jobes will be consulted for 
concurrence with plan on imminent risk situations as well. 
 
To protect patient participants from loss of confidentiality, the following procedures will be employed. Each 
client participant will be given an ID number and no identifying information will be written or documented on 
any data collected from the participant. Only the PIs, Co-I, and research staff trained in procedures for conduct 
of ethical human subjects research will have access to au dio-visual recordings of user test sessions and to 
study data exported from SurveyMonkey. The identity of participants will be kept separate from records of their 
data. As noted below, data will be identified by a participant code only. The master list that links subject names 
and code numbers will be stored in a password-protected computer file that is stored on the computer of one of 
the PIs and one member of the research team. Audio-visual recordings of user testing data will be stored in 
password-protec ted, encrypted files on a password -protected computer. For service providers and 
stakeholders, these data are not considered to be sensitive or health-related, because participants are 
providing information about their experience of the CAMS-RAS, not sensitive information about themselves. 
For patients, this data is considered sensitive, given that participants will be identified as being mental health 
clients. Therefore, as described above, the identity of all participants will be kept separate from records of their 
testing data. 
 
Participants will also be asked to complete the aforementioned self-report questionnaires on SurveyMonkey. 
To complete the questionnaires, participants will enter their unique participant code rather than identifying 
demographic information into SurveyMonkey. Data gathered via SurveyMonkey will be securely transmitted 
and stored according to SurveyMonkey’s data security policy, accessible only to the PIs, Co-Is, and research 
  
 staff via a password secured account. Study RAs will download the data from SurveyMonkey and place it into 
a local database that is password protected and does not include any identifying information beyond the 
participant code. 
 
User testing data will be recorded and stored on EBPI secure computer systems. Data will be securely stored 
on password protected EBPI computers, accessible only by research staff who have completed training in 
ethical conduct of human subjects research. User testing data will be destroyed after 5 years. We will 
safeguard service providers and stakeholders from perceiving pressure from their supervisors/administrators to 
participate in several ways. First, we will instruct supervisors/ administrators to invite but not pressure their 
employees to participate. Second, supervisors will invite their employees to participate, but will not participate 
in the consent process. Instead, service providers will contact the study RA to initiate the consent process. 
Finally, supervisors will not be informed of their staffs’ decision to participate in the study. 
 
We will safeguard patients from perceiving pressure from their treatment provider to participate in several 
ways. First, we will instruct service providers to invite but not pressure clients to participate. Second, clinicians 
will recruit and invite their patients to participate, but will not participate in the consent process. Instead, 
patients will contact the study RA to initiate the consent process. Finally, service providers will not be informed 
of clients’ decision to participate in the study. Dr. Koerner will be available to talk with any clinician or study 
participant who experiences discomfort related to the study procedures. Her contact information will be 
included on the consent form and all participants will be made aware of this resource in the event that it is 
needed.  
 
Management of Adverse Events. Participants will be provided with information about how to report Potential 
Adverse Events (patients will report to the chair of their department or the onsite coordinator; non-patients will 
be directed to a study website). In addition, client participants will be encouraged to report any Potential 
Adverse Events directly to their medical personnel who is in charge of their care. Potential Adverse Event 
reports will be monitored daily by study staff. Because the risks to participation are low, the likelihood of 
Adverse Events related to the proposed research is judged to be low. In the event that a Potential Adverse 
Event is reported, the departmental chair and a PI/Co-Investigator will be notified by the system immediately. 
The chair and/or Co-PI/Co-Investigator will then assess the situation and determine an appropriate clinical and 
ethical course of action, including report of an Adverse Event to the PI, EBPI's IRB (BHRC) and the Data 
Safety Monitoring Board. 
 
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Human Subjects and Others 
Patient participants may benefit from improved care as a result of their interaction with the relational agent. 
Findings from this study will be used to develop a product that is intended to increase quality of care for 
patients who recently made a suicide attempt or are struggling with suicidal ideation.  
 
IMPORTANCE OF THE KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED 
The proposed research contributes to the goal of improving  quality of care for suicidal patients, particularly in 
EDs where there is often a lack of sufficient mental health resources. Developing a successful relational agent 
based on CAMS means that suicidal patients will receive evidence-based assessment and treatment delivered 
in a more timely, effective, and efficient manner than is typical in EDs and other settings. 
 
PLANNED ENROLLMENT  
Racial Categories  Ethnic Categories  
Total  Not Hispanic or Latino  Hispanic or Latino  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
American I ndian/Alaska Native  0 0 0 0 0 
Asian  3 1 0 0 4 
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 0 0 
Black or African American  6 5 2 0 13 
White  21 16 5 3 45 
More than One Race  2 1 0 0 3 
Total  32 23 7 3 65 
  
  
LITERATURE CITED  
1. Pantin, H., Prado, G., Lopez, B., Huang, S., Tapia, M. I., Schwartz, S. J., . . . Branchini, J. (2009). A 
randomized controlled trial of familias unidas for hispanic adolescents with behavior problems. 
Psychosomatic Medicine , 71(9), 987-995. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181bb2913 
2. Laird, R. D., Criss, M. M., Pettit, G. S., Dodge, K. A., & Bates, J. E. (2008). Parents' monitoring knowledge 
attenuates the link between antisocial friends and adolescent delinquent behavior. Journal of Abnormal 
Child Psychology: An official publication of the International Society for Research in Child and Adolescent 
Psychopathology , 36(3), 299-310. doi: 10.1007/s10802 -007-9178-4 
3. Ary, D. V., Duncan, T. E., Biglan, A., Metzler, C. W., Noell, J. W., & Smolkowski, K. (1999). Development o f 
adolescent problem behavior. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology: An official publication of the 
International Society for Research in Child and Adolescent Psychopathology , 27(2), 141-150. doi: 
10.1023/a:1021963531607  
4. Cohen, M. A. & Piquero, A. R. (2009). New evidence on the monetary value of saving a high risk youth. 
Journal of Quantitative Criminology , 25(1), 25-49. doi: 10.1007/s10940 -008-9057-3 
5. Jessor, R. & Turbin, M. (2014). Parsing protection and risk for problem behavior versus pro-social behavior 
among us and chinese adolescents. Journal of Youth & Adolescence , 43(7), 1037-1051. doi: 
10.1007/s10964 -014-0130-y 
6. Luxton, D. D., June, J. D., & Comtois, K. A. (2013). Can postdischarge follow-up contacts prevent suicide 
and suicidal behavior? A review of the evidence. Crisis , 34(1), 32-41. doi: 10.1027/0227 -5910/a000158  
7. Fleischmann, A., Bertolote, J. M., Wasserman, D., De Leo, D., Bolhari, J., Botega, N. J., . . . Thanh, H. T. 
(2008). Effectiveness of brief intervention and contact for suicide attempters: A randomized controlled trial 
in five countries. Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 86(9), 703-709. doi: 10.2471/blt.07.046995  
8. Carter, G. L., Clover, K., Whyte, I. M., Dawson, A. H., & Este, C. D. (2005). Postcards from the edge 
project: Randomized controlled trial of an intervention using postcards to reduce repitition of hospital 
treated deliberate self poisoning. British Medical Journal , 331(7520), 805. doi: 
10.1136/bmj.38579.455266.e0  
9. Motto, J. A. & Bostrom, A. G. (2001). A randomized controlled trial of postcrisis suicide prevention. 
Psychiatric Services , 52(6), 828-833. doi:  
10. Vaiva, G., Ducrocq, F., Meyer, P., Mathieu, D., Philippe, A., Libersa, C., & Goudemand, M. (2006). Effect of 
telephone contact on further suicide attempts in patients discharged from an emergency department: 
Randomised controlled study. British Medical Journal , 332(1241-1245), doi:  
11. Corso, P. S., Mercy, J. A., Simon, T. R., Finkelstein, E. A., & Miller, T. R. (2007). Medical costs and 
productivity losses due to interpersonal and self-directed violence in the united states. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine , 32(6), 474-482. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2007.02.010  
12. Karch, D. L., Logan, J., McDaniel, D., Parks, S., & Patel, N. (2012). Surveillance for violent deaths - 
national violent death reporting system, 16 states, 2009. Surveillance Summaries , 61(6), 1-43. doi:  
13. Jordan, J. R. (2001). Is suicide bereavement different? A reassessment of the literature. Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior , 31(1), 91-102. doi:  
14. Begley, M. & Quale, E. (2007). The lived experience of adults bereaved by suicide: A phenomenological 
study. Crisis , 28(1), 26-34. doi:  
15. Barrett, T. W. & Scott, T. B. (1990). Suicide bereavement and recovery patterns compared with nonsuicide 
bereavement patterns. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior , 20(1), 1-15.  
16. McMenamy, J. M., Jordan, J. R., & Mitchell, A. M. (2008). What do suicide survivors tell us they need? 
Results of a pilot study. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior , 38(4), 375-389.  
17. Cvinar, J. G. (2005). Do suicide survivors suffer social stigma: A review of the literature. Perspectives in 
Psychiatric Care , 41(1), 14-21. doi:  
18. Pompili, M., Shrivastava, A., Serafini, G., Innamorati, M., Milelli, M., Erbuto, D., . . . Girardi, P. (2013). 
Bereavement after the suicide of a significant other. Indian Journal of Psychiatry , 55(3), 256-263.  
19. Weiss, B., Han, S., Harris, V., Catron, T., Ngo, V. K., Caron, A., . . . Guth, C. (2013). An independent 
randomized clinical trial of multisystemic therapy with non-court-referred adolescents with serious conduct 
problems. 81, 1027 -1039. doi: 10.1037/a0033928  
20. Farrington, D. P., Ttofi, M. M., & Coid, J. W. (2009). Development of adolescence-limited, late-onset, and 
persistent offenders from age 8 to age 48. Aggressive Behavior , 35(2), 150-163. doi: 10.1002/ab.20296  
  
 21. Jobes, D. A., Rudd, M. D., Overholser, J. C., & Joiner, T. E. (2008). Ethical and competent care of suicidal 
patients: Contemporary challen ges, new developments, and considerations for clinical practice. 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice , 39(4), 405-413. doi: 10.1037/a0012896  
22. Bongar, B. & Harmatz, M. (1991). Clinical psychology graduate education in the study of suicide: 
Availability, resources, and importance. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior , 21(3), 231-244.  
23. Baraff, L. J., Janowicz, N., & Asarnow, J. R. (2006). Survey of california emergency departments about 
practices for management of suicidal patients and resources available for their care. Annals of Emergency 
Medicine , 48(4), 452-458. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2006.06.026 
24. Hendin, H., Lipschitz, A., Maltsberger, J. T., Haas, A. P., & Wynecoop, S. (2000). Therapists' reactions to 
patients' suicides. American Journal of Psychiatry , 157 (12), 2022-2027.  
25. Fang, F., Kemp, J., Jawandha, A., Juros, J., Long, L., Nanayakkara, S., . . . Anzia, J. (2007). Encountering 
patient suicide: A resident's experience. Academic Psychiatry , 31(5), 340-344.  
26. Coverdale, J. H., Roberts, L. W., & Louie, A. K. (2007). Encountering patient suicide: Emotional responses, 
ethics, and implications for training programs. Academic Psychiatry , 31(5), 329-332. doi:  
27. Linehan, M. M. (2008). Suicide intervention research:  A field in desperate need of development. Suicide 
and Life -Threatening Behavior , 38(5), 483-485. doi:  
28. Comtois, K. A. & Linehan, M. M. (2006). Psychosocial treatments of suicidal behaviors: A practice-friendly 
review. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 62(2), 161-170.  
29. Hawton, K., Townsend, E., Arensman, E., Gunnell, D., Hazell, P., House, A., & van Heeringen, K. (2000). 
Psychosocial versus pharmacological treatments for deliberate self harm. Cochrane Database System 
Review , 2, CD001764.  
30. Gonzales, N. A., Pitts, S. C., Hill, N. E., & Roosa, M. W. (2000). A mediational model of the impact of 
interparental conflict on child adjustment in a multiethnic, low-income sample. Journal of Family 
Psychology , 14(3), 365-379. doi: 10.1037/0893 -3200.1 4.3.365 
31. Brown, G. K., Ten Have, T., Henriques, G. R., Xie, S. X., Hollander, J. E., & Beck, A. T. (2005). Cognitive 
therapy for the prevention of suicide attempts: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American 
Medical Association , 294 (5), 563-570.  
32. Linehan, M. M., Comtois, K. A., Murray, A. M., Brown, M. Z., Gallop, R. J., Heard, H. L., . . . Lindenboim, N. 
(2006). Two-year randomized controlled trial and follow-up of Dialectical Behavior Therapy vs therapy by 
experts for suicidal behaviors and borderline personality disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry , 63(7), 
757-766.  
33. Jobes, D. A. (2012). The Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality (CAMS): An evolving 
evidence-based clinical approach to suicidal risk. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior , 42(6), 640-653. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1943 -278x.2012.00119.x 
34. Jobes, D. A. (2006). Managing suicidal risk: A collaborative approach . New York: Guilford Press. 
35. Jobes, D. A., Jacoby, A. M., Cimbolic, P., & Hustead, L. A. T. (1997). Assessment and treatment of suicidal 
clients in a university counseling center. Journal of Counseling Psychology , 44(4), 368-377. doi: 
10.1037//0022 -0167.44.4.368  
36. Ellis, T. E., Rufino, K. A., Allen, J. G., Fowler, J. C., & Jobes, D. A. (in press). Impact of a suicide-specific 
intervention within inpatient psychiatric care: The Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality 
(CAMS). Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior .  
37. Ellis, T. E., Green, K. L., Allen, J. G., Jobes, D. A., & Nadorff, M. R. (2012). Collaborative Assessment and 
Management of Suicidality in an inpatient setting: Results of a pilot study. Psychotherapy , 49(1), 72-80. doi: 
10.1037/a0026746  
38. Arkov, K., Rosenbaum, B., Christiansen, L., Jonsson, H., & Munchow, M. (2008). Treatment of suicidal 
patients: The Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality. Ugeskr Laeg , 170(3), 149- 153.  
39. Jobes, D. A., Kahn-Greene, E., Greene, J., & Goeke-Morey, M. (2009). Clinical improvements of suicidal 
outpatients: Ex amining suicide status form responses as predictors and moderators. Archives of Suicide 
Research , 13(2), 147-159. doi: 10.1080/13811110902835080  
40. Nielsen, A. C., Alberdi, I. F., & Rosenbaum, B. (2011). Collaborative Assessment and Management o f 
Suicidality method shows effect. Danish Medical Bulletin , 58(8), A4300. PMID: 21827722 
41. Jobes, D. A., Wong, S. A., Conrad, A. K., Drozd, J. F., & Neal-Walden, T. (2005). The Collaborative 
Assessment and Management of Suicidality (CAMS) versus treatment as usual: A retrospective study with 
suicidal outpatients. Suicide and Life- Threatening Behavior , 35(5), 483-497.  
  
 42. Comtois, K. A., Jobes, D. A., O'Connor, S. S., Atkins, D. C., Janis, K., Chessen, C. E., . . . Yuodelis-Flores, 
C. (2011). Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality (CAMS): Feasibility trial for next-day 
appointment services. Depression and Anxiety , 28(11), 963-972. doi: 10.1002/da.20895 
43. Dimeff, L. A., Paves, A. P., Skutch, J. M., & Woodcock, E. A. (2010). Shifting paradigms in clinical 
psychology: How innovative technologies are shaping treatment delivery. In D.H. Barlow (Ed. ), The oxford 
handbook of clinical psychology  (618-648). New York: Oxford University Press. 
44. Mohr, D. C., Burns, M. N., Schueller, S. M., Clarke, G., & Klinkman, M. (2013). Behavioral intervention 
technologies: Evidence review and recommendations for future research in mental health. General Hospital 
Psychiatry , 35(4), 332-338.  
45. McHugh, R. K. & Barlow, D. H. (2010). The dissemination and implementation of evidence-based 
psychological treatments. A review of current efforts. American Psychologist , 65(2), 73-84. doi: 
10.1037/a0018121  
46. Fogg, B. J. & Eckles, D. (2007). Mobile persuasion: 20 perspectives on the future of behavior change . 
California: Stanford Captology Media. 
47. Pramana, G., Parmanto, B., Kendall, P. C., & Silk, J. S. (2014). The Smart CAT: An m-health platform for 
ecological momentary intervention in child anxiety treatment. Telemedicine Journal and e-Health , 20(5), 
419-427. doi: 10.1089/tmj.2013.0214  
48. Harrison, V., Proudfoot, J., Wee, P. P., Parker, G., Pavlovic, D. H., & Manicavasagar, V. (2011). Mobile 
mental health: Review of the emerging field and proof of concept study. Journal of Mental Health , 20(6), 
509-524. doi: 10.3109/09638237.2011.608746 
49. Donker, T., Petrie, K., Proudfoot, J., Clarke, J., Birch, M., & Christensen, H. (2013). Smartphones for 
smarter delivery of mental health programs: A systematic review. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 
15(11), e247.  
50. Luxton, D. D., McCann, R. A., Bush, N. E., Mishkind, M. C., & Reger, G. M. (2011). mH ealth for mental 
health: Integrating smartphone technology in behavioral healthcare. Professional Psychology: Research 
and Practice , 42(6), 505-512. d oi: 10.1037/a0024485 
51. Kendall, P. C., Khanna, M. S., Edson, A., Cummings, C., & Harris, M. S. (2011). Computer and 
psychosocial treatment for child anxiety: Recent advances and ongoing efforts. Depression and Anxiety , 
28(1), 58- 66. doi: 10.1002/da.20757  
52. Barak, A. & Grohol, J. M. (2011). Current and future trends in internet supported mental health 
interventions. Journal of Technology in Human Services , 29(3), 155-196. doi:  
53. Roy-Byrne, P., Craske, M. G., Sulivan, G., Rose, R. D., Edlund, M. J., Lang, A. J., . . . Stein, M. B. (2010). 
Delivery of evidence-based treatment for multiple anxiety disorders in primary care: A randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association , 303(19), 1921-1928. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2010.608 
54. Rizzo, A., Lange, B., Buckwalter, J. G. K., Forbell, E., Kim, J., Sagae, K., . . . Kenny, P. (2011). 
Proceedings from The Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference : Simcoach: An 
intelligent virtual human system for providing healthcare information and support . 
55. Lisetti, C., Amini, R., Yasavur, U., & Rishe, N. (2013). I can help you change! An empathic virtual agent 
delivers behavior change health interventions. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems 
(TMIS), 4 (4), 19. doi: 10.1145/2544103 
56. Reeves, B. & Nass, C. (1996). The media equation: How people treat computers, television, and new media 
like real people and places . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
57. Gratch, J., Wang, N., Okhmatovskaia, A., Lamothe, F., Marsella, S., Morales, M., . . . Morency, L. P. 
(2007). Can virtual humans be more engaging than real ones? In J.A. Jacko (Ed. ), Human-computer 
interaction. HCI intelligent multimodal interaction environments . Berlin: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
58. Bickmore, T. W. & Picard, R. W. (2005). Establishing and maintaining long-term human-computer 
relationships. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) , 12(2), 293-327. doi: 
10.1145/1067860.1067867  
59. Bickmore, T. W., Pfeifer, L. M., & Jack, B. W. (2009). Proceedings from SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems : Taking the time to care: Empowering low health literacy hospital patients 
with virtual nurse agents.   New York, NY. 
60. Jack, B. W. & Bickmore, T. W. (2011). The re-engineered  hospital discharge program to decrease 
rehospitalization: A randomized trial. Annals of Internal Medicine , 150(3), 178-187. doi: 10.7326/0003 -
4819-150-3-200902030-00007 
  
 61. Berkowitz, R. E., Fang, Z., Helfand, B. K. I., Jones, R. N., Schreiber, R., & Paasche-Orlow, M. K. (2013). 
Project R eengineered Discharge (RED) lowers hospital readmissions of patients discharged from a skilled 
nursing facility. Journal of the American Medical Directors Association , 14(10), 736-740. doi: 
10.1016/j.jamda.2013.03.004 
62. Wymbs, B. T., McCarty, C. A., Baer, J. S., King, K. M., Stoep, A. V., & McCauley, E. (2013). Callous-
unemotional traits and conduct disorder symptoms as prospective risk factors for adolescent sexual 
activity. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology , 42(5), 693-699. doi: 
10.1080/15374416.2013.796858  
63. Devries, K., Watts, C., Yoshihama, M., Kiss, L., Schraiber, L. B., Deyessa, N., . . . Garcia-Moreno, C. 
(2011). Violence against women is strongly associated with suicide attempts: Evidence from the who multi-
country study on women's health and domestic violence against women. Social Science & Medicine , 73(1), 
79-86.  
64. Massey, A. P., Montoya-Weiss, M. M., & O'Driscoll, T. M. (2002). Performance-centered design of 
knowledge-intensive processes. Journal of Management Information Systems , 18, 37 -58. doi:  
65. Gery, G. (1995). Attributes and behaviors of performance-centered systems. Performance Improvement 
Quarterly , 8, 47-93.  
66. Klahr, A. M., McGue, M., Iacono, W. G., & Burt, S. A. (2011). The association between parent–child conflict 
and adolescent conduct problems over time: Results from a longitudinal adoption study. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology , 120 (1), 46-56. doi: 10.1037/a0021350  
67. Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., & Williams, J. B. (2001). The phq-9: Validity of a brief depression severity 
measure. Journal of General Internal Medicine , 16(9), 606-613.  
68. Spitzer, R. L., Kroenke, K., & Williams, J. (1999). Validation and utility of a self-report version of PRIME-
MD: The PHQ primary care study. Journal of the American Medical Association , 282 (18), 1737-1744. doi:  
69. Koerner, K., Linehan, M. M., & Dimeff, L. A. (2001). Demographics questionnaire. Unpublished manuscript . 
70. Bangor, A., Kortum, P., & Miller, J. A. (2009). Determining what individual SUS scores mean: Adding an 
adjective rating scale. Journal of Usability Studies , 4, 114 -123.  
71. Brooke, J. (1996). Sus: A "quick and dirty" usability scale. In P.W. Jordan, B. Thomas, B.A. Weerdmeester, 
& I.L. McClelland (Eds.), Usability evaluation in industry  (189-194). London: Taylor and Francis. 
72. Strauss, A. L. & Corbin, J. M. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for 
developing grounded theory . California: Sage Publications, Inc. 
 