Study Title: IntravaScular Ultrasound (IVUS) Imaging During 
Transvenous LEad Extraction (ISEE)
Study ID: [REMOVED]
Document Date: October 15, 2021
Version : 2021Oct15  1 PROTOCOL TITLE : Intravascular Ultrasound (IVUS) Imaging During Transvenous L Ead 
Extraction   (ISEE)  
 
PI: Hemal M. Nayak, MD  
 
CO-I(S): Andrew Beaser, MD  
 
FUNDING  Image Guided Therapy Devices business group of Philips Healthcare (collectively, “Philips”)  
comprised of Spectranetics Corp oration and Volcano Corporation   
 
SPONSOR : Investigator -Sponsor  
 
TYPE OF RESEARCH : Clinical Trial  
 
INTERVENTION : Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) imaging conducted during transvenous lead 
extraction  (TLE)  
 
MANUFACTURER OF INTERVENTION  (if applicable):  
Volcano Corporation  
2870 Kilgore Road  
Rancho Cordova, CA 95670 USA  
 
 
  
Version : 2021Oct15  2 STUDY SUMMARY  
TITLE  Intravascular Ultrasound (IVUS) Imaging During Transvenous 
LEad Extraction   (ISEE)  
 
SHORT TITLE  ISEE  
PROTOCOL NUMBER  IRB18 -1600   
METHODOLOGY  Clinical Trial  
SAMPLE SIZE  100 consecutive patients that have been  recommended for lead 
extraction, with at least one lead over 1 year dwell time  
STUDY DURATION  1 year  
STUDY  CENTER(S)  Univ ersity of Chicago Medicine , Penn Medicine, University 
of Michigan , Allina Health  
OBJECTIVES  The purpose of this study is to evaluate IVUS  as a tool for 
grading the presence  of fibrotic adhesions to cardiac 
pacemaker/defibrillator leads  during transvenous lead 
extraction ( TLE).  
DIAGNOSIS AND MAIN 
INCLUSION CRITERIA  Subjects that have been recommended for TLE with at least 
one transvenous lead over 1 year dwell time.  
STUDY PRODUCT  IVUS catheter (Visions® PV.035 ) 
DURATION OF 
ADMINISTRATION  For the duration of the TLE procedure  
STATISTICAL 
METHODOLOGY  Traditional statistical methods will be employed. The 
student’s T -test will be used for continuous comparisons. 
Fisher’s exact or the Chi -square test will be applied for 
dichotomous variables. Spearman correlation coefficients w ill 
be calculated . 
  
Version : 2021Oct15  3 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
CIED      Cardiovascular implantable electronic device  
CXR      Chest x -ray 
ICD     Implantable cardioverter -defibril lator 
ILA     Intravascular lead adherence  
INNV     Innominate  vein 
IVUS      Intravascular ultrasound  
PA     Poster o-anterior  
RA     Right Atrium  
SVC      Superior vena c ava 
TV     Tricuspid valve  
TEE     Transesophageal echocardiography  
TLE     Transvenous lead extraction  
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
Increased indications for permanent cardiac pacing  with biventricular pacing systems  and the success of 
implantable cardioverter -defibril lators  (ICD)  in improving mortality in  patients with ventricular 
arrhythmias and chronic  systolic heart failu re, has resulted in a significant increase in the rate of 
implantation of cardiovascular implant able electronic devices (CIEDs) [1,2]. Unfortunately, there has also 
been a parallel rise in the rate of CIED infection an d lead failure or malfunction with subsequent increase 
in the need for transvenous lead extraction (TLE) [1,3 ]. As outlined in the 2017 Heart Rhythm Society 
(HRS ) consensus statement on  lead management  and extraction , CIED  leads should be fully removed in 
the case of system infection  (class I indicati on), and lead removal is suggested in the case of lead 
malfunction,  fracture, o r recall [4 ]. Some CIED  leads can be  removed without locking stylets or powered 
cutting sheaths, and therefore, TLE poses little risk to the patient. However, due to the develop ment of 
fibrosis on the majority of CIED leads  especially within sensitive venous and cardiac structures, more 
complex procedures  are often necessary , requiring the use of laser  sheaths or powered cutters to break the 
lead free from tissue and vascular adhesions. During this procedure, major adverse events can occur that 
can lead to patient morbidity and mortality. The most common mechanical injury during TLE is a tear in 
the superior vena cava (SVC)  [5]. Though rare, this complication is often devastating and associated with 
significant morbidity and mortality and almost always requires e mergent surgical intervention [4]. A 
common variable associated with th is major complication  is the presence of significant intravascular lead 
adhesion (ILA) or fibrosis  [5].  
Currently it is difficult to predict the locations and severity of ILA within the SVC or right atrium (RA) 
giving physicians a significant disadvantage  when entering these procedures.  Pre-procedure  imaging with 
CXR , CT scan and fluoroscopy have limited  utility  [6]. While clinical risk factors such as female gender, 
longer lead dwell time,  presence of high voltage coil or existence of multiple leads  in the vascular space , 
Version : 2021Oct15  4 low body mass index (BMI) and younger patient age have all been associated with a g reater likelihood of 
ILA, they are not reliable predictors due to the inherent inter -patient variability in the vascular biology 
dictating the development of  ILA [7,8,9,10 ].  
Phased -array i ntracardiac echocardiography  (ICE)  and/or radial -ICE, also known a s IVUS, have become 
important imaging tools in electrophysiology (EP) [11].  It is standard of care to use ICE  in many EP 
procedures  [11]. It helps in pe rforming safe trans -septal puncture , aids in identifying important cardiac 
structures (papillary muscle s, pulmonary veins, aortic cusps) , and is utilized  to monitor  for complications 
(pericardial effusion, clot development , steam pops ) [11].  
Radial -ICE or IVUS has been utilized during TLE and was found to be a feasible and safe tool to 
visualiz e leads in a  small study of 25  patients.  The authors concluded that radial -ICE evaluation “is safe 
and feasible in patients with pacing and defibrillating leads before and during transvenous lead removal, 
offering an excellent visualization of cardiac leads and relat ed areas of adherence. ICE can assist pacing 
and ICD lead removal and could improve procedure efficacy and safety ” [12]. Sadek and colleagues 
evaluated phased array ICE in 50 patients undergoing TLE. The authors concluded that while phased -
array ICE was ab le to identify areas of binding it was not able to  identify binding sites that are high versus 
low risk of requiring complex extraction techniques . In this study, there were no adverse even ts noted 
with using ICE [13]. Radial ICE or IVUS has a number of ad vantages over phase - array ICE because it 
can provide a 360° cross -sectional image, allowing better visualization and assessment of ILA.   
At the University of Chicago, IVUS is routinely used during TLE. At first, we used it to monitor for 
complications li ke the development of pericardial effusion or clots. We quickly realized that it had other 
uses. Under the following IRB protocol  #16-0272 title d “Safety and Outcomes of Electrophysiology 
Procedures in the Electrophysiology Laboratory at the University of Chicago: A Prospective Registry for 
Arrhythmia Care”.  Dr. Beaser and I reviewed and collected data on 56 patients who had undergone  TLE 
where IVUS imaging was performed and ILA was identified and quantified .  We correlated the degree of 
ILA seen on IVUS to  metrics reflecting the difficulty of TLE (pulses of laser energy delivered and time 
required to traverse an area of fibrosis or ILA). We found that (1) ILA can be readily visualized, 
accurately quantified using IVUS , (2) T he degree of ILA correlates highl y with difficulty of extraction as 
measured by the time required to traverse and the amount of laser pulses delivered in each vascu lar 
segment and (3) IVUS has potential to identify patients who may be at low risk for vascular 
complications in the SVC -RA r egion during TLE. No additional complications were found by routinely 
using IVUS and we noted that there was an added  incremental value to clinical predictors of fibrosis.  For 
example, a patient with a low body mass index, a high lead dwell time and a dual  coil ICD lead would be 
expecte d to have a higher amount of IL A based on clinical factors. We found that these factors were not 
reliable. In many cases, IVUS was able to demonstrate minimal ILA, This  finding helped guide laser 
sheath use and the need for placing the Philips rescue balloon. In contrast, a patient with risk factors 
predicting low ILA may have IVUS findings indicating the opposite. This type of finding would help in 
determining whether t he extraction should be approached from below (femoral work stat ion) or not 
performed using laser (e.g. refer to surgery). Our work was presented in  the Philips Imaging Symposium 
in July 2018 in Philadelphia. Our data was very well received by our EP colle agues , and this led us  to 
initiating  a larger multi -center study to validate our findings.  
Version : 2021Oct15  5 Therefore, t he purpose of this study is to prospectively evaluate intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) imaging 
as a tool for g rading the presence and characterization of ILA to cardiovascular implantable electronic 
device (CIED) leads during transvenous lead extraction (TLE) procedure s in a multi -center study. IVUS 
should identify the location and severity of these adhesions, which we will then correlate to difficulty of 
the extraction procedure  using metrics like pulses of laser energy delivered and time required to traverse 
an area of fibrosis or ILA . We will be focusing primarily on the section from innominate vein (I NNV) 
down through the superior vena c ava (SVC) to the  right atrium.   
 
Currently, the  Visions® PV.035  IVUS catheter is designed for use in the evaluation of vascular 
morphology in blood vessels of the peripheral vasculature  [Appendix A ]. It is commonly used during 
interventional cardiology and radiology  proce dures and has a solid safety profile [ 14-19]. In a large study 
of 227 patients, the Visions® PV.035  IVUS catheter was used to assess pelvic  vein insufficiency. There 
were no adverse events related to IVUS imaging  [14]. Two other studies of 117 and 104 pati ents 
respectively, found that imaging with the Visions® PV.035  IVUS catheter was safe and not associated 
with any adverse events  [15,16]. Three other studies using the Visions® PV.035  IVUS catheter found 
similar results  [17,18,19] . In all of these studies, the Visions® PV.035  IVUS catheter was used to image 
peripheral veins. In our proposed study, we wish to use IVUS to image leads in venous structures (SVC, 
INNV) and the SVC -RA junction. The IVUS catheter will need to be inserted through a sheath inserted in 
the right or left femoral vein and pass through the RA to reach the regions of interest which constitute s an 
“off-label” use of the product.  This “off -label” use of the IVUS catheter is standard clinical practice in the 
Univers ity of Chicago EP cath lab. T here were no adverse events seen with use of IVUS in our cohort of 
56 patients  that Drs. Beaser and I studied from the EP registry data. Based on the published literature 
supporting the safety of the  Visions® PV.035  IVUS cathet er and our own experience, we believe that 
using IVUS for this purpose provides a non -significant risk to patients.  
 
OBJECTIVES  
We hypothesize that :  
IVUS imaging will provide incremental value beyond clinical factor s in identifying vascular adherence  
Specific Aims:  
Aim 1:  Experienced operators at 5 major lead management medical centers will be able to image 
ILA using IVUS during TLE  
Aim 2:  ILA will be correlated to metrics of TLE difficulty  
Aim 3:  The incremental value of IVUS will be assessed systema tically in identifying patients at 
low risk of developing a vascular tear in the SVC -RA region  
 
Version : 2021Oct15  6 PRIMARY ENDPOINTS  
 
1. Ability of IVUS to image ILA  
 
SECONDARY ENDPOINTS:  
1. Correlate ILA grade to metrics reflecting the difficulty of TLE   
2. Fluoroscopy time of the  procedure, number and type of extraction sheaths used, and changes in 
tooling type during the procedure.  
 
Primary safety endpoints:  
1. Major complications during lead extraction as defined by the 2017 HRS expert consensus 
statement on cardiovascular implanta ble electronic lead management and extraction 4]. These 
include death, cardiac avulsion, vascular laceration, and pericardial effusion, requiring 
intervention during the extraction procedure.  
 
 
STUDY DESIGN  
OVERALL STUDY DESIGN :  
This study will be conduc ted at 4 major institutions  (Univ ersity of Chicago Medicine , Penn Medicine, 
University of Michigan , Allina Health) that specialize in TLE . The investigators in this study are 
electrophysiologists with expertise in TLE and imaging using ICE. All adult patie nts over the age of 21 
years scheduled to undergo lead TLE for any indication will be eligible to participate as long as the lead 
dwell time is greater than 1 year.  
Duration of study:  1 year  
 
SUBJECT SELECTION AND WITHDRAWAL  
SITES : 
Subjects selected fo r study will be recruited from 4 sites: Univ ersity of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL; 
Penn Medicine, Philadelphia, PA; University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI ; Allina Health, St.Paul, MN  
Eligibility: Patients  that have been recommended for lead extraction are  eligible for enrollment.  
Version : 2021Oct15  7 A total of 100  eligible patients will be enrolled in the study.  Twenty -five patients will be enrolled at each 
site which will allow 2 things: (1) the operator will first become comfortable with interpreting the images 
obtained from IVUS (5 patients) and (2) imaging from the remaining 20 patients will help reinforce 
understanding of the grading scale [2 5 patients x 4 sites  = 100 patients] . Assuming a Pearson correlation 
sample size calculation:  
• Power:   80% 
• Alpha Value:   5% 
• Baseline Ho Correlation:   0.50 
• Alternative Correlation:   0.70  
• Drop -Out Rate: 20%  
• Sample Size Calculation:   100 patients  
See Appendix D for further information.  
Inclusion:  
• Patients at least 21 years of age  
• Patients with at least one lead over 1 year dwell time  requiring extraction  
Exclusion:  
• Inability of patient capacity to provide consent for themselves either due to medical or 
psychiatric comorbidity  
• Venous occlusion to the extent that the IVUS catheter cannot pass  
• Leads < 1 year dwell time requiring extraction  
 
STUDY DEVICE  
Visions® PV.035  IVUS catheter  (Volcano, San Diego, CA ) [Appendix B] 
 
STUDY PROCEDURES  
SCREENING VISIT  
Patients will be screened for the study  using inclusion and exclusion criteria  outlined in Section  3. 
Informed consent will be obtained  as detailed in Section 0. The following data will be collected at 
screening once informed consent is obtained : 
Demographics to Record:  
1. Baseline characteristics:  
Version : 2021Oct15  8 a. Age 
b. Gender  
c. Body mass index  
d. Height  
e. Race  
2. Medical Co -morbi dities  
a. Diabetes  
b. Creatinine clearance rate (ESRD)  
c. Hypertension  
d. Coronary artery disease  
e. Prior open chest surgery  
f. Left ventricular ejection fraction (%)  
g. NYHA functional class  
3. Lead Data  
a. Reason for extraction (indication per HRS Consensus Guidelines)  
b. Type of le ads 
i. Location  
ii. Fixation type  
iii. Function  
iv. SVC Coil (Y/N, single or dual)  
c. Number of leads  
d. Lead dwell times  
4. Routine laboratory data including blood culture or wound culture results  if applicable.  
5. Chest x -ray findings  
6. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) or transthoracic echocardiogram  (if performed)   
   
PROCEDURE  
Transvenous lead extraction (TLE) should be performed in an EP lab, cardiac OR or hybrid lab as is 
customary based on the operator’s preference. A PA and lateral CXR is recommended any time prior to  
TLE to confirm the number, type and location of all implanted leads and hardware. The following tests 
are recommended but left to the discretion of the operator: (1) transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 
or transthoracic echocardiogram to look for vegeta tions (thrombus w/ infection indication) and tricu spid 
valve (T V) regurgitation, and (2) right or left subclavian vein venogram to evaluate patency of venous 
structures. If performed, reports of these tests will be collected. Prior to the start of the proc edure, the 
operator will need to perform the following assessment:  
1. Assessment of risk and /or difficulty of extraction based on clinical variables  alone  
a. Based on the following clinical variables, what is your assessment of risk or 
difficulty of extraction ? (LOW (L) = 1 point, MODERATE (M) = 2 points, HIGH 
(H) = 3 points)  
i. Lead dwell time    LOW   MODERATE  HIGH  
ii. Number of leads in vascular space  LOW   MODERATE  HIGH  
Version : 2021Oct15  9 iii. Type of lead    LOW   MODERATE  HIGH  
iv. BMI of patient    LOW   MODERATE  HIGH  
v. Patient age     LOW   MODE RATE  HIGH  
vi. Gender (male=1  point , female=2  points ) 
TOTAL: 6 -8 points = overall LOW risk , 9 -11 = MODERATE risk,  12 -17  = HIGH risk  
b. Are you planning on inserting the Philips Rescue Balloon guidewire (PRB -G) during 
this case?  
i. If Yes, why?  
ii. If No, why not?  
iii. If you are going to use the PRB -G, are you planning on inserting the Rescue 
Balloon up front?  YES or NO  
Two or more large (7F – 12F) venous sheaths will be inserted in the right and left femoral veins as per 
standard of care as part of the TLE procedure. A 8.5F SRO or other long sheath can help  direct the IVUS 
(Visions® PV.035 ) catheter and may be used as one of the two standard of care access sheaths. If a long 
sheath is not used, an 8.5 F short sheath is the minimum size required to use the IVUS catheter.  
Prior to pocket access , the IVUS catheter  is inserted through a right o r left femoral venous approach and 
advanced under fluoroscopic guidance to the RA. If the pacemaker lead entry is in left pectoral region, 
imaging will begin from the innominate vein us ing the medial end of left clavicle as the origin, registered 
under fluoro scopy . If the pacemaker leads start from right pectoral region, then imaging begins in the 
cranial portion of SVC, using the medial end of the right clavicle as origin, registered un der fluoro scopy . 
A 0.32 guidewire can help with IVUS catheter manipulation if necessary.  
Based on fluoroscopy alone, in left sided device implants, the chest will be divided into 3 zones: Zone 
1includes the area between the head of the clavicle and the in nominate vein; zone 2 includes the area 
between the innominate vein to SVC -RA junction and zone 3 includes the area between the SVC -RA 
junction through to the mid RA. In right sided device implants, zone 1 includes the area between the head 
of clavicle to the SVC -RA junction; zone 2 includes SVC -RA junction through to the mid RA.  
From there the physician retracts the IVUS catheter through the SVC to the RA in a “survey” run, looking 
for areas of ILA between the lead and the SVC wall  in the previously outli ned zones . He/she will also 
note the presence of lead -on-lead binding. At least one r epresentative image  from each zone  will be 
recorded, labelled and saved on the IVUS console. Fluoroscopic images of IVUS catheter position at each 
site of image recording will be saved and labelled.  Using the following scale, g rading of ILA in each 
zone of interest, b ased on relative motion of lead will be performed:  
i. Grade 1: Freely mobile, Rarely adjacent to vasculature  
ii. Grade 2: Restricted mobility, Frequently adjacent to  vasculature  
iii. Grade 3: Immobile, Always adjacent to vasculature  
iv. Grade L, added to number: Lead -to-lead binding  
If no ILA is seen, the extraction procedure commences.  
Version : 2021Oct15  10 If physician identifies locations of adhesions, he/she returns the IVUS catheter to those locations to 
evaluate severity of adhesion and quantify adhesions based on standardized grading scale which is 
outlined above . Once all adhesions are evaluated, the extraction procedure commences  and the physician 
gains pocket access and prepares the lead for extraction. The subjective amount (small, moderate, large) 
of pocket calcification needs to be noted.  
The physician begins  the extraction until the leads are free through the subclavicular space. At this point, 
a second run of IVUS imaging is done fo cusing on areas of highest adhesion seen in the initial imaging. 
These IVUS images will be collected and saved. When adhesion areas are located, traction is applied to 
lead of interest to watch the dynamic response of lead movement, then regraded according ly. Both grades, 
initial and secondary, should be recorded. The highest grade of adhesion seen in the zone of interest is 
recorded for that lead. Once this is done, t he IVUS catheter may or may not be removed during the 
extraction procedure. It may left in  the low RA to monitor for pericardial effusion development. Added 
imaging protocol should add 10  minutes to the overall procedure.  
During the extraction, the following information needs to be recorded: Laser pulse number of lasing per 
zone, n umber of hand le pulls for mechanical sheath  and time o f progression through zone of interest.  
Once the extraction is completed, the following data will be collected:  
Procedural Data to Record:  
1 Length of Procedure (Patient -on-table to wheel -out) 
2. Order of leads extract ed 
3. IVUS Procedure  
a. Length of imaging time  
b. Location of adhesions (images will be captured and collected for the study)  
c. Grading of adhesion in zone of interest, based on relative motion of lead:  
i. Grade 1: Freely mobile, Rarely adjacent to vasculature  
ii. Grade 2:  Restricted mobility, Frequently adjacent to vasculature  
iii. Grade 3: Immobile, Always adjacent to vasculature  
iv. Grade L, added to number: Lead -to-lead binding  
4. Length of Extraction (Opening pocket to start of re -implantation, if applicable)  
5. Extraction tools  
a. Laser, Mechanical, Dilating Sheath  
b. Starting sheath size  
c. Change of sheath size, settings (40 v. 80Hz), and type  
d. Use of Outer Sheath  
e. Switching of leads to extract  
6. Location of adhesions felt by extractor  
7. Operator rating about ease of sheath advancement  in ea ch zone (zones 1 -3): 
a.  None – removed without sheaths  
b.  0 – advanced without power assistance  
c. 1 – Power assistance but easily advanced  
d. 2 – Power assistance with effort  
Version : 2021Oct15  11 8. Laser pulse number of lasing per segment  
9. Number of handle pulls for mechanical sheath  
10. Time  of progression through zone of interest  
11. Pocket calcification (Y/N)  
12. Clinical Outcome Data:  
a. Extraction procedural success, as defined above  
b. Major/minor complications, as defined by 2017 HRS consensus guidelines  
c. Complications from IVUS catheters  (if any)  
  
PREDISCHARGE  
The patient will be assessed at pre -discharge for the occurrence of any major adverse events including: 
death, need for open heart surgery, cardiac tamponade, or need for re -operation.  
 
STATISTICAL PLAN AND CONSIDERATIONS  
Using Stata statistical software (StataCorp LP, College Station, Texas), ILA grades will be  correlated to 
the time required and amount of laser pulsations delivered to traverse each vascular segment. Spearman 
correlation coefficients w ill be  calculated.  The student’s T-test will be used for continuous comparisons. 
Fisher’s exact or the Chi -square test will be applied for dichotomous variables.  
 
RISKS AND BENEFITS  
RISKS   
It is standard of care to insert 2 or more large (7F – 12F) venous sheaths in the right and left femoral veins 
during TLE. This is done to provide access for large volume resuscitation and a conduit for temporary 
peripheral bypass in the event of a major vascular complication like SVC or RV tear [ 4]. In many centers 
ICE is already being utilized durin g TLE to monitor for complications. This study will require the 
operator to manipulate the IVUS catheter in the RA, SVC and IV. Potential risks  of the overall procedure 
include venous perforation leading to cardiac tamponade. Based on published data, the r isk of this event 
occurring is very low [11 -13]. Specifically, in a recent review of ICE/IVUS in EP procedures that was 
published in 2018, ICE/IVUS use was not associated with   any major complications.  Additionally, there 
were no adverse events seen with use of IVUS in our cohort of 56 patients that Drs. Beaser and I studied. 
Please refer to IFU’s for potential risks associated with IVUS cathe ter. [Appendix B] While we believe 
there are little to no added risks for using IVUS, procedure time may be increas ed by 10 minutes in order 
to capture images via IVUS . In our experience  though , the acquisition of IVUS images can be done 
simultaneously wi th other parts of the procedure thereby not adding any additional time to the procedure.  
Version : 2021Oct15  12 BENEFITS  
IVUS shows promis e as a tool to evaluate the presence of ILA in the SVC and other cardiac structures. 
This could potentially allow operators to risk -stratify the allowing them to better select the resources, 
tools and approach to the procedure . 
 
SAFETY AND ADVERSE EVENTS  
Monitoring of Adverse Events  
During the procedure, participants will be monitored by physicians (including anesthesiology), nurses, 
and technicians in accordance with standard operating procedures for routine catheter ablation 
procedures.  Real -time hemodyn amic monitoring during the procedure will be measured using arterial 
access.  Real -time cardiac visualization will occur with the use of intracardiac echocardiography.  
Post-operative monitoring will follow standard care for clinical ablation procedures, wh ich includes 
overnight admission for observation with monitored telemetry and measurement of heart rate, blood 
pressure, oxygen saturation, and respiratory rate.  
Table 1 Adverse Event Definitions and Grading  
Term  Definition  
Adverse Event (AE)  
 
Ref: ISO 14155 -2011  
 
Ref: MEDDEV 2.7/3 12/2010  Any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease or injury, or 
any untoward clinical signs (including an abnormal laboratory 
finding) in subjects, users or other persons, whether or not related to 
the investigational medical device.  
 
This definition includes events related to the procedures involved (any 
procedure in the clinical investigation plan).  
Adverse Device Effect (ADE)  
 
Ref: ISO 14155 -2011  
 
Ref: MEDDEV 2.7/3 12/2010  Adverse event related to the use of an investigational medical device  
 
This definition includes any adverse event resulting from insufficient 
or inadequate instructions for use, the deployment, the implantation, 
the installation, the operation, or any malfunction of the 
investigational medical device.  
 
This definition includes any event resulting from use error or from 
intentional misuse of the investigational medical device.  
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
 
Ref: ISO 14155 -2011  
 
Ref: MEDDEV 2.7/3 12/2010  Adverse event  that led to:  
• Death  
• Serious deterioration in the health of the subject, that either 
resulted in:  
o a life -threatening illness or injury, or  
Version : 2021Oct15  13 Term  Definition  
o a permanent impairment of a body structure or a body 
function, or  
o in-patient or prolonged hospitalization of existing 
hospitalization, or  
o medical or surgical intervention to prevent life -
threatening illness or injury or permanent impairment to a 
body structure or a body function  
• Fetal distress, fetal death, or a congenital abnormality or birth  
defect.  
 
NOTE: Planned hospi talization for a pre -existing condition, or a 
procedure required by the clinical investigational plan, without serious 
deterioration in health, is not considered a serious adverse event.  
Serious Adverse Device 
Effect (SADE)  
 
Ref: ISO 14155 -2011  
 
Ref: MEDDEV 2.7/3 12/2010  Adverse device effect that has resulted in any of the consequences 
characteristic of a serious adverse event.  
Unanticipated Adverse 
Device Effect (UADE)  
 
Ref: 21 CFR Part 812  Any serious adverse effect on health or safety or any life -threatening 
problem or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, 
problem, or death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or 
degree of incidence in the investigational plan or application 
(including a supplementary plan or application), or any other 
unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to 
the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.   
Device Deficiency  
 
Ref: ISO 14155 -2011  
 
Ref: MEDDEV 2.7/3 12/2010  A device deficiency is any inadequacy of a me dical device with 
respect to its identity, quality, durability, reliability, safety or 
performance.  
NOTE: Device deficiencies include malfunctions, misuse or use 
errors, and inadequate labeling.  
 
Underlying diseases are not reported as AEs unless there is  an increase in severity or frequency during the 
course of the investigation.  
A.  Assessing Relationship to Study Device  
The site investigator will be responsible for assessing the relationship of the AE to the study device as 
related or unrelated, and for r eporting the event to UChicago accor ding to criteria in Appendix C.  
Table 2 Adverse Event Relatedness Criteria  
Version : 2021Oct15  14 Classification  Description  
Unrelated  The adverse event is determined to be due to a concurrent illness or effect 
of another device/drug and is not related to the investigational product.  
Related  • The adverse event is determined to be potentially related to the 
investigational product, and an alternative etiology is equally or less 
likely compared to the potential relati onship to investigational 
product, or  
• There is a strong relationship to investigational product, or recurs on 
re-challenge, and another etiology is unlikely, or  
• There is no other reasonable medical explanation for the event.  
 
B. Adverse Event Reporting  
Adverse events should be reported to the UChicago study team according to the table in Appendix C.  
The site investigator is responsible for expeditiously evaluating adverse events for severity and causality 
designation according to details in Tables 1 and  2.   The site investigator is responsible for providing 
supporting documentation to UChicago. All AEs that are considered related to the study or the device 
must be followed to resolution.   
The UChicago study team will report adverse events to the FDA, U Chicago IRB, and Phillips  according 
to details in Appendix C.   
All SAEs reported from participating sites will be reviewed by the Lead Principal Investigator or his/her 
physician designee. Only those determined to be serious and unexpected by the Lead Pri ncipal 
Investigator will be distributed to participating sites . If Phillips  informs the Lead PI of new device 
information that impacts the safety of subjects, the UChicago study team will be responsible for 
distributing this information to sites.  
A safety monitor (a physician who is not part of the study and does not perform TLE) will be designated. 
His/her role will be to evaluate and adjudicate any potential IVUS related adverse events.  The study will 
be halted upon the discovery of unanticipated adverse device effects that present a significant or 
unreasonable risk to subjects enrolled in the study.  
STUDY MONITORING, AUDITING AND INSPECTING  
The University of Chicago responsibility as th e clinical sponsor is to ensure protocol and  regulatory 
comp liance through proper monitoring  of the investigation. The University of Chicago require s IRB  
review and a subject Informed Consent Form for all research. Monitoring may be conducted remotely by  
The University of Chicago Research Office.  
Version : 2021Oct15  15 Through c entralized monitoring, The University of Chicago  will assess the site’s  performance in the 
following areas:  
- Verification that informed consent was obtained and documented properly  
- Adherence to protocol eli gibility criteria and requirements  
- Conduct and documentation of procedures and assessments related to:  
- Study endpoints  
- Protocol required safety assessments  
- Evaluating, documenting, and reporting unanticipated adverse device effects,  subject deaths, 
and wit hdrawals, especially when a withdrawal may be related to  an adverse event.  
- Investigator oversight and delegation of authority to study personnel  
- Verification of study -specific required documentation  
- Conduct and documentation of procedures essential to trial integrity  
As the investigator, the physician is responsible for conducting the study  in accordance with the signed 
agreement, the investigational plan (protocol), applicable  laws, FDA regulations, and any conditions of 
approval imposed by the reviewi ng IRB/EC. The principal investigator must also accept responsibility for 
all aspects of the  study  including the actions of any sub -investigators participating in the study  at the  
investigational site.  
Data Monitoring  
The responsibility of The University o f Chicago as sponsor is to ensure protocol and regulatory 
compliance through proper monitoring of the clinical investigation in U.S. sites. The University of 
Chicago is also required to ensure that the device is used under the immediate direction of an inv estigator. 
As the investigator, the physician is responsible for conducting the clinical investigation in accordance 
with the signed study agreement, the study protocol, and applicable laws. The primary investigator must 
also accept responsibility for all aspects of the clinical investigation including the actions of any co -
investigators participating in the clinical investigation at the investigational site.  
Study data  will be reviewed and source verified at The Uni versity of Chicago to ensure that the 
investigator and the clinical investigation team conducts the clinical investigation in accordance with the 
clinical investigation protocol and applicable  FDA and local laws and regulations to ensure adequate 
protection of the rights, safety and wellbeing of subjects and the quality and integrity of the resulting data.  
 
PATIENT INFORMED CONSENT  
All study subjects must provide written informed consent using the applicable IRB informed consent 
form.  Each patient will receive a copy of his/her signed consent form.  The original signed consent 
document must be kept on file at the investigative site.  
The study must be explained in a language that is understandab le to the patient and s/he must be allowed 
sufficient time to decide whether to participate in this study. All subjects will be assured that they have 
Version : 2021Oct15  16 the right to withdraw from the study at any time during the course of the protocol and this decision will  
not influence his/her relationship with the lead investigator, the treating ph ysician and/or the study staff.  
 
DATA HANDLING, AND RECORD KEEPING, AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
University of Chicago will receive coded study data from participating sites for study an alysis.  
Data will be collected on paper by study coordinators at the respective participating sites and transcribed 
into an electronic  RedCap database which will be maintained on -campus locations at the University of 
Chicago . Data will be managed by the PI s and study coordinators. Access to the data will be limited to 
site PIs and research coordinators only during the study enrollment period.  
All patient specific identifiers will be kept separate from the primary research database. The research 
database wil l be organized by a unique patient identifier.  
 
DEVICE TRACKING  
The Industry -Sponsor may ship investigational devices only to qualified investigators participating in the 
clinical investigation.  A tracking s ystem will be used to maintain complete and acc urate record of 
shipment and disposition of the investigational devices. Records of shipment shall include the name and 
address of the consignee, type and quantity of device, and date of shipment.  
 
Device Tracking By Investigator  
Investigators are responsi ble for ensuring that investigational devices are made available only to persons 
who are legally authorized to receive them. Under no circumstances may the investigational device be 
used/made available to any person who has not been pre -approved by the Spo nsor as an investigator for 
use.    
Each  site will record lot and model numbers of each device received  onto a device tracking log . When a 
device is used, the subject identification along with the model and lot number of the device used will be 
recorded . Any device returned to the Industry -Sponsor, due to malfunction, expiration, etc. will also be 
documented on the device tracking log . Contaminated devices will be returned to Industry -Sponsor in the 
appropriate biohazard packaging.  
Upon completion or termin ation of a clinical investigation an investigator is required to return to the 
Industry -Sponsor any remaining supply of devices.  
Version : 2021Oct15  17 FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS  
No remun eration  will be provided to subjects . Funding for this study will be provided by the industry 
sponsor: Philips. The industry sponsor will be providing the Visions® PV.035  IVUS catheter and 
accompanying console to the sites for use in this study.   
Version : 2021Oct15  18 REFERENCES  
1. Greenspon  AJ, et al. 16-year trends in the infection burden for pacemakers and implantable  
cardioverter -defibrillators in the United States 1993 to 2008 .  JACC. 2011; 58:1001 – 1006  
2. Mond HG, et al. The world survey of cardiac pacing and implantable cardioverter defibrillators. 
PACE 2004;27:955 -964 
3. Joy PS, Kumar G, et al. Heart Rhythm 2017;14:83 9-845 
4. 2017 HRS Consensus Statement on CIED Lead Management and Extraction. Heart Rhythm, Vol 
14, No 12, December 2017  
5. Brunner, M.P., et al., Outcomes of patients requiring emergent surgical or endovascular 
intervention for catastrophic complications during  transvenous lead extraction. Heart Rhythm, 
2014. 11(3): p. 419 -25. 
6. Lewis, R.K., et al., Preprocedural ECG -gated computed tomography for prevention of 
complications during lead extraction. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol, 2014. 37(10): p. 1297 -305. 
7. Biefer, H.R. , et al., Generator pocket adhesions of cardiac leads: classification and correlation 
with transvenous lead extraction results. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol, 2013. 36(9): p. 1111 -6. 
8. Bracke, F., Complications and lead extraction in cardiac pacing and defibril lation. Neth Heart J, 
2008. 16(Suppl 1): p. S28 -31 
9. Mazzone, P., et al., Predictors of advanced lead extraction based on a systematic stepwise 
approach: results from a high volume center. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol, 2013. 36(7): p. 837 -44. 
10. Maytin, M., L.M. Epstein, and R.M. John, Lead implant duration does not always predict ease of 
extraction: extraction sheath may be required at < 1 year. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol, 2011. 
34(12): p. 1615 -20. 
11. Enriquez A., et al. Use of intracardiac echocardiography in inter ventional cardiology: Working 
with the anatomy rather than fighting it. Circulation. 2018;137:2278 –2294.  
12. Bongiorni, M.G., et al., Intracardiac Echocardiography in Patients with Pacing and Defibrillating 
Leads: A Feasibility Study. Echocardiography, 2008. 25(6): p. 632 -638. 
13. Sadek, M.M., et al., Utility of intracardiac echocardiography during transvenous lead extraction. 
Heart Rhythm, 2017. 14(12): p. 1779 -1785.  
14. Santoshi R, et al. Iliac vein stenosis is an underdiagnosed cause of pelvic venous insufficiency.  J 
Vasc Surg: Venous and Lym Dis 2017. 1-10. 
15. Ganguli S., et al., Inferior vena cava filters placed at the bedside via intravenous ultrasound 
guidance versus fluoroscopic guidance. Ann Vasc Surg. 2017 Feb;39:250 -255 
16. Kassavin DS, at al. The transition to IVUS -guided IVC filter deployment in the nontrauma 
patient . Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2011 Fe b;45(2):142 -5. 
17. Jeyabalan G., et al. Endovascular strategies for treatment of embolizing thoracoabdominal aortic 
lesions . Journal o f Vascular Surger y (2014) 59:5:1256 -1264.  
18. Di Valentino M., et al. Telementoring during endovascular treatment of abdominal aortic 
aneurysms: A prospective study. Journal of En dovascular Therapy (2005) 12:2: 200-205. 
19. Kolluri R., et al. A novel duplex finding of superficial epigastric vein flow reversal to diagnose 
iliocaval occlusion.  Journal of Vascular Surgery: Venous and Lymphatic  Disorders (2017) 
5:3:358 -362.   
Version : 2021Oct15  19 Appendix A  
SCHEDULE OF EVENTS  
 Screening  Procedure  
(Day 0)  Pre-discharge  
Informed consent  X   
Medical Records  Review  X   
Clinical Evaluation  X   
Chest  X -ray report  X   
Transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE) or Transthoracic 
echocardiogram   X a   
Transvensous Lead Extraction  Data   X  
Venogram results   X  
IVUS images and Fluoroscopy Pictures   X  
Adverse Events  X X X 
 
a Discretion of operator  
 
  
Version : 2021Oct15  20 Appendix B  
 
 
 
 
 
Visions® PV .035  
DIGITAL IVUS cATHETER  
 
 
 
CAUTION – Investigational Device Limit ed by Federal law to investigational use  
 
 
 
English     Page 1  

Version: 2019Aug05   Page 21 of 33                             Visions® PV .035                       
English   
DIGITAL IVUS Catheter
 

Version : 2021Oct15  22 CAUTION:  
1. U.S. Federal Law restricts this device t o sale by or on the order of a physician.  
2. Prior to use, read this entire package insert.  
 
INTENDED USE:  
The Visions® PV .035 catheters are designed for use in the evaluation of vascular morphology in blood vessels of the 
periphera l vasculature by providing a cross -sectional image of such vessels.  
The Visions® PV .035 ultrasound imaging catheters are designed for use as an adjunct to conventional angiographic 
procedures to provide an image of the vessel lumen and wall structures an d dimensional measurements from the image.  
 
DESCRIPTION:  
The Visions PV .035 catheter is an over -the-wire intravascular imaging catheter with a digital ultrasound transducer at the 
distal end.  The transducer utilizes a 64 -element cylindrical array that  r adiates acoustic energy into the surrounding tissue 
and detects the subsequent echoes. The information from the echoes is used to generate real -time images of the peripheral 
vessels.  
The Visions PV .035 catheter is introduced percutaneously or via surgical  cutdown into the vascular system, and is 
designed to track over 0.035” -0.038” (0.89 -0.97mm) guide wires.  
The catheter body has markers 1 cm apart along the working length. There are 25 radiopaque markers on the distal end of 
the catheter, starting 1 cm fr om the imaging plane, with the 25th RO marker overlapping the distal -most  wide inked 
marker. Inked markers (non -radiopaque) continue along the shaft, spaced 1 cm apart, middle -to-middle, with wider marks 
indicating 5 cm intervals.  
A lubricious GlyDx® hydrophilic coating is applied externally to a distal portion of the catheter.  
The Visions PV .035 catheters may only be used with Volcano s5TM Series and CORETM Series of Systems.  
 
CONTRAINDICATIONS:  
• Use in cerebral vasculature  
• Situations presenting a reasonable probability of tissue or organ damage  
• Vessel spasm  
• Severe calcification  
• Angiographic evidence of thrombus  
• Severe vessel tortuosity  
 
 
Version : 2021Oct15  23  
ADVERSE EFFECTS:  
As with all catheterization procedures, complications may be encountered with the use of the V isions PV .035 digital 
IVUS catheter. Possible adverse effects include, but are not limited to, the following:  occlusion; vessel spasm; vessel 
dissection; perforation, rupture or injury; restenosis; hemorrhage or hematoma; drug reactions; allergic reactio n to contrast 
medium; hypo/hypertension; infection; arteriovenous fistula; embolism; entry puncture site bleeding; vascular wall injury; 
vessel thrombosis; pseudoaneurysm (at site of catheter insertion); renal failure; aneurysm; vessel trauma requiring sur gical 
repair or intervention; death.  
 
WARNINGS:  
• Use of the Visions PV .035 catheters should be restricted to specialists who are familiar with, and have been 
trained to perform, the procedures for which this device is intended.  
• The product is supplied sterile; if the pouch is opened or damaged compromising the sterile barrier, please discard 
the product. This product cannot  be re -sterilized or re -used.  
• The Visions PV .035 catheter is designed for single use only.  VOLCANO Corporation (“VOLCANO”), makes  no 
warranty, representation or condition of any kind, whether expressed or implied (including any warranty of 
merchantability, suitability or fitness for a particular purpose) respecting the re -use of the catheter.  
• In addition, VOLCANO assumes no respon sibility or liability for incidental or consequential damages which may 
result from such re -use. Re -use including resterilization of unused product may result in, but is not limited, to the 
following:  
• Potential critical harm to patient due to Device Sepa ration, Material Deformation or Infection/Sepsis  
• Failure to Image or other device malfunctions   
• The catheter transducer is a delicate electronic assembly. Deliberate misuse by bending, twisting or any other severe 
physical manipulation will void the war ranty.  
• Do not use the Visi ons PV .035 device for purposes other than those indicated.  
 
PRECAUTIONS:  
The Visions PV .035 device is a delicate scientific instrument and should be treated as such. Always observe the 
following precautions:  
• Protect the catheter tip from impact and excessive force.  
• Do not cut, crease, knot, or otherwise damage the catheter.  
• Protect the electrical connections from exposure to fluid.  
• Do not handle the transducer.  
Version : 2021Oct15  24 • The outside diameter along the entire length of the guide wire should not exceed the maximum specified.  
• During use, ensure that the placement of the catheter does not preclude blood flow through the vessel.  
• Clean guide wire and flush catheter thoroughly  with sterile heparinized normal saline before and after each 
insertion.  
• Keep the exterior of the catheter wiped down with sterile heparinized normal saline during prolonged use.  
• When inserting the guide wire both catheter and wire must be straight with no bends or kinks, or damage to inner 
lumen may occ ur.  
• Do not advance the guide wire against significant resistance. If binding occurs between the catheter and the guide 
wire while inside the patient , CAREFULLY REMOVE BOTH the wire and catheter and do not use. If binding occurs 
outside of the patient, r emove the catheter and do not use.  
• When advancing or re -advancing the catheter over a guide wire and through a stented vessel, in the event that the 
stent is not fully apposed against the vessel wall, the guide wire / and or catheter may become entangled  in the stent 
between the junction of the catheter and guide wire or within one or more stent struts. This may result in entrapment of 
catheter/guide wire, catheter tip separation, and/or stent dislocation. Never use force to advance the catheter.               
• Use caution when re -advancing a catheter over a guide wire and into a stented vessel, in the event that the catheter 
may come in contact with one or more stent struts.  Subsequent advancement of the IVUS catheter could cause 
entanglement between th e catheter and the stent(s) resulting in entrapment of catheter/guide wire, catheter tip separation, 
and/or stent dislocation.  
• Use caution when removing the catheter over the guide wire from a stented vessel to minimize patient risk.  
• The catheter should never be forcibly inserted into lumens narrower than the catheter body or forced through a 
tight stenosis.  
• If resistance is encountered during pullback, remove the entire system (guide wire, IVUS catheter, sheath/guide 
catheter) at the same time.  
 
INSTRU CTIONS FOR USE:  
The Visions PV .035 catheter may be introduced into the vascular system percutaneously or surgically and advanced to 
the desired location. The frequency and duration of administration is subject to the discretion of the physician and depend s 
upon the procedure and information required.  
• Review the Volcano Imaging System Operator’s Manual thoroughly prior to use of this device. Check system 
operation prior to the use.  
• Open the Visions PV .035 catheter packaging using sterile technique and plac e the hoop in the sterile field.  
• Prepare the catheter by flushing the guide wire lumen through the port at the catheter’s Y -connector, and then wipe 
down the entire working length with sterile heparinized normal saline.  
• Remove the clear/white cap from the PIM connector.  
• Connect the PIM connector of the Visions PV .035 catheter to the Patient Interface Module as described in the 
imaging system Operator’s Manual. Verify that the device is imaging.  
Version : 2021Oct15  25 • Place the Visions PV .035 catheter onto the intravascular guid e wire. A guide wire of 0.035” (0.89 mm) -0.038" (0.97 
mm) can be used.  
• Activate the hydrophilic coating using sterile heparinized normal saline.  
• Advance the Visions PV .035 catheter over the guide wire to the site of the vasculature to be imaged. The guide  wire 
should always be advanced ahead of the IVUS catheter.  
• Check the Monitor for an image. Once the image has been obtained, the catheter can be advanced over the guide wire 
to image additional segments of vasculature.  
• If an image is not obtained or is no t satisfactory, consult the Volcano Imaging System Operator’s Manual.  
• Once imaging has been completed, remove the Visions PV .035 catheter and flush thoroughly with sterile heparinized 
normal saline.  
• For subsequent imaging, clean guide wire and flush catheter thoroughly  with sterile heparinized normal saline before 
re-insertion.  
• When the procedure is completed, remove and discard the catheter in accordance with local regulations.  
 
STORAGE AND HANDLING:  
Products should be stored in a dry, dark, cool place in their original packaging.  
 
PRODUCT SPECIFICATIONS:  
Model  Visions PV .035  
Maximum shaft outer diameter  7.0F (0.092", 2.33 mm)  
Maximum scanner diameter  8.2F (0.108", 2.73 mm)  
Maximum guide wire  0.038" (0.97 mm)  
Minimum Introducer sheath  8.5F (0.111”, 2.83 mm)  
Usable length  90 cm  
 
Acoustic Output Parameter  B-Mode  
ISPTA.3 (mW/cm2) 0.0534  
ISPPA.3 (W/cm2) 0.0680  
Pr.3 (MPa)  0.0482  
PD (μs)  0.333  
PRF (Hz)  2.09x104 
Center Freq (MHz)  9.00  
MI* 0.0162  
TI* 6.18x10-5 
 
 
Version : 2021Oct15  26 Maximum overall uncertainty ±20.4%  
 * As estimated in tissue  
TI:               Thermal Index defined as TI = W 01x1fc 
                                                       210 
W01x1:         Bounded -square Output (mW)  
fc:               Center Frequency (MHz)  
MI:              Mechanical Index defined as MI= Pr.3/(f c1/2) 
ISPPA.3 :         Derated Intensity, Spatial Peak Pulse Average (W/cm2) 
ISPTA.3 :         Derated Intensity, Spatial Peak Temporal Average (mW/cm2) 
Pr.3:           Derate d Peak Negative Pressure at a location of the maximum    
                   derated pulse intensity integral (MPa)  
PD:             Pulse Duration (μs)  
PRF :           Pulse Repetition Frequency (Hz)  
 
LIMITED WARRANTY:  
Subject to the conditions and limitations on liability stated herein, Volcano Corporation (“VOLCANO”) warrants that the 
Visions PV .035 catheter (the “Catheter”), as so delivered, shall materially conform to VOLCANO’s then current 
specification for the Catheter upon receipt for a perio d of one year from the date of delivery. ANY LIABILITY OF 
VOLCANO WITH RESPECT TO THE CATHETER OR THE PERFORMANCE THEREOF UNDER ANY 
WARRANTY, NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY OR OTHER THEORY WILL BE LIMITED EXCLUSIVELY TO 
CATHETER REPLACEMENT OR, IF REPLACEMEN T IS INADEQUATE AS A REMEDY OR, IN VOLCANO’S 
OPINION, IMPRACTICAL, TO REFUND OF THE FEE PAID FOR THE CATHETER. EXCEPT FOR THE 
FOREGOING, THE CATHETER IS PROVIDED “AS IS” WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESSED OR 
IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTY OF FITNESS, MERCHANTABILITY, AND 
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OF NONINFRINGEMENT. FURTHER, VOLCANO DOES NOT 
WARRANT, GUARANTEE, OR MAKE ANY REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE, OR THE RESULTS 
OF THE USE, OF THE CATHETER OR WRITTEN MATERIALS IN T ERMS OF CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY, 
RELIABILTY, OR OTHERWISE. Licensee understands that VOLCANO is not responsible for and will have no liability 
for any items or any services provided by any persons other than VOLCANO. VOLCANO shall have no liability for 
delay s or failures beyond its reasonable control.  
Additionally, this warranty does not apply if:  
1. The Catheter is used in a manner other than described by VOLCANO in the Instructions For Use supplied with 
the Catheter.  
Version : 2021Oct15  27 2. The Catheter is used in a manner that is not in conformance with purchase specifications or specifications 
contained in the Instructions For Use.  
3. The Catheter is re -used or re -sterilized.  
4. The Catheter is repaired, altered, or modified by other than VOLCANO  authorized personnel or without 
VOLCANO authorization.  
 
If claims under this warranty become necessary, contact VOLCANO for instructions and issuance of a Return Material 
Authorization number if the Catheter is to be returned. Equipment will not be accept ed for warranty purposes unless the 
return has been authorized by VOLCANO.  
PATENT www.volcanocorp.com/patents.php  
This product is licensed to the customer for single use only.  
Visions is a registered t rademark of Volcano Corporation and is registered in the United States and other countries.  
Volcano and the Volcano logo are registered trademarks of Volcano Corporation in the United States and other countries.  
  
ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS REGARDING THIS PRODU CT SHOULD BE DIRECTED TO:  
 
Legal Manufacturer:  
Volcano Corporation  
2870 Kilgore Road  
Rancho Cordova, CA 95670 
USA  
Telephone:       800.228.4728  
                         (916) 638 -8008     
Fax:                  916.638.8112  
  
 
  
Authorized European Representative:  
Volcano Europe BVBA/SPRL  
Excelsiorlaan 41  
B-1930 Zaventem, Belgium  

Version : 2021Oct15  28 Telephone:      +32.2.679.1076    
Fax:                 +32.2.679.1079  
 
Manufacturing Sites:  
Volcano Corporation  
2870 Kilgore Road  
Rancho Cordova, CA 95670 USA  
Or 
Volcarica  S.R.L.  
Coyol Free Zone and Business Park  
Building B37  
Coyol, Alajuela, Costa Rica  
Telephone: (800) 228 -4728  
                    (916) 638 -8008   
Fax: (916) 638 -8112  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Version : 2021Oct15  29  
 
www.volcanocorp.com  
 
501-0100.12/007  Revision Date: 10/2015  
 
Version: 15Oct 2021  Page 30 of 33 Appendix C:  Adverse Event Reporting Requirements  
Table 3 Adverse Event Reporting to University of Chicago  
University of Chicago study team contact information: Tiffany Hart, Lead CRA and Hemal Nayak, MD  
Phone #(773 )702-0535 and Fax#(773)834 -2109  
 
Event Classification  Event Reporting to University of Chicago (UChicago)  
Adverse Event  Event recorded and tracked at site.  
Serious Adverse Event  and  
Serious Adverse Device Effects  Event recorded using study provided reporting forms and reported 
within 48 hours of PI knowledge and required source documentation 
provided  
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect /  
Unanticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect  • Reported as soon as possible, but within 48 hours of site PI 
knowledg e 
• Site should call or UChicago CRA (contact above) to report event 
and email thart@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu  
• Event recorded using study provided reporting forms and 
reported within 48 hours of PI knowledge  and r equired source 
documentation provided  
Device Deficiencies (including but not limited to failures, 
malfunctions, and product nonconformities)  
NOTE:  Any Investigational Device Deficiency that might have led to 
a serious adverse event if a) suitable action had not been taken or b) 
intervention h ad not been made or c) if circumstances had been less 
fortunate is considered a reportable event.  • If the defect lead to a serious event, this should be reported as 
soon as possible, but within 48 hours of site PI’s knowledge.  
Otherwise, report within 48 h ours of site PI’s knowledge.  
• Event recorded using study provided reporting forms and 
reported within 48 hours of PI knowledge and required source 
documentation provided  
 
  
Version: 15Oct 2021  Page 31 of 33  
Table 4 Adverse Event Reporting by University of Chicago  
Event Classification  UChicago Communication to 
FDA  UChicago Communication to 
UChicago IRB  Reporting to  Phillips  
Adverse Event  NA Details provided at time of annual 
review, per IRB policy.  None, as these are expected events.  
Serious Adverse Event  
Serious  Adverse Device Effects  NA Details provided at time of annual 
review, per IRB policy, as these are 
not unanticipated events.  None, as these are expected events.  
Unanticipated Adverse Device 
Effect   
Unanticipated Serious Adverse 
Device Effect  Reported as soon as possible, but 
within 48 hours of Lead PI 
knowledge .  These would be 
unexpected and would be reported 
to the FDA regardless of IDE status 
for this study.  UADE reported within 10 days of PI 
knowledge  
USADE reported directly to IRB 
Chairman upon PI kn owledge, 
followed by formal reporting to the 
IRB within 48 hours.  
Study will be halted if event 
presents a significant or 
unreasonable risk to subjects 
enrolled in the study  Reported as soon as possible, but 
within 48 hours of Lead PI 
knowledge, including a copy of any 
notification provided to the FDA.  
Device Deficiencies (including but 
not limited to failures, 
malfunctions, and product 
nonconformities)  
NOTE:  Any Investigational 
Device Deficiency that might have 
led to a serious adverse event if a) 
suitab le action had not been taken 
or b) intervention had not been 
made or c) if circumstances had 
been less fortunate is considered a 
reportable event.  Investigational Device Deficiencies 
that might have led to a serious 
adverse event if a) suitable action 
had not been taken or b) 
intervention had not been made or 
c) if circumstances had been less 
fortunate is considered a reportable 
event and will be reported to the 
FDA within 48 hours of Lead PI 
knowledge.  
All other device deficiencies will 
be reported within 10 days.  Investigational Device Deficiency 
that might have led to a serious 
adverse event if a) suitable action 
had not been taken or b) 
intervention had not been made or c) 
if circumstances had been less 
fortunate is considered a reportable 
event will be reported to the IRB 
within 10 days of PI knowledge.  Investigational Device Deficiencies 
that might have led to a serious 
adverse event if a) suitable action 
had not been taken or b) 
intervention had not been made or c) 
if circumstances had been less 
fortun ate is considered a reportable 
event and will be reported within 48 
hours of Lead PI knowledge, 
including a copy of any information 
provided to the FDA.  
All other device deficiencies will be 
reported within 10 days.  
Version: 15Oct 2021  Page 32 of 33 Appendix D  
Pearson's Correlation Tests  
 
Numeric Results when H1: ρ0 ≠ ρ1 
────────────────────────────────────────────────  
Power  N Alpha  Beta  ρ0 ρ1 
0.80092  80 0.05000  0.19908  0.50000  0.70000  
 
References  
Graybill, Franklin. 1961. An Introduction to Linear Statistical Models. McGraw -Hill. New York, New York.  
Guenther, William C. 1977. 'Desk Calculation of Probabilities for the Distribution of the Sample 
Correlation  
   Coefficient', The American Statistician, Volume 3 1, Number 1, pages 45 -48. 
Zar, Jerrold H. 1984. Biostatistical Analysis. Second Edition. Prentice -Hall. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  
 
Report Definitions  
Power is the probability of rejecting a false null hypothesis. It should be close to one.  
N is the siz e of the sample drawn from the population. To conserve resources, it should be small.  
Alpha is the probability of rejecting a true null hypothesis. It should be small.  
Beta is the probability of accepting a false null hypothesis. It should be small.  
ρ0 is the value of the population correlation under the null hypothesis.  
ρ1 is the value of the population correlation under the alternative hypothesis.  
 
 
Summary Statements 
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────  
A sample size of 80 achieves 8 0% power to detect a difference of -0.20000 between the null  
hypothesis correlation of 0.50000 and the alternative hypothesis correlation of 0.70000 using a  
two-sided hypothesis test with a significance level of 0.05000.  
 
 
Dropout -Inflated Sample Size 
──── ────────────────────────────────────────────────  
 
  Dropout -  
  Inflated  Expected  
  Enrollment  Number of  
 Sample Size  Sample Size  Dropouts  
Dropout Rate  N N' D 
20% 80 100 20 
 
Definitions  
Dropout Rate (DR) is the percentage of subjects (or items) that are expected to be lost at random during 
the 
   course of the study and for whom no response data will be collected (i.e. will be treated as "missing").  
N is the evaluable sample size at which power is computed. If N subjects are evaluated out of the N' 
subjec ts 
   that are enrolled in the study, the design will achieve the stated power.  
N' is the total number of subjects that should be enrolled in the study in order to end up with N evaluable  
   subjects, based on the assumed dropout rate. After solving for N,  N' is calculated by inflating N using 
the 
   formula N' = N / (1 - DR), with N' always rounded up. (See Julious, S.A. (2010) pages 52 -53, or Chow, 
S.C.,  
   Shao, J., and Wang, H. (2008) pages 39 -40.) 
D is the expected number of dropouts. D = N' - N. 
Version: 15Oct 2021  Page 33 of 33  
Proc edure Input Settings 
──────────────────────────────────────────────────────  
 
Autosaved Template File  
C:\Users \sbesser \Documents \PASS 16 \Procedure Templates \Autosave \Pearson's Correlation Tests - 
Autosaved 2019_5_6 -14_45_54.t120  
 
Design Tab  
Solve For:  Sample Size  
Alternative Hypothesis:  H1: ρ0 ≠ ρ1  
Power:  0.80 
Alpha:  0.05 
ρ0 (Baseline Correlation):  0.50 
ρ1 (Alternative Correlation):  0.70 
 
 