COVER PAGE 
Document Type: 
STUDY PROTOCOL
Official stutuay title:
 Computational Design, Fabrication, and Evaluation of Optimized 
Patient-Specifc Transtibial Prosthetic Sockets
NCT number: 
not yet assigned
Document Date: 
02/15/2018
Principal investutigator: 
Prof. Hugh Herr
Sponstuor: 
NIH
Participating stuitestu: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
STUDY PROTOCOL
I.BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE
The overall goal of this study is to further develop, and clinically assess, a computational and data-
driven design and manufacturing framework for mechanical interfaces that quantitatively produces 
transtibial prosthetic sockets in a faster and more cost-efective way compared with conventional 
processes.
In the United States, 623,000 people live with major lower extremity loss, with that population 
expected to double by 2050 [1]. The U.S. Department of Veterans Afairs estimates lower extremity 
amputation (LEA) to account for more than $250 million in direct expenditures each year, not 
including civilian cases [2]. Complications of prosthetic leg use in persons with LEA often occur at the 
prosthetic socket, and includes delayed wound healing, recurrent skin ulcerations, and pressure 
damage to soft tissues [3]–[6]. Such complications can result in limited mobility, which further 
contributes to conditions such as obesity, musculoskeletal pathologies, and cardiovascular disease 
[7]–[9]. Conventional prosthetic socket fabrication is an artisanal process requiring substantial human  
hours, fnancial cost and patient involvement for evaluation. Computer aided design (CAD) (e.g.[10]–
[13]) and computer aided manufacturing (CAM) (e.g.[14]–[24]) methods have been explored as an 
alternative. However, these tools have not reached full clinical efcacy and do not inform the design 
in a data-driven sense since the actual design process remains a manual and experience-based 
procedure [25]. The long-term goal of our research is to develop a fully-quantitative process for 
prosthetic socket design and production that requires minimal patient involvement and can be 
delivered at afordable price points.
In pursuit of our long-term goal, our team has recently developed a framework for prosthetic socket 
design and fabrication [26] that involves: 1) non-invasive imaging to record patient geometry, 2) 
indentation to assess tissue mechanical properties, 3) data-driven and automated creation of patient-
specifc designs, 4) patient-specifc fnite element analysis (FEA) and design evaluation, and 5) 3D 
printing of the end design for clinical evaluation. 
II.OBJECTIVES
The overall goal of this study is to further develop and clinically assess a computational and data-
driven design and manufacturing framework for mechanical interfaces that quantitatively produces 
transtibial prosthetic sockets in a faster and more cost-efective way than conventional processes. 
Traditionally, prosthetic socket production has been a craft activity, based primarily on the 
experience of the prosthetist. Even with advances in computer-aided design and computer-aided 
manufacturing (CAD/CAM), the design process remains manual. The manual nature of the process 
means it is non-repeatable and currently largely non-data-driven, and quantitative data is either not 
obtained or insufciently employed. Furthermore, discomfort, skin problems and pressure ulcer 
formation remain prevalent. Through the proposed computational modeling framework, a 
repeatable, data-driven and patient-specifc design process is made available which is based on 
scientifc rationale. 
Objective/hypothesis:  The main hypothesis of this proposal is that a socket, designed using the novel 
computational design framework, is equivalent to, or better than, a conventional socket (designed by  
a prosthetist) in terms of: 1) skin contact pressures, 2) gait symmetry, 3) walking metabolic cost, 4) 
skin irritation levels as assessed by the dermatologist, and 5) comfort as evaluated from a 
questionnaire. Our hypothesis is supported by the presented pilot data which shows reduced or 
equivalent skin contact pressures and subject reported comfort levels for several critical anatomical 
regions. 
Specifc Aims: 1) Subject-specifc biomechanical modeling for N=18 subjects, 2) Computational design  
and fabrication of sockets fo r N=18 subjects, and 3)  Clinical evaluation  of novel sockets for N=18  
subjects.
III.STUDY POPULATION 
Sample Size 
A total of 18 subjects will be recruited for this study. The worst ratio between the mean and standard  
deviation for pilot contact pressure measurements for static standing was observed for the mid 
posterior wall, which presented with a mean of 97 kPa, and standard deviation of 8.9 kPa. If two-
tailed t-test based analysis is assumed, aiming to detect at least a 10% diference with respect to this  
mean, with a signifcance level of 0.05 and a power of 90%, the theoretically required number of test 
subjects is 12 (power analysis based on the MATLAB sampsizepwr function). However, to increase the 
chances of signifcant statistics for all measures (with varying signal to noise ratios), while also 
anticipating potential candidate drop-out, inclusion of N=18 subjects is proposed here. 
Statistical  analysis  of  the  socket  clinical  evaluation  data  will  focus  on  the  following  
measurements: 1) local skin contact pressures, 2) metabolic power, 3) gait parameters (symmetry  
indices  for  joint  angles,  positions,  torques,  and  also  ground  reaction  forces),  and  4)  the  socket  
evaluation questionnaire. For scalar comparisons a paired t-test, with the level of signifcance set at  
0.05, will be used to test for diferences between the novel and conventional sockets. For time-series  
analysis of variance (ANOVA) will be used. 
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
18 healthy participants with below-knee amputations will be recruited. Participants will be generally  
healthy and will have no other musculoskeletal problems or any known cardiovascular, pulmonary or  
neurological  disorders.  This  study  will  consider  subjects  of  all  sex/gender,  race,  and/or  ethnic  
orientation, provided that they conform to the inclusion criteria summarized below. We focus on  
healthy subjects who are unilateral or bilateral transtibial amputees, who are between 18-64 years  
old, have an activity level of at least K3 (a person with the ability or potential for ambulation with  
variable cadence, and to traverse most environmental barriers and may have vocational, therapeutic  
or  exercise  activity  that  demands  prosthetic  use  beyond  simple  locomotion.)  and  that  their  
amputation took place more than 1 year prior to the start of the study. The latter is to exclude  
subjects  whose  limbs  will  undergo  signifcant  changes  during  the  course  of  the  study.  Another  
inclusion criterion relates to the subject’s prosthetic sockets. In this study a comparison is made  
between a subject’s conventional sockets (designed by their experiences prosthetist) and our novel  
(computational  modeling derived) sockets.  Since we aim to match or improve upon comfortable  
prosthetic sockets, we will only include subjects whose current conventional sockets are deemed  
comfortable and of high quality. The quality of a subject’s conventional sockets will be judged by the  
consultant and certifed prosthetist involved in this study (Bob Emerson, A Step Ahead Prosthetics).  
One further inclusion criterion relates the subject’s ability to undergo MRI. If subjects are unable to  
undergo MRI (e.g. due to claustrophobia or the presence of objects their body that are not MRI Safe)  
they are excluded from this study. 
The American lower limb amputee population consists of subjects with varying etiology, sex,  
age, and ethnicity. Since clinical evaluation for only N=18 subjects is proposed here it is not practical  
to attempt to closely match all aspects of variation in the patient population. The key biological  
feature, relevant to the scientifc goals set out for this research, is the biomechanical behavior of soft  
tissue. The biomechanical behavior, e.g. soft tissue stifness dictates the response of the tissue to  
loading and therefore has a direct impact on socket comfort. The biomechanical behavior of soft  
tissue is known to vary with age, activity level and gender, but little information is known on efects  
of ethnicity on soft tissue biomechanics or amputee outcomes. Since variation in ethnicity is not  
expected to efect the study outcomes, subjects from all ethnicities may be eligible. Age and gender  
are more relevant for soft tissue biomechanics. We will aim to have our subject population refect the  
variation in the American amputee population in these respects.    
Subject recruitment
Subject recruitment (N=18) will be done via fyers, word of mouth, and by directly contacting subjects  
who have already worked with existing studies, or who are currently being seen by the consultant  
certifed  prosthetist  involved  in  this  study.  Furthermore,  we  will  actively  recruit  veterans  by  
advertising the study with the Boston chapter of the U.S. Department of Veteran Afairs. In order to  
participate  in  the  study,  eligible  subjects  will  sign  a  consent  form  where  pertinent  information  
regarding the study will be provided to them.
IV.STUDY DESIGN 
A cohort of 18 subjects will be recruited for this study. MRI data will be recorded for all subjects. 
Through image segmentation geometrically accurate 3D fnite element analysis (FEA) models will be 
constructed. Further, non-invasive indentation testing will be performed which, through combination  
with inverse FEA, provides accurate subject-specifc mechanical properties for all subjects. The 
resulting predictive FEA models will then be used in a  novel, data-driven, and automated 
computational design framework for prosthetic sockets, to design prosthetic sockets for all subjects. 
The framework optimizes the socket designs, as assessed by skin contact pressures and internal 
tissue strain, through iterative adjustment of the virtual tests sockets. Final designs are subsequently  
3D printed. To evaluate the prosthetic sockets with each of the subjects each subject will do a 
standing and walking exercise using their conventional sockets or the novel sockets. Meanwhile skin 
contact forces, walking metabolic cost, and gait symmetry are recorded. After the exercises, skin 
irritation will be assessed by a dermatologist, and socket comfort is assessed using a questionnaire. 
Together this data provides a quantitative and qualitative evaluation and comparison of the novel 
and conventional sockets. 
V.Methoastu 
The overall goal of this study is to further develop, and clinically assess, a computational and data-
driven design and manufacturing framework for mechanical interfaces that quantitatively produces  
transtibial prosthetic sockets in a faster and more cost-efective way compared with conventional  
processes.
In pursuit of our long-term goal, our team has recently developed a framework for prosthetic  
socket design and fabrication that involves: 1) non-invasive imaging to record patient geometry, 2)  
indentation to assess tissue mechanical properties, 3) data-driven and automated creation of patient-
specifc designs, 4) patient-specifc fnite element analysis and design evaluation, and 5) 3D printing  
of the end design for clinical evaluation. This study aims to advance these approaches, and clinically  
assess the overall design process for N=18 transtibial amputees.  Socket evaluations are conducted  
during standing and walking activities.  For these evaluations,  skin-socket interface pressures  are  
recorded using sensors located at the skin-socket interface. During the walking evaluation, motion  
capture is used additionally to allow for gait analysis. Furthermore, metabolic cost is measured by  
indirect calorimetry using an open circuit respirometry system. These experiments are repeated for  
each patient’s conventional socket for comparison. In addition to these quantitative evaluations,  
each study participant completes a socket evaluation questionnaire, and a certifed dermatologist  
writes a report documenting skin conditions subsequent to each socket test. 
The main hypothesis  of this proposal is that the novel quantitative socket is equivalent to, or  
better than, a conventional socket in terms of: 1) skin contact pressures, 2) gait symmetry, 3) walking  
metabolic cost, 4) skin irritation levels as assessed by the dermatologist, and 5) comfort as evaluated  
from  a  questionnaire.  Furthermore,  we  hypothesize  that  equivalence  or  improved  socket  
performance can be achieved for all N=18 subjects using a single computational design framework,  
i.e. that we can formulate the computational design framework such that it can automatically design  
these sockets for all subjects without requiring algorithm adjustments from one subject to the next. 
In order to address the hypothesis that the novel sockets can perform equivalently to, or  
better than, conventional sockets (designed by a qualifed prosthetist) we propose an experimental  
evaluation using N=18 subjects. Static standing and walking exercises will be performed. During the  
standing and walking exercise skin contact pressures will be recorded. During walking skin contact  
pressure,  metabolic  cost,  and  motion  capture  data  will  be  recorded.  Finally,  a  custom  socket  
evaluation  questionnaire  will be used  to  assess  the level  of socket  comfort  experienced  by  the  
subject. 
This study consists of three phases: 
1) Data collection 
2) Socket design 
3) Socket evaluation
Participant involvement is required for phase 1 and 3 which occur in two separate sessions.
Session 1 (phase 1): Data collection
In the frst session, each amputee participant will be scheduled to visit the Biomechatronics Group in  
The MIT Media Laboratory and our imaging center (the MIT McGovern Institute). The main purpose of  
this session is to quantitatively measure the stifness of the residual limb and map out the anatomy  
of the residual limb,  for N=18 subjects,  by using  Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) , 3D scanner, 
ultrasound  scanner,  and  a  stifness-measuring  device  on  the  amputee.  Mechanical  property  
investigation may also take place during imaging, e.g. during MRI by using MRI compatible indentor  
systems. Subjects are scanned using a 3T MRI system (Siemens Magnetom 3 Tesla, Siemens Medical  
Systems,  Erlangen,  Germany).  The  structural  and  geometrical  data  derived  from  MRI  (e.g.  using  
segmentation) provides the input for computational model development (used in the socket design  
process).  Morphological  data  (such  as  height,  weight,  limb  length  and  circumference)  of  the  
participant will also be recorded.  
Session 2 (phase 3): Socket evaluation. 
During a second session the sockets (designed based on the image and mechanical property data) are  
evaluated  (at  the  MIT  Media  Lab’s  Biomechatronics  department).  In  this  session  both  the  
conventional  and  novel  socket  systems  will  be  tested.  For  all  subjects  the  order  of  testing  
(conventional or novel frst) is randomized. Subjects are frst asked to sit on a chair and expose their  
residual limb surface for force sensor placement. Recently we established a new inter-socket skin  
contact  pressure  assessment  system  based  on  fexible  pressure  and  force  sensors  (A201,  111N,  
FlexiForce®, TekScan, Boston, MA, USA, and also F-Socket, TekScan, Boston, MA, USA). Data for an  
array of force sensors can be simultaneously recorded during static standing or dynamic walking  
exercises. Evaluating loads at select anatomical regions are of interest, these sites include: 1) the  
medial crest, 2) the fbular head, 3) the tibial crest, and 4) the Mid posterior wall. Sensors are secured  
to the skin using a thin adhesive tape (12.7 mm wide, 0.0625 mm thick, Scotch Magic®, 3M, USA)  
which can be removed with minimal discomfort. After sensor placement a liner is rolled over the skin  
and sensors. The conventional sockets are evaluated with the subject’s own liner and suspension  
system. For evaluation with the novel socket, subjects are ftted with a custom liner (e.g. through  
Ottobock Healthcare Gmbh) or standard commercially available liners (such as the Silosheath Double  
cushion 3-mm liner, Silipos Holding LLC, Niagara Falls, N.Y, USA). A commercially available sleeve is  
used for suspension (such as BK Suspension sleeve, Silipos Holding LLC, Niagara Falls, N.Y, USA). Next  
the compliant socket and rigid outer socket are donned on. For the novel sockets the outer socket is  
frst  attached  to  the  subject’s  conventional  foot-ankle  system,  and  alignment  is  optimized  by  a  
certifed prosthetists (present during all socket ftting and evaluation procedures) consulted for this  
study (Bob Emerson, A Step Ahead Prosthetics). Once subjects have been ftted with the sockets the  
standing, followed by the walking exercise is conducted. For the walking exercise not only force but  
also metabolic cost and motion capture data are recorded. The metabolic analysis will provide an  
assessment  of  the  energy  expenditure  while  wearing  either  a conventional  or the novel  socket  
(discomfort  may result  in  a less  efcient  or asymmetric  gait causing  increased  energy  use).  For  
metabolic cost analysis, subjects are equipped with a breath-by-breath portable telemetric system  
(Model K4b2, COSMED, Rome, Italy). Subjects are also equipped with 46 refective markers (15 mm  
diameter) for motion capture (following the Helen Hayes marker model). For the standing evaluation  
subjects are asked to stand still in an upright position for 5 minutes while skin contact force (or  
pressure) data and resting state metabolic data is acquired. 
For  the  walking  evaluation  subjects  are  asked  to  walk  at  1.4  m/s  for  10  minutes  on  an  
instrumented treadmill (Bertec, Columbus, OH) while ground reaction forces are recorded, as well as  
3D marker locations and the metabolic data. The marker locations are recorded at a sampling rate of  
100 Hz by a 12 infrared camera motion capture system (model: T40s, Vicon Motion Systems Ltd,  
Oxford, UK). The locations of these markers is chosen to track joint motion. 
The treadmill system used for the walking exercise is equipped with p arallel bars to prevent  
any injury to the subject if he were to lose balance and fall. A safely harness attached to the ceiling  
will also be utilized if the subject makes that request.  In addition, a member of the laboratory staf  
will also accompany the study participant to catch him/her in the event of a fall, if necessary. The  
participant may ask to rest or to terminate their participation in the study at any time. The socket  
evaluation session (walking and standing evaluations)  should take no more than 4 hours to complete.  
The  kinematic  and  force  plate  data  can  be  combined  with  inverse  dynamics  analysis  to  
compute joint angles and moment profles. Furthermore, analysis between data for the left and right  
limb  and  for  the  conventional  and  novel  socket  allows  for  comparison  of  symmetry  measures.  
Symmetry  indices  will  be  derived  for:  1)  ankle,  knee,  and  hip  joint  angle,  position,  torque  time  
profles, and 2) the vertical ground reaction forces. The metabolic measurements for standing will be  
subtracted from the metabolic rate of walking trials in order to obtain the net metabolic cost of  
walking. 
After the standing and walking exercises subjects will be requested to take of the socket and  
liner to expose their residual limb skin surface. The consultant dermatologist (Dr. Tan) will then  
inspect the skin and report on skin irritation. The dermatologist will also talk to the subjects on  
comfort and instruct them to fll out the developed socket evaluation questionnaire. Questions will  
also  relate  to  points  where  contact  pressure  measurements  will  be  made,  thus  enabling  direct  
comparison  of local  comfort  assessment  to  pressure  fndings.  Subjects  fll  out their  answers  by  
drawing a line at a desired level for each of the questions. This method allows for post-processing  
based  conversion  of the  input to  numerical  data (i.e.  0-100  %) and  lacks  biases  associated  with  
constrained integer number input (e.g. favoring of even/odd numbers). 
Data & Safety Monitoring Plan
All sensor (e.g. force/pressure) data is recorded using data acquisition units (e.g. Arduino Uno, Arduino  
LLC) connected to dedicated laptop computers. The motion capture data (VICON system) and treadmill  
data (speed and force plates) are recorded using a dedicated desktop computer. The metabolic cost  
analysis are recorded on a dedicated data acquisition unit (COSMED) and are subsequently uploaded to  
a laptop computer.  
We  will  record  video  (in  digital  format)  for  each  subject  walking  for  analysis  and  development  
purposes. Videos in digital format will be archived in a password protected secure server located at the  
MIT Media Laboratory. Access to video material will be limited to authorized investigators associated  
with  this  study.  Video  will  remain  archived  in  the  data  server  for  future  reference.  Upon  subject  
request, videos can be deleted from server once study is completed.
Benefits
There are no immediate benefts for participating in this study. The prosthetic sockets produced will  
be prototypes and would not be immediately available. 
It is expected that knowledge generated in this study will beneft society. The processes developed  
for producing  3D printed  sockets  during this research  will  be used  to understand  how to most  
efectively attach (mechanical) devices to humans. This understanding will aid the development of  
advanced prostheses, orthoses and other augmentation/rehabilitation technologies.
Risks 
Following the inclusion criteria (which include MRI safety) there should be no elevated risk associated  
with  the MRI  acquisitions.  Other  risks  and  discomforts  are  minimal  as  they  are  those incurred  by  
standing still for 5 minutes,  and walking on a treadmill for 10 minutes,  both while using either a  
conventional socket and the 3D printed socket. 
There will be a "spotter" standing next to the treadmill and close to the amputee while standing or 
walking in our facilities. We will give subjects periodic rest/water breaks. Any other necessary 
assistance to make the subjects comfortable will be provided. If during the standing or walking 
exercise the subject experiences discomfort such that he/she wishes to terminate the test he/she can  
decide to do so at any time. To minimize these uncomfortable situations, we will have a certifed 
prosthetist and a dermatologist around during the ftting process during the socket evaluation.  
The dermatologist (Dr. Tan) involved in the study will be present during socket evaluation and will  
judge skin irritation as a function of socket discomfort. Actual harm is unlikely but the researchers,  
dermatologist, and prosthetist are present to judge any potential harm. Feedback from the subject  
can be obtained promptly by researchers present, prosthetist, and/or the dermatologist present. The  
MIT ethical board (COUHES) will be informed of any adverse circumstances. No follow-up will be  
made as the procedure poses minimal risk of injury.   
Informed Consent
Informed consent will be obtained.  The informed consent process will be conducted prior to the  
initial visit by qualifed and approved study personnel. Retention is based upon the decision of each  
participant to continue with research enrollment. Participants may discontinue at any time without  
consequence.
VI.DATA ANALYSIS 
Perstuonal iaentifierstu
All data and fles particular to a subject will be anonymized (subjects will be assigned a code for naming  
fles e.g. subject1mmonthmdaymyear) and stored on password protected computers to which only the  
members of the research group have access. 
Data stutorage
The data will be stored on a password protected computer server in the MIT   Biomechatronics Group,  
Media Laboratory, E-14 room 274.   Access to this server is secured by a password. Only authorized  
investigators associated with the study will have access to data.
Treatment of aata after stutuay completion
The data will remain in the MIT Media Laboratory secure server for future processing. Upon subject  
request, digital videos can deleted from the data server once study is completed.
VII.REFERENCES
[1]K.  Ziegler-Graham,  E.  J.  MacKenzie,  P.  L.  Ephraim,  T.  G.  Travison,  and  R.  Brookmeyer,  
“Estimating  the Prevalence  of Limb  Loss  in  the United  States:  2005  to  2050,”  Arch.  Phys.  Med.  
Rehabil., vol. 89, no. 3, pp. 422–429, Mar. 2008.
[2]J.  E.  Kurichi,  W.  B.  Vogel,  P.  L.  Kwong,  D.  Xie,  B.  E.  Bates,  and  M.  G.  Stineman,  “Factors  
associated  with  total  inpatient  costs  and  length  of  stay  during  surgical  hospitalization  among  
veterans who underwent lower extremity amputation.,” Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 92, no. 3, pp.  
203–14, Mar. 2013.
[3]H. E. J. Meulenbelt, P. U. Dijkstra, M. F. Jonkman, and J. H. B. Geertzen, “Skin problems in  
lower limb amputees: a systematic review.,” Disabil. Rehabil., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 603–608, May 2006.
[4]C. C. Lyon, J. Kulkarni, E. Zimerson, E. Van Ross, and M. H. Beck, “Skin disorders in amputees,”  
J. Am. Acad. Dermatol., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 501–507, Mar. 2000.
[5]M. B. Silver-Thorn, J. W. Steege, and D. S. Childress, “A review of prosthetic interface stress  
investigations.,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 253–266, Jul. 1996.
[6]K.  E.  S.  Buikema  and  J.  H.  Meyerle,  “Amputation  stump:  Privileged  harbor  for  infections,  
tumors, and immune disorders,” Clin. Dermatol., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 670–677, Jan. 2014.
[7]V. Y. Ma, L. Chan, and K. J. Carruthers, “Incidence, prevalence, costs, and impact on disability  
of  common  conditions  requiring  rehabilitation  in  the  United  States:  stroke,  spinal  cord  injury,  
traumatic brain injury, multiple sclerosis, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, limb loss, and back pa,”  
Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 95, no. 5, p. 986–995.e1, May 2014.
[8]R.  Gailey,  K.  Allen,  J.  Castles,  J.  Kucharik,  and  M.  Roeder,  “Review  of  secondary  physical  
conditions associated with lower-limb amputation and long-term prosthesis use.,” J. Rehabil. Res.  
Dev., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 15–29, Jan. 2008.
[9]S. M. Tintle, J. J. Keeling, S. B. Shawen, J. A. Forsberg, and B. K. Potter, “Traumatic and trauma-
related amputations: part I: general principles and lower-extremity amputations.,” J. Bone Joint Surg.  
Am., vol. 92, no. 17, pp. 2852–68, Dec. 2010.
[10]“BioSculptor  Orthotic  and  Prosthetic  CAD  CAM  Systems.”  [Online].  Available:  
http://www.biosculptor.com/. [Accessed: 06-May-2015].
[11]“Prosthetic CAD/CAM Systems by Infnity CAD Systems - Cost-efective, reliable and efcient  
system.” [Online]. Available: http://www.infnitycadsystems.com/. [Accessed: 06-May-2015].
[12]“Vorum: Suppliers of CAD/CAM systems for P&O and Footware, and the creators of CanftTM  
Design software.” [Online]. Available: http://www.vorum.com/english/. [Accessed: 06-May-2015].
[13]“Orten - Accueil.” [Online]. Available: http://www.orten.fr/. [Accessed: 06-May-2015].
[14]D. G. Smith and E. M. Burgess, “The use of CAD/CAM technology in prosthetics and orthotics--
current clinical models and a view to the future.,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 327–334,  
2001.
[15]M. C. Faustini, R. H. Crawford, R. R. Neptune, W. E. Rogers, and G. Bosker, “Design and analysis  
of orthogonally compliant features for local contact pressure relief in transtibial prostheses.,” J.  
Biomech. Eng., vol. 127, no. 6, pp. 946–951, 2005.
[16]G. Facoetti,  S. Gabbiadini, G. Colombo, and C.  Rizzi, “Knowledge-based system for guided  
modeling of sockets for lower limb prostheses,” Comput. Aided. Des. Appl., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 723–737,  
Aug. 2010.
[17]E. K. Moo, N. a. Abu Osman, B. Pingguan-Murphy, W. a B. Wan Abas, W. D. Spence, and S. E.  
Solomonidis, “Interface pressure profle analysis for patellar tendon-bearing socket and hydrostatic  
socket,” Acta Bioeng. Biomech., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 37–43, Jan. 2009.
[18] a K. Topper and G. R. Fernie, “Computer-aided design and computer-aided manufacturing  
(CAD/CAM) in prosthetics.,” Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res., no. 256, pp. 39–43, Jul. 1990.
[19]B. Rogers, G. W. Bosker, R. H. Crawford, M. C. Faustini, R. R. Neptune, G. Walden, and A. J.  
Gitter, “Advanced trans-tibial socket fabrication using selective laser sintering.,” Prosthet. Orthot.  
Int., vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 88–100, 2007.
[20]R. Torres-Moreno, J. B. Morrison, D. Cooper, C. G. Saunders, and J. Foort, “A computer-aided  
socket design procedure for above-knee prostheses.,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 35–44,  
1992.
[21]F.  E.  H.  Tay,  M.  a.  Manna,  and  L.  X.  Liu,  “A  CASD/CASM  method  for  prosthetic  socket  
fabrication using the FDM technology,” Rapid Prototyp. J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 258–262, 2002.
[22]R. Torres-Moreno, C. G. Saunders, J. Foort, and J. B. Morrison, “Computer-aided design and  
manufacture of an above-knee amputee socket,” J. Biomed. Eng., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 3–9, Jan. 1991.
[23]P. Ng, P. S. V. Lee, and J. C. H. Goh, “Prosthetic sockets fabrication using rapid prototyping  
technology,” Rapid Prototyp. J., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 53–59, 2002.
[24]D. M. Sengeh and H. Herr, “A Variable-Impedance Prosthetic Socket for a Transtibial Amputee  
Designed from Magnetic Resonance Imaging Data,” JPO J. Prosthetics Orthot., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 129–
137, Jul. 2013.
[25]Y.  P.  Zheng,   a  F.  Mak,  and   a  K.  Leung,  “State-of-the-art  methods  for  geometric  and  
biomechanical assessments of residual limbs: a review.,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 487–
504, 2001.
[26]K. M. Moerman, H. M. Herr, and D. M. Sengeh, “Automated and Data-driven Computational  
Design of Patient-Specifc Biomechanical Interfaces,” Open Sci. Framew., 2016.