Physical Exercise Effects on Determina nts of Soci al Integration in Schizophrenia 
Principal Investigator:  Robert S. Kern 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
August 12, 2019 
A.  Background  and Significance  
 Impairments in s ocial integration are considered a hallmark of schizophrenia  and constitute a huge mental 
health problem .  Studi es show reduced marriage  rates , few friendships , and a high er frequency of living alone 
resulting in chronic social isolation 1-3.  Poor social integration reduces Veterans’ engagement with case 
management, medic al and mental health care, increases risk for suicide, and leads to early mortality.  A meta -
analysis examined prospective all -cause mortality data across 148 studies (over 300,000 participants) with an 
average follow up of 7.5 years .  Results for social integration revealed that the odds ratio for survival was .64, 
meaning a 36 % reduction in the odds of survival for those with inadequate social integration  4.  The e ffect size 
is comparable to that of smoking , and greater than obesity and alcohol abuse .  To gain traction on this 
problem, treatments will be need ed that target determinants of poor social integration.  
A.1 Determinants of Social Integration  in Schizophrenia: Cognition and Affect  
 Two leading determinants of poor social integration  in schizophrenia  are impairments in cognition  and 
disturbances in affect.   Cognitive impairments are  a core feature of schizophrenia  5, 6.  They are generally 
stable across the adult lifespan until age 65  when there is evidence for accelerated decline  7.  Impairments are 
found in attention, working memory, verbal and visual learning , reasoni ng and problem -solving ability,  speed of 
processing , and social cognition  8.  Meta -analyses reveal  medium to large effect size relationships between 
selected areas of cognition and community function ing in schizophrenia9-11. Importantly, c ognition is related to 
a number of abilities involved in the processing of social information such as understanding the thoughts, 
intentions, and action s of others , verbal communication, and social problem -solving skills  12. 
 Schizophrenia is also  characterized by disturbances in trait affect ivity (i.e., basic emotional dispositions ).  
Adult personality traits can be divided into 2 dimensions: positive and negative affectivity13.  People high on 
positive affectivity experience more positive emotions  (e.g., happiness, joy) , and approach life more actively, 
with energy and  enthusiasm.  They seek out and enjoy the company of others.  In contrast, people with high 
negative affectivity  experience negative emotions  (e.g., sadness, despondence) , and view the world as 
problematic, threatening, and distressing.  They tend to be more reserved and socially aloof.  As a group, 
individuals with schizophreni a tend to show stably low positive affectivity and elevated negative affectivity 
throughout the course of illness .  These traits are linked to a range of real -world behaviors including poor social 
engagement and activity , and account for significant deficits in social adjus tment independent of cognition14. 
A.2 Benefits of Physical Exercise on Cognition and Affect  
 Reviews and meta -analyses support the benefits of physical exercise (PE) on both cognition and affect.  
Benefits are observed in studies of normal aging , mild cognitive impairment , neurodeg enerative diseases, 
oncology, depression , and bipolar disorder15-18.  For cognition, PE  is associated with improvements in 
attention, worki ng memory, verbal learning, speed of processing , and executive control 15, 19 with some data 
showing corresponding brain -related changes in hippocampal volume  and brain -derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF ) signali ng20-22.  PE is also associated with higher levels of positive affect in patients with depress ion and 
dementia , as well as in healthy sedentary adults  23.   
 The majority of s tudies of PE  in schizophrenia have focused on changes in physical health  and psychiatric 
symptoms24, 25.  The schizophrenia literature for  PE effects on cogn ition and affect is s mall, but developing .  A 
recent PubMe d search (July, 2015) revealed 3  RCTs on the effects of PE on cognition 26-28, one on affect 29, 
and none on both cognition and affect together.  All studies were non -VA samples with mean age  of 
participants 40 years or less , and examination of response predi ctors was limited to one variable . 
 For this SPiRE proposal, we intend to address this gap in scientific knowledge  by examining the effects of 
PE on both cognition and affect in a VA samp le aged 45 -65, prototypical of the aging VA clinical population.   In 
addition, we plan to explore putative predictors of treatment response.  If the  hypotheses are supported, we will 
know the value of PE  for cognition and affect in middle -
aged Veterans with schizophrenia.  We view this 
application as a necessary first step in addressing a 
broader clinically important question :  Ultimately, we 
wish to see if PE leads to improve ments in  social 
integration , but first we need to show tha t we can gain 
traction on treating mediators along the pathway to 
social integration .  Should the findings support our 
hypotheses, d ata from this SPiRE will be used to support 
a VA Merit proposal to investig ate this eventual goal 
(see conceptual model in Figure 1 ). 
B.  Preliminary Studies  
 Findings from s tudies on assessment and 
rehabilitation  treatment relev ant to the proposal are 
presented ; feasibility data are presented  at the end.  

B.1. Assessment of Cognition and Affect  
B.1.1 Cognition  
 Our research lab is recognized for efforts aimed at understanding the relationship between cognitive 
impairment and community integration  in schizophrenia .  Findings  from one of the PI’s early studies revealed 
ties between selected areas of cognition and rehabilitation outcome  30.  Subsequently, the PI has been 
involved in schizophrenia studies  examining preserved vs. impaired areas of memory functioning 31, cognitive 
impairment  profiles  32, social cognition impairments33, and the relationship between social cognition  
impairments and  work  outcome34.  Dr. Green, co -investigator on this proposal, has written 3 reviews of the 
literature examining the relationship between cognition and functional outcome  9, 35, 36; the PI was co -author on 
2 of them .  These reviews have had strong impact  with 2 of them each receiving over 2,000 citations.  
B.1.2 Affect  
 Our lab has also been involved in research assessing trait affectivity in schizophrenia.  Data from a review 
of trait affectivity measures ( Horan and Green ) showed that  individuals with schizophrenia tend to  have  stably 
low positive affectivity an d elevated negative affectivity throughout  the illness course  37.  Dr. Horan has also 
examined trait aff ectivity in 2 other studies: o ne that examined emotional range associate d with the deficit 
syndrome of schizophrenia, and one that examined trait affectivity in response to psychosocial stress  38, 39. 
B.2 Rehabilitation  Treatment   
B.2.1 Cognitive rehabilitation and work outcome  
 The PI has been active in psychiatric rehabilitation research for over 25 years .  A primary aim has been to 
improve community integration  among individuals with schizophrenia by addressing cognitive impairments that 
serve as rate -limiting factors to rehabilitation success .  Errorless learning, a c ognitive rehabilitation intervention 
that teaches new skills and abilities by compensating for cognitive impairment s, was examined in a series of 
studies aimed at improving work outcome .  Results supported the efficacy of errorless learning at improving 
entry -level job task performance in a simulated work setting  40.  These findings were extended to a more 
naturalistic setting offering part -time, time -limited transitional work experience  41.  More rece nt efforts examined 
the efficacy of  errorless learning at improving work performance within VA and community -based supported 
employment programs .  Results from these studies revealed a separate problem:  Social difficulties were a 
greater barrier to employment success than job performance  difficulties .  Interpersonal problems with 
supervisors and co -workers  were the leading source of problems for Veterans with schizophrenia at their 
competitive jobs, and were the leading reason for early job termination.  These f indings provided an impetus 
for the current  proposal.  By realizing that training on work performance only solved part  of the problem, we  
wanted to focus on other aspects, such as social integration, that appear to be rate -limiting for vocational 
success .  Further, t hese findings underscore the fact that poor social integration  not only poses a problem in 
forming close friendships and maintaining family contacts , it also affects functioning in the workplace as well.  
 The rationale for selecting PE as a treatment intervention  stems from our  interest in investigating the health 
benefits associated with work  and physical activity .  A common element across most Veterans’ jobs attained 
through supported employment is that they involve physical activity, e.g., grounds work, housekeeping.  One 
hypothes is we have entertained is that Veterans who maintain steady employment  should be more physically 
active compared to unemployed Veterans and level of physical activity should  be associated with mental and 
physical health benefits. The current  proposal builds on this conceptual idea and targets physical activity 
directly with an active intervention aimed at improving  cardiorespiratory fitness , cognition, and affect  as a goal.  
B.2.2 Physical a ctivity and health outcom e 
 Dr. Young, co -investigator on this proposal, is currently examining the effects of physical activity on health 
outcomes.  He received a VA HSR&D grant to examine the effects of in -person vs. web -based delivered 
instructional modules on PE and nutrition in Veterans with serious mental illness  who are overweight.  
Participants are assigned to in -person delivery of the instructional modules  (n=95), web -based  delivery  (n=93), 
or a control group (n=88)  and followed for 12 months .  Data collection is ongoing , although all 6 month 
interviews have been completed and the follow -up rate was 84% (232/276).   Primary outcomes include 
measurement s of physical activity, dietary habits , weight  change, and health -related functioning .  Walking is 
currently the leading  choice  of physical activity with a p reference to exercise with others rather than alone.  
B.3 Feasibility Data on the Walking Exercise Program  
 For this application, we collected feasibility data on 4 Veterans with schizophrenia (aged 36 -59; body mass 
index (BMI) range = 24.3 - 29.6) drawn from the MIRECC registry (see section C.2 on recruitment) who 
participated in a n abbreviated  4-week version of the proposed walking  exercise program  (1/3 the length) .  The 
walking exercises were instructor -led (PI + study coordinator) , held 3  times p er week,  and conducted in small 
group format .  For weeks 1-2, Veterans walked 20 min per  session; for week 3, they walked 30 min per 
session; for week 4, 40 min per sessi on.  We wanted to address 3 questions:  (a) Would Veterans with 
schizophrenia participate in an exercise program of this type?  (b) Could the walking exercise s be conducted in 
small group format?  (c) Would  the 4-week pre-post training data provide a signal supporting improvement in 
cardiorespiratory fitness ?  Participation :  Of the 4 participants , 2 attended all 12 sessions, one missed one 
session due to illness, and one missed 2  sessions due to illness.   
All 4 stated that they enjoyed the walking exercise and would 
participate in suc h a program again if it were available at the VA.   
Group format :  We found some variability in cardiorespiratory 
challenge needed to attain the target peak heart rate for one of 
the Veteran s.  By including 2 instructors and selecting  an area of 
the VA campus with steeper grades  we were able to address 
this need (i.e., the Veteran requiring greater rigor went with one 
instructor; the others went with the other instructor).  
Implemented in this way, all 4 Veterans were able to reach the ir 
target peak heart rate on each walking session.  Pre-post training cardiorespiratory fitness data:  Baseline 
levels of cardiorespiratory fitness ( estimated V0 2 max) were all in the “very poor” to “poor” range compared to 
men in their age group (range = 11.1 to 31.1  mls/kg/min ; see Table 1 ).  Following training, each Veteran 
showed improve ment from baseline with increases in estimated V0 2 max of 10.8%, 21.2%,  33.7%, and 55.0 %, 
respectively;  2 Veterans attained  a “fair” classification rating at post-training .  In sum, the feasibility data 
suggest that Veterans with schizophrenia will p articipate in walking exercises;  that a group -based, instructor -
led format is feas ible; and that cardiorespiratory f itness levels can be improved.   
C.  Research Design and Methods  
C.1. Study Timeline  
 We propose a 2 -year study period.  The first 3 months will be devoted to training personnel on the test 
battery , purchasing supplies,  and recr uitment.  Th e succeeding 18 months will be devoted to data collection  
and the final 3 months to analyses and manuscript preparation.  
C.2 Research Setting  and Recruitment  
 The study will be conducted at the MIRECC Unit within  the VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System 
(GLA).  The composition of the GLA V eteran population allows recruitment of both women and mino rities for 
the project.  Based on previous GLA studies , appro ximately 90% of participants will be  men with an ethnic 
breakdown of approximately 40% White, 40% African -American, 15% Hispanic, and less than 5% of Asian and 
other ethnic groups.   Ample office and lab space exists wit hin the MIRECC ( including a 1,944 square  foot day 
room) for consenting, interview s, testing activities, conducting stretching exercises, and project personnel.  
 Participants will be recruited using methods approved by the VA Institutional Review Board  (IRB) .  Our 
primary recruitment strategy  will be to draw  potential participants from the IRB-approved MIRECC registry .  
Veterans in the registry are those  who have participated in past MIRECC research projects and consented to 
be contacted about future ones .  The registry currently includes 184  Veterans meeting the study’s di agnostic 
and age criteria.  As additional sources , MIRECC projects regularly draw from GLA mental health clinics which 
include the Schizophrenia Clinic, Mental Health Intensive Case Management, Mental Health Services, Dual 
Diagnosis Treatment Program, and Psychosocial Rehabilitation and Recovery Center .  These clinics provide 
services to an additional 800+ Veterans meeting the study’s diagnostic criteria.  
C.3. Study Sample  
 We plan to enroll 54  Veterans with a psychiatric diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.  
Medication type and dose will be left to the discretion of the treating psychiatrist.   
Selection criteria : 
(a) DSM -5 diagnosis of  schizophrenia or schizoa ffective disorder; (b) age 45 -65; (c) screened for physical 
health risks (i.e., no serious heart condition, dizziness  or falls , bone or joint problems posing safety concerns , 
ambulatory limitations ; or in those cases where a risk i s identified clearance is provided by the Veteran’s 
primary care provider or VA psychiatrist ); (d) clinically stable (e.g., no inpatient hospitalizations for 3 months 
prior to enrollment; no change in type of antipsychotic medication in the past 4 weeks); (e) no evidence of 
substance or alcohol use disorder (moderate to severe ) per DSM -5 criteria in the past 3 months; (f) no clinically 
significant neurological disease as determined by medical history (e.g., seizure disorder); (g) no history of 
serious head injury with loss of consciousness >1 hour;  (h) no participa tion in an exercise program in the past 
6 months; (i) able to understand spoken and written English sufficiently to  comprehend consent procedures.  
C.4 Study Design  
 Veterans who are eligible and provide written informed consent will be enrolled.  Three cohorts of 18  
Veterans each will be assembled over the course of the s tudy with subjects randomized 2:1 to an experimental 
group (n=36 ) vs. a control group (n=18 ).  The experimental group will participate in brisk walking exercises ; the 
control group will participate in non-aerobic (non-yoga) stretching exercises matched to the experimental group 
on duration, frequency, and number of sessions .  Within each cohort  of 18, we will form 6  triads  matched on 
baseline levels of cardiorespiratory fitness .  Within each triad , 2 Veterans will be randomized  to the  exercise 
group and 1  to the comparison group .  The purpose of the randomization sc heme is to maximize balance and 
power  for detecting a treatment effect and explore putative predictors  of treatment response .  Predictor Table 1. Pre -post Training  
Cardiorespiratory Fitness Data  
(estimated V0 2 max ; mls/kg/min)  
Participant  Baseline  Post-training  
Subj 1  11.1 12.3 
Subj 2  31.1 37.7 
Subj 3  24.9 33.3 
Subj 4  12.9 20.0 
 
variables will include baseline  levels of BMI, smoking 
behavior , symptoms, and motivation  (described in 
section C.5 below).  The 3 cohorts will be  assemble d and 
run between months 3 -21 of the study period  (Figure 2). 
C.4.1 Implementation of exercise training  
 In designing the  exercise program, we considered 
personal preference and physical activity risk factors 
common to Veterans with schizophrenia.  The modal, 
and most preferred , method of exercise in studies of 
schizophrenia has been walking, using a regimen of 3 
times per week in 40 -minute sessions over a 3 -month 
period  24, 25, 42.  Our exercise program will include 
instructor -led brisk walking exercises conducted outdoors 
in small groups.   This method provides a safe way of 
engaging in PE , but also helps ensure that target peak 
heart rates c an be attained for each Veteran.  
 Both the experimental and control groups will be run in groups of n=6  subjects each.  Veterans in the 
experimental group will partic ipate in walking exercises 3 times per week over a course of 12 weeks.  The 
walking exercises will be conducted on GLA grounds where there is a course mapped out that provides varying 
degrees of cardiorespiratory challenge (see Appendix  1).  Each session will include a 5 -min warm -up and cool -
down period and stretching exercises.  Walking duration will be gradually increased over the 12 -week period.  
For weeks 1 -2, Veterans will walk 20 min per  session; for week s 3-4, 30 min per  session ; for we eks 5 -12, 40 
min per  session (the desired maximum  outcome).  Walking exercises will be led by 2 research personnel 
experience d in PE work -outs.  Both will carry cell phone s with them to alert the PI and a back -up MIRECC 
investigator should any V eteran expe rience physical complaints during a walking session.  Each Veteran will 
wear a heart rate monitor (Fitbit ChargeHR)  that provides continuous heart rate measurement .  Heart rate will 
be recorded every 10 min during each walking session with the aim of maintaining a target peak heart rate of 
60% to 70% of the maximum for the individual’s age  (i.e., 220 -age).  Based on our feasibility data, it is likely 
that our cohorts will include a subset of individual s who  will require adjustments in exercise rigor to meet 
cardiorespiratory challenge .  Should this occur, we will divide the groups  accordingly  into hig her and lower 
functioning subsets , and  manipulate e xercise rigor in two ways by:  (a) implementing a brisker pace, and /or (b) 
walking uphill .  By monitorin g heart rate during the walking exercises, our instructors will be able to gauge t he 
need to walk faster , or take routes that include hill ier sections of the GLA grounds to provide adequate 
challenge.  Veterans in the control condition will participate in instructor -led, non-aerobic  (non-yoga) stretching 
exercises which will include a 5-min warm -up and cool -down period of slow walking to prevent muscle strain.  
C.4.2 Assessment schedule  
 All participants will receive  a baseline and end -point assessment .  The b aseline asses sment will include 
measurement of cardiorespiratory fitness, cognition, positive and negative affect, psychiatric symptoms, BMI, 
current and past smoking behavior , motivation, and social integration .  This assessment will also include a 
SCID update to confirm diagnosis and collection of 
demographic  and psychiatric history  data.  The end -
point assessment will be conducted immediately after 
12-week participation in the experimental or control 
condition and include the same measurements  as 
baseline  (excluding the SCID update and psychiatric 
history ; see Table 2 ).  Testers will be blind to group 
assignment.  To assess tolerability, w e will collect data 
on sessions  completed  and drop -outs respective to 
each group .  Qualitative data on the PE program will be 
collected to learn about participants’ likes, dislikes, and 
suggestions for improvement.  Total assessment time s 
are 4.0 and 3.2  hours fo r the baseline  and end-point  
assessment s, respectively  (see section C.5 below).  
C.5. Assessments  
C.5.1 Psychiatric diagnosis .  Psychiatric diagnosis will  
be based on SCID43 updates of Veterans with 
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder from our 
MIRECC registry .  The update s take  about 30 min utes. 
C.5.2 Psychiatric and social history  schedul e.  Used 
across MIRECC studies , this in -house developed Table 2:  Assessment Schedule  
Domain/Test  Baseline  End-
point  
Sample  characterization    
SCID  X  
Psych and Social History  X  
BMI X X 
Smoking behavior  X X 
Cardiorespiratory fitness    
Rockport one -mile walk test  X X 
Cognition    
Non-social cognition battery  X X 
Social cognition battery  X X 
Neurotrophic factor    
BDNF  X X 
Affect and symptoms    
PANAS  X X 
BPRS  X X 
Motivation  X X 
Social Integration    
Birchwood Social Functioning 
Scale   X X 
TSBC  X X 
 
Figure 2.  Project Timeline
n= 18 per cohort comprised of 2 walking groups and 1 stretching 
exercise group of n= 6 each; 
A = baseline assessment; B = end -point assessmentCohort
1Cohort
2Cohort
3
Project 
start dateProject 
end dateB A A B B
Month
18Month
12Month
6A
instrument is used to  collect data on demographic s, psychiatric history, and current medication s.  We will also 
measure BMI and current and past smoking behavior .  Administration time is 2 0 min utes.  
C.5.3 Card iorespiratory fitness .  Cardiorespiratory fitness will be measured using the Ro ckport one -mile walk 
test that provides an estimate of maximal oxygen consumption (VO 2 max)44.  This non -invasive procedure uses a 
regression -based formula that includes age, sex, weight, time to walk one -mile, and heart rate after one -mile 
as variables .  Heart rate will be measured usin g a Fitbit ChargeHR heart rate monitor worn by the Veteran .  
This method correlates .93 with direct measurement of VO 2 max.  Time is about 20  minutes for most individuals.  
C.5.4 Cognition .  Selected areas of non-social and social cognition will be assessed :  (a) Non -social cognition:  
attention (CPT -IP), speed of processing (BACS symbol coding), working memory (WAIS -IV letter -number 
sequencing test), verbal learning (Hopkins Verbal Learning Test – Revised) , and executive control  (AX-CPT)45, 
46.  (b) Social cognition:  emotion perception (Facial Emotion  Identification Test47), social perception ( Half-
Profile of Nonverbal Sensitivity; PONS48), theory of mind (The Awareness of Social Inference Test; TASIT  – 
Part 249), empathy (empathic accuracy test50).  For both non -social and social cognition, the primary measure 
will be an overall composite.  Total ad ministration  time is  approximately 90 minutes. 
C.5.5 Neuro trophic factor  (BDNF quantification) .  To assess possible brain -related changes consequent to PE, 
serum will be collected on the same day as the baseli ne and end -point assessments and stored at -80 C to 
measure BDNF .  BDNF concentration  remain s relatively stable within an individual’s system for up to 2 weeks  
and will be quantified by enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay (R&D Systems) with assay range of 62.5-4000 
pg/ml.  Assays will be performed by the UCLA Clinical and Tran slational Research Laboratory.  
C.5.6 Affect and p sychiatric symptoms .   
(a) Positive and negative affect.   Affect will be  measured using th e Positive and Negative Affect S chedule  
(PANA S) 51, a self -report measure tapping 20 different feelings  requiring 5 min utes administration time.   The 
primary measures will be total scores for positive affect and negative affect.  
(b) Clinical symptoms.  Positive and negative symptoms will be assessed using the Expanded Brief  Psychiatric 
Rating Scale (BPRS )52.  Primary measures are positiv e and negative symptom subscale scores .  
Admin istration time is 25 min utes. 
(c) Motivation.   Motivation will be measured using the Effort Expenditure for Rewards Task  53, a computerized 
measure developed out of the affective neuroscience literature54 in which  the participant chooses easy or hard 
button -pressing tasks for variable amounts of reward.  In schizophrenia, i t has shown good test-retest reliability 
(r=.73) and small practice effects (d=.09) .  The p rimary measure will be the percent of hard choices across 
reward levels.  Admin istration  time is 2 5 min utes. 
C.5.7 Social integration .  Social integra tion will be assessed with 2  measures  with established reliability and 
validity in schizophrenia  and serious mental illness  55-57: (a) Birchwood Social Functioning Scale  55: This 
measure is administered as a structured interview and include s 7 subtests  which assess social engagement, 
interpersonal communication, independence – performance, independence – competence, recreation, 
prosocial behavior, and employment , and yields a total score.  (b) Time Sample Behavior Checklist  (TSBC )58: 
This behavioral observation  measure  assesses frequency of involvement in common human beha viors such as 
talking , reading, etc.  Behavior sampl es will be drawn from a 5 -min observation period of Veterans gathered in 
the waiting area immediately afte r the first and last session.  A rater trained to a kappa = .90 with the PI will 
sample the behavior of each Veteran within the respective group in semi -random 2-sec windows conducted 2 
times per min  yielding a total of 10 observations .  The primary variab le is percent  time engage d in prosocial 
behavior , e.g., talking to others .  These 2 measures require 2 0 minutes administration  time.  The primary 
measure for social integration will be an overall composite derived from these 2 measures.  
C.6 Quality assurance  
 For the walking and stretching exercise groups, the PI will observe each group 1 day per week to monitor 
implement ation .  The PI and co -investigators will monitor the collection of cardiorespiratory fitness and BDNF 
data.  Each month, t he PI will meet with the tester and study coordinator to review data collected .  Symptom 
ratings will be carried out by an interviewer trained to reliability (i.e., kappa > .80).   
D. Data Analytic Plan  
C.3.1  Statistical Analysis Approach  
C.3.1.1 Specificatio n of primary measures .  Our primary outcome variables will be the estimated VO 2 max  value 
from the Rockport one -mile walk test (Hypothesis 1), a composite score of non -social cognition (Hypothesis 2), 
and total scores from the PANAS for positive and negative affect  (Hypothesis 3). 
C.3.1.2 Preliminary analyses .  Descriptive statistics and graphical summaries on all demographic, clinical and 
outcome measures will be examined to characterize the sample, to determine the advisability of scale 
transformati ons or non -parametric methods and to identify missing values, outliers, or other features that may 
be influential .  To assess tolerability, a ttendance and dropout rates will be compared for the two study ar ms; 
within the exercise group session -by-session heart rate data will be plotted to examine whether exercise 
targets were consistently achieved  over time . To verify the success of randomization, we will compare 
treatment groups at baseline on all primary outcome measures, as well as demographic and clini cal factors . 
Measures that show significant group differences and are correlated with the primary outcome measures  will 
be included as covariates in follow -up analyses to verify the robustness of observed effects.  
C.3.1.3 Primary ana lyses by hypothesis (see Table 3  above) :  The primary analyses are all intent -to-treat with 
subjects grouped as randomized to the PE or control conditions.  We will use generalized linear mixed model s 
(GLMM s) with treatment group  as the between subjects factor , time  as the within subjects factor , and a group x 
time interaction as the primary predictors , along with subject and cohort level random effects to account for 
correlations induced by repeated measurements within subjects a nd shared group experiences.  GLMMs allow 
for both fixed and time -varying covariates and automatically handle missing data, producing unbiased 
estimates as long as observations are missing at random.  Our primary hypotheses regarding the efficacy of 
PE correspond to tests of the  group x time interactions for differential effects of treatment on cardiorespiratory 
fitness, non -social cognition , and positive and negative affect.  A significant interaction effect in the predicted 
direction would support the hyp othesis that PE is an effective training intervention for improving one or more of 
these areas of functioning.   Post-hoc contrasts can be used to assess the degree of improvement within the 
exercise group.  Follow -up analyses  will adjust as necessary for d emographic and clinical covariates .  In 
addition, where treatment effects are observed on composite outcome measures, secondary analyses will be 
run for the individual component domains to determine whether particular factors are driving the overall results.   
C.3.1.4 Exploratory analyses:   Our ultimate goal is to determine whether the benefits of PE extend to 
improvements in  social integration in V eterans with schizophrenia.  We will conduct exploratory analyses, 
using the same GLMM paradigm as in the  primary analyses , to obtain initial esti mates of the effects of PE  on 
social integration.  We will also examine changes in social cognition , BDNF , and symptoms  to see if these 
areas are sensitive to the effects of training .  Our overall conceptual view is that any observed PE related 
improvements in social integration will be the result of improvements in non-social cognition and affect.  If this 
study is successful, a natural next step is to test t he effects of PE on social integration with inclusion of non -
social cognition and affect as mediators.  While we are underpowered for the full path analysis here, we will 
conduct exploratory analyses to  examine whether non-social cognition and affect mediate the effect of 
treatment on social integration outcomes  by including these measures as time -varying covariates in the 
GLMMs for social integration.   In addition, we will add baseline clinical and contextual factors (BMI, smoking 
behavior, symptoms, and motivation) and th eir interactions with group and time to the primary mixed models to 
begin exploring potential moderators of treatment effects.  We also plan to examine cohort effects to see if 
there are any significan t changes in the PE training program over time (compari ng cohort 1 vs. 2 vs. 3). 
C.3.2  Power  
 We plan to enroll 54  subjects, 36 in the experimental treatment arm and 18  in the control arm.  All sample 
size calculations are based on a 2 -sided significance level of α=.05, and assume a correlation of r = .5 
between repeated measurements w ithin subjects.  We allow for 17 % attrition  based on data from 2 ongoing 
studies  that yielded 15.9% and 16.7% attrition rates, respectively (Young:  44/276 lost at 6 -mo follow -up; Kern: 
7/42 lost at end-point following a 3 -mo psychosocial training intervention) .  For each of our hypothese s, our 
design has 80% power to detect an interaction with effect size of f = .21  (the general effect size unit for 
ANOVA/regression) which translates to a change from no difference at baseline  to a difference of d = .85  SDs 
at the endpoint.  Within the exercise group there is 80% power to detect an improvement of d = .5 on any of 
the outcome measures, a standard medium effect.  From the literature, the 2 RCTs on cognition examining PE 
alone vs.  a control condition  yielded  effect size s of f = .5926 (for the interaction) and d  = .9327 (for between -
group comparison of change scores) ; the one on affect  reported a medium effect for within -group change ( no 
control condition; d = .66 ) 29, so power should be adequate  for cognition and based on the limited data on 
affect we should be able to obtain reasonable estimates to inform a future study . Table 3 .  Aim x Hypothesis x Outcome Measure x Analysis.  
Specific Aim  Hypothesis  Outcome Measure(s)  Statistical Analysis  
To examine the 
benefits of 
physical 
exercise on 
cardio -
respiratory 
fitness, 
cognition, and 
affect in 
Veterans with 
schizophrenia.  Hyp 1: Veterans in the exercise group 
will show greater improvement in 
physical fitness as measured by a 
cardiorespiratory measure of functioning 
compared to a control group.   Estimate of VO 2 max from Rockport one -
mile walk test  Mixed effects regression 
with group, time, and a 
group x time interaction.  
Hyp 2: Veterans in the exercise group 
will show greater improvement in 
cognition compared to a control group.  Primary :  Composite score from non -
social cognition battery  
Secondary :  Composite score from so cial 
cognition battery; BDNF value  Mixed effects regression 
with group, time, and a 
group x time interaction.    
Hyp 3: Veterans in the exercise group 
will show greater increases in positive 
affect and greater decreases in negative 
affect compared to a control group.  Primary : Total scores on positive affect 
and negative affect from the PANAS.  
Secondary :  Positive and negative 
symptom subscale scores from the BPRS  Mixed effects regression 
with group, time, and a 
group x time interaction.    