Version 6/9/16 1  
 
 
NORTHSIDE HOSPITAL  
 
 
 
A PHASE II TRIAL OF REDUCED INTENSITY CONDITIONING AND 
TRANSPLANTATION OF PARTIALLY HLA -MISMATCHED PERIPHERAL BLOOD 
STEM CELLS  FOR PATIENTS WITH HEMATOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES  
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigators:  Melhem Solh MD  
     Scott R. So lomon MD  
  H. Kent Holland, MD  
                                                                Lawrence E.  Morris, MD  
      Asad Bashey, MD, PhD  
 
 
 
 
Version:   10/28/16  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 6/9/16 2  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
 
SCHEMA……………………………………………………….  3 
 
1.0 OBJECTIVES…………………… …………………………….  4 
 
2.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE………………………..  4 
 
3.0 DRUG INFORMATION………………………………………  6 
 
4.0 PAT IENT SELECTION………………………………………  8 
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN…………………………………………  11 
 
6.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING…………... ………………  14 
 
7.0 RISKS A ND TOXICITIES………………………… …………..  15 
 
8.0 STUDY PARAMETERS…………..…………………… …… … 16 
 
9.0 FOLLOW UP/OFF STUDY CRITERIA………………………  17 
 
10.0 STATIST ICAL CONSIDERATIONS…………………………  18 
 
11.0 REFERENCES… ……………………………………… ……….  20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 6/9/16 3  
 
Treatment Schema  
 
 
 
Days –6   –2 Fludarabine 30 mg/M2 IV qd x 5  days (day -6 to -2) 
  
 
 
Day –1 Melphalan 14 0 mg/M2 IV x 1 dose ( day -1) 
 
  
 
Day 0  Infuse unmanipulated PBSCs  
(Begin antibiotic prophylaxis)  
 
  

Days 3, 4  Cyclophosphamide  50 mg/kg IV q d  
 (hydration/Mesna)  
 
(First dose of C yclophosphamide  must be administered 48 -72 hr after infusion of PBSCs)  
 
  
 
Day 5    Begin Tacrolimus (target plasma level 5 -15)  
                MMF 15 mg/kg po tid with maximum daily dose 3 gm/d  
 
  
 
Day 35       Discontinue  MMF  
 
  
  
Day 180  Discontinue Tacrolimus  
  
 
 
Version 6/9/16 4 1. OBJECTIVES:  
 
Primary Objectives:  
 
1.1. To estimate the incidence of graft rejection following reduced intensity , human 
leukocyte antigen ( HLA )-mismatched hematopoietic stem cell transplantation ( HSCT ) in 
patients with high risk hematologic malignancies .  
 
Secon dary Objectives:  
 
1.2. To obtain estimates of  overall survival (OS), relapse,  graft versus host disease (GVHD),  
non-relapse mortality (NRM), and event -free survival (EFS) in p atients receiving 
reduced intensity conditioning and transplantation of partially hum an leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) -mismatched peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC)  from first -degree relatives.  
 
1.3. Characterize additional hematologic and non -hematologic toxicities of reduced intensity 
haploidentical HSCT . 
 
1.4. Identify the incidence of BK virus cystitis  in patients receiving reduced intensity 
conditioning and transplantation of partially human leukocyte antigen (HLA) -
mismatched peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) from first -degree relatives.  
 
 
 
2. BACKGROUND  
 
Allogeneic HSCT  is considered a curative modality  for many patients with high risk hematologic 
malignancie s. Transplantation using a matched related sibling if available leads to improved 
outcomes when compared to other graft sources1. Unfortunately, only about a third of candidates 
for HSCT  have HLA -matched siblings.  For patients who lack HLA -matched siblings, there are 
other  alternative sources of stem cells for HSCT : 1) volunteer unrelated donors; 2) umbilical 
cord blood; and 3) partially HLA -mismatched, or hap loidentical, related donors.  Haploidentical 
HSCT  has been historically associated with significant risks of graft rejection  and severe 
GVHD2, which are manifestations of excessive  alloreactivity by host and donor T cells3, 
respectively.  Earlier study of T cell depletion in the setting of haploidentical HSCT were 
associ ated with prolonged immune compromise and increase risk of mortality from infections4. 
Recently, the use of cyclophosph amide (Cy) post infusion of stem cells has become a new 
standard to reduce the incidence of GVHD without significantly increasing the risk of infections 
seen with T cell depleted haploidentical transplantation5. 
 
Version 6/9/16 5 Post-transplant  Cy (PTCY) was studied by the group from Johns Hopkins in  a non -ablative  
condition ing regimen of non -T cell -depleted marrow from haploidentical first degree relatives6.  
This study showed that optimally  dosed and timed  PTCY , after a conditioning regimen of 
fludarabine and low dose total body irradiation  had an acceptably low risk of graft rejection and 
GVHD, the two major complications of haploidentical HSCT .  All patients received 
mycophenolate mofetil  (MMF)  and tacrolimus, beginning 24 hours after PTCY  administration  
for GVHD prophylaxis . The median times to neutrophil and platelet recovery for all patients 
were 15 and 24 days, respectively. Graft failure occurred in a total of 15/84 patients (18%).  All 
but two patients with graf t failure experienced recovery  of autologous hematopoiesis with 
median times to neutrophil and platelet engraftment of 24 days (range 11 -48 days) and 44 days 
(range 15 -395 days), respectively.  
 
The cumu lative incidences of grades  II-IV and III -IV acute GVHD were 35% and 10%. 
The cumulative incidence of chronic and extensive chronic GVHD in the first year after 
transplantation for the entire population was 22% and 14%, respectively.  The cumulative 
incidences of NRM at 180 days and 1 year after transplantation were 13% and 19%, respectively. 
The cumulative incidences of relapse at 1 and 2 years after transplantation were 50% and 57%, 
respectively. At a median follow -up of survivors of 817 days (range, 112 -1808 days), the 
actuarial ov erall survival at 1 and 2 years were 45% and 35%, respectively.  
 
  From these results, it was  concluded that a combination of PTCY , tacrolimus, and  MMF 
were associated with an acceptably low incidence of graft rejection,  severe acute GVHD, and 
extensive c hronic GVHD . There was effective  clinical immune reconstitution as demonstrated by 
the low incidence of severe  opportunistic infections.  Relapse  represented  the major cause of 
treatment failure in this poor risk patient population.   One explanation for the  high rate of 
relapse, as in other nonmyeloablative HSCT trials, is that the transplantation conditioning was 
not intense enough to achieve sufficient tumor cytoreduction.    
 
 Given that relapse remains the largest impediment to success after nonmyeloabla tive 
bone marrow transplantation utilizing PTCY , efforts to reduce relapse remain  an important are a 
of clinical investigation . We have recently published 2 studies on the use of myeloablative 
conditioning with PTCY . The first study with busulfan based cond itioning established that 
myeloablative haploidentical transplantation can yield full donor chimerism at day 30, grade III -
IV acute GVHD rate of 10%, and a 1 year OS of 69% and DFS of 50%7. The sec ond 
myeloablative study with total body irradiation (TBI)  based conditioning showed full donor 
chimerism at day 30, and a 2 year DFS of 73%8. The limitation of myeloablative regimens is that 
they cannot be  safely  administered for elderly patients or patients with poor organ function , 
increased comorbidities  and poor performance status.  The need of a more intense regimen than 
the non -ablative (Flu darabine /low do se TBI)  but less intensive than the full myeloablative 
Version 6/9/16 6 conditioning regimens  in an effort t o decrease relapse among  HSCT patients remains an area of 
clinical  investigation.  
 
 This trial will evaluate the safety and efficacy of a reduced intensity allogeneic HSCT 
from partially HLA -mismatched first -degree relatives utilizing PBSC as the stem cell source.   
The primary objective of the study is to estimate the in cidence of graft rejection  and acute 
GVHD . A secondary objective will be to es timate the incidence of the  relapse, NRM, OS, 
chronic GVHD  and EFS.   
  
3. Drug Information  
 
3.1 Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan®)  
 
Cyclophosphamide is an alkylating agent which prevents c ell division  primarily by cross -linking 
DNA strands. Cyclophosphamide is cell cycle nonspecific. Cyclophosphamide for injection is 
available in 2000 mg vials which are reconstituted with 100 ml sterile water for injection. The 
concentration of the  reconsti tuted product is 20 mg/ml. The calculated dose will be diluted 
further in  250-500 ml of Dextrose 5% in water. Each dose will be infused over 1 -2 hr (depending 
on the total volume). Clinical toxicities of cyclophosphamide include alopecia, nausea and 
vomiti ng, headache and dizziness, hemorrhagic cystitis, cardiotoxicity, immunosuppression, 
myelosuppression, pulmonary fibrosis, increased hepatic enzymes and syndrome of 
inappropriate anti -diuretic hormone (SIADH).  
 
3.2 Mesna (sodium -2-mercapto ethane sulphonat e) 
 
Mesna is a prophylactic agent used to prevent hemorrhagic cystitis  induced by the 
oxasophosphorines (cyclophosphamide and ifosphamide). It has  no intrinsic cytotoxicity and no 
antagonistic effects on chemotherapy. Mesna  binds with acrolein, the urotoxi c metabolite 
produced by the oxasophosphorines,  to produce a non -toxic thioether and slows the rate of 
acrolein formation by  combining with 4 -hydroxy metabolites of oxasophosphorines.  Mesna is 
available in 200 mg, 400 mg and 1000 mg vials containing a 100  mg/ml solution. Each dose of 
mesna will be diluted further in 50 ml of normal  saline to be infused over 15 min or as per 
institutional standards. Mesna dose will  be based on the cyclophosphamide dose being given. 
The total daily dose of  mesna is equal to 8 0% of the total daily dose of cyclophosphamide.  At the 
doses used for uroprotection mesna is virtually non -toxic.  However, adverse effects which may 
be attributable to mesna include nausea and  vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, altered taste, 
rash, urtica ria, headache, joint  or limb pain, hypotension and fatigue. Mesna will be dispensed by 
the Oncology Pharmacy and is produced by Mead Johnson Pharmaceuticals.  
Version 6/9/16 7 3.3 Melphalan  
 
 Melphalan is an alkylating agent that is commonly used in stem cell transplant du e to its 
significant myelosuppressive effects. Melphalan will be infused as a single dose on day -1 prior 
to infusion of stem cells. Even with the use of hematopoietic growth factors, significant 
neutropenia is expected. Neutropenic infections and/or need for transfusions of red cells and/or 
platelets may result.  Stomatitis, esophagitis and severe diarrhea are common with high dose 
melphalan: management with i.v. narcotics and potentially i.v. alimentation may be needed.  
Other  less common toxicities reporte d include pulmonary fibrosis and interstitial pneumonitis, 
skin hypersensitivity, vasculitis, alopecia, hemolytic anemia and allergic reaction.  
 
3.4 Fludarabine  (Fludara ®) 
 
Fludarabine phosphate is purin e antimetabolite that, after administration, undergoe s rapid 
conversion in plasma to the nucleoside 2 -fluoro ara -A (F-araA). F -araA subsequently enters cells 
where it is phosphorylated to F -araATP and the monophosphate F -araAMP.  Once activated, F -
araATP inhibits DNA polymerase and ribonucleotide reductase. The monophosphate F -araAMP, 
once incorporated into DNA, is an effective DNA chain terminator.  Fludarabine monophosphate, 
50 mg/vial, is reconstituted with 2 ml of sterile water, resulting in a 25mg/ml solution. The 
desired dose is further diluted to concen trations of 0.04 -1 mg/ml in normal saline or 5% dextrose 
(50-100ml) for injection and will be administered by IV infusion over 30 minutes or longer.  
Following IV administration, the drug is metabolized to 2 -F-araA and widely distributed in 
tissues.  2 -F-araA is excreted primarily in urine and has a terminal elimination half -life of 7 to 12 
hours.  Clinical toxicities of fludarabine monophosphate include: myelosuppression, primarily 
lymphopenia and granulocytopenia, alopecia, rash, dermatitis, nausea, vomitin g, anorexia, 
stomatitis, diarrhea, somnolence, fatigue, peripheral neuropathy, mental status changes, cortical 
blindness, hepatocellular toxicity with elevation in serum transaminases, and interstitial 
pneumonitis. These effects are reversible when the dru g is discontinued.  Fludarabine will be 
administered by IV infusion over 30 minutes in a dose of 40 mg/m2/day on days -5 to -2. 
Fludara ® will be dispensed by the Oncology Pharmacy and is produced by Berlex 
Pharmaceuticals.  
 
3.5 Tacrolimus  
 
Tacrolimus, also known as FK -506, is a macrolide immunosuppressant. It  inhibits lymphocytes 
by forming a complex with FKBP -12, calcium, and  calmodulin, leading to the decrease in the 
phosphatase activity of calcineurin.  This drug is used with corticosteroids for prophylaxi s of 
organ rejection in  patients receiving allogeneic liver transplants. Its use is also currently being  
investigated in kidney, bone marrow, cardiac, pancreas, pancreatic islet cell and  small bowel 
transplantation. This drug is well -absorbed orally. It is  metabolized  in the liver by unknown 
Version 6/9/16 8 mechanisms, but demethylation and hydroxylation have  been proposed based on in vitro studies. 
The metabolized products are excreted in  the urine.  Nephrotoxic drugs, antifungals, calcium 
channel blockers, cimetidine,  danazol, erythromycin, methylprednisone and metoclopramide 
increase the  bioavailabilty of FK -506. In contrast, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifamycins and  
carbamazepine decrease FK -506 levels. Adverse reactions include tremor,  headache, diarrhea, 
hypertension, n ausea, and renal dysfunction.  
 
3.6 Mycophenolic Acid Mofetil (Cellcept®)  
 
Mycophenolate Mofetil is an ester prodrug of the active  immunosuppressant mycophenolic acid 
(MPA). This active metabolite is a  noncompetitive, reversible inhibitor of inosine 
monopho sphate dehydrogenase  (IMPDH). There are no pharmacokinetic interactions with 
ganciclovir,  cotrimoxazole, oral contraceptives and cyclosporine.  Side effect profiles include 
diarrhea, leukopenia, sepsis, allergic reactions,  and vomiting. There is also an inc rease in certain 
types of infection mainly from  the herpes virus family (CMV, HSV & VZV) and candida.  
3.7 Hematopoietic growth factor: G -CSF 
G-CSF may be associated with development of fevers, chills, skin rash, polyserositis, muscle 
aches, malaise and/or headache. It has also been reported to cause bone aches or pain in a 
minority of patients  
 
4. PATIENT SELECTION  
 
4.1 Criteria for recipient eligibility  
 
 4.1.1  No available matched related or unrelated donor , OR a matched related or 
unrelated donor will not b e available in the time frame necessary to perform a 
potentially curative transplant.  
 
4.1.2 Availability of a 3/6 – 5/6 matched (HLA -A, B, DR) related donor   
 Donor must have negative HLA cross -match in the host vs. graft direction.  
 
 4.1.3  Age ≤75 years  
 
 4.1.4 Karnofsky status ≥70%  
 
 4.1.5  One of the following high -risk malignancies:  
 
  4.1.5.1 Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia  
Version 6/9/16 9  Chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase, resistant or intolerant to 
available tyrosine kinase inhibitors (OR)  
 Chronic myelogenous le ukemia in accelerated phase (OR)  
 Chronic myelogenous leukemia with blast crisis that has entered into a 
second chronic phase following induction chemotherapy.   
 
  4.1.5.2 Acute Myelogenous Leukemia  in first or greater remission  
 
  4.1.5.3 Myelodysplastic Syndrome  at least one of the following:  
 Treatment -related  
 Monosomy 7 , complex cytogenetics  or other high risk karyotype  
 IPSS score of 1.0 or greater  
 Neutropenia or cytopenia requiring transfusion not responding to therapy    
 Peripheral or BM blast count of  <10%  
 Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)  
 
  4.1.5.4 Acute lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoblastic lymphoma  
 2nd o r subsequent complete remission  (OR)  
 First complete remission:  
Acute lymphocytic leukemia with poor-risk features:  including but not 
limited to  [t (9; 22 ) or bcr -abl fusion, t(4;11) or other MLL translocation]   
or hypodiploidy; WBC >20,000/µl at diagnosis, no CR by day 28 of initial 
induction therapy, extramedullary leukemia or age >30 at diagnosis  
 Marrow blasts <5%, but persistence of minimal res idual disease by flow 
cytometry, cytogenetics or FISH  
 
  4.1.5.5 Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia / Prolymphocytic Leukemia  
 Previously treated disease that has either relapsed or failed to respond 
adequately to conventional -dose t herap y including purine analog s  
        
  4.1.5.6 Hodgkin’s or Non -Hodgkin’s Lymphoma ( including low-grade, 
mantle cell, and intermediate -grade/diffuse ) 
 Previously treated disease that has either relapsed or failed to respond 
adequately to conventional -dose t herapy or autologous trans plantation  
  
             4.1.5.7 Myeloproliferative  diseases (myelofibrosis, CMML)  
 
  4.1.5.8 Multiple Myeloma with relapse after a prior autologous transplant or 
eligible for allogeneic HSCT based on other risk factors  
 
Version 6/9/16 10 4.2 Exclusion Criteria for recipie nt  
 
4.2.1 Patients will not be excluded on the basis of sex, racial or ethnic  background.  
 
4.2.2 Poor cardiac function: left v entricular ejection fraction <40 % 
 
4.2.3 Poor pulmonary function: FEV 1 and FVC <50% predicted  
 
4.2.4 Poor liver function: bilir ubin >2 mg/dl (not due to hemolysis, Gilbert ’s or primary 
malignancy)  
 
4.2.5 Poor renal function: Creatinine >2.0mg/dl  or creatinine clearance (calculated 
creatinine clearance is permitted) < 40 mL/min  based on Traditional Cockcroft -Gault 
formula : 140 - age (yrs)   x Smaller of Actual Weight vs. Ideal Body Weight (kg)   / 72 x 
Serum creatinine (mg/dl)  
 
4.2.6  HIV-positive  
 
 
4.2.8 Women of childbearing potential who currently are pregnant or who are not 
practicing adequate contraception  
 
4.2.9 Patients who hav e any debilitating medical or psychiatric illness  which would 
preclude their giving informed consent or their  receiving optimal treatment and follow -
up.  
 
4.3 Criteria for donor selection  
 
4.3.1 Donors will be relatives  (parent, child, sibling) of the reci pient and be matched at 
3/6 – 5/6 loci (HLA -A, B, DR) with the recipient.  
 
4.3.2 Donors will be selected to avoid a positive HLA crossmatch in the host -versus -graft 
(HVG) direction  or high titer donor specific antibodies as determined by the pre -
transplant  panel reactive antibody (PRA) testing .  
 
Version 6/9/16 11 5. Treatment Plan  
 
Days –6 –2 Fludarabine 30 mg/M2 IV qd x 5 days (day -6 to -2) 
  
  
 
 
Days –1 Melphalan 140  mg/M2 IV qd x 1 dose (day -1) 
  
 
 
Day 0  Infuse unmanipulated PBSCs  
(Begin antibiotic prophylaxis)  
 
  

Days 3, 4  Cyclophosphamide  50 mg/kg IV q d  
 (hydration/Mesna)  
 
(First dose of C yclophosphamide  must be administered 48 -72 hr after infusion of PBSCs)  
 
  
 
Day 5    Begin Tacrolimus (target plasma level 5 -15)  
                MMF 15 mg/kg po tid with m aximum daily dose 3 gm/d  
 
  
 
Day 35      Discontinue MMF  
 
  
  
Day 180  Discontinue Tacrolimus  
 
 
Version 6/9/16 12  
5.1  Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Collection   
Peripheral blood stem cells will be collected by institutional guidelines following 
standard G -CSF-based mobiliza tion and infused on day 0.  Cryopreservation of the 
stem cell product prior to infusion is permissible.  
 
5.2    Stem Cell Processing  
Minor ABO incompatible marrow or stem cell grafts will be plasma reduced and 
washed.  Major ABO incompatible stem cell prod ucts will not require 
manipulation.   
 
5.3 Preparative Regimen  
5.3.1 Fludarabine  30 mg/m2 infused over 30 minutes once daily on five consecutive 
days (total dose, 1 50 mg/m2):  days -6, -5, -4, -3 and -2. 
 
5.3.2 Melphalan  140 mg/m2 infused on day -1.   
 
5.3.3 Veno -occlusive dis ease (VOD ) prophylaxis will include:  
 Ursodiol 300mg PO bid starting 24 hours prior to starting the p reparative 
regimen until day +30  post-transplant  
 
5.3.4 Stem Cell Infusion  (Day of Transplant) day 0 .  
 
5.4 Post-transplant Cyclophosphamide  
 
5.4.1 Cyclophosphamide  50mg/kg  will be given on D+3 post -transplant (within 48-72 
hr of PBSC  infusion) and on D+4 post -transplant. Cyclophosphamide will be 
given as an IV infusion over 1 - 2 hr (depending on volume) . Hydration and 
Mesna will be given according the institution’s standard  of care .   
 
5.5 Chemotherapy Dosing :  All  chemotherapy should be dosed based on the less er of actual 
or  ideal body weight for patients who weigh less than or equal to 130% of their 
IBW.  For patients who weigh more than 130% of their IBW, dosing should be 
based on the adjusted ideal body weight (AIBW).   
 
1.  Ideal Body Weight (IBW) Formulas:  
  Males IBW = 50 kg + 2.3 kg/inch over 5 feet  
  Females IBW = 45.5 + 2.3 kg/inch over 5 feet  
  For patients less than 5 feet, subtract 2.3 kg/inch  
2.  Adjusted Ideal Bod y Weight (AIBW) Formula:  
Version 6/9/16 13   AIBW = IBW + [(0.25) x (ABW – IBW)]  
Doses of Fludarabine and Cyclophosphamide will be adjusted as needed according to 
creatinine clearance:  
 
  Creatinine Clearance = (140-Age) x IBW ( x 0.85 for females)  
       72 x Serum Creatin ine 
 
 
 
CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC 
AGENT   
Calculated Creatinine 
Clearance  
51-60  
Calculated Creatinine 
Clearance  
30-50 
 
Fludarabine   
80% of total dose   
80% of total dose  
 
Cyclophosphamide   
100% of total dose   
75% of total dose  
 
 
5.6 Antibiotic prophylaxis and other s upportive care measures will be implemented 
according to institutional guidelines.   
 
5.7 Post-transplant immunosuppression : 
 
5.7.1 No immunosuppressive agents are given until 24 hours after the completion of 
PTCY.   This in cludes steroids as anti -emetics  
 
5.7.2 Tacrolimus 0.03mg/kg/day infuse  over 24 hours starting on day+5  (adjusted to 
maintain a trough level of 5-15 ng/ml) and switched to oral (twice -daily divided 
dose) on day 21 or when able to tolerate p.o.   Tacrolimus will be discontinued on 
day +180 , in the absence of  clinically significant GVHD.   
 
5.7.3 Mycophenolate Mofetil  (MMF)  15 mg/kg po tid with maximum daily dose 3 
gm/d , starting on day+5 .  MMF will be discontinued  on day +35 in the absence of 
clinically significant GVHD.  
 
5.8 Chimerism testing  
 
Version 6/9/16 14 5.8.1 Quantitation of chimerism : PCR -based analysis of DNA to detect short tandem 
repeats (STRs) will be used for quantitative chimerism  of post -transplant 
peripheral blood T -lymphocytes and myeloid cells.  The level of chimerism in 
each of these populations is rep resented by the percentage of the cells that are of 
donor origin.  Chimerism will be assessed beginning at day +30 .  If full donor 
chimerism is reached by day +30, it will be assessed per institutional guidelines 
for restaging.  If full donor chimerism is not reached by day +30, additional 
assessments will be done at day  +60, + 90 and then every four weeks (+/ - 3 days) 
until the goal of full donor chimerism is achieved. For the purposes of this 
protocol mixed chimerism will be defined as the detection of > 5% and < 9 5% 
cells of donor origin and full donor chimerism  will be defined as 95% cells of 
donor origin.   
 
5.9 Graft -versus -host disease will be evaluated, graded and managed by current BMT 
of Georgia GVHD standards found in the BMT of Georgia Supportive Care  
Manual.  
 
5.10 Restaging evaluations will occur per institutional standards at day +100, at 6 
months, 12 months, 18 months, 24 months, and 36 months.  
 
5.11 Treatment failure :  
 
5.11.1  Treatment failure is defined as (1) p atients that develop disease relapse and 
progression in spite of grade II -IV acute G VHD or extensive chronic GVHD, (2) 
patients with graft failure, or (3) patients with impending graft rejection as 
defined by low (<20%) or dropping T cell chimerism.  
 
5.11.2  Such patients will be considered a treatmen t failure and receive any additional 
treatment off -study  according to physician discretion . 
 
 
6. Adverse Event /Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
6.1 Patients will be monitored b y the investigators and data maintained by the 
Clinical Research Program.  All Adv erse Events will be graded with the Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0.  Adverse events  
will be monitored  for a period of three (3)  months post HSCT  (approximately 
D100 restaging)  and for st udy purposes will be defined as  
 
 Grade 2 , 3 and 4  unexpected  reactions that are deemed related  to study.  
 
Version 6/9/16 15  
6.2 Serious adverse events will be r eport ed by telephone or email to the In stitutional  
Review Board within 24 hours  of notification .  Written report will follow within 
10 working days.  S erious adverse events will be reported for a period of six (6) 
months  post HSCT (180 days)  
 
 
6.2.1 Procedure for reporting Serious and Unexpected Adverse Events  
Serious Adverse Events will be reported by telephone or email to the Institutional Review 
Board with in 24 hours of notification of event.  Written report will follow within 10 
working days.   Serious adverse events will be reported for a period of 6 months post -
transplant.   
Routine hospital admissions for expected side effects/complications of stem cell 
transplant such as fever, infection, mucositis or GVHD will not be reported to the IRB 
but will be recorded in the BMT database . Only hospitalizations that are for unexpected 
side effects of the transplant procedure will be reported to IRB as serious adver se events.  
  
 6.2.2   Definition of Serious and Unexpected Adverse Events:  
Serious Adverse Events are defined as one of the following:  
a. Death  
b. Life-Threatening  
c. Hospitalization (initial or prolonged)  
d. Disability  
e. Congenital Anomaly  
f. Requires Intervention to P revent Permanent Impairment or Damage  
 
Unexpected  is defined as:  
Not previously reported with the agents/devices or procedures being undertaken.  
Symptomatically and pathophysiologically  related to known toxicity but differs because of 
greater severity than  previously reported.  
 
7. Risk s and Toxicities  
7.1    Cyclophosphamide after graft infusion  
 
The major risk of participating in this research protocol is that shifting part of the standard 
HSCT  dose of cyclophosphamide after the graft infusion may damage the graf t. The 
Version 6/9/16 16 consequences of damaging the graft may include delayed hematologic recovery, graft failure, 
or treatment -related malignancy in donor cells. The risk of delayed hematologic recovery 
does not appear to be severe, because patients who have engrafted wi th donor cells in the 
setting of a nonmyeloablative preparative regimen incorporating the same post -HSCT  dose 
of cyclophosphamide experienced only approximately two weeks of neutropenia. This 
protocol is more intense than the non -ablative regimens and if p atients fail to engraft, this can 
be fatal . However, we expect this to be a rare complication for several reasons. First,  
hematopoietic stem cells express high levels of aldehyde dehydrogenase that detoxifies the 
active metabolite of cyclophospha mide, 4 hydroxycyclophospamide. Second, patients with 
acute hematologic malignancies who received a much less intensive preparative regimen that  
incorporated the same dose of cyclophosphamide after HSCT  all engrafted, and 
intensification of the preparative regimen reduces the likelihood of graft rejection. The risk of 
treatment -related malignancy in donor cells is difficult to estimate, but is likely to be similar 
to the 1% risk estimated after limited exposure to cyclophosphamide.  
 
7.2  Acute and Chronic GVHD  
 
The second major risk in participating in this research protocol is the risk of developing acute 
and/or chroni c GVHD given the use of a reduced intensity  preparative regimen followed by 
the infusion of PBSC from haploidentical donors. The degree of GVHD varies  from mild 
cutaneous reactions to extensive widespread and systemic involvement of skin, liver, and 
gastrointestinal tract.  The incidence of fatal infection is greater in patients developing 
GVHD due to the immunosuppressive nature of GVHD and its associa ted treatments. The 
development of g rade 3 or higher acute GVHD is considered clinically significant and 
associated with increased morbidity and non -relapse mortality. The likelihood of surviving 
severe GVHD is to a large part dependent on the age of the p atient and the patient’s overall 
condition. For the majority of the patients eligible for this trial who have high -risk 
hematologic malignancies, a moderate increase in GVHD may be accompanied by an 
increased graft -versus -malignancy (GVM)  benefit, so that the same long -term relapse free 
survival is maintained.  
 
7.3 Regimen -related toxicities   
 
Toxicities directly related to the administration of high -dose chemotherapy include 
gastrointestinal toxicity (nausea, vomiting, mucositis), alopecia, infertility (which  may be 
permanent), interstitial pneumonitis, idiopathic cardiomyopathy, hemorrhagic cystitis, 
hepatic venoocclusive disease, or multi -organ failure which may be fatal.  
Toxicities related to individual chemotherapy drugs are described in section 3.0.  
Version 6/9/16 17  
7.4             Infection  
 
Infection is a major cause of morbidity in allo HSCT and is a major concern in these patients.  
Infections may be bacterial, viral, parasitic, or fungal.  Often, these infections are life -
threatening, particularly when caused by viral o r fungal organisms, and are associated with 
high mortality in the transplant population.  
 
7.5  Aplasia /Graft Failure  
Pancytopenia is an expected side effect of allogeneic HS CT with the use of reduced intensity 
preparative regimens. Given the previous exper ience with post -transplant cyclophosphamide 
in other trials, we would expect the duration of aplasia to be relatively short. Prolonged 
aplasia can result from the failure of donor PBSC to engraft and is usually fatal.  
  
 
8. STUDY PARAMETERS  
 
8.1  Non-relapse  mortality  
 
Non-relapse  mortality, which is defined as death in the absence of relapse  or progression, 
will be characterized at 100 days and at one year after HSCT . 
 
8.2  Relapse  
 
The secondary objective of this protocol is to characterize overall and progr ession free  
survival following reduced intensity  conditioning and transplantation of  PBSCs from 
partially HLA -mismatched related donors. High clinical suspicion  of relapse will most likely 
lead to a disease -specific evaluation . Cytogenetic studies or decre asing donor chimerism also 
increase the suspicion of relapse as well and can sometimes detect asymptomatic relapse in 
routine protocol -related marrow samples. If there is evidence of early relapse and no 
evidence of GVHD following HSCT , immunosuppressive t herapy may be discontinued 
earlier than indicated in Section 5. 7. If there is evidence of low donor chimerism and no 
evidence of GVHD, patients may be eligible for subsequent donor lymphocyte infusions.  
 
8.3  Hematologic recovery  
 
A secondary endpoint of t his Phase II trial is time to recovery of circulating  neutrophils and 
platelets (following chemotherapy). Neutrophil recovery is defined  as the first day of three 
consecutive lab values on different days, after the  conditioning regimen -induced nadir of 
blood counts, that the absolute neutrophil  count is > 500/μL. Platelet recovery is defined as 
the first day of three consecutive  lab values on different days, after the conditioning regimen -
Version 6/9/16 18 induced nadir of blood  counts, that the platelet count is ≥ 20,000 /μL without platelet 
transfusion support in  the seven days prior.  
 
8.4  Donor chimerism  
 
Chimerism will be assessed beginning at day +30.  If full donor chimerism is reached by day 
+30, it will be assessed per institutional guidelines for restaging.  If full donor chimerism is 
not reached by day +30, additional assessments will be done at day  +60, +90 and then every 
four weeks (+/ - 3 days) until the goal of full donor chimerism is achieved. For the purposes 
of this protocol mixed chimerism will be defined as the detection of > 5% and < 95% cells of 
donor origin and full donor chimerism  will be defined as 95% cells of donor origin.  
 
8.5  GVHD  
 
Patients will be followed for development of acute and chronic GVHD using  standard 
criteria.  
 
9. FOLLOW UP/OFF STUDY CRI TERIA  
 
9.1  Patients will be considered to be off study if disease relapse occurs and additional 
treatment is received .  No subsequent adverse or serious adverse event reporting will be 
done .  Further follow up off study will be  according to institutional requirements.   (For 
purposes of the study, donor lymphocyte infusions will not be considered “additional 
treatment.”)  
 
9.2  Patients will be considered to have completed study follow up at 6 months  post 
HSCT and will be removed from “on study” status .  Further off study follow up will be  
according to institutional requirements . 
 
10 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
The primary objective of this phase II clinical trial is to estimate the incidence of graft rejection 
and severe graft versus -host diseas e (GVHD) fol lowing r educed  intensity , HLA -mismatched 
HSCT  for patients with high risk hematologic malignancies. A secondary objective is to obtain 
estimates of overall survival (OS), relapse, non -relapse mortality (NRM), and event -free survival 
(EFS) in patients recei ving myeloablative conditioning and transplantation of partially human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) -mismatched bone marrow from first -degree relatives.  
 
We will plan to accrue 30 patients  that will be enough to test the following hypothesis:  For the 
graft fail ure endpoint we will test the hypotheses H0: p=1 0% versus Ha: p<1 0% using a one -
sided exact Binomial test. Assume that none of patients undergoing the proposed regimen will 
Version 6/9/16 19 have graft failure, the power for confirming p less than 15% is always 100% if the null 
hypothesis is rejected. The size of at least 29 patients is needed to achieve rejection of the null 
hypothesis at the 5% significance level.  
 
Stopping criterion:  
 
10.1  NRM : As outlined in Section 2.0 (Background), the overall nonrelapse  mortality 
on the phase I nonmyeloablative haploidentical HSCT  trial utilizing 2 doses of post -
transplantation Cy, MMF and tacrolimus was approximately 19% at one year. Other 
haploidentical HSCT  trials, both nonmyeloablative and ablative have shown NRM in the 
range of 30-40%, mostly from infectious causes. The working hypothesis of this trial is 
that the overall toxicity of reduced intensity  haplo identical HSCT  is less  than that of 
haploidentical HSCT  after myeloablative conditioning u tilizing PTCY . Therefor e we 
adopt t he stopping rule that  a NRM incidence is greater than 30% after a minimum 
enrollment of 5 patients. The stopping boundaries are presented in the following table.   
 
 
Number of enrollment  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 15 
Suspend trial if NRM 
occurs in r patients  r ≥ 2  r ≥ 2 r ≥ 3  r ≥ 3  r ≥ 3  r ≥ 4 r ≥ 4  r ≥ 5  
 
 
 
 
10.2   Severe acute GVHD : The incidence of severe aGVHD (Gr ades III -IV)) on the 
myeloablative haploidentical HSCT  trial utilizing 2 doses  of PTCY , MMF and  tacrolimus 
was approximately 23 %. The working hypothesis  of this trial is that the overall toxicity of 
reduced intensity conditioning should not be significantly more than that seen with 
myeloablative conditioning utilizing  post-transplantation Cy. Therefore we adopt the 
stopping rule that an incidence o f III-IV aGVHD  is greater than 35% after a minimum 
enrollment of 5 patients.  The stopping boundaries are presented in the following table.  
 
 
Number of enrollment  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 15 
Suspend trial if severe acute 
GVHD occurs in r patients  r ≥ 2  r ≥ 3  r ≥ 3  r ≥ 3  r ≥ 4  r ≥ 4  r ≥ 4  r ≥ 6  
 
10.3   Engraftment Failure:   As outlined in Section 2.0 (Background), the incidence of 
engraftment failure on the phase I nonmyeloablative haploidentical HSCT  trial utilizing 2 doses 
of post -transplantation  Cy, MMF and tacrolimus was approximately 18%. All patients in the two 
Version 6/9/16 20 myeloablative stu dies at our center engrafted. It  is concerning that with the intensity of flu/mel, 
patients are not going to recover their own count if they fail to engraft . The workin g hypothesis 
of this trial is that the overall toxicity of reduced intensity haplo  HSCT  is not significantly 
greater than haploidentical HSCT  after nonmyeloablative conditioning utilizing PTCY . 
Therefore we adopt the stopping rule that an incidence of engr aftment failure is greater than 30% 
after a minimum enrollment of 5 patients. The stopping boundaries are presented in the 
following table.  
 
 
Number of enrollment  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 15 
Suspend trial if engraftment 
failure occurs in r patients  r ≥ 2  r ≥ 2  r ≥ 3 r ≥ 3  r ≥ 3  r ≥ 4 r ≥ 4  r ≥ 5  
 
 
If any of the above stopping criteri a is met, accrual to the trial will be temporarily halted, until a 
decision regarding either modification or termination of the trial could be made.   
 
Version 6/9/16 21  
11. REFERENCES  
 
1. Szydlo R, Goldman JM, Klein JP, Gale RP, Ash RC, Bach FH, et al. Results of 
allogeneic bone marrow transplants for leukemia using donors other than HLA -identical siblings. 
Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clin ical Oncology. 
1997;15(5):1767 -77. 
2. Anasetti C, Amos D, Beatty PG, Appelbaum FR, Bensinger W, Buckner CD, et al. Effect 
of HLA compatibility on engraftment of bone marrow transplants in patients with leukemia or 
lymphoma. The New England journal of medic ine. 1989;320(4):197 -204. 
3. Kernan NA, Flomenberg N, Dupont B, O'Reilly RJ. Graft rejection in recipients of T -
cell-depleted HLA -nonidentical marrow transplants for leukemia. Identification of host -derived 
antidonor allocytotoxic T lymphocytes. Transplant ation. 1987;43(6):842 -7. 
4. Aversa F, Terenzi A, Tabilio A, Falzetti F, Carotti A, Ballanti S, et al. Full haplotype -
mismatched hematopoietic stem -cell transplantation: a phase II study in patients with acute 
leukemia at high risk of relapse. Journal of clinical oncology : officia l journal of the American 
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2005;23(15):3447 -54. 
5. Bashey A, Solomon SR. T -cell replete haploidentical donor transplantation using post -
transplant CY: an emerging standard -of-care option for patients who lack an HLA -identical 
sibling donor. Bone marrow transplantation. 2014;49(8):999 -1008.  
6. O'Donnell PV, Luznik L, Jones RJ, Vogelsang GB, Leffell MS, Phelps M, et al. 
Nonmyeloablative bone marrow transplantation from partially HLA -mismatched related donors 
using posttransplantat ion cyclophosphamide. Biology of blood and marrow transplantation : 
journal of the American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. 2002;8(7):377 -86. 
7. Solomon SR, Sizemore CA, Sanacore M, Zhang X, Brown S, Holland HK, et al. 
Haploidentical transpla ntation using T cell replete peripheral blood stem cells and myeloablative 
conditioning in patients with high -risk hematologic malignancies who lack conventional donors 
is well tolerated and produces excellent relapse -free survival: results of a prospectiv e phase II 
trial. Biology of blood and marrow transplantation : journal of the American Society for Blood 
and Marrow Transplantation. 2012;18(12):1859 -66. 
8. Solomon SR, Sizemore CA, Sanacore M, Zhang X, Brown S, Holland HK, et al. Total 
Body Irradiation -Based Myeloablative Haploidentical Stem Cell Transplantation Is a Safe and 
Effective Alternative to Unrelated Donor Transplantation in Patients Without Matched Sibling 
Donors. Biology of blood and marrow transplantation : journal of the American Society for  
Blood and Marrow Transplantation. 2015.  
 
 