 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   1 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018 PHASE 1, DOUBLE- BLIND, PLACEBO -CONTROLLED ASSESSMENT OF 
POTENTIAL INTERACTIONS BETWEEN  
INTRAVENOUS COCAINE AND CLAVULANIC ACID [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
U54 Principal Investigator :  Kyle M. Kampman, M.D. 
 Principal Investigator:   Mary F. Morrison, M.D., M.S. 
Project 1     Professor of Psychiatry  
Lewis Katz School of Medicine Temple University  
1316 West Ontario Street, Room 800 Philadelphia, PA  19140 T: 215-707-8688 C: 610-247-2126  
Co-Investigator:     M. Ingre Walters, M.D. 
 Co-Investigator    
and Medical Monitor:   Kyle M. Kampman, M.D. 
 Statistician:     Kevin Lynch, Ph.D.      
 
Version :           2.3 
 NIDA Investigators:   [name ]   
NIDA Study Manager:  [name ] 
     National Institute on Drug Abuse  
National Institutes of Health  
6001 Executive Boulevard Bethesda, MD 20892 301/443-3318 
 Funding Agency:
   Division of Pharmacotherapies and Medical Consequences  
of Drug Abuse National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) National Institutes of Health  
Center for Cocaine Medication Development University of Pennsylvania 
 Data Coordinating Center:  University of Pennsylvania 
     Perelman School of Medicine Department of Psychiatry  
 
 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   2 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018  
 2  SYNOPSIS OF STUDY  
Title  Phase 1, Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled 
Assessment of Potential Interactions 
Between Intravenous Cocaine and 
Clavulanic Acid  
Short Title  CLAV and Cocaine Interaction Safety Study  
Phase  Phase Ib  
Methodology  This is a prospective, placebo controlled 
inpatient crossover safet y study of 3 doses (250 
mg/day, 500 mg/day, 750 mg/day ) of CLAV 
with an intravenous infusion of cocaine 40 mg. Subjects will be non- treatment seeking 
experienced cocaine dependent adult s, ages 18 -
65 (N=12 completers, 21 estimated to enroll). Subjects will undergo a washout of the study drug for 5 half-lives between study drug 
administration sessions.  
Study D uration  Approximately 1.5 years.  
Study C enter  Temple Episcopal Hospital.  Centennial 6th 
floor, an inpatient medical unit with telemetry.  
Primary Objective  To determine whether there are clinically 
significant adverse interactions between CLAV (250 mg/day; 500 mg/day; 750 mg/day) and intravenously administered cocaine in healthy, non-treatment seeking adults with cocaine use 
disorder . 
Secondary Objectives  1. To evaluate whether administration of 
CLAV alters the pharmacokinetics (PK) of cocaine or its major metabolite, benzoylecgonine (BE). 
2. To determine PK of CLAV during treatme nt 
at 250 mg/day (low dose) and 500 mg/day (medium dose).  
3. To evaluate whether there are significant interactions between CLAV treatment concurrent with i.v. cocaine infusions of 40 mg by measuring the diameter of the pupil using a 
pupillometer.  
Explora tory Objectives  3. To evaluate whether CLAV treatment alters 
the subjective effects of cocaine, the perceived value of the dose of cocaine, and craving.  
4. To assess the effects of clavulanic acid on 
mood and personality and on the abuse 
 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   3 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018 liability.  
Outcome Measures  Primary outcome measure is safety which will 
be measured by AEs, BP, HR, and ECG QTc 
interval. Secondary outcome measures include PK parameters of cocaine, PK parameters of CLAV, pupillometry.  Exploratory outcome measures are subjective effects measuremen ts 
assessed for cocaine in combination with 
CLAV and CLAV alone. Effect on mood 
(POMS), abuse liability (ARCI), and subjective effects measurements (VAQ, VAS)  will be  
obtained.  The effect of CLAV on cocaine craving will be assessed using the CCQ -Brief. 
The DVQ will be used to determine the 
perceived value of each dose of cocaine.  
Number of P articipants  12 completers, 21 estimated to enroll.  
Diagnosis and Main Inclusion C riteria  Non-treatment seeking adults with cocaine use 
disorder, moderate to severe, ages 18 -65. 
Study Product, Dose, Route, R egimen  Clavulanic acid 250 mg/day (always given 
before 500 mg dose ); 500 mg/day or placebo. 
Study drug doses administered on Days 2, 3, and 4 in a double- blind fashion.  
Clavulanic acid 750 mg/day dose will always be given on Study Day 5 in a single-blind fashion if both the low and medium doses are 
well tolerated . 
Duration of A dministration  6 day inpatient study, acute oral dosing of 
CLAV 250 mg/day, 500 mg/day, 750 mg/day 
and matching  placebo  
Reference T herapy  Placebo  
Statistical M ethodology  Data are gathered from  a 3 period, 3 treatment 
crossover design (except 750 mg dose). Our primary analyses compare the rates of occurrences of adverse events across the first three periods  (250 mg, 500 mg, placebo) within 
each person using standard mixed effects 
ANOVA models for binary responses.  
      
 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   4 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018 3  MODEL STUDY SCHEMA 
    
 
-30 to 0   Pre-intake screening  
Screening Infusion #2 – 40 mg cocaine i.v.  Study Day  Activity 
 
 
2   
   3    Treatment Infusion #1 –40 mg cocaine i.v.  
   Discharge  
 
 
 
   Screening Infusion  #1 – 20 mg cocaine i.v.  
Clavulanic acid/placebo administration  
on days 2 through 4 
 4 
       6      
  
5 
 5-8 days after discharge  
 
     
 
     
     1    
Randomization   
Treatment Infusion #2 –40 mg cocaine i.v.  
Treatment Infusion #3 –40 mg cocaine i.v.  
Treatment Infusion #4 –40 mg cocaine i.v. with 
Clavulanic acid administration   
(750 mg, single- blind) if Days 2 -4 are well 
tolerated OR Discharge  -30 to 0  
Follow -up Visit  Buprenorphine plus naloxone stabilization 
period for opiate -dependent subjects  
 
Intake and inpatient screening  
 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   5 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018 4   ABSTRACT  
STUDY OBJECTIVES: This is a human laboratory clinical pharmacology study to assess 
potential interactions between intravenous cocaine and treatment with clavulanic acid (CLAV) . 
 Primary : The primary objective of this study is to determine if there are significant interactio ns 
between CLAV treatment concurrent with i.v. cocaine infusions of 40 mg by measuring the frequency of adverse events and cardiovascular responses [heart rate (HR), blood pressure (BP), and electrocardiogram (ECG)] in adult subjects with cocaine use disor der.  
 Secondary:  
 1. To evaluate whether the acute administration of CLAV alters the pharmacokinetics (PK) of 
cocaine or its major metabolite, benzoylecgonine (BE) in adult subjects with cocaine use disorder. 
2. To determine PK of CLAV in adult subjects with cocaine use disorder during treatment at 250 mg/day (low dose) and 500 mg/day ( medium dose) . 
3. To evaluate whether there are significant pharmacodynamic (PD)  interactions between 
CLAV treatment (250 mg, 500 mg) concurrent with i.v. cocaine infusions of 40 mg by measuring the diameter of the pupil using a pupillometer. 
 Exploratory: 
 1. To evaluate whether CLAV treatment alters the subjective effects of cocaine measured by 
Visual Analog Questionnaire (VAQ) and the V isual Analog Scales (VAS), the perceived 
value of the dose of cocaine measured by the Drug Value Questionnaire (DVQ), and craving 
measured by Cocaine Craving Questionnaire- Brief (CCQ -Brief).  
2. To assess the effects of clavulanic acid on mood and personality  using the Profile of Mood 
States (POMS) and on the abuse liability using the Addiction Research Center Inventory 
(ARCI).   
3. To evaluate the safety of CLAV treatment concurrent with iv cocaine infusions with subjects with combined cocaine and opiate use diso rder whose opiate use disorder symptoms are 
stabilized on buprenorphine plus naloxone. 
4. To evaluate the safety and  whether there are significant PD interactions between CLAV 
treatment 750 mg concurrent with i.v. cocaine infusions of 40 mg.  
 STUDY ENDPOINTS :  
 Primary endpoint :  Safety and toleration as assessed by  the rates of occurrence of adverse 
events across the three study periods wi thin each subject .   In addition, the following 
cardiovascular measures wil l be assessed  during the three study periods: supine vital signs 
measurements ( BP, HR) and ECG standard 12- lead monitoring  (QTc prolongation).   
 Secondary endpoints : 
 
1. PK of cocaine alone will be compared statistically with PK  when both Cocaine and 
CLAV (250 mg, 500 mg) are present . Both the PK of cocaine and its major metabolite, 
 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   6 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018 BE, will be evaluated with both doses of CLAV.  PK will be sampled close to T max and drug 
levels during combination therapy will be compared with drug levels during treatment with 
each drug alone.  
2. PK of CLAV alone will be compared statistically at both doses of CLAV (250 mg, 500 mg) PK will be sampled close to T
max. If possible, important gende r differences in CLAV PK 
will be explored. 
3. PD. Pupil diameter  (over time ) after Cocaine infusion alone (with PBO) will be compared 
with pupil diameter ( over time ) after Cocaine infusion with CLAV at both doses (250 mg, 
500 mg). 
Exploratory:  
1. Subjective effects  of cocaine alone  (PBO)  will be  compared with subjective effects of 
cocaine and CLAV (250 mg, 500 mg, 750 mg)  using both the Visual Analog Questionnaire 
(VAQ) and the Visual Analog Scales (VAS)  for each condition (COC+PBO vs. 
COC+CLAV).  The perceived value of cocaine alone (PBO) will be compared with the 
perceived value of cocaine in combination with CLAV (250 mg, 500 mg, 750 mg) using the Drug Value Questionnaire (DVQ) for  each condition (COC+PBO vs. COC+CLAV).   
Cocaine craving  associated with cocaine alone (PBO) will be compared with the craving 
associated with cocaine and CLAV (250 mg, 500 mg, 750 mg) using measured by Cocaine Craving Questionnaire- Brief (CCQ -Brief).  
 2. The subjective effects of clavulanic acid  without cocaine  (250 mg, 500 mg, and 750 mg) on 
mood and personality will be assessed using the Profile of Mood States (POMS) score for each dose of CLAV compared with the score on PBO. The effects of CLAV on  the abuse 
liability using the Addiction Research Center Inventor y (ARCI)  will be compared at each 
dose of CLAV (250 mg, 500 mg, and 750 mg) compared with PBO score. 
 
3. Safety of clavulanic acid and buprenorphine in combination with cocaine. Safety and toleration as assessed by  the rates of occurrence of adverse events across the three study 
periods within each subject  with comorbid cocaine and opiate use disorder.   In addition, the 
following cardiovascular measures will be assessed during the three study periods: supine vital signs measurements (BP, HR) and ECG standard 12- lead monitoring (QTc 
prolongation).  
 
4. Safety of 750 mg clavulanic acid dose.  Safety and toleration as assessed by  the occurrence 
of adverse events compared with adverse events on placebo.    In addition, the following cardiovascular measures will be assessed and compared with placebo: supine vital signs measurements (BP, HR) and ECG standard 12 -lead monitoring (QTc prolongation).  
 STUDY DESIGN:  This is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled inpatient cross-over 
study of CLAV for Cocaine Use Disorder (CUD). The crossover study will involve acute oral 
administration of two (2) doses of CLAV (250 mg/day; 500 mg/day); (low and medium ) and 
matched oral placebo in 12 (12 completers, 21 enrolled) healthy non- treatment seeking CUD 
adult subjects for each drug. The study is performed in an inpa tient medical unit (Centennial 6) 
 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   7 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018 at Temple -Episcopal Hospital (T -EH) to determine the safety of the CLAV in combination with 
cocaine (COC).  
 
STUDY DURATION:  Study duration will include up to six (6) days on an inpatient unit in 
addition to the pre- intake  screening and follow up visit. The pre -intake screening will last up to 
30 days. The inpatient period will include:  
 
• One (1) outpatient day of intake and admission screening (Day # -30 – 0)  
• One (1) inpatient day of screening cocaine infusions (Day #1) 
• Four (4) days of inpatient treatment with CLAV or placebo  with i.v. cocaine infusions of 
40 mg (Days #2 through #5) 
 Clinic discharge is on Day # 6 unless subject safety precludes them from completing Study Day 
#5. L iver function test results , hematology st udies, CPK results,  vital signs, and 
occurrence/severity of adverse events (AEs) will be reviewed  after Study Day #4 to determine 
eligibility for Study Day #5 at 750 mg.   Subjects will be requested to return for follow -up at 5 -8 days after the day of disc harge.  If 
subjects have a positive urine for cocaine on inpatient admission, they have the option of being admitted for observation for 24 hours and commencing Study Day #1 on the next day.  Subjects with severe cocaine use disorders have difficulty not using cocaine in their community to obtain a negative urine for cocaine.  Subjects with combined cocaine and opiate use disorder must have 
a positive urine test for buprenorphine on admission and a negative test for other opiates to be eligible for Day #1 screening that day. Subjects with a positive test for buprenorphine as well as other opiates will be evaluated on a case by case basis for commencing Study Day #1 after being observed for 24 hours in the hospital.  SAMPLE SIZE:  Twenty -one (21) subjects are estimated to enroll, with 12 expected to complete 
the study.  Study subjects who complete the inpatient phase of the study will be considered 
completed subjects. Subjects will continue to be screened until the total number (n= 12) have 
completed the study.  
 
POPULATION: Volunteer experienced cocaine users, 18 -to-65 years of age, who have used 
cocaine by the smoked or i.v. route at least twice a week for at least four (4) of the past six (6) weeks and provided a positive urine test for cocaine within two weeks of entering the study.            
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  1. Schedule for Inpatient CLAV Study  
DAY 2  
 DAY 3  
 DAY 1  
COCAINE  
20 mg  
COCAINE  
40 mg  
COCAINE  
40 mg  
CLAV 250 mg  
PLACEBO  
CLAV 250 mg  
COCAINE  
40 mg  
CLAV 500 mg  
PLACEBO  
CLAV 250 mg  
DAY 4  
 DAY 5  
 DAY 6  
COCAINE  
40 mg  
COCAINE  
40 mg  
CLAV 500 mg  
CLAV 500 mg  
PLACEBO  
CLAV 750 mg  
DISCHARGE 
DAY  
 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   8 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018 TREATMENTS:  The initial crossover study will involve acute oral administration of 2 doses of 
CLAV  (250 mg/day; 500 mg/day); (low and medium ) and matched oral placebo. Subject will 
potentially have four (4) cocaine infusions after randomization, one with C LAV 250 mg, one 
with CLAV 500 mg (always given after 250 mg dose) and one with placebo (See Figure 1).  If 
subjects tolerate the low and medium dose of cocaine with mild adverse effects, have stable vital signs and bloodwork results that indicate it is saf e for them to proceed , they are given 750 
mg/day dose on study day #5 on a single blind basis. Subjects will be randomized after the screening cocaine infusion of 40 mg i.v. (Day #1) to one of the following arms:           Treatment Arm 1:  Day #2: CLAV 250  mg (low dose); Day #3: CLAV 500 mg; Day #4: Placebo ; 
Day #5: CLAV 750 mg.  Treatment Arm 2:  Day #2: CLAV 250 mg (low dose); Day #3: Placebo; Day #4: CLAV 500 mg; 
Day #5: CLAV 750 mg.  Treatment Arm 3 :  Day #2: Placebo; Day #3: CLAV 250 mg (low dose); Day #4: CLAV 500 mg; 
Day #5: CLAV 750 mg. 
Table 1. Cocaine Infusion Session Schedule  
 
Study 
Phase  Infusion        
Number  Study 
Day Infusion  
Screening  
Stage II  Safety 
Infusion #1 1 Single -blind infusion of COC 20 mg  IV  
Screening 
Stage II  Safety 
Infusion #2 1 Single -blind infusion of COC 40 mg IV at least 2 hours 
45 minutes after initial infusion  
Treatment  Treatment 
Infusion #1 2 Single -blind infusion of COC 40 mg IV 60 minutes post 
CLAV /placebo administration  
Treatment  Treatment 
Infusion #2 3 Single -blind infusion of COC 40 mg IV 60 minutes post 
CLAV /placebo administration  
Treatment  Treatment 
Infusion #3  4 Single -blind infusion of COC 40 mg IV 60 minutes post 
CLAV/ placebo administration  
Treatment  Treatment 
Infusion #4  5 Single -blind infusion of COC 40 mg IV 60 minutes post 
single -blind CLAV 750 mg administration  
 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
5.1  Outcome Measures 
5.1.1  Primary Outcome Measures 
The primary outcome measures are adverse events and cardiovascular responses (HR, BP, ECG  
(QTc prolongation ). Safety and toleration as assessed by  the rates of occurrence of adverse 
events across the three study periods  (250 mg, 500 mg, PBO) wi thin each subject .  
 5.1.2  Secondary Outcome Measures Secondary outcome measures are intended to determine if there are any changes in cocaine 
pharmacokinetics in the presence of clavul anic acid (250 mg, 500 mg) after acute dosing of 
 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   9 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018 CLAV.  The pharmacokinetics of clavulanic acid at 2 doses (250 mg, 500 mg) will be 
determined in non-treatment seeking adults with cocaine use disorder.  The pharmacodynamic effects of clavulanic acid in com bination with cocaine will be determined by measuring the 
diameter of the subject’s pupil after the cocaine infusion.  
 
5.1.3  Exploratory Outcome Measures  
 
Exploratory outcome measures are intended to evaluate whether if there are any changes in the subjective effects of cocaine in the presence of clavulanic acid (250 mg, 500 mg, 750 mg) after acute dosing of CLAV.  The subjective effects of clavulanic acid without cocaine in non-treatment seeking adults with cocaine use disorder will be assessed at all do ses (250  mg, 500 mg, 
750 mg).  
 
5.2   Data Analysis Plan 5.2.1  Primary Outcome Measures 
 
The primary objective of this study is to assess the safety and tolerability of CLAV in combination with cocaine to generate data regarding the safety of the combination of CLAV and cocaine in relevant doses of both drugs. This is required prior to an outpatient efficacy study of CLAV for cocaine use disorders. Secondary objectives are to assess whether cocaine alters serum levels of CLAV and to assess serum levels of CLAV at both doses of CLAV in study subjects . Exploratory objectives are to assess the sub jective ratings of drug effects with regard to 
craving and mood.  Summary statistics will be provided for all safety, tolerability and subjective data.  In addition to the analyses specified below, listings of all data for each patient will be provided. 
5.2.1.1 Demographic and Baseline Comparability Analyses 
Demographic variables will be summarized for all for male and female patients.  
5.2.1.2  Primary , Secondary , and Exploratory Analyses 
 
5.2.1.2.1  Primary Analyses: Safety is a primary assessment variabl e.  The number of patients 
reporting each AE by treatment group and severity will be presented.  Adverse events will be tabulated by body system and organ class.   In addition, all adverse events (AE’s) noted during the study will be listed.  The listings will include each occurrence of the AE, when it was 
reported, the severity and the duration. Adverse event data will be compiled for CLAV at all  
doses (250 mg, 500 mg, 750 mg) and placebo and presented as summary statistics by organ system. Our primary analyses will compare the rates of occurrence of adverse events across the 
three -periods within each person. The data are gathered using a 3-period 3- treatment crossover 
design. Safety concerns constrain us to restrict the order of administration of the 2 study drug doses of CLAV, so each subject receives the doses in increasing order. Thus, we have three sequences: {PBO, Low (250 mg), Medium (500 mg)}, {Low, PBO, Medium}, and {Low, Medium, PBO}. One third of the subjects are randomized to each of these sequences. Each period is a 1 day session and the periods correspond to days 2, 3, and 4, providing 24 half- lives 
between administrations. The main explanatory variables in the mod els are: 1) a 3 level within -
 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   10 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018 subject factor representing drug condition (PBO, study drug low dose (SDlow), study drug 
medium dose (SD medium), and 2) a three level factor representing period (1, 2, and 3). We use 
standard mixed effects (repeated measures) A NOVA models for binary responses in three -period 
three -treatment crossover designs to test our hypotheses.73 An overall F-test of the condition 
effect will test for differences in response across the three drug doses, and contrasts will determine the pattern of differences (if any). Mixed effects models can allow for different error variances for different sessions, and other complex error structures as needed. As this study has only three repeated measures, a relatively simple covariance structure model (e.g. heterogeneous compound symmetry model) should be sufficient to account for within- subject correlations.  
 Pharmacodynamic parameters (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, heart rate and QT
C interval, 
expressed as AUC, 2 -minute values and maximal value s) will be similarly analyzed.  The COC 
infusions occur on the day of each session, providing three repeated sets of measures of each COC related response ( change in HR, change in SBP, change in DBP, change in QT
c interval,).  
 HR and BP (systolic BP  (SBP)  and diastolic BP  (DBP )) and QT
C induced by cocaine infusion 
will be compared to HR and BP and QT C measurements before the cocaine infusion to assess 
change. BP and HR and QT C changes after infusion given after CLAV (250 mg, 500 mg, 750 
mg) will be c ompared to those without CLAV. We will compare the distribution of Area Under 
Curve (AUC) summaries of the within -period repeated measures of changes in vital signs (heart 
rate, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure) across the three-periods wi thin each 
person as described above.  QT
C interval measured by the ECG induced by cocaine infusion will be compared to QT C 
interval before the cocaine infusion to assess change. QT C interval changes after infusion given 
after CLAV (250 mg, 500 mg, 750 mg) will be compared to those without CLAV. We will compare the distribution of Area Under Curve (AUC) summaries of the within -period repeated 
measures of changes in QTc interval across the three- periods within each person as described 
above.  5.2.1.2.2  Secondary Analyses: The pharmacokinetic parameters will be statistically analyzed using a repeated measure analysis of variance model.   
 5.2.1.2.3  Exploratory Analyses:  Subjective effects of cocaine, as measured by check lists, visual analog an d rating scales, will be listed for each patient and summarized for each group . 
Adverse events for the CLAV 750 mg group will be analyzed as described above for the lower CLAV doses. Adverse events for the subset of subjects stabilized on Buprenorphine wil l be 
analyzed as described above.  
 
5.2.2  Secondary Outcome Measures Secondary outcome measures are intended to determine if there are any changes in cocaine 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in the presence of clavulanic acid (250 mg, 500 mg).  The pharmacokinetics of clavulanic acid will be determined in non -treatment seeking adults with 
cocaine use disorder.  The COC infusions occur on the day of each session, providing four repeated sets of measures of each COC related response (PK, PD as determined  by change in 
 
Protocol Clavulanic Acid - Cocaine Interaction Study   11 
Version 2. 3 Date: February 2 2, 2018 pupil diameter from baseline).  PK curves for single dose CLAV at 250 mg and 500 mg will be 
constructed for all subjects and then for men and women, separately.   
 
5.2.3 Exploratory Outcome Measures Data regarding CLAV’s effect on subjective effects and motivation for COC will be considered 
exploratory regarding efficacy, as subjects receive acute treatment.   
 