Official Title:  Randomized, Double -Blind, Vehicle -Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of 
HylaCareTM in the Treatment of Acute Skin Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam 
Radiotherapy for Tumors of the Breast.  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Protocol Date: May 07, 2014 – Version 5  
1 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  STUDY TITLE:  Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle-Controlled Pilot Study 
of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM in the Treatment 
of Acute Skin Changes in Patients Undergoing External 
Beam Radiotherapy for Tumors of the Breast. 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  STU 092012-058  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Asal Shoushtari Rahimi M.D., M.S.      
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center 
Department of Radiation Oncology 
 
CO Investigators:        Ann Spangler MD 
Department of Radiation Oncology 
 
Dan Garwood MD 
Department of Radiation Oncology 
 
Marilyn Leitch MD 
Department of Surgery 
 
Roshni Rao MD 
Department of Surgery 
 
Barbara Haley MD 
Department of Medical Oncology 
 
Chul Ahn, PhD 
Professor 
Department of Clinical Sciences 
5323 Harry Hines Blvd 
Dallas, TX 75390-9066 (214) 648-9418 
 
 NUMBER OF PATIENTS TO  
BE TREATED:    30 
     
 
ESTIMATED START DATE:   2013 
 
 
TEST ARTICLES:    HylaCare
TM (Test Serum) 
     Placebo (Control) 
Vehicle 
 
SPONSOR'S NAME AND  
ADDRESS:    Hylaco, LLC 
        3401 Lee Parkway Suite 1504 
        Dallas, TX  75219 
 
:        
 
Version Date 
2 March 6,2013 
3 August 6, 2013 
                          4            October 3, 2013 
                          5                May 7, 2014 
 
 
2 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  This confidential information is provided to you as an investigat or or potential investigator to be reviewed by you, your 
staff, and applicable institutional review board. It is understood  that this information will not be disclosed to others 
without written authorization from Hylaco. 
3 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1. INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE 
 
2. BACKGROUND 
 2.1 Study Objectives  3. STUDY DESIGN  4. STUDY PROCEDURES 
 4.1 Subject Selection Criteria 
 4.2  Study Duration  4.3  Data Collection  4.4  Concomitant Medication  4.5  General Plan 
 4.6  Test Article Blinding and Administration 
 5. SOURCE OF RESEARCH MATERIAL 
5.1  HylaCare
TM and Vehicle Control 
5.2  Proper Handling and Storage 
 6. EVALUATION AND CONSENT  6.1  Baseline Procedures (Visit #BL)  6.2  Table of Baseline and Subsequent Assessments  6.3  Final Visit  6.4  Informed Consent 
 
7.  EFFICACY PARAMETERS  8.  POTENTIAL RISKS  8.1 Definition of Adverse Events 
 8.2 Severity of Adverse Events 
 8.3 Steps to Determine if an Adverse Event Requires Expedited Reporting  9. DATA MONITORING  9.1  Statistical and Analytical Methods  9.2  Subject Safety 
 9.3  Monitoring Procedures 
 9.4  Handling of Dropouts or Patients Lost to Follow-Up  9.5  Discontinuation of Patients from Study  10. PROCEDURES TO MAINTAIN CONFIDENTIALITY 
 
11. PROTOCOL ADMINISTRATION  12.1  Discontinuation of Study  12.2  Changes in Protocol  12.3  Institutional Review Board 
 12.4  Reporting of  Data 
 12.5  Final Report, Publication, and Protection of Trade Secrets  12. INVESTIGATOR AGREEMENT  13.  REFERENCES 
4 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
1. INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE 
More than 50% of all patients with cancer receive some form of radiotherapy (RT), for curative or 
palliative purposes, during the course of their illness.  
One of the dose-limiting effects of radiotherapy is the acute reaction that ionizing radiation 
induces in normal tissues. The severity of adverse events resulting from exposure to 
radiotherapy is, in general, related to age and general health as well as to treatment-related 
factors such as the area being treated, radiation dose per fraction, and the total dose administered. 
Skin toxicity is the most common acute side effect of radiotherapy to the breast, occurring in more 
than 90% of patients. (1)  
 The specific purpose of this trial is to determine whether the hyaluronan components of HylaCare
TM induce an effectiveness response significantly greater than use of a vehicle control 
which lacks those ingredients in the management of acute skin reactions to external beam 
radiotherapy.   
 
2. BACKGROUND 
Early-onset adverse events occur to tissues soon  after treatment initiationwith external beam 
radiation therapybegins. The emergence of such symptoms, when severe, can adversely affect 
the patient's quality of life, result in treatment interruptions, and can reduce patient compliance 
with the treatment regimen. Among the most common of these is skin toxicity, observed frequently in patients being treated for breast cancer. The onset of acute radio-epidermititis results in erythema, epilation, and epidermolysis, with the skin in the treated area becoming dry, pruritic, hypersensitive, easily irritated, and in the longer term, hyper-pigmented. With some forms of radiotherapy, treated skin may develop a mo ist reaction, resulting in severe soreness in 
the area of body folds. In addition, patients treated for breast tumors may develop changes in 
skin texture. Most skin reactions resolve within a few weeks after treatment is completed, although the skin may remain slightly darker than pretreatment.   The present management of radiation-associated skin  toxicity includes instructions for care of 
the affected areas and the use of skin care products which can combat symptoms, without inducing further skin irritation.  Attention has recently been focused on the effe cts of hyaluronan (HA) for the management of 
radio-epithelitis and acute skin reactions. Liguori et al. (2) reported the effects of hyaluronan 
serum when applied to skin surfaces affected by radiation to head and neck, breast, and pelvic 
tumors. Compared to a matching placebo serum, patients treated with the HA serum showed a 
significant postponement in the first signs of acute radio-epithelitis and a reduction in the severity of skin reactions. 
The present study will evaluate the effectiveness and safety of HylaCare
TM in the management 
of acute skin reactions to extern al beam radiotherapy.  HylaCareTM contains the patented 
HylaSponge®System, composed of small and large molecular weight hyaluronan 
(hyaluronic acid) and polymerized HylaSponges of infinite molecular weight.  Due to its 
structure and preparation, the HylaSponge®System is  designed to improve the controlled 
release and slow delivery of various ingredients. A Repeated Insult Patch Test (RIPT) with HylaCare
TM in 30 volunteer subjects demonstrated no potential for eliciting either dermal 
irritation or sensitization (3). 
5 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
The major properties which make this biopolymer unique and valuable for skin care are: 
 Its ability to be loaded with, and then slowly release, water and a variety of active 
ingredients  
 Extremely high water retention 
 The quality of acting as a  “second skin”,  which is hydrated, protective, and 
biocompatible 
HylaCareTM, formulated as a topical product, has super-hydrating properties. It contains skin 
moisturizers such as pure low and high molecular weight hyaluronan, the HylaSponge
®System, and squalane. These characteristics make HylaCareTM an excellent 
candidate for use in the skin care of patients who may develop acute skin toxicity associated with the use of external beam radiotherapy.  
 
2.1  Study Objectives 
The objective of this controlled study will be to determine the effectiveness and safety of 
HylaCare
TM in the management of the symptoms of acute skin toxicity induced by exposure to 
external beam radiotherapy associated with the treatment of breast cancer. 
 
The primary measures of effectiveness will be: 
 
1. Physician's Follow-Up Evaluation: assessing signs and symptoms at each irradiated site  at 
week 5 during RT and at 2 weeks post-treatment:  
2. Physician's Global Assessment:  assessing each irradiated site at 5 weeks of RT prior to 
boost and at 2 weeks  post-treatment 
A secondary measure of effectiveness will be: 
 The patient's independent and separate assessment of the tolerance to radiotherapy of each 
treated site at Week 5 of  radiotherapy and at 2 weeks after its completion. 
An additional method of evaluation will be the Investigator’s assessment (disease oriented team 
to do assessment) of the baseline and treatment timeline photos. 
 
3. STUDY DESIGN 
This will be a randomized, double blind, vehicl e-controlled evaluation of the effectiveness and 
safety of HylaCareTM. The study will employ the patient as her own control, a commonly used 
method for the evaluation of topical dermatologic agents. Each patient will be randomized blindly 
as to whether  the study serum will be applied to the medial or lateral portion of the treated breast, using the nipple as the dividing line (see Figure  1. below). The product and placebo will 
also be applied to the contra-lateral breast in the same fashion, as a further control. The study 
drug and placebo will be applied three (3) times daily, but not within 4 hours prior to 
radiation treatment .  It is a well known fact that any cream or moisturizer that leaves a film on 
the breast prior to radiation treatment can cause a bolus effect which can increases surface dose to the breast worsening dermatitis. Thus, no topical agent should be applied to the breast 4 hours 
before radiation treatment.  
Patients will be allocated to the treatment using a randomized permuted block. There will be no 
stratification. Patients will be randomized to receive the investigational product to be applied to either the medial (inside) or lateral (outside) portion of the breast, a placebo product will be used on the other side. Patients and clinical investigators will be blinded to the treatment assignments. 
 
6 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  
Patients will also complete  a daily log, recording  daily application times. At, or prior to, the 
first radiotherapy visit, the patient will be provided with 3 Set Bags containing sufficient 
materials for 3 weeks of treatment, or as needed.  Patients will receive more Set Bags at Week 3 and Week 5, or as needed. Patients an d investigators will not know which bottle of 
serum is study serum vs. placebo.  The bottles will be labeled with an identifying code showing the  subject’s initials plus a patient number, and another label indicating where the serum is to be applied (medial or lateral part of the breast). 
 Medial (down the middle of the breast bone)  
   
↓   
 
 Lateral (on the side)   Lateral (on the side) 
   Figure 1. Diagram showing medial and lateral portions of breasts to be addressed. 
Applications three (3) times per day will continue throughout the course of radiotherapy and for 
24 weeks after its completion (end of study).  On any treatment day, there will be an application 
of test and control products immediately after the radiotherapy. No application will be made within four (4) hours prior to radiotherapy.   HylaCare
TM and a matching (in appearance, consistency and odor) vehicle control product will 
be supplied in identically appearing opaque bottles and dispensed according to a randomized 
code list prepared by the Statistician.  This pilot study will be initially conducted at one center with 30 patients undergoing standard fractionation external beam radiotherapy.   
Patients enrolled in this study will be those who are to undergo  curative or palliative 
radiotherapy for tumors of the breast. Treatment prescription will be 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions with tangential beams, followed by a 10 Gy in 5 fr action electron or photon boost. Those who meet all 
selection criteria will have a history taken, undergo a physical examination, and a baseline 
evaluation by the Investigator . This evaluation will describe the tumor location and symptoms, as well as the intended radiotherapy treatment plan, dose, and duration of treatment. The 
radiation treatment protocol for each patient will be determined by the Radiation Oncologist. 
 After the commencement of radiotherapy, patients will be evaluated at Week 5, and at 2 weeks post-treatment, by one of the radiation oncology  investigators who will examine and grade the breast  for acute skin toxicity changes using the NCIC-CTC version 4.0 scale.  A 
second Investigator Grading Scale will also be used for evaluation.  Evaluation of the
 changes will 
also include examination and questioning for eryt hema, pruritis, pain, dryness, exfoliation, 
epilation, hyperesthesia, or other signs/symptoms at each site.  A supra-clavicular field  may 
be  irradiated and may also be treated with Products A and B, but will not be assessed for dermatitis.    
At study completion, both the Investigator and patient will, independently and separately, 
assess the overall dermatitis of the irradiated breast and the contralateral (non-irradiated) breast.
 
7 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  1.  Grading Scale:  NCIC-CTC 
Adverse Event 1 2 3 4 5 
Dermatitis radiation Faint erythema or 
dry desquamation Moderate to brisk 
erythema; 
desquamation patchy moist desquamation, mostly confined to skin folds and 
creases moderate 
edema 
 Moist desquamation 
in areas other than skin folds and creases  
bleeding induced by 
minor trauma or abrasion Life-threatening consequences; skin necrosis or ulceration of full 
thickness dermis; 
spontaneous bleeding from involved site; skin graft indicated Death 
Definition: A finding of cutaneous inflammatory reaction occurring as a result of exposure to biologically effective levels of ionizing  
 
 
2.  Investigator Grading Scale: 
 Grade the status of the medial and lateral sides of the irradiated skin as: 0 = normal skin 
1 = light epidermal irritation, consisting of the onset of erythema, possibly associated with slight edema 2 = erythema with dry desquamation 3 = wet desquamation </= 2 cm  
4 = wet desquamation from 2.1 – 5cm 
5 =  wet desquamation from 5.1 - 9 cm 6 = wet desquamation  > 9.1 cm 
 
4. STUDY PROCEDURES 
 
4.1 Subject Selection Criteria 
Patients will be recruited by the Investigator from his/her available patient population, or by 
referral. Selected patients must meet the Inclusion and Exclusion criteria: 
 Inclusion Criteria 
 Female, age 18 or older 
 Diagnosis of breast cancer 
 Intact breast (not surgically absent) 
 Planned fractionated external beam radiotherapy to be delivered by opposing, 
tangential beams to 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions with a planned photon or electron boost of 10Gy in 5 fractions (for a total of 33 fractions) 
 Ability to understand and comply with the requirements of this study  
 Ability to give Informed Consent 
 For sexually active females, patient agrees to use acceptable method of 
birth control 
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 
 Women who are pregnant or lactating  
 Use of concomitant skin care preparations at any of the treated or control portal areas 
to be observed  
 Any infection or unhealed wound of the radiotherapy portal areas, or generalized 
dermatitis  
 Severe renal failure (serum creatinine > 3.0mg/dL) within 6 months of study 
registration 
8 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   Allergic history, including anaphylaxis or severe allergies to products in study serum 
or placebo 
 Planned relocation which would make follow-up visits impossible during the course of 
the study  
 Collagen vascular disease such as Lupus, or scleroderma  
 
4.2 Study Duration 
Patients selected for this study will be undergoing radiotherapy for curative or palliative treatment 
with fractionated external beam radiotherapy to be delivered by opposing, tangential beams to 
50.4 Gy in 28 fractions with a planned photon or electron boost of 10 Gy in 5 fractions (total of 
33 fractions).  Patients will be followed for 2weeks after radiotherapy has finished, with a follow- 
up visits at 2 weeks post-treatment.  
 
 4.3 Data Collection 
Data will be collected (typewritten, or handwritten legibly in black ink) on the appropriate case 
report forms supplied by the Sponsor.  
 
4.4 Concomitant Medications 
 Patients will be asked about changes in their medications (prescription, nonprescription, or 
herbals) during their participation including name of the drug, indication for use, dosage, date started and date stopped.  Changes in medications will be recorded. 
 
4.5 General Plan 
 
The patient's overall treatment plan will be guided by her tumor type. In general, its planning 
steps will include: 
 
1. Special radiologic studies may be ordered to help plan the radiation treatments 
2. Devices (e.g., breast boards, vac lok) may  be fabricated to maintain proper 
positioning during treatment per the radiation oncologist 
3. Simulation x-rays will be performed to ensure accurate planning of the size and 
direction of the radiation treatment fields on a weekly basis 
4. Tattoos or other markers will be applied to ensure the proper setup for daily treatment 5. Custom-made blocks may be fabricated, based on CT simulation, to shield normal 
structures 
6. During a setup session, the field ar rangements and blocks will be checked for proper 
alignment 
7. In general, the borders of the field are: 
i. Superior:  inferior to the clavicle 
ii. Lateral:  mid-axillary line 
iii. Inferior:  2 cm inferior to the infra-mammary fold 
iv. Medial:  Mid-sternum 
 4.6 Test Article Blinding and Administration   At, or prior to, the first radiotherapy visit, the patient will be provided with 3 Set Bags containing 
sufficient materials for 3 weeks of treatment, or as needed.  Patients will receive more Set Bags at Week 3 and Week 5, or as needed. Each Set Bag will contain two (2) 60 mL bottles of 
HylaCare
TM, and two (2) i dentically appearing bottles of Placebo (Control Vehicle). Both 
containers will be labeled with the patient's initials , study number, and location of skin to be 
covered (ie. right lateral breast, left medial breast, etc.)  Additionally, the patient will be instructed as to the proper application of the serums, including amount, location, coverage, 
9 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  and hand washing.  See “Patient Instructions”, Form 8 
The contents of each bottle (HylaCareTM or Placebo) will have been determined by a 
computerized random assignment scheme, the code fo r which will be kept at the study site in a 
sealed envelope. 
 
The radiotherapy nurse, research team or physician will instruct the patient as to the proper application method and ensure that the patient understands which container contents are to be applied to which site (see Figure 1 and Patient Instructions, Form 8). The patient will apply a sufficient amount  of either HylaCare or plac ebo (as prescribed in the experimental randomized 
design) to cover the entire marked surface of their irradiated skin area IMMEDIATELY AT THE 
END OF THE TREATMENT SESSION. At this time the same treatment will be applied to the 
contralateral (non-irradiated) breast. The patient will make two other applications during the day to ensure a total of three (3) daily applications of both HylaCare
TM and the vehicle control.  No 
applications will be made within 4 hours before radiotherapy.  The three (3) daily 
applications will continue throughout the course of radiotherapy and for 2 weeks after 
its completion. A drawn dashed line on both treated and untreated breast, as seen in Figure 
1 will determine areas for use of study serum and placebo.  The patient will also be instructed: 
1. To apply product only to the areas identified on both breasts immediately  after the 
radiotherapy session, and then two more times that day.        
2. On non-treatment days, to apply the product three (3) times daily 3. Not to use other skin care products on any of the radiotherapy-exposed skin areas 4. To report any generalized reactions  or any localized reactions in treatment area to the 
investigator at the next daily session, or more severe reactions by telephone (See Section 8). 
5. to discontinue use of topical agents if they develop >/= grade 3 dermatitis. 
 
 Suggestions for personal care of the irradiated treatment sites may include:  
1. Avoid irritating the skin 2. When washing, use only lukewarm water and mild soap, patting the surface 
dry  
3. Avoid the use of tight clothing 4. Do not rub, scrub or scratch the skin 5. Avoid the use of heating pads or ice packs 
6. Do not use powders, creams, perfumes, deod orants, body oils, ointments, or lotions 
on the irradiated surfaces 
7. Avoid direct sun exposure; if necessary, wear protective clothing 
 
5. SOURCE OF RESEARCH MATERIAL 
 
5.1 HylaCareTM (Test Serum)and Place bo (Vehicle Control) 
HylaCareTM (Test Serum)and Placebo (Vehicle Control) will be supplied in identically appearing 
opaque 60 mL bottles.   
 HylaCare
TM contains the following ingredients: 
HylaSponge®System 
 Water 
Xanthan gum 
Hydroxyethylcellulose  
10 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  Squalane  
EMT Polymer (Hydroxyethyl acrylate, Sodium acryloyldimethyl, Taurate copolymer) 
Benzylalcohol-DHA (benzylalcohol, (dihydroacetic acid)  
The Vehicle Control contains the above- noted ingredients except for HylaSponge
®System 
 
5.2 Proper Handling and Storage 
1. Store test article containers at room temperature  
2. Do not freeze 
 
6. EVALUATIONS AND CONSENT Patients who meet all selection criteria will be enrolled in numerical sequence.  The assigned 
number will correspond to the order in which they are enrolled. The following visits will occur: 
Visit # Title Time 
 BL* Baseline Evaluation(s) 0 (Prior to treatment) or Week 1 visit 
1 Radiotherapy (RT) Initiation 
2 Follow-Up Evaluation At 5 Weeks prior to boost 
3 Final Evaluation  2 weeks after RT ends  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
*Baseline Evaluation may require more than one visit. 
 
6.1 Baseline Procedures (Visit #BL)  
At the Baseline Evaluation, all enrolled patients will undergo history, physical examination, and baseline laboratory/radi ological assessments dictated by the 
plan of treatment for the tumor to undergo radiotherapy. 
 
The Research Team or treating Physician will complete these forms and actions: 
 (Form 1) Informed Consent (Form 1) 
 (Form 2a/2b) Inclusion /Exclusion Criteria (Forms 2A/2B) 
 (Form 3) Physician Follow-Up Assessment Form 3 
 (Form 4) Demographics and History Form 4 
 (Form 5) General Physical Examination Form 5 
  (Form 6) Radiotherapy Treatment  
 (Form 7) Patient Daily Log 
 (Form 8) Patient Instructions  
 6.2 Table of Baseline and Subsequent Assessments 
Assessment of all radiation-exposed skin areas will occur as directec in the table below 
following the initiation of radiotherapy and at 2 and 4 weeks after the completion of radiotherapy. 
These forms and activities will be completed or reviewed at each assessment: 
 
11 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
 
FORM / ACTION  
Base 
Line  
Week 
1 Week 
2 Week 
3 Week 
4 Week   
5     
Prior to   
boost  Week 
6  
Week 
 7 2 
weeks 
post 
Informed Consent ⱱ         
Photography ⱱ     ⱱ   ⱱ 
Inclusion/ 
Exclusion Criteria ⱱ         
Physician  Follow-Up Assessment       ⱱ**   ⱱ 
Demographics and History ⱱ         
General Physical 
Examination  ⱱ         
Concomitant Medication ⱱ review review review review review review review review 
Baseline  Assessment  ⱱ         
Urine Pregnancy 
Test ⱱ***         
Radiotherapy Treatment   ****         
Patient Daily Log 
 ⱱ ⱱ ⱱ 
collect 
log 
pageⱱ ⱱ 
collect 
log page  ⱱ ⱱ ⱱ 
collect 
log page  
Adverse Event If 
needed  If 
needed If 
needed If 
needed If 
needed If  
needed If 
needed If 
needed If needed  
Patient Overall Evaluation      ⱱ*****   ⱱ 
Physician Global Assessment      ⱱ   ⱱ 
Patient Completion         ⱱ 
 
* Photographs of patient’s breasts prior to radiation therapy: The baseline photo should be a close-up encompassing only the breast to be treated at a 45 degree oblique angle with arms elevated over the patient’s head.  Other photos should be a straight frontal view of both breasts 
taken in either a standing or seated position with the patient’s hands on her hips, excluding her 
face. Boost area will be labeled prior to week 5 photo and a photo will be taken showing the boost area
.     Label each slide or photograph with the date and the patient case number. The labeled 
photographs will be stored electronically under study specific patient folders.  
** Separate photo with boost drawn on skin. 
*** If Patient is of child-bear ing age and sexually active 
**** Prior to first Radiation Therapy  ***** Evaluation should be completed prior to boo st, but Patient will not be removed from the 
study is this is completed after the boost.   
6.3 Final Visit 
This will occur at 2weeks after the completion of radiotherapy. These forms and actions will be 
completed: 
 Physician’s Follow-Up Assessment Form 3 
Describes the radiotherapy treatment and provides a time line to compare 
irradiated and non-irradiated breast indications 
 Physician's Global Assessment Form 9 
12 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  To be completed at Week 5 prior to boost and also 2 weeks post radiation  
 Patient Overall Evaluation Form 10 
      Used to elicit patient evaluation of prophylaxis 
 Patient Completion Form 11 
Final compilation of patient data upon study completion or discontinuation 
 
6.4 Informed Consent  
Written consent will be obtained from each patient prior to entering this trial and will become 
part of the patient’s permanent study record.  Each patient will be assured that study 
participation is voluntary and that she may withdraw at any time.  At the time of obtaining written consent, the Investigator will advise patients of the experimental nature of HylaCare
TM, 
the duration of the trial, alternate modes of prophylaxis, and prevalent adverse events that might occur and discuss willing ness to have photographs taken.  
 7. EFFICACY PARAMETERS 
The primary measures of effectiveness will be: 
 Physician's Follow-Up Evaluation(Form 3): assessing signs and symptoms at each 
irradiated site  Week 5 during RT and at 2 weeks post-treatment  
 Physician's Global Assessment:  assessing each irradiated site at Week 5 RT prior to boost 
and at2 weeks  post-treatment 
A secondary measure of effectiveness will be the patient's independent and separate assessment 
of the tolerance to radiotherapy of each treated site at the completion of  radiotherapy and at 2 weeks after its completion. 
An additional method of evaluation will be the Investigator’s assessment (disease oriented team 
to do assessment) of the baseline and timeline photos.  
 
In addition, other local (irradiated areas) symptoms/signs (e.g., pain, tenderness, pruritus, dryness, epilation, hyperesthesia) and any gene ralized adverse events will be evaluated on the 
basis of NCIC toxicity criteria  
http://ctep.cancer.gov /reporting/ctc.html  . 
 
Week 5 of radiotherapy and at the final evaluation (2 weeks post-treatment), the Investigator will 
make an overall global assessment of effectiveness of radiation tolerance of the treated breast (medial and lateral breast will be scored individua lly).  This assessment will be based upon the 
Investigator’s  experience, comparing the skin appearance and symptomatology of the site with the normally expected degree of radiation damage for similar body sites. The overall result will 
be graded as: 
 
0= poor       (worse than typical expectations) 1= fair          (equal to, or slightly better than typical expectations) 2= good       (moderately better than typical expectations)  3= excellent (markedly better than typical expectations) 
 The Investigator will also judge which of the paired sites (medial, lateral) ) tolerated radiotherapy better, in terms of: (1) symptoms experienced by the patient and (2) overall skin appearance. If investigator feels medial and lateral breast symptomatology equivalent, then this will be reported as such. 
 
Independent of the Investigator, the patient will also assess  which of the paired sites fared better in terms of: (1) symptoms experienced and (2) overall skin appearance, at the completion 
of radiotherapy and 2 weeks post-treatment. 
13 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
8.   Potential Risks 
Investigational Product: 
In previous use of HylaCare as a commercial product, no adverse events have been identified. 
 
Psychological Stress: Questionnaires will be given to the patient as a part of this study, which may make them feel uncomfortable.  Patient can refuse to answer any of the questions, take a break or stop participating in this study at any time. 
 
Loss of Confidentiality: Any time information is collected; there is a potential risk for loss of confidentiality.  Every effort will be made to keep the patients information confidential; however, this cannot be guaranteed.   
Photographs: 
Patient could feel slightly uncomfortable during the photographic sessions when asked to position the body to take the photograph of the breast area. Patients could be uncomfortable with standing still for an extended period of time or from turning their body in various positions. They could be sensitive to the bright and repeating flashes from the camera, which 
can sometimes cause headaches, irritation of the eyes, discomfort, after effects such as 
seeing spots, and in rare cases, could stimulate a migraine headache or epileptic seizure.  Photographs include a risk of identification.  Patients privacy will be protected to the greatest extent possible.  Photos will be taken to exclude faces or any other identifying marks. Photos will only be identified by a unique subject identification number that contains no personal 
identifying information. For research purposes, photos may be used in scientific publications. 
 Risks to Embryo, Fetus or Breast-fed Infant: Females: For patients who are pregnant or breast-feeding an infant, it is possible that they may expose the unborn child or infant to risks.  For that reason, pregnant and breast-feeding 
females cannot participate in the study.  For patient who are participating in this study and are of childbearing age and sexually active, results of a urine pregnancy test will be obtained, and it must be negative before participating in the study. Patient taking part in this study and who are sexually active, must use medically-acceptable birth control (contraceptives) during the study.  Medically-acceptable birth control (contraceptives) includes: 
(1) Surgical sterilization (such as  hysterectomy or “tubes tied”), 
(2) Approved hormonal contraceptives ( such as birth control pills, patch or ring; Depo-
Provera, Depo-Lupron, Implanon), (3) Barrier methods (such as condom or diaphragm) used with a spermicide (a substance that kills sperm), or  
(4) An intrauterine device (IUD). 
Patient who become pregnant during this study, must notify the researchers immediately.  Other Risks There may possibly be other side effects that are unknown at this time.  
 
Radiation exposure to a woman’s reproductive organs may harm an embryo or fetus.  Also, if radioactive materials are used for certain types of scans, harm may come to an embryo, fetus, or an infant who is breast feeding.    
14 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  Pregnancy tests performed during the early stages of pregnancy do not always reveal 
pregnancy.  Therefore, radiation exposure that includes the reproductive organs will be limited to the first ten days after a woman who can become pregnant has begun her most recent menstrual period.  This is standard policy in clinics and hospitals within UT 
Southwestern.  This policy applies unless there is an important medical reason requiring 
radiation outside this time frame.  Risks of Radiation – Radiation Therapy : The radiation therapy used in this research is the standard radiation therapy, therefore, the risk of harm involved is the same. 
 
High-dose radiation treatments to or near a man’s testicles or a woman’s ovaries may produce harmful changes that could be passed on to children through a sperm or an egg.  Women:  Females able to have children should avoid becoming pregnant until after they 
have had three menstrual periods after the end of all radiation therapy.  After three 
menstrual periods, there is almost no risk of harmful changes to an egg.    Possible side effects of radiation therapy to the breast include:  
Likely (these side effects occur in 10% or more of patients): 
 Reddening of the skin during treatment and for several weeks following 
treatment 
 Tanning of the skin lasting months and may be permanent 
 Slightly smaller breast size or change in the way the breast looks 
 Tiredness and weakness during treatment and for several weeks following 
treatment 
 Swelling of the breast 
 Peeling of the skin in the area treated with radiation 
 Mild pain at the site of radiation treatment requiring over the counter pain 
Relievers. 
 
Less Likely (these side effects occur in 3-9% of patients): 
 Soreness or tightness in muscles of the chest wall under the treated  
breast 
 Severe pain at the site of radiation requiring prescription pain relievers 
 Rare but Serious (these side effects occur in less than 3% of patients): 
 Cough 
 Difficulty breathing 
 Inflammation of the heart muscle 
 Rib fracture 
 Slight increase in risk for heart disease for patients with cancer in the leftbreast 
 Risk of developing another cancer  
 At each follow-up assessment, patients will be evaluated for any adverse effects. These will be grouped as follows:  1. Localized reactions at the irradiated sites   
2. Other adverse events 
 The Investigator will enter details of any of these events on the Adverse Event Form. The 
15 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  duration, intensity, and any action taken will be recorded. 
 
8.1 Definition of Adverse Event 
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical o ccurrence in a patient receiving study treatment 
and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment. An AE can 
therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of an experimental intervention, whether or not related to the intervention.  
8.2 Severity of Adverse Events 
All non-hematologic adverse events will be graded according to the NCI Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0. The CTCAE v4 is available at 
http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/ctc.html 
 If no CTCAE grading is available, the severity of an AE is graded as follows: 
Mild (grade 1): the event causes discomfort without disruption of normal daily activities. 
Moderate (grade 2): the event causes discomfort that affects normal daily activities. 
Severe (grade 3): the event makes the patient unable to perform normal daily activities or 
significantly affects his/her clinical status. 
Life-threatening (grade 4): the patient was at risk of death at the time of the event. 
Fatal (grade 5): the event caused death. 
8.3 Steps to Determine If an Adverse Event Requires Expedited Reporting 
Step 1: Identify the type of adverse event using the NCI Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE v4).  
 
Step 2: Grade the adverse event using the NCI CTCAE v4. 
 
Step 3: Determine whether the adverse event is related to the protocol therapy  
Attribution categories are as follows: - Definite – The AE is clearly related to the study treatment. 
- Probable – The AE is likely related to the study treatment. 
- Possible – The AE may be related to the study treatment. 
- Unrelated – The AE is clearly NOT related to the study treatment. 
Note: This includes all events that occur within 30 days of the last dose of protocol 
treatment. Any event that occurs more than 30 days after the last dose of 
treatment and is attributed (possibly, probably, or definitely) to the agent(s) must 
also be reported accordingly. 
 Step 4:  Determine the prior experience of the adverse event.  Expected events are those that have been prev iously identified as resulting from 
administration of the agent. An adverse  event is considered unexpected, for 
expedited reporting purposes only, when either the type of event or the severity of 
the event is not listed in: 
 the current known adverse events listed in the Agent Information 
Section of this protocol; 
 the drug package insert; 
 the current Investigator’s Brochure 
 
The intensity of adverse events will be graded as mild, moderate, or severe to describe 
16 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  these observations regardless of whether they are medical events, symptoms, or physical 
findings. For purposes of consistency, the following definitions of intensity are provided:  
Mild:  Easily tolerated, causes minimal discomfort and does not interfere 
with everyday activities 
Moderate:  Causes sufficient discomfort to interfere with normal 
everyday activities 
Severe:  Incapacitating and prevents normal everyday activities 
 A Serious Adverse Event is  any experience that suggests a significant hazard, contraindication, 
side effect or precaution, and includes any experience which: 
 is fatal or life-threatening 
 is permanently disabling (i.e., incapacitating or interfering with the ability to resume 
usual life patterns 
 requires in-patient hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization 
 is a secondary cancer, or an overdose 
For HylaCare
TM, potential adverse events might include an allergic reaction. Although this has 
not been observed in other clinical trials of hyaluronan-based agents, this product is hyaluronan 
derived from a biological source; hence, the Investigator should be aware of the possibility that the material theoretically could cause an allergic reaction.  Any Serious Adverse Event Form should be faxe d, then emailed immediately to Hylaco  
(Janet L. Denlinger PhD, Chief Scientific Officer 201 886 1643/jdenlinger@hylaco.com) and 
Jean Wu (214-645-8913/jean.wu@utsouthwestern.edu). Any death or serious or unusual 
reaction is to be reported promptly (within 24 hours) by telephone to Dr. Denlinger (201 886 1562) or, in her absence, to Morgan Hare (214 559 6125) , even though it may not appear to be related 
to HylaCare
TM. 
All adverse events will be reviewed at the monthly radiation oncology research meeting which 
includes radiation oncologist not adhering to the protocol. 
 Any preliminary telephone report of a serious adverse event is to be followed by a detailed 
written report summary within three working days and must include copies of hospital/office records and other documents when applicable. An additional follow-up written report summary is
 
to be forwarded to Hylaco within 10 days of the adverse event. The Investigator will also notify 
his/her Institutional Review Board (IRB) of any deaths, serious or unexpected reactions. 
 
Follow-up of all adverse events will be continu ed until the overall clinical outcome has been 
ascertained. All deaths, serious and non-serious adverse events will be summarized in the report prepared for Hylaco after the conclusion of the study.  
UTSW IRB: SAEs will be collected from the time consent is given, throughout the           
treatment period, and until subject’s participation in the trial has ended or participants 
death.    
Investigators and other site personnel must inform the UTSW IRB, of any serious 
or unexpected adverse events that occur in accordance with the reporting 
obligations of 21 CFR 312.32, and will concurrently forward all such reports to UTSW IRB. It is the responsibility of the investigator to compile all necessary 
information. 
17 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
 
If a non-serious AE becomes serious, this and other relevant follow-up information 
must also be provided to UTSW IRB.. 
 
All SAEs have to be reported to UTSW IRB, whether or not considered causally related to the investigational product.  All SAEs will be documented.  The investigator is responsible for informing the IRB and/or the Regulatory Authority of the SAE as per local requirements.  
Non-serious adverse events will be collected  from the time consent is given, 
throughout the treatment period and up to and including the 30 day follow-up  
period.   After withdrawal from treatment, subjects must be followed-up for all 
existing and new AEs for 30 calendar days after the last dose of trial drug and/or until event resolution.  All new AEs occurring during that period must be recorded 
(if SAEs they must be reported to the UTSW IRB).  All study-related toxicities/ SAEs must be followed until resolution, unless in the Investigator’s opinion, the condition is unlikely to resolve due to the patient’s underlying disease. 
 
All serious adverse events must be reported to the  UT Southwestern TELEPHONE 
LINE: (214) 633-1753 within 24 hours of the investigator’s awareness of the occurrence of the event.  All safety reports shall be faxed to (214) 645-8913 or e-mail to the attention of the project manager. 
 
The following events meet the definition of UPR: 
1. Any serious event (injuries, side effects, deaths or other problems), 
which in the opinion of the Principal Investigator was unanticipated, 
involved risk to subjects or others, and was possibly related to the research procedures. 
2. Any serious accidental or unintentional change to the IRB-approved 
protocol that alters the level of risk. 
3. Any deviation from the protocol taken without prior IRB review to 
eliminate apparent immediate hazard to a research subject. 
4. Any new information (e.g., publication, safety monitoring report, 
updated sponsor safety report), interim result or other finding that indicates an unexpected change to the risk/benefit ratio for the research. 
5. Any breach in confidentiality that may involve risk to the subject or 
others. 
  
9.   DATA MONITORING  
 9.1 Statistical and Analytical Methods  
Thirty patients will be recruited in this pilot st udy. Descriptive statistics will be computed 
to estimate the sample size needed for a future larger study if the study results looks 
promising. 
 
Descriptive statistics will be obtained for baseline demographic, medical history, 
18 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  physical examination, radiation therapy treatment/dosimetry data. 
Patients will be allocated to the treatment using a randomized permuted block. There will be no stratification. Patients will be randomized to receive the investigational product to be applied to either the medial (inside) or lateral (outside) portion of the breast, a placebo product will be used 
on the other side. Patients and clinical investigators will be blinded to the treatment assignments. 
The primary efficacy variables are the Physici an's Follow-Up Evaluation, to be performed at 
each visit, and the Physician's Global Assessment, to be performed at the end of radiotherapy and 2 (two) weeks after the completion of radiotherapy. The key component of the Physician's 
Follow-Up Evaluation is the grading, on an ordinal scale (0 to 5) NCIC-CTC, as well as the Investigator Grading  Scale of the irradiated area of the breast. The data collected from the 
Physician's Follow-Up Evaluation will be grouped into two parts, those data collected during 
radiotherapy and those data collected following the completion of radiotherapy. For each patient, the difference between the HylaCare
TM treated side and the control side will be 
determined at each visit during radiotherapy. These differences will then be averaged for each patient. The significance of the mean difference among the patients will then be determined 
using a paired t-test or Wilcox on signed-rank test. The data obta ined during the period following 
radiotherapy will be analyzed in this manner. The analysis of the Physician's Global 
Assessment will also be performed separately at the completion of radiotherapy and at the end of the follow-up period. The comparison of the groups will be based on a paired t-test or Wilcoxon signed-rank test. A secondary analysis will be performed to examine the possible 
influence of body habitus (BMI- breast size) and radi ation hot spots  on the effectiveness of the 
HylaCare
TM prophylaxis. All efficacy analyses will be based on a modified intent-to-treat patient 
population. This population will be defined as all patients who commence radiotherapy and who 
have at least one on-treatment visit. 
 The secondary efficacy measure is the patient's  assessment of the tolerance to radiotherapy. 
These data will be collected at the end of radiotherapy and at the end of the follow-up period. At each time point the patient will be asked three questions and will respond to each question by indicating which product was preferred or if the patient had no preference. For each question the analysis will compare, among those patients who have a preference, the percent who prefer HylaCare
TM to the percent who prefer the control. The comparison will be based on an exact 
Binomial test of the hypothesis that the percent who prefer HylaCareTM is 50%, the percent that 
corresponds to the patient having no preference between HylaCareTM and the control. 
 The evaluation of photos taken during the course of radiotherapy represents the third efficacy 
measure.  These will be evaluated in a blinde d manner by the disease oriented team (which 
may consist of breast surgeons, plastic surgeons, or medical oncologists) after the last patient 
completes post-treatment week 2 follow-up and photo 
 Safety will be assessed through the recording of responses and other adverse events. All patients who undergo prophylaxis will be included in the analyses. The adverse events will be classified using the NCIC-CTC version 4.0. 
 All computations will be performed using Statistical Analysis System (SAS) software. 
 
 Grading NCIC-CTC 
Adverse Event 1 2 3 4 5 
Dermatitis radiation Faint erythema or 
dry desquamation Moderate to brisk 
erythema; 
desquamation patchy moist desquamation, 
mostly confined to 
skin folds and creases moderate Moist desquamation in areas other than 
skin folds and 
creases  bleeding induced by minor trauma or abrasion Life-threatening consequences; skin 
necrosis or 
ulceration of full thickness dermis; spontaneous bleeding from involved site; skin Death 
19 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  edema  
 graft indicated 
Definition: A finding of cutaneous inflammatory reaction occurring as a result of exposure to biologically effective levels of ionizing  
 
 
Investigator Grading Scale: 
0 = normal skin 
1 = light epidermal irritation, consisting of the onset of erythema, possibly associated with slight edema 2 = erythema with dry desquamation 3 = wet desquamation </= 2 cm   4 = wet desquamation  from 2.1 -- 5 cm 
5 = wet desquamation  from 5.1 - 9 cm  
6 = wet desquamation  > 9.1 cm   
9.2 Subject Safety    
Safety will be assessed through the recording of responses and other adverse events. All 
patients who undergo prophylaxis will be included in the analyses. The adverse events will be classified using the NC IC-CTC scale 4.0. 
 
 9.3 Monitoring Procedures  
Throughout the study, the monitor or a designated deputy will monitor completion of the forms, 
discuss questions regarding adverse events, remova l of patients from the trial, study conduct, 
or the use of the test articles. 
 The monitor will pay site visits to review each patient's Case Report Forms to help ensure completeness and accuracy of data entry specified in the Protocol. As required by Good Clinical 
Practices guidelines, clinical records will be reviewed to confirm that: (1) the case report forms are consistent with the Investigator's clinical records; (2) background clinical and laboratory data and concomitant medications are recorded on the case report forms; (3) there is an accurate 
account of test and control article use; and (4) there is timely, appropriate reporting of any adverse events. 
Patients will be instructed to  discontinue use of topical agents if they develop >/= grade 3 
dermatitis. 
 The data and safety Monitoring Board/Committee are: 
 Internal DSMB/DSMC 
 UTSW Radiation Onclolgy Investigators 
 External DSMB/DSMC 
 Simmons Cancer Center 
 
9.4 Handling of Dropouts or Patients Lost to Follow-Up 
All patients who meet the selection criteria will be considered evaluable for efficacy and safety. Every attempt will be made to ensure that all patients complete the required follow-up visits. 
Those not appearing will be telephoned and/or contacted by mail to ensure that they complete their visit schedule. The reason for all dropouts is to be specified by the Investigator on the 
Patient Completion Form.  
 
9.5  Discontinuation of Patients From Study 
Participation in this study may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:  
 adverse events 
 severe inter-current illness 
20 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   administrative reasons 
 patient's voluntary decision to discontinue participation 
 Investigator's opinion that it is not in the patient's best interests to continue 
 
Any patient discontinued because of an adverse event will be followed for at least 4 weeks, or 
until the adverse event is resolved, or as otherwis e medically indicated. It is important that the 
reason and the date of discontinuation be reported on the Patient Completion Form. If at all possible, an assessment should be  done at the time of withdrawal. 
Patients who failed to apply the test and control products  as directed for more than 5 days  during radiation will be  removed fr om the study for noncompliance. 
  10.  PROCEDURES TO MAINTAIN CONFIDENTIALITY 
Confidentiality of each patient's identity will be maintained. A subject number consisting of the 
patient’s initials and a random number will be assigned to each patient upon study entry and that 
number will be used to identify that patient for the duration of the st udy. Only the patient's initials 
and numbers will be used on case report forms as well as any study-related correspondence. 
 
 11.  PROTOCOL ADMINISTRATION 
 
11.1  Discontinuation of the Study 
 
Hylaco reserves the right to discontinue any study for administrative reasons at any time such as, but not limited to, a decision to discontinue further clinical investigation with the test article, improper conduct of the study by the Investigator, or inability to obtai n the number of patients 
required by the Protocol. Reimbursements for re asonable expenses will be made if such action 
is necessary. 
 
11.2  Changes in the Protocol 
Any changes that may affect the scientific soundness of the investigation or the rights, safety, or welfare of the subjects must receive appropri ate IRB approval prior to implementation. Any 
changes in this Protocol will require the express written consent of Hylaco. 
 
11.3  Institutional Review Board 
Prior to implementation of this study, the Protocol and Patient Consent Form must be reviewed 
and approved by a properly constitut ed Institutional Review  Board (IRB). No ch anges that relate 
to the safety or welfare of patients may be made to the consent form unless they are approved by the IRB and Hylaco.  All major amendments to the Protocol and case r eport forms must also be 
approved by the IRB and by Hylaco. 
 
11.4  Reporting of Data 
All information required by the Protocol is to be provided, or an explanation given for omissions. 
All case report forms (CRFs) must be made available as soon as they are completed in order 
that the Study Monitor may verify the validity and completeness of those forms and permit 
transmittal of the data to the Sponsor.  All data and information on these CRFs are to be neatly recorded in type or legibly written in black ink for ease of duplication, interpretation and analysis before submission to Hylaco. All 
corrections on the CRFs should be crossed out neatly with a single line, and the new entry 
initialed and dated by the member of the Investigator's staff making tile correction. Prior to forwarding the CRFs to Hylaco, they should be reviewed for completeness, accuracy, and legibility by the Principal Investigator and the Study Monitor. He/she will indicate by 
2 1 
1 4 0 5 0 7 H yla Care 
R a n d o miz e d, D o u bl e- Bli n d, V e hi cl e C o ntr oll e d Pil ot St u d y of t h e Effi c a c y a n d S af et y of H yl a C ar eT M    i n t h e Pr o p h yl a xi s of A c ut e S ki n 
C h a n g e s i n P ati e nt s U n d er g oi n g E xt er n al B e a m R a di ot h er a p y f or  T u m or s of t h e Br e a st  si g n at ur e o n t h e a p pr o pri at e f or m s t h at h e/ s h e h a s r e vi e w e d t h e d at a at e a c h e v al u ati o n p eri o d. 
 
 1 2. 0 R E F E R E N C E S 
( 1) R ef er e n c e: T o pi c al H y al ur o ni c A ci d v s. St a n d ar d of C ar e f or t h e Pr e v e nti o n of R a di ati o n 
D er m atiti s Aft er A dj u v a nt R a di ot h er a p y f or Br e a st C a n c er: Si n gl e- Bli n d R a n d o mi z e d P h a s e III Cli ni c al Tri al . I nt er n ati o n al J o ur n al of R a di ati o n O n c ol o g y* Bi ol o g y* P h y si c s 
V ol u m e 8 3, I s s u e 4, 1 5 J ul y 2 0 1 2, P a g e s 1 0 8 9 – 1 0 9 4    C h el s e a Pi n ni x, M. D., P h. D. , G e or g e H. P er ki n s, M. D., M. P. H. ,  Eri c A. Str o m, M. D. , W e n d y W o o d w ar d, M. D., P h. D. ,  
 
( 2) Li g u ori, V., G uill e mi n, C., P e s c e, G. F., Miri m a n off, R. O., a n d B er ni er, J. ( 1 9 9 7). D o u bl e-
bli n d, r a n d o mi z e d cli ni c al st u d y c o m p ari n g h y al ur o ni c a ci d cr e a m t o pl a c e b o i n p ati e nt s tr e at e d 
wit h r a di ot h er a p y. R a di ot h er a p y a n d O n c ol o g y 4 2, 1 5 5- 1 6 1.  
 
( 3) Fi n al R e p ort: R e p e at e d I n s ult P at c h T e st f or H yl a C ar e
T M B at c h c o d e l ot # 3 4 9 0 5 R 0 2 0 7 1 1. 
L a b a n d 2- 7- 1 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A P P E N DI X A 
 
E V A L U A TI O N S a n d  A C TI O N S  
22 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  Baseline Visit 
At the Baseline Evaluation, all enrolled patients will undergo history, physical 
examination, and baseline laboratory/radi ological assessments dictated by the 
plan of treatment for the tumor to undergo radiotherapy. 
The Research Team or treating Physician will complete these forms and actions: 
 (Form 1) Informed Consent  
 (Form 2a/2b) Inclusion /Exclusion Criteria  
 (Form 3) Physician Follow-Up Assessment  
 (Form 4) Demographics and History  
 (Form 5) General Physical Examination  
  ((Form 6) Radiotherapy Treatment  
 (Form 7) Patient Daily Log  
 (Form 8) Patient Instructions  
 
6.2 Table of Baseline and Subsequent Assessments 
Assessment of all radiation-exposed skin areas will occur as described in the table below 
following the initiation of radiotherapy and at 2  weeks after the completion of radiotherapy. These forms and activities will be completed or reviewed at each assessment: 
 
 FORM / ACTION  
Base 
Line  
Week 
1 Week 
2 Week 
3 Week 
4 Week 
5 
Prior 
to 
boost Week 
6  
Week 
 7 2 
weeks 
post 
Informed Consent ⱱ         
Photography ⱱ     ⱱ   ⱱ 
Inclusion/ 
Exclusion Criteria ⱱ         
Physician  Follow-
Up Assessment       ⱱ**   ⱱ 
Demographics and History ⱱ         
General Physical Examination  ⱱ         
Concomitant Medication ⱱ review review review review review review review review 
Baseline  Assessment  ⱱ         
Urine Pregnancy 
Test ⱱ***         
Radiotherapy 
Treatment   ****         
Patient Daily Log 
 ⱱ ⱱ ⱱ 
collect 
log 
pageⱱ ⱱ 
collect 
log 
pageⱱ ⱱ ⱱ 
collect 
log 
page
Adverse Event If 
needed  If 
needed If 
needed If 
needed If 
needed If 
needed If 
needed If 
needed If 
needed 
Patient Overall Evaluation      ⱱ*****   ⱱ 
Physician Global Assessment      ⱱ   ⱱ 
Patient 
Completion         ⱱ 
 
Photographs of patient’s breasts prior to radiation therapy: The baseline photo should be a 
close-up encompassing only the breast to be treated at a 45 degree oblique angle with arms 
23 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  elevated over the patient’s head.  Other  photos should be a straight frontal view of both breasts 
taken in either a standing or seated position with the patient’s hands on her hips, excluding her face.  Boost area will be labeled prior to week 5 photo and a photo will be taken showing the boost area.
   Label each slide or photograph with the date and the patient case number. The 
labeled photographs will be stored electronically under study specific patient folders.  ** Separate photo with boost drawn on skin.  *** If Patient is of child-bear ing age and sexually active 
 
 
**** Prior to first Radiation Therapy  ***** Evaluation should be completed prior to boo st, but Patient will not be removed from the 
study is this is completed after the boost. 
 
Final Visit  
This will occur at 2 weeks after the completion of radiotherapy. These forms and actions will be 
completed: 
 Physician Fo llow-Up Assessment Form 3 
Describes the radiotherapy treatment and provides a time line to compare irradiated and non-irradiated breast indications 
 Physician's Global Assessment Form 9 
 To be completed at Week 5 prior to boost and also 2 weeks post radiation 
 Patient Overall Evaluation Form 10 
 Used to elicit patient evaluation of prophylaxis 
 Patient Completion Form 11 
 Final compilation of patient data upon study completion or discontinuation  
24 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
 
 
APPENDIX B 
 
FORMS  
25 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
 
FORM 1 
 
CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN RESEARCH  TEMPLATE 
Instructions 
Please read this consent form carefully and ta ke your time making a d ecision about whether to 
participate.  As the researchers discuss this consent form with you, please ask him/her to explain 
any words or information that you do not clear ly understand.  The purpose of the study, risks, 
inconveniences, discomforts, and other important information about the study are listed below.  
If you decide to participate, you will be  given a copy of this form to keep. 
 
Why is this study being done? 
The study is being done to provi de information about the effec tiveness and safety of a product 
containing the patented HylaSponge®System and whether the use of this product reduces the 
tissue damage that results from radiotherapy treatment.   
 
Why is this considered research?  
This is a research study because the HylaSponge®System is being compared to placebo when 
applied to the breast which is  undergoing radiotherapy as part  of treatment for cancer.   
 
The following definitions may help you understand this study:   
 Double-blind means neither you nor the researchers will know which product you are 
receiving.  
 Randomization means the products will be assign ed by chance for application to either 
side of your breast.   
 Standard medical care means the regular ca re you would receive from your personal 
doctor if you choose not to par ticipate in this research. 
 Researchers means the study doctor and resear ch personnel at the University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center 
 
Why am I being asked to take part in this research study? 
You are being asked to take part in this study because you are going to be receiving radiotherapy 
as part of your treatment for breast cancer. 
 
Do I have to take part in this research study?” 
No.  You have the right to choose whether you want to take part in this research study.  If you 
decide to participate and later change your mi nd, you are free to stop par ticipation at any time. 
 
If you decide not to take part in  this research study it will not change your legal rights or the 
quality of health care that  you receive at this center. 
 
How many people will take part in this study? 
We plan to have approximately 30 people participate in this st udy here at UT Southwestern.  
26 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
What is involved in the study? 
If you volunteer to take part in this research study, you will be asked to sign this consent form 
and will have the following tests a nd procedures.  Some of the pr ocedures may be part of your 
standard medical care, but others are bei ng done solely for the purpose of this study. 
 
Screening Procedures 
To help decide if you qualify to be in this study, the researchers may ask you questions about 
your health, including medicati ons you take and any surgic al procedures you have had. 
 
You may also have to fill out certain forms or have the following exams, tests or procedures:  
Visit 1: 
 Demographic information (age, gender, ra ce, ethnic origin, and skin type); 
 Eligibility assessment and an explana tion of study purposes and procedures; 
 Complete medical history incl uding  vital signs (temperatu re, pulse, respirations, blood 
pressure), height, weight, physical exam,  allergies; 
 Record current medications, vitamins, or herbs that you are taking; 
 Photographs of breast.  At your first visit, and at Week 5, and 2 weeks post-radiation 
treatment, photographs will be taken. Photos will be taken to exclude faces or any other 
identifying marks. Photos will only be identified by a unique subject identification number that contains no pers onal identifying information.  Th ese photographs are part of 
the research.  You will not be able to participate in the research if you do not want to 
have photographs taken .  
 You will be randomized to receive the investig ational product to be a pplied to either the 
medial (inside) or lateral (outside) portion of your breast, a place bo product will be used 
on the other side. 
 You will be given a supply of the in vestigational product and placebo and 
instruction/demonstra tion for application. 
 During participation, you will be  asked to do the following:  
 No application of any skin care product besides the study products 
 No use of skin products that may affect the color of your skin, such as sunless tanning 
lotions;  
Study Medication/Intervention 
You will be provided with the study products to  apply three times a day to each side as 
designated according to your random assignmen t. Please be sure to wash your hands 
before and between each application of product/cream.  The creams/products will be 
labeled with your Subject Number.   Products will be supplied by the sponsor.  This part of the study will be blinded, that is, both products will be packaged identi cally by the sponsor and labeled product A 
and product B so that neither you, nor the inve stigator, nor the research team will be 
able to distinguish which Product is a pplied to areas of radiation exposure.. 
27 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
Procedures and Evaluati ons during the Research 
 
     Study Visits  
 Every week during your radiation treatment you will be assessed by an Investigator.  
 The Investigator will evaluate the status of  your skin, comparing the medial (inside) 
to the lateral (outside), a nd determining an overall assessment of your  skin’s 
tolerance to the radiotherapy. 
 At your first visit, and during Week 5, and 2weeks post-radi ation treatment, 
photographs will be taken.  
 On your last day of radiation, both you and your radiation oncologist will be asked to 
complete an assessment of your skin, giving you an opportunity to report how you 
felt the creams worked, and if the skin on one  side of your breast fared better than the 
other side 
 
Study Visit 9: (2 weeks af ter last radiotherapy)  
 
 The physician will examine your  skin 
 Photographs of your breast 
 You will return of any unused investigationa l product, as well as empty containers 
  
 We will ask you about your current medications and any changes in your 
medications 
 We will ask you about any adverse events (s ide effects or medical problems) that 
you are having 
 We will ask you to complete another patient assessment, giving you another 
opportunity to report how you felt the creams worked, and if the skin on one side 
of your breast fared bett er than the other side. 
 Additionally, during the entire duration of this study, we w ill ask you to maintain a 
log describing when you app lied the products/creams. 
 
 
 
28 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
 Restricted Therapies 
o Drugs, procedures, and/or treatments re stricted during the course of this 
study  include:  
o Use of any skin products on the b ilateral breast, unless directed by 
physician 
o Application of any additional skin care products besides the study products. 
Please ask your doctor if you have any questi ons about the medications that you are 
taking.  
The photographs, assessments, and measurements in this study are designed for research, not for 
medical purposes.  They are not useful for fi nding problems or diseases.  Even though the 
researchers are not looking at this information to  find or treat a medical problem, you will be told 
if they notice something unusual.  You and your regular doctor can decide together whether to 
follow up with more tests or treatment.    
How long can I expect to be in this study? 
Your participation in this study will last about 11 weeks. 
You can choose to stop participating for any reason at any time.   
 What are the risks of the study? 
Study Procedure/Intervention 
Because of your participation in this study, you are subject to the following risks: You should 
discuss these with the re searchers and your regular health care provider.  
 Investigational Product 
In previous use of HylaCare™ , no adverse events have been identified .   
 Psychological Stress 
Some of the questions we will ask you as part of this study may make you feel uncomfortable.  You may refuse to answer any of the questions, take a break or stop your participation in this 
study at any time.  Loss of Confidentiality 
Any time information is collected; there is a pot ential risk for loss of confidentiality.  Every 
effort will be made to keep your information c onfidential; however, this cannot be guaranteed.  
29 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
Photographs 
You could be slightly uncomf ortable during the photographic sessions when asked to position 
your body to take the photograph of your breast area. You may be  uncomfortable with standing 
still for an extended period of time or from turning your body in various positions. You may be sensitive to the bright and repeating flashes from the camera, which can sometimes cause headaches, irritation of the eyes, discomfort, after effects such as s eeing spots, and in rare cases, 
could stimulate a migraine headache or epileptic seizure.  Photographs include a risk of iden tification.  Your privacy will be protected to the greatest extent 
possible.  Photos will be taken to exclude faces or any other id entifying marks. Photos will only 
be identified by a unique subjec t identification number that contains no personal identifying 
information. For research purposes your photos  may be used in scientific publications. 
 Other Risks 
There may possibly be other side effects that are unknown at this time. If you are concerned 
about other, unknown side effects, please discuss this with the researchers. 
 
How will risks be minimized or prevented?    
You will be carefully screen ed prior to participation in this study to be sure that you do not have 
any conditions that would make it unsafe for you.  You will be closely monitored during the 
study.  You will be asked, at each visit, about how you are feeling and about any problems or 
changes in your health that you are having.  If you have any adverse events (side effects) from 
the study products, your surgeon will discuss appropriate treatment with you.  
 What will my responsibilities be during the study?    
While you are part of this study, the researcher s will follow you closely to determine whether 
there are problems that need medical care.  It is your responsibili ty to do the following: 
 Ask questions about anything you do not understand. 
 Keep your appointments. 
 Follow the researchers’ instructions. 
 Let the researchers know if your te lephone number or address changes. 
 Store study materials (containers of product)  in a secure place at home away from 
anyone who is unable to read and unde rstand labels, especially children. 
 Tell the researchers before you take any ne w medication, even if it is prescribed by 
another doctor for a different medical problem  or something purchased over the counter. 
 Tell your regular doctor about your participation in this study. 
 Report to the researchers a ny injury or illnesses while  you are on study even if you do 
not think it is related.  
 
If I agree to take part in this research study, will I be told of any new risks that may be 
found during the course of the study? 
Yes.  You will be told if any new informati on becomes available during the study that could 
cause you to change your mind about continuing to part icipate or that is important to your health 
or safety. 
30 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
What should I do if I think I am having problems? 
If you have unusual symptoms, pain, or any other problems while you are in the study, you 
should report them to the resear chers right away.  Telephone numb ers where they can be reached 
are listed on the first page of this consent form. 
 If you have a sudden, serious problem, like difficu lty breathing or severe pain, go to the nearest 
hospital emergency room, or call 911 (or the correc t emergency telephone number in your area).  
Tell emergency personnel about any medications you are taking. 
 
What are the possible be nefits of this study? 
If you agree to take part in th is study, there may or may not be direct benefits to you.  The 
researchers cannot guarantee that you will benefit fr om participation in this  research.   You may 
benefit from a reduction in sk in irritation, decreased inflamma tion, and improved healing, but 
this cannot be guaranteed.   
 We hope the information learned from this st udy will may provide a be tter understanding of the 
effects of HylaCare™ on  irradiated skin.   
 
What options are available if I decide no t to take part in this research study? 
This is not a treatment study.  You do not have to be  part of it to get tr eatment for your elective 
procedure. 
 
Will my insurance provider or I be charged for th e costs of any part of this research study? 
No. Neither you, nor your insurance provider, wi ll be charged for anything done only for this 
research study (i.e., the Screen ing Procedures, Experimental Pr ocedures, or Monitoring/Follow-
up Procedures described above).   
 However, the standard medical care for your cond ition (care you would have received whether or 
not you were in this study) is your  responsibility (or the responsibi lity of your insurance provider 
or governmental program).  You will be charged,  in the standard manner, for any procedures 
performed for your stan dard medical care. 
 
What will happen if I am harmed as a result of taking part in this study?  
It is important that you report any illness or injury to the research  team listed at the top of this 
form immediately. 
 Compensation for an injury resulting from your participation in this rese arch is not available 
from the University of Texas Southwes tern Medical Center at Dallas.    
 You retain your legal rights during y our participation in this research 
 
Can I stop taking part in this research study? 
Yes.  If you decide to participate and later change your mind, you are free to  stop taking part in 
the research study at any time. 
 
31 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  If you decide to stop taking part in this research  study, it will not affect your relationship with the 
UT Southwestern staff or doctors.  Whether you participate or not will have no effect on your 
legal rights or the qual ity of your health care. 
 
If you are a medical student, fellow, faculty, or staff at the Medical Center, your status will not be affected in any way.  Your doctor may be a research inve stigator in this study.  S/he is  interested in both your medical 
care and the conduct of this res earch study.  At any time, you may discuss your care with another 
doctor who is not part of this research study.  Y ou do not have to take part in any research study 
offered by your doctor.  
If I agree to take part in this research stud y, can I be removed from the study without my 
consent?
 
Yes.  The researchers may decide to take you off this study if: 
 Your medical problem becomes worse. 
 The researchers believe that participation in the research is no longer safe for you. 
 The researchers believe that other treatment may be more helpful. 
 The sponsor stops the research for the safety of the participants. 
 The sponsor cancels the research. 
 You are unable to keep appointments or to follow the research ers’ instructions. 
 
Will my information be kept confidential? 
Information about you that is collected for this  research study will rema in confidential unless you 
give your permission to share it with others, or if we are required by law to release it.  You 
should know that certain organizations that ma y look at and/or copy your medical records for 
research, quality assurance, and data analysis include: 
 
• Hylaco, LLC; 
Disease Oriented Breast Team- Surgical Oncologist, Medical Oncologist, Plastic 
surgeons  
• Representatives of government agencies invo lved in keeping research safe for people; 
and 
• The UT Southwestern Institutional Review Board.  
 
Medical information collected during this study a nd the results of any test or procedure done 
may be included in your medical record and this  information may be available to health care 
providers and authorized persons including your insurance company.  In addition to this consent form, you will be  asked to sign an "Authorization for Use and 
Disclosure of Protected Health Information."  This authorization will gi ve more details about 
how your information will be used for this resear ch study, and who may see and/or get copies of 
your information. 
32 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
Are there procedures I should follow after stopping participation in this research? 
If you, the researchers, or the s ponsor stops your participation in  the research, you may be asked 
to do the following: 
 
 Let the researchers know immediately that you wish to withdraw from the research. 
 Return to the research center for test s that may be needed for your safety. 
 Return any unused study material s, including empty containers. 
 Discuss your future medical care, if any, with the researchers and/or your personal 
doctor. 
 
Whom do I call if I have questions or problems? 
For questions about the study, Asal Rahimi MD 214 645-8525 
For questions about your rights as a research participant, contact the UT Southwestern 
Institutional Review Boar d (IRB) Office at 214-648-3060. 
 
SIGNATURES: 
 
YOU WILL BE GIVEN A COPY OF THIS CONSENT FORM TO KEEP.  
 
Your signature below ce rtifies the following: 
 
•  You have read (or been read) the information provided above. •  You have received answers to all of your questions and have been told whom to call if you 
have any more questions. 
•  You have freely decided to participate in this research. 
•  You understand that you are not giving up any of your legal rights. 
You understand that a copy of th is signed consent document, information about this study 
d the results of any test or procedure done may be included in your medical record and this 
ormation may be available to health care provi ders and authorized persons including your 
urance company. 
   
 
__________________________________________________ 
Participant’s Name (printed)   
__________________________________________________ Participant’s Signature  _______________ 
Date 
__________________________________________________ Name of person obtaining consent (printed)   
__________________________________________________ Signature of person obtaining consent  ________________ 
Date 
3 3 
1 4 0 5 0 7 H yla Care 
R a n d o miz e d, D o u bl e- Bli n d, V e hi cl e C o ntr oll e d Pil ot St u d y of t h e Effi c a c y a n d S af et y of H yl a C ar eT M    i n t h e Pr o p h yl a xi s of A c ut e S ki n 
C h a n g e s i n P ati e nt s U n d er g oi n g E xt er n al B e a m R a di ot h er a p y f or  T u m or s of t h e Br e a st   
F O R M 2 A 
T est Articl e: Hyl a C ar eT M    P ati e nt N o.: St u dy N o.:  I N C L U SI O N C RI T E RI A  
I nv esti g at or’s N a m e:  T o d ay’s D at e: 
 
  
 
F or t h e p ati e nt t o b e i n cl u d e d i n t h e st u d y, all a n s w er s t o t h e f oll o wi n g q u e sti o n s 1- 6 m u st b e c h e c k e d Y E S, 
A N D at l e a st t h e a n s w er t o o n e p art of q u e sti o n 7 m u st b e c h e c k e d Y E S  
 Y E S  N O 
1. Is t h e p ati e nt 1 8 y e ars or ol d er ?   
2. Is t h er e a di a g n osis of c a nc er of t h e br e ast ?   
4. Will t h e pl a n n e d r a di ot h er a py b e a d mi nist er e d vi a t a n g e nti al p orts ?   
5. H as t h e p ati e nt pr ovi d e d a pri or writt e n I nf or m e d C o ns e nt f or m t ?   
6. D o es t h e p ati e nt h av e t h e a bility t o u n d erst a n d a d c o m ply wit h t h e r e q uir e m e nts of t his st u dy ?   
7. F or s ex u ally activ e f e m al es, o n e of t h e a ns w ers pr ovi d e d b el o w m ust b e “ Y E S”   
  a. H as t h e p ati e nt a gr e e d t o us e a n acc e pta bl e m et h o d of birt h c o ntr ol; or t ak e or al   c o ntr ac e ptiv es f or at l e ast o n e m o nt h pri or t o st u dy a n d f or t h e d ur ati o n of t h e st u dy ?   
  b. B e e n st eril e, i nf ertil e or ot h er wis e i nc a p a bl e of b ec o mi n g pr e g n a nt, or   
  c. b e e n p ost- m e n o p a us al f or at l e ast o n e y e ar ? 
   
 
 
 
I nv esti g at or’s Si g n at ur e:             D at e:       
3 4 
1 4 0 5 0 7 H yla Care 
R a n d o miz e d, D o u bl e- Bli n d, V e hi cl e C o ntr oll e d Pil ot St u d y of t h e Effi c a c y a n d S af et y of H yl a C ar eT M    i n t h e Pr o p h yl a xi s of A c ut e S ki n 
C h a n g e s i n P ati e nt s U n d er g oi n g E xt er n al B e a m R a di ot h er a p y f or  T u m or s of t h e Br e a st   
   
F O R M 2 B 
T est Articl e: Hyl a C ar eT M    P ati e nt N o.: St u dy N o.:  E X C L U SI O N C RI T E RI A  
I nv esti g at or’s N a m e:  T o d ay’s D at e: 
 
 
 
F or t h e p ati e nt t o b e i n cl u d e d i n t h e st u d y, all a n s w er s t o t h e f oll o wi n g q u e sti o n s m u st b e c h e c k e d N O  
 Y E S  N O 
1. Is t h e p ati e nt eit h er pr e g n a nt or  l act ati n g ?   
2. Is t h e p ati e nt usi n g a ny m e dic ati o n t h at mi g ht i nt erf er e wi t h t h e i nt er pr et ati o n of                   
t h e t est articl e’s eff ectiv e n ess or s af ety ?   
3. Will t h e p ati e nt b e usi n g a ny c o nc o mit a nt ski n c ar e pr e p ar ati o ns o n a ny of t h e irr a di at e d ar e as ?   
4. D o es t h e p ati e nt h av e a ny i nf ecti o n or u n h e al e d w o u n d i n t h e i nt e n d e d r a di ot h er a py ski n p ort ar e as ?   
5. D o es t h e p ati e nt h av e a ny f or m of g e n er aliz e d d er m at osis ?   
6. D o es t h e p ati e nt h av e a ny k n o w n dis e as e  t o aff ect t h e ski n h e ali n g pr oc ess ?                             
( e. g. s ev er e r e n al f ail ur e, etc.) ?   
7.  D o es t h e p ati e nt h av e a hist ory of a n a p hyl axis or m ulti pl e s ev er e all er gi es ?   
8. D o es t h e p ati e nt h av e a hist ory of all er gy t o avi a n-s o urc e d pr ot ei n pr o d ucts ?                              
( e. g., c hick e n, e g gs) ?   
9. D o es t h e p ati e nt pl a n t o r el oc at e d uri n g t h e c o urs e of t h e st u dy,  m aki n g sc h e d ul e d visits i m p ossi bl e ? 
1 0.  D o es t h e p ati e nt  h av e c oll a g e n v asc ul ar dis e as e ( L u p us, scl er o d er m a) ? 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
I nv esti g at or’s Si g n at ur e:           D at e:       
 
35 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
 
Test Article: HylaCareTM    
 
FORM 3 
 Patient No.: 
Study No.:  Physician’s Follow-Up 
Assessment Form  
Investigator’s Name:  Today’s Date: 
 
 
Date Radiotherapy Initiated (mm/dd/yy):  _____/_____/_____ 
 
Number of weeks of RT completed:  5___   2 weeks post-treatment___   
Check (X) signs or symptoms reported by the patient at the irradiated skin areas: 
 
Indication Right breast Left BreastWhich side  of 
IRRADIATED BREAST 
ONLY  is worse? 
(M/L/ equal)  
Medi
al Lateral  
Medial Lateral 
Redness         
Pain 
        
Tenderness         
Easily Irritated 
        
Burning 
        
Dryness         
Hypersensitive 
        
Hair Loss 
        
Other 
(describe) 
        
 Comments: 
 
    
 
   [Form 3, continued]   
36 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  
 
I.  Grading NCIC-CTC 
Adverse Event 1 2 3 4 5 
Dermatitis 
radiation Faint erythema or dry desquamation Moderate to brisk 
erythema; 
desquamation patchy moist desquamation, mostly confined to skin folds and creases moderate edema 
 Moist 
desquamation in areas other than skin folds and creases  
bleeding induced 
by minor trauma or abrasion Life-threatening consequences; skin necrosis or ulceration of full thickness dermis; 
spontaneous 
bleeding from involved site; skin graft indicated Death
 
Definition: A finding of cutaneous inflammatory reaction occurring as a result of exposure to biologically effective levels of ionizing  
radiation 
 
 Please use NCIC-CTC grading and diagram below:  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
II. In addition, using the Investigator Grading Scal e, grade the status of the medial  and lateral 
sides of the irradiated skin as: 
 
0 = normal skin 
1 = light epidermal irritation, consisting of the onset of erythema, possibly associated 
with slight edema 
2 = erythema with dry desquamation 
3 = 
wet desquamation </= 2 cm   
4 = wet desquamation  from 2.1 – 5 cm   
5 = wet desquamation from 5.1 - 9 cm  
6 = wet desquamation  > 9.1 cm  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investigator’s Signature:     _______Date:    
 
 
[Form 3, continued] 
 
37 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
 
 
 
If there is any skin desquamation, note minimal and maximal desquamation size: 
Medial:  __________  mm mini mal x __________ mm maximal 
Lateral: __________  mm minimal x __________ mm maximal 
 
Most severe desquamation is dry___ or wet_____? 
 
At  2-week Post-Radiation visit: Describe any treatment performed: 
Skin cleansing:___________________ _____________________________ __________________ 
Other (describe):__________________ _____________________________ __________________ 
 
Please grade the current status of desquamati on healing at 2-week Post-Radiation visit:   
Right Breast Medial:  __________  1 = no evidence of healing (or worsening) 
    2 = Beginning of proliferation     3 = Tissue granulation 
Lateral:  __________  4 = Re-epithelialization 
 Left Breast 
Medial:  __________  1 = no evidence of healing (or worsening) 
    2 = Beginning of proliferation 
    3 = Tissue granulation 
Lateral:  __________  4 = Re-epithelialization 
 Has the patient started any concomitant medication( s) since the last visit,  or has the medication 
dosage changed?  If yes, please list below. 
Medication Dose indication 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Has the patient reported any adverse events since the last visit?     Yes: _____     No: _____ 
If Yes, please list below and complete Adverse Event Form. 
I 
 
Investigator’s Signature:      ________Date:   
 
 
 
 
38 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
 
Test Article: HylaCareTM   FORM 4 Patient No.: Study No.:  DEMOGRAPHICS  
Investigator’s Name: AND MEDICAL HISTORY  Today’s Date: 
 
PATIENT DEMOGRAPHICS   
Date of Birth (mm/dd/yy):     SEX:   Female  
Height (inches):      Weight (pounds):     
Race:                               
1=White;  2=Black;  3=Hispanic ;  4=Asian;  5=Other, specify 
 
BMI: _________                           Breast Cup Size:  __________ 
 
 
MEDICAL HISTORY 
(Check appropriate boxes) 
System Normal Abnormal If Abnormal, specify: 
Allergies    
Drug Sensitivities    
Dermatologic    
HEENT    
Cardiovascular    
Pulmonary    
Gastrointestinal    
Renal    
Endocrine-metabolic    
GU Systems    
Musculoskeletal    
Peripheral Vascular    
Neurological    
Psychiatric    
Other    
 
Additional comments on Medical Hist ory findings (if any):       
              
  
 
Investigator’s Signature:       Date:    
39 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
   
 
 
Test Article:  HylaCareTM    
Patient No.: Study No.:  FORM 5 
GENERAL PHYSICAL  
Investigator’s Name: EXAMINATION  Today’s Date: 
  
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION Normal Abnormal If Abnormal, specify: 
Head and Neck     
Skin and Mucosa    
Eyes    
Lymph Nodes    
Cardiovascular    
Chest and Lungs    
Abdomen    
Musculoskeletal    
Other     
    
 
Additional Comments (if any):          
             
             
             
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investigator’s Signature:       Date:    
40 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
   
 
  
Test Article: HylaCareTM    
Patient No.: Study No.:  FORM 6 
RADIOTHERAPY  
Investigator’s Name: TREATMENT FORM  Today’s Date: 
 
Date of first radiotherapy session (mm/dd/yy):  _____/_____/_____ 
 Maximum Hot spot:  
 
Circle whether      6MV       15MV           18 MV or      MIXED PHOTONS    are used.    If mixed photons are used, please note weighting of each photon energy.  
#cc’s receiving greater than 107% prescription dose: ____________ 
 #cc’s receiving greater than 110% prescription dose:_____________  # of cc’s of breast tissue in the tangential field (breast tangents including chest wall and ribs) 
 
Whole breast radiation prescription dose:  ____________ Maximum dose: ______________  Which breast is being irradiated? Right ____   Left_______ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investigator’s Signature:      Date:    
41 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
 
 
Test Article: HylaCareTM   FORM 7 
PATIENT DAILY LOG  Patient No.: 
Study No.:   
Investigator’s Name:  
 Today’s Date: 
 
 
Day (Date) Morning 
(time of application) Afternoon 
(time of application) Evening 
(time of application) 
Monday     
Tuesday     
Wednesday     
Thursday     
Friday     
Saturday     
Sunday     
Day (Date) Morning 
(time of application) Afternoon (time of application) Evening (time of application) 
Monday     
Tuesday     
Wednesday     
Thursday     
Friday     
Saturday     
Sunday     
Day (Date) Morning 
(time of application) Afternoon 
(time of application) Evening (time of application) 
Monday     
Tuesday     
Wednesday     
Thursday     
Friday     
Saturday     
Sunday     
42 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  
 
 
Test Article: HylaCareTM   FORM 8 
PATIENT INSTRUCTIONS FORM  Patient No.: 
Study No.:  (to be given to the patient!) 
Investigator’s Name:  Today’s Date: 
	
You	have	been	given	two	nearly	i dentical	pump	containers	of	ser um	to	be	applied	to	your	irradiated	
skin	three	times	a	day.		The	label	on	each	container	will	tell	 you	on	which	side	to	apply	the	serum,	
either	medial	(inside)	or	latera l	(outside).		The	picture	below	shows	you	which	container	should	be	
used	on	which	location.				At	Baseline	visit	or	first	week	of	treatment,	at	Week	3,	Week	5 	and	2	weeks	post‐treatment	you	will	
be	given	sufficient	Set	Bags	as	needed	to	complete	the	study.				
Please outline the areas of skin that will be subject to irradiation.  Note areas to be 
included in study with a CIRCLE, and note areas outside study area with an X. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use diagram to indicate which jar to use on which portion of breast. 
Note:  
(1) The above-outlined areas, within the circles to indicate inclusion in the study, are the 
ones to which the test article products are be applied. 
(2) The patient will be instructed how, where, and how much product to apply to each 
irradiated skin area. 
(3) The patient will also be instructed to apply these products only to the encircled areas, 
and not to apply any other skin care products to these sites. 
 
	
					
	
					
43 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  	
Application	Methods	
Ensure	that	your	hands	are	clean,	then	use	the	pump	to	dispense 	an	adequate	amount	of	serum.				
Apply	enough	serum	to	cover	the	 entire	area	noted	in	the	diagra m.		Wash	your	hands	again,	before	
switching	to	the	other	serum	and	applying	to	the	other	side.		D o	not	use	any	other	products	on	the	
treatment	areas.					
	
				Additional	Information	
Apply	serums	three	times	a	day,	every	day,	but	 ensure	that	you	don’t	apply	anything 	to	your	
skin	within	4	hours	before	your	radiotherapy	 appointment. 	
Ensure	that	you	apply	the	serums	IMMEDIATELY	AFTER		radiotherap y	treatment.	
Apply	only	to	the	area	identified	for	 prophylaxis .	
	Report	any	reactions	(general	or 	localized)	to	the	investigator 	at	the	next	daily	session,	or	more	
severe	reactions	by	telephone.	Suggestions	for	personal	care	of	the	irradiated	skin	
1. 	Avoid	irritating	the	skin	
2. When	washing,	use	only	lukewarm	water	and	mild	soap,	patting	th e	surface	dry	
3. Avoid	the	use	of	tight	clothing	
4. Do	not	rub,	scrub	or	scratch	the	skin	
5. Avoid	the	use	of	heating	pads	or	ice	packs	
6. Do	not	use	powders,	creams	,	perfumes,	deodorants,	body	oils,	o intments	or	lotions	on	the	
irradiated	surfaces	
7. Avoid	direct	sun	exposure,	if	necessary,	wear	protective	clothi ng
44 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  
	
Study No.:  Form 9 
 PHYSICIAN’S GLOBAL  Patient No.: 
Investigator’s Name: ASSESSMENT FORM  Today’s Date: 
 
Note:  This form should be completed at Week 5 prior to boost  and at the end of study 
(2  weeks after completion of RT). 
Please make an overall global  assessment of the effect iveness of radiation skin 
tolerance of both sides of the irradiated breast tissue.  Based on your judgment and 
past experience, compare the skin appearance and patient’s reported symptomatology for each side of the breast, and for each breas t (test substance-treated and vehicle 
control-treated) with the normally expected degree of radiation damage for similar body 
sites.  Grade your overall impression as:   0 = poor (worse than typical expectations)  1 = fair (equal to, or slightly  better than typical expectations) 
 2 = good (moderately better than typical expectations)  3 = excellent (markedly bette r than typical expectations) 
 Please compare the two irradiat ed sites.  In your opinion, which skin site fared better, 
based on symptoms experienc e by the patient and overall skin appearance? 
 Right Breast: Medial:  __________     Lat eral:  __________     Equal Tolerance:  __________ 
Left Breast Medial:  __________     Later al:  __________     Equal  Tolerance:  __________ 
 
Comments:    
 
  
________________________ _____________________ _________________________
__________________________________________ _______________ _____________
________________________ _____________________ _________________________
________________________ _____________________ _____________ 
 
 
Investigator’s Signature:       Date:    
45 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast  
 
 
Test Article: HylaCareTM   FORM 10 
PATIENT’S OVERALL  Patient No.: 
Study No.:  EVALUATION FORM  
Investigator’s Name:  Today’s Date: 
 
Note:  The patient should complete this questionna ire at Week 5 prior to boost and at 
the final visit (2  weeks a fter the completion of RT). 
 Instructions to the Patient 
 
You have now completed your prescribed course of radiot herapy administrated to your 
breast.   
Please compare the two sides (medial [inner] and lateral [out er]) of your irradiated 
breast which were exposed to radiation.  In terms of any localized skin reactions you have experiences throughout your radiotherapy (such as redness, so reness, itching, or others), which side of the irradiated 
breast do you believe fared better. __________Medial better than late ral (inner better than outer) 
__________Lateral better than medial (outer better than inner) 
__________No difference between medial (inner) and lateral (outer)  Which side of the irradiated breast has main tained an overall appearance closest to its 
appearance before ra diotherapy began? 
__________Medial (inner) __________Lateral (outer) __________No difference between medial (inner) and lateral (outer)  Do you have any preferences between the serums applied to your skin ? 
__________Prefer the product applie d to medial side (inner) 
__________Prefer the product applie d to lateral side (outer) 
__________No preference bet ween the two products 
 
 
    If you did prefer one product over the other, please explain why: 
________________________ ______________________________________________
________________________ _____________________ _________________________ 
 
Investigator’s Signature:       Date:    
46 
140507 HylaCare 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Vehicle Controlled Pilot Study of the Efficacy and Safety of HylaCareTM    in the Prophylaxis of Acute Skin 
Changes in Patients Undergoing External Beam Radiotherapy for  Tumors of the Breast   
Test Article: HylaCareTM   FORM 11 
PATIENT  Patient No.: 
Study No.:  COMPLETION FORM  
Investigator’s Name:  Today’s Date: 
 
Note:  To be completed at the final visit, or upon discontinuation from the study. 
 
1.Subject Overview 
Did the patient experience any side effects from  the study agent?      Yes: _____  No: _____ 
 If yes, complete Adverse Event Form 
 
2.Study Completion Did the patient complete the entir e study?    Yes: _____  No: _____ 
 If no, complete information below. 
 
3.Discontinuation from Study 
Date of withdrawal (mm/dd/yy):   _____/_____/_____ 
 Reason for withdrawal (check and explain) 
_____Adverse Event:_______________ ____________________________________________ _________ 
_____Did not meet protocol crit eria:________________________________________________ _________ 
_____Unreliable:_____ _______________________________________________ ___________________ 
_____Lost to follow-up/moved:______ _______________________________________________________ 
_____Subject requested discontinuat ion:________________________________________ _____________ 
_____Other:________________________________________________________ ___________________ 
 
Explain (in detail, as needed)  
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________ ________________ 
  
I have reviewed and evaluated the info rmation provided in these case report forms and believe it accurate 
represents the patient’s clin ical progress in the study. 
 
 
Investigator’s Signature:       Date:    