Protocol 8/15/17 Page 1 
COMIRB #: 17-0781 
 Project Title: A pilot study of stable ki dney transplant recipients taking tacrolimus 
with CNS symptoms  switched to Envarsus    
 
Principal Investigator:  Laurence Chan, MD  Version Date:  August 15, 2017  COMIRB #: 17-0781        
Hypotheses and Specific Aims :   
 
The use of once-daily Envarsus XR® (tacrolimus extended-release tablets) will have significant improvement in the pa tients reported CNS symptoms. 
 
Background and Significance : 
Graft survival in renal transplant patients ha s improved steadily over the last decades as a 
result of improved immunosuppressive therapie s. Immunosuppressive regimens continue 
to have side effects which pa tients find burdensome and which may lead to sub-therapeutic 
dosing and non-compliance by the patient.  Patients on different immunosuppr essant regimens may be bothered by Central Nervous 
System (CNS) side effects or report better he alth-related quality of life (HRQL). We will 
evaluate the reliability and validity CNS- specific outcome instruments (CNS Symptom 
Rating Scale; higher scores = increased severity ) and Quality of Life Index (higher scores 
= better CNS-specific HRQL) in renal transplant patients.  
Neurotoxicity in transplant patients occurs  in >40-50% of the patients treated with 
tacrolimus (1).  Tacrolimus was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
in April of 1994 for the prophylax is of organ rejection in patie nts receiving allogeneic liver 
transplants under the brand name Prograf® (tacrolimus capsules, Astellas Pharma US, 
Inc.). 
 The majority of the neurotoxicity events in tacrolimus treated transplant patients are headache and tremor, while less frequent and more severe neurotoxicity (encephalopathy, seizures) is also observed. (2) The current  management of neurotoxicity varies by 
investigator and institution, but  normally begins with a dose reduction of the tacrolimus, 
balancing increased risk of acute rejection and graft loss with  the desire to improve the side 
effects observed for a given patient. (3, 4)  In more severe cases, immunosuppressant 
regimens may be changed from tacrolimus to cyclosporine, an agent which also is 
associated with similar neurotoxicity and a reduced clinical effectiveness. Literature documents that the neurotoxicity is associated  with peak tacrolimus concentrations in 
transplant as well as autoimmune diseases and shows that the neurotoxicity essentially 
abates when tacrolimus treatment is discont inued, providing proof that tacrolimus is a 
reversible neurotoxic agent. (5)  
 
 
Protocol 8/15/17 Page 2 
COMIRB #: 17-0781 
 Envarsus XR (Veloxis Pharmaceuticals) is an extended-release formulation of 
tacrolimus designed for once-daily administ ration that has been developed utilizing 
Veloxis Pharma’s proprietary   MeltDose® drug-delivery technology (Veloxis 
Pharmaceuticals A/S, Hørsholm, DK). Envarsus XR is designed and has been 
approved by FDA to deliver equivalent whol e blood concentrations to the immediate-
release formulation of tacrolimus over the 24-hour dosing interval.   As previously 
reported, The ASERTAA trial demonstrated  that patients on Envarsus achieved 
therapeutic drug levels with a 30% lower peak concentration and 20% lower average dose 
compared to tacrolimus immediate-release regardless of genotype status. Importantly, 
patients expressing the CYP3A5*1 genotype on tacrolimus immediate-release reached a 
peak concentration as high as 26 ng/mL.  
 This high peak levels might related to the high incidence of CNS rela ted side effects. The 
PK data collected for Envarsus XR® dem onstrated similar exposure, lower Cmax, 
prolonged Tmax, and increased bioavailability  when compared to tacrolimus immediate-
release.  
 
The study is designed in such a way that patient will report objectively their experience 
related to CNS symptoms using a standard questionnaire before staring on Envarsus XR. 
The OPTN/SRTR 2011 Annual Data Report shows that approximately 90% of 
Recipients transplanted in 2010 were init iated on tacrolimus as part of their 
immunosuppression regimen and we re continuing to take ta crolimus at one-year post-
transplant.  
 Envarsus XR is designed to deliver equiva lent whole blood concentrations to the 
immediate-release formulation of tacrolimus over the 24 -hour dosing interval. This 
formulation works better with the enzyme system s in the lower gastrointestinal (GI) tract, 
facilitating a constant stable absorption of  tacrolimus through the GI tract leading to 
improved bioavailability and constant  plasma levels over the full day.  
 In a prior study in stable renal transplant recipients  converted from Prograf to Envarsus XR 
(LCP-Tacro), showed 30% greater bioavailability compared to Prograf, as well as a steadier and more consistent concentration time profile over 24 hours, and reduced peak-
to-trough fluctuations and swing compared to Prograf, with good tolerability and a robust 
AUC/Cmin correlation (correlation coefficients from 0.86 to 0.91). 
 A Phase III study in stable renal transplant reci pients converted from Prograf to Envarsus 
XR demonstrated non-inferior efficacy and si milar safety for Envarsus XR compared to 
Prograf. Total daily Envarsus XR dose was a bout 20% lower than preconversion Prograf 
twice-daily dose.   The Expanded access Study Envarsus 3007 conducted to provide patients the opportunity for an alternative tacrolimus treatment a nd/or continuation of therapy for patients 
previously on Envarsus clinical studies.   Envarsus XR tablets are an extended-release formulation of tacrolimus, intended for once-
daily administration, the anticipat ed risks of Envarsus XR are expected to be the same as 
for Prograf though the severity and frequency may be less due to reduced maximal blood 
Protocol 8/15/17 Page 3 
COMIRB #: 17-0781 
 concentrations. Based on the Prograf package,  insert and the overall experience with 
Prograf in solid organ transplantation the anticipated risks from Envarsus XR include: 
nephrotoxicity, new onset diabetes mellitu s, hypertension, neurotoxicity, hyperkalemia, 
and latent viral infections. Given the low peak  tacrolimus levels when taking Envarsus, we 
might expect less CNS side effects. (6.7). 
 Overall, the study would provide renal transplant patients the opportunity to an alternative 
tacrolimus treatment with possi ble less CNS side effects.  
 CNS side effects are one of the main reasons that patients complain after having a kidney 
transplant while on tacrolimus (P rograf). The side effects can be debilitating and can affect 
patients overall well-being. In severe cases may lead to non-compliance. So the advantage of the study of using Envarsus XR for the patien ts is the ability to avoid those debilitating 
CNS side effects, like tremor, headache, and difficulty in concentrating and sleep 
disturbances. Envarsus XR has been approved and has similar efficacy as tacrolimus (Prograf, so there is no disadvant ages or risk to the patients.  
 III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
 
This is the first study on Envarsus XR using Patients reported questionnaire 
methodology to examine the CNS side-effects of Tacrolimus (Prograf). There 
is no need for a cross over study and each patient will serve as its own control. The design and methodology will be similar to the PROGIS study that was published by Chan et al (8).   Prior studies including the Phase III study in stable renal transplant recipients 
converted from Prograf to Envarsus XR  demonstrated non-inferior efficacy 
and similar safety for Envarsus XR comp ared to Prograf. Total daily Envarsus 
XR dose was about 20% lower than prec onversion Prograf twice-daily dose.  
Additional Expanded access Study Enva rsus 3007 conducted to provide 
patients the opportunity for an altern ative tacrolimus treatment and/or 
continuation of therapy for patients previ ously on Envarsus cl inical studies. In 
addition to comparable efficacy and non-in feriority of Envarsus XR, there was 
better pharcokinetics and po ssible less CNS side effects. However, the studies 
were not specifically designe d to test this hypothesis. 
 IV. Research  Methods 
 
Outcome Measure(s):   
This is a population-based, longitudinal, prospective, minimal risk interventional 
study of renal transplant patients in routin e practice. This approach is designed to 
generate hypotheses (rather than test hypotheses) concer ning the impact of current 
and newly emerging immunosuppressive  regimens and decision-making on 
regimen tolerability, safety, patient co-mor bidities, and graft and patient outcomes 
in the real world.  We expect patients will have improvement in quality of life 
Protocol 8/15/17 Page 4 
COMIRB #: 17-0781 
 related to sleep disturbance and upper extremity fine motor skills/ADL.  
Tacrolimus drug levels, serum creatinine and other parameters related to graft 
function, graft function, and other advers e events will be documented during the 
study period.  Standard of care immunosuppr ession for kidney transplant recipients 
at UC Health is either Prograf twice a day or Envarsus XR once a day, Myfortic 
and steroids.   Serum creatinine and tacrolimus levels (drug level monitoring) is 
required for both Prograf and Envarsus XR  and is standard of care for this 
population.   
 
Description of Populatio n to be enrolled:   
 Inclusion 
 Kidney transplant recipients with stab le graft function will be switched from 
Prograf twice/day to Envarsus XR once a day per standard of care  
 More than 1 months post-transplant  
 18+ years of age with some CNS proble ms secondary to Prograf (tacrolimus) 
Exclusion 
 Multi-organ patients (kidne y/pancreas, kidney/liver) 
 Evidence of graft rejection or treatment of  acute rejection within 14 days prior to 
baseline visit 
 Inability to self-administer the QOL questionnaires 
 
 Study Design and Research Method 
Pilot study documenting the neurotoxic side effects including tremors in patients with 
stable graft who are receiving Tacrolimus fo llowing kidney transplantation.  Standardized 
questionnaire will be used to document these symptoms.  Envarsus XR® will be provided 
to the subjects by Veloxis Pharmaceuticals (m anufacture of the drug) for the duration of 
the study (6 months).  After a subject completes the study, they will continue taking Envarsus XR® through thei r insurance/self-pay.  
 
Description, Risks and Justification of Procedures and Data Collection Tools: 
After informed consent, the subject will co mplete the PROMIS questionnaire before 
switching to Envarsus XR.  Subjects will rep eat questionnaires at 1 month and 6 months 
focusing on quality of life (QOL) questionnair e related to sleep disturbance and upper 
extremity fine motor skill/activ ities of daily living (ADL) 
Questionnaires 
 Sleep Disturbance-Short Form 8a 
 Upper Extremity Function (Fine Motor, ADL)-Short Form 
 Upper Extremity-Short Form 7a 
 Global Health Scale v1.2 
Review medical record for demographics, medi cal history (including kidney transplant) and 
other basic information:  
 vital signs,  
Protocol 8/15/17 Page 5 
COMIRB #: 17-0781 
  minimal lab collected as standard of car e (serum creatinine, tacrolimus level) 
Adverse events 
Graft function 
    
Potential Scientific Problems:   
 
Each patient will serve as its own control.  No scientific problem will be expected. 
Although the study is an open-label and no placebo group; but the patient reported outcomes will serve as its own control and any improvement in symptoms may not be 
placebo related as reported in previous studies using the same methodology.  
 
Data Analysis Plan:   
 
Research is conducted according to the ICH Harmonized Tripartite Guidelines for Good 
Clinical Practice and in compliance with the et hical principles of th e Helsinki Declaration. 
Appropriate Institutional Revi ew Board/Ethics Committee ap proval will be obtained prior 
to study initiation. Patients are eligible for partic ipation if they are at least 18 years of age; 
willing to provide informed consent and adhe re to study requirements; have received a 
renal transplant at least 1 month prior to the study enrollment; and have been on an 
immunosuppressive regimen including Tacrolimus (Prograf) for at least four weeks prior 
to enrollment. 
 All analyses will be performed with SA S version 8.02 (SAS Institute, Cary NC). 
Demographic variables and clin ical conditions will be evalua ted by descriptive analyses. 
For the descriptive analyses, chi-square tests will be used to evaluate categorical data; t-
tests and analyses of variance (ANOVA) will be used to evaluate continuous data. Scoring 
– including imputations for missing data if n ecessary – will be performed according to 
each questionnaire's guidelines.  Reliability refers to the consistency of items  within an instrument, either over time or 
internally within the instrument. Internal cons istency reliability is the extent to which all 
items measure the same construct; values are presented descriptively, on an internal level 
scale from 0 to 1.0, with higher scores indi cating a more reliable (precise) instrument 
 
Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:    
Immunosuppressive therapies have burden some side effects which may lead to 
sub-therapeutic dosing and non-compliance. 
 
The study will provide renal transplant patients the opportunity to an 
alternative tacrolimus treatment with po ssible less CNS side effects. CNS side 
effects are one of the main reasons that patients complain after having a kidney transplant while on tacrolim us (Prograf). The side effects can be debilitating 
and can affect patients overall well-b eing. In severe cases may lead to non-
compliance. So the advantage of the study of using Envarsus for the patients is 
Protocol 8/15/17 Page 6 
COMIRB #: 17-0781 
 the ability to avoid thos e debilitating CNS side effects and afford better 
compliance with the patients taking the medicine. 
  
 
 
  
Study Calendar 
 
 
            
 
  
 
     
             Procedure  Baseline M1 M6/EOS
Consent X   
VS (BP, P, weight) X X X 
Serum creatinine X X X 
Tacrolimus level X X X 
Pregnancy test (as needed) X   
    
Global health questionnaire X X X 
Sleep Disturbance-Short 
Form 8a X X X 
Upper Extremity Function (Fine Motor, ADL)-Short Form  X X X 
Upper Extremity-Short Form 7a  X X X 
Switch to Envarsus X   
Adverse events  X X 
Protocol 8/15/17 Page 7 
COMIRB #: 17-0781 
 References: 
 
1.    Prograf® [package label]. Astellas Phar ma US, Inc. Deerfield (IL); 2009  
2   Wijdicks EFM, Weisner RH,  Dahl ke LJ,  Krom RAF.  FK5  06-induced 
Neurotoxicity in  Liver 
Transplantation. Ann Ne urol 1994;35.498-501.  
3.    Appignani B, Bhadelia R, Blacklow S, Wang A, Roland S, Freeman R. Neuroimaging 
findings in patients on immunosuppressive thera py: experience with ta crolimus toxicity. 
Am J Roentgenol 1996; 
166: 683-688.  
4.    Reinohs M, Straube T, Baum P, Berr ouschot J, Wagner A. Recurrent reversible 
cerebral edema after long term immunos uppression with tacrolimus. J Neurol 
2002;249:780-781.  
5.    Bechstein WO. Neurotoxicity of calci neurin inhibitors: impact and clinical 
management. Transpl Int. 2000;13:313-326. 
 
6.      Novel Once-Daily Extended-Release Tacrolimus Versus Twice-Daily Tacrolimus in De Novo Kidney Transplant Recipients: Two-Year Results of Phase 3, Double-Blind, Randomized Trial.. Rostaing L, Bunnapradis t S, Grinyó JM, Ciechanowski K, Denny JE, 
Silva HT Jr, Budde K; Envarsus Study Group.. Am J Kidney Dis. 2016 Apr;67(4):648-59. 
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2015.10.024.. PMID: 26717860   7  Switching STudy of Kidney TRansplant  Patients with Tremor to LCP-TacrO 
(STRATO): an open-label, multicenter, prospe ctive phase 3b study.  Langone A, Steinberg 
SM, Gedaly R, Chan LK, Shah T, Sethi KD, Nigro V, Morgan JC; STRATO Investigators..Clin Transplant. 2015  Sep;29(9):796-805. doi: 10.1111/ctr.12581. PMID: 
26113208 Free PMC Article.  8.  Chan L, Mulgaonkar S, Walker R, Arns W, Ambuhl P, Schiavel li R. Patient-reported 
gastrointestinal symptom burden and health -related quality of lif e following conversion 
from mycophenolate mofetil to enteric-coat ed mycophenolate sodium. Transplantation. 
2006;81:1290–1297. doi: 10.1097/01.tp.0000209411.66790.b3. [PubMed] [Cross Ref] 