Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Phase 2 Trial of Olaparib in Pat ients with Metastatic Urothelia l Cancer Harboring DNA 
Damage Response Gene Alterations 
  
Sponsor Investigator 
 
Matthew D. Galsky, MD 
Icahn School of Medic ine at Mount Sinai 
Tisch Cancer Institute 
 
Co-Principal Investigator 
 
Matthew Milowsky, MD 
UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center 
UNC-Chapel Hill School of Medicine 
 
Statistician 
 
Menggang Yu, PhD, MS 
  
Trial Management Provided by  
Hoosier Cancer Res earch Network, Inc. 
500 N. Meridian, Suite 100 
Indianapolis, IN 46204 
  
Trial Supported by  
Astra-Zeneca ESR-16-12351 
  
Investigational New Drug (IND) #: Exempt per FDA 10/27/17 
  
 
 
Initial Protocol Version Date: 13NOV2017  
Protocol Amendme nt Version Date:  
24MAY2018 15MAY2019 
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 2 of 60 PROTOCOL SIGNATURE PAGE 
 
Phase 2 Trial of Olaparib in Pat ients with Metastatic Urothelia l Cancer Harboring DNA 
Damage Response Gene Alterations 
   
VERSION DATE: 15MAY2019 
I confirm I have read this pr otocol, I understand it, and I wil l work according to this protocol and 
to the ethical principles stated in the latest version of the D eclaration of Helsink i, the applicable 
guidelines for good clinical practi ces, whichever provides the greater protection of the 
individual. I will accept the mon itor’s overseeing of the study . I will promptly submit the 
protocol to applicable institutional review board(s).  
 
  ____________________________________ ________________________ 
 S i g n a t u r e  o f  S i t e  I n v e s t i g a t o r        D a t e    ____________________________________  Site Investigator Name (printed)  
 
____________________________________  Site Investigator Title   ____________________________________  Name of Facility   ____________________________________  Location of Facility (City and State)    
 PLEASE COMPLETE AND EM AIL A COPY TO HCRN 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 3 of 60 SYNOPSIS  
TITLE Phase 2 Trial of Olaparib i n Patients with Metastatic 
Urothelial Cancer Harboring DNA Damage Response Gene 
Alterations
SHORT TITLE Phase 2 Trial of Olaparib i n Metastatic UC Patients 
PHASE  2 
OBJECTIVES Primary Objective 
• Estimate the objective res ponse rate (per RECIST 1.1 
in patients with measurable disease and MD Anderson criteria in patients with b one-only metastases) to 
treatment with olaparib in subjects with metastatic urothelial cancer harboring s omatic DDR alterations.   
 Secondary Objectives 
• Describe the safety of olapar ib in subjects with DDR 
mutant metastatic urothelial cancer. 
• Describe the progression-fr ee survival of subjects with 
DDR mutant metastatic urothelial cancer treated with olaparib. 
• Describe the overall survi val of subjects with DDR 
mutant metastatic urothelial cancer treated with olaparib.  
Exploratory Objectives 
• Explore the relationship between specific genomic 
alterations with res ponse to olaparib. 
• Explore the relationship be tween prior platinum-based 
chemotherapy treatment (response, duration of treatment, and time since treatment) with response to olaparib. 
• Explore the relationship between tumor mutational 
profile, circulating DNA mu tational profile, and 
response to olaparib. 
• Determine the feasibility of establishing patient-
derived xenografts from ci rculating tumor cells 
collected from enrolled subjects at baseline and progression to better explo re mechanisms of response 
and resistance. 
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 4 of 60 STUDY DESIGN This is a single arm open label m ulti-instituti onal phase II tr ial 
of olaparib monotherapy in subjec ts with metastatic urothelial 
cancer harboring DDR alterations . The primary objective of 
the study is to estimate the  objective response rate (per 
RECIST 1.1) to treatment with olaparib. 
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA (See Section 3 for full eligibility criteria) Inclusion Criteria 
 
1. Written informed consent and HIPAA authorization for 
release of personal health inf ormation prior to registration. 
NOTE:   HIPAA authorization may be included in the 
informed consent or obtained separately.  
2. Age ≥ 18 years at the time of consent. 
 
3. ECOG Performance Status of ≤ 1 within 14 days prior to 
registration. Cisplatin-ine ligible chemotherapy-naïve 
subjects (see inclusion cr iteria #9) may have an ECOG 
Performance Status of ≤ 2. 
 
4. Histological or cytological evidence/confirmation of 
urothelial cancer.   
 
5. Metastatic and/or unresectable (cT4b) urothelial cancer.  
 
6. Metastatic disease evaluabl e on imaging studies. Subjects 
may have measurable disease according to RECIST 1.1 or 
bone-only disease within 30 days  prior to registration.  
NOTE : Bone-only subjects are eligible if their disease can 
be documented/ evaluate d by bone scans, CT or MRI. 
Their disease will be a ssessed using MD Anderson 
criteria.
34 NOTE : Previously irradiate d lesions are eligible 
as a target lesion only if the re is documented progression 
of the lesion after irradiation. 
 
7. Somatic alteration considered pathogenic/likely 
pathogenic in one of the following DDR genes as determined by genomic sequencing performed in a Clinical Laboratory Improve ment Amendments (CLIA) 
laboratory. Somatic alterat ions will include nonsense, 
frameshift, splice-site or  missense mutations or 
homozygous deletions. Subjects with alterations in DDR genes not included in the list below will be considered on a case by case basis after di scussion with the sponsor-
investigator. Subjects wit h germline alterations in DDR 
genes will be considered on a case by case basis and will 
be reviewed b y the sponso r-investi gator. At least 6 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 5 of 60 subjects will have BRCA  or ATM alterations. 
Nucleotide 
Excision Repair Homologous 
Recombination Base 
Excision Repair Other 
ERCC2 BRCA1 RAD52 XRCC2 MUTYH
ERCC3 BRCA2 RAD54L XRCC3 RECQL4
ERCC4 RAD50 NBN XRCC4 POLQ 
ERCC5 RAD51 MRE11A XRCC5 POLE 
ERCC6 RAD51B RAD51D XRCC6 WRN 
 RAD51C CTIP  
  
DNA Sensor  Fanconi Anemia 
Pathway  
ATM  PALB2  FANCE  
ATR BRIP1 FANCF  
MDC1 FANCA FANCG  
ATRX FANCB BLM  
CHEK1 FANCC  
CHEK2 FANCD2  
 
8. A subject with prior brain meta stasis may be considered if 
they have completed their treat ment for brain metastasis at 
least 4 weeks prior to study registration, have been off of 
corticosteroids for ≥ 2 weeks, and are asymptomatic. 
 9. Subjects must have progressed de spite at least 1 prior line 
of treatment for metastatic a nd/or unresectable urothelial 
cancer. However, cisplatin -ineligible (defined by a 
calculated creatinin e clearance of > 30 but < 60 mL/min 
OR CTCAE v4 Grade ≥ 2 audiom etric hearing loss OR 
CTCAE v4 Grade ≥ 2 periphe ral neuropathy OR ECOG 
PS = 2), chemotherapy-naïve su bjects are also eligible.  
 
10. Prior cancer treatment (sy stemic therapy or radiation 
therapy) must be completed at least 3 weeks prior to registration and the subject m ust have recovered from all 
reversible acute toxic effects  of the regimen (other than 
alopecia) to Grade ≤ 1 or baseline.  
 
11. Demonstrate adequate orga n function. All screening labs 
to be obtained within 28 days  prior to reg istration. 
• Absolute Neutrophil Count (ANC) ≥ 1.5 x 10
9/L 
• Hemoglobin (Hgb) ≥ 9 g/dL 
• Platelets ≥ 100 x 109/L 
• Calculated creatinine clearance1 > 30 mL/min 
• Bilirubin ≤ 1.5 × upper limit of normal (ULN) 
• Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and Alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT)  ≤ 2.5 × ULN (or ≤ 5 × ULN 
if liver metastases)
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 6 of 60 12. Female subjects must be postmenopausal or there must be 
evidence of non-childbear ing status for women of 
childbearing potential: negativ e urine or serum pregnancy 
test within 28 days of study t reatment and confirmed prior 
to treatment on day 1. Postmenopausal is defined as:  
• Amenorrheic for 1 year or more following cessation of 
exogenous hormonal treatments 
• Luteinizing hormone (LH) and Follicle stimulating 
hormone (FSH) levels in t he post-menopausal range 
for women under 50 
• radiation-induced oophorectomy with last menses >1 
year ago 
• chemotherapy-induced menopause with >1 year 
interval since last menses 
• surgical sterilization (bilateral oophorectomy or 
hysterectomy) 
 
13. Females of childbearing potential must be willing to 
abstain from heterosexual activity or to use 2 forms of 
effective methods of contraception from the time of informed consent until 90 days after treatment discontinuation. The two cont raception methods can be 
comprised of two barrier methods, or a barrier method plus a hormonal method. Males must be willing to abstain from heterosexual activity or t o use 2 forms of effective 
contraception from the time of informed consent until 90 days after treatment discontinuation.  
14. As determined by the enrolling physician or protocol 
designee, ability of the subj ect to understand and comply 
with study procedures for the  entire length of the study 
 
15. All subjects must have adequa te archival tissue available 
prior to registrati on (i.e., at least 15 u nstained slides or 
paraffin block). Archival tissue should represent invasive 
or metastatic urothelial can cer with a preference for 
metastatic tissue if availabl e. Archival tissue should be 
identified at screening a nd shipped by C1D1. Subjects 
without adequate tissue ma y be considered on a case by 
case basis after discussion w ith the sponsor-investigator.  
 Exclusion Criteria  
1. Active infection requiring systemic therapy. 
 
2. Pre
gnant or breastfeedin g 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 7 of 60  
3. Known additional malignancy t hat is active and/or 
progressive requiring treat ment; subjects with other 
malignancies that have bee n definitively treated and who 
have been rendered disease free will be eligible. 
 
4. Prior treatment with a PARP i nhibitor, including olaparib. 
 
5. Treatment with any investig ational drug within 30 days 
prior to registration.  
 
6. Involvement in the planni ng and/or conduct of the study 
(applies to both AstraZeneca st aff and/or staff at the study 
site). 
 
7. Resting ECG with QTc > 470 msec on 2 or more time 
points within a 24 hour peri od or family history of long 
QT syndrome. 
 
8. Concomitant use of known strong CYP3A inhibitors (eg. 
itraconazole, telithromycin, c larithromycin, protease 
inhibitors boosted with ritonavi r or cobicistat, indinavir, 
saquinavir, nelfinavir, bocepre vir, telaprevir) or moderate 
CYP3A inhibitors (eg. ciprofloxacin, erythromycin, diltiazem, fluconazole, verapamil). The required washout period prior to starting ol aparib is 2 weeks. 
 
9. Concomitant use of known strong (eg. phenobarbital, 
enzalutamide, phenytoin, rifampi cin, rifabutin, rifapentine, 
carbamazepine, nevirapine and St John’s Wort) or moderate CYP3A  inducers (eg. bosentan, efavirenz, 
modafinil). The required was hout period prior to starting 
olaparib is 5 weeks for enzalutamide or phenobarbital and 3 weeks for other agents. 
 
10. Subjects with myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid 
leukemia or with features suggestive of MDS/AML. 
 
11. Major surgery within 2 weeks  of starting study treatment 
and subjects must have recove red from any effects of any 
major surgery.  
 
12. Subjects considered a poor m edical risk due to a serious, 
uncontrolled medical disorder, non-malignant systemic disease or active, uncontr olled infection.  Examples 
include, but are not limited t o, uncontrolled ventricular 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 8 of 60 arrhythmia, recent (within 3 months) myocardial 
infarction, uncontrolled major seizure disorder, unstable 
spinal cord compression, supe rior vena cava syndrome, 
extensive interstitial b ilateral lung di sease on High 
Resolution Computed Tomography (HRCT) scan, history of pneumonitis, or any psychiatric disorder that prohibits obtaining informed consent. 
 
13. Subjects unable to swallow orally administered 
medication and subjects with gast rointestinal disorders 
likely to interfere with absor ption of the study medication. 
 
14. Immunocompromised subject s, e.g., subjects who are 
known to be serologically positive for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
 
15. Subjects with a known hypersensitivity to olaparib or any 
of the excipients of the product.  
 
16. Subjects with known active hepa titis (i.e. Hepatitis B or 
C) due to risk of transmitting the infection through blood or other body fluids. 
 
17. Previous allogeneic bone ma rrow transplant or double 
umbilical cord blood transplantation (dUCBT). 
 
TOTAL  NUMBER OF SUBJECTS/ SITES N = 30  
Utilizing sites within Hoosier Cancer Research Network 
ESTIMATED ENROLLMENT PERIOD Estimated 36 months 
ESTIMATED 
STUDY DURATION  Estimated 48 months 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 9 of 60 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Schema ........................................................ ............................................................... ...... 10  
1. Background and Rationale ...................................... ............................................. 11  
2. Study Objectives and Endpoints................................. .......................................... 24  
3. Eligibility Criteria .......................................... ........................................................ 25  
4. Subject Registration........................................... .................................................... 29  
5. Treatment Plan................................................. ...................................................... 29  
6. Toxicities and Dose Delays/Dose Modifications ................. ................................. 32  
7. Study Calendar & Evaluations .................................. ........................................... 38  
8. Biospecimen Studies and Procedures ............................ ....................................... 41  
9. Criteria for Disease Evaluation ............................... ............................................. 42  
10 Drug Information .............................................. ..................................................... 47  
11 Adverse Events ................................................ ....................................................... 48  
12 Statistical Methods ........................................... ...................................................... 53  
13 Trial Management .............................................. ................................................... 54  
14. Data Handling and Record Keeping .............................. ...................................... 56  
15 Ethics ........................................................ ...............................................................  57 
16 References .................................................... ........................................................... 58  
 
   
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 10 of 60 SCHEMA 
  
 
 
*The starting dose of olapari b will be 300 mg PO BID. Subjects with a calculated creatinine 
clearance of > 30 to < 40 mL/min will start at a dose of olaparib tablets 200 mg twice  a day. 
  
 Informed Consent
Eligibility
Registration
Olaparib 300 mg tablet PO BID*
Cycle = 28 days
Imaging
Tumor imaging ~ every 8 weeks fo r the first 12 m onths following  cycle 1 day 1. After 12 
months, tumor assessments will be performed ~ every 12 weeks.
Correlative Studies
Archival tumor tissue at registration
Tissue at progression if subj ect undergoing standard of care bi opsy
Peripheral blood pre-dose C1D1, C 3D1, C5D1, and at progression and/or end of treatment
Continue olaparib until disease progression, 
toxicity, or patient or site investigator choice
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 11 of 60 1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
 1.1 Disease Background 
Each year in the United States , an estimated 77,000 adults are diagnosed with urothelial cancer 
of the bladder and approxima tely 16,400 patients succumb to the  disease.
1 Urothelial cancer of 
the bladder is the fourth mos t common cancer diagnosed in men i n the United States. While the 
majority of patients with urothe lial cancer of the bladder pres ent with clinically l ocalized disease, 
approximately 30% of patients presen t with muscle-invasive dise ase which has a high propensity 
for metastatic spread despite l ocal therapy with curative inten t. Furthermore, approximately 5% 
of patients harbor metastatic dis ease at the time of diagnosis.   
 1.2 Current Standard of Care 
While metastatic urothelial cancer is a relatively chemotherapy  sensitive neoplasm with response 
rates to first-line platinum-bas ed chemotherapy of approximatel y 40-60%, responses are 
generally short-lived and the m edian progression free survival is only 8-9 months.
2 In 2016, the 
PD-L1 inhibitor atezolizumab became the first treatment approve d by the United States Food and 
Drug Administration for patients with platinum-resistant metast atic urothelial cancer.3 However, 
durable responses to single-agen t PD-1/PD-L1 blockade are only achieved in a small minority of 
patients with metastatic urothe lial cancer (approximately 15-20 % of patients) highlighting the 
critical need for the development of additional novel therapeut ic strategies.3–6 
 1.3 DNA Damage Response Gene Alter ations in Urothelial Cancer 
High throughput comprehensive geno mic analyses of solid tumors,  including urothelial cancer, 
have uncovered recurrent somatic a lterations providing clues to  disease pathogenesis and 
identifying potential therapeutic  targets. Indeed, analysis of data from 389 urothelial cancer 
specimens from The Cancer Genome Atlas
7 reveals deleterious (nonsense , frameshift, splice site, 
or hotspot point mutations) al terations in DNA damage response genes (DDR) in ~28% of 
specimens (Figure 1). At  least f our studies have now demonstra ted the potential clinical 
relevance of DDR alterations in urothelial cancer.8–11 In an analysis of a cohort of 50 patients 
with muscle-invasive bladder cancer (25 patients achieving a pa thologic complete response and 
25 patients not achieving a pathol ogic complete response with n eoadjuvant cisplatin-based 
chemotherapy), Van Allen and colle agues performed whole exome s equencing on the initial 
transurethral resection of bladde r tumor (TURBT) specimens and demonstrated that the presence 
of mutations in ERCC2  were found exclusively in the pati ents achieving a pathologic complete 
response.9 ERCC2  encodes a nucleotide excision rep air protein which is critical  for repair of 
DNA damage resulting from platinum -based chemotherapy. The corr elation between ERCC2  
mutations and pathologic complete response to platinum-based ch emotherapy was subsequently 
validated in an independent cohort.10 Plimack et al performed targeted exome sequencing on a 
cohort of patients with muscle-i nvasive bladder cancer treated with dose-dense MVAC 
(methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubi cin, cisplatin) chemotherap y.11 These investigators 
demonstrated that alterations  in one or more of three DDR genes  (ATM, RB1, and FANCC) 
predicted pathologic complete response (p<0.001, 87% sensitivit y, 100% specificity) and better 
overall survival (p=0.007). Iyer and colleagues performed targe ted exome sequencing on a 
cohort of patients with muscle-i nvasive bladder cancer treated on a phase 2 trial of neoadjuvant 
dose-dense gemcitabine plus cisplatin.8 Mutations in a set of 29 DDR genes were correlated with 
a higher probability of achievi ng pathologic complete response.   Deleterious DDR gene 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 12 of 60 mutations were associated with achieving a pathologic complete response with 92% specificity 
and a positive predictive value of 88%. Such mutations were pre sent in 26% of patients and 
included mutations in ERCC2, ERCC5, BRCA2, RAD51C, ATR, CHEK2, and RECQL4 . 
Together, these data indicate that (a) deleterious DDR alterati ons are common in urothelial 
cancer and (b) DDR alterations may be relevant to selection of therapies in the clinic. Additional 
approaches to exploit these vulne rabilities in a “targeted” fas hion are needed.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Deleterio us DNA Damage Response Gene Alterations in T CGA Urothelial Cancer Dataset 
 
  

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 13 of 60 1.4 Targeting Poly ADP Ribose Polymerase (PARP) in DDR mutant Tumor s 
 
 
 
Figure 2. DNA repair by  PARP1 and the effects of PARP inhibitor s (from Pommier et al, Science 
Translational Medicine, 2016) 
 
PARP1 plays multiple key roles in the repair of DNA damage incl uding single strand breaks 
(SSB), double strand breaks (DSB), and replication fork damage.12 The role for PARP inhibition 
as monotherapy is based on the c oncept of synthetic lethality w here neither PARP inhibition 
alone nor DDR mutations alone are lethal but the combination re sults in lethal cellular damage. 
This concept was initially based on the hypothesis that unrepai red SSBs resulting from PARP 
inhibition would be converted int o more genotoxic single-ended DSBs (DSEs) in replicating 
cells. These DSEs could theoretic ally be repaired effectively i n normal cells with functional 
homologous recombination repair. However, cells with DDR mutati ons, such as homologous 
recombination repair deficienc ies, would only have low-fidelity  repair pathways intact leading to 
increase in genomic instability and tumor-specific cell death.  
 Emerging evidence suggests that the mechanistic basis for synth etic lethality with PARP 
inhibition is likely more complex and PARP trapping may play a critical role.
13 The concept of 
PARP trapping was invoked to explain why the cytotoxicity of PA RP inhibition was greater than 
that of genetic loss of PARP1 in model systems and why the cyto toxic activity of PARP 
inhibitors was abrogated by gene tically removing PARP1. PARP tr apping was demonstrating by 
detecting PARP-DNA complexes in cells treated with PARP inhibit ors. PARP1 and PARP2 are 
effectively trapped on DNA until the inhibitor dissociates from  the active site. PARP trapping is 
markedly more deleterious than persistent SSBs. While the basis  for the cytotoxicity of PARP 
inhibition is not fully elucidate d, one possibility is that ong oing replication forks collide with 

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 14 of 60 trapped PARP-DNA complexes le ading to stalled replication forks  which generate DSEs also 
known as “replication fork collapse”.   1.5 Olaparib  
Olaparib (AZD2281, KU-0059436) is a potent PARP inhibitor (PARP -1, -2 and -3) that is being 
developed as an oral therapy, bot h as a monotherapy (including maintenance) and for 
combination with chemotherapy a nd other anti-cancer agents. 
 Tumors with HR deficiencies (HR D), such as ovarian cancers in p atients with BRCA1/2 
mutations, cannot accurately rep air the DNA damage, which may b ecome lethal to cells as it 
accumulates.  In such tumor types, olaparib may offer a potenti ally efficacious and less toxic 
cancer treatment compared with currently available chemotherapy  regimens. Indeed, BRCA1 
and BRCA2 defective tumors are intrinsically sensitive to PARP inhibitors, both in tumor 
models in vivo  and in the clinic.
14–16 The mechanism of action for  olaparib results from the 
trapping of inactive PARP onto the  single-strand breaks prevent ing their repair as described in 
Section 1.4.13,17 Olaparib has been shown to inhi bit selected tumor cell lines in vitro  and in 
xenograft and primary explant models as well as in genetic BRCA  knock-out models, either as a 
stand-alone treatment or in com bination with established chemot herapies. 
 The capsule formulation of olaparib was approved in December 20 14 by the European 
Commission (EC) and United State s (US) Food and Drug Administra tion (FDA), as follows:  
 EU indication: Lynparza is indicat ed as monotherapy for the mai ntenance treatment of adult 
patients with platinum-sensitive  relapsed BRCA-mutated (germlin e and/or somatic) high grade 
serous epithelial ova rian, fallopian tube, or primary peritonea l cancer who are in response 
(complete response or partial re sponse) to platinum-based chemo therapy.  
 US indication: Lynparza is indi cated as monotherapy in patients  with deleterious or suspected 
deleterious germline BRCA mutat ed (as detected by an FDA-approv ed test) advanced ovarian 
cancer who have been treated wit h three or more prior lines of chemotherapy.  
 1.5.1 Pre-clinical experience The pre-clinical experience is fully described in the current v ersion of the olapari b Investigator’s 
Brochure (IB).     1.5.2 Toxicology and safety pharmacology summary The toxicology and safety pharmacology is fully described in th e current version of the olaparib 
Investigator’s Brochure (IB).     1.5.3 Clinical experience The olaparib capsule formulation w as registered for use in the EU and US in December 2014. 
The recommended olaparib monotherapy capsule dose is 400 mg bid . As of 15 June 2016, >5670 
patients with ovarian, breast, pa ncreatic, gastric and a variet y of other solid tumors are estimated 
to have received treatment with ol aparib in clinical studies as  either monotherapy or in 
combination with other chemothera py/anti-cancer agents. The Pha se III registration studies and 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 15 of 60 most new clinical studies are inv estigating the tablet formulat ion which delivers the therapeutic 
dose of olaparib in fewer dose  units than the capsule.  
 The clinical experience with olap arib is fully described in the  current version of the olaparib 
Investigator’s Brochure. A lar ge number of clinical studies wit h olaparib to date have explored 
the efficacy of olaparib in patients with germline mutations in  BRCA. Particularly relevant to the 
current study is the experience  with olaparib in patients with prostate cancer ha rboring germline 
and/or somatic DDR alterations . The TOPARP study enrolled 50 pa tients with castration-
resistant metastatic prostate cancer.
18 Targeted next-generati on sequencing, exome and 
transcriptome analysis, and digita l polymerase-chain-reaction t esting were performed on samples 
from mandated tumor biopsies. S ixteen of 49 patients who could be evaluated achieved a 
response (33%; 95% CI 20-48). Nex t-generation sequencing identi fied homozygous deletions, 
deleterious mutations, or  both, in DDR genes (including BRCA1/2 , ATM , Fanconi’s anemia 
genes, and CHEK2 ) in 16 of 49 patients who could be e valuated (33%). Of these 1 6 patients, 14 
(88%) achieved a response to ol aparib, including all 7 patients  with BRCA2 loss (4 with biallelic 
somatic loss, and 3 with germline mutations) and 4 of 5 with ATM aberrations.  
 1.5.4 Safety  This section lists those advers e events and laboratory abnormal ities that are currently regarded as 
expected. A full description of  the emerging safety profile for  olaparib, with guidance for 
investigators, is pr ovided in Section 6.  
 Administration of olaparib monotherapy has been associated with  reports of the following 
laboratory findings and/or clini cal diagnoses, generally of mil d or moderate severity (CTCAE 
Grade 1 or 2) and generally not r equiring treatment discontinua tion.  
 
Adverse Drug Reactions reported in Clinical Trials  
 
MedDRA SOC  MedDRA Term  CIOMS descriptor/ 
Overall Frequency  (All CTCAE  
grades)  Frequency of 
CTCAE  
Grade 3 and above  
Blood and Anemiaa Very common Very common 
lymphatic system 
disorders Neutropeni aa Common Common 
 Thrombocytopeniaa Common Common 
 Leukopeniaa Common Common 
 Lymphopeniaa Uncommon Uncommon 
Immune system Rasha Common - 
disorders Hypersensitivitya Uncommon - 
 Dermatitisa Uncommon - 
Metabolism and 
nutrition disorders Decreased appetite Very common Uncommon 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 16 of 60 Nervous system Dizziness V ery common Uncommon 
disorders Headache Ve ry common Uncommon 
 Dysgeusia Very common - 
Gastrointestinal Vomiting Very common Common 
disorders Diarrhea Very common Common 
 Nausea Very common Common 
 Dyspepsia Very common -  Stomatitis Common Uncommon 
 Upper abdominal pain Common Uncommon 
General disorders Fatigue (including 
asthenia) Very common Common 
Investigations Increase in creatinine Common Uncommon 
 Mean corpuscular volume 
elevation Uncommon - 
a Anemia includes PTs of anemia, hemoglobin decreased, red blood  cell count decreased, and 
hematocrit decreased; Neutropeni a includes PTs of neutropenia, granulocytopenia, granulocyte 
count decreased and neutrophil c ount decreased, febrile neutrop enia and neutropenic sepsis; 
Thrombocytopenia includes PTs of  thrombocytopenia, platelet cou nt decreased a nd plateletcrit 
decreased; Leukopenia includes PT s of leukopenia and white bloo d cell count decreased; Rash 
includes PTs of rash, rash eryth ematous, rash generalized, rash  macular, rash maculo-papular, 
rash papular, rash pruritic, exfo liative rash and generalized e rythema; Hypersensitivity includes 
PTs of hypersensitivity and drug hypersensitivity; Dermatitis i ncludes PTs of dermatitis, 
dermatitis allergic and dermatitis  CIOMS Council for International Organizations of Medical Scienc es; CTCAE Common 
Terminology Criteria for Advers e Events v.3.0; MedDRA Medical D ictionary for Regulatory 
Activities; SOC System organ class.  The safety profile of olaparib i s further highlighted by the SO LO-2 trial which randomized 
patients with platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer received olapar ib 300 mg tablets BID versus 
placebo.  
 Adverse Reactions in SOLO-2 trial  (≥20% of Patients who receive d Olaparib) 
Adverse Reactions Olaparib tablets (n=195) Placebo (n=99)
Grade 1-4 
%Grade 3-4 
%Grades 1-4 
% Grades 2-4 
%
Blood and lymphatic disorders 
Anemia 44 20 9 2
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Nausea 76 3 33 0
Vomiting 37 3 19 1
Diarrhea 33 2 22 0
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 17 of 60 Stomatitis 20 1 16 0
Infections and Infestations 
Nasopharyngitis/URI/sinusitis/ 
rhinitis/influenza 36 0 29 0 
General disorders and 
administration site conditions     
Fatigue including asthenia 66 4 39 2
Metabolism and nutrition 
disorders 22 0 11 0 
Musculoskeletal and connective 
tissue disorde r 30 0 28 0 
Nervous system disorders 
Dysgeusia 27 0 7 0
Headache 26 1 14 0
 
Laboratory abnormalities in SOLO-2 trial (≥25% of Patients who received Olaparib) 
Adverse Reactions Olaparib tablets (n=195) Placebo (n=99)
Grade 1-4 
%Grade 3-4 
%Grades 1-4 
% Grades 2-4 
%
Increase in mean corpuscular volume 89 - 52 - 
Decrease in hemoglobin 83 17 69 0
Decrease in leukocytes 69 5 48 1
Decrease in lymphocytes 67 11 37 1
Decrease in absolute neutrophil 
coun t 51 7 34 1 
Increase in serum creatinine 44 0 29 0
Decrease in platelets 42 2 22 1
 
1.5.5 Summary of Risks As of 15 June 2016, approximatel y 5670 patients with ovarian, b reast, pancreatic, gastric and a 
variety of other solid tumors ar e estimated to have received tr eatment with olaparib in 
AstraZeneca-sponsored, investig ator-sponsored, collaborative gr oup studies and a Managed 
Access Program. Olaparib has b een given as either monotherapy ( an estimated 3624 patients) or 
in combination with other chemot herapy/anti-cancer agents (an e stimated 2046 patients). An 
estimated 2343 patients to date have  received the capsule formu lation of olaparib. Since 
2012/2013, most new clinical studies  have utilized the tablet f ormulation which was designed to 
deliver the therapeutic dose of  olaparib in fewer dose units th an the capsule. An estimated 3300 
patients to date have receive d the tablet formulation and 27 pa tients have received both 
formulations of olaparib. Appr oximately 1500 patients have rece ived comparator or placebo 
across the olaparib d evelopment program. 
 From the available data to date , there is no evidence of any un expected toxicity following long-
term olaparib (capsule) monothe rapy exposure. An analysis of da ta from 12 AstraZeneca-
sponsored capsule monotherapy studies (D0810C00001, D0810C00002 , D0810C00007, 
D0810C00008, D0810C00009, D0810C00012, D0810C00019, D0810C00020 , D0810C00024 
[capsule data], D0810C00042, D9010C0008 and D081AC00001) in 766  patients with ovarian 
cancer (398/766 [52%]) and other non- ovarian solid tumors ( 368 /766 [48%]) who received 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 18 of 60 olaparib capsule at a range of doses, estimated that 18.3% (140 /766) of patients had been 
exposed to olaparib (capsule) f or >12 months, 9.4% (72/766) for  >18 months, 5.4% for >24 
months, 3.3% for >36 months and 2. 6% for >48 months (as of 08 A ugust 2016). Eighteen 
patients (2.3%) had received ≥60 m onths of olaparib exposure. 
 An estimated 360 patients (all on ta blet) have also received ol aparib from 11 investigator-
sponsored monotherapy studies/c ollaborative group studies. 
 1.5.6 Serious adverse events A review of the AstraZeneca Patient Safety database (which incl udes AstraZeneca-sponsored, 
investigator-sponsored/collabora tive group monotherapy studies and Managed Access Program 
reports) as of 15 June 2016 identif ied a total of 1413 SAEs (10 93 unblinded, 320 blinded) 
received from 752 patie nts in olaparib monotherapy studies. SAE  reports of ≥1% (≥36 patients 
treated with olaparib/placebo monotherapy) were anemia (n=143),  abdominal pain (n=40), 
vomiting (n=47), nausea (n=42) and dyspnea (n=41). The most com monly reported SAEs from 
these monotherapy studies were si milar for the tablet and capsu le formulation. 
 1.5.7 Other adverse events of interest Myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia events As of 15 June 2016, 23 reports of MDS  and/or AML have been rece ived out of a total of 5670 
patients estimated to have received  olaparib in the clinical st udy program, giving an estimated 
cumulative incidence of 0.41% for  MDS/AML. Six additional repor ts of MDS/AML from 6 
patients have been received fro m 2 blinded studies (D0816C00002  and D0818C00001) in which 
the treatment of the 6 patients (olaparib or placebo) is unknow n. If these patients are considered 
to have been on olaparib treatment , the estimated incidence wou ld be 0.51%. 
 
MDS was also reported for 2 pa tients who were known to have rec eived placebo or comparator 
in the olaparib trial program  (1 patient received placebo in St udy D0810C00019 and 1 patient 
received liposomal doxorubi cin in Study D0810C00012). Of the 23  olaparib-treat ed patients and 
6 patients on blinded treatment, t he MDS/AML events have been r eported in patients receiving a 
range of doses from both monothera py and combination studies an d for a variety of tumor types; 
ovarian, peritoneal or fallopia n tube cancer (n= 26), breast ca ncer (n=1) and pancreatic cancer 
(n=2). Twenty-one of the 29 patient s died: in 12 of these patie nts, MDS/AML or myelodysplasia 
was recorded as either a primary or secondary cause of death. T he other 9 deaths were reported 
as follows: 1 due to cerebral he morrhage and disseminated intra vascular coagulation, 1 due to 
complication of bone marrow tran splant, 1 due to hemothorax and  6 due to disease progression 
(4 ovarian cancer, 1 bre ast cancer [patient had a prior history  of ovarian cance r treated with 
platinum-based chemotherapy]  and 1 pancreatic cancer). In 16 pa tients, the event of MDS/AML 
is reported as not recovered (in cluding patients that died of o ther causes). In 1 patient, the 
outcome was unknown.  Of the 23 olaparib-treated and 6 b linded treatment patients sub sequently diagnosed with 
MDS/AML, the diagnosis occurre d while receiving study treatment  or within 60 days after study 
treatment discontinuation in 12 patients, more than 60 days and  <120 days after study treatment 
discontinuation in 2 patients, more than 120 days and <240 days  after study treatment 
discontinuation in 2 patients, and m ore than 240 days after stu dy treatment discontinuation in 4 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 19 of 60 patients. Time to onset of MDS/A ML was not reported in 9 patien ts. The duration of therapy 
with olaparib/blinded treatment i n patients with MDS/AML report ed was <6 months in 16 
patients, 6 to 12 months in 4 pa tients, 12 to 18 months in 1 pa tient, 18 to 24 months in 1 patient, 
and >2 years in 5 patients. Dura tion of therapy with olaparib/b linded treatment was not reported 
in 2 patients. All patients had othe r potential features that m ay be contributing factors for the 
development of MDS/AML. All patie nts had received previous chem otherapy with DNA 
damaging agents including plati num, with many patients having e xtensive previous 
chemotherapy with multiple treatment regimens over multiple yea rs including carboplatin, 
taxanes, anthracyclines, othe r alkylating and DNA damaging agen ts and radiotherapy. Twenty-
four patients had a documented gB RCA mutation of whom 2 patient s were known to be gBRCA 
wild type. In 5 patients, the BRCA mutation status was unknown.  While information from bone 
marrow examination is not avail able for all reports, in 12 case s cytogenetic abnormalities typical 
of therapy–related MDS (abnorma lities of chromosomes 5 and 7 an d complex karyotypes) were 
reported.  Therapy-related AML (t-AML) is a rare and fatal complication of  cytotoxic chemotherapy, 
which is often preceded by the development of secondary MDS. MD S is poorly captured in 
cancer registration, as it is not  always considered to be a can cer so it is dif ficult to quantify 
background incidence rates fr om large, population based registr ies, including Surveillance, 
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER).
19–22 Furthermore, changing Inter national Classification 
of Diseases coding conventions and definitions of primary and s econdary MDS, under-diagnosis 
and under reporting to registries are likely an underestimation  of the true incidence as incidence 
rates based on cancer registrie s may be 2 to 3 times lower than  the actual incidence rate.21 
 A recent study investigated the incidence and risk of developin g t-AML in 426,068 adults 
initially treated with chemother apy for a first primary maligna ncy between 1975 and 2008. The 
study identified 801 tAML cases; th is was 4.70-times more than expected in the general 
population (p<0.001).
23 In an earlier study, using the US  SEER database, 109 AML cases  were 
identified among 63,359 epithelia l ovarian cancer cases, with a n overall incidence of 0.17%.24 
The median time to onset of t-AML  from ovarian cancer diagnosis  is reported as approximately 
5.5 years.24 The overall standardized inc idence ratio (8.68 ov erall) varies  over time - 12.07 
within 1 to 5 years, 10.81 withi n 5 to 10 years and 2.30 after 10 years.23 
 There is some evidence that the r isk of MDS/AML may be increase d in patients with BRCA 
mutation
25,26, but published data are not avail able to quantify this risk in  BRCA mutated ovarian 
cancer due to the rarity of the  event coupled with the small po pulation of interest, and lack of 
routine BRCA mutation screening. T he development of t-AML in re current ovarian cancer has 
been linked with the  use of DNA-damaging t herapies, specificall y pelvic radiati on, alkylating 
agents and platinum chemotherapies. 23,27–29 The risk of developing t-AML (and secondary 
MDS) is associated with the cum ulative dose and duration of tre atment. Travis et al reported an 
increasing relative risk after pl atinum therapy rising from 1.9  to 7.6 with doses <500 g to >1000 
mg, and from 1.2 to 7.0 with treatme nt duration rising from <6 months to >12 months.29 Morton 
et al reported a reductio n of risk in the period 1975 to 1983, due to a shift in treatment from 
pelvic irradiation and melphalan to platinums, while in the per iod 1983 to 2008, over which time 
treatments shifted from cispla tin to carboplatin and taxanes we re introduced, the excess risk has 
remained approximately stable.23 In order to minimize the potential risk for MDS/AML, 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 20 of 60 additional safety measures have b een incorporated into the Phas e III program: specified 
hematological values are require d before inclusion into the stu dies and regular monitoring is 
continued while on treatment to detect hematological abnormalit ies early. In case of prolonged 
cytopenias, patients are to be r eferred to a hematologist and b one marrow analysis should be 
considered. If a diagnosis of M DS/AML is confirmed, study treat ment must be discontinued and 
the event, treatment, course a nd outcome must be reported as an  SAE.  
 Evidence from across the developm ent program for olaparib does not support a conclusion that 
there is a causal relationshi p between olaparib and MDS/AML. Al l patients had other potential 
features that may be contributing f actors for the development o f MDS/AML. This important 
potential risk for olaparib is be ing kept under close surveilla nce. 
 New primary malignancies As of 15 June 2016, 23 patients (rep orting 25 events) out of a total of 5670 patients estimated to 
have received olaparib in the cl inical program have reported a new primary malignancy (other 
than MDS/AML), giving a cumula tive incidence of 0.41% for new p rimary malignancies. Eleven 
additional reports of New Primary  Malignancies (NPM) have been received from 4 blinded 
studies in which the t reatment of the patient  (olaparib or plac ebo) is unknown. If these patients 
were considered to have been on ol aparib treatment, the estimat ed incidence would be 0.60%. 
 One event (bladder cancer) has b een reported in the placebo arm  of the double-blind Study 
D0810C00019 (1/128 [0.78%]).  The new primary malignancies we re reported in patients receivin g a range of doses from both 
monotherapy and combination studi es and for a variety of tumor types, ovarian (n=24), breast 
(n=3), and one each of the following: pancreas, chronic lymphoc ytic leukemia, biliary tract, 
colorectal cancer, gastric cancer , lung cancer and prostate can cer. 
 The types of new primary maligna ncies reported in these 34 pati ents (36 events) were breast 
cancer (11), basal cell carcinoma (6), squamous cell carcinoma (2), skin cancers (2), gastric 
cancer (2), lung cancer (2) and one  each of: colo n cancer, plas ma cell myeloma, malignant 
melanoma, malignant muscle neop lasm, precursor T lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia, tongue 
cancer, papillary thyroid carcinom a, rectal cancer, ovarian can cer, chronic myelomonocyctic 
leukemia and bladder transitional cell carcinoma.  Four spontaneous events of new  primary malignancy have been rec eived from 3 patients in the 
post marketing setting. The patien ts concerned were reported to  have developed: peritoneal 
neoplasm in 1 patient, pancrea tic cancer in 1 patient and 1 pat ient with gastric a nd renal cancers.  
 Eleven of the 25 events of new pr imary malignancies reported by  10 olaparib-treated patients 
were skin cancers (2 SAEs, 9 AEs). Ten of these were the most c ommon forms of non-melanoma 
skin cancer; basal cell carcinom a (n=6), squamous cell carcinom a (n=2), skin cancer (n=1) and 
skin neoplasm (n=1). One event of  malignant melanoma was report ed for a patient treated for 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia i n an investigator-sponsored study
. This patient had previously 
presented with a pigmented skin l esion 12 months prior to start ing olaparib treatment. The lesion 
increased in size while on st udy treatment but the investigator  did not consider it causally related 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 21 of 60 to olaparib treatment. Following s urgery, the melanoma was remo ved and the event was reported 
as recovered by the investigator . The skin cancers recovered in  the majority of patients. 
 Of the 34 patients (23 on olapar ib, 11 on blinded treatment) su bsequently diagnosed with a new 
primary malignancy, the majority of  events were reported whilst  on olaparib treatment. In 4 
patients, the new primary maligna ncy was reported after the fol low-up period of the study (>1 
year, 68 days, 49 days and 34 days and r espectively from stoppi ng olaparib treatment). The time 
from start of olaparib treatme nt to the onset of the 36 events was <6 months for 7 patients, 6 to 
12 months for 12 patients, 12 to 18 months for 2 patients, 18 t o 24 months for 6 patients and >2 
years for 9 patients.  There were other contributing f actors/potential alternative exp lanations for the development of 
the new primary malignancy in a ll of the 23 olaparib-treated pa tients and the 11 on blinded 
treatment. All patients had alr eady previously received various  chemotherapy agents including 
multiple cycles of DNA damaging pl atinum containing chemotherap ies, taxanes, anthracyclines 
and other alkylating and DNA dama ging agents. Four patients wer e reported to have had prior 
radiotherapy. Twenty-five pati ents had a documented breast canc er gene mutation (BRCA 1 or 
2). Seven patients had previous m edical histories of cancer (ov arian, cervix, brea st, peritoneal) 
prior to the cancer under inves tigation in the olaparib studies , and 3 patients with skin cancers 
had either had previous basal ce ll carcinoma reported or had sk in lesions evide nt prior to study 
treatment.  There is insufficient evidence for an association between olapa rib treatment and the development 
of new primary malignancies i n the clinical study program to da te. The types of new primary 
cancers reported were generally i n line with secondary cancers observed in ovarian and breast 
cancer populations reported in the literature or were cancers s uch as, skin cancers known to be 
the most common cancer in the ge neral population and associated  with high cure rates.
30,31 
Patients with gBRCA mutations a re at risk of developing other p rimary cancers notably breast 
cancer. Ginsburg et al 2010 reporte d higher rates of skin cance rs in patients with BRCA1 (1.6%) 
and BRCA2 (3.0%) mutations.32 All patients had other contribut ory factors that offer alterna tive 
explanations for the developmen t of the secondary primary tumor  including documented BRCA 
mutation, treatment with radiother apy and extensive previous ch emotherapy including 
carboplatin, taxanes, anthracyc lines and other alkylating and D NA damaging agents. This safety 
topic is an important potential risk for olaparib and is being kept under close surveillance. The 
ongoing placebo-controlled Phase III  studies will be important in providing additional 
information.  Pneumonitis events As of 15 June 2016, pneumonitis has been reported in 22 olapari b-treated patients out of a total 
of 5670 patients estimated to have received olaparib in the cli nical study program, giving an 
estimated cumulative incidence  of 0.39%. Eleven additional repo rts of pneumonitis have been 
received from 4 blinde d studies, where the t reatment of the pat ients is unknown (7 either olaparib 
or placebo [D0816C00002 or D0818C00001] ; 2 either olaparib + pa clitaxel or p lacebo + 
paclitaxel [D081BC00004] and 2 ol aparib + abiraterone or placeb o + abiraterone 
[D081DC00008]). If these patients  were considered to have been on olaparib treatment, the 
estimated cumulative incidence would be 0.58% (33/5670). 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 22 of 60 Pneumonitis has also been repor ted for 1/128 (0.78%) patient ra ndomized to placebo in Study 
D0180C00019, 1/62 (1.61%) patient randomized to placebo + pacli taxel in a double-blind study 
in recurrent or metastatic ga stric cancer (Study D0810C00039) a nd 1/262 (0.38%) patient 
randomized to placebo + paclit axel in a double-blind, phase III  study in advanced gastric cancer 
(Study D081BC00004).  The reports of pneumonitis were from patients receiving olapari b at a range of doses, given 
either as monotherapy or in combi nation with the other chemothe rapy treatments. The diagnosis 
of pneumonitis was made while on treatment or within a 60-day f ollow-up period for all patients. 
The patients were treated with ol aparib for ovarian cancer (n=1 4), breast cancer (n=4), NSCLC 
or small cell lung cancer (SCLC; n=7), pancreatic cancer (n=1),  gastric cancer (n=4), prostate 
cancer (n=2) and thymic cancer (n=1).  Four of the 33 patients died due to pneumonitis (2 of these pat ients who were receiving olaparib 
in combination with liposom al doxorubicin [Study D0810L00001] a nd the cause of death also 
included pulmonary insufficiency); in 1 patient receiving olapa rib and radiotherapy, the cause of 
death included bronchopulmonar y hemorrhage. An additional 7 pat ients subsequently died. In 5 
patients, the pneumonitis was ongoing at the time of death due to disease progression (n=4) and 
at the time of euthanasia (n=1 ). Two patients had recovered fro m the pneumonitis but then 
subsequently died due to diseas e progression (1 patient with ga stric cancer and 1 patient with 
ovarian cancer).  The reports of pneumonitis presen ted with no consistent clinica l pattern and were heavily 
confounded by a number of pre-dispos ing factors (including dise ase under investigation, 
underlying pulmonary disease, pre-existing medical conditions, smoking history and/or previous 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy). T he majority of patients had re ceived prior radiotherapy and/or 
chemotherapy and had other risk fac tors within the medical hist ories including pneumonitis, 
interstitial lung fib rosis, dyspnea, hemoptysis, chest infectio n, allergic asthma, pleural effusion, 
pleural metastases, or smoking. S even patients had current SCLC  or NSCLC. An independent 
review of available chest computed tomography (CT) scans and ra diographs associated with the 
reports of pneumonitis concluded that there appeared to be no c lear consistent clinical pattern. 
 The mechanisms of drug-induced pneumonitis are not well underst ood. Pre-clinical data do not 
show any evidence of lung indu ced toxicity due to a direct effe ct of olaparib on lung tissues. 
Patients with lung disorders in cluding cancer (lung and breast) , lung metastases, medical history 
of medications/chemotherapy (in cluding alkylatin g agents), radi ation treatment, occupational and 
environmental factors are asso ciated with a high risk of develo pment of intersti tial lung disease. 
 Summary of other adverse events of interest MDS/AML, new primary malignancies and pneumonitis have been ide ntified as important 
potential risks for olaparib. The  cumulative incidences are con sistent with that expected for the 
patient population under study according to the available liter ature. These events are being 
closely monitored in ongoing studies.    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 23 of 60 1.6 Rationale 
 1.6.1 Rationale for studying olapar ib in metastatic urothelial cancer 
There are few standard therapies  available for patients with me tastatic urothelial cancer. While 
PD-1/PD-L1 blockade represents th e first new treatment approved  for metastatic urothelial 
cancer in over 30 years, only ~20% o f patients with metastatic urothelial cancer respond such 
treatment. Novel approaches to treatment are urgently needed.  
 1.6.2 Rationale for patient selection based on the presence of somatic DDR alterations 
Germline and somatic alterations in DDR genes have been associa ted with response to PARP 
inhibition across several maligna ncies establishing proof-of-co ncept for synthetic lethality. 
While there are likely a number  of mechanisms whereby tumors ac quire faulty DDR machinery 
which may be captured by means ot her than targeted or whole exo me sequencing (e.g., gene 
expression profiling for eviden ce of “BRCAness” or assays for “ genomic scars”), selection of 
patients with DDR mutations base d on somatic exome sequencing i s included in the current 
study due to (a) the increasing us e of exome sequencing in CLIA  laboratories as part of routine 
clinical care, (b) the correla tion between DDR mutations and re sponse to PARP inhibition in 
other solid tumors, and (c) the  goal of enriching the populatio n with those most likely to respond 
in this initial proof-of-concep t study (i.e., if sufficient ant itumor activity is observed, future 
studies may enroll patients w ithout DDR mutations in hopes of e xpanding the biomarker profile 
associated with response).    1.6.3 Potential limitations of st udy design and approach to add ress limitations 
There are several potential expl anations in the event that anti cancer activity is  not observed with 
PARP inhibition in this study. The se potential explanations, an d our plans to address these 
limitations, are outlined below: 
 Specific DDR alterations, as a result of their func tional consequences, may not  result in synthetic 
lethality with PARP inhibition. While urothelial cancer s harbor a large number of diverse 
somatic alterations in DDR genes (Figure 1), we will enrich the  population with patients 
harboring somatic alterations i n BRCA1, BRCA2, and ATM as alter ations in these genes have 
been associated with sensitivity to PARP inhibition in other st udies such as prostate cancer. 
 There is overlap with mechanisms of sensitivity and resistance to  platinum-based chemotherapy 
such that patients progressing despite prior pl atinum-based chemotherapy may be uniformly 
resistant to PARP inhibition. Importantly, in studies in patie nts with ovarian cancer treated  with 
PARP inhibition, responses have i ndeed correlate d with platinum -sensitivity.
16 However, while 
patients with platinum-sensitive  ovarian cancer achieve the hig hest response rates with PARP 
inhibition, response rates in pl atinum-resistant and platinum-r efractory diseas e are 45% and 23% 
respectively. Furthermore, cispl atin-ineligible patients will b e eligible for the current study.  
 DDR alterations present in archival primary tumo r specimens are not presen t in metastatic sites 
relevant to a patient’s current disease state . Metastatic lesions may not  harbor tumor cells with 
DDR alterations present in a patien t’s archival primary tumor s pecimen due to an elimination of 
the DDR mutant clones with prio r therapy or due to genomic evol ution of the disease.
33 While 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 24 of 60 we will not mandate metastatic bi opsies prior to enrollment, we  will collect peripheral blood 
specimens to facilitate retrospec tive assessment of circulating  tumor DNA.  
 2. STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 
 2.1 Objectives 
 2.1.1 Primary Objective 
• Estimate the objective response rate (per RECIST 1.1 or MD Ande rson criteria for bone 
only metastases) to treatment w ith olaparib in subjects with me tastatic urothelial cancer 
harboring somatic  DDR alterations 
 2.1.2 Secondary Objectives 
• Describe the safety of olaparib i n subjects with DDR mutant met astatic urothelial cancer 
• Describe the progression-free su rvival of subject s with DDR mut ant metastatic urothelial 
cancer treated with olaparib 
• Describe the overall survival of  subjects with DDR mutant metas tatic urothelial cancer 
treated with olaparib 
 2.1.3 Correlative/Exploratory Objectives 
• Explore the relations hip between specific  genomic alterations w ith response to olaparib 
• Explore the relations hip between prior platinum-based chemother apy treatment 
(response, duration of treatment , and time since treatment) wit h response to olaparib 
• Explore the relationshi p between tumor muta tional profile, circ ulating DNA mutational 
profile, and response to olaparib 
• Determine the feasibility of est ablishing patient-derived xenog rafts from circulating 
tumor cells collected from en rolled subjects at baseline and pr ogression to better explore 
mechanisms of response and resistance 
 2.2 Endpoints 
 2.2.1 Primary Endpoint 
• Objective response rate will in clude confirmed complete respons e (CR) + confirmed 
partial response (PR) and will  be determined as per RECIST 1.1 or MD Anderson 
Criteria (for bone-only m etastatic disease) 
 
2.2.2 Secondary Endpoints 
• 
Adverse events are defined by the  NCI Common Terminology Criter ia for Adverse 
Events (NCI CTCAE) v4 
• Progression-free survival is de fined as the time from Day 1 of treatment until the criteria 
for disease progression is me t as defined by RECIST 1.1 or deat h as a result of any cause.  
• Overall survival is defined as the time from Day 1 of treatment  until death as a result of 
any cause 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 25 of 60 3. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
 3.1 Inclusion Criteria 
Subject must meet all of the fo llowing applicable inclusion cri teria to participate in this study: 
 1. Written informed consent and HIP AA authorization for release  of personal health 
information prior to registration. NOTE:   HIPAA authorization may be included in the 
informed consent or obtained separately. 
 2. Age ≥ 18 years at the time of consent.  3. ECOG Performance Status of ≤  1 within 14 days prior to regis tration. Cisplatin-ineligible 
chemotherapy-naïve subjects (see  inclusion criteria #9) may hav e an ECOG Performance 
Status of ≤ 2. 
 4. Histological or cytological ev idence/confirmation of urothel ial cancer.   
 5. Metastatic and/or unresectabl e (cT4b) urothelial cancer.  
 6. Metastatic disease evaluabl e on imaging studies. Subjects ma y have measurable disease 
according to RECIST 1.1 or bone-only disease within 30 days pri or to registration.  
 NOTE : Bone-only subjects are eligib le if their disease can be docum ented/evaluated by bone 
scans, CT or MRI. Their disease will be assessed using MD Ander son criteria.
34  
 
NOTE : Previously irradiated lesions are eligible as a target lesion  only if there is 
documented progression of the l esion after irradiation. 
 7. Somatic alteration considered pa thogenic/likely pathogenic i n one of the following DDR 
genes as determined by genomic sequencing performed in a Clinic al Laboratory 
Improvement Amendments (CLIA) l aboratory. Somatic alterations w ill include nonsense, 
frameshift, splice-site or mi ssense mutations or homozygous del etions. Subjects with 
alterations in DDR genes not inc luded in the list below will be  considered on a case by case 
basis after discussion with the s ponsor-investigat or(s). Subjec ts with germline alterations in 
DDR genes will be considered on a c ase by case basis and will b e reviewed by the sponsor-
investigator(s). At least 6 s ubjects will have BRCA or ATM alte rations. 
 
Nucleotide 
Excision Repair Homologous 
Recombination DNA 
Sensor Fanconi Anemia 
Pathway Base 
Excision Repair Other 
ERCC2 BRCA1 RAD52 ATM PA LB2 FANCE XRCC2 MUTYH
ERCC3 BRCA2 RAD54L ATR BRIP1 FANCF XRCC3 RECQL4
ERCC4 RAD50 NBN MDC1 FANCA FANCG XRCC4 POLQ
ERCC5 RAD51 MRE11A ATRX FANCB BLM XRCC5 POLE
ERCC6 RAD51B RAD51D CHEK1 FANCC  XRCC6 WRN 
 RAD51C CTIP CHEK2 FANCD2  
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 26 of 60 8. A subject with prior brain meta stasis may be considered if t hey have completed their 
treatment for brain metastasis at least 4 weeks prior to study registration, have been off 
corticosteroids for ≥ 2 weeks, and are asymptomatic 
 9. Subjects must have progressed de spite at least 1 prior line of treatment for metastatic and/or 
unresectable urothelial cancer. H owever, cisplatin-ineligible ( defined by a calculated 
creatinine clearance  of >30 but < 60 mL/min OR CTCAE v4 Grade ≥ 2 audiometric hearing 
loss OR CTCAE v4 Grade ≥ 2 peripheral neuropathy OR ECOG PS = 2) and chemotherapy-
naïve subjects are also eligible.  
 10. Prior cancer treatment (syst emic therapy or radiation thera py) must be completed at least 3 
weeks prior to registration and t he subject must have recovered  from all reversible acute 
toxic effects of the regimen (ot her than alopecia) to Grade ≤ 1  or baseline. 
 11. Demonstrate adequate organ f unction as defined in the table  below. All screening labs to be 
obtained within 28 days pri or to registration. 
 
System Laboratory Value 
Hematological  
Absolute Neutrophil Count (ANC) ≥ 1.5 x 109/L 
Hemoglobin (Hgb) ≥ 9 g/dL  
Platelets ≥ 100 x 109/L
Renal  
Calculated creatinine clearance1> 30 mL/min  
Hepatic  
Bilirubin ≤ 1.5 × upper limit of normal (ULN)  
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)  ≤ 2.5 × ULN (or ≤ 5 × ULN if liver metastases)  
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)  ≤ 2.5 × ULN (or ≤ 5 × ULN if liver metastases)  
1 Cockcroft-Gault formula  will be used to calculate cr eatinine clearance (See SPM) 
 
12. Female subjects must be postmenopausal or there must be evi dence of non-childbearing 
status for women of childbeari ng potential: negative urine or s erum pregnancy test within 28 
days of study treatment and conf irmed prior to treatment on Day  1. Postmenopausal is 
defined as: 
• Amenorrheic for 1 year or more  following cessation of exogenous  hormonal 
treatments 
• Luteinizing hormone (LH) and Fo llicle stimulating hormone (FSH)  levels in the post-
menopausal range for women under 50 
• radiation-induced oophorectomy w ith last menses >1 year ago 
• chemotherapy-induced menopause w ith >1 year interval since last  menses 
• surgical sterilization (bilate ral oophorectomy or hysterectomy)  
 
13. Females of childbearing potential  must be willing to abstain fr om heterosexual activity or to 
use 2 forms of highly effective methods of contraception from t he time of informed consent 
until 90 days after treatment di scontinuation. The two contrace ption methods can be 
comprised of two barrier methods, or a barrier method plus a ho rmonal method. Males must 
be willing to abstain from hetero sexual activity or to use 2 fo rms of highly effective methods 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 27 of 60 of contraception from the time of informed consent until 90 day s after treatment 
discontinuation. 
 Acceptable non-hormonal birth control methods: 
• Total sexual abstinence ie, refra in from any form of sexual int ercourse in line with 
the patients’ usual and/or pref erred lifestyle. Periodic abstin ence (eg, calendar ovulation, 
symptothermal, post-ovulation met hods) and withdrawal are not a cceptable methods of 
contraception. 
• Vasectomised sexual partner PLUS male condom. With participant assurance that 
partner received post-vasectom y confirmation of azoospermia. 
• Tubal occlusion PLUS male condom 
• Intrauterine Device PLUS male condom. Provided coils are copper -banded. 
 Acceptable hormonal methods: 
• Etonogestrel implants (eg, Implanon®, Norplant®) PLUS male cond om 
• Normal and low dose combined oral pills PLUS male condom 
• Hormonal shot or injection (eg, D epo-Provera) PLUS male condom 
• Intrauterine system device (eg, levonorgestrel-re leasing intrau terine system - 
Mirena®) PLUS male condom 
 14. As determined by the enrolling phys ician or protocol designee, ability of the subject to 
understand and comply with study p rocedures for the entire leng th of the study 
 15. All subjects must have adequate a rchival tissue available prior  to registration ( i.e., at least 15 
unstained slides or paraffin bloc k). Archival tissue should rep resent invasive or metastatic 
urothelial cancer with a preference for metastatic tissue if av ailable. Archiva l tissue should be 
identified at screening and s hipped by C1D1. Subjects without a dequate tissue may be 
considered on a case by case basi s after discussion with the sp onsor-investigator.   
 3.2 Exclusion Criteria 
Subjects meeting any of the crite ria below may not participate in the study: 
 1. Active infection requiring systemic therapy. 
 
2. Pregnant or breastfeeding ( NOTE:  breast milk cannot be stored f or future use while the 
mother is being treated on study).  
3. Known additional malignancy that is active and/or progressive r equiring treatment; subjects 
with other malignancies that have been definitively treated and  who have been rendered 
disease free will be eligible.  
4.
 Prior treatment with a PARP i nhibitor, including olaparib. 
 
5. Treatment with any investigati onal drug within 30 days prior to  registration.  
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 28 of 60 6. Involvement in the planning and/ or conduct of the study (applie s to both AstraZeneca staff 
and/or staff at the study site). 
 7. Resting ECG with QTc > 470 msec on 2 or more time points within  a 24 hour period or 
family history of long QT syndrome. 
 8. Concomitant use of known strong CYP 3A inhibitors (eg. itraconaz ole, telithromycin, 
clarithromycin, proteas e inhibitors boosted with ritonavir or c obicistat, indinavir, saquinavir, 
nelfinavir, boceprevir, telapre vir) or moderate CYP3A inhibitor s (eg. ciprofloxacin, 
erythromycin, diltiazem, flucon azole, verapamil). The required washout period prior to 
starting olaparib is 2 weeks.  
9. Concomitant use of known strong (eg. phenobarbital, enzalutamid e, phenytoin, rifampicin, 
rifabutin, rifapentine, carbamazepine, nevirapine and St John’s  Wort) or moderate CYP3A  
inducers (eg. bosentan, efavirenz , modafinil). The required was hout period prior to starting 
olaparib is 5 weeks for enzalutamide or phenobarbital and 3 wee ks for other agents. 
 
10. Subjects with myelodysplastic synd rome/acute myeloid leukemia o r with features suggestive 
of MDS/AML.  
11. Major surgery within 2 weeks of s tarting study treatment and su bjects must have recovered 
from any effects of any major surgery.  
12. Subjects considered a poor med ical risk due to a serious, uncon trolled medical disorder, non-
malignant systemic disease or  active, uncontro lled infection.  Examples include, but are not 
limited to, uncontrolled ventricular arrhythmia, recent (within  3 months) myocardial 
infarction, uncontrolled major seiz ure disorder, unstable spina l cord compression, superior 
vena cava syndrome, extensive i nterstitial bilateral lung disea se on High Resolution 
Computed Tomography (HRCT) scan, history of pneumonitis, or any  psychiatric disorder 
that prohibits obtaining informed consent.  
13. Subjects unable to swallow ora lly administered medication and s ubjects with gastrointestinal 
disorders likely to interfere with absorption of the study medi cation.  
 
14. Immunocompromised subjects, e .g., subjects who are known to be serologically positive for 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).  
15. Subjects with a known hypersensiti vity to olaparib or any of th e excipients of the product. 
 
16. Subjects with known active hepatit is (i.e. Hepatitis B or C) du e to risk of transmitting the 
infection through blood or  other body fluids. 
 
17.
 Previous allogeneic bone marrow transplant or double umbilical cord blood transplantation 
(dUCBT). 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 29 of 60 4. SUBJECT REGISTRATION 
All subjects must be registered through HCRN’s electronic data capture (EDC) system. Subjects 
will be considered registered w hen an “on study” date is entere d into the EDC system.  
 Subjects must be registered prio r to starting protocol therapy and begin study treatment within  7 
business days  of registration.  
 
5. TREATMENT PLAN 
This is a single-arm open label  phase II trial of olaparib in s ubjects with DDR mutant metastatic 
urothelial cancer. Subjects will receive olaparib, in the absen ce of prohibitive adverse events, 
until the time of disease progression.   5.1 Olaparib 
Olaparib tablets will be packe d in high-density polyethylene (H DPE) bottles with child-resistant 
closures. Each dosing container wil l contain sufficient medicat ion for at least 28 days plus 
overage. Olaparib will be dispen sed to subjects on Day 1 of eac h cycle thereafter  until the patient 
completes the study, withdraws fr om the study or closure of the  study.   
 Study treatment is available as a  film-coated tablet containing  150 mg or 100 mg o f olaparib. 
Subjects will be administered o laparib orally twice daily. Olap arib tablets should be taken at the 
same time each day, approximatel y 12 hours apart. The starting dose of olaparib tablets will be 
dependent on the subject’s calcu lated creatinine clearance (CrC l). Subjects with a CrCl of ≥ 40 
mL/min will start at a dose of ol aparib tablets of 300 mg twice  a day (total 600 mg per day). 
Subjects with a CrCl of > 30 to < 40 mL/min will start at a dose of olaparib tablets 200 mg twice  
a day (total 400 mg per day).  Olaparib should be taken with one  glass of water . The tablets s hould be swallowed whole and 
not chewed, crushed, dissolved, or d ivided. Olaparib tablets ca n be taken with or without food. It 
is not recommended to consume grap efruit juice or consume Sevil le oranges while on olaparib 
therapy. 
 
5.2 Concomitant Medications 
 5.2.1 Allowed Concomitant Medications 
All treatments that the investig ator considers necessary for a subject’s welfare may be 
administered at the discretion of  the investigator in keeping w ith the community standards of 
medical care unless as oth erwise indicated below. 
 
5.2.1.1 Anticoagulant Therapy Subjects who are taking warfari n may participate in this trial;  however, it is recommended that 
international normalized ratio (INR) be monitored carefully at least once per week for the first 
month, then monthly if the INR is  stable. Subcutaneous heparin and low molecular weight 
heparin are permitted.  5.2.1.2 Anti-emetics/Anti-Diarrheals If a patient develops nausea, vomiting and/or diarrhea, these s ymptoms should be reported as 
AEs and should be treated per in stitutional guidelines. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 30 of 60 5.2.1.3 Palliative radiotherapy  
Palliative radiothera py may be used for the treatment of pain a t the site of bony metastases that 
were present at baseline, provide d the site investigator does n ot feel that these are indicative of 
clinical disease progressi on during the study period.  Study tr eatment should be discontinued for 
a minimum of 3 days before a pati ent undergoes th erapeutic pall iative radiation treatment.  Study 
treatment should be restarted w ithin 4 weeks as long as any bon e marrow toxicity has recovered.  
 5.2.1.4 Contraception  Olaparib is regarded as a compound with medium/high fetal risk.  
Women of childbearing potential  and their partners, who are sex ually active, must agree to 
the use of TWO highly effective forms of contraception in combi nation [as listed below], 
throughout the period of tak ing study treatment  and for at least 90 days  after last dose of 
study drug(s), or they must totally/ truly abstain from any form  of sexual intercourse (see 
below). 
Male subjects and their partner s, who are sexually active and o f childbearing potential, must 
agree to the use of TWO highly e ffective forms of contraception  in combination [as listed 
below], throughout the peri od of taking study treatment  and for 90 days after last dose of 
study drug(s) due to the unknown e ffects of the study drug on t he sperm, or they must 
totally/truly abstain from any f orm of sexual intercourse (see below). Male subjects 
should not donate sperm throughout  the period of taking study t reatment  and for 90 days 
following the last dose of study drug(s).  
 Acceptable non-hormonal birth control methods: 
• Total sexual abstinence ie, refra in from any form of sexual int ercourse in line with 
the patients’ usual and/or pref erred lifestyle. Periodic abstin ence (eg, calendar ovulation, 
symptothermal, post-ovulation met hods) and withdrawal are not a cceptable methods of 
contraception. 
• Vasectomised sexual partner PLUS male condom. With participant assurance that partner 
received post-vasectomy conf irmation of azoospermia. 
• Tubal occlusion PLUS male condom 
• Intrauterine Device PLUS male condom. Provided coils are copper -banded. 
 
Acceptable hormonal methods: 
• Etonogestrel implants (eg, Implanon®, Norplant®) PLUS male cond om 
• Normal and low dose combined oral pills PLUS male condom 
• Hormonal shot or injection (eg, D epo-Provera) PLUS male condom 
• 
Intrauterine system device (eg, levonorgestrel-re leasing intrau terine system - 
Mirena®) PLUS male condom 
 5.2.2 Prohibited Concomitant Medications 
The use of any natural/herbal pr oducts or other tr aditional rem edies should be discouraged, but 
use of these products, as well as use of all vitamins, nutritio nal supplements, and all other 
concomitant medications must be  recorded in the case report for m (CRF).  
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 31 of 60 5.2.2.1 Medications that may NOT be administered 
No other anti-cancer therapy ( chemotherapy, immunotherapy, horm onal therapy (Hormone 
replacement therapy (HRT) is acceptable), radiotherapy, biologi cal therapy or other novel agent) 
is to be permitted while the patient is receiving study medicat ion. 
 Live virus and live bacterial  vaccines should not be administer ed while the patient is receiving 
study medication and during the  30 day follow up period. An inc reased risk of infection by the 
administration of live virus and ba cterial vaccines has been ob served with conventional 
chemotherapy drugs and the eff ects with olaparib are unknown. 
 5.2.2.2 Restricted concomitant medications Subjects must not be taking strong or moderate CYP3A inhibitors  or strong or moderate 
CYP3A inducers at the time of stu dy enrollment. Subjects for wh om these medications are 
being considered after subjects have already been enrolled on s tudy should follow the 
guidance below :  
 Strong or Moderate CYP3A inhibitors  Known strong CYP3A inhibitors (e. g., itraconazole, telithromyci n, clarithromycin, boosted 
protease inhibitors, i ndinavir, saquinavi r, nelfinavir, bocepre vir, telaprevir) or moderate CYP3A 
inhibitors (ciprofloxacin, ery thromycin, diltiazem, fluconazole , verapamil) should not be taken 
with olaparib.  If there is no suitable alternat ive concomitant medication then  the dose of olaparib should be 
reduced for the period of concomitant administration. The dose reduction of olaparib should be 
recorded in the eCRF with the rea son documented as concomitant CYP3A inhibitor use.  
• Strong CYP3A inhibitors – redu ce the dose of olaparib to 100 mg  bid for the duration of 
concomitant therapy with the str ong inhibitor an d for 5 half-li ves afterwards. 
• Moderate CYP3A inhibitors - re duce the dose of olaparib to 150 mg bid for the duration 
of concomitant therapy with the  moderate inhibitor and for 3 ha lf-lives afterwards. 
• After the washout of the inhibito r is complete, the olaparib do se can be re-escalated. 
 Strong or Moderate CYP3A inducers  
Strong (e.g., phenobarbital, phenyt oin, rifampicin, rifabutin, rifapentine, carbamazepine, 
nevirapine, enzalutamide and St John’s Wort) and moderate  CYP3A  inducers (eg. bosentan, 
efavirenz, modafinil) of CYP3A  should not be taken with olapari b. 
 If the use of any strong or moderate  CYP3A inducers are conside red necessary for the patient’s 
safety and welfare this could di minish the clinical efficacy of  olaparib. 
 If a patient requires use of a s trong or moderate CYP3A inducer  or inhibitor then they must be 
monitored carefully for any c hange in efficacy of olaparib. 
 P-gp inhibitors It is possible that co-administ ration of P-gp inhibitors (eg am iodarone, azithromycin) may 
increase exposure to olapari b. Caution should therefore be obse rved.  
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 32 of 60 Effect of olaparib on other drugs 
Based on limited in vitro  data, olaparib may increase the exposure to substrates of CYP3 A4, P-
gp, OATP1B1, OCT1, OCT2, OAT3, MA TE1 and MATE2K.  Based on limi ted in vitro  data, 
olaparib may reduce the exposure to substrates of CYP3A4, CYP1A 2, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19 and P-gp.  
 The efficacy of hormonal contraceptives may be reduced if co ad ministered with olaparib.  
Caution should therefore be obser ved if substrates of these iso enzymes or transpor ter proteins are 
co-administered.  Examples of substrates include: 
• CYP3A4 – hormonal contraceptive, s imvastatin, cisapride, cyclos porine, ergot alkaloids, 
fentanyl, pimozide, sirolimus , tacrolimus and quetiapine 
• CYP1A2 – duloxetine, melatonin 
• CYP2B6 – bupropion, efavirenz 
• CYP2C9 – warfarin  
• CYP2C19 - lansoprazole, omeprazole, S-mephenytoin 
• P-gp - simvastatin, pravastati n, digoxin, dabigatran, colchicin e 
• OATP1B1 - bosentan, glibenclamide , repaglinide, statins and val sartan 
• OCT1, MATE1, MATE2K – metformin 
• OCT2 - serum creatinine 
• OAT3 -furosemide, methotrexate 
 5.2.2.3 Administration of ot her anti-cancer agents 
Subjects must not receive any othe r concurrent a nti-cancer ther apy, including investigational 
agents, while on study treatment. Subjects may continue the use  of bisphosphonates or 
denosumab for bone disease.   6. TOXICITIES AND DOSE DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS 
The NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4.03 will be used to 
grade adverse events.   Subjects enrolled in t his study will be evalua ted clinically an d with standard laboratory tests 
before and at regular intervals  during their par ticipation in t his study as specified in Study 
Calendar & Evaluations.  Subjects will be evaluated for a dverse events (all grades), ser ious adverse events, and adverse 
events requiring study drug int erruption or discontinuation as specified in Study Calendar & 
Evaluations.    6.1 Dose Delays/Dose Modifications 
For guidance on dose reductions when concomitant strong or mode rate CYP3A inhibitors or 
inducers cannot be avoided see section 5.2.2.  Any toxicity observed during the  course of the study could be m anaged by interruption of the 
dose of study treatment or dose re ductions. Repeat dose interru ptions are allowed as required, for 
a maximum of 4 weeks on each occasion. If the interruption is >  4 weeks, the sponsor-
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 33 of 60 investigator should be informe d. Study treatment can be dose re duced to 250 mg twice daily as a 
first step and to 200 mg twice da ily as a second step. If the r educed dose of 200 mg twice daily is 
not tolerable, no furth er dose reduction is allowed and study t reatment should be discontinued. 
There will be no dose reductions f or subjects (with moderate re nal insufficiency) starting at a 
dose of 200 mg twice daily.   6.1.1 Dose Levels for Dose Reductions 
 Table 1 Dose reductions for olaparib* 
Initial Dose Following re-challenge post 
interruption: Dose reduction 1 Dose reduction 2 
300mg twice daily 250mg twice daily 200mg twice daily 
*see section 6.1 for mo re specific guidance 
 
Once dose is reduced, escalation is not permitted except as ind icated in section 5.2.2. for 
temporary dose reductions associ ation with concom itant use of C YP3A inhibitors or inducers. 
 6.2 Management of Hemat ological Toxicity 
 6.2.1 Management of Anemia  Table 2 Management of anemia 
Hemoglobin Action to be taken 
Hb < 10 but ≥ 8 g/dl 
(CTCAE Grade 2)  Give appropriate supportive treat ment and investigate causality .  
Site investigator judgement to continue olaparib with supportiv e treatment 
(e.g. transfusion) or interrupt dose for a maximum of 4 weeks.  
If repeat Hb < 10 but ≥ 8 g/dl , dose interrupt (for max of 4 weeks) until 
Hb ≥ 10 g/dl and upon recovery dose reduction to 250 mg twice daily  as a 
first step and to 200 mg twice daily as a second step may be considered.
Hb < 8 g/dl 
(CTCAE Grade 3)  Give appropriate supportive treatme nt (e.g. transfusion) and in vestigate 
causality. Interrupt olaparib for a maximum of 4 weeks. until i mproved to 
Hb ≥ 10 g/dl. Upon recovery dose reduce to 250 mg twice daily  as a first 
step and to 200 mg twice daily  as a second step in the case of repeat Hb 
decrease. 
 
Common treatable causes of a nemia (e.g., iron, vitamin B12 or f olate deficiencies and 
hypothyroidism) should be investig ated and appropriately manage d. In some cases, management 
of anemia may require blood trans fusions. For cases where subje cts develop prolonged 
hematological toxicity (≥ 2 wee k interruption/delay in study tr eatment due to CTC Grade 3 or 
worse anemia and/or development of blood transfusion dependence ), refer to Section 6.2.3 for 
the management of this.     
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 34 of 60 6.2.2 Management of Neutropenia, L eukopenia and Thrombocytopeni a 
 Table 3 Management of neutropenia, leukopenia and thrombocytope nia 
Toxicity Study treatment dose adjustment 
CTCAE Grade 1-2 Investigator judgement to continue treatment or  if dose interruption, this 
should be for a maximum of 4 w eeks; appropriate supportive trea tment 
and causality investigation
CTCAE Grade 3-4 Dose interrupti on until recovered to CTCAE gr 1  or better for a maximum 
of 4 weeks. If repeat CTCAE gra de 3-4 occurrence, dose reduce o laparib 
to 250 mg twice daily  as a first step and 200 mg  twice daily as a second 
step 
Adverse event of neutropenia and leukopenia should be managed a s deemed appropriate by the 
investigator with close follo w up and interr uption of study dru g if CTC Grade 3 or worse 
neutropenia occurs.  Primary prophylaxis with Granuloc yte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is not recommended, 
however, if a patient develops f ebrile neutropenia, study treat ment should be stopped and 
appropriate management includ ing G-CSF should be given accordin g to local hospital 
guidelines. Please note that G-CSF should not be used within at  least 24 hours (7 days for 
pegylated G-CSF) of the last dos e of study treatment unless abs olutely necessary. Platelet 
transfusions, if indicated, should be done according to local h ospital guidelines. 
 For cases where subjects deve lop prolonged hematological toxici ty (≥ 2 week int erruption/delay 
in study treatment due to CTC grad e 3 or worse), refer to Secti on 6.2.3. 
 6.2.3 Management of Prolonged Hem atological Toxicities While on  Study Treatment 
If a patient develops prolonged he matological toxicity such as:  
≥ 2 week interruption/delay in s tudy treatment due to CTC Grade  3 or worse anaemia and/or 
development of blood transfusion dependence 
≥ 2 week interruption/delay in s tudy treatment due to CTC Grade  3 or worse neutropenia 
(ANC < 1 x 10
9/L) 
≥ 2 week interruption/delay in s tudy treatment due to CTC Grade  3 or worse 
thrombocytopenia and/or developm ent of platelet transfusion dep endence (Platelets < 50 
x 109/L) 
 Check weekly differential blood cou nts including reticulocytes and peripheral blood smear. If 
any blood parameters remain clinic ally abnormal after 4 weeks o f dose interruption, the patient 
should be referred to hematologist  for further investigations. Bone marrow analysis and/or blood 
cytogenetic analysis should be c onsidered at this stage accordi ng to standard hematological 
practice. Study treatment shoul d be discontinued if blood count s do not recover to CTC Grade 1 
or better within 4 weeks of dose interruption.  Development of a confirmed myel odysplastic syndrome or other cl onal blood disorder should be 
reported as an SAE and full repor ts must be provided by the sit e investigator to HCRN who will 
then report to AstraZeneca Pati ent Safety (See Section 11). Ola parib treatment should be 
discontinued if patient’s diagnos is of MDS and/or AML is confir med. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 35 of 60 6.3 Management of Non-Hem atological Toxicity 
Repeat dose interrupti ons are allowed as re quired, for a maximu m of 4 weeks on each occasion. 
If the interruption i s any longer than thi s the sponsor-investi gator must be informed.  Where 
toxicity reoccurs following re- challenge with study treatment, and where further dose 
interruptions are considered ina dequate for management of toxic ity, then the patient should be 
considered for dose reduction o r must permanently discontinue s tudy treatment. 
 Study treatment can be dose redu ced to 250 mg bid as a first st ep and to 200 mg bid as a second 
step. Treatment must be interr upted if any NCI-CTCAE Grade 3 or  4 adverse event occurs which 
the site investigator considers  to be related to administration  of study treatment. 
 6.3.1 Management of New or Worsening Pulmonary Symptoms  If new or worsening pulmonary symptoms (e.g., dyspnea) or radio logical abnormalities occur in 
the absence of a clear diagnosis , an interruption in study trea tment dosing is recommended and 
further diagnostic workup (incl uding a high resolution CT scan)  should be performed to exclude 
pneumonitis.  Following investigation, if no evidence of abnormality is obser ved on CT imaging and symptoms 
resolve, then study treatment ca n be restarted, if deemed appro priate by the site investigator. If 
significant pulmonary abnormalities are identified, these need to be discussed with the sponsor-
investigator. If pneumonitis is confirmed, discontinue olaparib .  
 6.3.2 Management of Nausea and Vomiting Events of nausea and vomiting are known to be associated with o laparib treatment. In study 
D0810C00019 nausea was reported i n 71% of the olaparib treated subjects and 36% in the 
placebo treated subjects and vomiting was reported in 34% of th e olaparib treated subjects and 
14% in the placebo treated patient s. These events are generally  mild to moderate (CTCAE grade 
1 or 2) severity, intermittent a nd manageable on continued trea tment. The first onset generally 
occurs in the first month of tr eatment for nausea and within th e first 6 months of treatment for 
vomiting. For nausea, the inciden ce generally plat eaus at aroun d 9 months, and for vomiting at 
around 6 to 7 months.  No routine prophylactic anti-emetic  treatment is required at th e start of study treatment; however, 
subjects should receive appropria te anti-emetic treatment at th e first onset of nausea or vomiting 
and as required thereafter, in acc ordance with local treatment practice guidelines.  Alternatively, 
olaparib tablets can be taken w ith a light meal/snack (i.e. 2 p ieces of toast). 
 As per international guidance on a nti-emetic use in cancer subj ects (ESMO, NCCN), generally a 
single agent antiemetic should be considered eg dopamine recept or antagonist, antihistamines or 
dexamethasone.  6.3.3 Renal Impairment If subsequent to study entry a nd while still on study therapy, a patient’s estimated CrCl falls 
below the threshold for study i nclusion, retesting should be pe rformed promptly.  
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 36 of 60 A dose reduction is recommende d for subjects who develop a decl ine in renal function as defined 
by a calculated creatin ine clearance by Coc kcroft-Gault equatio n of between 31 and 39 ml/min 
for any reason during the course of  the study: the dose of olap arib should be reduced to 200mg 
BID.  Olaparib should be discontinued if  the calculate d creatinine cl earance declines to  ≤ 30 ml/min. 
 6.4 Interruptions for Intercurrent Non-Toxicity Related Events 
Study treatment dose interrupti on for conditions other than tox icity resolution should be kept as 
short as possible. If  a patient cannot restart study treatment within 4 weeks for resolution of 
intercurrent conditions not relat ed to disease progression or t oxicity, the case should be discussed 
with sponsor-investigator.  All dose reductions and inte rruptions (including any missed dos es), and the reasons for the 
reductions/interruptions are to b e recorded in the eCRF.  
 Study treatment should be stopped at least 3 days prior to plan ned surgery. After surgery study 
treatment can be restarted when the wound has healed. No stoppa ge of study treatment is 
required for any needle biopsy procedure.  Study treatment should be discontin ued for a minimum of 3 days before a patient undergoes 
radiation treatment. Study tre atment should be restarted within  4 weeks as long as any bone 
marrow toxicity has recovered.  6.5 Protocol Therapy Discontinuation 
In addition to discontinuation from therapy related to toxiciti es as outlined above, a subject will 
also be discontinued from prot ocol therapy and followed per pro tocol under the following 
circumstances outlined below.  T he reason for discontinuation o f protocol therapy will be 
documented on the electronic case report form (eCRF)   
• Documented disease progression  
• Site investigator determines a  change of therapy would be in th e best interest of the 
subject 
• Subject requests to discontinue  protocol therapy, whether due t o unacceptable toxicity or 
for other reasons o In a subject decides to prematur ely discontinue protocol therap y (“refuses 
treatment”), the subject should be asked if he or she may still  be contacted for further 
scheduled study assessments. The ou tcome of that discussion sho uld be documented 
in both the medical rec ords and in the eCRF. 
• Female subject becomes pregnant  
• Bone marrow findings consistent w ith myelodysplastic syndrome ( MDS)/acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML) 
• Pneumonitis 
• Protocol therapy is inte rrupted for > 4 weeks.  
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 37 of 60 6.6 Protocol Discontinuation  
If a subject decides to discontinue from the protocol (and not just from protocol therapy) all 
efforts should be made to complete and report study assessments  as thoroughly as possible. A 
complete final evaluation at th e time of the subject’s protocol  withdrawal should be made with 
an explanation of why the subject is withdrawing from the proto col. If the reason for removal of 
a subject from the study is an adverse event, it will be record ed on the eCRF. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 38 of 60 7. STUDY CALENDAR & EVALUATIONS 
 
Study Evaluation  
Cycle = 28 days Screening Treatment Tumor 
Assessments8 
± 7 days Safety Follow Up 
Visit13 Survival  
Follow U p14
-28 days Cycle 1 + 
Day 1 
± 2 da ys30 Days 
Post Treatment 
(±7 da ys)Every 3 Months 
(±7 days) 
REQUIRED  ASSESSMENTS 
Informed Consen t X  
Medical Histor y1  X  
Physical Exa m X X  X
Vital si gns and ECOG Performance Status2 X X  X
Documentation of DDR alteration in CLIA lab assa y3X 
ECG4 X4   
AEs & Concomitant Medications X X  X
LABORATORY ASSESSMENTS  
Complete Blood Cell Count with diff (CBC)5 XX  X
Comprehensive Metabolic Profile (CMP)5 X X  X
PT/INR and aPTT6 X 
Pregnanc y test (serum or urine) (WOCBP)7 XX7  
Urinal ysis X  
DISEASE ASSESSMENT 
CT of ches t8 XX8 
CT or MRI of abdomen and pelvis8 XX8 
Bone Scan8 XX8 
TREATMENT EXPOSURE 
Olaparib X  
CORRELATIVE SAMPLES  
Archival Tumor Tissue9 X  
Collection of tumor tissue obtained as standard of care10   X10
Blood Samples for correlative research11  X11  X11 
BANKING SAMPLES   
Whole Blood12 X12  X12 
FOLLOW-UP  
Survival Status, Subsequent Therap y X
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 39 of 60 Key to Footnotes  
 
1: Medical History should include the following information: (1 ) Diagnosis and staging to incl ude Tumor Node Metastasis (TNM) staging (2) 
smoking history, (3) trial awareness question (4) prior cancer treatment history and (5) gene tic sequencing information. 
 
2: Vital signs to include blood pressure, weight, and height (s creening only) and EC OG performance status. 
 3: The laboratory report indicating the presence of a DDR alter ation (see eligibility) from a CLIA laboratory is required for registration. 
 
4: ECG is required within 7 days prior to starting study treatm ent.   
 5: If screening (baseline) CBC and CMP were performed within 7 days of Day 1 of treatment, these do not need to be repeated.  CMP to include 
sodium, potassium, chloride, crea tinine, blood urea nitrogen; l iver function tests (LFTs) to include AST, ALT, total bilirubin , alkaline phosphatase 
 
6: Subjects taking warfarin may participate in this study; howe ver, it is recommended that prothrombin time (INR and APTT) be monitored 
carefully at least once per week for the first month, then mont hly if the INR is stable. 
 7: For women of childbearing potential (WOCBP): urine or serum βhCG will be checked at screening and prior to study drug on Cy cle 1 Day 1 
(only if clinically appropriate).  If a urine test is done and it is positive or cannot be confir med as negative, a serum pre gnancy test will be required.  
 8: Tumor imaging to contin ue near the end of every 2
nd cycle (~every 8 weeks) for the first 12 months following Cycle  1 Day 1.  After 12 months, 
tumor assessments will be pe rformed near the end of every 3rd cycle (~every 12 weeks). Imaging selected for each subject sho uld remain the same 
throughout the study.  Bone scan will be obtained at screening if there is any clinica l or laboratory suspicion of metastatic bone involvement. If 
bone scan is positive at baseline fo r metastases, it will be in cluded with tumor response assessments as noted above.  
 
9: All subjects must have adequate archival tissue available; i dentified at screening and shipped by C1D1 (i.e., at least 15 u nstained slides or 
paraffin block). Archival tissue should represent invasive or m etastatic urothelial cancer with a  preference for metastatic ti ssue if available. If 
acceptable archival tissue is not available, this should be dis cussed with the sponsor-investig ator. Subjects will be consente d to optional banking of 
any remaining tumor samples after protocol-specified studies ar e complete. Banked samples will be reserved for future unspecif ied cancer-related 
research. See Correlative Laborat ory Manual (CLM) for additiona l details.   
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 40 of 60 10: If a subject has a biopsy at progression or for other clini cal reasons as per standard of car e, they will be asked permiss ion to store some of this 
tissue for research directed at mechanisms of resistance. Subje cts will also be consented to optional banking of any remaining  tumor samples after 
protocol-specified studies are complete. Banked samples will be  reserved for future unspecifi ed cancer-related research. See C orrelative 
Laboratory Manual (CLM) for additional details.  
 11: 
 Serial blood samples will be coll ected to support biomarker res earch; There are 4 time points for blood samples to be obtained : (1) pre-dose 
C1D1, (2) pre-dose C3D1, (3) pre -dose C5D1 and at (4) Progressi on. If a subject comes off study due to progression, samples ma y be obtained at 
the Safety Follow Up visit. S ee CLM for additional details. 
 
12: Serial blood samples will be collected for banking; See CLM  for additional details. There are  4 time points for blood samp les to be obtained: 
(1) pre-dose C1D1, (2) pre-dose C3D1, (3) pre-dose C5D1 and at (4) Progression. If a subject comes off study due to progressio n, samples may be 
obtained at the Safety Follow Up visit.  
13: Safety Follow-Up Visit should only occur when subjects perm anently stop study treatment for  whatever reasons (toxicity, pr ogression, or at 
discretion of site investigator) and should be performed 30 day s (±7 days) after the last dose of treatment. Subjects who have  an ongoing Grade ≥ 
2 or serious AE (SAE) at this vi sit will continue to be followe d until the AE resolves to Grade ≤  1 or baseline, deemed clinic ally insignificant, 
and/or until a new anti-cancer tr eatment starts, whichever is e arlier.   
 
14: Survival Follow Up will occur in  all subjects until documented disease progression. Subjects who  discontinue treatment for any reason without 
documented disease progression will be followed for disease pro gression every 3 months for 2 years from safety follow up visit . Once disease 
progression is documented, subjects will enter a survival follo w up period every 3 months for 2 years from the time of documen ted progression. 
Follow up may be accomplished via clinic visit, phone call, or other avenues as appropriate. During this follow up, any radiol ogy imaging results 
performed should be entered into the EDC system.  
 
    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 41 of 60 8. BIOSPECIMEN STUDIES AND PROCEDURES 
See Correlative Laboratory Manua l for collection, processing an d shipping instructions for all 
tissue and blood specimens.  8.1 Correlative Analyses 
Tissue based and peripheral-blood b ased correlative analyses wi ll focus on the identification of 
biomarkers of response and resista nce to treatment with olapari b and will include, but not be 
limited to, DNA, RNA, and protein-based assays. Because all pat ients enrolled on this study will 
have been previously identified as having a DDR mutation, we wi ll obtain prior genetic 
sequencing reports for explorato ry analyses of co-alterations a nd response/resistance to treatment 
and time-to-event outcomes. Furthermore, whole exome sequencing  may be pursued on select 
archival specimens, or all spec imens, to better define the geno mic landscape. Circulating DNA 
will be utilized to cor relate genomic alterations in the periph eral blood with altera tions present in 
tumor tissue.   In addition to the analyses desc ribed above, we may generate ci rculating tumor cell-based 
patient-derived xenograft models  and/or organoids using an appr oach that we have previously 
described.
35,36 The feasibility of est ablishing these mode ls will be assessed and if successful, we 
will evaluate sensitivity and resistance to olaparib in these m odel systems.   
 8.2 Archival Tissue 
All subjects must have adequate a rchival tissue available; iden tified at screening and shipped by 
C1D1 (i.e., at least 15 unstain ed slides or paraffin block). Ar chival tissue should represent 
invasive or metastatic urothe lial cancer with a preference for metastatic tissue if available. If 
archival tissue is not available , enrollment must be discussed with the sponsor-investigator on a 
case by case basis.  
 8.3 Peripheral Blood  
All samples to be drawn prior t o study drug administration (if applicable). Seria l blood samples 
will be collected to s upport biomarker res earch; There are 4 ti me points for blood samples to be 
obtained: (1) pre-dose C1D1, (2)  pre-dose C3D1, (3) pre-dose C5 D1 and at (4) Progression. If a 
subject comes off study due to progression, samples may be obta ined at the Safety Follow Up 
visit.  8.4 Tumor Specimens Obtained at t he Time of Disease Progression  or for Other 
Clinical Purposes  
Subjects may have tumor tissue obtained during the course of th e study or at the time of disease 
progression for clinical purpos es (e.g., confirmation of diseas e progression, management of 
complication of disease progressi on, etc.). Specimens obtained in these settings may be accessed 
by the research team to facilita te an understanding of the phar macodynamic effects of treatment 
at the level of the tumor and microenvironment including mechan isms of treatment resistance. 
 8.5 Samples for Future Unspecified Cancer Related Research 
Subject consent will be obtained for additional samples collect ed for future unspecified cancer 
related research. Hoosier Cancer  Research Network will manage t he banked samples. Samples 
will be banked indefinitely in the  Hoosier Cancer Research Netw ork Biorepository.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 42 of 60 • Whole Blood will be collected prior to treatment on Cycle 1 Day  1, C3D1, C5D1 and at 
progression/D30 Safety Follow-up visit.  
 8.6 Storage of Excess Biospecimens Excess biospecimens not completel y utilized in these experiment s will be stored indefinitely at 
HCRN for future use in researc h focused on GU malignant disease s that are yet to be 
determined. All specimens collect ed will maintain the assigned unique study number of the 
corresponding patient. Deidentifie d samples may be shared with other research institutions. We 
believe that allowing for storage  and usage of the remaining sa mples for future research is 
ethically justified and a prefe rred option to discarding these materials given the potential impact 
on improving clinical outcomes for  subjects with bladder cancer . Subjects will be given the 
option to store excess specimens  during the informed consent pr ocess. 
 8.7 Confidentiality of Biospecimens Samples that are collected w ill be identified by a subject’s se quence ID number assigned at the 
time of registration to the tria l. Any material issued to colla borating researchers will be 
anonymized and only identified by th e subject’s sequence number . 
 9. CRITERIA FOR DISEASE EVALUATION 
 9.1 Measurable Disease 
Measurable disease is defined as the presence of at least one m easurable lesion. Measurable 
lesions are defined as those that can be accurately measured in  at least one dimension (longest 
diameter to be recorded) as > 20 mm by chest x-ray, as >10 mm wi th CT scan, or >10 mm with 
calipers by clinical exam. All tumo r measurements must be recor ded in millimeters (or decimal 
fractions of centimeters). 
 9.1.1 Malignant Lymph Nodes 
To be considered pathologically e nlarged and measurable, a lymp h node must be >15 mm in 
short axis when assessed by CT s can (CT scan slice thickness re commended to be no greater 
than 5 mm). At baseline and in f ollow-up, only the short axis w ill be measured and followed. 
 9.2 Non-measurable Lesions 
All other lesions (or sites of di sease), including small lesion s (longest diameter <10 mm or 
pathological lymph nodes with ≥  10 to <15 mm short axis), are c onsidered non-measurable 
disease. Bone lesions, leptomeni ngeal disease, ascites, pleural /pericardial effusions, lymphangitis 
cutis/pulmonitis, inflammatory breast disease, and abdominal ma sses (not followed by CT or 
MRI), are considered as non-measurable.  NOTE:   Cystic lesions that meet the c riteria for radiographically de fined simple cysts should not 
be considered as malignant lesi ons (neither measurable nor non- measurable) since they are, by 
definition, simple cysts. ‘Cys tic lesions’ thought to represent  cystic metastases can be considered 
as measurable lesions, if they m eet the definition of measurabi lity described above. However, if 
non-cystic lesions are present i n the same subject, these are p referred for selection as target 
lesions.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 43 of 60 9.3 Target Lesions 
All measurable lesions up to a m aximum of 2 lesions per organ a nd 5 lesions in total, 
representative of all involve d organs, should be identified as target lesions and recorded and 
measured at baseline. Target lesions should be selected on the basis of their size (lesions with the 
longest diameter), be represent ative of all involved organs, bu t in addition should be those that 
lend themselves to reproducible repeated measurements. It may b e the case that, on occasion, the 
largest lesion does not lend itsel f to reproducible measurement  in which circumstance the next 
largest lesion which can be m easured reproducibly should be sel ected. A sum of the diameters 
(longest for non-nodal lesions, shor t axis for nodal lesions) f or all target lesions will be 
calculated and reported as the ba seline sum diameters. If lymph  nodes are to be included in the 
sum, then only the short axis is added into the sum. The baseli ne sum diameters will be used as 
reference to further characterize any objective tumor regressio n in the measurable dimension of 
the disease.  9.4 Non-target Lesions 
All other lesions (or sites of di sease) including any measurabl e lesions over and above the 5 
target lesions should be identif ied as non-target lesions and s hould also be record ed at baseline. 
Measurements of these lesions a re not required, but the presenc e, absence, or in rare cases 
unequivocal progression of eac h should be noted throughout foll ow-up. 
 9.5 Evaluation of Target Lesions 
NOTE:  In addition to the information be low, also see the internation al criteria proposed by the 
Response Evaluation Criteria in S olid Tumors (RECIST) Committee , version 1.1 (Eur J Cancer 
45;2009:228-247) for special notes  on the assessment of target lesions.  
 
Complete Response (CR) Disappearance of all target lesions. Any pathological lymph nod es 
(whether target or non-target) must have reduction in short axi s to 
<10 mm. 
Partial Response (PR) At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the diameters of target l esions, 
taking as reference the baseline sum diameters 
Progressive Disease (PD) At least a 20% increase in the sum of the diameters of target l esions, 
taking as reference the smallest  sum on study (this includes th e 
baseline sum if that is the smallest on study). In addition to the 
relative increase of 20%, the sum must also demonstrate an abso lute 
increase of at least 5 mm. (Note:  the appearance of one or mor e new 
lesions is also considered progressions).
Stable Disease (SD) Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient i ncrease 
to qualify for PD, taking as refe rence the smallest sum diamete rs 
while on study
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 44 of 60 9.6 Evaluation of Non-Target Lesions 
Complete Response (CR) Disappearance of all non-target l esions and normalization of tu mor 
marker level. All lymph nodes must be non-pathological in size (<10 mm short axis)  
NOTE:   If tumor markers are initially above the upper normal 
limit, they must normalize for a subject to be considered in complete clinical response.
Non-CR/ Non-PD Persistence of one or more non-target lesion(s) and/or maintena nce 
of tumor marker level above the normal limits
Progressive Disease (PD) Appearance of one or more new lesions and/or unequivocal 
progression of existing non-target lesions. Unequivocal progres sion 
should not normally trump target lesion status. It must be representative of overall disease status change, not a single l esion 
increase.
 
Although a clear progression of “non- target” lesions only is ex ceptional, the opinion of the site 
investigator should prevail in s uch circumstances, and the prog ression status should be 
confirmed at a later time by the sponsor investigator.  9.7 Evaluation of Best Overall Response 
Target Lesions Non-Target Lesion s New Lesions Overall Response 
CR CR No CR 
CR Non-CR/ Non-PD No PR 
CR Not evaluated No PR 
PR Non-PD/ or not all evaluated No PR 
SD Non-PD or not all evaluated No SD 
Not all evaluated Non-PD No Non-evaluable 
PD Any Yes or No PD 
Any PD* Yes or No PD 
Any Any Yes PD 
*In exceptional circumstances, unequivocal progression in non-t arget lesions may be 
accepted as disease progression.
 
Subjects with a global deteriora tion of health status requiring  discontinuation of treatment 
without objective evidence of dis ease progression at that time should be classified as having 
“symptomatic deterioration.” Every effort should be made to doc ument the objective progression 
even after discontinuation of treatment. In some circumstances, it may be  difficult to distinguish resid ual disease from normal tissue. 
When the evaluation of complete response depends on this determ ination, it is recommended that 
the residual lesion be investigat ed (fine needle aspirate/biops y) to confirm the complete response 
status.    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 45 of 60 9.8 Definitions for Response Evaluation – RECIST 1.1 
 9.8.1 First Documentation of Response The time between initiation of t herapy and first documentation of PR or CR. 
 9.8.2 Confirmation of Response 
To be assigned a status of compl ete or partial response, change s in tumor measurements must be 
confirmed by repeat assessments  performed no less than four wee ks after the criteria for response 
are first met.  9.8.3 Duration of Response 
Duration of overall response—the period measured from the time that measurement criteria are 
met for complete or partial res ponse (whichever status is recor ded first) until the date that 
recurrent or progressive diseas e is objectively documented (tak ing as reference for progressive 
disease the smallest measurement s recorded since treatment star ted). 
 9.8.4 Duration of Overall Complete Response 
The period measured from the time that measurement criteria are  met for complete response until 
the first date that recurrent di sease is objectively documented . 
 9.8.5 Objective Response Rate  
The objective response rate is the proportion of all subjects w ith confirmed PR or CR according 
to RECIST 1.1, from the start of  treatment until disease progre ssion/recurrenc e (taking as 
reference for progressive disease the smallest measurements rec orded since the start of 
treatment). 
 
9.8.6 Disease Control Rate 
The disease control rate is the proporti on of all subjects with  stable disease (SD) for 8 weeks, or 
partial response (PR), or complete response (CR) according to R ECIST 1.1, from the start of 
treatment until disease progression/recurrence (taking as refer ence for progressive disease the 
smallest measurements recorded since the start of treatment). 
 9.8.7 Time to Progression: 
A measurement from the date of  initiation of therapy until the criteria for disease progression is 
met as defined by RECIST 1.1. Subjects who have not progressed or have died due to any cause 
will be right-censored at the da te of the last disease evaluati on or date of death. 
 9.8.8 Progression Free Survival 
A measurement from the date of initiation of therapy until the criteria for disease progression is 
met as defined by RECIST 1.1 or death occurs. Subjects who have  not progressed will be right-
censored at the date of the l ast disease evaluation. 
 9.8.9 Overall Survival 
Overall survival is defined by t he date of enrollment to date o f death from any cause. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 46 of 60 9.9 Definitions for Response Cri teria for patients with bone-on ly metastases; MD 
Anderson (MDA) criteria34 
 
Complete Response (CR) • Complete sclerotic fill-in  of lytic lesions on XR or CT 
• Normalization of bone density on XR or CT 
• Normalization of si gnal intensity on MRI 
•Normalization of tracer uptake on SS 
Partial Response (PR) • Development of a sclerotic rim or partial sclerotic fill-in 
of lytic lesions on XR or CT 
• Osteoblastic flare - Interval  visualization of  lesions with 
sclerotic rims or new scleroti c lesions in t he setting of 
other signs of PR and absence of progressive bony disease 
• ≥ 50% decrease in measurab le lesions on XR, CT, or 
MRI 
• ≥ 50% subjective decrease in the size of ill-defined 
lesions on XR, CT, or MRI 
•≥ 50% sub
jective decrease in tracer uptake on SS
Progressive Disease (PD) • > 25% increase in size of  measurable lesions on XR, 
CT, or MRI 
• > 25% subjective increase in the size of ill-defined 
lesions on XR, CT, or MRI 
• > 25% subjective increase in tracer uptake on SS 
•New bone metastases
Stable Disease (SD) • No change 
• < 25% increase or < 50% decr ease in size of measurable 
lesions 
• < 25% subjective increase or  < 50% subjective decrease 
in size of ill-defined lesions 
•No new bone metastases
Abbreviations: XR: radiography;  CT: computed tomography; SS: sk eletal scintigraphy; 
MRI: ma gnetic resonance ima ging.
 Measurements are based on the sum  of a perpendicular, bi-dimens ional measurement of the 
greatest diameters of each individual lesion. 
    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 47 of 60 10 DRUG INFORMATION 
Please refer to the current vers ion of the Investigator’s Broch ure (IB) for additional information 
regarding this drug.  10.1 Olaparib 
Olaparib (AZD2281, KU-0059436) is a potent PARP inhibitor (PARP -1, -2 and -3).  
 10.1.1  Supplier/How Supplied 
Astra Zeneca will supply olapari b at no charge to subjects part icipating in this clinical trial.  
 The site investigator shall take  responsibility for and shall t ake all steps to maintain appropriate 
records and ensure a ppropriate supply, sto rage, handling, distr ibution, and usage of 
investigational product in accordance with the protocol and any  applicable laws and regulations. 
 The AstraZeneca Pharmaceutical Development R&D Supply Chain wil l supply olaparib to the 
investigator as round or oval film coated tablets. NOTE:  The capsule and tablet forms of 
olaparib should not be substituted as they have different bioav ailability and dosing instructions.  
 
Investigational product Dosage form and strength 
Olaparib 100 mg tablet  
Olaparib 150 mg tablet  
a Descriptive information for olaparib can be found in the Invest igator’s Brochure  
 
10.1.2  Preparation  
When possible, refer to the pres cribing information and/or inve stigator’s brochure for details on 
the preparation of the drug. Dos ing and administration should b e addressed in the Treatment Plan 
section.  10.1.3  Storage and Stability 
All study drugs should be kept in a secure place under appropri ate storage conditions. Olaparib 
tablets should be stored at 20° C to 25°C (68°F to 77°F); excurs ions permitted to 15°C to 30°C 
(59°F to 86°F). Protect from moisture.  10.1.4  Handling and Disposal 
Investigational drug should be disposed as per institutional po licy.  
 10.1.5  Dispensing 
Olaparib must be dispensed only f rom official study sites and t o eligible subjects under the 
supervision of the site investig ator. Olaparib should be stored  in a secure area according to local 
regulations. It is th e responsibility of the site investigator to ensure that study drug is only 
dispensed to subjects.   
 Labels will be prepared in accordance with Good Manufacturing P ractice (GMP) and local 
regulatory guidelines. The lab els will fulfill GMP Annex 13 req uirements for labelling. Label 
text will be translated into local language.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 48 of 60 Each bottle of olaparib will have an investigational product la bel permanently affixed to the 
outside stating that th e material is for clinical trial/investi gational use only and should be kept 
out of reach of children. The label will include the dosing ins tructions and a space for the 
enrolment code (E-code) to be completed at the time of dispensi ng. 
 The label will include the following information: 
blank lines for quantity o f tablets to be taken 
enrolment code (E-code) date of dispensing Instructions stating that the olaparib tablets should be taken at approximately the same time 
each morning and evening 
 
10.1.6  Potential Adverse Events 
See the most current IB or packag e insert for a comprehensive l ist of adverse events. 
 11 ADVERSE EVENTS 
The descriptions and grading s cales found in the NCI CTCAE v4 w ill be utilized for AE 
assessment. A copy of the CTCAE v 4 can be downloaded from the C TEP website at 
http://ctep.cancer.gov. All forms for AE/SAE recording and repo rting can be found in the Study 
Procedure Manual or in the EDC s ystem (Documents and Informatio n Tab). 
 11.1 Definitions 
 11.1.1 Adverse Event (AE) An AE is any untoward medical occu rrence whether or not conside red related to the study drug 
that appears to change in inte nsity during the course of the st udy. The following are examples of 
AEs:  
• Unintended or unfavorab le sign or symptom 
• A disease temporally associate d with participa tion in the proto col 
• An intercurrent illnes s or injury that impairs the well-being o f the subject 
 Abnormal laboratory values or diag nostic test results constitut e AEs only if they induce clinical 
signs or symptoms or require tre atment or further diagnostic te sts   
 
Hospitalization for elective surg ery or routine clinical proced ures that are not the result of an AE 
(e.g., surgical insertion of cen tral line) should not be record ed as an AE.  
 
Disease progression should not be  recorded as an AE, unless it is attributable to the study 
regimen by the site investigator.    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 49 of 60 11.1.2 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) 
A SAE is an adverse event that: 
• Results in death. NOTE:  Death due to disease progression should not be reported as a 
SAE, unless it is attributable  by the site investigator to the study drug(s) 
• Is life-threatening (defined as an event in which the subject w as at risk of death at the 
time of the event; it does not r efer to an event which hypothet ically might have caused 
death if it were more severe) 
• Requires inpatient hospitaliza tion for >24 hours or prolongatio n of existing 
hospitalization. NOTE:  Hospitalization for anticipate d or protocol specified procedur es 
such as administration of chemot herapy, central line insertion,  metastasis interventional 
therapy, resection of primary tum or, or elective surgery, will not be considered serious 
adverse events. 
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
• Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect 
• Is an important medical event ( defined as a medical event(s) th at may not be immediately 
life-threatening or r esult in death or ho spitalization but, bas ed upon appropriate medical 
and scientific judgment, may jeopa rdize the subject or may requ ire intervention (e.g., 
medical, surgical) to prevent one  of the other serious outcomes  listed in the definition 
above). Examples of such event s include, but are not limited to , intensive treatment in an 
emergency room or at home for  allergic bronchospasm; blood dysc rasias or convulsions 
not resulting in hospitalizatio n; or the development of drug de pendency or drug abuse.  
 
11.1.3  Olaparib Adverse Events of Special Interest (AESI) 
Adverse events of special interes t [AESI] are events of scienti fic and medical interest specific to 
the further understa nding of olaparib’s s afety profile and requ ire close monitoring and rapid 
communication by the local investiga tor to the sponsor-investig ator via HCRN. An AESI may be 
serious or non-serious. Adverse Events of Special Interest for olaparib are the Important 
Potential Risks of MDS/AML, new primary malignancy (other than MDS/AML) and 
pneumonitis.    ANY event of MDS/AML, new primary malignancy, or pneumonitis sh ould be reported to 
AstraZeneca Patient Safety wheth er it is considered a non-serio us AE [eg non-melanoma skin 
cancer] or SAE, and regardless of s ite investigator’s assessmen t of causality.  
 A questionnaire will be sent to  any investigator reporting an A ESI, as an aid to provide further 
detailed information on the event .  During the study there may 
be other events identified as 
AESIs that require the use of a  questionnaire to help character ize the event and gain a better 
understanding regarding the rel ationship between the event and study treatment. 
 11.1.4  Overdose of Olaparib 
There is currently no specific treatment in the event of overdo se with olaparib and possible 
symptoms of overdose ar e not established.  
 Olaparib must only be used in accordance with the dosing recomm endations in this protocol. 
Any dose or frequency of dosing that exceeds the dosing regimen  specified in this protocol 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 50 of 60 should be reported as an overdos e. Adverse reactions associated  with overdose should be treated 
symptomatically and should be  managed appropriately. 
 An overdose with associated AEs i s recorded as the AE diagnosis /symptoms on the relevant AE 
modules in the eCRF and on the Ove rdose CRF module. An overdose  without associated 
symptoms is only reported on the Overdose CRF module.  If an overdose on an AstraZeneca study drug occurs in the cours e of the study, sit e investigators 
or other site personnel inform a ppropriate Hoosier Cancer Resea rch Network (HCRN) within  
one business day  and HCRN will report to AstraZeneca within  one business day.  
 11.1.5  Reproductive Reporting Information 
 11.1.5.1  Pregnancy 
All outcomes of pregnancy should be  reported to HCRN who will t hen report to AstraZeneca. 
 11.1.5.2 Maternal Exposure If a patient becomes pregnant  during the course of the study, o laparib  should be discontinued 
immediately.  The outcome of a ny conception occurring from the date of the first dose until 1 
month after the last dose should be followed up and documented.  Pregnancy itself is not 
regarded as an adverse event unl ess there is a suspicion that t he investigational product under 
study may have interfered with the  effectiveness of a contracep tive medication. Congenital 
abnormalities/birth defects and spontaneous miscarriages should  be reported and handled as 
SAEs. Elective abortions without  complications should not be ha ndled as AEs.
 The outcome of 
all pregnancies (spontaneous miscarriage, elective termination,  ectopic pregnancy, normal birth 
or congenital abnormality) should be followed up and documented  even if the patient was 
withdrawn from the study.   
 If any pregnancy occurs in the cou rse of the study, site invest igators or other site personnel must 
inform HCRN within one business day  and HCRN will report to
 AstraZeneca within one 
business day.  11.1.5.3 Paternal Exposure Male subjects should refrain f rom fathering a child or donating  sperm during the study and for 3 
months following the last dose .  Pregnancy of the patient’s par tners is not considered to be an 
adverse event. However, the outco me of all pregnancies (spontan eous miscarriage, elective 
termination, ectopic pregnanc y, normal birth or congenital abno rmality) should if possible be 
followed up and documented.  The outcome of any conception occu rring from the date of the 
first dose until 3 months after the last dose should be followed up and documented. 
 11.1.6  Unexpected Adverse Event 
For this study, an AE is consider ed unexpected when it varies i n nature, intensity or frequency 
from information provided in the c urrent IB, pres cribing inform ation or when it is not included in 
the informed consent document as a potential risk. Unexpected a lso refers to AEs that are 
mentioned in the IB as occurri ng with a class of drugs or are a nticipated from the 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 51 of 60 pharmacological properties of t he drug, but are not specificall y mentioned as occurring with the 
particular drug under investigation.    11.1.7  Relatedness 
AEs will be categorized according to the likelihood that they a re related to the study drug(s). 
Specifically, they will be categorized using the following term s:  
 
Unrelated Adverse Event is not related  to the study drug(s)  
Unlikely Adverse Event is doubtfully related  to the study drug(s)  
Possible Adverse Event may be related  to the study drug(s)  
Probable Adverse Event is  likely related  to the study drug(s)  
Definite Adverse Event is clearly related  to the study drug(s)  
 
11.2 Reporting 
 11.2.1  Adverse Events  
• AEs will be recorded from time of signed informed consent until  30 days after 
discontinuation of study drug(s) or until a new anti-cancer tre atment starts, whichever 
occurs first.  
• AEs will be recorded regardless  of whether or not they are cons idered related to the study 
drug(s).   
• All AEs will be recorded in the s ubject’s medical record and on  the appropriate study 
specific eCRF form within the EDC system. 
• AEs considered related to st udy drug(s) will be followed until resolution to  
Grade ≤ 1 or baseline, deemed clin ically insignificant, and/or until a new anti-cancer 
treatment starts, whichever occurs first. 
• Transient asymptomatic laboratory abnormalities that do not req uire treatment will not be 
collected as adverse events. 
 11.2.2  Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) 
 11.2.2.1 Site Requirements for Reporting SAEs to HCRN 
• SAEs will be reported from time of signed informed consent unti l 30 days after 
discontinuation of study drug(s).  
• SAEs will be reported on the SAE Submission Form within  1 business day  of discovery 
of the event.   
• SAEs include events related a nd unrelated to the study drug(s).   
• All SAEs will be recorded in the s ubject’s medical record and o n the appropriate study 
specific eCRF form within the EDC system.   
• All SAEs regardless of relat ion to study drug will be followed until resolution to ≤ Grade 
1 or baseline and/or deemed clini cally insignificant and/or unt il a new anti-cancer 
treatment starts, whichever occurs first. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 52 of 60 The site will submit the completed SAE Submission Form to HCRN within  1 business day of 
discovery of the event . The form may be submitted to HCRN electronically to 
safety@hoosiercancer.org . The site investigator is res ponsible for informing the IRB an d/or other 
local regulatory bodies as per local requirements.   
 The original copy of the SAE Submission Form and the email corr espondence must be kept 
within the study file  at the study site. 
 Once the SAE has resolved (see resolution guidelines listed in 11.2.2.1), sites must submit a 
follow-up SAE Submission Form within a reasonable timeframe to HCRN electronically to 
safety@hoosiercancer.org .   
 
11.2.2.2  HCRN Requirements for Reporti ng Events to AstraZeneca 
HCRN will report all SAEs, AESIs , and other reportable events t o AstraZeneca within 1 
business day  of knowledge of the event.  Follo w-up information will be prov ided to 
AstraZeneca as reasonably requested.  Serious adverse events  that do not require expedited reporting to the FDA still need t o be 
reported to AstraZeneca, prefer ably using the MedDRA coding lan guage for serious adverse 
events. This information should be reported on a monthly basis and under no circumstance less 
frequently than quarterly.  Send SAE report and accompanying cover page by way of email to AstraZeneca’s 
designated mailbox: AEMailboxClinicalTrialTCS@astrazeneca.com.  
 
11.2.2.3 Sponsor-Investigator Responsibilities  
HCRN will send a SAE summary to the sponsor-investigator within 1 business day  of receipt of 
SAE Submission Form from a site .  The sponsor-investigator will  promptly review the SAE 
summary and assess for expectedness and relatedness.    11.2.2.4 HCRN Responsibilities to FDA This protocol was deemed exemp t by the FDA 10/27/17. For protoc ols exempt from the 
requirements of an IND, the above  stated requirements are not a pplicable. HCRN will continue 
to facilitate compliance of applicable requirements for the spo nsor-investigator i n relation to this 
study. This includes but is not  limited to 21 CFR 50.20 informe d consent, 21 CFR Part 56 IRB, 
and pertinent sections of the P ublic Health Service Act and FDA AA. 
 11.2.2.5 IND Safety Reports Unrelated to this Trial AstraZeneca will provide to HCRN  IND safety reports from extern al studies that involve the 
study drug(s) per their guidelin es. HCRN will forward safety re ports to the sponsor-investigator 
who will review these reports and de termine if revisions are ne eded to the protocol or consent. 
HCRN will forward these reports to participating sites within 1 business day  of receiving the 
sponsor-investigator’s review. B ased on the sponsor-investigato r’s review, applicable changes 
will be made to the protocol and informed consent document (if required). All IND safety reports 
will also be made available to sites via the EDC system.     
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 53 of 60 Upon receipt from HCRN, site inves tigators (or designees) are r esponsible for submitting these 
safety reports to their respec tive IRBs, as per their IRB polic ies. 
 12 STATISTICAL METHODS 
 12.1 Study Design 
This is a single arm open label m ulti-instituti onal phase II tr ial of olaparib  monotherapy in 
subjects with metastatic urothe lial cancer harboring somatic DD R alterations. The primary 
objective of the study is to es timate the objective response ra te (per RECIST 1.1 or MD 
Anderson criteria for bone-only m etastases) to treatment with o laparib. 
 12.2 Endpoints 
 12.2.1  Definition of Primary Endpoint 
The primary endpoint is objective response rate as determined b y RECIST 1.1 (or MD Anderson 
criteria for bone-only metastase s). Objective response rate wil l include confirmed complete 
response (CR) + confirmed partia l response (PR) and will be det ermined as outlined in section 9. 
 12.2.2  Definition of Secondary Endpoints 
• Safety of olaparib, defined as ra tes of Grade 1-5 toxicity acco rding to CTCAE v4.03. 
• PFS, which is defined as the time from initiation of treatment to death or progression, 
depending on which occurs first  (as defined by RECIST 1.1). 
• Overall survival (OS), which is defined as the time from initia tion of treatment to death. 
 
12.3 Sample Size and Accrual 
Assume the null hypothesis (P0) of  10% as the re sponse rate (th e response rate with standard 
cytotoxic chemothe rapy in this setting
37), a sample size of 27 achieve s 81% power to detect a 
difference (P1-P0) of 18% (that  is, P1=28%) using a one-sided e xact test with a target 
significance level of 0.05. The actual significan ce level achie ved by this test is 0.0471. The 
sample size may be inflated to 30 if replacement of subjects is  needed due to early withdrawals 
or unevaluable subjects.   12.4 Data Analysis Plans 
 12.4.1  Analysis Plans for Primary Objective 
Any subjects who receive at least one dose of treatment on this  protocol will be included in the 
analysis of the objective respons e rate. Patients who discontin ue treatment prior to the first 
response assessment will be defi ned as “non-eval uable” but will  be included in the denominator. 
The objective response rate and its associated 95% confidence i nterval will be constructed based 
on the exact binomial test due t o the small sample size.  
 12.4.2  Analysis Plans for Secondary Objectives 
Any subject who receives at least  one dose of treatment on this  protocol is evaluable for toxicity, 
progression free survival and overa ll survival. Toxicity rates will be summarized using frequency 
tables. Progression free survival  and overall survival curves w ill be based on the Kaplan-Meier 
method.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 54 of 60 12.4.3  Analysis Plans for Exploratory Objectives 
To explore the relationship between  specific genomic alteration s with response to olaparib, 
Fisher's exact test will be us ed. To explore the relationship b etween prior platinum-based 
chemotherapy treatment (exposur e, response, duration of treatme nt, and time since treatment) 
with response to olaparib, Fisher' s exact test (for chemo respo nse) and T-test (for duration of 
treatment and time since treatment) will be used. To explore th e relationship between tumor 
mutational profile, circulating DNA mutational profile, and res ponse to olaparib, both Fisher's 
exact test and T-tes t will be used.  
 12.5 Stopping Study for Excessive Toxicities 
A stopping rule will be employe d after 10 and 20 subjects finis h at least one cycle of treatment. 
This safety stopping rule will be performed with respect to a) SAEs that are treatment related and 
b) events of specific interest ( that is, MDS/AML, new primary m alignancies and pneumonitis). 
Two-sided 95% exact binomial conf idence intervals (CIs) of thes e event rates will be constructed 
at 10 and 20 subjects. If their lo wer bounds exceed pre-defined  levels, the study drug will be 
considered unacceptably toxic for this patient population and t he study will be terminated.  
Therefore, we have the f ollowing 2 stopping rules:  
1. In a prospective trial of olapar ib in subjects with advanced so lid tumors and germline 
BRCA 1 and 2 mutations, among the ova rian, breast, pancreatic, and prostate cancer 
groups, 10.4%, 9.7%, 17.4%, and 12.5% of  subjects, respectively , experienced serious 
AEs considered causally related to olaparib.
38 We will use 15% as our cutoff and if the 
lower bounds of the CIs exceed 15%, the study will be halted. T his corresponds to ≥ 5+ 
(5 or more) out of 10 and ≥ 7+ out of 20 subjects. 
2. The rate of other events of int erest (that is, MDS/AML, new pri mary malignancies and 
pneumonitis) varies around 1% (see Section 1.5.6). If the lower  bounds of the CIs exceed 
1%, the study will be halted. Thi s corresponds to ≥ 2+ (2 or mo re) out of 10 and ≥ 2+ out 
of 20 subjects. 
 Enrollment will not be halted whi le these safety assessments ta ke place.  
 There will be no planned interim efficacy assessment.   13 TRIAL MANAGEMENT 
 13.1 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) The study will be conducted in accordance with the Icahn School  of Medicine/Tisch Cancer 
Institute’s DSMP.   HCRN oversight activities include: 
• Review all adverse events requi ring expedited reporting as defi ned in the protocol 
• Provide trial accrual progress, safety information and data sum mary reports to the 
sponsor-investigator  
• Submit data summary reports to the lead institution Data Safety  Monitoring Committee 
according to Icahn School of Medicine/Tisch Cancer Institute’s DSMP. 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 55 of 60 13.2 Icahn School of Medicine/Tisch Cancer Institute Data Safet y Monitoring Committee 
HCRN will provide the following f or the Icahn School of Medicin e/Tisch Cancer Institute’s 
DSMC to review: 
• Adverse event summary report 
• Audit results if applicable 
• Data related to stopping/decisi on rules described in study desi gn 
• Study accrual patterns  
• Protocol deviations 
 
The Icahn School of Medicine/Tisc h Cancer Institute’s DSMC will  review study data every 
quarter.  Documentation of DSMC re views will be provided to spo nsor-investigator and HCRN.  
Issues of immediate concern by the DSMC will be brought to the attention of the sponsor-
investigator and other regulator y bodies as appropriate.  The s ponsor-investigator will work with 
HCRN to address the DSMC’s concerns.   
 
13.3 Data Quality Oversight Activities Remote validation of the EDC system data will be completed on a  continual basis throughout the 
life cycle of the study. Automated edit check listings will be used to generate queries in the EDC 
system and transmitted to the site to address in a timely fashi on. Corrections will be made by the 
study site personnel.   Participating sites may also be subject to quality assurance au dits by BMS or its designee as well 
as inspection by appropriate  regulatory agencies. 
 13.3.1 Onsite Monitoring Monitoring visits to the trial sites may be made periodically d uring the trial to e nsure key aspects 
of the protocol are followed. S elected source documents will be  reviewed for verification of 
agreement with data entered into the EDC system. It is importan t for the site investigator and 
their relevant personnel to be available for a sufficient amoun t of time during the monitoring 
visits or audit, if applicable. T he site investigator and insti tution guarantee access to source 
documents by HCRN or its designee.  The trial site may also be s ubject to qualit y assurance audit 
by AstraZeneca-MedImmune or its designee as well as inspection by appropriate regulatory 
agencies.  13.4 Compliance with Trial Registrat ion and Results Posting Requirem ents 
Under the terms of the Food and D rug Administration Modernizati on Act (FDAMA) and the 
Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA), the sponso r-investigator of the trial 
is solely responsible for determi ning whether th e trial and its  results are subject to the 
requirements for submission to t he Clinical Trials Data Bank, http://www.clinicaltrials.gov . All 
results of primary and secondar y objectives must be posted to C T.gov within a year of 
completion.  The sponsor-investigator has delegated responsibil ity to HCRN for registering the 
trial and posting the results  on clinicaltria ls.gov. Informatio n posted will allow subjects to 
identify potentially app ropriate trials for their disease condi tions and pursue pa rticipation by 
calling a central contact number  for further information on app ropriate trial l ocations and study 
site contact information.    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 56 of 60 14. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING 
 14.1 Data Management 
HCRN will serve as the Clinical R esearch Organization for this trial. Data will be collected 
through a web based clinical resea rch platform, a system compli ant with Good Clinical Practices 
and Federal Rules and Regulati ons.  HCRN personnel will coordin ate and manage data for 
quality control assurance and integrity. All data will be colle cted and entered into the EDC 
system
 by study site personnel from par ticipating institutions.   
 14.2 Case Report Forms and Submission 
Generally, clinical data will be e lectronically captured in the  EDC system
 and correlative results 
will be captured in the EDC system or other secure database(s) . If procedures on the study 
calendar are performed for standa rd of care, at minimum, that d ata will be captured in the source 
document. Select standard of care data will also be captured in  the EDC system, according to 
study-specific objectives.   The completed dataset is the sol e property of the sponsor-inves tigator’s institution and should 
not be exported to third parties, e xcept for authorized represe ntatives of appropriate 
Health/Regulatory Authorities, w ithout permission from the spon sor-investigator and HCRN. 
 14.3 Record Retention 
To enable evaluations and/or aud its from Health Authorities/HCR N, the site investigator agrees 
to keep records, including the i dentity of all subjects (suffic ient information to link records; e.g., 
hospital records), all original s igned informed consent forms, copies of all source documents, and 
detailed records of drug disposi tion. All source documents are to remain in the subject’s file and 
retained by the site investigator  in compliance with the site c ontract with HCRN.  No records 
will be destroyed until HCRN confi rms destruction is permitted.  
 14.4 Confidentiality 
There is a slight risk of loss  of confidentiali ty of subject in formation. All records identifying the 
subjects will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted  by the applicable laws and/or 
regulations, will not b e made publicly available. Information c ollected will be maintained on 
secure, password protected electro nic systems. Paper files that  contain personal information will 
be kept in locked and secure lo cations only accessible to the s tudy site personnel.  
 Subjects will be informed in writi ng that some organizations in cluding the sponsor-investigator 
and his/her research associates, HCRN, AstraZeneca, IRB, or gov ernment agencies, like the 
FDA, may inspect their medical  records to verify the informatio n collected, and tha t all personal 
information made available for inspection will be handled in st rictest confidence and in 
accordance with local data protection laws.  If the results of the  study are published, t he subject’s identi ty will remain confidential. 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 57 of 60 15 ETHICS 
 15.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approval 
The final study protocol and the  final version of the informed consent form must be approved in 
writing by an IRB. The site investigator must submit written ap proval by the IRB to HCRN 
before he or she can enroll subjects into the study.   
 The site investigator is respons ible for informing the IRB of a ny amendment to the protocol in 
accordance with local requirements. In addition, the IRB must a pprove all advertising used to 
recruit subjects for the study. T he protocol must be re-approve d by the IRB, as local regulations 
require.   Progress reports and notificati ons of serious and unexpected ad verse events will be provided to 
the IRB according to local re gulations and guidelines. 
 15.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study 
The study will be performed in acco rdance with ethical principl es originating from the 
Declaration of Helsi nki.  Conduct of the study will be in compl iance with ICH Good Clinical 
Practice, and with all applicab le federal (including 21 CFR par ts 56 & 50), state, or local laws. 
 15.3 Informed Consent Process 
The site investigator will ensure the subject is given full and  adequate oral and written 
information about the nature, pur pose, possible risks and benef its of the study. Subjects must 
also be notified they are free t o discontinue from the study at  any time. The subject should be 
given the opportunity to ask quest ions and allowed time to cons ider the information provided. 
 
The subject’s signed and dated i nformed consent must be obtaine d before conducting any 
procedure specifically for the s tudy. The site investigator mus t store the original, signed 
informed consent form. A copy of the signed informed consent fo rm must be given to the 
subject.    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 58 of 60 16 REFERENCES 
1.  Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jem al A. Cancer statistics, 2016. CA Cancer J Clin 2015;66(1):n/a-
n/a.  
2.  von der Maase H, Hansen SW, Robe rts JT, et al. Gemcitabine and cisplatin versus 
methotrexate, vinblastine, doxor ubicin, and cisplatin in advanc ed or metastatic bladder 
cancer: results of a large, randomized, multinational, multicen ter, phase III study. J Clin 
Oncol 2000;18(17):3068–77.  
3.  Rosenberg JE, Hoffman-Censits J, Powles T, et al. Atezolizu mab in patients with locally 
advanced and metastatic urothe lial carcinoma who have progresse d following treatment 
with platinum-based chemotherapy: a single-arm, multicentre, ph ase 2 trial. Lancet 
(London, England) 2016; 
4.  Galsky M, Retz M, Siefker-Radtke A, Baron A, Necchi A. Effi cacy and Safety of 
Nivolumab Monotherapy in Patients with Metastatic or Surgically  Unresectable Locally 
Advanced Urothelial Cancer Who H ave Received Prior Treatment: P hase II CheckMate 
275 Study. In: ESMO. 2016.  
5.  Apolo AB, Infante JR, Ham id O, et al. Avelumab (MSB0010718C ; anti-PD-L1) in 
patients with metastatic urothelial carcinoma from the JAVELIN solid tumor phase 1b 
trial: Analysis of safety, clini cal activity, and PD-L1 express ion. ASCO Meet Abstr  
2016;34(15_suppl):4514.  
6.  Plimack ER, Bellmunt J, Gupta S, et al. Pembrolizumab (MK-3 475) for advanced 
urothelial cancer: Updated resul ts and biomarker analysis from KEYNOTE-012. ASCO 
Meet Abstr  2015;33(15_suppl):4502.  
7.  Comprehensive molecular char acterization of urothelial blad der carcinoma. Nature 2014; 
8.  Iyer G, Balar AV, Milowsky MI , et al. Correla tion of DNA da mage response (DDR) gene 
alterations with response to neoadj uvant (neo) dose-dense gemci tabine and cisplatin 
(ddGC) in urothelial carcinoma (U C). ASCO Meet Abstr  2016;34(1 5_suppl):5011.  
9.  Van Allen EM, Mouw KW, Kim P, e t al. Somatic ERCC2 Mutation s Correlate with 
Cisplatin Sensitivity in Muscle-Invasive Urothelial Carcinoma. Cancer Discov 
2014;4(10):1140–53.  
10.  Liu D, Plimack ER, Hoffman-Cen sits J, et al. Clinical Vali dation of Chemotherapy 
Response Biomarker ERCC2 in Muscl e-Invasive Urothelial Bladder Carcinoma. JAMA 
Oncol 2016; 
11.  Plimack ER, Dunbrack RL, Brennan TA, et al. Defects in DNA  Repair Genes Predict 
Response to Neoadjuvant Cisplat in-based chemotherapy in Muscle- invasive Bladder 
Cancer. Eur Urol 2015; 
12.  Pommier Y, O’Connor MJ, de B ono J. Laying a trap to kill c ancer cells: PARP inhibitors 
and their mechanisms of acti on. Sci Transl Med 2016;8(362).  
13.  Murai J, Huang SN, Das BB, et al. Trapping of PARP1 and PA RP2 by Clinical PARP 
Inhibitors. Cancer Res 2012;72(21):5588–99.  
14.  Rottenberg S, Jaspers JE, Kersbergen A, et al. High sensit ivity of BRCA1-deficient 
mammary tumors to the PARP inhi bitor AZD2281 alone and in combi nation with 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 59 of 60 platinum drugs. Proc Natl Aca d Sci U S A 2008;105(44):17079–84.   
15.  Hay T, Matthews JR, Pietzka L, et al. Poly(ADP-ribose) pol ymerase-1 inhibitor treatment 
regresses autochthonous Brca2/p53- mutant mammary tumors in vivo  and delays tumor 
relapse in combination with c arboplatin. Cancer Res 2009;69(9): 3850–5.  
16.  Fong PC, Yap TA, Boss DS, et al. Poly(ADP)-ribose polymera se inhibition: frequent 
durable responses in BRCA carrier  ovarian cancer correlating wi th platinum-free interval. 
J Clin Oncol 2010;28(15):2512–9.  
17.  Helleday T. The underlying mec hanism for the PARP and BRCA  synthetic lethality: 
clearing up the misunderstandings. Mol Oncol 2011;5(4):387–93.  
18.  Mateo J, Carreira S, Sandhu S , et al. DNA-Repair Defects a nd Olaparib in Metastatic 
Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 2015;373(18):1697–708.  
19.  Dowsett M, Cuzick J, Howell A, Jackson I, ATAC Trialists’ Group. Pharmacokinetics of 
anastrozole and tamoxifen alone , and in combination, during adj uvant endocrine therapy 
for early breast cancer in postme nopausal women: a sub-protocol  of the “Arimidex and 
tamoxifen alone or in combination”  (ATAC) trial. Br J Cancer 20 01;85(3):317–24.  
20.  Aul C, Gattermann N, Schneid er W. Age-related incidence an d other epidemiological 
aspects of myelodysplastic syndromes. Br J Haematol 1992;82(2): 358–67.  
21.  Cogle CR, Craig BM, Rollison D E, List AF. Incidence of the  myelodysplastic syndromes 
using a novel claims-based algorithm: high number of uncaptured  cases by cancer 
registries. Blood 2011;117(26):7121–5.  
22.  Rollison DE, Howlader N, Smith MT, et al. Epidemiology of myelodysplastic syndromes 
and chronic myeloproliferative di sorders in the United States, 2001-2004, using data from 
the NAACCR and SEER programs. Blood 2008;112(1):45–52.  
23.  Morton LM, Dores GM, Tucker MA, et al. Evolving risk of th erapy-related acute myeloid 
leukemia following cancer chemotherapy among adults in the Unit ed States, 1975-2008. 
Blood 2013;121(15):2996–3004.  
24.  Vay A, Kumar S, Seward S, et al. Therapy-related myeloid l eukemia after treatment for 
epithelial ovarian carcinoma: A n epidemiological analysis. Gyne col Oncol 
2011;123(3):456–60.  
25.  Friedenson B. The BRCA1/2 pa thway prevents hematologic can cers in addition to breast 
and ovarian cancers. BMC  Cancer 2007;7(1):152.  
26.  Cole M, Strair R. Acute Myelogenous Leukemia and Myelodysp lasia Secondary to Breast 
Cancer Treatment: Case Studies and Literature Review. Am J Med Sci 2010;339(1):36–
40.  
27.  YEASMIN S, NAKAYAMA K, ISHIB ASHI M, et al. Therapy-related  myelodysplasia 
and acute myeloid leukemia following paclitaxel- and carboplati n-based chemotherapy in 
an ovarian cancer patient: a case r eport and literature review.  Int J Gynecol Cancer 
2008;18(6):1371–6.  
28.  SEE HT, THOMAS DA, BUESO-RAM OS C, KAVANAGH J. Secondary le ukemia after 
treatment with paclitaxel and carboplatin in a patient with rec urrent ovarian cancer. Int J 
Gynecol Cancer 2006;16(S1):236–40.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU15-262 
 
Version Date: 15MAY2019 C onfidential Page 60 of 60 29.  Travis LB, Holowaty EJ, Ber gfeldt K, et al. Risk of Leukem ia after Platinum-Based 
Chemotherapy for Ovarian Can cer. N Engl J Med 1999;340(5):351–7 .  
30.  Bergfeldt K, Einhorn S, Rosendahl I, Hall P. Increased ris k of second primary 
malignancies in patients with gyn ecological cancer. A Swedish r ecord-linkage study. Acta 
Oncol 1995;34(6):771–7.  
31.  Fowble B, Hanlon A, Freedman G, Nicolaou N, Anderson P. Se cond cancers after 
conservative surgery and radia tion for stages I-II breast cance r: identifying a subset of 
women at increased risk. Int J  Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2001;51(3 ):679–90.  
32.  Ginsburg OM, Kim-Sing C, Foul kes WD, et al. BRCA1 and BRCA 2 families and the risk 
of skin cancer. Fam  Cancer 2010;9(4):489–93.  
33.  Faltas BM, Prandi D, Tagawa ST, et al. Clonal evolution of  chemotherapy-resistant 
urothelial carcinoma. N at Genet 2016;48(12):1490–9.  
34.  Hayashi N, Costelloe CM, Ham aoka T, et al. A prospective s tudy of bone tumor response 
assessment in metastatic breast cancer. Clin Breast Cancer 2013 ;13(1):24–30.  
35.  Vidal SJ, Rodriguez-Bravo V, Q uinn SA, et al. A targetable  GATA2-IGF2 axis confers 
aggressiveness in lethal pros tate cancer. Can cer Cell 2015;27(2 ):223–39.  
36.  Williams E, Rodriguez-Bravo V, Chippada-Venkata U, et al. Generation of Prostate 
Cancer Patient Derived Xenograft Models from Circulating Tumor Cells. [Internet]. J Vis 
Exp. 2015 [cited 2015 Nov 17];105. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26555435 
37.  Bellmunt J, de Wit R, Vaughn DJ, et al. Pembrolizumab as S econd-Line Therapy for 
Advanced Urothelial Carcinom a. N Engl J Med 2017;NEJMoa1613683.   
38.  Kaufman B, Shapira-Frommer R , Schmutzler RK, et al. Olapar ib monotherapy in patients 
with advanced cancer and a germ line BRCA1/2 mutation. J Clin On col 2015;33(3):244–
50.  
  