 
 
 
CLINICAL  STUDY  PROTOCOL  COVER LETTER  
 
A Phase  2, Multicenter  Study  of Tesevatinib  Monotherapy  in 
Patients  with  Recurrent  Glioblastoma  
 
 
Protocol Number:  KD019 -208 
IND Number:  129323  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Document Date:  Version  4.0 03  April 2019  
 

Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 1 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
  
  
 
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL 
 
A Phase 2, Multicenter Study of Tes evatinib Monotherapy in Pati ents 
with Recurrent Glioblastoma  
 
 
Protocol Number: KD019-208 
IND Number:  129323 
 
Study Drug: Tesevatinib  
 Sponsor: Kadmon Corporation, LLC 
 450 East 29
th Street 
 New York, NY  10016 
 
Medical Monitor: Sanjay Aggarwal, MD 
 Kadmon Corporation, LLC  55 Cambridge Parkway  Cambridge, MA 02142 
 
Date of Protocol: Original: 5 February 2016 
Version: 2.0 25 March 2016  
 3.0 3 October 2017 
 4.0 03 April 2019                                                                                  
 
  
Confidentiality Statement 
The information contained herein is confidential and the propri etary property of Kadmon Corporation and any 
unauthorized use or disclosure o f such information without the prior written authorization of Kadmon Corporation is 
expressly prohibited.  

Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 2 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 1. PROCEDURES IN CAS E OF EMERGENCY 
Serious Adverse Events  
All serious adverse events (SAEs )* occurring in patients while on-study or within 30 days of 
receiving the last dose of st udy drug regardless of relationshi p, must be promptly reported 
(within 24 hours) by telephone, ema il, or telefax to the sponso r (or designee).   
Emergency Contact Information  
 
SAE AND SUSAR CRITERIA 
* A serious adverse event (SAE ) is any untoward medical occurre nce that at any dose results in an y of the following outcomes, regardless 
of relationship to study drug (see Section 11.3  Serious Adverse Events for additional information): 
 Death 
 Life-threatening adverse drug event 
 Inpatient hospitalization or pro longation of existing hospitali zation 
 A persistent or significan t disability / incapacity 
 A congenital anomaly/birth defect 
 An important medical event that may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surgical i ntervention to prevent one of 
the outcomes listed above. 
Some serious events will not be reported as SAEs, including: 
 Disease progression 
 Death due to disease progression occurring more than 30 days af ter the last dose of study drugs 
 Medical or surgical procedures when the condition that leads to  the procedure is an adverse event 
 Pre-existing diseases, or cond itions or laboratory abnormalitie s present or detected prior to the screening visit, that do not  worsen 
 Situations for which an untoward medical occurrence has not occ urred (e.g. hospitalization for elective surgery, social and/or  
convenience admissions) 
**  A suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction (SUSAR) is any untoward and unintended responses to an investigational pro duct 
related to any dose administered, of which the nature, or sever ity, is not consistent with the applicable product information (see also 
Section 11.3.2  of this document; Suspected Une xpected Serious Adverse Reactio ns).  All suspected adverse reactions related to an 
investigational medicinal produc t which occur in the concerned trial and that are both unexpected and serious are subject to e xpedited 
reporting. 
 For SAE/SUSAR reporting: For any other questions or to  
contact the Medical Monitor: 
 APCER Life Sciences, LLC Fax:  646-430-9549  In the event of an issue with the fax line, forward the SAE/SUSAR via email to:  
 
ClinicalSAEReporting@kadmon.com Sanjay Aggarwal, MD 
Vice President Clinical Development, Medical Monitor   Kadmon Corporation 55 Cambridge Parkway Cambridge, MA 02142 Mobile Phone:  857-253-8642 E-mail:   sanjay.aggarwal@kadmon.com  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 4 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 3. INVESTIGATOR SIGNATURE 
I have read this protocol, in cluding all appendices, and I agre e to conduct the study in 
compliance with all applicable r egulations (including 21 CFR Pa rt 312).  I will also make a 
reasonable effort to complete th e study within the time designa ted.  I will provide all study 
personnel under my supervision c opies of the protocol and acces s to all information provided by 
Kadmon Corporation, LLC.  I will disc uss this material with the m to ensure that they are fully 
informed about the drug and the study. 
I am aware that, prior to the c ommencement of this study, the I nstitutional Review Board must 
approve this protocol and the i nformed consent document associa ted with the clinical facility 
where the study will be conducted.  I agree to make all reasona ble efforts to adhere to the 
attached protocol.  I agree to pr ovide all patient s with a sign ed and dated copy of their informed 
consent document, as required by F DA and ICH regulations.  I fu rther agree to report to Kadmon 
any adverse events in accordance with the terms of this protoco l and FDA regulation 21 CFR 
312.64.   
Nothing in this document is intended to limit the authority of a physician to provide emergency 
medical care under applicable regulations.  
   
Investigator Signature 
  Date of Signature 
(DD MM YYYY) 
Name of Investigator (please print)  
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 5 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 4. SYNOPSIS 
Study title A Phase 2, Multicenter Study of Tesevatinib Monotherapy in Pati ents with Recurrent 
Glioblastoma 
Clinical phase Phase 2 
Number of study 
centers Up to 10 US centers 
Study background Tesevatinib (formerly known as KD019) is an orally-administered  tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
that has been documented to inhibit multiple molecular drivers of tumor growth, including 
epidermal growth factor  receptor (EGFR), human epidermal growth  factor receptor 2 
(HER2), Src, and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2). 
Tesevatinib has been evaluated in 6 clinical studies in various  solid tumors in more than 
275 patients, of whom at least 50 received the recommended dose  of 300 mg daily. The 
safety profile is similar to tha t of other agent s in the class,  with predominantly 
gastrointestinal (GI) and skin a dverse events (AEs). QTc prolon gation has also been 
observed, which appears to be dos e related. Efficacy has been o bserved in non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) with activating EGFR mutations. For further  information see the 
Investigator Brochure (Vers ion 7.0 dated 23 July 2015). 
Study rationale Gliomas account fo r 80% of primary malignancies of the central nervous system (CNS).  
Glioblastomas (World Health Organization (WHO) Grade IV astrocy tic tumors) account 
for 60–70% of gliomas and remain the most aggressive subtype. Gliob lastoma occurs 
mostly  in adults (median age of 64 years at diagnosis) with an estimat ed incidence of 2–3 
cases per 100,000 people in Europe and North America. With 1- a nd 5-year overall 
survival (OS) rates  of 29% and 3%, respectively, the prognosis of glioblastoma rema ins 
poor [ Central Brain  Tumor Registry of the United States 2011 ] and there is a need to 
develop more effective therapeutic  approaches. 
Standard treatment for newly diagnosed glioblastoma is surgical  debulking followed by  
radiotherapy and temozolomide (TMZ) with additional maintenance  TMZ [ Stupp 2005 ]. 
Despite the survival benefit associated with such treatment, al most all patients  relapse 
following initial therapy.  
Patients with recurrent glioblastoma have a median progression- free survival (PFS) of 
about 4 months and OS of less than 10 months. The  optimal management for patients 
with recurrent glioblastoma remains unclear, as there  have been no randomized trials 
directly comparing active intervention with supportive care. Th e most important 
prognostic factors for benefit from re-intervention  are pre-treatment performance status 
and patient age [ Kappelle 2001 ].  
Active  interventions include repeated surgery, re-irradiation, or syst emic therapy in order 
to improve or preserve neurological  function and prolong PFS and O S. Chemotherapy  
with TMZ demonstrated an increase in survival as second-line th erapy in initial trials. 
However, TMZ is now generally used as a component of first-line  treatment and hence  
there is no established chemotherapy regimen available for recu rrent glioblastoma [ Stupp 
2009 ; Stupp 2010 ]. Nitrosourea-based chemotherapy, either as single agents or i n 
combination regimens such as procarbazine, lomustine, and vincr istine (PCV), have 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 6 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 shown some activity in Phase 2 studies of patients who progress ed after prior 
chemotherapy [ Schmidt 2006 ; Fabrini 2009 ]. Systemic treatment with the anti-VEGF 
monoclonal antibody bevacizumab has also shown some activity in  recurrent 
glioblastoma [ Friedman 2009 ]. Bevacizumab is currently approved for use in patients with 
progressive disease following prior therapy in the United State s but not in the European 
Union [ Avastin® USPI 2015 ]. The label specifically men tions that there are no data 
demonstrating an improvement in disease-related symptoms or inc reased survival. 
EGFR gene abnormalities occur commonly in glioblastomas, sugges ting that EGFR 
inhibition could be a useful clinical strategy. Studies indicat e that EGFR gene 
amplification and /or mutation ar e present in approximately 57%  of glioblastomas 
[Brennan 2013 ]. EGFR variant III (EGFRvIII), which leads to constitutive EGF R 
signaling, is seen in approximately 25% of glioblastomas [ van den Bent 2009 ]. Clinical 
trials of EGFR inhibitors in patients with glioblastomas have p roduced disappointing 
results, perhaps because the ava ilable agents have poor blood-b rain barrier (BBB) 
penetration. A Phase 2 trial of erlotinib, for instance, led to  a 6-month PFS rate of 11% 
with erlotinib, compared to 24% with physician’s choice of temo zolomide or carmustine 
[van den Bent 2009 ]. In vitro data suggest that some EGFR abnormalities will corr elate 
with clinical sensitivity to erlotinib [ Sarkaria 2007 ]. In addition to targeting EGFR, 
tesevatinib also has VEGFR2 inhi bitory activity, and there may be advantages to the 
simultaneous inhibition of EGFR and VEGFR2 in glioblastomas. Th us, although the 
determinants of glioblastoma responsiveness to EGFR inhibitors remain poorly defined, 
further research on the role of tesevatinib in glioma could be a productive approach to 
improving glioma treatment.   
Unlike other agents in its class, tesevatinib effectively penet rates into the brain, with 
levels in mice and rats with intact BBBs the same or higher tha n plasma levels [ Tonra 
2015 ].  Tesevatinib has levels in the  choroid plexus and meninges t hat are 10 times the 
plasma levels, suggesting that t esevatinib may penetrate well i nto cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF). There is preliminary evid ence of clinical benefit in pat ients with leptomeningeal 
metastases in NSCLC [Kadmon data on file]. Thus, there is a goo d biologic rationale to 
evaluate tesevatinib in patients with recurrent glioblastoma wh ich has progressed on or 
after prior therapy. Its role in  tumors with and  without the EG FR activating mutations, 
EGFR protein overexpression and gene amplification also needs t o be explored. 
Study objectives Primary efficacy objectives 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tese vatinib as measu red by investig ator-assessed 
progression-free survival at 6-months (PFS-6) 
Secondary efficacy objectives 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tese vatinib as measu red by investig ator-assessed 
PFS-6 in the subgroup of patients with EGFRvIIIpos glioblastoma  
 To evaluate the efficacy of tese vatinib as measu red by investig ator-assessed 
PFS-6 in the subgroup of patients with EGFR gene amplified glio blastoma 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tese vatinib as measured by the over all survival  
rate at 9 months (OS-9) and OS overall, in all patients and in those with 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 7 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR gene amplified glioblastoma 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tese vatinib as measured by PFS, obj ective 
response rate (ORR) per Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology (RANO) criteria, and duration of r esponse (DOR) in all patients  and in 
those with EGFRvIII
pos and EGFR gene amplified tumors 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tese vatinib as measured by PFS-6, O S-9, RANO 
OOR and DOR in: 
o EGFRvIIIpos vs EGFRvIIIneg 
o EGFR amplificationpos vs EGFR amplificationneg 
Safety objectives 
 To evaluate the safety and tolera bility of tesevatinib in all p atients and in the 
subgroup of patients with EGFRvIIIpos and the subgroup of patients with 
EGFR amplificationpos tumors 
Exploratory objectives 
 To evaluate the plasma concentration of tesevatinib in patients  with and 
without systemic steroid treatment 
 To evaluate the potential association of exploratory tissue and  blood 
biomarkers with response to tes evatinib and with adverse events . These 
include EGFRvIII mutation and gene  amplification and may includ e 
circulating tumor DNA  
 To evaluate the correlation between patients with EGFRvIIIpos tumor and 
those patients with EGFR gene amplification 
 To evaluate and compare EGFRvIIIpos expression and/or other tissue 
biomarkers potentially associated with response with tesevatini b, in paired 
primary and recurrent glioblastoma specimens from the same pati ent, when 
these are available 
 To evaluate patient-reported outc omes of disease and treatment- related 
symptom severity and interference as measured by t he M.D. Ander son 
Symptom Inventory – Brain Tumor questionnaire (MDASI-BT) 
 To evaluate patient-reported outc omes of disease and treatment- related 
symptom severity and interference as measured by t he M.D. Ander son 
Symptom Inventory – Brain Tumor questionnaire (MDASI-BT) in the  
subgroup of patients with EGFRvIIIneg  and EGFR gene amplificationneg 
tumors as compared to those in patients with EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR gene 
amplificationpos tumors 
 
Study design This is a multicenter, Phase 2 st udy to assess the activity of tesevatinib in patients with 
recurrent glioblastoma. 
Screening and Study Treatment 
The availability of paraffin-emb edded tumor sample diagnostic o f glioblastoma is 
mandatory for entry into the study and should be provided with a copy of the original 
pathology report for central review. Tumor samples will be eval uated for the EGFRvIII 
mutation and for EGFR gene amplif ication. Tissue from recurrent  surgery is preferred, but 
tissue from initial surgery is sufficient for study entry. Base line magnetic resonance 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 8 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 imaging (MRI) is mandatory within 7 days of study drug administ ration. After completion 
of the screening assessments and confirmation of study eligibil ity, tesevatinib will be orally 
administered to all patients at a dose of 300 mg once daily.  
Patients who develop ≥ Grade 3 a dverse event considered by the investigator to be related 
to study drug (with the exception of asymptomatic Grade 3 eleva tions of amylase or lipase, 
Grade 3 elevation of glucose in a patient receiving systemic co rticosteroids, Grade 3 
creatine phosphokinase [CPK] elevat ion in the absence of muscle  symptoms, or Grade 3 
sodium values ≥126 mmol/L in a p atient with diarrhea) will have  study treatment 
interrupted until the ≥ Grade 3 drug-related toxicities have re solved to ≤ Grade 1 (refer to 
Section 9.1.3) .  
Once toxicities have resolved to ≤ Grade 1, the patient may res ume study treatment at a 
reduced dose of 250 mg/day. No more than one dose reduction is permitted. Patients who 
require more than one dose reduction will have study drug disco ntinued and enter the 
Follow-up Period. 
Patients for whom toxicity persi sts beyond 21 days despite dose  interruption may resume 
study treatment only with permission from the responsible Medic al Monitor.   
If study treatment is withheld, the patient should be instructe d not to make up the withheld 
doses. 
Study treatment will continue until disease progression, unacce ptable toxicity, patient or 
physician decision to discontinue, or death.  Assessments for d isease response will occur at 
week 4 and 8 and then every 8 weeks using the RANO criteria (se e Appendix 2) .  
Upon treatment discontinuation, p atients will be followed every  8 weeks for survival. 
Tumor samples will be used for exploratory biomarker research i ncluding, but not limited 
to, evaluation of EGFRvIII expr ession by immunohistochemistry ( IHC) or real-time 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR).  An appropriate histopathologi cal definition and cutoff 
for EGFRvIIIpos tumors will be established, and outcome in this subpopulation will be 
evaluated in addition to the overall study population. 
To characterize the sa fety and tolerability profile of tesevati nib, patients will be monitored 
throughout the study for adverse events (all grades), serious a dverse events, and any 
adverse events requiring drug interruption or discontinuation.  Patients will undergo safety 
evaluations, including physical examination (PE), vital sign me asurements, hematology, 
serum chemistry, urinalysis and electrocardiogram (ECG).   
MRI will be used to evaluate the tumor at baseline (within 7 da ys of study drug 
administration). All MRIs taken on study patients will be submi tted to the sponsor for 
possible retrospective analysis (refer to Section 10.1) .  
Subjects who have completed 24 cy cles of treatment and who cont inue to tolerate treatment 
with KD019 may continue on study with bimonthly visits to clini c for drug dispensing, 
safety and efficacy assessment. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 9 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 End of Treatment Visit 
An End-of-Treatment visit is to  be performed as soon as possibl e after the patient’s last 
dose of study drug.  This may occu r at the visit at which disea se progression is diagnosed.  
The patient will continue to be f ollowed in the study for disea se progression and survival. 
Follow-Up Period 
A follow-up visit will occur 30 days (±5 days) after the last d ose of study drug. Patients will 
undergo PEs; vital sign measurements; hematology, serum chemist ry, urinalysis and ECG, 
all performed prior to the start of any new therapy.  This visi t may occur prior to 30 days 
if a new therapy is started with in 30 days of last dose of stud y drug.  If progressive disease 
has not occurred at the end of the follow-up period MRIs should  be repeated every 8 weeks 
until disease progressi on per RANO criteria. 
Long-Term Follow-Up 
Patients are to be contacted by telephone every 8 weeks to asse ss progression status if 
not PD when study drug stopped, survival status and any subsequ ent anti-cancer 
treatment. If PD was not observed before the 30-day follow-up p eriod, patients will 
return for follow-up MRI until PD  is demonstrated or they start  a new anti-cancer 
treatment.  
As of Amendment 4, long-term fo llow-up will no longer be requir ed. 
Study 
population/Number 
of patients A total of approximately 40 patients with recurrent glioblastom a will be enrolled at up to 10 
US centers. 
Diagnosis and main 
criteria for inclusion Inclusion criteria :  
Patients will be included if they meet the following criteria: 1) Willingness and ability to provide written informed consent and  to comply with the 
study protocol as judged by the investigator 
2) Age ≥ 18 years old  
3) Karnofsky performance status (KPS) ≥70% (see Appendix 1).
  
4) Stable or decreasing dose of corticosteroids within 5 days prio r to study enrollment. 
5) Female subjects of childbearing potential have a negative pregn ancy test at 
screening. Females of childbear ing potential are defined as sex ually mature women 
without prior hysterectomy or who have had any evidence of mens es in the past 12 
months. However, women who have been amenorrheic for 12 or more  months are 
still considered to be of childb earing potential if the amenorr hea is possibly due to 
prior chemotherapy, anti-estrogens, or ovarian suppression. 
 Women of childbearing potential (i.e., menstruating women) must  have a 
negative urine pregnancy test (po sitive urine tests are to be c onfirmed by 
serum test) documented within the 24-hour period prior to the f irst dose of 
study drug.  
 Sexually active women of childbe aring potential enrolled in the  study must 
agree to use two forms of accepted methods of contraception dur ing the 
course of the study and for 6 months after their last dose of s tudy drug.  
Effective birth control includes (a) IUD plus one barrier metho d; (b) on 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 10 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 stable doses of horm onal contraception for at least 3 months (e .g., oral, 
injectable, implant, transdermal) plus one barrier method; (c) 2 barrier 
methods.  Effective barrier methods are male or female condoms,  
diaphragms, and spermicides (cream s or gels that contain a chem ical to 
kill sperm); or (d) a v asectomized partner. 
6) For male patients who are sexually active and who are partners of premenopausal 
women: agreement to use two for ms of contraception as in criter ion 5 above during 
the treatment period and for at l east 6 months after the last d ose of study drug. 
7) Histologically confirmed glioblastoma. A local pathology report  constitutes adequate 
documentation of histology for s tudy inclusion.  Patients with an initial diagnosis of 
a lower-grade glioma are eligible if a subsequent biopsy was de termined to be 
glioblastoma. 
8) First recurrence after concurrent  or adjuvant chemoradiotherapy . Imaging 
confirmation of first tumor progression or regrowth as defined by the RANO criteria 
(see Appendix 2 ).  A minimum of 12 weeks must hav e elapsed from the completion  
of radiotherapy to study entry to minimize the potential for MR I changes related to 
radiation necrosis that might be misdiagnosed as progression of  disease, unless there 
is a new lesion outside the radiation field or unequivocal evid ence of viable tumor on 
histopathological sampling. 
9) Prior treatment with TMZ for low grade glioma or glioblastoma. 
10) No more than one prior line of s ystemic treatment for glioblast oma.  Concurrent and 
adjuvant TMZ-based chemotherapy , including the combination of T MZ with an 
investigational agent, is considered one line of therapy. 
11) Prior therapy with gamma knife or other focal high-dose radioth erapy is allowed, but 
the patient must have subsequent histologic documentation of re currence, unless the 
recurrence is a new lesion out side the irradiated field. 
12) Recovery from the toxic effects of prior therapy, with a minimu m time of: 
a) ≥ 28 days elapsed from the administration of any investigationa l agent 
b) ≥ 28 days elapsed from the administration of any prior cytotoxi c agents, except 
≥ 14 days from vincristine, ≥ 21 days from procarbazine, and ≥ 42 days from 
nitrosureas 
c) ≥ 14 days elapsed from administration of any non-cytotoxic agen t (e.g., 
interferon, tamoxifen, thalidomide, cis-retinoic acid) 
13) Patients who have undergone recen t surgery for r ecurrent or pro gressive tumor are 
eligible provided that: 
a) Surgery must have conf irmed the recurrence 
b) There must be residual disease m easurable per RANO criteria e.g . 1 cm x 1cm 
c) A minimum of 28 days must have e lapsed from the day of surgery to first dose 
of the study drug. For core or needle biopsy, a minimum of 7 da ys must have 
elapsed prior to study entry 
14) Availability of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissue d iagnostic of 
glioblastoma.  
 
Exclusion criteria: 
Patients who meet any of the fo llowing criteria will be exclude d from study entry: 
1) Concurrent therapeutic interven tion (including radiation therap y and NovoTTF). 
2) Prior exposure to EGFR inhibitors. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 11 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 3) Prior exposure to bevacizumab or  other VEGF- or VEGF-receptor-t argeted  agent 
within 8 weeks of study start. 
4) Prior treatment with prolifeprosp an 20 with carmustine wafer. 
5) Prior intracerebral agent. 
6) Evidence of recent he morrhage on baseline MRI of the brain.  Ho wever, patients 
with clinically asymptomatic presence of hemosiderin, resolving  hemorrhagic 
changes related to surgery, or presence of punctuate hemorrhage  in the tumor are 
eligible. 
7) Need for urgent palliative interv ention for primary disease (e. g., rapidly increasing 
intracranial pressure, impending herniation, uncontrolled seizu res). 
8) Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) < 1.5 x109/L; platelet count < 100 x109/L; or 
hemoglobin (Hb) < 9.0 g/dL within 7 days prior to enrollment.  Note: The use of 
transfusion or other intervention to achieve Hb ≥ 9 g/dL is acc eptable. 
9) Total bilirubin ≥ 1.5 x ULN (except in patients diagnosed with Gilbert’s disease). 
10) Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (SGOT), alanine aminotransfera se (ALT) 
(SGPT), or alkaline phosphatase (ALP) ≥ 2.5 x ULN. 
11) Serum creatinine > 1.5 x ULN. 
12) Serum potassium or magnesium below the lower limit of 
normal. 
13) International normalized ratio (INR), prothrombin time (PT), or   activated partial 
thromboplastin time (APTT) as follows unless on anticoagulation  that is expected 
to alter coagulation test results: 
-  INR > 1.5 or PT > 1.5 xULN or aPTT > 1.5 xULN 
14) Known contraindication to MRI, such as cardiac pacemaker, shrap nel or ocular 
foreign body. 
15) Used any prescription medication during the prior 2 weeks that the investigator 
judges is likely to interfere with  the study or to pose an addi tional risk to the 
patient in participating, speci fically inhibitors or inducers o f cytochrome P450 
(CYP)3A4 (refer to Appendix 4) .  A stable regimen (≥ 4 w eeks) of antidepressants 
of the selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor (SSRI) class is allowed (common 
SSRIs include escitalopram oxalate, citalopram, fluvoxamine, pa roxetine, 
sertraline, and fluoxetine). 
16) Taking any drugs associated with torsades de pointes or known t o moderately or 
severely prolong the QTc(F) interval (see Appendix 4) . 
17) History of torsades de pointes, ventricular tachycardia or fibr illation, pathologic 
sinus bradycardia (< 50 bpm), heart block (excluding first degr ee block, being PR 
interval only), or congenital lo ng QT syndrome.  Patients with a history of atrial 
arrhythmias should be discussed with the Medical Monitor. 
18) Uncontrolled diabetes, as eviden ced by fasting serum glucose le vel >200 mg/dL 
19) New York Heart Association (NYHA)  Grade II or greater congestiv e cardiac 
failure. 
20) Has marked prolongation of QTc(F) interval at screening or base line (QTc[F] 
interval > 470 msec) using the F ridericia method of correction for heart rate. 
21) History of myocardial infarction (within 12 months) or unstable  angina 
(within 6 months) prior to study enrolment. 
22) History of stroke or transient ischemic attacks within 6 months  prior to study 
enrolment. 
23) Significant vascular disease (e. g., aortic aneurysm requiring su rgical 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 12 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 repair or recen tperipheral arterial thrombosis) within 6 months prior 
to study enrolment. 
24) Evidence of bleeding diathesis or coagulopathy (in the absence of therapeutic 
anticoagulation). 
25) History of intracranial abscess within 6 months prior to study enrolment. 
26) History of another malignancy in the previous 3 years, with a d isease-free interval 
of < 3 years. Patients with pri or history of in situ cancer or basal or squamous cell 
skin cancer are eligible. 
27) Evidence of any act ive infection requiring hospitalization or I V antibiotics 
within 2 weeks prior to study enrolment. 
28) Known hypersensitivity to any excipients of tesevatinib. 
29) Inabilit y to swallow or absorb orall y-administere dmedication. 
Dosage and 
administration Tesevatinib will be administered at the dose of 300 mg once dai ly. Tesevatinib will be 
used in dosage strength of 100-mg, and 150-mg tablets. Patient diaries will be utilized to 
evaluate compliance.  One cycle will be defined as 28 days of t reatment.   
Tesevatinib should be taken in the morning (unless there is a p atient-specific rationale to 
take it regularly at a different time of day) and can be admini stered without regard to 
food intake.   
Duration of 
treatment/ 
Discontinuation Duration of treatment:  Patients will be treated with study dru g until disease progression or 
unacceptable toxicity occurs. 
Discontinuation:  Patients who discontinue tesevatinib treatmen t will be followed for 
disease progression (if ap plicable) and survival.   
Concomitant 
medications  Concomitant treatment and medication information will be collec ted from the time the 
patient signs the informed consent form until 30 days after the  last dose of study drug or 
until the patient starts a new treatment, and is to be reported  on the appropriate case 
report form (CRF). The generic name of the drug (or trade name for combination drugs) 
must be specified along with the  reason for use, and duration o f treatment. Additionally, 
all diagnostic, therapeutic, or surgical procedures, whether re lating to malignancy or 
not, should be recorded in the CRF  including the date, indicati on, description of the 
procedure(s), and any clinical f inding. Any medication that is considered necessary for 
the patient’s welfare may be give n at the discretion of the inv estigator. Ancillary 
treatments will be given as medi cally indicated. The reason for  administration must be 
recorded on the CRF. Any changes in documented, permitted conco mitant treatment 
already being taken at the beginning of the clinical study must  be recorded in the CRF, 
noting the type of medication, the duration, and indication. 
Administration of acid-reducing medications should be avoided d uring the study as these 
agents may decrease exposure to t esevatinib. If acid-reducing a gents are needed, H-2 
antagonists or antacids will be recommended rather than proton pump inhibitors. 
Administration of acid-reducing agents such as H-2 antagonists or antacids, if required, 
should take place no less than 2  hours before or after dosing w ith tesevatinib.   
Since tesevatinib is a potent inhi bitor of MATE transporter pro teins, increased levels of 
concomitant medications that are secreted by the kidney proxima l tubule cells into the 
renal tubule by MATE transporter  proteins may occur.  Thus subj ects taking cephalexin, 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 13 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 cimetidine, dofetilide, fexofenadine, metformin, procainamide, and pyrimethamine 
should be monitored carefully. 
Prohibited 
treatments  Other investigational drugs 
 Concurrent anti-tumor therapies such as chemotherapy, gene ther apy, 
biologics, tyrosine kinases inhi bitors, radiation therapy, or i mmunotherapy 
 Medications associated with torsades de pointes or known to mod erately or 
severely prolong the QTc(F) interval, including anti-arrhythmic  medications 
within 2 weeks prior to Day 1 of treatment in the study.   
 Tesevatinib is largely metaboli zed by CYP3A4.  Therefore, takin g any 
medication known to strongly inhibit the CYP3A4 isozyme or any drugs that 
are strong CYP3A4 inducers (including anti-epileptic agents suc h as 
phenytoin).  A stable regimen ( ≥ 4 weeks) of an tidepressants of  the SSRI class 
is allowed (common SSRIs include  escitalopram oxalate, citalopr am, 
fluvoxamine, paroxe tine, sertraline, and  fluoxetine). See Appendix 4 .    
 Steroid medications are allowed 
 Radiation therapy: need for radi ation will be considered to be progressive 
disease 
Safety assessments The National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for A dverse Events (NCI 
CTCAE; Version 4.03) will be use d for grading toxicities. Safet y assessments will 
include AEs, serious adverse events (SAEs), PEs including full neurologic exam, vital 
sign measurements, clinical safet y laboratory evaluations (hema tology, serum 
chemistry, and urinalysis), KPS, and ECGs.   
The AE reporting period for a pa tient enrolled in the study beg ins when the patient 
provides informed consent and is continued through 30 days afte r the last dose of study 
drug or until start of new treat ment. All AEs that occur in enr olled patients during the 
AE reporting period specified in the protocol must be recorded,  regardless of the 
relationship of the AE to study drug. Any known untoward event that occurs beyond the 
AE reporting period that the inve stigator assesses as at least possibly related to 
tesevatinib should be reported to Kadmon. 
Vital sign measurements, including sitting blood pressure, puls e rate, respiratory rate, 
and temperature will be monitored throughout the study. 
Plasma Concentration 
Evaluation of 
Tesevatinib Plasma samples for tesevatinib  concentration analysis will be d rawn predose of 
tesevatinib on Days 15 of Cycle 1; and predose of tesevatinib o n Day 1 of every 
subsequent cycle (up to cycle 6). Data from these samples will contribute to a 
population PK analysis, and will be used to explore exposure-re sponse relationships. 
Pharmacodynamic 
Evaluation Samples will be evaluated for th e EGFRvIII mutation and for EGF R gene amplification.   
Efficacy Disease assessments will be b ased on the RANO criteria [ Wen 2010 ] and will  comprise 
radiological assessments, clini cal assessments, and corticoster oid use 
(see Appendix 2 ). Per the study’s schedule of assessments, full disease  assessments 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 14 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 should be performed at week 4 and  8 after the date of first stu dy drug administration and 
then every 8 weeks. Disease a ssessments as initially planned ac cording to the schedule 
of assessments  should be maintained regardless of treatment delays. Unschedule d 
disease  assessments may be performed at the discretion of the investiga tor to allow a 
decision  on further study treatment administration for individual patien ts. For patients 
who discontinue treatment for reason s other than progressive diseas e, disease 
assessment in the follow-up period should continue every 8 week s until disease 
progression. 
Radiological Assessment 
Radiological assessments will be p erformed using M RI scans. The  acquisition protocol  
for MRI (provided as a separat e document) will provide further details for scan  
standardization. All efforts sh ould be made to perform MRI scan s according to the  
corresponding specification in o rder to ensure that quality of MRI will be standardized  
among all sites. Consistency of subsequent MRIs should be ensur ed during all  
assessments for each patient, with the same technique being use d for evaluating lesions.  
Patients should be imaged on the same MRI scanner for the durat ion of the study. A 
1.5T or 3T scanner must be used for this study. The use of IV c ontrast should, as long as 
clinically possible, be kept consistent. The following sequence s of the entire brain must 
be acquired: 
 T1 pre-gadolinium 
 T2/FLAIR 
 T1 post-gadolinium 
Target Lesions: Lesions should b e measured on the greatest size  (bi-dimensional 
measurement of the longest cross- sectional diameters) observed either  on axial, coronal, 
or sagittal slices, and the most representative observed chosen  to be  followed for 
response evaluation (i.e., once selected at baseline, the plane  should be  maintained 
across the study, to allow comp arison). If there are multiple c ontrast-  enhancing lesions, 
a minimum of two of the largest lesions, and a maximum of five lesions, should be 
measured, and the sum of the products of the perpendicular  diameters of these lesions 
should be determined . Occasionally, the l argest lesions may  not lend themselves to 
reproducible measurements, and the  next largest lesions that ca n be measured 
reproducibly should be selected. For patients with recurrent di sease who  have multiple 
lesions of which only one or two are increasing in size, the en larging  lesions should be 
considered the target lesions for evaluation of response. 
Nontarget Lesions: All other le sions will be considered nontarg et lesions and should  
also be recorded. Rarely, unequiv ocal progression of a nontarge t lesion requiring 
discontinuation of therapy or development of a new contrast-enh ancing lesion may 
occur,  even in the setting of stable di sease or partial response in th e target lesions. These  
changes would qualif y as progression. 
Tumor measurements should be made by the same investigator/radi ologist for  each 
patient during the study to the extent that this is feasible. 
A radiological assessment of complete response (CR) or partial response (PR) requires  
confirmatory imaging at least 4 weeks after the initial assessm ent of response was  
observed. In the event that the radiograph ic changes are equivocal and it  is unclear 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 15 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 whether the patient has stable o r progressive disease, treatmen t should  be 
continued and the patient should  be closely observed. If subseq uent imaging studies 
demonstrate that progression has  occurred, the date of progress ion should be the date of 
the scan at which disease prog ression was first suspected. 
Clinical Status 
Clinical deterioration is defined  as a decline in the Karnofsky  performance status from  
100% or 90% to ≤ 70%; a decline of ≥ 20% from 80% or less; or a  decline from any  
baseline value to 50% or less, f or at least 7 days, unless attr ibutable to comorbid events  
(e.g., seizures, medication adve rse effects, complications of t herapy, cerebrovascular  
events, infection, etc.). Clinical  status must be recorded as I mproved, Stable, or  
Worsened. 
Corticosteroid Dose 
At the time of each disease asse ssment, the corticosteroid inta ke will be compared with  
corticosteroid intake at the tim e of the last disease assessmen t. The changes will be  
recorded as Increased, Unchanged,  or Decreased. I ncreases or de creases in  
corticosteroid dose should be clinically justified. 
Note: Increases in corticosteroid  dose for reasons other than d isease control do not  need 
to be taken into consideration when making this comparison. 
Overall Disease Assessment 
Based on radiological assessment s, clinical status, and cortico steroid use, an overall  
evaluation of CR, PR, s table disease (SD), or  progressive disease (PD) should be made 
at each disease assessment after baseline  according to the RANO criteria ( Appendix 2 ). 
Progressive disease is defined as any of the following: 
 ≥ 25% increase in sum of the products of perpendicular diameter s of 
enhancing  lesions (compared with baseline if no decrease or otherwise 
compared with the  smallest recorded sum [nadir] during the study) on stable 
or increasing doses of  corticosteroids 
 Significant increase in T2/FLAIR non-enhancing lesions on stabl e or 
increasing  doses or corticosteroids (compare d with baseline or best respon se 
after initiation of  therapy) 
 Appearance of any new lesions 
 Clear progression of nonmeasurable lesions 
 Definite clinical deterioration not attributable to other cause s apart from the 
tumor,  or to decrease in corticosteroid dose 
 Failure to return for evaluation as a result of d eath or deteri orating condition 
Note: Increase in corticosteroid dose alone, in the absence of persistent clinical  
deterioration related to tumor, will not be used as a determina nt of progression. Patients  
whose corticosteroid dose was in creased for new symptoms and si gns without  
confirmation of disease progression on neuroimaging do not qual ify for disease 
progression and should continue study treatment. If subsequent follow-up  imaging 
shows that this increase in cor ticosteroids was required becaus e of disease  progression, 
the date of progression should be the first timepoint at which the increase in  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 16 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 corticosteroids was necessary. 
Patient Reported 
Outcomes and Mini-Mental State 
Examination Patient reported outcomes (PROs) of disease- and treatment-rela ted symptom severity 
and symptom interference will be  assessed using the MDASI-BT qu estionnaire. 
The MDASI is a validated and re liable self-report measure that was developed to assess 
symptom severity and interference [ Cleeland 2000 ; Armstrong 2006 ]. 
Thirteen items ask patients to r ate how severe the symptoms wer e when “at their worst” 
in the last 24 hours with regard to pain, fatigue, nausea, dist urbed sleep, distress, 
shortness of breath, rememberi ng things, lack of appetite, drow sy, dry mouth, sad, 
vomiting, and numbness or tingling. An additional six items ask  patients to rate how 
much the symptoms have interfered with six areas of function (g eneral activity, 
walking, work, mood, relations with other people, and enjoyment  of life) in the last 24 
hours. The MDASI-BT (see
 Appendix 3 ) contains an additional nine items that assess 
symptoms and concerns specific to primary brain tumor patients (difficulty 
understanding, difficulty speaking, difficulty concentrating, s eizures, weakness, change 
in appearance, change in vision, change in bowel patterns, irri tability), for a total of 28 
items. 
Subjects completing 24 cycles of tesevatinib will no longer be required to complete 
patient reported outcomes and mini-mental state examinations. 
Statistical methods Analysis populations 
Adult patients with recurrent gli oblastoma, meeting all inclusi on criteria and no 
exclusion criteria, with availab ility of paraffin-embedded tumo r samples diagnostic of 
glioblastoma will be enrolled. 
Two subgroups of patients are defined as having: EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR 
amplificationpos tumors. 
Primary and secondary efficacy a nalyses will include all patien ts who were included in 
the study. The same analysis methods for the primary and second ary analyses will be 
applied to both the ITT po pulation and the EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR gene amplificationpos 
population. 
Safety analyses will include a ll patients who enrolled and rece ived at least one dose of 
study treatment (the safety population). 
All patients who take at least one dose of tesevatinib will be evaluable for safety and 
efficacy assessments. 
Patients who do not complete the study, for whatever reason, wi ll have all available data 
(up until the time of termination related to the reason they we re terminated) included in 
the analysis.   
For statistical purposes, comple tion of the study will be defin ed as six months after the 
last patient starts study treatment.  
The plasma concentration analysis  population will consist of al l patients who receive at 
least one dose of tesevatinib, and who have at least one sample  analyzed for plasma 
concentrations. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 17 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
  
 
Sample Size Justification and power calculations: 
The power calculation is based o n simulations in the Weibull di stribution to describe the 
progression and survival times. The estimation of PFS-6 is done  using the Cox model. 
Based on a one-stage design, with a sample size of 40 patients in the overall population, 
a PFS-6 of 25% and median PFS of 4 .5 months, the t rial has 95% power to demonstrate 
an estimated PFS-6 >15%. Based on a one-sided test on a 5% sign ificance level, the trial 
has 95% power to show a signifi cant difference ab ove the null h ypothesis of 7% and 
80% power to show a significant difference above 10%. The study  is not powered to 
detect differences in th e secondary endpoints. 
 Interim Analysis 
An interim analysis is included with the possibility to stop fo r futility. The stopping rule 
is based on an unacceptable PFS-6 rate of 5% and a desirable PF S-6 rate of 20% or 
more. The trial will continue aft er the interim analysis if mor e than 1 responders are 
seen in 21 patients giving a 72% probability of stopping if the  PFS-6 rate is ≤5%.   
Primary efficacy endpoint: PFS-6  
PFS is defined as the time between  date of first dose and the d ate of first documented 
disease progression or  death, whichever occurs first. The PFS-6  is defined as a patient 
being alive and progression fr ee at 6 months (24 weeks). Diseas e progression will be 
determined based on investigator  assessment with use of radiolo gical assessments, 
clinical status, and corticostero id use. Patients without a dat e of disease progression or 
death will be analyzed as censore d observations on the date of the last disease 
assessment; if no post-baseline di sease assessment is available , PFS will be censored at 
the date of 1st dose. 
The analysis of the primary endpoint and the estimation of PFS- 6 is performed with a 
Cox model. Karnofsky performance status is included as a covari ate. Study center is 
included as a random effect assumed to follow a gamma distribut ion. Thus, this is a 
shared Cox gamma frailty model. The model is used to estimate P FS-6 with 2-sided 
95% and 90% confid ence intervals. 
Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier methodology will be used to estimate median PFS with 
95% CI and the Kaplan-Meier curv e will be constructed to provid e a visual description 
of the PFS over time.  
Descriptive statistics overall an d for each parameter (radiolog ical assessment, clinical 
status and corticosteroid dose) in the disease progression asse ssment are presented for 
the entire assessment period as w ell as for 3-, 6-, and 9- mont h time points. 
The analysis of second ary and exploratory endpoints is describe d in Section 13.4.6  and 
will be further ou tlined in the SAP. 
Safety and PK: 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 18 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 AEs/SAEs will be graded using Co mmon Terminology Criteria for A dverse Events 
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) V4.03, c oded and 
tabulated using MedDRA (version 18.1 or greater). 
Laboratory results, ECGs, KPS, P K and vital signs will be tabul ated and presented in 
listings. 
Concomitant medications will be c oded using WHO Drug and tabula ted. 
Expectedness of the AEs will be a ssessed against the current te sevatinib IB. 
A statistical analysis plan (SA P) will be written to describe t horoughly the planned 
analyses.  
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 19 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019 
 
 Table 1: Schedule of Study Assessments  
Timepoint  
(Study Day) Screen Cycle 1 Cycle 2 Cycle 3 Cycle 4 Cycle 5 Cycle 6 Cycle 7+
EOS Tx o30-Day 
FU p 
(± 5d) LTFU UNS q -22 to -1 Day 1 Day 15 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 (± 
3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) 
Informed Consent X             
Medical History X             
Demographics X             
Tumor sample(s) a X                       
Inclusion/exclusion criteria X                      
Physical Examination b X  X X X X X X X X X X  X 
Neurological Examination c X     X  X  X     
Vital Signs d X  X X X X X X X X X X  X 
Safety Labs e, f X  X X X X X X X X X X  X 
Pregnancy Test g X  X  X X X X X X X X  X 
12-Lead ECG h X  X X X X X X X X X   X 
Disease Assessment j X    X X  X  X X   X 
 Karnofsky performance 
status X     X  X    X    X X  X 
 Corticosteroid use X  X X X  X X X 
 MRI tumor assessment X      X X    X    X  X   X r X 
Pt. Reported Outcomes 
(MDASI-BT) k  X  X X  X  X X    
Plasma concentration l      X  X X X  X  X         
Tesevatinib Dosing m  X X X X X X X X    X 
Collect/Issue Diary  X  X X X X X X X   X 
Concomitant Medications To be collected from the time of informed consent through 30 days after last dose of study drug.  
AE Monitoring n To be collected from the time of informed consent through 30 days after last dose of study drug.  
Follow-Up Phone Contact             X r  
d = day; ECG = electrocardiogram ; EOS = end of s tudy; FU = foll ow-up; KPS = Karnofsky Performan ce Status; LTFU = long-term fol low-up; MRI = magnetic resonance 
imaging; PK = pharmac okinetic; UNS = unsched uled; Tx = treatmen t 
a: Tumor tissue samples (20 slides  cut as recently as possible and  sections containing adequate tu mor) must be available and read y to be sent to the cent ral laboratory or the 
Sponsor. Samples from the origin al tumor and any subsequent bio psies will be required. An optio nal biopsy should be considered . For core or needle biopsy, a minimum of 7 
days must have elapsed p rior to study entry. Se e lab manual  for definition of adequate tumor sample.     
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 20 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019 
 
 b: At screening, PE to include heigh t and weight. Complete PE incl uding weight is required at all  visits except for Day 15 of Cyc le 1, when an abbreviated PE is acceptable (to 
be completed in a targeted manner covering related body systems ). 
c: Neurological exam should include full cranial nerve central and  peripheral, motor and sensory assessments. 
d: Vital sign measurements (blood pressure, heart rate, respirator y rate, and temperature) to be obtained with patient in sitting  position.  On Cycle 1, Day  1, and Cycle 1, Day 15 
vital signs are to be measured predose and 1 and 4 hours postdo se. 
e: Safety labs = hematology, coagulation, cystatin-C, clinical che mistry and urinalysis.  See Table 2 .  Note that Cycle 1 Day 1 labs need not be repeated if screeni ng visit 
occurred within 4 days prior to D ay 1 visit.  Safety labs will also be done at C2D15, C3D15, C4D 15, C5D15, and C6D15; they are  to be done locally and will incl ude serum 
chemistry only.  There  will be a 3 day window  for the D15 chemi stry labs.  Cystatin C does not need to be included in the chem istry labs done on C2D15, C3D15, C4D15, 
C5D15, and C6D15. 
f: Coagulation function to be tested at baseline only.  INR, PT, APTT.  
g: Urine test in women of childbearing poten tial within 24-hours p rior to first dose of study dru g. Positive urine results are to  be confirmed by serum pregnancy test. 
h: Supine 12-Lead ECGs will be performed at screening; predose, an d once within the 4 – 8 hours p ostdose on Days 1 and 15 of Cycl e 1; pre-dose on Day 1 of Cycles 2 and 
beyond; and at End of Study Drug Treatment visit.  At each time point, repeat ECG three times c onsecutively within 30 minutes ( must have an interval of at least 1–2 minutes 
between ECGs).  ECGs will be read  by a central laboratory. Foll owing dose reduction and resumpti on of study drug treatment, EC Gs must be repeated weekly for 2 weeks, 
then on Day 1 of each cycle fo llowing restart of study drug.  
i: The assessment is intended to b e done prior to starting cycle 2 , 3, 5, 7+ but should be  performed every 8 weeks. Radiological assessment must be performed with a brain MRI 
scan. The method of radiologic al assessment shoul d be consisten t throughout all visits.  Disease assessment during the screeni ng period is to be performed within 7 days 
before study drug administration and must be used as the baseli ne radiological assessment. The  corticosteroid dose should be k ept stable for 5 days prior to the MRI scan. 
During the study, dis ease assessments should be performed at we ek 4 and 8 after the date of first study treatment and then eve ry 8 weeks (at Week 16, 24, etc.), regardless of 
treatment delays. For patients wh o discontinue treatment for ot her reasons than PD, disease a ssessment in the follow-up period  should continue every 8  weeks (according to 
the original schedule) until d isease progression. For patients with PD, disease assessment at the EOS is only required if not performed within the previous 8 weeks. 
j: Patients will complete the quest ionnaire pre-dose on Day 1 of C ycles 1 and 2; every 8 weeks afte r study drug administration (i .e., coinciding with the schedule of disease 
assessments); and at the EOS. Pa tients who discontinue study tr eatment for reasons other than disease progression will also co mplete the questionnaire  every 8 weeks during 
follow-up until the time of docume nted disease progression. Pat ients must complete th e questionnaire prior  to any other tests or assessments and prior to  any discussion of the 
patient’s progress with their physician or any other healthcare  personnel at the site. 
k: Blood samples for tesevatinib pla sma concentrat ions should be d rawn prior to study drug administration. 
l: Tesevatinib will be administered  at the dose of 300 mg once dai ly. Study drug should be dispense d and accounted for from previ ous visit. 
m: AEs are to be collected from the time of informed consent throu gh 30 days after last dose of study drug.   
n: The End-of-Study Drug Treatment v isit is to occur  as soon as po ssible after the patient’s last dose of study drug.  This may o ccur at the visit at whi ch disease progression is 
diagnosed. Tumor assessment does  not need to be performed if it  was performed in the previous 8 weeks.   
o: The 30-Day Follow-Up visit should  occur 30 days (±5 days) after  the patients’ last dose of tesevatinib, but prior to starting on a new therapy.  This may  occur prior to 30 days 
if the new therapy is started w ithin 30 days of last dose of st udy drug.  Assessment s for the 30-day follow up may be done by telephone. 
p: For unscheduled visits, study a ssessments are at the investigat or’s discretion. 
q: Patients are to be contacted by  telephone every 8 weeks to asse ss progression status i f not PD when study drug stopped, surviv al status and any s ubsequent anti-cancer 
treatment. If PD was not observe d before the 30-day follow-up p eriod patients will return for  follow-up MRI until PD is demons trated or they start a new anti-cancer 
treatment. In the case of a patient receiving a new anti-cancer  treatment in the absence of PD, the date of the most recent MR I will be used as the date of PD. 
  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 21 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019 
 
 Table 2b: Schedule of Study Asse ssments for Subjects Completing  24 Cycles of Tesevatinib Treatment 
Timepoint  
(Study Day) Cycle 26 Cycle 28 Cycle 30 Cycle 32 Cycle 34 Cycle 36+
EOS Tx i30-Day 
FU j 
(± 5d) UNS kDay 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 (± 
3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) 
Physical Examination a X X X X X X X X X 
Neurological Examination b X X X X X X   X 
Vital Signs c X X X X X X X X X 
Safety Labs d X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X 
12-Lead ECG e X X X X X X X  X 
Disease Assessment f X X X X X X X  X 
Karnofsky performance 
status X X X X X X X  X 
Corticosteroid use X X X X X X X  X 
MRI tumor assessment X X X X X X X  X 
Concomitant Medications X X X X X X X X X 
Tesevatinib Dispensing g X X X X X X   X 
AE Monitoringh X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X 
d = day; ECG = electrocardiogram ; EOS = end of s tudy; FU = foll ow-up; KPS = Karnofsky Performan ce Status; LTFU = long-term fol low-up; MRI = magnetic resonance 
imaging; PK = pharmac okinetic; UNS = unsched uled; Tx = treatmen t 
a: Abbreviated PE is acceptable (to be completed in a targeted man ner covering related body systems). 
b: Neurological exam should include full cranial nerve central and  peripheral, motor and sensory assessments. 
c: Vital sign measurements (blood pressure, heart rate, respirator y rate, and temperature) to be obtained with patient in sitting  position. 
d: To be drawn and analyzed locally .  Safety labs = hematology and  clinical chemistry.  See Table 2b .   
e: Supine 12-Lead ECGs will be performed at each visit.   
f: The assessment should be perform ed every 8 weeks. Radiological assessment must be performed with  a brain MRI scan and should b e consistent thr oughout all visits.   
g: Study drug should be dispensed a nd accounted for from previous visit. 
h: AEs are to be collected from the time of informed consent throu gh 30 days after last dose of study drug.   
i: The End-of-Study Drug Treatment v isit is to occur  as soon as po ssible after the patient’s last dose of study drug.  This may o ccur at the visit at w hich disease progression 
is diagnosed. Tumor assessment doe s not need to be performed if  it was performed in th e previous 8 weeks.   
j: The 30-Day Follow-Up visit should  occur 30 days (±5 days) after  the patients’ last dose of tesevatinib, but prior to starting on a new therapy.  This may occur prior to 30 
days if the new therapy is start ed within 30 days of last dose of study drug.  Assessments for t he 30-day follow up may be don e by telephone. 
k: For unscheduled visits, study a ssessments are at the investigat or’s discretion. 
  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 22 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019 
 
 Table 3: Clinical Laboratory Panels 
Hematology Serum Chemistry  Urinalysis (dipstick) 
 WBC with differential (including neutrophils, 
basophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, monocytes) 
 hemoglobin 
 hematocrit 
 platelet count 
 mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 
  cystatin-c 
 albumin 
 amylase (trigger fasting 
triglycerides if amylase is 1.5 x normal) 
 alkaline phosphatase 
 ALT 
 AST 
 bicarbonate 
 BUN 
 calcium 
 chloride 
 creatinine 
 creatine phosphokinase 
 phosphorous 
 potassium 
 glucose (non-fasting) 
 sodium 
 total bilirubin 
 total protein 
 magnesium  appearance 
 color 
 pH 
 specific gravity 
 ketones 
 leukocytes 
 protein 
 glucose 
 
bilirubin 
 urobilinogen 
 occult blood (microscopic examination of 
sediment will be performed only if the results of the urinalysis dipstick evaluation are positive) Coagulation* 
 INR 
 PT 
 aPTT 
ALT = alanine aminotransferase ; APTT = activated partial thromb oplastin time; AST = aspartate a minotransferase; BUN = blood ur ea nitrogen; INR = International normalized 
ratio; MCV = mean cell volume; PT = prothrombin time  
*Coagulation function only to b e tested at baseline visit. 
  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 23 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019 
 
  
 Table 4: Clinical Laboratory Panels for Subjects Completing 24 Cycles of Tesevatinib Treatment 
Hematology Serum Chemistry  
 WBC with differential (including neutrophils, 
basophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, monocytes) 
 hemoglobin 
 hematocrit 
 platelet count 
 mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 
  albumin 
 amylase (trigger fasting 
triglycerides if amylase is 1.5 x 
normal) 
 alkaline phosphatase 
 ALT 
 AST 
 bicarbonate 
 BUN 
 calcium 
 chloride 
 creatinine 
 creatine phosphokinase 
 phosphorous 
 potassium 
 glucose (non-fasting) 
 sodium 
 total bilirubin 
 total protein 
 magnesium  
 
 
ALT = alanine aminotransferase ; APTT = activated partial thromb oplastin time; AST = aspartate a minotransferase; BUN = blood ur ea nitrogen; INR = International normalized 
ratio; MCV = mean cell volume; PT = prothrombin time  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 24 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1.  PROCEDURES IN CASE OF EMERGENCY ............................... .............................2  
2.  SPONSOR SIGNATURE ............................................. ................................................3  
3.  INVESTIGATOR SIGNATURE ........................................ .........................................4  
4.  SYNOPSIS ...................................................... .............................................................5  
5.  BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE ...................................... .................................33  
5.1.  Tesevatinib ................................................... ............................................................... 33 
5.1.1.  Tesevatinib Nonclinical Toxicology ............................ ...............................................33  
5.1.2.  Clinical Experience with Tesevatinib .......................... ...............................................33  
5.2.  Safety Profile of Tesevatinib ................................. .....................................................33  
5.3.  Rationale ..................................................... ............................................................... .35 
5.3.1.  Study Rationale ............................................... ............................................................35  
5.3.2.  Rationale for Dosage Selection ................................ ..................................................36  
6.  STUDY OBJECTIVES .............................................. ................................................37  
6.1.  Primary Objectives ............................................ .........................................................37  
6.1.1.  Primary efficacy objective .................................... ......................................................37  
6.1.2.  Primary safety objective ...................................... .......................................................37  
6.2.  Secondary Objectives .......................................... .......................................................37  
6.3.  Exploratory objectives ........................................ ........................................................37  
7.  INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN .......................................... ...........................................39  
7.1.  Overview of Study Design ...................................... ....................................................39  
7.2.  Discussion of Study Design .................................... ....................................................40  
7.3.  Conditions for Terminating the Study .......................... ..............................................40  
8.  STUDY POPULATION .............................................. ...............................................42  
8.1.  Target Population ............................................. ...........................................................42  
8.2.  Inclusion Criteria ............................................ ............................................................42  
8.3.  Exclusion Criteria ............................................ ...........................................................43  
8.4.  Removal of Patients from Study ................................ .................................................45  
8.5.  Replacement of Patients in Study .............................. .................................................47  
9.  STUDY DRUG .................................................... .......................................................48  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 25 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 9.1.  Tesevatinib ................................................... ............................................................... 48 
9.1.1.  Randomization and Blinding .................................... ..................................................49  
9.1.2.  Tesevatinib Administration .................................... ....................................................49  
9.1.3.  Dose Modifications and Delays for  Toxicity Related to Study Dru g .........................49  
9.1.3.1. Requirements for Continuation of Treatment Post Cycle 1 ....... .................................50  
9.1.3.2. Study Drug Discontinuation .................................... ...................................................51  
9.1.4.  Management of Adverse Events of Special Interest .............. .....................................51  
9.1.4.1. Diarrhea ...................................................... ............................................................... .51 
9.1.4.2. Skin Rash ..................................................... ............................................................... 51 
9.1.4.3. QT Interval Prolongation ...................................... ......................................................53  
9.1.4.4. Elevated Serum Creatinine ..................................... ....................................................55  
9.1.4.5. Elevated Serum Amylase ........................................ ....................................................55  
9.1.4.6. Interstitial Lung Disease ..................................... ........................................................55  
9.2.  Study Drug Accountability and Patie nt Treatment Compliance .... ............................55  
9.3.  Concomitant Medication and Treatment .......................... ..........................................56  
9.3.1.  Additional Therapy ............................................ .........................................................57  
9.3.2.  Additional Anti-Cancer Treatment and Radiotherapy ............. ...................................57  
9.3.3.  Interaction of Tesevatinib w ith Other Medications ............. .......................................57  
9.3.3.1. Management of Patients Requiri ng Concomitant Medications Associ ated 
with QT Interval Prolongation ................................. ...................................................57  
10.  EFFICACY ASSESSMENTS .......................................... ..........................................59  
10.1.  Radiological Assessment by Brain MRI .......................... ...........................................59  
10.2.  Clinical Status by Karnofsky Performance ...................... ...........................................60  
10.3.  Corticosteroid Dose ........................................... .........................................................60  
10.4.  Overall Disease Assessment .................................... ...................................................61  
11.  SAFETY ........................................................ .............................................................62  
11.1.  Safety Parameters ............................................. ..........................................................62  
11.2.  Adverse Event Definition ...................................... .....................................................62  
11.3.  Evaluating Adverse Events ..................................... ....................................................63  
11.3.1.  Serious Adverse Events ........................................ ......................................................63  
11.3.2.  Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) ........ ...........................64  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 26 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 11.3.3.  Unexpected Adverse Events ..................................... ..................................................64  
11.3.4.  Non-Serious Adverse Events .................................... ..................................................64  
11.3.5.  Protocol-Related Adverse Events ............................... ................................................64  
11.3.6.  Relationships/Causality to Study Drug ......................... ..............................................65  
11.3.7.  Recording Adverse Events ...................................... ...................................................65  
11.3.8.  Adverse Event Monitoring and Follow-up ........................ .........................................65  
11.3.9.  Laboratory and ECG Abnormalities .............................. .............................................65  
11.3.10. Pregnancy ..................................................... ..............................................................6 6 
11.3.11. Serious Adverse Event Reporting ............................... ................................................66  
11.3.11.1.  Governing Regulatory Requirements ............................. ............................................66  
11.3.11.2.  Time-Frame for Reporting ...................................... ....................................................67  
11.3.11.3.  Information to be Provided by the Investigator ................ ..........................................67  
11.3.12. Regulatory Reporting .......................................... ........................................................68  
11.3.13. Follow-up Information on a Serious Adverse Event .............. ....................................69  
11.4.  Other Safety Considerations ................................... ....................................................69  
11.4.1.  Medication Errors ............................................. ..........................................................69  
11.4.2.  Follow-Up of Serious Adverse Events ........................... ............................................69  
11.5.  Safety Monitoring ............................................. ..........................................................69  
12.  STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES .............................. ........................70  
12.1.  Procedures to be Performed .................................... ....................................................70  
12.1.1.  Informed Consent .............................................. .........................................................70  
12.1.2.  Demographics and Medical History .............................. .............................................70  
12.1.3.  Complete and Abbreviated Physical Examinations ................ ....................................70  
12.1.4.  Detailed Neurological Examination ............................. ..............................................70  
12.1.5.  Vital Sign Measurements ....................................... .....................................................71  
12.1.6.  Hematology, Serum Chemistries, C oagulation and Urinalysis ..... .............................71  
12.1.7.  Pregnancy Test ................................................ ............................................................73  
12.1.8.  Tumor Samples ................................................. ..........................................................73  
12.1.9.  12-Lead Electrocardiogram (ECG) ............................... ..............................................74  
12.1.10. Disease and Response Assessments  .............................................................. ...........74  
12.1.11. Tesevatinib Administration .................................... ....................................................75  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 27 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 12.1.12. Patient Reported Outcomes (MDASI-BT) .......................... .......................................75  
12.1.13. Tesevatinib Plasma Concentrations ............................. ...............................................76  
12.1.14. Pharmacodynamics .............................................. .......................................................76  
12.1.15. Prior and Concomitant Medications ............................. ..............................................76  
12.1.16. Adverse Event Assessments ..................................... ..................................................76  
12.1.17. Study Diary ................................................... ..............................................................7 7 
12.2.  Schedule of Visits ............................................ ...........................................................77  
12.2.1.  Screening Visit ............................................... .............................................................77  
12.2.2.  Cycle 1; Day 1 ................................................ ............................................................78  
12.2.3.  Cycle 1; Day 15 ............................................... ...........................................................78  
12.2.4.  Cycle 2; Day 1 ................................................ ............................................................79  
12.2.5.  Cycle 3; Day 1 ................................................ ............................................................79  
12.2.6.  Cycle 4; Day 1 ................................................ ............................................................80  
12.2.7.  Cycle 5; Day 1 ................................................ ............................................................81  
12.2.8.  Cycle 6; Day 1 ................................................ ............................................................81  
12.2.9.  Cycle 7+; Day 1 ............................................... ...........................................................82  
12.2.10. Day 15 on Cycle 2 through Cycle 6 ............................. ...............................................83  
12.2.11. End-of-Study Drug Treatment Visit (EOS) ....................... .........................................83  
12.2.12. 30-Day Follow-up .............................................. .........................................................84  
12.2.13. Follow-up Phone Contact ....................................... ....................................................85  
12.2.14. Unscheduled Visits: To Occur as Needed ........................ ..........................................85  
13.  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS .................................... ...................................86  
13.1.  General Design ................................................ ...........................................................86  
13.2.  Sample Size Justification ..................................... .......................................................86  
13.3.  Interim Analysis .............................................. ............................................................87  
13.4.  Statistical Considerations .................................... ........................................................87  
13.4.1.  Study Populations ............................................. ..........................................................87  
13.4.2.  Patient Accountability, Demogra phics, and Baseline Characterist ics ........................88  
13.4.3.  Tesevatinib Exposure .......................................... ........................................................88  
13.4.4.  Concomitant Medications ....................................... ....................................................88  
13.4.5.  Plasma Concentrations ......................................... .......................................................88  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 28 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 13.4.6.  Efficacy/Activity ............................................. ............................................................88  
13.4.6.1.  Primary efficacy endpoint ..................................... ......................................................88  
13.4.6.2.  Secondary efficacy endpoints .................................. ...................................................89  
13.4.6.3.  Sensitivity analysis for primary and secondary PFS and OS endpo int 
analysis ...................................................... ............................................................... ..90 
13.4.6.4.  Exploratory endpoints ......................................... ........................................................90  
13.4.6.5.  Safety Data ................................................... ............................................................... 91 
14.  DIRECT ACCESS TO SOURCE  DATA/DOCUMENTS ........................ .................93  
14.1.  Monitoring the Study .......................................... ........................................................93  
14.2.  Audits and Inspections ........................................ ........................................................94  
15.  ETHICAL ASPECTS ............................................... ..................................................95  
15.1.  Compliance Statement .......................................... ......................................................95  
15.2.  Good Clinical Practice ........................................ ........................................................95  
15.3.  Informed Consent .............................................. .........................................................95  
15.4.  Institutional Review Board .................................... .....................................................96  
15.5.  Future Use of Patient Samples ................................. ...................................................96  
16.  PROTOCOL AMENDMENTS ........................................... .......................................98  
17.  STUDY DOCUMENTATION, CRFS , AND RECORD KEEPING ................. ........99 
17.1.  Investigator’s Files and Retention of Documents ............... ........................................99  
17.2.  Source Documents and Background Data .......................... ........................................99  
17.3.  Electronic Case Report Forms .................................. ................................................100  
17.4.  Confidentiality of Trial Documents and Patient Records ........ .................................100  
18.  PUBLICATION POLICY ............................................ ............................................102  
19.  REFERENCES .................................................... .....................................................103  
APPENDIX 1.  KARNOFSKY PERFORMANCE STATUS CRITERIA ......................... ......105 
APPENDIX 2.  RANO CRITERIA ................................................. ..........................................106  
APPENDIX 3.  MD ANDERSON SYMPTOM INVENTORY-BRAIN TUMOR 
MODULE ........................................................ .........................................................108  
APPENDIX 4.  CONCOMITANT DRUGS THAT SHOULD BE AVOIDED, 
SUBSTITUTED OR USED WITH CAUTION .............................. .........................110  
APPENDIX 5.  TOPICAL STEROID POTENCY CHART ................................. ....................112  
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 29 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1: Study Assessments ............................................. .........................................................19  
Table 2: Clinical Laboratory Panels .................................... .....................................................21  
Table 3: Dose Adjustments According to CTC AE Toxicity Grade for Related AEs ...............50  
Table 4: Median PFS and PFS-6 Distributions ............................ .............................................86  
Table 5: Assumptions for Distribu tion of EGFR Subpopulations ........... .................................87  
 
 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 30 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
AE(s) adverse event(s) 
ADL activities of daily living 
ADPKD autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease  
ALT alanine aminotransferase 
ALP alkaline phosphatase 
ANC absolute neutrophil count 
APTT activated partial thromboplastin time 
AST aspartate aminotransferase 
BBB blood-brain barrier 
BID twice-a-day 
BSA body surface area 
CNS central nervous system 
CPK creatine phosphokinase 
CR complete response 
CRF case report form 
CS clinically significant  
CSF cerebrospinal fluid 
CYP3A4 cytochrome P450 
DOR duration of response 
ECG electrocardiogram 
EGFR epidermal growt h factor receptor 
EGFRvIII epidermal growth factor receptor variant III 
eCRF electronic case report form 
EOS end of study 
FU follow-up 
GCP good clinical practice 
GI gastrointestinal 
Hb hemoglobin 
HER2 human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 
HR hazard ratio 
ICF informed consent form 
ICH International Conference on Harmonization 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 31 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 IHC immunohistochemistry 
ILD interstitial lung disease 
INR international normalized ratio 
IRB Institutional Review Board 
IV intravenous  
KPS Karnofsky performance status 
LM leptomeningeal 
LTFU long-term follow-up 
MDASI-BT M.D. Anderson Symptom Inventory – Brain Tumor 
questionnaire 
MRI magnetic resonance imaging 
NCI-CTCAE National Cancer Institu te Common Terminology Criteria  
for Adverse Events 
NCS non-clinically significant  
NSCLC non-small cell lung cancer 
NYHA New York Heart Association 
ORR objective response rate 
OS overall survival 
OS-9 overall survival at 9 months 
PCR polymerase chain reaction 
PCV procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine 
PD progressive disease 
PE physical exam 
PFS progression-free survival 
PFS-6 progression-free survival at 6 months 
PK pharmacokinetics 
PR partial response 
PRO patient reported outcome 
PT prothrombin time 
QTc(F) QT interval, corrected 
RANO Response Assessme nt in Neuro-Oncology 
SADR (or SAR) suspected adverse drug reactions  
SAE(s) serious adverse event(s) 
SD stable disease 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 32 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 SGOT serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase 
SGPT serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase 
SSRI selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors  
SUSAR suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions 
TMZ temozolomide 
ULN upper limit of normal 
VEGFR2 vascular endothelia l growth factor receptor 2 
WHO World Health Organization 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 33 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 5. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
5.1. Tesevatinib 
Tesevatinib (formerly known as KD0 19) is an orally administered  tyrosine kinase inhibitor, 
which has been documented to inhibit multiple molecular drivers  of tumor growth, including 
EGFR, HER2, Src, and VEGFR2.   
Tesevatinib is a highl y potent inhibitor of  the EGFR activating  mutations that, when present, 
drive the growth of non-small ce ll lung cancers and potentially  other solid tumors. When 
measured in HCC827 cells, whic h are human lung cancer cells wit h an EGFR exon 19 deletion, 
the IC50 for inhibition of EGFR pho sphorylation for tesevatinib  (0.6 nM) was very similar to 
that for erlotinib (0.8 nM), whic h is registered in this indica tion. The IC50 for inhibition of 
proliferation in the same cell line was 3.5 nM for tesevatinib and 4.6 nM for erlo tinib. Thus 
tesevatinib and erlotinib have si milar potency in vitro against  a cell line with activating EGFR 
mutations. The potential advantag e of tesevatinib over erlotini b is that tesevatinib is far more 
efficient at crossing the blood-br ain barrier. It is therefore a good candidate for  therapy of brain 
metastases and primary brain cancers which are driven by EGFR m utations. 
5.1.1.  Tesevatinib Nonclinical Toxicology 
Tesevatinib nonclinical toxicol ogy has been characterized in mu ltiple species using a variety of 
dosing regimens. Details are prov ided in the Investigator’s Bro chure. 
5.1.2.  Clinical Experience with Tesevatinib 
To date, the tesevatinib clinical  program consists of eight com pleted trials using the tablet 
formulation (six Phase 1 and tw o Phase 2 studies). One of the P hase 1 trials (KD019-104) in 
healthy volunteers compared the t ablet formulation to the liqui d formulation.  Four additional 
trials of the tablet formulati on are included, of which three a re ongoing; KD019-101 in 
autosomal dominant polycystic  kidney disease (ADPKD), KD019-204  in metastatic breast 
cancer, and KD019-206 in patients  with NSCLC; and one (KD019-30 1 in NSCLC) which 
recently closed due to slow enrollment.  
In these studies, over 275 patients with solid tumor malignanci es, ADPKD, and healthy 
volunteers have received teseva tinib. The MTD in patients with solid tumor malignancies was 
determined to be 300 mg once daily. 
Further details of the clinical s tudies are provided in the Inv estigator’s Brochure. 
5.2. Safety Profile of Tesevatinib 
Tesevatinib has been evaluat ed in 6 clinical studies in various  solid tumors in more than 275 
patients, of whom at least 50 rec eived the recommended dose of 300 mg daily. The safety profile 
is similar to that of other agen ts in this class, with predomin antly GI and skin AEs. The most 
frequently reported AEs associat ed with tesevatinib use are dia rrhea, skin rash, fatigue, nausea, 
cough, dyspnea, dry skin, vomiting, constipation, vomiting, ano rexia and QTc prolongation (see 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 34 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 Investigators Brochure for furthe r detail). The AEs of special interest are as follows (refer to 
Section 9.1.4  for instruction on management of these AEs):  
Diarrhea:   Diarrhea is an expected AE for agents like tesevatinib that h ave significant EGFR 
inhibitor activity. Grade 3 diarrhea was the dose-limiting toxi city. At doses below those that 
cause dose-limiting toxicity, diarr hea has been effectively man aged by starting loperamide upon 
occurrence of grade 1. 
QTc Prolongation : In clinical trials of tese vatinib, cases of QTc prolongation have been 
observed.  
In patients with malignancies tr eated in the clin ical program a t ≥ 300 mg daily or 350 mg 
intermittently, the majority of w hom had advanced metastatic NS CLC, approximately 20% were 
found to have QTc prolongation base d on machine read ECGs at so me time during treatment that 
met the CTCAE v3 definition of an AE. The majority of these wer e Grade 2 and 3 with no Grade 
4. There were no clinical findings  associated with the ECG chan ges.  
No SAEs of syncope, convulsions , sudden death, ventricular tach ycardia, fibrillation, flutter, or 
torsades de pointes have been r eceived for the > 275 patients e xposed to tesevatinib.  
PK data from the clinical program  demonstrated that QTc prolong ation increased with increasing 
tesevatinib plasma c oncentration which cor related with dose adm inistered. 
Patients in this study will be monitored carefully for QTc prol ongation, and a central  laboratory 
will review all ECGs.    
Skin Rash:   Acneiform skin rash is an expected adverse event for agents l ike tesevatinib that 
have significant EGFR inhibitor activity. The ras h characterist ically involves the chest and face.  
Paronychial involvement, although cha racteristic of EGFR inhibi tors, has not been seen in 
tesevatinib studies.   
Clinical Chemistry:   Creatinine elevations hav e been observed up to Grade 3 in the  absence of 
other indicators of renal failu re. Cystatin-C levels, during th e same time periods, did not change, 
indicating that the increases i n serum creatinine may not be re flective of changes in kidney 
function. This effect appears to b e due to inhib ition of MATE t ransporter proteins by tesevatinib. 
Elevations of creatinine have a lso been observed in patients wi th other concurrent causes of renal 
dysfunction such as dehy dration due to diarrhea.  
Increases in creatinine appear  to be reversible. Both serum cre atinine and cystatin-C will be 
evaluated in this study in order to provide more information ab out any changes in creatinine that 
occur.  
Occasional elevation of amyla se and CPK have been observed with  tesevatinib treatment. These 
were asymptomatic and reversible.   
Interstitial Lung Disease:  Non-fatal interstitial lung dis ease (ILD) has been reported in  
association with the  use of tesevatini b in one patient with NSC LC out of >275 patients exposed 
to tesevatinib. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 35 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 5.3. Rationale 
5.3.1.  Study Rationale 
Gliomas account for 80% of primary malignancies of the CNS.  Glioblastomas (WHO Grade IV 
astrocytic tumors) account for  60–70% of gliomas and remain the  most aggressive subtype. 
Glioblastoma occurs mostly  in adults (median age of 64 y ears at diagnosis) with an estimat ed 
incidence of 2–3 cases per 100,000 people in Europe and North A merica. With 1- and 5-year OS 
rates  of 29% and 3%, respectively, the prognosis of glioblastoma rema ins poor [ Central Brain  
Tumor Registry of the United States 2011 ] and there is a need to develop more effective 
therapeutic  approaches.  
Standard treatment for newly dia gnosed glioblastoma is surgical  debulking followed by  
radiotherapy and TMZ with a dditional maintenance TMZ [ Stupp 2005 ]. Despite the survival 
benefit associated with such treatment, almost all patients  relapse following initial therapy.  
Patients with recurrent glioblas toma have a median PFS of about  4 months and OS of less than 10 
months. The  optimal management for patients with recurrent glioblastoma rem ains unclear, as 
there  have been no randomized trials di rectly compari ng active interv ention with supportive care. 
The most important prognostic factors for benefit from re-inter vention  are pre-treatment 
performance status and patient age [ Kappelle 2001 ].  
Active  interventions include repeated s urgery, re-irradiation, or syst emic therapy in order to  
improve or preserve neurological function and prolong PFS and O S. Chemotherapy  with TMZ 
demonstrated an increase in survival as second-line therapy in initial trials. However, TMZ is now 
generally used as a component of first-line treatment and hence  there is no established 
chemotherapy regimen availabl e for recurrent glioblastoma [ Stupp 2009 ; Stupp 2010 ]. 
Nitrosourea-based chemotherapy, either as single agents or in c ombination regimens such as PCV, 
have shown some activity in Pha se 2 studies of patients who pro gressed after prior chemotherapy 
[Schmidt 2006 ; Fabrini 2009 ]. Systemic treatment with the  anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody 
bevacizumab has also shown some activity in recurrent glioblast oma [ Friedman 2009 ]. 
Bevacizumab is currently approved for use in patients with prog ressive disease following prior 
therapy in the United States but not in the European Union [ Avastin® USPI 2015 ]. The label 
specifically mentions that ther e are no data demonstrating an i mprovement in disease-related 
symptoms or increased survival. 
EGFR gene abnormalities occur commonly in glioblastomas, sugges ting that EGFR inhibition 
could be a useful clinical strat egy. Studies indicate that EGFR  gene amplification and /or 
mutation are present in approxi mately 57% of glioblastomas [ Brennan 2013 ]. EGFR variant III 
(EGFRvIII), which leads to constitutive EGFR signaling, is seen  in approximately 25% of 
glioblastomas [ van den Bent 2009 ]. Clinical trials of EGFR i nhibitors in patients with 
glioblastomas have produced disa ppointing results, perhaps beca use the available agents have 
poor BBB penetration. A Phase 2 t rial of erlotinib, for instanc e, led to a 6-month PFS rate of 
11% with erlotinib, compared to 24 % with physician’s choice of temozolomide or carmustine 
[van den Bent 2009 ]. In vitro data suggest that some EGFR abnormalities will corr elate with 
clinical sensitivity to erlotinib [ Sarkaria 2007 ]. In addition to inhibiting EGFR, tesevatinib also 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 36 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 has VEGFR2 inhibitory activity, a nd there may be advantages to the simultaneous inhibition of 
EGFR and VEGFR2 in glioblastoma s. Thus, although the determinan ts of glioblastoma 
responsiveness to EGFR inhibi tors remain poorly defined, furthe r research on the role of 
tesevatinib in glioma could be a pr oductive approach to improvi ng glioma treatment.   
Unlike other agents in its class,  tesevatinib effectively penet rates into the brain, with levels in 
mice and rats with intact BBBs the same or higher than plasma l evels [ Tonra 2015 ].  Tesevatinib 
has levels in the choroid plexus and meninges that are 10 times  the plasma levels , suggesting that 
tesevatinib may penetrate well in to CSF.  There is preliminary evidence of clinical benefit in 
patients with leptomeningeal met astases in NSCLC [Kadmon data o n file]. Thus, there is a good 
biologic rationale to evaluate t esevatinib in patients with rec urrent glioblastoma which has 
progressed on or after prior the rapy. Its role in tumors with a nd without and EGFR activating 
mutations, EGFR protein overexpression and gene amplification a lso needs to be explored. 
Glioblastomas are inherently inaccessible and challenging to as sess in terms of repeat biopsy for 
evaluation of treatment-relate d biomarkers. Circulating tumor D NA has shown promise as a 
peripherally accessible source of  biomarker information in glio blastoma [Touat 2015, Best 
2015]. 
  
5.3.2.  Rationale for Dosage Selection 
Tesevatinib administered as a single-agent at a dose of 300 mg daily has shown clinically 
significant activity in lung cancer studies i n patients with EG FR mutations.  In one study, the 
confirmed PR rate in patients wi th EGFR mutations was 57% (8/14 ), and an additional 3 patients 
with EGFR mutations h ad unconfirmed PRs. 
Tesevatinib 300 mg daily was selec ted from the regimens tested in the early clinical program 
based on its benefit-risk profile. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 37 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 6. STUDY OBJECTIVES 
6.1. Primary Objectives 
6.1.1.  Primary efficacy objective 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tesevatinib as measured by investig ator-assessed PFS-6 
6.1.2.  Primary safety objective 
 To evaluate the safety and tol erability of tesevatinib in all p atients and in the 
subgroup of patients with EGFRvIIIpos and the subgroup of patients with EGFR 
amplificationpos tumors 
6.2. Secondary Objectives 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tesevatinib as measured by investig ator-assessed PFS-6 in 
the subgroup of patients with EGFRvIIIpos glioblastoma  
 To evaluate the efficacy of tesevatinib as measured by investig ator-assessed PFS-6 in 
the subgroup of patients with EGF R gene amplified glioblastoma 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tesevatinib as measured by the rate  OS-9 and OS overall, 
in all patients and in those with EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR gene amplified glioblastoma 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tesevatinib as measured by PFS, ORR  per RANO criteria, 
and DOR in all patients and in those with EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR gene amplified 
tumors 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tesevatinib as measured by PFS-6, O S-9, RANO OOR and 
DOR in: 
o EGFRvIIIpos vs EGFRvIIIneg 
o EGFR amplificationpos vs EGFR amplificationneg 
6.3. Exploratory objectives 
 To evaluate the plasma concentrations of tesevatinib in patient s with and without 
systemic steroid treatment  
 To evaluate the potential associ ation of exploratory tissue and  blood biomarkers with 
response to tesevatinib and with a dverse events. These include EGFRvIII mutation 
and gene amplification and may inc lude circulating tumor DNA  
 To evaluate the correlation be tween patients with EGFRvIIIpos tumor and those 
patients with EGFR gene amplification 
 To evaluate and compare EGFRvIIIpos expression and/or other  tissue biomarkers 
potentially associated with res ponse with tesevatinib, in paire d primary and recurrent 
glioblastoma specimens from the same patient, when these are av ailable 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 38 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  To evaluate patient-reported outc omes of disease and treatment- related symptom 
severity and interf erence as measured by the MDASI-BT questionn aire 
 To evaluate patient-reported outc omes of disease and treatment- related symptom 
severity and interfer ence as measured by the MDASI-BT in the su bgroup of patients 
with EGFRvIIIneg  and EGFR gene amplificationneg tumors as compared to those in 
patients with EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR gene amplificationpos tumors 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 39 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 7. INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 
7.1. Overview of Study Design 
This is a multicenter, Phase 2 s tudy to assess th e activity of tesevatinib in patients (n =40) with 
recurrent glioblastoma. This study will be conducted at up to 1 0 sites in the United States. 
The availability of paraffin-embe dded tumor sample diagnostic o f glioblastoma is mandatory for 
entry into the study. Tumor samples will be evaluated for the E GFRvIII mutation and for EGFR 
gene amplification. Tissue from r ecurrent surgery is preferred,  but tissue from initial surgery is 
sufficient for study entry. Baseline MRI is mandatory.  
After completion of the screening assessments and confirmation of study eligib ility by the 
Medical Monitor upon review of a n inclusion package, tesevatini b will be orally administered to 
all patients at a dose of 300 mg on ce daily. A cycle will be co nsidered as 28 days. Patients will 
be evaluated for efficacy acco rding to the RANO criteria. 
Patients who develop ≥ Grade 3 adv erse event(s) considered by t he investigator to be related to 
study drug (with the exceptions noted in Section 9.1.3 ) will have study treatment interrupted 
until the drug-related toxicities have resolved to ≤ Grade 1. O nce toxicities have resolved to ≤ 
Grade 1, the patient may resume study treatment at a reduced do se of 250 mg/day. No more than 
one dose reduction is permitted. Patients who require more than  one dose reduction will have 
study drug discontinued and ent er the Follow-up Period. 
Patients for whom toxicity pe rsists beyond 21 days despite dose  interruption may resume study 
treatment  only with permission from the res ponsible Medical Monitor.   
If study treatment is withheld, t he patient should be instructe d not to make up the withheld doses. 
Section 9.1.3  provides detailed instructions  concerning dose interruptions a nd reductions. 
Study treatment will continue until disease progression, unacce ptable toxicity, patient or 
physician decision to discontinue , or death.  Asse ssments for d isease response will occur at week 
4 and week 8 and then every 8 weeks thereafter using the RANO c riteria ( Appendix 2 ).  
Upon treatment discontinuation, pati ents will be followed every  8 weeks for survival. 
Tumor samples will be used for e xploratory biomarker research i ncluding, but not limited to, 
evaluation of EGFRvIII expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC)  or real-time Polymerase 
Chain Reaction (PCR).  An appropria te definition and cutoff for  EGFRvIIIpos tumors will be 
established, and outcome in this subpopulation will be evaluate d in addition to t he overall study 
population.  
To characterize the safety and t olerability profile of tesevati nib, patients will be monitored 
throughout the study for adverse ev ents (all grades), serious a dverse events, and any adverse 
events requiring drug interrupt ion or discontinuation.  Patient s will undergo safety evaluations, 
including PE, KPS, vital sign measurements, hematology, serum c hemistry, urinalysis and ECG.   
MRI will be used to evaluate the tumor at baseline. All MRIs ta ken on study patients will be 
submitted to the sponsor for possible retrospective analysis. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 40 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 7.2. Discussion of Study Design 
The single arm design assessing PFS-6 in the overall population  with the ability to detect a rate 
of 25% is appropriate a s a preliminary test of activity in pati ents with glioblastoma, based on 
PFS-6 rates seen in randomize d studies with bevacizumab [ Weathers 2015; Taal 2014; Galanis 
2015 ]. The sample size of this st udy is also designed to permit the  comparison of results with 
EGFR amplified and non-amplified tumors, as well as EGFRvIII mu tated versus wild-type. The 
sample size is adequate to chara cterize the safety profile in p atients with glioblastoma. 
7.3. Conditions for Terminating the Study 
Kadmon has the right to terminat e the study at any time. In ter minating the study, Kadmon and 
the investigator will ensure tha t adequate consideration is giv en to the protecti on of the patients’ 
interests. Reasons for study di scontinuation may include, but a re not limited to the following:  
 The incidence or severity of AEs  in this or other studies evalu ating the drug indicates 
a potential health hazard to patients.  
 Patient enrollment is unsatisfactory. 
 Drug supply issues. 
 Data recording is inaccu rate or incomplete. 
 Excessive patient self-withdrawal. 
 Significant protocol deviations  (e.g., violati on of eligibility  criteria, dosing errors, 
missing data for study e ndpoint analysis). 
The following data and materials are required by Kadmon before a study can be considered to be 
complete or terminated: 
 Laboratory findings, clinical dat a, and all special test result s from screening through 
the end of the study, including t he follow-up period for all en rolled patients. 
 Case Report Forms/Records.  Electronic case report forms (eCRFs ) will be used in 
this study.  Records (including co rrection forms) for all enrol led patients will be 
properly completed by appropria te study personnel, and signed a nd dated by the 
principal investigat or, as required. 
 Principal investigator sign-o ff of all required eCRF forms. 
 Completed Drug Accountability R ecords, Drug Inventory Log, and Inventory of 
Returned Drug forms or documen tation of destruction, as appropr iate. 
 Return of all unused study drug t o Kadmon unless an alternate d isposition method is 
agreed upon at study initiation by K admon and investigational s ite(s). 
 Copies of protocol amendments and other documents, and IRB appr oval/notification, 
as applicable. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 41 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  A summary of the study prepare d by the principal investigator ( IRB summary closure 
letter is an acceptable equivalent). 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 42 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 8. STUDY POPULATION 
8.1. Target Population 
This study will be conducted in up to 40 patients with recurren t glioblastoma. Tumor samples 
will be evaluated for the EGFRvIII mutation and EGFR gene ampli fication.   
8.2. Inclusion Criteria 
Patients will be included if the y meet the following criteria: 
1. Willingness and ability to provide written informed consent and  to comply with the study 
protocol as judged by t he investigator. 
2. Age ≥ 18 years old. 
3. Karnofsky performance status ≥ 70% (see Appendix 1 ). 
4. Stable or decreasing dose of cor ticosteroids within 5 days prio r to study enrollment. 
5. Female subjects of childbearing po tential have a negative pregn ancy test at screening. 
Females of childbearing potenti al are defined as sexually matur e women without prior 
hysterectomy or who have had any evi dence of menses in the past  12 months. However, 
women who have been amenorrheic for 12 or more months are still  considered to be of 
childbearing potential if the amenorrhea is possibly due to pri or chemotherapy, anti-
estrogens, or ovarian suppression.  
 Women of childbearing potential (i.e., menstruating women) must  have a negative 
urine pregnancy test (positive ur ine tests are to be confirmed by serum test) 
documented within the 24-hour peri od prior to the first dose of  study drug.  
 Sexually active women of childb earing potential enrolled in the  study must agree to 
use two forms of accepted methods of contraception during the c ourse of the study 
and for 6 months after their  last dose of study drug.  Effectiv e birth control includes 
(a) IUD plus one barrier method;  (b) on stable doses of hormona l contraception for at 
least 3 months (e.g., oral, injecta ble, implant, transdermal) p lus one barrier method; 
(c) 2 barrier methods.  Effective  barrier methods are male or f emale condoms, 
diaphragms, and spermicides (creams or gels that contain a chem ical to kill sperm); or 
(d) a vasectomized partner. 
6. For male patients who are sexua lly active and who are partners of premenopausal 
women: agreement to use two forms of contraception as in criter ion 5 above during the 
treatment period and for at leas t 6 months after the last dose of study drug. 
7. Histologically confirmed glioblas toma. A local pathology report  constitutes adequate 
documentation of histology for s tudy inclusion.  Patients with an initial diagnosis of a 
lower-grade glioma are eligible i f a subsequent biopsy was dete rmined to be 
glioblastoma. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 43 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 8. First recurrence after concurre nt or adjuvant chemoradiotherapy . Imaging confirmation of 
first tumor progression or regr owth as defined by the RANO crit eria.  A minimum of 12 
weeks must have elapsed from th e completion of radiotherapy to study entry to minimize 
the potential for MRI changes re lated to radiation necrosis tha t might be misdiagnosed as 
progression of disease, unless there is a new lesion outside th e radiation field or 
unequivocal evidence of viable t umor on histopathological sampl ing. 
9. Prior treatment with TMZ for low  grade glioma or glioblastoma. 
10. No more than one prior line of sys temic treatment for glioblast oma.  Concurrent and 
adjuvant TMZ-based chemotherapy, including the combination of T MZ with an 
investigational agen t, is considered one  line of therapy. 
11. Prior therapy with gamma knife or o ther focal high-dose radioth erapy is allowed, but the 
patient must have subsequent hi stologic documentation of recurr ence, unless the 
recurrence is a new lesion outsi de the irradiated field. 
12. Recovery from the toxic effects  of prior therapy, with a minimu m time of: 
a. ≥ 28 days elapsed from the admi nistration of any investigationa l agent 
b. ≥ 28 days elapsed from the admi nistration of any prior cytotoxi c agents, except ≥ 14 
days from vincristine, ≥ 21 da ys from procarbazine, and ≥ 42 da ys from nitrosureas 
c. ≥ 14 days elapsed from admini stration of any non-cytotoxic agen t (e.g., interferon, 
tamoxifen, thalidomide, cis-retinoic acid) 
13. Patients who have undergone recent surgery for recurrent or pro gressive tumor are 
eligible provided that: 
a. Surgery must have confirmed the recurrence 
b. There must be residual disease measurable per RANO criteria e.g . 1 cm x 1 cm 
c. A minimum of 28 days must have elapsed from the day of surgery to first dose of the 
study drug. For core or needle bi opsy, a minimum of 7 days must  have elapsed prior 
to study entry 
14. Availability of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissue d iagnostic of 
glioblastoma. 
8.3. Exclusion Criteria 
Patients who meet any of the fo llowing criteria will be exclude d from study entry: 
1. Concurrent therapeutic intervention (including radiation therap y and NovoTTF). 
2. Prior exposure to EGFR inhibitors. 
3. Prior exposure to bevacizumab or other VEGF- or VEGF-receptor-t argeted  agent within 8 
weeks of study start. 
4. Prior treatment with prolifepr ospan 20 with carmustine wafer. 
5. Prior intracerebral agent. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 44 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 6. Evidence of recent hemorrhage on baseline MRI of the brain.  Ho wever, patients with 
clinically asymptomatic presenc e of hemosiderin, resolving hemo rrhagic changes related 
to surgery, or presence of punctuat e hemorrhage in the tumor ar e eligible. 
7. Need for urgent pallia tive intervention for  primary disease (e. g., rapidly increasing 
intracranial pressure, impe nding herniation, uncontrolled seizu res). 
8. ANC < 1.5 x109/L; platelet count < 100 x109/L; or Hb < 9.0 g/dL within 7 days prior to 
enrollment.  Note: The use of t ransfusion or other intervention  to achieve Hb ≥ 9 g/dL is 
acceptable. 
9. Total bilirubin ≥ 1.5 x ULN (except in patients diagnosed with Gilbert’s disease). 
10. AST (SGOT), ALT (SGPT), or ALP ≥ 2.5 x ULN. 
11. Serum creatinine > 1.5 x ULN. 
12. Serum potassium or magnesium below lower limit of normal. 
13. INR, PT, or APTT as follows unl ess on anticoagulation that is e xpected to alter 
coagulation test results: 
 INR > 1.5 or PT > 1.5 xULN or aPTT > 1.5 xULN 
14. Known contraindication to MRI, such as cardiac pacemaker, shrap nel or ocular foreign 
body. 
15. Used any prescription medicati on during the prior 2 weeks that the investigator judges is 
likely to interfere with the study or to pose an additional ris k to the patient in 
participating, speci fically inhibitors or inducers of cytochrom e P450 (CYP)3A4 (refer to 
Appendix 4 ).  A stable regimen (≥ 4 weeks) of  antidepressants of the SSRI class is 
allowed (common SSRIs include e scitalopram oxalate, citalopram,  fluvoxamine, 
paroxetine, sertraline, and fluoxetine). 
16. Taking any drugs associated with  torsades de pointes or known t o moderately or severely 
prolong the QTc(F) interval (see Appendix 4 ). 
17. History of torsades de pointes, v entricular tachycardia or fibr illation, pathologic sinus 
bradycardia (< 50 bpm), heart bl ock (excluding first degree blo ck, being PR interval 
only), or congenital long QT syndr ome.  Patients with a history  of atrial arrhythmias 
should be discussed with t he Medical Monitor. 
18. Uncontrolled diabetes, as evidenced by fasting serum glucose le vel >200 mg/dL. 
19. NYHA Grade II or greater congestive cardiac failure. 
20. Has marked prolongation of QTc(F) interval at screening or base line (QTc[F] interval 
> 470 msec) using the Fridericia method of correction for heart  rate. 
21. History of myocardial infarction ( within 12 months) or unstable  angina (within 6 months) 
prior to study enrolment. 
22. History of stroke or transient isc hemic attacks within 6 months  prior to study enrolment. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 45 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 23. Significant vascular disease (e .g., aortic aneurysm requiring s urgical repair or recent 
peripheral arterial thrombosis) within 6 months prior to study enrolment. 
24. Evidence of bleeding diathesis or coagulopathy (in the absence of therapeutic 
anticoagulation). 
25. History of intracranial abscess within 6 months  prior t o study enrolment. 
26. History of another malignancy i n the previous 3 years, with a d isease-free interval of < 3 
years Patients with prior hist ory of in situ cancer or basal or  squamous cell skin cancer 
are eligible. 
27. Evidence of any active infection requiring hospitalization or I V antibiotics within 2 
weeks prior to study enrolment. 
28. Known hypersensitivity to any exc ipients of tesevatinib. 
29. Inability to swallow or absorb or ally-administered medication. 
8.4. Removal of Patients from Study  
Withdrawal of a patient from th e study means that no further st udy visits or procedures are 
performed and no further data are c ollected. Every reasonable e ffort will be made to keep the 
patient in the study; however, in th e event that a patient is w ithdrawn from the study, every effort 
will be made by the investigator t o complete and report the rea sons for withdrawal as thoroughly 
as possible. The reason for termi nation must be clearly documen ted on the appropriate page of 
the eCRF.  Study withdrawal should i nclude the final assessment s, as required by the protocol 
and every effort should be made to perform the study follow-up procedures (e.g., laboratory 
tests, physical examination inc luding an evaluation of toxicity /adverse events). Refer to Table 1  
and   
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 46 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 Table  2b: Schedule of Study Assessments for Subjects Completing 24 C ycles of Tesevatinib 
Treatment 
Timepoint  
(Study Day) Cycle 26 Cycle 28 Cycle 30 Cycle 32 Cycle 34 Cycle 36+ 
EOS Tx i 30-Day 
FU j 
(± 5d) UNS kDay 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 (± 
3d) Day 1  
(± 3d) 
Physical Examination a X X X X X X X X X 
Neurological Examination b X X X X X X   X 
Vital Signs c X X X X X X X X X 
Safety Labs d X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X 
12-Lead ECG e X X X X X X X  X 
Disease Assessment f X X X X X X X  X 
Karnofsky performance 
status X X X X X X X  X 
Corticosteroid use X X X X X X X  X 
MRI tumor assessment X X X X X X X  X 
Concomitant Medications X X X X X X X X X 
Tesevatinib Dispensing g X X X X X X   X 
AE Monitoringh X  X  X X X X X  X
d = day; ECG = electrocardiogram ; EOS = end of s tudy; FU = foll ow-up; KPS = Karnofsky Perfo rmance Status; LTFU = long-
term follow-up; MRI = magnetic r esonance imagi ng; PK = pharmaco kinetic; UNS = unsche duled; Tx = treatment 
l: Abbreviated PE is acceptable (to be completed in a targeted man ner covering related body systems). 
m: Neurological exam should include full cranial nerve central and  peripheral, motor and sensory assessments. 
n: Vital sign measurements (blood pressure, heart rate, respirator y rate, and temperature) to be obtained w ith patient in 
sitting position. 
o: To be drawn and analyzed locally .  Safety labs = hematology and  clinical chemistry.  See Table 2b.    
p: Supine 12-Lead ECGs will be performed at each visit.   
q: The assessment should be perform ed every 8 weeks. Radiological assessment must be performed with a brain MRI 
scan and should be consiste nt throughout all visits.   
r: Study drug should be dispensed a nd accounted for from previous visit. 
s: AEs are to be collected from the time of informed consent throu gh 30 days after last dose of study drug.   
t: The End-of-Study Drug Treatment v isit is to occur  as soon as po ssible after the patient’s last dose of study drug.  This 
may occur at the visit at whic h disease progression is diagnose d. Tumor assessment does not need to be performed if it 
was performed in the previous 8 weeks.   
u: The 30-Day Follow-Up visit should  occur 30 days (±5 days) after  the patients’ last dose of  tesevatinib, but prior to 
starting on a new therapy.  This may occur prior to 30 days if the new therapy is started with in 30 days of last dose of 
study drug.  Assessments for the 30-day follow up may be done b y telephone. 
v: For unscheduled visits, study a ssessments are at the investigat or’s discretion. 
  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 47 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 Table 3.  
A termination eCRF must be compl eted for all enrolled patients.  
The patient may be withdrawn fro m the study for any of the foll owing reasons. 
 Voluntary withdrawal by patient 
 Patient lost to follow-up 
 Termination of the study by sponsor 
 Patient death 
If a patient dies, Kadmon will actively seek to determine the d ate and cause of death.  
If there is an ongoing toxicity a ssociated with tesevatinib, pa tients must be followed with 
appropriate medical management until resolution or stabilizatio n. 
A reasonable effort should be made to contact any patient who i s lost to follow-up during the 
course of the study in order to c omplete assessments and retrie ve any outstanding data. If a 
patient is unreachable by telephone after three (3) attempts, t he minimum of a registered letter 
should be sent requesting that th e patient make contact with th e investigator. 
8.5. Replacement of P atients in Study 
Patients discontinued from the trial will not be replaced. 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 48 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 9. STUDY DRUG 
9.1. Tesevatinib 
Tesevatinib will be provide d in 100-, and 150-mg tablets. Kadmo n will provide each investigator 
with adequate supplies of tesev atinib. Study drug  must be store d at controlled room temperature 
and inventoried according to applicable regulations. 
Patients will be provided with e ither a weekly or monthly suppl y of study drug and instructions 
for taking the study drug at home . Subjects who have completed 24 cycles of treatment without 
disease progression or unacceptable toxicity will receive a 2-m onth supply of tesevatinib at each 
bimonthly visit.  After the ini tial 28-day cycle, study drug wi ll be supplied on Day 1 of each 
subsequent cycle to those c ontinuing on study. Unused drug must  be returned to the study site at 
each visit for accounting and reconciliation.   
Tesevatinib tablets are white  to off-white round tablets that c ontain API in a lactose-based 
immediate release (IR) formula tion. Tesevatinib tablets are pac kaged in high-density 
polyethylene (HDPE) bottles cappe d with childproof caps. The fo llowing information will be 
printed on the label for clini cal lots of tesevatinib: 
Kadmon Corporation, LLC 
KD019 Tablets 100-mg – 32 tablets/bottle Lot Number:  XXXXX.XXX   ____bottles/box Direction: Take as directed by physician Caution: Federal law prohibits t he transfer of  this drug to any  person other than the 
patient for whom it was prescribed. 
Caution:  New Drug-Limited by Federal Law to Investigational Us e 21 CFR 
312.6(a). Keep out of reach of children and pets. 
Store at USP controlled room tem perature of 20°-25°C (68°-77°F) .  Brief excursions 
permitted to 15°C-30°C (59°-86°F) Kadmon Corporation, LLC  New York, NY 10016 USA 
 Kadmon Corporation, LLC KD019 Tablets 150-mg – 32 tablets/bottle Lot Number:  XXXXX.XXX   ____bottles/box Direction: Take as directed by physician Caution: Federal law prohibits t he transfer of  this drug to any  person other than the 
patient for whom it was prescribed. 
Caution:  New Drug-Limited by Federal Law to Investigational Us e 21 CFR 
312.6(a). Keep out of reach of children and pets. 
Store at USP controlled room tem perature of 20°-25°C (68°-77°F) .  Brief excursions 
permitted to 15°C-30°C (59°-86°F) 
Kadmon Corporation, LLC  New York, NY 10016 USA 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 49 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 9.1.1.  Randomization and Blinding 
This is an open-label, non-randomized study. 
9.1.2.  Tesevatinib Administration 
Tesevatinib will be administe red at the dose of 300 mg once dai ly. One cycle will be defined as 
28 days of treatment.   
Study drug may be taken with or w ithout food at approximately t he same time every morning 
(unless there is a patient-speci fic rationale to take it regula rly at a different time of day). Patients 
should drink a full glass of wat er (approximately 8 ounces [240  mL]) immediately after study 
drug administration.  Grapefruit and similar (pomelo fruit, Sev ille oranges, etc.) products should 
be avoided for the duration of study treatment. 
Patients must be instructed not to make up missed doses unless the missed dose can be taken 
within 12 hours of the normal dos ing time.  Patients should not  re-take study drug doses in the 
event of vomiting. 
Patients will be treated with s tudy drug until disease progress ion or unacceptable toxicity occurs.   
Subjects who have completed 24 cy cles of treatment without dise ase progression or unacceptable 
toxicity will be elig ible to receive tesevatinib until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity 
occurs.   
All patients also will be fo llowed for a period of 30 days foll owing their last dose of tesevatinib.   
9.1.3.  Dose Modifications and Delays f or Toxicity Related to Study Dru g 
Patients who develop ≥ Grade 3 adv erse event(s) considered by t he investigator to be related to 
study drug (with the exceptions no ted below) will have study tr eatment interrupt ed until all drug-
related toxicities have resolved t o ≤ Grade 1. Once these toxic ities have resolved to ≤ Grade 1, 
the patient may resume study tr eatment at a reduced dose of 250  mg/day. No more than one dose 
reduction is permitted. Patients who require more than one dose  reduction will have study drug 
discontinued and enter t he Follow-up Period. 
The exceptions are: 
 asymptomatic Grade 3 elevations of amylase or lipase,  
 Grade 3 elevation of alkaline  phosphatase in a patient known to  have bone 
metastases,  
 Grade 3 elevation of glucose in a  patient receiving systemic co rticosteroids,  
 Grade 3 creatine phosphokinase [CP K] elevation in the absence o f muscle symptoms,  
 Grade 3 sodium values ≥126 mmol/L  in a patient with diarrhea) 
Patients for whom toxicity pe rsists beyond 21 days despite dose  interruption may resume study 
treatment  at a reduced dose of 250 mg/day only with permission from the r esponsible Medical 
Monitor.   
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 50 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 If study treatment is withheld, t he patient should be instructe d not to make up the withheld doses.  
Table 5: Dose Adjustments According to CTCAE Toxicity Grade for  Related AEs 
Occurrence Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4 
First appearance No action with study 
drug 
 For diarrhea start 
loperamide, 
monitor for dehydration 
 For rash start 
topical steroids (see 
Section 9.1.4.2 )  
 For QTc 
prolongation no 
action No action with study 
drug 
 For diarrhea 
start/increase  
loperamide, monitor for 
dehydration 
 For rash topical 
steroids ± 
doxycycline (see 
Section 9.1.4.2 ) 
 For QTc check 
con-meds and 
electrolytes, 
correct as 
indicated  
 For confirmed 
pneumonitis 
interrupt and consult Medical 
Monitor Interrupt treatment 
until resolved to Grade 0-1. If 
interruption < 21 days 
restart at 250 mg/day. If interruption ≥ 21 
days, check with 
Medical Monitor. 
 In addition, for 
QTc check con-meds, 
electrolytes and consult Medical 
Monitor (see 
Section 9.1.4.3.1  
for restarting and 
monitoring 
instructions). 
 For creatinine in 
absence of renal dysfunction no 
interruption. Discontinue. Consult 
Medical Monitor if continuation is in 
patient’s best interest. 
 In addition, for 
QTc hospitalize 
patient and perform 
cardiology 
evaluation (see 
Section 9.1.4.3.1 )
. 
Second appearance Discontinue study 
drug Discontinue study 
drug 
9.1.3.1.  Requirements for Continuation of Treatment Post Cycle 1 
Patients must fulfill the followi ng criteria in order to commen ce a new cycle of treatment: 
 all related ≥ Grade 3 AEs ha ve resolved to ≤ Grade 1 
 serum potassium and magnesium above the lower limit of normal 
 no arrhythmias, pathologic brady cardia, or associated symptomol ogy 
 QTcF ≤ 470 msec and increase from baseline ≤ 60 msec unless Med ical Monitor has 
given permission to continue 
 no concurrent medications  that prolong QTc (see Appendix 4)  
 no evidence of progressive disease  
 no additional therapeutic interventions for glioblastoma 
 no strong inhibitors or inducers  of CYP3A4, CYP2C8, CYP2D6 or C YP1A2 (see 
Appendix 4)   
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 51 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 9.1.3.2.  Study Drug Discontinuation 
Withdrawal of a patient from study treatment means that no furt her tesevatinib is administered 
but the remaining study visits or  procedures are performed and follow-up data are collected.  
A patient’s study drug may be prem aturely discontinued for any of the following reasons:  
 Progression of disease 
 An AE requires permanent  discontinuation of study drug 
 Voluntary withdrawal by patient 
 Protocol deviation 
 Patient lost to follow-up 
 Patient death 
 Termination of study by sponsor 
Patients that have study drug disc ontinued due to toxicity are to be followed until there is either: 
 Resolution or stabilizatio n to baseline or Grade 1 
 The patient is lost to follow-up 
 The event is otherwise explained 
9.1.4.  Management of Adverse Events of Special Interest 
AEs of special interest include  the following:  diarrhea, skin rash, QTc(F) prol ongation, elevated 
serum creatinine, elevated serum amylase and ILD.  Unless other wise specified, study drug may 
be held for up to 21 days at the discretion of the investigator .   
9.1.4.1.  Diarrhea 
Diarrhea should be managed with l operamide. On first occurrence  of Grade 1 diarrhea initiate 
loperamide and monitor patient’s  electrolytes and hydration sta tus. Patients with severe diarrhea 
who are unresponsive to loperamide  or other anti-diarrheals or who become dehydrated require 
interruption of study drug until resolution to ≤ Grade 1 in sev erity. If Grade 4 diarrhea occurs, 
the Medical Monitor should be  consulted about study drug decrea ses or discontinuation. In the 
event of severe or persistent diarrhea, nausea, anorexia, or vo miting associated with dehydration, 
study drug should be interrupted, a nd appropriate measures shou ld be taken to rehydrate the 
patient intensively via intrave nous fluid administration. In ad dition, renal func tion and serum 
electrolytes, including potassi um and magnesium, should be moni tored in patients at risk of 
dehydration. 
9.1.4.2.  Skin Rash  
Skin rash should be managed according to locally accepted clini cal recommendations. Study 
drug may be held up to 21 days for Grade 3 rash.   
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 52 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 Suggestions for Rash Management [ Lacouture 2011 , Kiyohara 2013 , www.psoriasis.org ] 
Papulopustular (acneiform) rash: 
 Most common rash seen with EGFR inhibitors 
 Typically seen in the first  few weeks of treatment 
 Usually peaks at Week 4–6 
 Then will decrease in severity at Week 6–8 
 Post-inflammatory skin changes can last for months, so preventi on and reactive 
treatment are important 
Suggestions for preven tative treatment: 
 Patient education prior to star ting treatment on what to expect  
 Gentle cleansing of skin using mild soap products 
 Use of moisturizer twice dail y making sure to include hands, fe et and nails 
 Avoid sun when possible and use of sunscreen SPF 30 or higher ( preferably titanium 
dioxide or zinc oxide) 
 Hypoallergenic makeup when possible 
Suggestions for treatment once a rash appears (see Appendix 5  for steroid potency chart): 
 Ongoing use of treatments from ‘pr eventative treatments’ above 
 Grade 1 (<10 % BSA involved, with out pruritus or tenderness) 
 Topical steroids (refer to Appendix 5  for a steroid potency chart that categorizes 
brand name topical steroid medications) 
o For face use medium potency 
o For body use strong potency 
o Note: As soon as rash improves the lowest strength steroid 
that controls rash should be  used, especially on the face  
 Grade 2 (10%–30% BSA involved, ±  pruritus/tenderness; limiting instrumental ADLs 
and causing psychosocial impact) 
 Topical steroids 
o For face use strong potency 
o For body use very strong potency 
o Note: As soon as rash improves the lowest strength steroid that  
controls rash should be used, especially on the face  
 Systemic treatment 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 53 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 o Doxycycline 100 mg BID (less renal toxic than minocycline, but can 
cause photosensitivity) 
 Grade 3 (> 30% BSA involved, limiting ADLs) 
 Refer to dermatology 
 Topical steroids 
o All areas very strong potency 
o Note: As soon as rash improves the lowest strength steroid that  
controls rash should be used, especially on the face 
 Systemic treatment 
o Doxycycline 100 mg BID 
o Oral steroids: prednisolone 10 m g QD for 1 week or equivalent 
 
Suggestions for once a rash reappears:  
 Over the course of treat ment rash may come and go 
 Hydrocortisone 1% cream with moi sturizer and sunscreen twice da ily, in 
combination with doxycycline 100 mg BID 
 May need to follow guidelines above if rash worsens 
If unacceptable rash recurs on rei ntroduction of tesevatinib at  the same dose, then dose reduction 
of tesevatinib should be discusse d with the Medical Monitor.  
9.1.4.3.  QT Interval Prolongation 
Patients should be carefully monitored for symptoms of arrhythm ia (i.e., dyspnea, chest pain or 
tightness, palpitations, dizziness ) and for episodes of syncope . An ECG should be obtained if 
these symptoms occur. In addition, serum potassium and magnesiu m must be maintained within 
the normal range and may require additional monitoring or adjus tment if patients develop 
diarrhea. Medications with poten tial for QTc(F) prolongation sh ould not be used concurrently or 
started within 24 hours of tesevat inib administration (see Appendix 4) . 
9.1.4.3.1.  Management of QTc(F) Interval Prolongation 
The following guidelines should be u sed in the management of QT c(F) prolongation.  Patients 
will have ECGs performed at tim es designated by the protocol (r efer to Table 1 ).     
Grade 2 QTc(F) Prolongation: 
If the QTc(F) interval increas es to an absolute value of  ≥ 60 msec above baseline (predose on 
Day 1) but < 500 msec and the patien t is asymptomatic (does not  have palpitations, dizziness, 
syncope, orthostatic hypotension, o r a significant ventricular arrhythmia on ECG), the following 
actions should be taken: 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 54 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  Re-check and confirm concomitant medications for any medication s that may be 
contributing to QTc(F) prolongati on.  Consult the Medical Monit or for 
discontinuation of any medication found. 
 Check electrolytes, especially magnesium and potassium; correct  abnormalities as 
clinically indicated. 
Grade 3 QTc(F) Prolongation: 
If the QTc(F) interval increas es to an absolute value of ≥ 500 msec at any evaluation and if the 
patient is asymptomatic (does  not have palpitations, dizziness,  syncope, orthostatic hypotension, 
or a significant ventricular ar rhythmia on ECG), then the follo wing actions should be taken: 
 Consult with Medical Monitor 
 Hold study drug 
 Re-check and confirm concomitant medications for any medication s that may be 
contributing to QTc(F) prolonga tion.  Consult Medical Monitor f or discontinuation of 
any medication found. 
 Check electrolytes, especially magnesium and potassium; correct  abnormalities as 
clinically indicated 
 Contact Medical Monitor to disc uss appropriate management 
 QTc(F) :  When QTc(F) is within 30 msec of baseline or ≤ 470 msec (whi chever is 
lower), then study drug may be res tarted with one dose level re duction.   
 Following dose reduction and resum ption of study drug treatment , ECGs must be 
repeated weekly for 2 weeks, t hen on Day 1 of each cycle per pr otocol following 
restart of study drug. 
 Study drug may be restarted at the pre-event dose level if QTc( F) values of ≥ 500 
msec are not confirmed by the cen tral lab and if there is no ev idence of drug-related 
abnormal ECG findings. This may be done as soon as the data are  confirmed. 
Grade 4 QTc(F) Prolongation: 
If the QTc(F) interval increas es to an absolute value of ≥ 500 msec at any evaluation, and if the 
patient is or has recently been s ymptomatic (has palpitations, dizziness, syncope, orthostatic 
hypotension, a significant ventri cular arrhythmia on ECG), then  the following actions should be 
taken: 
 The patient should be hospitaliz ed and undergo a thorough cardi ology evaluation 
 Do not dose with study drug again   
 Consult with Medical Monitor  
 Check electrolytes especially m agnesium and potassium; correct abnormalities as 
clinically indicated 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 55 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  ECGs should be monitored until the  QTc(F) returns to within 30 msec above the 
average baseline value or ≤ 470 msec 
Study drug should be permanently discontinued if the cardiac/el ectrophysiology evaluation 
confirms that symptoms are the  consequence of a drug-induced QT c(F) interval prolongation.  
However, if the patient has objective tumor response, considera tion will be given to continuing 
treatment with tesev atinib at a reduced dos e after discussion w ith the Medical Monitor. 
9.1.4.4.  Elevated Serum Creatinine 
Patients with increases in serum c reatinine to > 2 × ULN should  be evaluate d for non-renal 
causes of renal dysfunction, suc h as dehydration due to diarrhe a.  Cystatin C values should also 
be utilized to evaluate renal f unction.  Dose interruptions and  reductions are not necessary in the 
absence of renal dysfunction. 
9.1.4.5.  Elevated Serum Amylase 
In the event of asymptomatic increase of serum amylase to > 1.5  × ULN, lipase, fasting 
triglycerides, and amylase iso enzymes should be monitored.  Tre atment should only be 
interrupted if clinical pancre atitis develops, corresponding to  Grade 3 CTCAE per Table 5 .  
9.1.4.6.  Interstitial Lung Disease 
New or worsening respiratory s ymptoms suspicious of pneumonitis  in patients in the study 
should be evaluated with high-reso lution CT of the chest to det ermine whether ILD is present.  
Tesevatinib should be discontinue d if interstitial lung disease  is suspected, and further 
management discussed with the Medical Monitor. 
9.2. Study Drug Accountability and Pa tient Treatment Compliance 
Drug accountability and patient treatment compliance will be as sessed using drug dispensing and 
return records, and the patient’s  study diary. The principal in vestigator is responsible for 
ensuring adequate accountability of all used and unused study d rug. While the principal 
investigator may delegate com ponents of drug accountability tas ks to documented designee(s) 
(e.g., pharmacist), the ultimate re sponsibility for drug contro l and accountability resides with the 
investigator.  This includes acknowledgment of receipt of each shipment of study drug (quantity 
and condition) and the maintenan ce of patient dispensing record s and returned study product 
documentation.  Dispensing records will document quantities rec eived from Kadmon and 
quantities dispensed to patient s, including lot number, date di spensed, patient identification 
number, patient initials, and t he initials of the person dispen sing study drug.  Reasons for 
deviation from the expected disp ensing regimen also must be rec orded.  
At study initiation, the study m onitor will evaluate and obtain  a copy of each site’s written 
standard operating procedure fo r study drug disposal/destructio n in order to ensure that it 
complies with the requirements of Kadmon.  
At the end of the study, followi ng final drug inventory reconci liation by the monitor, the study 
site will dispose of and/or de stroy any remaining unused study drug supplies, including empty 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 56 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 containers, according to institutional procedures for destructi on, reviewed and approved by 
Kadmon prior to material destruct ion. If the site cannot meet t he requirements of Kadmon for 
disposal, arrangements will be made between the site and Kadmon  or its representative, for 
destruction or return of  unused study drug supplies. 
All drug supplies and associated documentation will be periodic ally reviewed and verified by the 
study monitor over the course of the study. 
9.3. Concomitant Medication and Treatment 
If the patient must use a concom itant medication during the stu dy, it is the responsibility of the 
principal investigator to ensure  that details regarding the med ication are recorded on the eCRF. 
Patients should avoid ingesti ng grapefruit, pomelo or Seville o range fruits (and juice) with 
tesevatinib or at a ny time during the study.  Patients should n ot take medications that are 
associated with a risk of QTc i nterval prolongation and/or tors ades de pointes. Additionally, 
patients are not permitted to take concomitant medications that  strongly inhibit (e.g., 
ketoconazole, itraconazole, eryth romycin, clarithromycin) or in duce (e.g., phenytoin, 
carbamazepine, rifampicin, or phenob arbital) the CYP3A4 isozyme . Steroid medications are 
allowed. 
Administration of acid-reducing m edications should be avoided d uring the study as these agents 
may decrease exposure to teseva tinib. If acid-reducing agents a re needed, H-2 antagonists or 
antacids will be recommended rat her than proton pump inhibitors . Administration of acid-
reducing agents such as H-2 anta gonists or antacids, if require d, should take place no less than 2 
hours before or after dosi ng with tesevatinib.   
Since tesevatinib is a potent inh ibitor of MATE transporter pro teins, increased levels of 
concomitant medications that ar e secreted by the kidney proxima l tubule cells into the renal 
tubule by MATE transporter protei ns may occur. Thus subjects ta king cephalexin, cimetidine, 
dofetilide, fexofenadine, metformin, procainamide, and pyrimeth amine should be monitored 
carefully (see Appendix 4 ). 
Other prohibited treatments  include the following: 
 Other investigational drugs 
 Concurrent anti-tumor therapies such as chemotherapy, gene ther apy, biologics, 
radiation therapy, or ot her immunotherapy 
 Warfarin or other anti-coagulan t drugs (Low dose low molecular weight heparin 
given for deep vein thrombosis ( DVT) prophylaxis is allowed) 
 Medications known to moderately or  severely inhibit the CYP3A4 isozyme or any 
drugs that are moderate or sever e CYP3A4 inducers.  A stable re gimen (≥ 4 weeks) of 
antidepressants of the SSRI cla ss is allowed (common SSRIs incl ude escitalopram 
oxalate, citalopram, fluvoxamine , paroxetine, sertraline, and f luoxetine)  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 57 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  Drugs associated with torsades  de pointes or known to prolong t he QTc interval, 
including anti-arrhythmic medi cations within 2 w eeks prior to D ay 1 of treatment on 
study 
Antiemetics and antidiarrheal med ications should not be adminis tered prophylactically before 
initial treatment with study dr ug. At the discretion of the inv estigator, treatment of symptoms 
with antiemetic and antidiarrheal medications may be undertaken  per standard clinical practice. 
9.3.1.  Additional Therapy 
A patient should not receive additional therapeutic treatment f or glioblastoma during the study 
period. 
9.3.2.  Additional Anti-Cancer Treatment and Radiotherapy  
Patients should not receive additi onal therapeutic anti-cancer treatment until after PD has been 
documented on study and End of Treatment study assessments have  been completed. If a patient 
requires additional anti-cancer treatment, study treatment will  be discontinued and the patient 
will enter the Post-Treatment  Period and followed every 8 weeks  by phone call.  
9.3.3.  Interaction of Tesevatinib with Other Medications 
Cytochrome P4503A4 is the major metabolic pathway of tesevatini b in humans. This suggests 
the potential for other drugs t o significantly affect the biotr ansformation of tesevatinib in humans 
through drug-drug interactions. The re is also a moderate potent ial to inhibit CYP2C8, CYP2D6 
and CYP1A2 although this is most l ikely to occur at higher conc entrations than those expected in 
this study.  
Due to these interactions and pot ential interactions, inhibitor s and inducers of CYP3A4, 
CYP2C8, CYP2D6, and CYP1A2 sh ould be avoided if a substitute is  available or otherwise used 
with caution in all patients w hile receiving study drug. In add ition, patients must be closely 
monitored for the desired drug effect and potential AE. 
Substrates of isoenzymes CYP3A4, CYP2C8, CPY2D6 and CYP1A2 may be used with 
appropriate clinical monitoring. 
See Appendix 4  for a list of drugs that are clin ically relevant inhibitors an d inducers of CYP3A4, 
CYP2C8, CYP2D6, and CYP1A2.  
9.3.3.1.  Management of Patients Requiring Concomitant Medications Associ ated with 
QT Interval Prolongation 
Tesevatinib has been associa ted with prolongatio n of the QT int erval. Patients requiring 
treatment with drugs known to be a ssociated with torsades de po intes or significant QT interval 
prolongation may not be enrol led into this study (see Appendix 4 ).  
Drugs associated with QT inte rval prolongation should be avoide d in patients receiving study 
drug unless deemed clinically nece ssary. Should a patient devel op a condition for which a 
medication known to affect QT inte rval is indicated, considerat ion should be given to the 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 58 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 additive risk of QT interval  prolongation versus the potential benefit of treatment with the 
required medication and/or st udy drug.  Contact the Medical Mon itor prior to the administration 
of the concomitant medication. 
As of Amendment 4 this will not be applicable—During long-term follow-up, patients who 
require short-term (2 to 3 weeks, not to exceed 21 days) treatm ent with a concomitant medication 
associated with QT interval pr olongation while receiving study drug should have the study drug 
held until the concomitant treat ment course is complete.  The d ecision about whether the patient 
can continue on trial following thi s interruption will be deter mined by the Medical Monitor. 
During long-term follow-up, patien ts who require chronic treatm ent with a concomitant 
medication associated with QT in terval prolongation while recei ving study drug should be 
monitored as follows: 
 Three ECGs should be obtained pri or to start of the concomitant  medication. These 
ECGs should be obtained within a t otal span of 30 minutes with an interval of 
approximately 1–2 minutes between recordings. 
 If the average QTc interval fr om these 3 ECGs is > 60 msec abov e the average 
baseline (Day 1 predose) value  or is ≥ 500 msec, study drug may  be discontinued or 
dose reduced after discussion w ith the Medical Monitor. 
 If both of the above criteria are  not met (i.e., the average QT c interval is no more than 
60 msec above baseline and is < 500 msec), ECGs should be obtai ned daily for the 
first 3 days of treatment with t he concomitant medication. 
 Additionally, an ECG should be obt ained weekly for 2 weeks, the n every 2 weeks for 
1 month and monthly thereafter un til the concomitant medication  is no longer 
required or study drug is discontinued. 
QTc interval prolongation should be managed as noted in Section 9.1.4.3 . 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 59 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 10. EFFICACY ASSESSMENTS 
Disease assessments will be  based on the RANO criteria [ Wen 2010 ] and will  comprise 
radiological assessments (MRI), c linical assessments (KPS), and  corticosteroid use.  Based on 
radiological assessments, clini cal status, and corticosteroid u se, an overall  evaluation of CR, PR, 
SD, or  PD should be made at each disease assessment after baseline  according to the RANO 
criteria ( Appendix 2 ).  
Disease assessment during the s creening period is to be perform ed within 7 days before study 
drug administration and must be us ed as the baseline radiologic al assessment. Per the study’s 
schedule of assessments (see Table 1 ), disease assessment is inte nded to be done prio r to starting 
cycle 2, 3, 5, 7+.  The corticoster oid dose should be kept stab le for 5 days prior to the MRI scan. 
During the study, disease assessments should be performed at we ek 4 and week 8 after the date 
of first study treatment and t hen every 8 weeks (at Week 16, 24 , etc.), regardless of treatment 
delays. For patients who discont inue treatment for other reason s than PD, disease assessment in 
the follow-up period should continue every 8 weeks (according t o the original schedule) until 
disease progression. For patients with PD, disease assessment a t the EOS is only required if not 
performed within the previous 8 weeks. 
Disease assessments as initiall y planned according to the sched ule of assessments  should be 
maintained regardless of treat ment delays. Unscheduled disease  assessments may be performed 
at the discretion of the inves tigator to allow a decision  on further study treatment administration 
for individual patients. For patients who  discontinue treatment for reas ons other than progressive 
disease, disease assessment in  the follow-up period should cont inue every 8 weeks (according to 
the original schedule)  until disease progression. 
10.1. Radiological Assessment by Brain MRI 
The acquisition protocol  for MRI (provided as a separate  document) will provide further details 
for scan  standardization. All efforts s hould be made to perform MRI scan s according to the  
corresponding specification in orde r to ensure that quality of MRI will be standardized  among all 
sites. Consistency of subsequent MRIs should be ensured during all assessments for each patient, 
with the same technique being us ed for evaluating lesions.  Patients should be imaged on the 
same MRI scanner for the duration of the study. A 1.5T or 3T sc anner must be used for this 
study. The use of IV contrast s hould, as long as clinically pos sible, be kept consistent.  
The following sequences of the ent ire brain must be acquired: 
 T1 pre-gadolinium 
 T2/FLAIR 
 T1 post-gadolinium 
Target Lesions: Lesions should be  measured on the greatest size  (bi-dimensional measurement of 
the longest cross-sectional  diameters) observed either  on axial, coronal, or sagittal slices, and the 
most representative observed chosen to be  followed for response evalua tion (i.e., once selected at 
baseline, the plane should be  maintained across the study, to a llow comparison). If there are  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 60 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 multiple contrast-  enhancing lesions, a minimum of  two of the largest lesions, and  a maximum of 
five lesions, should be measure d, and the sum of the products o f the perpendicular  diameters of 
these lesions should be determi ned. Occasionally, the largest l esions may  not lend themselves to 
reproducible measurements, and the  next largest lesions that ca n be measured reproducibly 
should be selected. For patients with recurrent disease who  have multiple lesions of which only 
one or two are increasin g in size, the enlarging  lesions should be considere d the target lesions for 
evaluation of response. 
Nontarget Lesions: All other le sions will be c onsidered nontarg et lesions and should  also be 
recorded. Rarely, unequivocal pr ogression of a nontarget lesion  requiring discontinuation of 
therapy or development of a new contrast-enhancing lesion may o ccur,  even in the setting of 
stable disease or partial respons e in the target lesions. These  changes would qualify as 
progression.  
Tumor measurements should be made  by the same investigator/radi ologist for  each patient 
during the study to the exten t that this is feasible. 
A radiological assessment of com plete response (CR) or partial response (PR) requires  
confirmatory imaging at least 4 w eeks after the initial assessm ent of response was  observed. In 
the event that the radiographic changes are equivocal and it is  unclear whether the patient 
has stable or progressive d isease, treatment should  be continued and the patient should be 
closely observed. If subsequent imaging studies d emonstrate that progression has occurred, the 
date of progression  should be the date of  the scan at which disease progression was  first 
suspected. 
Sites should save all MRI images  as DICOM files or other standa rd format with unique 
descriptive file names (e.g. s tudy number, patient initials and  number, date and image sequence 
number) on to anonymized DVD(s) a nd provide these to the Sponso r upon request. 
10.2. Clinical Status by Ka rnofsky Performance 
Clinical deterioration is defined as a decline in the Karnofsky  performance status ( Appendix 1 ) 
from  100% or 90% to ≤ 70%; a decline of ≥ 20% from 80% or less; or a  decline from any  
baseline value to 50% or less, for at least 7 days, unless attr ibutable to comorbid events  (e.g., 
seizures, medication adverse effects, complications of therapy,  cerebrovascular  events, infection, 
etc.). Clinical status must be recorded as Improved, Stable, or  Worsened. 
10.3. Corticosteroid Dose 
At the time of each disease assessment, the corticosteroid inta ke will be compared with  
corticosteroid intake at the time of the last disease assessmen t. The changes will be  recorded as 
Increased, Unchanged, or Decreased. Increases or decreases in  corticosteroid dose should be 
clinically justified. 
Note: Increases in corticosteroid dose for reasons other than d isease control do not  need to be 
taken into consideration when making this comparison. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 61 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 10.4. Overall Disease Assessment 
Based on radiological assessments, clinical status, and cortico steroid use, an overall  evaluation of 
CR, PR, SD, or  PD should be made at each diseas e assessment after baseline  according to the 
RANO criteria ( Appendix 2 ). 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 62 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 11. SAFETY 
11.1. Safety Parameters 
The NCI-CTCAE; Version 4.03 will be  used for grading toxicities  unless otherwis e specified.  
Patients will be monitored throughou t the treatment and follow- up period for occurrence of AEs 
(acute, delayed, and/or cumulative) , as well as for changes in clinical status, vital sign 
measurements, and laboratory data .  Safety parameters to be mea sured/assessed include vital sign 
measurements, physical examinations, concomitant medications, h ematology, serum chemistries, 
urinalysis, pregnancy testing, E CGs, and Karnofsky performance status.  
11.2. Adverse Event Definition 
An adverse event (AE) is defi ned as any untoward medical occurr ence associated with the use of 
a drug in humans, whether or not c onsidered drug related.  AEs include: 
 Suspected adverse drug reactions  (abbreviated as either SADR or  SAR). This may be 
serious or not serious. 
 Reactions from drug overdose, abus e, withdrawal, sensitivity, o r toxicity. 
 Significant changes or abnormalities, when compared to baseline , in structure (sign), 
function (symptom), clinical labor atory results, ECG results, o r physiological testing.  
This includes any worsening of a  pre-existing condition tempora lly associated with 
the use of study drug. 
 Other medical events, regardles s of their relationship to the s tudy drug, such as injury, 
surgery, accidents, extensions of  symptoms, or apparently unrel ated illnesses. 
Findings existing prior to signing informed consent will be rec orded as medical history.  For the 
purpose of data collection, all un toward events that occur afte r informed consent through 30 days 
after last dose of study treat ment are to be recorded on eCRFs by the investigational site.  This 
requirement includes AEs from uns cheduled as well as scheduled visits.  
An AE does not include:  
 Medical or surgical procedures  (e.g., surgery, endoscopy, tooth  extraction, 
transfusion); when the conditi on that leads to the procedure is  an AE. 
 Pre-existing diseases, or conditions or laboratory abnormalitie s present or detected 
prior to the screening vis it, those do not worsen. 
 Situations where an untoward m edical occurrence has not occurre d (e.g., 
hospitalization for elective surg ery, social, and/or convenienc e admissions). 
 Overdose of either tesevatini b or a concomitant medication with out any signs or 
symptoms, unless the patient is hospitalized for observation. 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 63 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 11.3. Evaluating Adverse Events 
The investigator will determin e the seriousness, intensity, and  causality of an AE associated with 
the use of the study drug (i.e., e vents where there is a reason able possibility that the event may 
have been caused by the study drug) based on the definitions th at follow. 
11.3.1.  Serious Adverse Events 
(Notify sponsor or designee within 24 hours of first awareness) The SAE definition and reporting requirements are in accordance  with the ICH Guideline for 
Clinical Safety Data Manageme nt, Definitions, and Standards for  Expedited Reporting, 
Topic E2A, with Title 21 Par t CFR 312.32, and the Guidance for Industry and Investigators 
Safety Reporting Requirements for INDs and BA/BE Studies. 
SAE:  An adverse event is consid ered "serious" if, in the view of either the investigator or 
sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: 
 Death:   This includes any death that occu rs while the patient is “on study” as well as 
any death that occurs within 30 da ys after last dose of study d rug administration.  
Note : Death is an outcome of an AE , and not an AE in itself.  The e vent(s) that 
caused death (e.g., illness, accident) is the SAE.  Death due t o any other 
cause(s) must also be reported as an outcome of the reportable SAE. 
 Life-threatening adverse event:   An AE or suspected adver se reaction is considered 
“life-threatening” if, in the vi ew of either the investigator o r sponsor, its occurrence 
places the patient or patient at immediate risk of death. It do es not include an AE or 
suspected adverse reaction that, ha d it occurred in a more seve re form, might have 
caused death).  
 Inpatient hospitalization or pro longation of existing hospitali zation:  In the 
absence of an AE, the investigat or should not rep ort hospitaliz ation or prolongation of 
hospitalization.  This is the case in the following situations:  
 Hospitalization or prolongation of  hospitalization is needed fo r a procedure 
required by the protocol 
 Hospitalization or prolongation of  hospitalization is part of r outine procedure 
followed by study center 
 Hospitalization for surve y visits or annual physicals 
In addition, a hospitalization pla nned before the start of the study for a pre-existing condition 
which has not worsened does not count as an SAE.   
 Persistent or significant incap acity or substant ial disruption of the ability to 
conduct normal life functions  
 Congenital anomaly/birth defect 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 64 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  Important medical event:  An eve nt that may not result in death , be life 
threatening, or require hospita lization may be considered serio us when, based 
upon appropriate medical judgment, it may jeopardize the patien t and may require 
medical or surgical interventi on to prevent one of the outcomes  listed in this 
definition.  
Some serious events will not be  reported as SAEs, including: 
 Disease progression 
 Death due to disease progressi on occurring more than 30 days af ter the last dose of 
study drugs 
 Medical or surgical procedures  when the condition that leads to  the procedure is an 
AE 
 Pre-existing diseases, or conditions or laboratory abnormalitie s present or detected 
prior to the screening vi sit, that do not worsen 
 Situations for which an untowar d medical occurrence has not occ urred 
(e.g., hospitalization for electiv e surgery, social and/or conv enience admissions) 
11.3.2.  Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) 
(Notify sponsor or designee within 24 hours of first awareness) 
A suspected unexpected serious  adverse reaction is any adverse drug event, the specificity or 
severity of which is not consiste nt with those noted in the cur rent protocol and/or Investigator’s 
Brochure (IB).  This refers to any AE that has not been previou sly observed (e.g., included in the 
IB), rather than from the pers pective of such an event not bein g anticipated from the 
pharmacological properties of the product.  
11.3.3.  Unexpected Adverse Events 
An AE is considered “unexpected ” if it is not listed in the Inv estigator Brochure (IB) or is not 
listed at the specificity or seve rity that has been observed; o r, if an IB is not req uired or available, 
is not consistent with the risk i nformation described in the Ge neral Investigational Plan or 
elsewhere in the current applica tion. Also refers to AEs that a re mentioned in the IB as occurring 
with a class of drugs or as anti cipated from the pharmacologica l properties of the drug, but are 
not specifically mentioned as occu rring with the particular dru g under investigation. 
11.3.4.  Non-Serious Adverse Events 
All other AEs, not fulfilling t he previous definitions, are cla ssified as non-serious. 
11.3.5.  Protocol-Related Adverse Events 
AEs that are not test drug relat ed may nevertheless be consider ed by the investigator or the 
Medical Monitor to be  related to the conduct  of the clinical st udy.  That is, the event may be 
related to the fact t hat a patient is participating in the stud y.  For example, a protocol-related AE 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 65 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 may be an event that occurs duri ng a washout period or that is related to a pro cedure required by 
the protocol. 
11.3.6.  Relationships/Causality to Study Drug 
The investigator wi ll attempt to assess t he relationship of the  event to study dr ug using a 5- point 
scale (not related, unlikely-re lated, possibly related, probabl y related, or defin itely related). 
11.3.7.  Recording Adverse Events 
All AEs (including SAEs) are t o be accurately recorded on the A dverse Event page of the 
patient’s eCRF.  The date of onset  as well as the duration of t he event also should be recorded.  
In addition, the method used to t reat the AE and the outcome of  the AE also will be noted.  The 
investigator will assess the relationship of the event to study  drug (not related, unlikely-related, 
possibly related, probably relat ed, or definitely related). 
11.3.8.  Adverse Event Monitoring and Follow-up 
The investigator will follow a ll patients who experience advers e events until there is a return to 
the patient’s baseline cond ition, Grade 1 severity or until a c linically satisfact ory resolution has 
been achieved.  The appropriate f ollow-up visits must be schedu led and the specific tests 
repeated or performed as necessary.  Where a diagnosis is possi ble, it is preferable to report this 
diagnosis rather than a series of  terms (signs/symptoms) relati ng to the diagnosis.  
11.3.9.  Laboratory and ECG Abnormalities 
For the purposes of grading cre atinine, the uppe r limit of norm al – not the patient’s baseline 
value - will be used to determine grade. 
For the purpose of grading sodium, values of 126–130 mmol/L wil l be considered to be Grade 2 
and values of 120–125 mmol/L will be considered Grade 3.   
For the purposes of this study, ECG abnormalities will be handl ed in the same manner as 
laboratory abnormalities. 
Non-Clinically Significant ( NCS) Laboratory Abnormalities 
All laboratory results must be  filed in the patient’s medical r ecord and be monitored. The 
investigator must review labor atory results in a timely manner demonstrated by signature/date 
and assignment of clinical signi ficance assessment.  Non-clinic ally-significant laboratory 
abnormalities, i.e., minor deviations from the normal range, ar e expected and it is likely that no 
medical intervention will be required.  Such results will not b e considered to be AEs. 
Clinically Significant (CS) Laboratory Abnormalities 
Any laboratory abnormality that is considered to be clinically significant by the i nvestigator will 
be recorded on the AE eCRF.  A clin ically significant abnormal test result will  be considered an 
AE if:  
 It is not associated with an a lready reported AE, diagnosis or pre-existing condition 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 66 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  There is a change in concomitant  medication or intervention as needed, in direct 
response to the laboratory result 
 The investigator exercises his/ her discretion to make significa nce determinations for 
any patient laboratory result or r esult that requires intervent ion 
All such lab abnormalities will be repeated and assessed by the  investigator, or licensed (MD), as 
soon as possible for “seriousness” and if they meet the regulat ory definition of “serious”, they 
will be reported as SAEs followi ng regulatory and  protocol requ irements.  Repeat laboratory 
tests may be run in order to monitor the result.  
Serious Laboratory Abnormalities 
Any lab abnormality meeting the regulatory definition of “serio us” must be recorded on both the 
AE eCRF/record and the SAE Form.  If a patient experiences a se rious toxicity or dies, the FDA 
will be notified within 2 4 hours, as required.   
11.3.10.  Pregnancy 
If any patient becomes pregnant f ollowing the first dose of tes evatinib, the patient  will be taken 
off study and followed regularl y until birth or termination of the pregnancy. The pregnancy must 
be immediately reported to the  sponsor. Forms for reporting pre gnancies will be provided to the 
study sites upon request. The an ticipated date of  birth or term ination of the pregnancy should be 
provided at the time of the ini tial report.  The outcome of a p regnancy must be reported to the 
Medical Monitor as s oon as it is known. If th e pregnancy ends f or any reason before the 
anticipated date initially repor ted, the investigator must noti fy the Kadmon Medical Monitor as 
soon as possible. 
If the outcome of the pregnanc y meets any criterion for classif ication as a SAE (including 
stillbirth, neonatal death, spont aneous abortion, or congenital  anomaly – including that in an 
aborted fetus) the investigator m ust follow the procedures for reporting SAEs. Any neonatal 
death occurring  30 days after birth will be reported as a SAE. 
11.3.11.  Serious Adverse Event Reporting 
11.3.11.1.  Governing Regulatory Requirements 
Compliance with this request for  prompt reportin g is essential in that the sponsor is responsible 
for informing the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as well  as all other participating 
investigators of the event.  
Under FDA ruling (US Code of Fed eral Regulations, Title 21 CFR Part 312.32) and the 
Guidance for Industry and Investig ators Safety Reporting Requir ements for INDs and BA/BE 
Studies, the sponsor is required to submit written documentatio n, in the form of an IND safety 
report, detailing: 
 Any event associated with the us e of the drug, that is both ser ious and unexpected, or  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 67 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  Any findings from clinical, epide miological, or pooled analysis  of multiple studies or 
any findings from animal or in v itro testing that suggest a sig nificant risk in humans 
exposed to the drug.  
Written submission must be made by the sponsor to the FDA and t he IRBs as soon as possible 
and in no event later than 15 cale ndar days after the sponsor’s  initial notification of the event.  
Any unexpected fatal or life-thre atening suspected adverse reac tion must be reported to FDA no 
later than 7 calendar days after  the sponsor’s initial receipt of the information . The sponsor shall 
also inform all investigators. 
11.3.11.2.  Time-Frame for Reporting 
Any death, pregnancy, or SAE expe rienced by a patient from the time of informed consent until 
30 days after receiving the la st dose of study drug, regardless  of relationship to study drug, or 
any death that occurs more tha n 30 days after re ceiving study d rug, and is believed to be study 
drug-related, must be promptl y reported (within 24 hours of the  investigator becoming aware of 
the event) by fax to the sponsor  (or designee). Fax: 646-430-95 49. 
In the event of an issue with the  fax line, forward the SAE for m via email to 
ClinicalSAEReporting@kadmon.com. 
The investigator will be able to  contact the safety Medical Mon itor at all times: 
Sanjay Aggarwal, MD 
Vice President Clinical Development Kadmon Corporation 55 Cambridge Parkway Cambridge, MA 02142 Phone:  857-253-8642 
 E-mail:   sanjay.aggarwal@kadmon.com 
11.3.11.3.  Information to be Provided by the Investigator 
SAEs must be recorded on the SAE  eCRF page. This requirement in cludes all SAEs that occur 
after informed consent and thr ough 30 days after last dose of s tudy treatment, and in addition, 
any SAE that are assessed as po ssibly related to study treatmen t by the investigator, even if the 
SAE occurs more than 30 days aft er the last dose of study treat ment. 
The minimum information required for SAE reporting includes ide ntity of investigator, site 
number, patient number, an event  description, SAE term(s), onse t date, the reason why the event 
is considered to be serious (i.e ., the seriousness criteria) an d the investigator’s assessment of the 
relationship of the event to s tudy treatment (not related, unli kely-related, possibly related, 
probably related, or definitely r elated). Additional SAE inform ation including medications or 
other therapeutic measures used t o treat the event, action take n with the study treatment due to 
the event, and the outcome/resolution of the event will be reco rded on the SAE form. Forms for 
reporting SAEs will be provided to the study sites. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 68 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 In all cases, the investigator  should continue to monitor the c linical situation and report all 
material facts relating to the  progression or outcome of the SA E. Furthermore, the investigator 
may be required to provide supplem entary information as request ed by the Kadmon Drug Safety 
personnel or designee. 
When reporting SAEs, the followi ng additional points should be noted: 
 When the diagnosis of an SAE is  known or suspected, the investi gator should report 
the diagnosis or syndrome as the  primary SAE term, rather than as signs or 
symptoms.  Signs and symptoms ma y then be described in the even t description.  For 
example, dyspnea should not be used as an SAE term if the diagn osis which caused 
the dyspnea is known to be malignant pleural effusion.  There i s no requirement that 
the chosen SAE term be listed in the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common 
Terminology Criteria for Advers e Events (CTCAE) Version 4.03. 
 Death should not be reported as an  SAE, but as an outcome of a specific SAE, unless 
the event preceding the death is unknown.  In the exceptional c ase where the events 
leading to death are  unknown, then death may be used as an even t term.  If an autopsy 
was performed, the autopsy r eport should be provided.  
 While most hospitalizations neces sitate reporting of an SAE, so me hospitalizations do 
not require SAE reporting, as follows:  
 Elective or previously schedul ed surgery, e.g. a previously sch eduled ventral 
hernia repair 
 Procedures for pre-existing conditions that have not worsened a fter initiation of 
treatment 
 Pre-specified study hospita lizations for observation 
 Events that result in hospital stays of less than 24 hours and that do not require 
admission, e.g. an emergency room visit for hematuria that resu lts in a diagnosis 
of cystitis and discharge to home on oral antibiotics 
 SAEs must, however, be reported f or any surgical or procedural complication 
resulting in prolongation  of the hospitalization. 
11.3.12.  Regulatory Reporting 
Kadmon Drug Safety (or designee) will process and evaluate all SAEs as soon as the reports are 
received.  For each SAE receive d, Kadmon will make a determinat ion as to whether the criteria 
for expedited reporting have been met. 
Kadmon (or designee) will submit SA Es that meet the criteria fo r expedited reporting to the 
Regulatory Authorities in accord ance with local regulations gov erning safety reporting.  
Reporting of SAEs by the investigator to his or her IRB will be  done in accordance with the 
standard operating procedures a nd policies of the IRB. Adequate  documentation must be 
maintained showing that the IRB was properly notified. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 69 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 11.3.13.  Follow-up Information on a Serious Adverse Event 
Appropriate diagnostic tests shoul d be performed and therapeuti c measures, if indicated, should 
be instituted.  Appropriate cons ultation and follow-up evaluati ons should be carried out until the 
event has returned to baseline or is otherwise explained by the  investigator.   
Follow-up data concerning the SAE  (e.g., diagnostic test report s, physician's summaries, etc.) 
also must be submitted to Kadmon, as they become available, by telefax or email transmission, 
until resolution of the SAE. 
11.4. Other Safety Considerations 
11.4.1.  Medication Errors 
Any medication error that results  in an AE, even if it does not  meet the definition of serious, 
requires reporting within 24 hours t o the Medical Monitor.  An overdose of tesevatinib without 
any associated signs or symptom s, unless the patient is hospita lized for observation, will not 
constitute an AE but will be reco rded as a protocol deviation.  
11.4.2.  Follow-Up of Serious Adverse Events 
Any SAE that led to treatment  discontinuation (including clinic ally significant abnormal 
laboratory values that meet t hese criteria) and is ongoing 30 d ays after last dose of study 
treatment must be followed until either resolution of the event  or determination by the 
investigator that the event ha s returned to base line/resolved, Grade 1 or has become stable. This 
follow-up guidance also applies to SAEs that occur more than 30 days after last dose  of study 
treatment.  
11.5. Safety Monitoring 
Patients will be closely monitore d for adverse events of intere st and potential drug-drug 
interactions through standard saf ety reporting as well as a reg ular medical review of safety data 
outputs from both the clinical and p harmacovigilance databases.  Particular attent ion will be paid 
to the success of diarrhea and rash management strategies and t he use of concomitant 
medications which have a risk of  drug-drug interaction or QTc p rolongation. SAEs, including 
deaths, and withdrawals due to adverse events will also be clos ely monitored. A central 
laboratory will be used to monitor for QTc prolongation, and an y study drug reintroduction in the 
case of QTc prolongation will only b e performed with the agreem ent of the Medical Monitor. 
A Data Monitoring Committee will not be used for this study. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 70 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 12. STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
Informed consent must be obtaine d before any study-specific sam ples are taken or study-specific 
tests or evaluations are conduc ted. Screening assessments shoul d be performed within 28 days 
before the first dose of st udy drug is administered on Day 1. S tudy eligibility will be based on 
satisfying all of the study inc lusion and exclusion criteria fo r each cohort.   
Study Day 1 is defined as the date  the patient takes the first dose of study drug, with subsequent 
study days numbered seque ntially thereafter.  
If significant changes from ba seline are noted during the cours e of the study, additional 
unscheduled clinic visits may be  undertaken by the investigator , or requested by the sponsor, in 
order to determine both the relev ance of the finding(s) and the  duration of the event(s). 
12.1. Procedures to be Performed 
12.1.1.  Informed Consent 
All patients must take part in th e informed consent process. Ad equate time must be allowed for 
the patient to ask questions a nd make a voluntary decision. No protocol-specific procedures, 
including screening procedures t hat are not standard of care pr ocedures, are to be performed until 
the patient has signed and da ted an IRB/IEC-approved ICF. 
12.1.2.  Demographics and Medical History 
A complete medical history will be taken.  Medical history incl udes clinically significant 
diseases, surgeries, h istory of glioblastoma  (including date of diagnosis, history of prior low-
grade astrocytoma, location of disease,  prior cancer therapies and procedures), and all 
medications (e.g., prescription drugs,  over-the-counter drugs, herba l/homeopathic remedies, 
nutritional supplements) used by  the patient within 28 days pr ior to randomization. 
Demographic data will include age,  sex, and self-reporte d race/ethnicity. 
12.1.3.  Complete and Abbreviated Physical Examinations 
On days in which a complete physi cal examination is required, t he investigator should perform a 
thorough examination of all body sys tems (exception: genitourin ary and reproductive should be 
symptom-directed). On days in w hich a limited physical examinat ion is required, the investigator 
should inquire about signs/symptom s, general appearance, eyes, heart and pulse, lungs, abdomen 
(liver/spleen), kidneys, and neurol ogical (symptom directed onl y). Interval hi story should be 
recorded at all study visits. 
12.1.4.  Detailed Neurologi cal Examination 
Neurological exam should include f ull cranial nerve central and  peripheral, motor and sensory 
assessments. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 71 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 12.1.5.  Vital Sign Measurements 
Vital sign measurements will be col lected after the patient has  been sitting for 5 minutes. Vital 
sign assessments will include measurements of sitting blood pre ssure (mm Hg), heart rate (beats 
per minute), respiration rate (b reaths per minute), and tempera ture (Celsius/Fahrenheit).   
Please note that blood pressure m easurements are to be performe d using the appropriate 
technique (per guidelines of the  American Heart Association). S pecifically, patients should be 
seated quietly for at least 5 mi nutes in a chair with their bac ks supported, their fe et flat on floor 
(legs uncrossed), and their arm s bared on a hard surface, with the arm slightly abducted and bent, 
with palm up and the midpoint of upper arm at heart level. Corr ect cuff and bladder size should 
be utilized. Record cuff size , arm used, and patient’s position  (if not seated). 
12.1.6.  Hematology andSerum Chemistries. 
Samples for laboratory assessments (hematology andserum chemist ries) are to be  collected.  A 
Local laboratory will perform he matology andserum chemistry tes ts and results will be provided 
to the investigator.  Blood and ur ine samples for hematology, s erum chemistry will be prepared 
using standard procedures. Labor atory panels are defined as lis ted in    
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 72 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 Table  2b: Schedule of Study Assessments for Subjects Completing 24 C ycles of Tesevatinib 
Treatment 
Timepoint  
(Study Day) Cycle 26 Cycle 28 Cycle 30 Cycle 32 Cycle 34 Cycle 36+ 
EOS Tx i 30-Day 
FU j 
(± 5d) UNS kDay 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 
(± 3d) Day 1 (± 
3d) Day 1  
(± 3d) 
Physical Examination a X X X X X X X X X 
Neurological Examination b X X X X X X   X 
Vital Signs c X X X X X X X X X 
Safety Labs d X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X 
12-Lead ECG e X X X X X X X  X 
Disease Assessment f X X X X X X X  X 
Karnofsky performance 
status X X X X X X X  X 
Corticosteroid use X X X X X X X  X 
MRI tumor assessment X X X X X X X  X 
Concomitant Medications X X X X X X X X X 
Tesevatinib Dispensing g X X X X X X   X 
AE Monitoringh X  X  X X X X X  X
d = day; ECG = electrocardiogram ; EOS = end of s tudy; FU = foll ow-up; KPS = Karnofsky Perfo rmance Status; LTFU = long-
term follow-up; MRI = magnetic r esonance imagi ng; PK = pharmaco kinetic; UNS = unsche duled; Tx = treatment 
w: Abbreviated PE is acceptable (to be completed in a targeted man ner covering related body systems). 
x: Neurological exam should include full cranial nerve central and  peripheral, motor and sensory assessments. 
y: Vital sign measurements (blood pressure, heart rate, respirator y rate, and temperature) to be obtained w ith patient in 
sitting position. 
z: To be drawn and analyzed locally .  Safety labs = hematology and  clinical chemistry.  See Table 2b.    
aa: Supine 12-Lead ECGs will be performed at each visit.   
bb: The assessment should be perform ed every 8 weeks. Radiological assessment must be performed with a brain MRI 
scan and should be consiste nt throughout all visits.   
cc: Study drug should be dispensed a nd accounted for from previous visit. 
dd: AEs are to be collected from the time of informed consent throu gh 30 days after last dose of study drug.   
ee: The End-of-Study Drug Treatment v isit is to occur  as soon as po ssible after the patient’s last dose of study drug.  This 
may occur at the visit at whic h disease progression is diagnose d. Tumor assessment does not need to be performed if it 
was performed in the previous 8 weeks.   
ff: The 30-Day Follow-Up visit should  occur 30 days (±5 days) after  the patients’ last dose of  tesevatinib, but prior to 
starting on a new therapy.  This may occur prior to 30 days if the new therapy is started with in 30 days of last dose of 
study drug.  Assessments for the 30-day follow up may be done b y telephone. 
gg: For unscheduled visits, study a ssessments are at the investigat or’s discretion. 
  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 73 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 Table 3.  In addition to central l aboratory testing, a local la boratory will perform serum 
chemistry tests on Day 15 of each cycle from Cycle 2 through Cy cle 6 for additional safety data.  
The local laboratory will perform all the serum chemistry tests  included in Table 2 with the 
exception of Cystatin C. 
Subjects who have completed 24 cy cles of treatment without dise ase progression or unacceptable 
toxicity will have saf ety laboratory assessments collected at e ach bi-monthly visit.  The local 
laboratory will perform hematology and serum chemistry tests.  Laboratory panels are defined as 
listed in Table 2b.    
Abnormalities in clinical laborat ory tests that lead to a chang e in patient management (e.g. dose 
delay, requirement for additional medication or monitoring) are  considered clinically significant 
for the purposes of this study, and will be recorded on the AE electronic case report form (eCRF) 
page. If laboratory values consti tute part of an event that mee ts criteria defining it as serious, the 
event (and associated lab values) must be reported as an SAE (s ee Section 11.3 ). 
12.1.7.  Pregnancy Test 
Urine pregnancy tests are to be pe rformed for females of childb earing potential. P ositive urine 
tests are to be confir med by a serum test.  
12.1.8.  Tumor Samples 
The availability of paraffin-embe dded tumor sample diagnostic o f glioblastoma is mandatory for 
entry into the study. Samples from the original tumor  and any subsequent biopsies wil l be 
required. Tissue from recurrent surgery i s preferred, but tissue from ini tial surgery is sufficient 
for study entry.  
Twenty (20) slides cut as recently as possible and sections mus t contain adequate tumor. See the 
study laboratory manual for defi nition of adequate tumor sample .   
If the archival tissue is neither sufficient nor available , the patient may s till be eligible,  upon 
discussion with the Medical Moni tor, with the assumption that t he patient: 
 Can provide sufficient tissue; OR 
 Is willing to consent to and under go a pre-treatment biopsy of the tumor 
A detailed description of tissue  quality requirements and proce dures for collection,  handling, 
preparation and shipping of the s amples to the ce ntral laborato ry will be provided in a  separate 
laboratory manual. 
For enrolled patients, part of the  available tumor tissue from the tissue submitted will be  used to 
assess EGFRvIII mutation and for E GFR gene amplification biomar kers. Other tissue 
assessments may include testing of  protein expression, activation s tatus, somatic mutations, and 
other exploratory markers relat ed to tesevatimib and to gliobla stoma biology.  These assessments 
will be performed by the Sponsor, a t a Sponsor-selected vendor.  The remaining tumor tissue 
block will be returned to the site. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 74 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 12.1.9.  12-Lead Electrocardiogram (ECG) 
Supine 12-Lead ECGs will be performed at screening; predose, an d once within 4 – 8 hours 
postdose on Days 1 and 15 of Cycle  1; pre-dose on Day 1 of Cycl es 2 and beyond; and at the 
End of Study Drug Treatment vis it.  ECGs will be read by a cent ral laboratory. 
ECGs are to be performed before any blood sample collection whe n possible. 
ECGs are to be repeated three times consecutively within 30 min utes (must have an interval of at 
least 1–2 minutes between ECGs).   
During the study, all ECGs will be digitally analyzed by a vali dated central ECG laboratory 
vendor. This central vendor will pl ace ECG machines at sites un der contract with Kadmon. 
ECGs will be transmitted electronically to the central vendor f or analysis. Reports, including 
clinical alerts resulting from the analysis of the ECGs, will b e provided back to sites. Sites will 
be trained on the use of the ECG  machines, and instructions for  performing ECG assessments 
will be provided in the ECG manual. Although ECGs will be read by a central laboratory, sites 
should take action if c linically significant abnormalities are detected at time of ECG. 
Subjects who have completed 24 cy cles of treatment without dise ase progression or unacceptable 
toxicity will have ECG assessmen ts performed at each bi-monthly  visit.  These ECG assessments 
will be performed locally and r ead by qualified site personnel.    
Prior to enrollment, all patients must demonstrate an average s creening QTc(F ) value of 
≤ 470 msec by central digital analysis. Immediate clinical mana gement of patients will initially 
be based on results of machine-read  ECGs at the sites. However,  the central digital analysis will 
prevail as it becomes availabl e. In addition, th e central digit al analysis will be used for any AE 
and SAE documentation. 
An increase in QTc(F) interval  (by central digital analysis) to  a value > 60 msec above baseline 
or to the level of ≥ 500 msec requi res further monitoring. Afte r discussion with the Medical 
Monitor (if ≥ 500 msec) on appropriate management, the patient may be removed from the trial 
(see guidelines in Section 9.1.4.3.1 ). 
Abnormalities in the ECG that lead to a change in patient manag ement (e.g., requirement for 
additional medication or monitoring ) or result i n clinical sign s and symptoms are considered 
clinically significant for the purposes of this study and will be recorded on the AE eCRF.  If 
ECG abnormalities meet criteria defining them as serious, they must be reported as SAE (see 
Section 11.3 ). 
12.1.10.  Disease and Response Assessments 
Disease assessments will be  based on the RANO criteria [ Wen 2010 ] and will  comprise 
radiological assessments (MRI), c linical assessments (KPS), and  corticosteroid use.  Based on 
radiological assessments, clini cal status, and corticosteroid u se, an overall  evaluation of CR, PR, 
SD, or  PD should be made at each disease assessment (see  Section 10 ) after baseline  according 
to the RANO criteria ( Appendix 2 ).  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 75 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 Disease assessment during the s creening period is to be perform ed within 7 days before study 
drug administration and must be us ed as the baseline radiologic al assessment. Per the study’s 
schedule of assessments (see Table 1 ), disease assessment is inte nded to be done prio r to starting 
cycle 2, 3, 5, 7+.  The corticoster oid dose should be kept stab le for 5 days prior to the MRI scan. 
During the study, disease assessments should be performed at we ek 4 and week 8 after the date 
of first study treatment and t hen every 8 weeks thereafter (at Week 16, 24, etc.), regardless of 
treatment delays. For patients  who discontinue treatment for ot her reasons than PD, disease 
assessment in the follow-up peri od should continue  every 8 week s (according to the original 
schedule) until disease progression. For patients with PD, dise ase assessment at the EOS is only 
required if not performed with in the previous 8 weeks. 
Disease assessments as initiall y planned according to the sched ule of assessments  should be 
maintained regardless of treat ment delays. Unscheduled disease  assessments may be performed 
at the discretion of the inves tigator to allow a decision  on further study treatment administration 
for individual patients. For patients who  discontinue treatment for reas ons other than progressive 
disease, disease assessment in  the follow-up period should cont inue every 8 weeks (according to 
the original schedule)  until disease progression. 
12.1.11.  Tesevatinib Administration 
Tesevatinib will be administe red at the dose of 300 mg once dai ly. Tesevatinib will be used in 
dosage strength of 100-mg, and 150-m g tablets. Patient diaries will be utilized to evaluate 
compliance. One cycle will be defined as 28 days of treatment.   
Tesevatinib should be taken in t he morning (unless there is a p atient-specific rationale to take it 
regularly at a different time of  day) and can be administered w ithout regard to food intake. 
12.1.12.  Patient Reported Outcomes (MDASI-BT) 
PROs of disease- and treatment-re lated symptom severity and sym ptom interference will  be 
assessed using the MDASI-BT questionnaire. 
The MDASI is a validated and relia ble self-report measure that was developed to assess  
symptom severity and interference [ Cleeland 2000 ; Armstrong 2006 ]. 
Thirteen items ask patients to rat e how severe the symptoms wer e when “at their worst” in  the 
last 24 hours with regard to pai n, fatigue, nausea, disturbed s leep, distress, shortness  of breath, 
remembering things, lack of a ppetite, drowsy, dry mouth, sad, v omiting, and  numbness or 
tingling. An additional six items ask patients to rate how much  the symptoms  have interfered 
with six areas of function (gene ral activity, walking, work, mo od, relations  with other people, 
and enjoyment of life) in the l ast 24 hours. The MDASI-BT (see Appendix 3 ) contains an 
additional nine items that assess symptoms and concerns  specific to primary brain tumor patients 
(difficulty understanding, difficulty speaking,  difficulty concentrating, seizures, weakness, 
change in appearance, change in vision,  change in bowel patterns, irr itability), for a total of 28 
items. 
All patients will complete the self-administered questionnaire pre-dose on Day 1 of Cycles 1  and 
2; every 8 weeks after enrollment (i.e., coinciding with the sc hedule of disease  assessments); and 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 76 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 at the End of Study Drug Treatment visit (EOS). Additionally, p atients who discontinue study 
treatment for  reasons other than disease progression will complete the questi onnaire every 8 
weeks  during follow-up until the time of documented disease progressi on. The questionnaire will  
take patients ~5–10 minutes to comp lete. Patients must complete  the questionnaire prior to  any 
other tests or assessments a nd prior to any discussion of the p atient’s progress with  their 
physician or any other healthcar e personnel at the site. 
Subjects who have completed 24 cy cles of treatment without dise ase progression or unacceptable 
toxicity will not be required to c omplete the MDASI-BT question naire at subsequent bi-monthly 
visits. 
12.1.13.  Tesevatinib Plasma Concentrations 
Blood samples will be drawn to evaluate tesevatinib plasma conc entrations. Plasma samples for 
tesevatinib concentration analys is will be drawn predose of tes evatinib on Days 15 of Cycle 1; 
and predose of tesevatinib on Da y 1 of every subsequent cycle ( up to cycle 6). Data from these 
samples will contribute to a popul ation PK analysis, and will b e used to explore exposure-
response relationships.    
12.1.14.  Pharmacodynamics 
The tumor tissues submitted should be a formalin-fixed, paraffi n-embedded tumor specimen that 
enables the definitive diagnosis of glioblastoma and determinat ion of EGFR status, to permit 
stratification for the purposes of the efficacy analyses.           
A tissue block (preferred) or 20 s erial, freshly cut, unstained  slides accompanied by an associated 
pathology report is required for  participation in this study. T issue quality and  adequate viable 
tumor cell content are specified in the accompanying lab manual . 
Cytological samples are not acceptable. 
For enrolled patients, part of the  available tumor tissue from the tissue submitted will be  used to 
assess exploratory biomarkers. T issue assessments may include t esting of  protein expression, 
activation status, somatic muta tions, and/or gene amplification  of EGFR, and other exploratory 
markers related to tesevatin ib and to glioblastoma biology.  These assessments will be performed 
by the Sponsor, at a central laboratory, or by a  Sponsor-selected vendor. The remaining tumor 
tissue block will be r eturned to the site. 
12.1.15.  Prior and Concomitant Medications 
All concomitant medications will be recorded from the time the patient signs the informed 
consent form through 30 days after  the last dose of study drug.  
12.1.16.  Adverse Event Assessments 
Information regarding the occurrence of AEs and SAEs will be co llected from the time the 
patient signs the informed cons ent form throughout their partic ipation in the study, including a 
period of 30 days after the pati ent’s last dose of study drug, unless a new treatment has been 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 77 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 started.  Any known untoward event that occurs beyond the AE re porting period that the 
investigator assesses as possibl y related to tesevatinib also s hould be reported to Kadmon. 
Note:    AEs resulting in a patient’s  permanent discontinuation from the study, regardless of 
seriousness or relationship to s tudy drug, MUST be promptly rep orted to the sponsor. 
12.1.17.  Study Diary 
Patients will be required t o keep a study drug diary in which t hey will record the date and time 
that each dose of tesevatinib i s taken as well as any missed do ses.  Diaries will be reviewed at 
each visit during the treatment periods. 
12.2. Schedule of Visits 
12.2.1.  Screening Visit 
At the screening visit (Day - 22 to -1), information will be col lected and patients will have 
clinical evaluations as follows: 
 Informed consent 
 Medical history  
 Demographics  
 Vital sign measurements (sitting b lood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory rate, 
temperature) 
 Neurological examination 
 Tumor sample; original tumor  and any subsequent biopsies requir ed 
 Inclusion/exclusion criteria 
 Complete physical examinati on, including height and weight 
 Hematology, cystatin-C, serum ch emistry, coagulation, and urina lysis 
 Urine pregnancy test, if applic able. Subject must have a negati ve urine pregnancy test 
documented within the 24-hour peri od prior to the first dose of  study drug. Positive 
results are to be confir med with serum testing.  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (repeat thr ee times consecutively within 30 minutes [must have 
an interval of at least 1–2 mi nutes between ECGs]; perform ECG immediately prior 
to blood sample collection when possible) 
 Disease assessment (MRI, clinical status, and corticosteroid us e) - within 7 days 
before study drug administration 
 Baseline AE assessment 
 Baseline concomita nt medications 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 78 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 12.2.2.  Cycle 1; Day 1 
Results of clinical and laborat ory evaluations, including ECGs,  must be reviewed prior to dosing 
to confirm that the patient cont inues to meet eligibility crite ria.  At the Day 1 Visit, the following 
procedures and evaluations will be performed: 
 Vital sign measurements (pre dose and 1 and 4 hours postdose) (s itting blood pressure, 
heart rate, respirator y rate, temperature) 
 Complete physical examination, including weight   
 Clinical laboratory tests (hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemis try panel and 
urinalysis) (Need not be repeate d if screening visit occurred w ithin 4 days prior to 
Day 1 visit.) 
 Urine pregnancy test, if applicable. Positive results are to be  confirmed with serum 
testing.  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (to be pe rformed predose, and 4 - 8 hours po stdose prior to any 
blood sample collection) (repeat  three times consecutively with in 30 minutes [must 
have an interval of at leas t 1-2 minutes between ECGs]) 
 Tesevatinib administration  
 Completion of PRO – MDASI-BT 
 Concomitant medications 
 AE assessment 
 Issue study drug diary 
 Dispense study drug 
12.2.3.  Cycle 1; Day 15 
At the Cycle 1, Day 15 visit (± 3 da ys), the following evaluati ons will be performed: 
 Vital sign measurements (pre dose and 1 and 4 hours postdose) (s itting blood pressure, 
heart rate, respirator y rate, temperature) 
 Limited physical examination   
 Clinical laboratory tests (hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemis try panel and 
urinalysis)  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (to be pe rformed predose, and 4 - 8 hours po stdose prior to any 
blood sample collection) (repeat  three times consecutively with in 30 minutes [must 
have an interval of at leas t 1-2 minutes between ECGs]) 
 Tesevatinib administration  
 Plasma sample predose for tesevatinib concentration 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 79 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  Concomitant medications 
 AE assessment 
12.2.4.  Cycle 2; Day 1 
At the Cycle 2, Day 1 visit (± 3 days ), the following procedure s and evaluations will be 
performed: 
 Vital sign measurements (sitting b lood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory rate, 
temperature) 
 Complete physical examination   
 Clinical laboratory tests (hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemis try panel and 
urinalysis)  
 Urine pregnancy test, if applicable. Positive results are to be  confirmed with serum 
testing.  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (to be pe rformed predose, and 4 - 8 hours po stdose prior to any 
blood sample collection) (repeat  three times consecutively with in 30 minutes [must 
have an interval of at leas t 1-2 minutes between ECGs]) 
 Completion of PRO – MDASI-BT 
 Disease assessment (MRI, clinical status, corticosteroid use an d overall disease 
assessment)  
 Tesevatinib administration  
 Plasma sample predose for tesevatinib concentration 
 Concomitant medications 
 AE assessment 
 Issue study drug diary 
 Dispense study drug 
12.2.5.  Cycle 3; Day 1 
At the Cycle 3, Day 1 visit (± 3 days ), the following procedure s and evaluations will be 
performed: 
 Vital sign measurements (sitting b lood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory rate, 
temperature) 
 Complete physical examination   
 Clinical laboratory tests (hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemis try panel and 
urinalysis)  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 80 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  Urine pregnancy test, if applicable. Positive results are to be  confirmed with serum 
testing.  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (to be pe rformed predose, and 4 - 8 hours po stdose prior to any 
blood sample collection) (repeat  three times consecutively with in 30 minutes [must 
have an interval of at leas t 1-2 minutes between ECGs]) 
 Neurological examination 
 Plasma sample predose for tesevatinib concentration 
 Disease assessment (MRI, clinical status, corticosteroid use an d overall disease 
assessment) 
 Tesevatinib administration  
 PRO – MDASI-BT 
 Concomitant medications 
 AE assessment 
 Collect/Issue study drug diary 
 Dispense study drug 
12.2.6.  Cycle 4; Day 1 
At the Cycle 4, Day 1 visit (± 3 days ), the following procedure s and evaluations will be 
performed: 
 Vital sign measurements (sitting b lood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory rate, 
temperature) 
 Complete physical examination   
 Clinical laboratory tests (hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemis try panel and 
urinalysis)  
 Urine pregnancy test, if applicable. Positive results are to be  confirmed with serum 
testing.  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (to be pe rformed predose, and 4 - 8 hours po stdose prior to any 
blood sample collection) (repeat  three times consecutively with in 30 minutes [must 
have an interval of at leas t 1-2 minutes between ECGs]) 
 Plasma sample predose for tesevatinib concentration 
 Tesevatinib administration  
 Concomitant medications 
 AE assessment 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 81 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  Collect/Issue study drug diary 
 Dispense study drug 
12.2.7.  Cycle 5; Day 1 
At the Cycle 5, Day 1 visit (± 3 days ), the following procedure s and evaluations will be 
performed: 
 Vital sign measurements (sitting b lood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory rate, 
temperature) 
 Complete physical examination   
 Clinical laboratory tests (hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemis try panel and 
urinalysis)  
 Urine pregnancy test, if applicable. Positive results are to be  confirmed with serum 
testing.  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (to be pe rformed predose, and 4 - 8 hours po stdose prior to any 
blood sample collection) (repeat  three times consecutively with in 30 minutes [must 
have an interval of at leas t 1-2 minutes between ECGs]) 
 Neurological examination 
 Plasma sample predose for tesevatinib concentration 
 Disease assessment (MRI, clinical status, corticosteroid use an d overall disease 
assessment) 
 Tesevatinib administration  
 PRO – MDASI-BT 
 Concomitant medications 
 AE assessment 
 Collect/Issue study drug diary 
 Dispense study drug 
12.2.8.  Cycle 6; Day 1 
At the Cycle 6, Day 1 visit (± 3 days ), the following procedure s and evaluations will be 
performed: 
 Vital sign measurements (sitting b lood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory rate, 
temperature) 
 Complete physical examination   
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 82 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  Clinical laboratory tests (hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemis try panel and 
urinalysis)  
 Urine pregnancy test, if applicable. Positive results are to be  confirmed with serum 
testing.  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (to be pe rformed predose, and 4 - 8 hours po stdose prior to any 
blood sample collection) (repeat  three times consecutively with in 30 minutes [must 
have an interval of at leas t 1-2 minutes between ECGs]) 
 Plasma sample predose for tesevatinib concentration 
 Tesevatinib administration  
 Concomitant medications 
 AE assessment 
 Collect/Issue study drug diary 
 Dispense study drug 
12.2.9.  Cycle 7-24; Day 1 
At the Cycle 7+, Day 1 visit (±  3 days), the following procedur es and evaluations will be 
performed: 
 Vital sign measurements (sitting b lood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory rate, 
temperature) 
 Complete physical examination   
 Clinical laboratory tests (hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemis try panel and 
urinalysis)  
 Urine pregnancy test, if applicable. Positive results are to be  confirmed with serum 
testing.  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (to be pe rformed predose, and 4 - 8 hours po stdose prior to any 
blood sample collection) (repeat  three times consecutively with in 30 minutes [must 
have an interval of at leas t 1-2 minutes between ECGs]) 
 Neurological examination 
 Disease assessment (MRI, clinical status, corticosteroid use an d overall disease 
assessment) 
 Tesevatinib administration  
 PRO – MDASI-BT 
 Concomitant medications 
 AE assessment 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 83 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  Collect/Issue study drug diary 
 Dispense study drug 
12.2.10.  Cycle 26+; Day 1 
At the Cycle 26+, Day 1 visit (± 3 d ays), the following procedu res and 
evaluations will be performed: 
 Limited physical examination   
 Neurological examination 
 Vital sign measurements (sittin g blood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory 
rate, temperature) 
 Clinical laboratory tests (hema tology and serum chemistry panel   
 12-Lead ECG  
 Disease assessment (MRI, clinical  status, corticosteroid use an d overall 
disease assessment) 
 Karnofsky performance status  
 Concomitant medications 
 Tesevatinib dispensing  
 AE assessment 
 
12.2.11.  Day 15 on Cycle 2 through Cycle 6 
At the Day 15 visit of Cyc les 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 (± 3 days), the  following evaluation will be 
performed: 
 Serum Chemistry (Cystatin C  does not need to be tested) 
12.2.12.  End-of-Study Drug Treatment Visit (EOS) 
As soon as possible after the last dose of study drug, patients  are to return to the study site to 
complete all end-of-study drug tre atment assessments as describ ed below. This may occur at the 
visit at which disease pr ogression is diagnosed.  
 Vital sign measurements (sitting b lood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory rate, 
temperature) 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 84 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  Complete physical examination   
 Clinical laboratory tests (hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemis try panel and 
urinalysis)  
 Urine pregnancy test, if applicable. Positive results are to be  confirmed with serum 
testing.  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (to be pe rformed predose, and 4 - 8 hours po stdose prior to any 
blood sample collection) (repeat  three times consecutively with in 30 minutes [must 
have an interval of at leas t 1-2 minutes between ECGs]) 
 Disease assessment (MRI, clinical status, corticosteroid use an d overall disease 
assessment) if not done within the  previous 8 weeks. If PD was not observed prior to 
the EOS visit, disease assessm ents should be performed until PD . 
 PRO – MDASI-BT 
 Concomitant medications 
 AE assessment 
 Collect study drug diary 
 Collect study drug 
12.2.13.  30-Day Follow-up 
The 30-Day Follow-Up should occur 30 days (± 5 days) after the patients’ last dose of 
tesevatinib, but prior to star ting new therapy.  This may occur  prior to 30 days if new therapy is 
started within 30 days of l ast dose of study drug. 
 Vital sign measurements (sitting b lood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory rate, 
temperature) 
 Complete physical examination   
 Clinical laboratory tests (hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemis try panel and 
urinalysis)  
 Urine pregnancy test, if applicable. Positive results are to be  confirmed with serum 
testing.  
 Concomitant medications 
 If PD was not observed prior t o the 30-day follow-up visit, dis ease assessments 
should be performed until PD. 
 AE assessment 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 85 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 12.2.14.  Follow-up Phone Contact 
Beginning 8 weeks after the 30-Da y Follow-Up Visit, patients ar e to be contacted by telephone 
every 8 weeks to assess survival s tatus and any subsequent anti -cancer treatment. If PD was not 
observed before the 30-day follo w-up period patients will need to return for follow-up MRI until 
PD is demonstrated or they start  a new anti-cancer treatment. I n the case of a patient receiving a 
new anti-cancer treatment in the  absence of PD, the date of the  most recent MRI will be used as 
the date of PD. 
 
12.2.15.  Unscheduled Visits: To Occur as Needed 
If additional visits are needed (e.g., for resolution of an adv erse event), the following procedures 
and evaluations may be performed as needed: 
 Vital sign measurements (sitting b lood pressure, heart rate, re spiratory rate, 
temperature) 
 Complete physical examination, including weight 
 Hematology, cystatin-C, serum chemistry and urinalysis 
 Urine pregnancy test, if applicable. Positive results are to be  confirmed with serum 
testing.  
 Supine 12-Lead ECG (repeat thr ee times consecutively within 30 minutes [must have 
an interval of at least  1-2 minutes between ECGs]. 
 Disease assessment (MRI, clinical status, corticosteroid use an d overall disease 
assessment) 
 Tesevatinib administra tion (if appropriate) 
 AE assessment 
 Concomitant medications 
 Perform drug accountability, re view patient diary, and collect old and dispense new 
study drug (if appropriate) 
 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 86 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 13. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
All descriptive and inferential statistical analyses will be pe rformed using the most recently 
released and available SAS statis tical software or the most rec ently released and available 
version of R, unless otherwise noted.  
Additional statistical details w ill be provided in a prospectiv e statistical analysis plan (SAP). 
13.1. General Design 
This is an open-label phase 2, multicenter study of tesevatinib  monotherapy in patients with 
recurrent glioblastoma.  
13.2. Sample Size Justification 
This phase 2 trial is designed prim arily to allow a preliminary  assessment of the efficacy and 
safety of tesevatinib in th e overall population of 40 patients with recurrent glioblastoma as well 
as to permit exploratory comparisons between predefined subgrou ps (by EGFRvIII mutation 
status and by EGFR gene amplificat ion status). The target PFS-6  rate in the overall study 
population is 25%. PFS-6 rates seen  in randomized studies with bevacizumab [ Weathers 2015; 
Taal 2014; Galanis 2015 ] are of the order of 15-18%. Bev acizumab is registered in this  
indication.  
With a sample size of 40 patient s in the overall population, PF S-6 = 25% and median PFS-6 = 
4.5 months, the trial has 95% pow er of having an estimated PFS- 6 >15%. Addressing uncertainty 
by the lower 90% confidence limit of the estimated PFS-6  – corresponding to a one-sided test on 
5% significance level, the trial  has 95% power to show a signif icant difference above 7% and 
80% power to show a significan t difference above 10%. 
The power calculation is base d on simulations in the Weibull di stribution to describe the 
progression and survival times. T he median PFS and the PFS-6 an d the corresponding shape and 
scale parameters from the Wei bull distribution are shown in Table 6  below. 
Table 6: Median PFS and PFS-6 Distributions 
 Median PFS 
(months) 6 month PFS Weibull 
shape 
parameter Weibull 
scale 
parameter 
Overall population 4.5 25% 5.24 2.41 
For the trial outcome, two subpopul ations (A and B) are defined  in Table 7 . 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 87 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 Table 7: Assumptions for Distribution of EGFR Subpopulations 
 
Subpopulation Description Assumed 
proportion of 
subjects 
A Patients with an assumed beneficial mutation (EGFR gene 
amplified glioblastoma) 57% 
B Patients with an assumed beneficial mutation (EGFRvIIIpos 
glioblastoma) 27% 
 
The trial is not stratified to i nclude a specific proportion of  patients with the EGFR gene 
mutations and is not powered to sho w significant differences fo r the secondary endpoints that 
estimate differences in PFS-6 for  the two subgroups compared to  patients without the EGFR 
gene mutations.  
13.3. Interim Analysis 
An interim analysis is incl uded with the possibility to stop fo r futility. The stopping rule is based 
on an unacceptable PFS-6 rate of 5%  and a desirable PFS-6 rate of 20% or more. The trial will 
continue after the interim anal ysis if more than 1 responder is  seen in 21 patients giving a 72% 
probability of stopping if the PFS-6 rate is ≤5%.  
13.4. Statistical Considerations 
For categorical variables, the number and percent of each categ ory within a parameter will be 
calculated for observed data only. F or continuous variables, th e mean, median, and standard 
deviation, as well as the minimum  and maximum values, will be p resented. The summary of 
time-to-event variables will include Kaplan-Meier methods as ap propriate.  
Statistical significan ce will be declared whe n the two-tailed p -value is found to be less than or 
equal to 0.05, unless otherwise  noted. Missing data will not be  imputed unless otherwise stated. 
All clinical data captured will  be provided in da ta listings.  
13.4.1.  Study Populations  
Adult patients with recurrent g lioblastoma with availability of  paraffin-embedded tumor samples 
diagnostic of glioblastoma will be enrolled. 
Two subgroups of patients are defined as having: EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR amplificationpos 
tumors. 
Primary and secondary efficacy analyses will include all patien ts who were included in the study. 
The same analysis methods for the primary and secondary analyse s will be applied to both the 
ITT population and the EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR gene amplificationpos population. 
Safety analyses will include a ll patients who enrolled and rece ived at least one dose of study 
treatment (the safety population). 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 88 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 All patients who take at least one dose of study drug will be e valuable for safety and efficacy 
assessments. 
Patients who do not complete the study, for whatever reason, wi ll have all available data (up 
until the time of termination related to the reason they were t erminated) included in the analysis.   
For statistical purposes compl etion of the study will be define d as six months after the last 
patient starts study treatment.  
The plasma concentration analysi s population will consist of al l patients who receive at least one 
dose of tesevatinib, and who have a t least one sample analyzed for plasma concentrations. 
13.4.2.  Patient Accountability, Demographics, and Baseline Characterist ics  
Patient disposition, demographic information and baseline chara cteristics will be tabulated for 
the overall population as well as by subgroups. Minimal data fo r screen failures, pertaining to 
why they failed to qualify to enroll will also be collected and  listed. 
13.4.3.  Tesevatinib Exposure  
The amount of tesevatinib administered by visit and overall (to tal dose) will be tabulated and 
presented by patient in data list ings.  The distribution of the  number of cycles achieved per 
patient will also be summari zed. In addition, delays and all ot her alterations in tesevatinib 
administration will be presented.  
13.4.4.  Concomitant Medications  
Concomitant medications will be coded using the current WHO Dru g Dictionary and the data 
will be summarized and presented in tables and listings.  
13.4.5.  Plasma Concentrations 
Plasma samples for tesevatini b concentration analysis will be d rawn predose of tesevatinib on 
Day 15 of Cycle 1; and predose of  tesevatinib on Day 1 of every  subsequent cycle (up to cycle 
6). Due to the sparse number of time points data are summarized  using descriptiv e statistics by 
time points, systemic steroid treatment and subgroup. 
These data, pooled with data from  other studies, may be analyze d in a population PK analysis 
using nonlinear mixed effects modeling. 
13.4.6.  Efficacy/Activity 
13.4.6.1.  Primary efficacy endpoint 
Progression-Free Survival at 6 months (PFS-6).  
PFS is defined as the time betwee n date of first dose and the d ate of first documented disease 
progression or death, whichever o ccurs first. The PFS-6 is defi ned as a patient being alive and 
progression free at 6 months (24 w eeks). Disease progression wi ll be determined based on 
investigator assessment with use  of radiological assessments, c linical status, and corticosteroid 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 89 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 use. The specific criteria for  disease progression is defined i n Appendix 2 . Patients without a 
date of disease progression or death will be analyzed as censor ed observations on the date of the 
last disease assessment; if no post- baseline disease assessment  is available, PFS will be censored 
at the date of 1st dose. 
The analysis of the primary e ndpoint and the estimation of PFS- 6 is performed with a Cox 
model. Karnofsky performance stat us is included as a covariate.  Study center is included as a 
random effect assumed to follow a gamma distribution. Thus, thi s is a shared Cox gamma frailty 
model. The model is used to est imate PFS-6 with 2-sided 95% and  90% confidence intervals. 
Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier methodology will be used to estimate median PFS with 95% CI and 
the Kaplan-Meier curve will be c onstructed to provide a visual description of the  PFS over time.  
Descriptive statistics overall and for each parameter (radiolog ical assessment, clinical status and 
corticosteroid dose) in the dis ease progression assessment are presented for the entire assessment 
period as well as for 3, 6 and 9-month time points. 
13.4.6.2.  Secondary efficacy endpoints 
The following subgroup PFS-6 endpoints: 
 Investigator-assessed PFS-6 in t he subgroup of patients with EG FRvIIIpos 
glioblastoma 
 Investigator-assessed PFS-6 in t he subgroup of patients with EG FR gene amplified 
glioblastoma 
are evaluated using the same me thodology as for the primary end point. The analysis is 
performed by including a subgr oup factor as fixed effect in the  model used to analyze the 
primary endpoint. PFS-6 with 95% confidence intervals are estim ated for each subgroup as well 
as for the residual population. 
Comparison of the efficacy betwee n the subgroups and the residu al group is performed by 
estimating the hazard ratio (HR) with 2-sided 95% and 80% confi dence intervals and the p-value 
for the null hypothesis: HR=1. 
Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier methodology will be used to estimate median PFS with 95% CI 
using Greenwood’s formula and the Kaplan-Meier curves will be c onstructed to provide a visual 
description of the PFS fo r the subgroups over time.  
Descriptive statistics overall and for each parameter in the di sease progression assessment are 
presented for the entire asse ssment period as well as for 3, 6 and 9-month time points by 
subgroup. 
The secondary endpoint: 
 OS rate at 9 months (OS-9) and O S overall, in all patients and in those with 
EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR gene amplified glioblastoma 
where OS is defined as the time between date of first dose of s tudy drug and the date of death 
due to any cause. OS-9 is defined a s the percentage of patients  who are alive at 9 months.  
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 90 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 Patients who are not reported as having died at the time of ana lysis will be censored at the date 
when they were last known to be  alive; if no post- baseline data  are available, OS will be 
censored at the date of first s tudy drug. The analysis methods will be the same as for the PFS. 
The secondary endpoints: 
 ORR per RANO criteria, and DOR i n all patients and in those wit h EGFRvIIIpos and 
EGFR gene amplified tumors 
where ORR is defined as a CR or P R. Patients without a post-bas eline disease assessment will be 
considered as non-responders. T he analysis population for ORR w ill be all enrolled patients with 
measurable disease at baseline. A n estimate of ORR and its 95% CI will be calculated using the 
Blyth-Still-Casella method for each  treatment arm. CIs for the difference in ORRs between the 
subgroups will be determined using the normal approximation to the binomial distribution. In 
addition, ORR is analyzed with a ge neralized logistic regressio n analysis. Subgroup is included 
as fixed effect, KPS as a covari ate and study center as random effect. The adjusted odds ratio for 
being a responder is estimate d and the two-sided 95% confidence  interval presented. 
DOR is defined as the time from the initial response to disease  progression or death among 
patients who have experienced a  CR or PR during study. Patients  who have not progressed or 
died at the time of analysis will be censored at the last disea se assessment date. DOR will be 
estimated using Kaplan- Meier m ethodology. Comparisons between subgroups through use of 
the unstratified log-rank test will  be made for descriptive pur poses only. 
 To evaluate the efficacy of tesevatinib as measured by PFS-6, O S-9, RANO ORR and 
DOR in the subgroups: 
 EGFRvIIIpos vs EGFRvIIIneg 
 EGFR amplificationpos vs EGFR amplificationneg 
The statistics for these subgroup c omparisons are described at each of the endpoints. 
In addition, statistics for the  change and percent change from baseline tumor measurements will 
be presented. These analyses will be done after each two cycles  of therapy. Summary statistics 
will be produced for PFS and OS . The percentage of patients wit hout disease progression after 3 
and 6 months of dosing will also be presented separately by loc al (investigator) and potentially 
by central radiography results. Sites will provide copies of al l MRI image sets for central 
retention in case central radiology review is required. 
13.4.6.3.  Sensitivity analysis for prima ry and secondary PFS and OS endpo int analysis 
As a sensitivity analysis for the primary and secondary PFS and  OS analysis the estimation of 
PFS-X, medium PFS, OS-X and median OS is performed with paramet ric survival analysis 
models, the models are compare d to the Cox model based on the A IC-value. For each model the 
PFS-X, medium PFS, OS-X and median OS confidence intervals are estimated. 
13.4.6.4.  Exploratory endpoints 
The analysis of the exploratory endpoints will be further detai led in the SAP. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 91 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  To evaluate the potential associ ation of exploratory tissue and  blood biomarkers with 
response to tesevatinib (PFS-6)  and with adverse events. These include EGFRvIII 
mutation and gene amplification and  may include circulating tum or DNA expression 
of these and other factors 
 To evaluate the correlation be tween patients with EGFRvIIIpos tumor and those 
patients with EGFR gene amplifi cation with respect  to survival and safety 
 To evaluate and compare EGFRvIIIpos expression and/or other  tissue biomarkers 
potentially associated with res ponse with tesevatinib, in paire d primary and recurrent 
glioblastoma specimens from the same patient, when these are av ailable 
 To evaluate patient-reported outc omes of disease and treatment- related symptom 
severity and interf erence as measured by the MDASI-BT questionn aire  
The MDASI-BT score is analyzed u sing a repeated measurement ana lysis with the MDASI-
BT score as dependent variable , baseline score as covariate and  cycle as fixed effect. Patient 
and center as included as random effects. 
The data are summarized as scor es and as change from baseline, as well as the categorical 
variables severe, moderate and mild cognitive impairment. 
 To evaluate patient-reported outc omes of disease and treatment- related symptom 
severity and interf erence as measured by the MDASI-BT questionn aire in the 
subgroup of patients with EGFRvIIIneg  and EGFR gene amplificationneg tumors as 
compared to those in patients with EGFRvIIIpos and EGFR gene amplificationpos 
tumors 
Comparisons will be performed by u sing the mixed model and incl uding subgroup and a 
subgroup-cycle interaction.  
Data will be modelled with the MDASI-BT score as dependent vari able and with a categorical 
response (binary or three categories). 
13.4.6.5.  Safety Data  
Safety analyses will be performed on all patients who received any quantity of study drug. AEs 
that are not related to treatme nt and that occur more than 30 d ays after the admi nistration of the 
last dose of treatment will  not be reported or analyzed.  
Safety analyses will present overall results and results by sub groups. 
Safety observations and measuremen ts include AEs, safety labora tory tests, vital sign 
measurements, physical examinations, ECG assessments, and plasm a levels.  
Treatment-emergent AEs will be summarized using MedDRA® (Version 18.1 or higher) System 
Organ Class (SOC) and preferred te rm, classified from verbatim terms. The incidence and 
percentage of patients with at least 1 occurrence of a preferre d term will be included, according 
to the most severe grade usi ng the NCI-CTCAE; Version 4.03. The  number of events per 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 92 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 preferred term will also be summ arized. Causality (relationship  to study treatment) will be 
summarized separately. 
AEs, SAEs, related AEs, related S AEs, ≥ Grade 3 AEs, related ≥ Grade 3 AEs, and AEs leading 
to withdrawal, dose modificati on, or treatment discontinuation will be summarized by subgroup 
and tesevatinib overall accordi ng to SOC and preferred terms.  All AEs will be in listings. 
Duration of AEs will be determined and included in listings, al ong with action taken and 
outcome. 
Laboratory results will be class ified according to NCI-CTCAE Ve rsion 4.03 and summarized. 
Laboratory results not corresponding to a coded term will not b e graded. Incidence of laboratory 
abnormalities will be summarized. The worst on-study grade afte r the first dose of study drug 
will be summarized. The inciden ce of ≥ Grade 3 laboratory abnor malities under treatment and 
shifts in toxicity g rading from baseline to highest grade post- baseline will be displayed. Results 
for variables that are not coded will be presented in the listi ngs as below, within, and above the 
normal limits of the local laboratory. 
Vital sign measurements will be summarized at each scheduled ti me point using descriptive 
statistics.  Karnofsky performance status results will be summa rized by scheduled time point. 
Additional statistical details w ill be provided in a prospectiv e statistical plan. 
Digital ECG results and wave i ntervals measurements will be sum marized and reported by 
patient visit and dose cohort and/ or as appropriate. QTc prolon gation results wil l be summarized 
separately. Covariate analyses will be employed as necessary. 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 93 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 14. DIRECT ACCESS TO SOURCE DATA/DOCUMENTS 
14.1.  Monitoring the Study 
All aspects of the study will  be carefully monitored by Kadmon or authorized representatives 
according to GCP and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for c ompliance with applicable 
government regulations. 
It is understood that the respons ible Kadmon study monitor (or designee) will contact and visit 
the investigator regularly and will be allowed on request to in spect the various records of the trial 
(eCRFs and other pertinent data)  provided that patient confiden tiality is maintained in 
accordance with local requirements. The principal investigator and key trial personnel must be 
available to assist the monitor  during these visits. The invest igator (or designee) must agree to 
cooperate with the monitor to ens ure that any problems detected  during the course of these 
monitoring visits are resolved. 
All data will be entered in a va lidated electronic data capture  system using single data entry. 
Standard procedures (including f ollowing data review guidelines , manual clinical review based 
on patient profiles, computerize d validation to produce queries , and maintenance of an audit file 
which includes all database modi fications) will be followed to ensure accurate data. Clinical 
personnel will review all data l istings for outliers, data inco nsistencies, and spelling errors. 
During the course of the study, a s tudy monitor (CRA) will make  site visits to review protocol 
compliance, compare eCRFs against individual patient’s medical records, assess drug 
accountability, and ensure that t he study is being conducted ac cording to pertinent regulatory 
requirements. In the course of the clinical study, access will be available to K admon or designee 
(e.g., CRO) to view the eCRFs after completion of the individua l sections of the study. 
Electronic CRF entries will be verified with source documentati on. The review of medical 
records will be performed in a man ner to ensure that patient co nfidentiality is maintained.  
Checking the eCRFs for completeness, clarity and cross checking  with source documents is 
required to monitor the progress of the study. 
The monitor will visit the site s at regular intervals throughou t the study according to the 
monitoring plan, to verify the adhe rence to the protocol and th e completeness, consistency, and 
accuracy of the data being entered on them and clarifying any d ata queries. The monitor should 
have access to laboratory test reports and other patient record s needed to verify the entries on the 
eCRF. The completed and correct ed eCRFs/CRFs for completed visi ts will either be collected by 
the monitor at the end of the st udy or obtained el ectronically for data processing. The 
investigator is responsible fo r the timely completion of eCRFs by assigned study staff. The 
eCRFs should be completed within s even (7) days of the patient’ s visit. A copy of the eCRFs 
will be retained by the investigat or who must ensure that it is  stored in a secure  place with other 
study documents, such as the protoc ol, the Investigator’s Broch ure, and any protocol 
amendments. 
Upon completion of the study, the monitor will make a final ass essment of the conduct of the 
study and inventory all clinical s upplies to be returned to Kad mon. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 94 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 14.2. Audits and Inspections 
The investigator should understa nd that source documents for th is study should be made 
available to appropriately qualif ied personnel from the Kadmon Quality Assurance Unit (or 
designee), or to health authority i nspectors after appropriate notification.  
Direct access to source data is also required for inspections a nd audits, and will be carried out 
giving due consideration to data p rotection and medical confide ntiality. Each investigator will 
have assured Kadmon of full access to complete source data for study participants and associated 
necessary support at all times. 
In addition to routine monitoring pr ocedures, audits of clinica l research activities in accordance 
with SOPs may be performed to eva luate compliance with the prot ocol, the principles of GCP 
and any applicable regulatory re quirements.  A regulatory autho rity or IRB may also wish to 
conduct an inspection (during the  study or even after its compl etion).  If a regul atory authority or 
IRB requests an inspection, the i nvestigator must immediately i nform Kadmon that this request 
has been made. 
Study conduct may be assessed during the course of the study by  a Clinical Quality Assurance 
representative(s) to ensure th at the study is conducted in comp liance with the protocol.  This 
designee, as well as the CRA, will be permitted to inspect the study documents (study protocol, 
eCRFs, investigational product accountability, original study-r elevant medical records).   
All patient data will be treat ed confidentially.  Furthermore, the study protocol, each step of the 
data-recording procedure and the  handling of the data as well a s the study report may be patient 
to independent review by a Quality Assurance representative.  C linical site and st udy audits will 
be conducted as necessary to assure the validity of the study d ata. 
Initial IRB approval, and all ma terials approved by the IRB for  this study including the patient 
consent form and recruitment materials must be maintained by th e Investigator and made 
available for inspection. 
 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 95 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 15. ETHICAL ASPECTS 
15.1. Compliance Statement 
This study will be conducted in compliance with Good Clinical P ractice (GCP), including 
International Conference on Harm onization (ICH) Guidelines, and  in general, consistent with the 
most recent version of the Declar ation of Helsinki. The investi gator will ensure that the conduct 
of the study complies with the ba sic principles of GCP as outli ned in the current version of 
21 CFR, subpart D, Part 312, “Res ponsibilities of Sponsors and Investigators”, Part 50, 
“Protection of Human Patients” , and Part 56, “Institutional Rev iew Boards”. In addition, the 
investigator agrees to adhere to  the protocol and to all applic able local laws and regulatory 
requirements relevant to the us e of new therapeutic agents in t he countries involved. 
The appropriate Institutional Re view Boards (IRBs) must approve  the protocol and any 
amendments and the patient informed consent form (ICF) prior to  implementation.  
Voluntary written informed cons ent must be obtained from every patient prior to participation in 
this clinical study. The rights , safety, and well-being of part icipating patients are the most 
important considerations and shoul d prevail over interests of s cience and society. 
Study personnel involved in conducting this study will be quali fied by education, training, and 
experience to perform their resp ective task(s). This study will  not use the services of study 
personnel where sanctions have been invoked based upon scientif ic misconduct or fraud (e.g., 
loss of medical licensure, debarment). 
15.2. Good Clinical Practice 
The principal investigator will ensure that the basic principle s of Good Clinical Practice, as 
outlined in 21 CFR 312, subpart D, “Responsibilities of Sponsor s and Investigat ors,” 21 CFR, 
part 50 (1998) and 21 CFR, part 56, (1998) are followed. Since this is a covered clinical trial, the 
principal investigator is adhered to 21 CFR, part 54, (1998). A  covered clinical trial is any “study 
of a drug or device in humans sub mitted in a marketing applicat ion or reclassification petition 
patient to this part that the applicant or FDA relies on to est ablish that the product is effective 
(including studies that show equi valence to an effective produc t) or that make a significant 
contribution to the demonstration of safety.”  This requires th at investigators and all sub-
investigators must provide docum entation of their financial int erest or arrangements with 
Kadmon or proprietary interests  in the drug being studied. This  documentation must be provided 
prior to the participation of t he principal investigator and an y sub-investigator. The principal 
investigator and sub-investigat or agree to notify Kadmon of any  change in reportable interests 
during the study and for one year f ollowing completion of the s tudy. Study completion is defined 
as the date that the last patie nt has completed the protocol-de fined activities. 
15.3. Informed Consent 
A properly executed, written info rmed consent document, in comp liance with 21 CFR, Part 50 
and the International Conferen ce on Harmonization (ICH) guideli nes, will be obtained from each 
patient before the patient is en tered into the study and before  any study screening procedure is 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 96 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 performed that involves risk.  Attention will be directed to th e basic elements required for 
incorporation into the informed c onsent under US Federal Regula tions for Protection of Human 
Patients (21 CFR 50.25[a]) and ( 21 CFR 50.25[b]), as necessary.   Sample ICFs will be supplied 
to each site. Kadmon or its desi gnee must review any proposed d eviations from the sample ICF. 
The final IRB-approved document must be provided to Kadmon for regulatory purposes. 
It is the responsibil ity of the investigat or, or a person desig nated by the investig ator, to obtain 
written informed consent from each patient (or the patient’s le gally authorized representative) 
participating in this study aft er adequate explanation of the a ims, methods, anticipated benefits, 
and potential hazards of the study. In the case where the patie nt is unable to read, an impartial 
witness should be present during the entire informed consent di scussion. After the patient has 
orally consented to participation i n the trial, the witness’ si gnature on the form will attest that the 
information in the consent form was accurately explained and un derstood. A copy of the ICF 
must be provided to the patient or  to the patient’s legally aut horized representative. If applicable, 
it will be provided in a certifie d translation of the local lan guage.  The site will retain the original 
signed/dated consent form and a ny associated HIPAA authorizatio n for all consented patient 
candidates. 
The eCRF for this study contains  a section for documenting info rmed patient consent, and this 
must be completed appropriatel y. Signed ICFs must remain in eac h patient’s study file and must 
be available for verification by s tudy monitors at any time. If  new safety information results in 
significant changes in the risk/ benefit assessment, the consent  form should be reviewed and 
updated as necessary. All patients (including those already bei ng treated) should be informed of 
the new information, should be given a copy of the revised form , and should give their written 
consent to continue in the study. 
15.4. Institutional Review Board 
This study is being conducted in co mpliance with the protocol, the ICH GCP Guidelines, and the 
applicable regulatory requireme nts under a United States IND ap plication. This protocol (and 
any modifications) and appropriate  consent procedures must be r eviewed and approved by an 
IRB. This board must operate in a ccordance with the current fed eral or local regulations. The 
investigator will send a letter or certificate of IRB approval to Kadmon (or designee) before 
patient enrollment and whenever subsequent modifications to the  protocol are made. 
15.5. Future Use of Patient Samples 
Not all of the tissue and bl ood components obtained during this  study may be required for the 
tests that are part of the clin ical trial. Following the conclu sion of the study, the samples may be 
used for additional research. These samples will be held for a maximum of 5 years. This may 
include pharmacogenomics profili ng analyzing CYP enzyme polymor phisms.  This will be of 
particular interest given the us e of tesevatinib in a new patie nt population who may experience 
toxicity not previously seen in e arlier oncology studies, and m ay help identify those at risk for 
toxicity at various doses. This research will help to understan d disease subtypes, drug response 
and toxicity, and possibly ident ify new drug targets or biomark ers that predict patient response to 
treatment. The use of the samples  for internal research will be  done according to the guidelines 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 97 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 defined by the FDA guidance for In  Vitro Diagnostic Device Stud ies Using Leftover Human 
Specimens that are Not Indivi dual Identifiable (issued 25 April  25 2006) and the EMEA 
Reflection Paper on Pharmacogenetic Samples, Testing and Data H andling 
(EMEA/CHMP/PGxWP/201914/2006).  If a patient requests destructi on of their tissue and blood 
samples and the samples have not  yet been de-identified, Kadmon  will destroy the samples as 
described in this FDA guidance. Kadmon will notify the investig ator in writing that the samples 
have been destroyed. 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 98 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 16. PROTOCOL AMENDMENTS 
Protocol modifications to ongoing s tudies must be made only aft er consultation between a 
Kadmon representative and the inve stigator. Protocol modificati ons will be prepared, reviewed, 
and approved by Kadmon representatives. 
All protocol modifications must be submitted to the IRB for inf ormation and approval in 
accordance with local requirements, and to regulatory agencies if required. Approval must be 
obtained before any changes can be  implemented, except for chan ges necessary to eliminate an 
immediate hazard to study patients, or when the change involves  only logistical or administrative 
aspects of the trial (e.g., cha nge in monitor, change of teleph one number) or to eliminate an 
immediate hazard to study patients. In these circumstances, imm ediate approval of the chairman 
of the IRB must be sought, and the  investigator should inform K admon, and the full IRB within 
5 business days after the emergency occurs. 
 
  
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 99 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 17. STUDY DOCUMENTATION, CR FS, AND RECORD KEEPING 
17.1. Investigator’s Files and  Retention of Documents 
The investigator must maintain a dequate and accur ate records to  enable the conduct of the study 
to be fully documented and the st udy data to be subsequently ve rified. These documents should 
be classified into two separate categories as follows: (1) inve stigator’s study file  and (2) patient 
clinical source documents. 
The investigator’s study file will contain the protocol and pro tocol amendments, eCRFs, query 
forms, IRB and governmental approva l with correspondence, sampl e informed consent, drug 
records, staff curriculum v itae and authorization forms, and ot her appropriate documents and 
correspondence. 
Patient clinical source document s (usually predefined by the pr oject to record key efficacy and 
safety parameters independent of  the eCRFs) may include patient  hospital/clinic records, 
physician’s and nurse’s notes, a ppointment book, original labor atory reports, ECG, X-ray, 
pathology and special assessment reports, signed ICFs, consulta nt letters, email communication 
and patient screening and enrollm ent logs. The investigator mus t keep these two categories of 
documents on file for at least  2 years following the marketing application approval date for the 
study treatment and for the indi cation being investigated or fo r 2 years after the investigation is 
discontinued and the FDA is notif ied. After that period of time , the documents may be destroyed 
patient to local regul ations with prior wr itten permission from  Kadmon. If the investigator wants 
to assign the study records to anot her party or move them to an other location, Kadmon must be 
notified in advance. 
If the investigator cannot guarant ee the archiving requirement at the study site for any or all of 
the documents, special arrangements must be made between the in vestigator and Kadmon to 
store these in a sealed contai ner outside of the study site so that they can be returned sealed to the 
investigator in case of a re gulatory audit. When source documen ts are required for the continued 
care of the patient, appropriat e copies should be made for stor ing outside of the study site. 
17.2. Source Documents and Background Data 
Investigators must maintain adequate and accurate source docume nts on which the eCRFs for 
each patient are based. They are s eparate and distinct from the  eCRFs. 
These records include detailed notes on: 
 Medical history 
 Date and time of informed consent with HIPAA authorization eith er contained in the 
ICF or presented to the patient candidate as a standalone docum ent 
 Description of the complete consenting process 
 The basic identifying informati on that linked the patient’s med ical record with the 
eCRFs 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 100 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  The results of all diagnostic t ests performed, diagnoses made, therapy provided, and 
any other data on the condition of the patient 
 The medical condition of the pati ent during their involvement i n the study 
 All AEs 
 The patient’s exposure to the study medication 
 The patient’s exposure to any concomitant therapy 
 All relevant observations a nd data on the condition of the pati ent throughout the trial 
 Justification for all entries in the patient’s eCRF 
 Radiology images (hard copy and dig ital), and reports if requir ed 
 Death information and any available autopsy data 
A patient log of all potentially e ligible patients considered, but not consented, for obvious 
deviations from the entry criter ia, will be kept at each site. The log will contain patients’ initials, 
diagnosis, eligibility, or, if  not eligible, reason for not con senting.  All consented patients will be 
logged, regardless of wheth er they ultimately enroll.  
Upon request, the investigator w ill supply Kadmon with any requ ired background data from the 
study documentation or clinic recor ds. In case of special probl ems or governmental queries or 
requests for audit inspections , it is also necessary to have ac cess to the complete study records, 
provided that patient confidentiality is protected. 
17.3. Electronic Case Report Forms 
Clinical trial data for this st udy will be captured on electron ic case report forms (eCRF) designed 
for computer processing and analy sis. This computerized system will be validated and compliant 
with 21 CFR Part 11. Corrections t o data will be made according  to 21 CFR Part 11, Electronic 
Records; Electronic Signatures. T here will also be an electroni c audit trail. The investigator 
agrees to provide all informati on requested on the eCRF in an a ccurate manner according to 
instructions provided. The inve stigator should ensure the accur acy, completeness, and timeliness 
of the data reported to Kadm on in the eCRF and in all required reports. 
An eCRF is required to be submitte d for every patient who recei ves any amount of study drug.  
This includes submission of ret rievable data on patients who wi thdraw before completion of the 
study.  Prior to submission, eCRFs mu st be reviewed for complet eness and accuracy, and signed 
and dated where indicated by the pr incipal investigator or auth orized delegate from the study 
staff.  If a patient stops treat ment or terminates from the stu dy, the dates and reasons must be 
noted on the eCRF. 
17.4. Confidentiality of Trial Docu ments and Patient Records 
The investigator must ensure that patients’ anonymity will be m aintained and that their identities 
are protected from unauthorize d parties. On eCRFs or other docu ments submitted to Kadmon 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 101 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 and the IRB, patients should be i dentified by an identification  code and/or initials and not by 
their names. The investigator s hould keep a patient enrollment log showing codes, names, and 
addresses. The investigator s hould maintain documents not for s ubmission to Kadmon 
(e.g. patients’ written consent f orms) in strict confidence. 
Authorized regulatory official s and Kadmon personnel (or their representatives) will be allowed 
full access to inspect and copy the records.  All study drug, p atient bodily fluids and tissue, 
and/or other materials collect ed shall be used solely in accord ance with this protocol, unless 
otherwise agreed to in writing by Kadmon. 
The principal investigator als o agrees that all information rec eived from Kadmon, including but 
not limited to the Investigator’s B rochure, this protocol, eCRF s, the investigational new drug, 
and any other study information rem ain the sole and exclusive p roperty of Kadmon during the 
conduct of the study and thereaf ter.  This information is not t o be disclosed to any third party 
(except employees or agents di rectly involved in the conduct of  the study or as required by law) 
without prior written c onsent from the Sponsor. The principal i nvestigator further agrees to take 
all reasonable precautions to prevent the disclosure by any emp loyee or agent of the study site to 
any third party or otherwise into the public domain. 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 102 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 18. PUBLICATION POLICY 
The results of this study ma y be published or presented at scie ntific meetings. The investigator 
agrees to submit all manuscripts  or abstracts to Kadmon for rev iew at least 30 days before 
submission. This allows Kadmon to pr otect proprietary informati on and to provide comments 
based on information from other st udies that may not yet be ava ilable to the investigator. 
In the event that Kadmon coordi nates a publication or presentat ion of study results from all study 
sites, the participation of invest igator or other representativ es of study site as a named author 
shall be determined in accordance with Kadmon policy and genera lly accepted standards for 
authorship. 
This study will be posted to clinicaltrials.gov to permit publi cation in appropriate peer reviewed 
journals. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 103 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 19. REFERENCES 
Armstrong TS, Mendoza T, Gning I, et al. Validation of the M.D.  Anderson Symptom  Inventory 
Brain Tumor Module (MDASI-BT) . J Neurooncol 2006;80:27–35. 
Best MG, Sol N, Zijl S, et al. Liquid biopsies in patients with  diffuse glioma. Acta Neuropathol 
2015;129:849-865. 
Brennan CW, Verhaak RGW, McKenna  A et al. The Somatic Genomic L andscape of 
Glioblastoma. Cell  2013; 155(2):462-477. 
[CBTRUS] Central Brain Tumor Registry of the United States 2011 . 
Cleeland CS, Mendoza TR, Wang XS, et al. Assessing symptom dist ress in cancer  patients: the 
M.D. Anderson Symptom Inventory. Cancer 2000;89:1634–46. 
Fabrini MG, Silavano G, Lolli I , et al. A multi-institutional p hase II study on second-line  
Fotemustine chemotherapy in rec urrent glioblastoma. J Neuroonco l 2009;92:79–86. 
Friedman HS, Prados MD, Wen PY, et al. Bevacizumab alone and in  combination with  irinotecan 
in recurrent glioblastoma. J Clin Oncol  2009; 27:4733–40. 
Galanis E, Anderson SK, Anastasia dis P, et al. NCCTG N0872 (All iance): A randomized 
placebo-controlled phase II trial of bevacizumab plus dasatinib  in patients with recurrent 
glioblastoma (GBM). J Clin O ncol 2015; 33(suppl ):abstr 2004. 
Kappelle AC, Postma TJ, Tahoorn MJ, et al. PCV chemotherapy for  recurrent  glioblastoma 
multiforme. Neurology 2001;56:118–20.  
Kiyohara Y, Yamazaki N, Kishi A. Erlotinib-related skin toxicit ies: treatment strategies in 
patients with metastatic non-sma ll cell lung cancer. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013;69(3):463–472.  
Lacouture ME, Anadkat MJ, Bensa doun RJ et al. Clinical practice  guidelines for the prevention 
and treatment of EGFR inhibitor- associated dermatologic toxicit ies. Support Care Cancer 
2011;19(8):1079–1095. 
www.psoriasis.or g 
Sarkaria JN, Yang L, Grogan PT , et al.  Identif ication of molec ular characteristics correlated 
with glioblastoma sensitivity t o EGFR kinase inhibition through  use of an intracr anial xenograft 
test panel.  Mol Cancer Ther 2007; 6:1167-1174. 
Schmidt F, Fischer J, Herrlinger U, et al. PCV chemotherapy for  recurrent glioblastoma.  
Neurology 2006;66:587–9. 
Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, et al: Radiotherapy plus co ncomitant and  adjuvant 
temozolomide for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med 2005;352:987–96. 
Stupp R, Hegi ME, Mason WP, et a l. Effects of radiotherapy with  concomitant and  adjuvant 
temozolomide versus radiotherapy alone on survival in glioblast oma in a  randomised phase III 
study: 5-year analysis of the EORTC-NCIC trial. Lancet Oncol  2009;10:459–66. 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 104 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 Stupp R, Tonn JC, Brada M, et al . High-grade malignant glioma: ESMO Clinical Practice  
Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 20 10;21 Suppl 5:v190–3. 
Taal W, Oosterkamp HM, Walenkamp AM, et al. Single-agent bevaci zumab or lomustine versus 
a combination of bevacizumab plus lomustine in patients with re current glioblastoma (BELOB 
trial): a randomised controlle d phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 201 4;15(9):943-53.  
Touat M, Duran-Pena A, Alentorn A, et al. Emerging circulating biomarkers in glioblastoma: 
promises and challenges. Exp R ev Mol Diagnost 2015;15(10):1311- 1323. 
Tonra JR, Poyurovsky M, Liu KG et al.. KD019: Blood brain barri er penetrant HER2/neu, Src, 
and EGFR inhibitor. Cancer  Res 2015;75(15 Suppl):A2590. 
van den Bent MJ, Brandes AA, Rampling R, et al.  Randomized Pha se II trial of erlotinib versus 
temozolomide or carmustine in recurrent glioblastoms: EORTC Bra in Tumor Group study 
26034.  J Clin Onc 2009; 27:1268-1274. 
Weathers SPS, Han SX, Liu DD, e t al. A randomized phase II tria l of standard dose bevacizumab 
versus low dose bevacizumab plus lomustine (CCNU) in adults wit h recurrent glioblastoma. J 
Clin Oncol 2015; 33( suppl):abstr 2005. 
Wen PY, Macdonald DR, Reardon DA, et al. Updated response asses sment criteria for  high-grade 
gliomas: response assessment in  neuro-oncology working group. J  Clin  Oncol 2010;28:1963–72. 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 105 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 APPENDIX 1.  KARNOFSKY PERFORMANCE STATUS CRITERIA 
Score (%) Criteria 
100 Normal, no complaints, no signs of disease 
90 Capable of normal activity, few  symptoms or signs of disease 
80 Normal activity with some difficulty, some symptoms or signs 
70 Caring for self, not capable of normal activity or work 
60 Requiring some help, can take care of most personal requiremen ts 
50 Requires help often, requires frequent medical care 
40 Disabled, requires special care and help 
30 Severely disabled, hospital ad mission indicated but no risk of death 
20 Very ill, urgently requiring adm ission, require s supportive mea sures 
or treatment 
10 Moribund, rapidly progressive fatal disease processes 
0 Death 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 106 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 APPENDIX 2.  RANO CRITERIA 
Response Criteria 
Complete 
response 
(CR) Requires all of the following: 
 Complete disappearance of all enhancing measurable and nonmeasu rable disease 
sustained for at least 4 weeks 
 No new lesions 
 Stable or improved non-enhancing (T2/FLAIR) lesions 
 Patients must be off corticosteroids (or on physiological repla cement doses only) 
 Clinical status is stable or improved 
Partial 
response (PR) Requires all of the following: 
 ≥ 50% decrease compared with baseline in the sum of products of  perpendicular 
diameters of all measurable enhancing lesions sustained for at least 4 weeks 
 No progression of nonmeasurable T1enhancing disease 
 No new lesions 
 Stable or improved non-enhancing (T2/FLAIR) lesions on the same  or lower dose of 
corticosteroids compared to baseline 
 Clinical status is stable or improved 
Note: Patients with nonmeasurable disease only cannot have a pa rtial response; the best response 
possible is stable disease 
Stable 
disease (SD) Requires all of the following: 
 Patient does not qualify for complete response, partial respons e, or progression 
 Stable non-enhancing (T2/FLAIR) lesions on same or lower dose o f corticosteroids 
compared to baseline 
 Clinical status is stable or improved 
Note: In the event that the corticosteroid dose was increased f or new symptoms and signs without 
confirmation of disease progression on neuroimaging, and subseq uent follow-up imaging shows 
that this increase in corticoste roids was requir ed because of d isease progression, the last scan 
considered to show stable disease will be the scan obtained whe n the corticosteroid dose was 
equivalent to the baseline dose. 
Progression 
(PD) Defined by any of the following: 
 ≥25% increase in sum of the products of perpendicular diameters  of enhancing lesions 
compared with the smallest tumor measurement obtained either at  baseline (of no 
decrease) or best response, on a stable or increasing dose of c orticosteroids 
 Significant increase in T2/FLAIR non-enhancing lesions on stabl e or increasing doses of 
steroids compared with baseline scan or best response after ini tiation of therapy, not caused 
by comorbid events (e.g., radiation therapy, demyelination, isc hemic injury, seizures, 
postoperative changes, or other treatment effects) 
 Presence of any new lesions 
 Clear clinical deterioration not attributable to other causes a part from the tumor 
(e.g., seizures, medication advers e effects, complications of t herapy, cerebrovascular 
events, infection, and so on) or decreases in corticosteroid do se 
 Failure to return for evaluatio n due to death or  deteriorating condition 
 Clear progression of nonmeasurable disease 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 107 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 FLAIR = fluid-attenuated inversi on recovery, RANO = Response As sessment in Neuro-Oncology (adapted from 
Wen 2010 ) 
 
 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 108 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
 APPENDIX 3.  MD ANDERSON SYMPTOM  INVENTORY-BRAIN 
TUMOR MODULE  
 

Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 109 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary  03 Apr 2019
  

Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 110 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 APPENDIX 4.  CONCOMITANT DRUGS THAT SHOULD B E AVOIDED, SUBSTITUTED OR USED 
WITH CAUTION 
Drugs with QTc risk should be avoided per Section 9.3.3.1  of the protocol. Drugs that inhibit or induce the CYP isoenzym es 3A4, 2C8, 
2D6, 1A2 should be substituted whe n possible or used with cauti on in view of their potential to alter tesevatinib exposure. Dr ugs that are 
secreted by the kidney proximal tubule cells into the renal tub ule by MATE transporter proteins should be used with caution. This list is not 
comprehensive, and all concomitant medications should be evalua ted for possible interactions with tesevatinib . See the Indiana 
University P450 drug interaction table for complete information  (http://medicine.iupui.edu/clinpharm/ddis/main-table/).  
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 111 of 113  
Confidential and Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 Drug Type Drugs with QTc Risk: AVOID Drugs with CYP or MATE Int eraction Risk: CAUTION 
Anti-anginal bepridil  
Anti-arrhythmics amiodarone, disopyramide, dofetilide, ibutilide, 
procainamide, quinidine, sotalol amiodarone, quinidine, dofetilide, procainamide  
Antibiotics/anti-fungals clarithromycin, erythro mycin, azithromycin, 
sparfloxacin, gatifl oxacin, moxifloxacin, 
troleandomycin,  pentamidine fluoroquinolones, clarithromycin, erythromycin, rifampin, 
rifabutin, terbinafine, itracon azole, ketoconazole, cephalexin,  
pyrimethamine 
Anti-depressant  fluvoxamine, bupropion, fluoxetine, paroxetine, duloxetine, 
clomipramine, doxepin, nefazodone 
Anti-epileptics  carbamazepin e, phenytoin, phenobarbital 
Anti-malarial chloroquine, halofantrine, quinidine quinidine,  
Anti-nausea/emetics domperidone, droperidol  
Anti-platelet  ticlopadine, 
Anti-psychotic haloperidol, mesoridazine, thioridazine, chlorpromazine, 
pimozide aripiprazole, haloperidol,  
Anti-viral  efavirenz, indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, nevira pine 
Asthma and allergy  chlorpheniramine, diphenhydramine, monteluk ast, fexofenadine 
Calcium channel blockers  verapamil, diltiazem 
CNS depressants   barbiturates  
GI stimulant/heartburn/GERD cisapride cimetidine 
Glucose lowering agents  Pioglitazone, troglitazone, metformin 
Immune modulators  cyclosporine, tacrolimus 
Lipid lowering  gemfibrazole,  
Miscellaneous  St John’s Wort, g rapefruit juice, Seville orange s,  
Opiates/dependence levomethadyl, methadone Suboxone, methadone 
 
 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 112 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 APPENDIX 5.  TOPICAL STEROID POTENCY CHART 
The following potency chart categ orizes brand- name topical ste roid medications along with the 
name of the corresponding generi c drug. The medications are lis ted in order of their potency. 
Please note that the percentage  of ingredient in the medication  does not necessarily correlate with 
the strength of the steroid. The  list may not be comprehensive.  
Brand Name Generic Name 
Class 1 – Superpotent 
Clobex Lotion/Spray/Shampoo, 0.05%
 Clobetasol propionate 
Cormax Cream/Solution, 0.05% Clobetasol propionate 
Diprolene Ointment, 0.05% Augmented betamethasone 
Olux E Foam, 0.05% Clobetasol propionate 
Olux Foam, 0.05% Clobetasol propionate 
Temovate Cream/Ointment/Solutio n, 0.05% Clobetasol propionate 
Ultravate Cream/Ointment, 0.05% Halobetasol propionate 
Vanos Cream, 0.1% Fluocinonide 
Cordran Tape, 0.05% Flurandrenolide 
Class 2 - Potent 
Diprolene Cream AF, 0.05% Augmented betamethasone 
Elocon Ointment, 0.1% Mometasone furoate 
Florone Ointment, 0.05% Diflorasone diacetate 
Halog Ointment/Cream, 0.1% Halcinonide 
Lidex Cream/Gel/Ointment, 0.05% Fluocinonide 
Psorcon E Cream, 0.05% Diflorasone diacetate 
Topicort Cream/Ointment,  0.25% Desoximetasone 
Topicort Gel, 0.05% Desoximetasone 
Class 3 – Upper Mid-Strength 
Cutivate Ointment, 0.005% Fluticasone propionate 
Lidex-E Cream, 0.05% Fluocinonide 
Luxiq Foam, 0.12% Betamethasone valerate 
Topicort LP Cream, 0.05% Desoximetasone 
Class 4 – Mid-Strength  
Cordran Ointment, 0.05% Flurandrenolide 
Tesevatinib  Protocol Number KD019-208  
 
    
Kadmon Corporation 
  Page 113 of 113  
Confidential and 
Proprietary 03 Apr 2019
 Brand Name Generic Name 
Elocon Cream/Lotion, 0.1% Mometasone furoate 
Kenalog Cream/Spray, 0.1% Triamcinolone acetonide 
Synalar Ointment, 0.025%  Fluocinolone acetonide 
Westcort Ointment, 0.2% Hydrocortisone Valerate 
Class 5 - Lower Mid-Strength 
Capex Shampoo, 0.01% F luocinolone acetonide 
Cordran Cream/Lotion, 0.05% Flurandrenolide 
Cutivate Cream/Lotion, 0.05% Fluticasone propionate 
Dermatop Cream, 0.1% Prednicarbate 
DesOwen Lotion, 0.05% Desonide 
Locoid Cream/Lotion/Ointment/ 
Solution, 0.1% Hydrocortisone butyrate 
Pandel Cream, 0.1% Hydrocortisone probutate 
Synalar Cream, 0.025/ Fluocinolone acetonide 
Westcort Cream, 0.2% Hydrocortisone valerate 
Class 6 – Mild 
Aclovate Cream/Ointment, 0.05%  Alclometasone dipropionate 
Derma-Smoothe/FS Oil, 0. 01% Fluocinolone acetonide 
Desonate Gel, 0.05% Desonide 
Synalar Solution, 0.01%  Fluocinolone acetonide 
Verdeso Foam, 0.05% Desonide 
Class 7 - Least Potent  
Cetacort Lotion, 0.5%/1% Hydrocortisone 
Cortaid Cream/Spray/Ointment, 1% Hydrocortisone 
Hytone Cream/Lotion, 1%/2.5% Hydrocortisone 
Micort-HC Cream, 2%/2.5% Hydrocortisone 
Nutracort Lotion, 1%/2.5% Hydrocortisone 
Synacort Cream, 1%/2.5% Hydrocortisone 
Abstracted from:  National Psor iasis Foundation. Topical treatm ents for Psoriasis. 2013. 
http://www.psoriasis.org/document.doc?id=164  (accessed 24 February 2014). 
 
 