 
Version 1 6/28 /18 Clinical Protocol  2018 -008 
Effect  of TrueTear  use on anterior  corneal surface imaging  quality  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR :   Francis W. Price, Jr. MD  
CO-INVESTIGATOR S:   Matthew T. Feng, MD ; Kathleen Kelley, OD ; Faye Peters, OD;  
    Ashlyn Lynn, OD  
     
    Price Vision Group &  
    Cornea Research Foundation of America  
    9002 N. Meridian St.  
    Indianapolis, IN  46260  
 
 
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY :  
To evaluate  the utility o f TrueTear™  to improv e anterior corneal surface imaging  quality before 
catar act surgery, r efractive lens exchange, or laser refractive surgery . 
 
BACKGROUND : 
Consistent and accurate mapping of the ocular surface is required to perform accurate 
preoperative calculations for a variety of “refractive” surgeries including cataract surgery , 
refractiv e lens exchange,  and laser refractive surgery. Accurate mapping of the anterior surface 
of the eye is need ed in order to obtain “keratometry” readings with a topographer (Tomey) and 
an optical biometer ( LensStar™ ) to determine the appropriate intraocular l ens power to implant 
in association with cataract surgery  or refractive lens exchange .  Likewise with new topography -
directed laser refractive treatments using Contoura™ mapping of the cornea, it is essential that 
the mapping reflect the accurate contour o f the ocular surface and not distortions caused by dry 
spots on the surface.  If the imaging includes surface irregularities caused by dry spots, then the 
excimer laser treatment would transfer these ir regularities  onto the cornea, permanently 
distortin g the optical system of the eye and causing poorer  vision rather than improved vision.  
 
The importance of a normal tear film for accurate corneal surface imaging has long been 
recognized,1,2 and becomes particularly apparent when patients have dry eyes and/or  low 
ambient humidity stresses patients’ ocular surfaces causing the  three imaging systems noted 
above  to produce  unusable images .  During imaging, the eye may be open for a longer than 
normal interval between blinks, and the dryer the ambient air or the m ore stressed the ocular 
surface is from underlying disease, the more distorted these images can become.  Using  artifi cial 
tears, humidifiers, or  having patients sit with their eyes closed for 20 to 30 minutes  does not 
reliably  improve the test results .  
 
Because the TrueTear™ system uniquely improves all three layers of the tear film, we 
hypothe size that  use of this device could be beneficial for obtaining more accurate imaging when 
the imaging is negatively impacted by the  quality of the ocular surfac e.3,4   
  
STUDY SPONSOR : Cornea Research Foundation of America  
   9002 N. Meridian St., Ste 212, Indianapolis, IN 46260   
 
Version 1 6/28 /18  
STUDY DESIGN :  
This is a  single -center  cohort study.   
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF TH E RESEARCH  POPULATION :  
 NUMBER OF SUBJECTS :   
 50 subjects sc heduled to undergo cataract surgery or refractive lens exchange and 50  
subjects scheduled to undergo laser refractive surgery wil l be enrolled for a total of 100  
subjects.   
 
 GENDER OF SUBJECTS : 
 Males and females will be enrolled.  
 
 AGE OF SUBJECTS : 
 Age 18 years and older will be enrolled because that is typically the minimum age for 
these s urgeries . 
 
 RACIAL AND ETHNIC ORI GIN: 
 Subjects can be of any racial and ethnic origin.  
 
INCLUSION CRITERIA :  
 Male or female of any racial or ethnic origin,  age 18 years or older  
 Able to provide written, informed consent  
 Scheduled to undergo routine imaging for cataract surgery, refractive lens exchange,  or 
laser refractive surgery  
 
EXCLUSION CRITERIA : 
 A cardiac pacemaker, implanted or wearable defibrillator, or other implanted metallic or 
electronic device (e.g. cochlear implant) in the head or neck  
 Chronic or frequent nosebleeds, a bleeding disorder (e.g. hemophilia), or another 
condition that can lead to increased bleeding  
 A known hypersensitivity (allergy) to the hydrogel material that comes into contact with 
the inside of the nose during use of the TrueTearTM device  
 Pregnancy  
 Presence of any oc ular disease or condition which  in the investigator’s opin ion would 
confound the study  results  
 
VULNERABLE SUBJECTS : 
 Most  study subjects will be new patients, but it’s possible that a few l ong-term patients  
might  be interested in  enroll ing. To minimize coercion , the study consent clearly states 
that participation is voluntary and the decision whether to participate or not wi ll not affect 
the patient’s care . 
 
Version 1 6/28 /18 METHODS AND PROCEDURES :  
 
 SCREENING : Prospective subjects who are scheduled to undergo imaging for cataract  
surgery, refractive lens exchange,  or laser refractive surgery will be considered for 
enrollment into the study.  Medical and ophthalmic histories will be recorded.   
 
 ENROLLMENT : Subjects who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be informed 
about the opportunity to participate in the study. Subjects will be entered into the study 
after providing written i nformed consent. Each subject will be instructed that if they 
decide to participate, they may withdraw at any time.    
 
 EXAMINATION : Subjects are expected to complete the study in one visit.  
 
Table 1. Visit Schedule  Visit 1  
Informed Consent  X 
Inclusion/E xclusion  X 
Medical & Ophthalmic History  X 
SPEED (dry eye symptom) Questionnaire  X 
Ophthalmic Examination  X 
Anterior corneal surface imaging  X 
Use TrueTearTM device  X 
Repeat anterior corneal surface imaging  X 
Adverse Events  X 
    
 IMAGING :  
o All subj ects will have 3  images taken of the anterior corneal surface  with the 
Tomey topographer . 
o Cataract surgery and refractive lens exchange patients will have 5 LensStarTM 
images  taken.  
o Laser refractive surgery patients will have 10 ContouraTM images  taken.    
o The imaging will be done  before and after use  of the TrueTearTM device.  
 
 STUDY TREATMENT :  Subjects  will be carefully instructed regarding proper use of the  
TrueTearTM device. The  device will be utilized for 3 sequential 1 -minute cycles at the 
intensity level selected by the patient to provide a gent le tingling sensation.  
 
PRECAUTIONS FOR MINIMIZING POTENTIAL RISKS 
 
The study will use an FDA -approved device . Subjects assigned to TrueTearTM will be carefully 
instructed in proper use. The instructions for u se note that the most frequently reported adve rse 
events (≥2% incidence)  were nasal pain, discomfort or burning, transient electrical discomfort, 
nosebleed, nasal congestion, headache, trace blood in nostril, and facial pain.   
 
Subje cts will be instructed to let  the investigator  or study coordinator know  immediately if they 
notice any problems  or discomfort .  Any study subject who experiences an adverse event will 
receive appropriat e treatment  and be allowed to immediately withdraw from the study.  
 
Version 1 6/28 /18 SAMPLE A ND DATA ANALYSIS : 
 
The primary outcome measure  will be the change  in the ocular surface asymmetry index (SAI)  
after use of the TrueTearTM device . The null hypothesis is that the mean SAI  will not change 
significantly after  TrueTearTM use. The research hypo thesis is that SAI will decease significantly 
after TrueTearTM use. The hypothesis will be assessed using  a one-sided paired t -test at a 
significance level of 0.05 . Secondary outcome measures will include the  change in the surface 
regularity index (SRI) me asured with corneal topography and the variances of the keratometry 
readings obtained with the topographer, Lenstar, and Contoura imaging devices . The study 
participants will be scored on baseline signs and symptoms of ocular dryne ss and associations 
betwe en the outcome measures and ocular dryness scores will be assessed.  
 
This is a f irst-of-its-kind study . Considering  the range  of patients who undergo each type of 
surgery , we anticipate that  enrollment of  50 subjects per treatment arm in each surgical coho rt 
will provide adequate statistical power  to detect clinically meaningful difference s.  
 
REFERENCES : 
 
1. Chuang J, Shih KC, Chan TC, Wan KH, Jhanji V, Tong L. Preoperative optimization of 
ocular surface disease before cataract s urgery. J Cataract Refract Sur g 2017;43:1596 -607. 
 
2. Epitropoulos AT, Matossian C, Berdy GJ, Malhotra RP, Potvin R. Effect of tear 
osmolarity on repeatability of keratometry for cataract surgery planning. J Cataract 
Refract Surg 2015;41:1672 -7. 
 
3. Gumus K, Pflugfelder SC. Intranasal tear n eurostimulation: an emerging concept in the 
treatment of dry eye. Int Ophthalmol Clin 2017;57:101 -8. 
 
4. Gumus K, Schuetzle KL, Pflugfelder SC. Randomized controlled crossover trial 
comparing the impact of sham or intranasal tear neurostimulation on conjunctival goblet 
cell degranulation. Am J Ophthalmol 2017;177:159 -68. 
 
 