IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0630 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/09/2023  Page 1 of 9   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deep Learning Enabled Endovascular Stroke Therapy Screening  
in Community Hospitals  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 02/09/2023  
  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0630 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/09/2023  Page 2 of 9  Protocol  Title:  Deep Learning Enabled Endovascular Stroke Therapy  Screening  
in Community Hospitals  
 
Protocol Version/Date: 
Principal Investigator:  3.0, 01/16/2023  
 
Sunil A. Sheth, MD, Luca Giancardo, PhD  
 
Co-Investigators:  Youngran Kim,  MD 
 
Key Study  Personnel:  Sergio A. Salazar  Marioni  
 
Population:  5,000  subjects  
 
Number  of Sites:  4 Sites  
Memorial Hermann Hospital – TMC 
Memorial Hermann Hospital – Memorial City 
Memorial Hermann Hospital – Southwest 
Memorial Hermann Hospital – Woodlands  
 
Study  Duration:  July 15th 2019 – March 01st, 2026  
Subject  Duration:  Not applicable  
 
 
Acute Ischemic Stroke (AIS) is the leading cause of long -term disability in the US, and 
every  minute  of delay  from  onset  to treatment  reduces  the likelihood  of good  clinical  outcome.  As 
a result  of our ongoing  Comprehensive  Stroke  Center  (CSC)  quality  improvement  efforts,  we have 
identified a key delay: time from the completion of computed tomography (CT) angiography of 
the head and neck to interpretation in the setting of AIS care. Motivated by this unmet need in 
clinical  care,  and in partnership  with the UTHealth  School  of Biomedical  Informatics,  we recently 
developed a machine -learning algorithm to automate the interpretation of CT angiography (CTA) 
for the presence or absence of large vessel occlusion (LVO) and other stroke relevant  information 
such as estimated stroke core size. We propose a prospective, cluster - randomized study to 
determine  whether  incorporating  our automated  machine  learning  (ML)  algorithms  to AIS care pathways 
reduces the time from patient ER arrival to imaging interpretation by sending automated alerts of 
its findings to physicians on the stroke care team. Physicians will ultimately decide if patients are 
eligible for thrombectomy, and all patients wil l receive the standard of care following current 
guidelines. This strategy is expected to help improve patient stratification procedures for 
endovascular thrombectomy by using commonly available data. Our unique research team 
consisting  of machine -learning  and AIS imaging  experts  will take advantage  of the rich and diverse 
talents across the UTHealth Campuses and Memorial Hermann Hospital  System.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0630 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/09/2023  Page 3 of 9  Background Information  
 
Acute  Ischemic  Stroke  (AIS)  is the leading  cause  of long-term disability  in the US adult  population 
with nearly 800,000 new patients affected by stroke annually in the US, and with Large Vessel Occlusion 
(LVO), a subtype of AIS that could require endovascular stroke therapy (EST), disproportionately 
contributing to stroke -related dependence and death.1,2 The last four years, however, have borne witness to 
rapid changes in care for patients with LVO AIS. In 2015, five randomized clinical trials established EST 
as one of the most significant advances in modern medicine.3-7 Compared t o patients treated with medical 
management alone, LVO AIS patients treated with EST were nearly 2.5 fold more likely to achieve good 
neurological outcomes (number needed to treat = 3), a treatment effect size rivaling that of antibiotics to 
treat acute bac terial infections.8,9 Yet these advances have revealed shortcomings in our AIS systems of 
care,  as we are now faced  with a great  number  of patients  that must  be triaged  with an increasingly  complex 
evaluation that must be performed in a shorter  time.  
 
A known dogma is that time is brain in AIS. Every minute after an occlusion of the cerebral 
vasculature 2 million neurons die, and key quality metrics in AIS revolve around reducing the time from 
when  the patient  arrives  to the hospital  to when  treatment  is initiated.13 While  we now know  from  the results 
of pivotal randomized clinical trials that EST, which re -opens occluded cerebral vessels through catheter - 
based  procedures,  can dramatically  improve  patient  outcomes  following  AIS, these  outcomes  are still highly 
time-dependent.  10,11  This challenge  is particularly  relevant  in the non-Texas  Medical  Center  MH campuses, 
where  delays  after imaging  arise  for two reasons.  First,  Neurologists  caring  for patients  in these  settings  are 
not comfortable interpreting the imaging studies to determine the presence or absence of LVO without 
relying on a Radiologist interpretation, thereby adding an additional step to the care pathway. Second, for 
Neurologists evaluating these patients remotely through Telemedicine, the im aging studies may not be 
completed at the time of the initial evaluation, and the requirement for the physician to remember to  check 
periodically to see when the imaging study is complete can lead to fall outs, particularly when they may 
have moved on to c are for another  patient.  
Through our continuous process of quality improvement, we recently conducted an analysis of 
delays  in AIS treatment.  Among  833 patients  with AIS, median  time from  ER arrival  to CTA  interpretation 
for presence or absence of LVO was 65 minutes [IQR 41 - 127]. In order to comply with our Joint 
Commission requirements for Comprehensive Stroke Center, the EST procedure must be initiated within 
90 minutes from patient arrival to the ER, an d given the multiple steps that must occur after the imaging 
result and before EST initiation, this time interval from ER arrival to imaging result was identified as a 
weak point in the  process.  
Motivated by this unmet need in clinical care, and in partner ship with the UTHealth School of 
Biomedical  Informatics,  we recently  developed  a machine -learning  algorithm  to automate  the interpretation 
of CTA for the presence or absence of LVO. This novel deep neural network architecture,  named 
DeepSymNet, was trained  on over 400 CTA studies, using the radiology report and expert readers 
interpretations as gold standard, and can nearly instantaneously analyze images for LVO.12 We then 
validated this algorithm on a fully external dataset of 126 patients, and found that it can perform this task 
with very high discrimination (Figure  1). 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0630 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/09/2023  Page 4 of 9  Given  these  results,  we propose  a prospective,  cluster -randomized  study  to determine  whether  AIS 
care pathways incorporating image based ML algorithms reduces the time from patient ER arrival to 
imaging  interpretation  (Figure  2). Our unique  research  team  consisting  of machine -learning  and AIS imaging 
experts  will take advantage  of the rich and diverse talents  across  the UTHealth  Campuses  and the Memorial 
Hermann Hospital System. Given our preliminary findings, we hypothesize that integration of these 
approaches into the AIS care pathway will reduce delays from CTA acquisition to interpretation, wit hout 
requiring any change in existing CT hardware or acquisition  protocols.  
Objectives  
 
The expected outcome is the creation of a state -of-the-art infrastructure for deploying artificial 
intelligence algorithms in the clinical practice and a thorough evaluation of a potential paradigm shifting 
approach for a measurable and sustainable quality  improvement of stroke care.  
Study Design  
 
To test the previously mentioned hypotheses, we propose a multi -center, stepped wedge cluster - 
randomized study that will include patients across 4 hospitals in the Memorial Hermann/UTHealth stroke 
system of care in the greater Houston area. The software will be randomly enabled at each of 4 
comprehensive stroke center hospitals to evaluate the impact of this software on primary and secondary 
outcomes. The primary outcome will be the time from patient ER arrival to  initiation of EST (“door -to- 
groin” time). Secondary outcomes include the number of patients treated with EST and 90 -day disability 
outcomes.  
 
Study Population  
 
The alert system will be enabled for all CT angiography imaging studies for participating Hosp itals.  
A valid sample will be one that satisfy the following criteria:  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Male or Female, 18 years of age or  older.  
2. Patients who present to the emergency department with signs and/or symptoms concerning  for 
acute ischemic  stroke.  
3. Patients who undergo CT angiography  imaging  
4. Patients determined to have a large vessel occlusion acute ischemic stroke. This determination will be made 
based on official radiology report for the CT angiography  imaging.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0630 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/09/2023  Page 5 of 9  Exclusion Criteria  
1. Patients with incomplete data on the electronic medical record.  
 
Study Procedures  
 
ML Algorithms Integration  
 
Custom ML software (Viz.AI) will be installed on a server and receive data from the centralized 
PACS system. This software has been purchased by th e MH hospital system for commercial use. The 
system will then send alerts to the care team through notifications pushed through the Viz.AI app present 
on the physician, nurse and technologist’s mobile phone. Diagnosis and treatment decisions will be based 
on the clinical evaluation and review of the images by the treating physician, as per routine standard of 
care.  This study  will not interfere  with routine  clinical  work.  Data  capture  will be performed  after treatment 
decisions and care have been  delivered.  
 
Clinical Data Acquisition  
 
Clinical data will be collected at each of the participating sites as a part of our ongoing 
Comprehensive Stroke System quality improvement protocols. All other clinical and outcome data will be 
collected through electronic medical record review. Captured data will include patient demographics, past 
medical history, imaging utilization and imaging findings, time intervals (i.e. time from last known well  to 
presentation, time from door to imaging, time from door to IV tPA, time from door to groin puncture), 
procedural  outcomes  (i.e. TICI  scores,  hemorrhage  rates),  discharge  clinical  outcomes,  and in patients  who 
received  EST or IV tPA, 90-day disability  outcomes.  These  data are routinely  captured  per standard -of-care 
at our Comprehensive Stroke System and wil l be used for analysis as a part of this  study.  
Ethics  
 
Being an observational project, there will be no interventions, investigations, tests, drugs, and/or 
interviews administered to patients. We do not expect any research -related adverse events. All personal 
health  information  from  patients  will be kept confidential  and in compliance  with HIPAA  regulations.  This 
site is seeking waver of consent for this observational study involving electronic medical chart review and 
analysis of de -identified CTA  images.  
Risks and benefits for the human subjects  
 
Risks  
In this study, ML algorithms are not used for diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention as it  
only sends alerts. All diagnosis and treatment decisions are still based on the clinical evaluations and 
radiology reports. As such, we do not foresee t hat this study poses more than minimal risk encountered 
during the routine stroke care.  
 
Benefits  
We do not foresee any immediate benefits for the human subjects involved. However, if successful,  
this study could enable a faster time -to-treatment for strok e patients.  
 
Data handling and record keeping  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/09/2023   Imaging Data  
The server  running  the ML algorithm  will hosted  by Viz.AI.  This server  and imaging  transfer  protocol  have 
been  reviewed  by MH IT and found  to fall within  acceptable  security  parameters.  The Viz.AI  software  is a 
commercial product, and its usage in this study will fall within the boundaries of its intended use as a 
commercial product and the contract with MH  hospital.  
 
Clinical Data  
All the clinical numerical variables collecte d for this study will be anonymized and stored in a central 
RedCap database inside the UTHealth network. All users of this database will comply with HIPAA 
regulations and with Good Clinical Practice for the handling of electronic clinical  data. Only the st udy key 
personnel will have access to the project  data.  
Each  subject  will be given  a unique  subject  identification  which  will be linked  to the subject’s  MRN 
for prospective data collection. If data is to be analyzed, no patient identifier will be included to ensure no 
patient  can be tracked  or identified.  Thus,  analysis  will solely  be performed  on de-identified  data.  No paper 
records will be kept. To ensure reproducibility of the finding, the UTHealth RedCap will continue to store 
the data after the completion  of the study  and until IT resources  will allow  to maintain  the machine  updated 
and protected. If this is not possible, all the data containing Protected Health Information (PHI) will be 
destroyed.  
 
Data Sharing  
In order  to allow  for a broader  reach for our finding  and scientific  publications,  we might  have  to share  part 
of the data for scientific non -commercial purposes. In this case, we will strip the imaging and clinical data 
of any PHI  information.  
 
Publication Plan  
 
Results based on data gathered from this this study may serve to elaborate abstract submissions or 
manuscripts for peer -reviewed journals. Research publications will not include any patient -specific 
information or identifiers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 9  IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0630  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0630 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/09/2023    
 
 
 
References  
 
1. Benjamin,  E.J. et al. Heart  Disease  and Stroke  Statistics -2018  Update:  A Report  From  the American 
Heart Association. Circulation 137, e67–e492  (2018).  
2. Malhotra, K., Gornbein, J. & Saver, J. L. Ischemic Strokes Due to Large -Vessel Occlusions 
Contribute Disproportionately to Stroke -Related Dependence and Death: A Review. Front Neurol 
8, 651 (2017).  
3. Berkhemer, O. A. et al. A randomized  trial of intraarterial treatment for acute ischemic stroke. N. 
Engl. J. Med. 372, 11–20 (2015).  
4. Campbell, B. C. V. et al. Endovascular therapy for ischemic stroke with perfusion -imaging 
selection. N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 1009 –1018  (2015).  
5. Goyal, M. et al. Randomized assessment of rapid endovascular treatment of ischemic stroke. N. 
Engl. J. Med. 372, 1019 –1030  (2015).  
6. Saver, J. L. et al. Stent -retriever thrombectomy after intravenous t -PA vs. t -PA alone in stroke. N. 
Engl. J. Med. 372, 2285 –2295  (2015).  
7. Jovin , T. G. et al. Thrombectomy  within  8 Hours  after Symptom  Onset  in Ischemic  Stroke.  N. Engl. 
J. Med. 150417035025009 (2015).  doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1503780  
8. Tibayrenc M. Encyclopedia of Infectious Diseases : Modern Methodologies. John Wiley & Sons; 
2007.  
9. Powers, W. J. et al. 2018 Guidelines for the Early Management of Patients With Acute Ischemic 
Stroke: A Guideline for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart Association/American 
Stroke Association. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation 49, e46–e110  (2018).  
10. Sheth, S. A. et al. Time to endovascular reperfusion and degree of disability in acute stroke. Ann 
Neurol 78, 584–593 (2015).  
11. Saver, J. L. et al. Time to Treatment With Endovascular Thrombectomy and Outcomes From 
Ischemic Stroke: A Meta -analysis. JAMA 316, 1279 –1288  (2016).  
12. Barman, A. et al. Determining Ischemic Stroke From CT -Angiography Imaging Using Symmetry - 
Sensitive Convolutional Networks. IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging ISBI 
(2019) (in print)  
13. Saver, J. L. Time is brain --quantified. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation 37, 263–266 
(2006).  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0630 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 02/09/2023    
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. DeepSymNet performance for large vessel occlusion detection in fully external dataset of acute ischemic 
stroke from the clinical PACS at Memorial Hermann/UTHealth. The model was previously trained on an independent 
set of 297 CTA images. AUC: Area Under th e Receiving Operating Characteristic curve.  
 
Figure 2. Overview of current stroke care and the proposed approach, designed to reduce the time to imaging 
interpretation  
