 
1  
 
Title  
A histomorphometric  analysis  of bone  formation  following  sinus  augmentation  with two dif-
ferent  bone  graft  materials.   
 
 
NCT  03059914  
 
 
Date  5/10/2021   
 
2 Research  Project  
 
A histomorphometric  analysis  of bone  formation  following  sinus  augmentation  
with  two  different  bone  graft  materials.  
A Pilot  study  in humans  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal  Investigator:   Dr. Jaime  Lozada  
Graduate  student:  Dr. Sarat  Chandra  Ummethala  
 
 
 
Name  of Applicant:    Sarat  Chandra  Ummethala  DDS,  MBA  
 
3  
Principal  Investigator:   Jaime  Lozada,  DMD  MS 
 Professor  and Director,  
 Advanced  education  program  in Implant  Dentistry  
 
Co-investigator:                 Sarat  Chandra  Ummethala,  DDS,  MBA  
                        Graduate  student,   
                                                Advanced  Education  Program  in Implant  Dentistry  
 
  Joseph  Kan,  DDS,  MS 
                                  Professor,  Department  of Restorative  Dentistry  
   
  Aladdin  Al-Ardah,  DDS  
  Assistant  professor,  
  Advanced  education  program  in Implant  Dentistry  
 
  Christopher  A. Church,  MD 
  Otolaryngologist  
  Loma  Linda  University,  Medical  center  
  
 
Office  Address:         Loma  Linda  University  School  of Dentistry  
                                      Advanced  Education  Program  in Imp lant  Dentistry  
                                               Loma  Linda,  California  92350  
                                               Tel: (909)  558 -4983  Fax:  (909)  558 -4803  
 
Sponsoring  Agency:    Sigma  Graft  
   
Project  Monitor:        Dr. Jaime  Lozada  
                                                 
 
 
 
4 Title:   
A Histomorphometric  Analysis  of Bone  Formation  following  sinus  augmentation  
with  Two  Different  Bone  Graft  Materials.  A pilot  study  in humans.  
 
Introduction:   
Sinus  augmentation  procedure  is a well-accepted  and predictable  surgical  procedure  
that is used to increase  the bone  volume  to facilitate  implant  placement  for individuals  who 
otherwise  present  with inadequate  bone  quantity  in the posterior  maxilla.1-4 In 1980,  Boyne  
and James  published  a technique  for maxillary  sinus  augmentation  using  autogenous  bone.5 
Since  then,  several  different  techniques  have  been  developed  and are currently  being  utilized  
for sinus  augmentation.6-9 
The original  sinus  augmentation  protocol  utilized  autogenous  bone  
from  either  intraoral  or extra  oral sources.5,10
 The disadvantages  of utilizing  autogenous  bone  
are requirement  of an additional  surgical  procedure,  increase  in surgical  time and post-surgical  
morbidity.  Moreover,  autogenous  bone  has reported  high and unpredictable  resorption  
rate.11,12
  Therefore,  various  grafting  materials  such as allografts,  xenografts,  alloplastic  ma-
terials,  and mixtures  of various  materials  have  been  utilized  in sinus  floor  elevation.1,13-18
  Del 
Fabbro  et al. concluded  in their systematic  review  that bone -substitute  materials  are as effec-
tive as autogenous  bone  when  used alone  or in combination  with autogenous  bone. 2
  
Anorganic  bovine  bone  mineral  (Bio -Oss,  Geistlich,  Princ eton,  NJ) (ABBM)  is a 
bone  substitute  that  is manufactured  from  bovine  bone  mineral  having  a microscopic  
structure  similar  to human  cancellous  bone.   In humans,  ABBM  alone  or mixed  with  
other  materials  was  found  to be highly  osteoconductive  and provided  a scaffold  for new  
 
5 bone  formation  in extraction  sockets  or sinus  augmentations.  The results  of sinus  aug-
mentations  with  xenografts  are complete  and well  documented.14-24
  Jensen  T et al.24 
reported  that  there  is no statistical  difference  between  the use of ABBM  alone  and a mix-
ture  with  autogenous  bone  as graft  material  for maxillary  sinus  augmentation.  
Inteross   (Sigma  Graft)  is another  anorganic  bovine  bone  mineral  bone  substitute  
that  is manufactured  from  bovine  bone  and is supposed  to have  a similar  microscopic  
structure  to Bio-oss but with  more  surface  area.  This  will be an attempt  to compare  the 
clinical  performance  with  histomorphometric  analysis  of the bone  that  is formed  using  
the two different  graft  materials.  
 
Objective:  
The purpose  of this investigation  is to compare  new  bone  formation  by means  of 
histomorphometric  analysis  following  maxillary  sinus  augmentation  using  two different  
bone  graft  materials.   
 
Null  Hypothesis:   
There  is no histomorphometric  difference  in new  bone  formation  in maxill ary 
sinuses  augmented  using  two different  materials,  ABBM  (Bio -oss)  and ABBM  (InterOss).  
 
 
 
 
6 Material   & Methods:  
Patient  selection:   
 20 patients  who  require  sinus  augmentation  prior  to implant  placement  in the 
posterior  maxilla  at Loma  Linda  University  School  of Dentistry  (LLUSD),  Advanced  Ed-
ucation  Program  in Implant  Dentistry  will be selected  to participate  in this study.   Pa-
tient  will complete  a medical  history  form  and be selected  using  the following  inclusion  
and exclusion  criteria.  
Inclusion  Criteria : 
1. Over  18 years  old who are able to read and sign an informed  consent  form.   
2. Patient  who has good  oral hygiene  (Full -mouth  plaque  score  <25%).  
3. Subject  would  be available  for study  monitoring  and follow -up visits.  
4. Patients  with missing  teeth  in the maxillary  posterior  region  who will require  sinus  
augmentation  for implant  placement.   The patients  may be partially  or completely  
edentulous.  
5.  Patient  is a candidate  for delayed  implant  placement  approximately  8 months  follow-
ing sinus  grafting.   
6. Patient  will be evaluated  for the dimensions  of the maxillary  sinus  after initial  CBCT  
evaluation  and patient  with the following  minimum  dimensions  will be included.   
Length  (anterior -posteriorly)  – 25mm  
Width  (medial -laterally)  – 18mm  
Height  (coronally -apically)  – 25mm  
 
7  
Exclusion  Criteria:   
A medical  history  that will complicate  the outcome  of the study  such as  
1. Alcohol,  drug dependency.   
2. Signs  or symptoms  of chronic  maxillary  sinus  disease.  
3. Current  smoker.   
4. History  of head  and neck  radiation  treatment.   
5. Poor health,  conditions  like uncontrolled  diabetes,  uncontrolled  hypertension  or 
other  uncontrolled  systemic  disease.   
6.  Physical  or psychological  reason  that might  affect  the surgical  procedure  or the 
subsequent  prosthodontic  treatment  and/or  required  follo w-up examinations.  
7. Also,  subjects  who are nursing  or pregnant  will be excluded  from  the study.  
A guideline  and treatment  protocol  for patient  care  will be submitted  to the In-
stitutional  Review  Board  (IRB)  of Loma  Linda  University  (LLU)  and the research  review 
committee  for approval.   All clinical  procedures  will be performed  at the Center  for Im-
plant  Dentistry,  Loma  Linda  University  School  of Dentistry.    
Informed  Consent:  
In accordance  with  the standards  of conduct  established  by the Institutional  Re-
view  Board  of Loma  Linda  University,  participants  will be required  to sign  an informed  
consent.  The purpose  and the nature  of the study  will be explained  to the subjects  by 
one investigator  (SU)  and patient  who  will meet  our inclusion  criteria  will then  be in-
vited  to participate.  Subjects  will be required  to read,  understand,  and sign  the consent  
form  before  being  enrolled  in the study.   Hard  copy  will be retained  following  the stand-
ard protocol  set by the Institutional  Review  Board  of Loma  Linda  University.  
 
8 Randomization  – Quickcalcs  software  from  Graphpad  (Graphpad  software  Inc, La 
Jolla,  CA USA)  will be used  to randomly  assign  patients.  All patients  will undergo  sinus  
augmentation  and will be randomly  placed  into  two groups  according  to the graft  mate-
rial to be used  in the surgical  procedure.  If a patient  requires  bilateral  sinus  augmenta-
tion,  (two  sinus  on either  side  in the same  patient)  each  sinus  will be considered  as one 
unit  for the randomization  procedure.  
Group  A: 10 Maxillary  sinus  augmentation  using  ABBM  (InterOss).   
Group  B: 10 Maxillary  sinus  augmentation  using  ABBM  ( Bio-Oss).  
Clinical  Procedure:  
Diagnosis  and  Treatment  Plan  
1. Subjects  will be informed  in detail  about  the sequencing  of the events  that would  take 
place during  the study.  This will include  risks,  benefits  and alternatives  for treatment.  
2. Preliminary  impressions  will be made  with polyvinyl  siloxane  impression  material  
(Exafast,  GC America  Inc., Alsip,  IL).  Diagnostic  casts  will be fabricated  in type III 
dental  stone  (Microstone,  Whip  Mix,  Louisville,  KY).   
3. The diagnostic  casts  will be articulated  with the use of a face-bow on a Panadent  semi -
adjustable  articulator  (Panadent  Corporation,  Colton,  CA) using  interocclusal  record  
made  with polyvinyl  siloxane  (Exabite,  GC America  Inc., Alsip,  IL) and wax record  
bases.   
4. The diagnostic  waxing  of the missing  teeth  will be fabricated  with tooth -colored  wax 
(Pro-Art, Ivoclar  Vivadent,  Inc., Williams,  Amherst,  NY),  and then will be duplicated  
in type III dental  stone  for partially  edentulous  patients.   In case of completely  eden-
tulous  patients,  denture  teeth  will be set up in an optimal  position  on a base plate  based  
 
9 on the conventional  complete  denture  fabrication.   A silicone  lab putty  (Polysiloxane  
Coltene  Lab-Putty , Coltene  Whaledent  Inc. Cuyahoga  Falls,  OH) impression  will be 
taken  of this denture  setup.   
5. A vacuum -formed  radiographic  template  (Polypropylene  Coping  Sheet,  Ultradent  
Products,  South  Jordan,  UT) with auto-polymerizing  acrylic  resin  (Jet, radiopaque  
teeth color,  Lang  Dental,  Wheeling,  IL) will be fabricated  from  the duplicated  cast for 
partially  edentulous  patients.   For completely  edentulous  patients,  a radiographic  tem-
plate  will be fabricated  from  the silicone  putty  impression  with radiopaque  color  auto-
polymerizing  acrylic  resin  for teeth  and clear  color  for the base (Jet, radiopaque  teeth  
color,  Lang  Dental,  Wheeling,  IL). These  templates  will be used in conjunction  with 
the cast for identifying  the desired  locations  of the dental  implants.   
6. All patie nts will undergo  radiographic  evaluations  before  sinus  augmentation.  A cone -
beam  computed  tomography  (CBCT)  scan (NEWTOM  full volume  scan of the max-
illa) would  be taken  with the radiographic  template.  (The  radiographic  evaluation  prior  
to sinus  augmentatio n is standard  protocol)  
Pre-operative  procedure  
1. At a pre-surgical  appointment,  the patient ’s vital signs  (blood  pressure,  pulse  rate) will 
be recorded  and the patient ’s medical  history  will be updated.   At this point,  patients  
will be randomly  assigned  to Group  A or B. 
2. Patients  will be given  the following  three  choices  of anesthesia  for the sinus  surgery:  
a) Local  anesthesia  (LA)  only.   
b) LA in conjunction  with oral sedation  (Halcion  0.25mg,  Roxane  Laboratories  
Inc., Columbus,  OH).  Administered  30 minutes  before  the appointment.  
 
10 c) LA in conjunction  with intravenous  (IV) sedation.   
            A patient  who  chooses  IV sedation  will have  a pre-surgical  interview  with  the an-
esthesiologist  (Surgery  Center  for Dentistry,  Loma  Linda  University  School  of 
Dentistry)  who  will conduct  sedation  at the time  of the surgery.  
3. All patients  will be questioned  regarding  drug allergy  and prescribed  with appropriate  
antibiotics  (Amoxicillin  500 mg or Clindamycin  300mg,  TID for 10 days,  to start day 
1 before  the day of surgery)  analgesic  (Ibuprofen  800 mg) to take 1 tab 1 hour before  
the surgery  and for post-operative  usage  as needed  for pain.  The patient  will also be 
instructed  to rinse  with 0.12%  chlorhexidine  gluconate  solution  (Peridex,  Zila Phar-
maceuticals  Inc., Phoenix,  AZ) twice  a day starting  1 week  before  the surgery  to con-
tinue  for 2 weeks  after the surgery.   
4. The radiographic  template  will be converted  into a surgical  template.  The proposed  
implant  locations  in the radiographic  template  will be finalized  and modified  if neces-
sary after reviewing  the CBCT  scan with the template  in place.  The location  of the 
anterior  wall of the sinus  cavity  will be marked  on the surgical  template.  
5. All pre-operative  and postoperative  instructions  will be given  to the patient  in an oral 
and written format.  All of the patient ’s questions  about  the instructions  will be an-
swered.  
Surgical  procedures  
1. On the day of surgery,  the patient  will be asked  to rinse  their mouth  with 0.12%  chlor-
hexidine  gluconate  solution  (Peridex)  for 3 minutes  prior  to the surgery.   After  being  
seated,  the patient  will be monitored  for blood  pressure,  pulse  rate, and oxygen  level  
and circumoral  area will be scrubbed  with a Povidone -Iodine  swab  stick  (Aplicare,  
 
11 Aplicare  Inc., Branford,  CT) and the patient  will be draped.   Oxygen  will be provided  
to the patient  through  the nasal  cannula  at a minimum  rate of 3 liters/minute,  if the 
patient  chooses  to be sedated.  
2. All the patients  will be treated  with the same  surgical  technique  consisting  of sinus  
floor  augmentation  via a latera l approach.  All surgeries  will be performed  by one sur-
geon  (SU).  After  appropriate  local  anesthetic  administration  (2% Xylocaine  with epi-
nephrine  1:100,000,  Dentsply  International  Inc., York,  PA) administration,  a mid-
crestal  incision  will be made  and a vertical  releasing  incision  will be made  anteriorly  
at the appropriate  location.   A full-thickness  flap will be reflected  to expose  the lateral  
wall of the sinus.   
3. Each  antrostomy  will be outlined  with a round  carbide  bur (KOMET  USA,  Rock  Hill, 
SC) ensuring  that the inferior  border  will be at least 2 mm superior  to the sinus  floor.  
If the lateral  bone  window  is not completely  separated  from  the surrounding  bone,  a 
mallet and chisel  (H & H Company,  Ontario,  CA) will be used to facilitate  complete  
separation.    
4. Sinus  membrane  will be carefully  elevated  to create  space  for the bone  graft.  The bony  
remnant  from  the window  will be elevated  with the sinus  membrane  to form  the roof 
of the future  space  for the bone  graft  material.   The membrane ’s integrity  will be 
checked  visually  and with the Valsalva  test. If a perforation  to the sinus  membrane  
occurs,  the surgeon  will evaluate  the site prior  to proceeding.   If the perforati on is < 5 
mm in diameter  and is able to be repaired,  the perforation  will be isolated  and a re-
sorbable  collagen  membrane  (Bio-Gide,  Geistlich,  Wolhusen,  Switzerland)  will be 
placed  over the area,  in such a position  so as to overlay  unaffected  membrane  by at 
least 3 mm in all directions.  Then,  the surgeon  will continue  with the procedure  as 
 
12 planned.   Any perforation  > 5 mm will be excluded  from  this study.  Prior  to the place-
ment  of the graft,  the mesial  and distal  margins  of the lateral  window  will be marked  
on the surgical  template.  A line connecting  these  two marks  will be made  following  
the outline  of the inferior  margin.   The inferior  and superior  margins  will be measured  
from  this line and these  measurements  will be recorded.  
5.  ABBM  (InterOss  large  partic le 1-2mm)  or ABBM  (Bio-Oss® large  particle  1-2mm)  
will be placed  into the each sinus  compartment  for the two groups.   Approximately  2-
3 grams  of graft  material  will be placed  in each sinus  compartment  as per the individ-
ual case requirements.  
6. Primary  closur e of the flap will be performed  using  a 5-O expanded  poly tetrafluoro-
ethylene  (Gore -Tex, W.L.  Gore  and Associates,  Inc. Newark,  DE) suture  material  for 
the crestal  incision  and polyglactin  910 suture  material  (Vicryl  6-0, Ethicon,  Somer-
ville,  NJ) for the vertical  incision.   
Post -operative  instructions  
All patients  will be instructed  to maintain  a liquid  diet  for 2 weeks  after  the sinus  
surgery,  continue  on a soft diet  for one month  and general  diet  for the remaining  dura-
tion  of the healing  phase.   If a pati ent presents  with  a removable  prosthesis,  the pros-
thesis  will be evaluated  for proper  tissue  adaptation.   If the tissue  adaptation  is poor,  the 
prosthesis  will be relined  using  a soft reline  material  (GC Reline  Soft,  GC, Alsip,  IL) fol-
lowing  the surgery.   The patient  will be advised  to avoid  nose  blowing  and placing  any 
undue  pressure  on the surgical  site.  The patient  will be instructed  to rinse  gently  with  
0.12%  chlorhexidine  gluconate  solution  (Peridex)  for the first  two weeks  following  the 
surgery.   Reca ll examinations  will be scheduled  two weeks  following  the surgery  for su-
ture  removal  and at 1, 3, and 6 months  after  sinus  augmentation  and 2 weeks  before  
 
13 biopsy  and implant  placement.  The biopsy  and implant  placement  procedure  will be 
performed  8 months  after the grafting  procedure.  A CBCT  scan  will be taken  2 weeks  
before  implant  placement  to determine  the final  implant  position  and size.  (The  post  
operative  CBCT  scan  after  sinus  augmentation  and prior  to implant  placement  is stand-
ard protocol  ) 
Surgical  and  post -operative  complications   
Surgical  and post -operative  complications  such  as perforation  of the sinus  mem-
brane,  acute  or chronic  sinus  infection  (pain,  suppuration,  swelling,  nasal  fluid  leakage),  
bleeding,  wound  dehiscence,  and exposure  of the graf t will be recorded.  
Biopsy  Procedure:  
1. After  8 months  of healing,  a full-thickness  flap will be reflected  and previous  antros-
tomy  site will be located  using  the same  surgical  template.   Two trephines  (2.75mm  
internal  diameter  and 3.5mm  external  diameter,  ACE  Surgical  Supply  Company,  Inc., 
Brockton,  MA)  will be used to collect  at least 8mm  length  biopsy  specimen.  Two cores  
will be taken  from  each patient  site; one core from  the previous  lateral  window  of each 
sinus  augmentation  site without  interf ering  with implant  placement  and one core from  
the implant  osteotomy  site. When  obtaining  the core from  the implant  osteotomy  site, 
at least 8mm  in length  of the grafted  bone  will be included  in the core.  The trephines  
are marked  at 8mm,10mm,13mm,15mm.The  core samples  will be kept in the trephine  
in 10% buffered  formalin,  coded  and mailed  to the laboratory  for the histomorpho-
metric  analysis.   
2. The alveolar  ridge  will be prepared  for implant  placement,  in accordance  with the 
conventional  surgical  protocol,  and implants  of appropriate  dimensions  will be placed.  
 
14 Immediately  after insertion  the stability  of the implants  will be recorded  by measuring  
the ISQ values.  
3. Post-operative  care instructions  will be provided  as described  previously.  
4. Appropriate  healing  time for the implants  will be allowed  for osseointegration,  and 
definitive  restorative  prostheses  will be constructed  accordingly.  
 
Confidentiality:  
            All patient ’s data  will be collected  as part  of standard  care,  stored  dental  record.   
Bone  samples  sent  to the outside  laboratory  will be coded.   The list will be stored  in a 
locked  cabinet  or locked  office.  All information  provided  to the Principal  Investigator  by 
SigmaGraft,  Inc, or their  designates  including  non -clinical  data,  protocols,  clinical  re-
search  findings,  and verbal  and written  information,  will be kept  strictly  confidential  
and confined  to the clinical  personnel  involved  in conducting  the study.  It is recognized  
that  this information  may  be related  in confidence  to the Ethics  Committee.  In addition,  
no reports  or information  about  the study  or its progress  will be provided  to anyone  not 
involved  in the study  other  than  to SigmaGraft,  Inc. or their  designates.  
   
Histology  / MicroCT  assessment  
The trephine  with  the retrieved  specimens  will be placed  in 10%  neutral  buffered  
formalin.   Each  specimen  will be labeled  and packaged  in an individual  container,  which  
will then  be numerically  coded  to keep  the patient’s  information  confidential  and exam-
 
15 iners  will be blinded.  Specimens  (40)  will be sent  to the Hard  Tissue  Research  Labora-
tory,  University  of Minnesota  School  of Dentistry  for histomorphometric  analysis.   Or 
the specimens  will be analysed  by using  a MicroCT  at the university  of Loma  Linda,  cen-
ter for radiation  research.  The microCT  will give  us digital  reconstruction  of the 3D 
structure  of the core  material.  This  will be analysed  for new  bone  formation,  amount  of 
graft  material  remaining,  interaction  between  the graft  and the patient’ s native  bone.  
Non -decalcified  histologic  processing  and  histomorphometric  analysis  include  
the followings:  
-Dehydration  and infiltration  with  resin.  
-Retrieval  of the core  specimen  from  the trephine  with  as much  care  as possible  at a 
specific  point  during  infiltration  with  resin.  
-Embedding  in specialized  Kulzer  7200  light  polymerizing  resin.  
-Preparation  of slides  to 45-50 µm. 
-2 slides  will be made  from  each  of the core  specimens  unless  there  are extenuating  cir-
cumstances  for a specific  specimen  making  it possible  to only  produce  one good  slide. 
-Slides  will be cut in a longitudinal  section  unless  cross  sections  are requested.   
-Staining  of the slides.  
-The specimen  slides  will be stained  with  Stevenel’s  blue  and Van  Gieson’s  picro -fuchsin.   
This  stain  differentially  stains  material  within  the specimens.   Precise  determinations  of 
the percentage  of vital,  non -vital  bone  and non-bone  components  will be conducted  us-
ing computerized  image  analysis.  
 
16 -Vital  bone  stains  bright  red with  variations  in intensity  depending  on the maturity  of 
the bone.  
-Non-vital  bone  and osteoid  stain  bright  green.  
-Nuclei  of cells,  including  osteoblasts,  osteoclasts  and osteocytes,  stain  blue.  
-Connective  tissue  stains  various  shades  of green.  
-Non -biologic  materials  such  as ceramic  material,  hydroxyapatite,  membranes,  etc., are 
not affected  by the stain  and are easily  visualized  and analyzed.  
Two  slides  will be prepared  from  each  core.   Specimens  will be cut vertically  through  
the center  of the core.   
Histomorphometric  analysis:  
All the specimens  will be digitized  at the same  magnification  using  a NIKON  
ECLIPSE  50i microscope  (Nikon  corporation , JAPAN)  and a SPOT  INSIGHT  2 mega  sam-
ple digital  camera  (Diagnostic  instruments  Inc, USA).   Histomorphometric  measure-
ments  will be completed  using  a combination  of SPOT  5.1 Advanced  Software  (Diagnos-
tic instruments  Inc, USA)  and Adobe  Photoshop  (Adobe  Systems,  Inc.).  
The measurements  to be obtained  and presented  in tabular  form  are:  
1. Percentage  of the area of the core,  which  is bone.   Of the bone,  the percentage  of vital 
and non-vital bone  will be determined.  
2. Percentage  of non-bone  material.  (ABBM)  
3. Percenta ge of connective  tissue.  
 
17 The histomorphometric  data  for each  specimen  will be recorded  as the average  of the 2 
slides  from  the specimen.  
 
Statistical  analysis:   
Statistical  package  for the social  science  (SPSS)  version  21(SPSS , IL) computer  
software  will be used  for descriptive  and inferential  statistics  in all parameters.   Descrip-
tive statistics  will be presented  for each  clinical  parameter.   Primary  hypothesis  will be 
analyzed  if it is normally  distributed.  ANCOVA  procedure  will be used  to test the relat ion 
between  the primary  variables  and control  the influences  of the covariates.  Statistical  
significance  is denoted  when  P < .05.   
 
 
Adherence  to Protocol:  
Departure  from  the protocol  will not be permitted  except  for medical  conditions  
that  require  manage ment  not specified  in the protocol.   Changes  in the protocol  may  be 
made  only  by written  amendment  agreed  upon  by the sponsor  and subsequently  ap-
proved  by the Institutional  Review  Board.  
Patient  Withdrawal  and/or  Replacement:  
If a subject  decides  to withdraw  from  the study  prior  to sinus  augmentation,  this 
individual  will be replaced  with  another  subject.   If a perforation  of the sinus  membrane  
(> 5 mm)  occurs  during  the surgical  procedure,  the site will be closed  and the augmen-
tation  procedure  will be aborted.   This  individual  will be replaced  with  another  subject.   
 
18 If a subject  is withdrawn  from  the study  following  sinus  augmentation,  all data  associ-
ated  with  this individual  will be reported  but not included  in the final  results  and analy-
sis.  If the subject  is unable  to attend  the required  post -operative  sessions  or is uncoop-
erative,  this individual  may  be dismissed  from  the study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References:  
 
1. Jensen  OT, Shulman  LB, Block  MS, Iacono  VJ. Report  of the Sinus  Consensus  Confer-
ence of 1996.  Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants.  1998;13:11 -45. 
2. Del Fabbro  M, Testori  T, Francetti  L, Weinstein  R. Systemic  review  of survival  rates  for 
implants  placed  in the grafted  maxillary  sinus.  Int. J Periodontics  Restorative  Dent.  
2004;24:565 –577. 
3. Wallace  SS, Froum  SJ. Effect  of maxillary  sinus  augmentation  on the survival  of endos-
seous  dental  implants.  A systemic  review.  Ann Periodontol.  2003;8:328 –343. 
4. Esposito  M, Grusovin  MG, Coulthard  P, Worthington  HV. The efficacy  of various  bone  
augmentation  procedures  for dental  implants:  a Cochrane  systematic  review  of random-
ized controlled  clinical  trials.  Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants.  2006;21:696 –710. 
5.  Boyne  PJ, James  RA. Grafting  of the maxillary  sinus  floor  with autogenous  marrow  and 
bone.  J Oral Surg.  1980;38:613 –616. 
6. Hirsch  JM, Ericsson  I. Maxillary  sinus  augmentation  using  mandibular  bone  grafts  and 
simultaneous  installation  of implants.  A surgical  technique.  Clin Oral Implants  Res. 
1991;2:91 -96. 
7. Summers  RB. A new concept  in maxillary  implant  surgery:  the osteotome  technique.  
Compendium.  1994;15:152,154 -156,158.  
8. van den Bergh  JP, ten Bruggenkate  CM, Krekeler  G, Tuinzing  DB. Maxillary  sinusfloor  
elevation  and grafting  with human  demineralized  freeze  dried  bone.  Clin Oral Implants  
Res. 2000;11:487 -493. 
 
19 9. Kent  JN, Block  MS. Simultaneous  maxillary  sinus  floor  bone  grafting  and placement  of 
hydroxylapatite -coated  implants.  J Oral Maxillofac  Surg.  1989;47:238 -242. 
10. Wood  RM, Moore  DL. Grafting  of the maillary  sinus  with intraorally  harvested  auto- 
genous  bone  prior  to implant  placement.  Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants.  1988;3:209 –214. 
11. Johansson  B, Grepe  A, Wannfors  K, Hirsch  JM. A clinical  study  of changes  in the volume  
of bone  grafts  in the atrophic  maxilla.  Dentomaxillof ac Radiol.  2001;30:157 -161. 
12. Cordaro  L, Amad é DS, Cordaro  M. Clinical  results  of alveolar  ridge  augmentation  with 
mandibular  block  bone  grafts  in partially  edentulous  patients  prior  to implant  placement.  
Clin Oral Implants  Res. 2002;13:103 -111. 
13. Esposito  M, Grusovin  MG, Coulthard  P, Worthington  HV. The efficacy  of various  bone  
augmentation  procedures  for dental  implants:  a Cochrane  systematic  review  of random-
ized controlled  clinical  trials . Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants.  2006;21: 696-710. 
14. Jensen  SS, Terheyden  H. Bone  augmentation  procedures  in localized  defects  in the alve-
olar ridge:  clinical  results  with different  bone  grafts  and bone -substitute  materials.  Int J 
Oral Maxillofac  Implants.  2009;24:218 -236. 
15. Nkenke  E, Stelzle  F. Clini cal outcomes  of sinus  floor  augmentation  for implant  place-
ment  using  autogenous  bone  or bone  substitutes:  a systematic  review.  Clin Oral Implants  
Res. 2009;20:124 -133. 
16. Cordaro  L, Bosshardt  DD, Palattella  P, Rao W, Serino  G, Chiapasco  M. Maxillary  sinus  
grafting  with Bio-Osss  or Straumann  Bone  Ceramic:  histomorphometric  results  from  a 
randomized  controlled  multicenter  clinical  trial . Clin Oral Implants  Res. 2008;19:796 -
803. 
17. Froum  SJ, Wallace  SS, Cho SC, Elian  N, Tarnow  DP. Histomorphometric  comparison  of 
a biphasic  bone  ceramic  to anorganic  bovine  bone  for sinus  augmentation:  6- to 8-month  
postsurgical  assessment  of vital bone  formation.  A pilot study.  Int J Periodontics  Restor-
ative  Dent.  2008;28:273 -281. 
18. Froum  SJ, Wallace  SS, Elian  N, Cho SC, Tarnow  DP. Comparison  of mineralized  can-
cellous  bone  allograft  (Puros)  and anorganic  bovine  bone  matrix  (Bio-Oss) for sinus  aug-
mentation:  histomorphometry  at 26 to 32 weeks  after grafting.  Int J Periodontics  Restor-
ative  Dent.  2006;26:543 -551. 
19. Froum,  S.J., Tarnow,  D.P.,  Wallace,  S.S., Rohrer,  M.D.  & Cho,  S.C. Sinus  floor  elevation  
using  anorganic  bovine  bone  matrix  (OsteoGraf/N)  with and without  autogenous  bone:  a 
clinical,  histologic,  radiographic,  and histomorphometric  analysis -- part 2 of an ongoing  
prospective  study.  Int J Periodontics  Restorative  Dent.  1998;18:528 –543. 
20. Valentini  P, Abensur  D, Wenz  B, Peetz  M, Schenfe  R. Sinus  Grafting  with Porous  Bone  
Mineral  (Bio-Oss) for Implant  Placement:  a 5-Year  Study  on 15 Patients.  Int J Periodon-
tics Restorative  Dent.  2000;20:245 -253. 
 
20 21. Yildirim  M, Spiekermann  H, Handt  S, Edelhoff  D. Maxillary  sinus  augmentation  with 
the xenograft  Bio-Oss and autogenous  intraoral  bone  for qualitative  improvement  of the 
implant  site: a histologic  and histomorphometric  clinical  study  in humans.  Int J Oral Max-
illofac  Implants.  2001;16:23 –33. 
22. Galindo -Moreno  P, Avila  G, Fernández -Barbero  JE, Aguilar  M, Sánchez -Fernández  E, 
Cutando  A, Wang  HL. Evaluation  of sinus  floor  elevation  using  a composite  bone  graft  
mixture.  Clin Oral Implants  Res. 2007;18:376 -382. 
23. Choi  KS, Kan JY, Boyne  PJ, Goodacre  CJ, Lozada  JL, Rungcharassaeng  K. The effects  
of resorbable  membrane  on human  maxillary  sinus  graft:  a pilot study.  Int. J Oral Maxil-
lofac  Implants.  2009;24:73 -80. 
24. Jensen  T, Schou  S, Stavropoulos  A, Terheyden  H, Holmstrup  P. Maxillary  sinus  floor  
augmentation  with Bio-Oss or Bio-Oss mixed  with autogenous  bone  as graft:  a systematic  
review.  Clin Oral Implants  Res. 2012;23:263 -273. 
25. Minichetti  JC, D'Amore  JC, Hong  AY, Cleveland  DB. Human  histologic  analysis  of min-
eralized  bone  allograft  (Puros)  placement  before  implant  surgery.  J Oral Implantol.  
2004;30:74 -82. 
26. Ten Heggeler  JM, Slot DE, Van der Weijden  GA. Effect  of socket  preservation  therapies  
following  tooth extraction  in non-molar  regions  in humans:  a systematic  review.  Clin 
Oral Implants  Res. 2011;22:779 -788. 
27. Beck  TM, Mealey  BL. Histologic  analysis  of healing  after tooth  extraction  with ridge  
preservation  using  mineralized  human  bone  allograft.  J Period ontol.  2010;81:1765 -1772.   
28. Noumbissi  SS, Lozada  JL, Boyne  PJ, Rohrer  MD,  Clem  D, Kim JS, Prasad  H. Clinical,  
histologic,  and histomorphometric  evaluation  of mineralized  solvent -dehydrated  bone  al-
lograft  (Puros)  in human  maxillary  sinus  grafts.  J Oral Impla ntol. 2005;31:171 -179. 
29. Annibali  S, Cristalli  MP, La Monaca  G, Bignozzi  I, Scarano  A, Corrado  R, Lo Muzio  L.  
Human  maxillary  sinuses  augmented  with mineralized,  solvent -dehydrated  bone  allo-
graft:  a longitudinal  case series . Implant  Dent.  2011;20:445 -454. 
30. Kim TI, Chung  CP, Heo MS, Park YJ, Rhee  SH. Periodontal  regeneration  capacity  of 
equine  particulate  bone  in canine  alveolar  bone  defects.  J Periodontal  Implant  Sci. 
2010;40:220 -226.  
31. Schwarz  F, Ferrari  D, Balic  E, Buser  D, Becker  J, Sager  M. Lateral  ridge  augmentation  
using  equine - and bovine -derived  cancellous  bone  blocks:  a feasibility  study  in dogs.  Clin 
Oral Implants  Res. 2010;21:904 -912. 
32. Nevins  M, Nevins  ML, Karimbux  N, Kim SW, Schupbach  P, Kim DM. The Combination  
of Purified  Recombina nt Human  Platelet -Derived  Growth  Factor -BB and Equine  Partic-
ulate  Bone  Graft  for Periodontal  Regeneration.  J Periodontol.  2012;83:565 -573. 
 
21 33. Tetè S, Vinci  R, Zizzari  VL, Zara S, La Scala  V, Cataldi  A, Gherlone  E, Piattelli  A. 
Maxillary  sinus  augmentation  procedures  through  equine -derived  biomaterial  or calvaria  
autologous  bone:  immunohistochemical  evaluation  of OPG/RANKL  in humans.  Eur J 
Histochem.  2013;57:e10,   
 
 