Permission to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
 Page 1 of 7 
  
 
IRB Approval  Period  
  HRPP  Revision Date: September 17, 2015   
University at Buffalo  Institutional Review Board ( UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room 5018  
875 Ellicott St. | Buffalo, NY 142 03 
UB Federalwide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824   
Title of research study: Adult Consent to Participate in the Research 
Study: Prevena  Incision Management System  versus Dermabond in the 
Prevention of  Groin Wound Infections in Patients Who Undergo Vascular 
Surgery  
Version Date: [insert  a version date here corresponding to the date of submission  to the IRB ] 
Investigator: Linda M. Harris, MD, FACS  
Why am I being invited to take part in a research study ? 
You are being invited to take part in a research study because  you are scheduled to have surgery on 
one or more of your blood vessels that will require your surgeon to make an incision (cut) in your 
groin area to perform the operation.   
What should I know about a research study ? 
 Someone will explain this research stu dy to you.  
 Whether or not you take part is up to you.  
 You can choose not to take part.  
 You can agree to take part and later change your mind . 
 Your decision  will not be held against you . 
 You can ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
Who can I talk to ? 
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you , talk to the research 
team at  [Insert  contact information for the research team ]. You may  also contact  the research 
participant advocate at 716-888-4845 or researchadvocate@buffalo.edu .  
This research has been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board  (“IRB”) . You may 
talk to them at (716) 888-4888 or email ub-irb@buffalo.edu    
 if:  
 You have questions about your rights as a participant in this research  
 Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
 You cannot reach the research team.  
 You want to talk to someone besides t he research team.  
 You want to get information or provide input about this research.  

Permission to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
 Page 2 of 7 
  
 
IRB Approval  Period  
  HRPP  Revision Date: September 17, 2015  Why is this research  being  done ? 
This research study is being done to evaluate the ability of two commonly used wound care treatments 
(Prevena Incision Management System or Dermabond) in preventing infections of a surgical groin 
incision in patients who have vascular surgery  (an operation on blood vessels) .  We will also evaluate 
the cost of each treatment.  Information from this study will help surgeons to make better decis ions 
regarding which treatment can best prevent infection .  Answers from this study can potentially save 
future patients the time and hardship associated with the additional care necessary to treat wound 
infections and may possibly lower health care costs by reducing or eliminating the expenses that arise 
from treating infections.  
How long will the research last ? 
We expect that you wil l be in this research study until your first postoperative visit with your surgeon 
or his/her designee which should be between 25 -40 days following your operation.  
How many people will be studied?  
We expect about 140 people in this research study . Half will be treated with Prevena  Incision 
Management System  and the other half will be treated with Dermabond.   
What happens i f I say yes, I want to be in this research ? 
If you agree to be a part of this study , your surgeon will perform the operation on your blood vessels 
exactly as if you were not part of the study. At the end of your operation, the treatment used to prevent 
infection of your groin incision will be chosen by chance, like flipping a coin  instead of by your 
surgeon . Each of these treatment s is commonly used and the surgeons participating in this study have 
had much experience with both . Your chances of getting Prevena  Incision Management System  or 
Dermbond will be equal. Both you and your surgeon will know which tre atment you received. Prevena  
is Incision Management S ystem  is made up of a dressing  that is placed on the incision to cover and 
protect it from  bacteria in the surrounding area . The dressing is connected with a small tube to a 
lightweight battery powered remote which creates a vacuum like seal that helps  to remove any fluids 
from the incision which can cause infection . The Prevena Incision Management S ystem must be used 
for at least 4 days. If the Prevena device is used on your incision,  your nurse will take care of it w hile 
you are in the hospital.  If you are discharged before  Prevena is removed , you and  a family member or 
helper will be instructed on how to care for the device as well as given written instructions.  This is 
currently standard of care for patients who receive this dressing. Dermabond is a  surgical glue placed 
on the incision to hold it together  and prevent infection . It is used instead of skin stitche s, and has a 
coating that fights bacteria and is water resistan t.  Your care in the hospital after your operation will be 
exactly the same as if you were not part of the study. No additional bloo d work or testing will be 
required because of being in the study  and the length of your hospital stay will not be affected. If you 
should develop infection of your groin incision , your surgeon will have full control in decid ing the 
necessary testing and treatment. As a part of standard care , you will  see your surgeon between 25 -40 
days following your surgery to check your incis ion for healing and to evaluate your operation . No 
additional testing or treatment will be required because of your involvement in the study. This visit 
will complete your participation  in this research project . Information from your hospital medical and 
financial record  including past medical history, operation  details , postoperative care, cost and 
Permission to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
 Page 3 of 7 
  
 
IRB Approval  Period  
  HRPP  Revision Date: September 17, 2015  reimbursement  will be gathered by a study coordinator as well as information from your follow -up 
visit.  This will be entered into a password protected database  which will be kept in a locked office. 
Your protected health information and hospital financial records will not be persona lly identified in the 
data base .  All research team members will have access to this data on an as needed basis.  
What are my respons ibilities if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this research  and are chosen to receive The Prevena  Incision Management S ystem, 
you, a family member or helper  may be responsible  for caring for the device if you are discharged 
from the hospit al before the device is  ready to be  removed. If this happens, you and your family/helper 
will be taught how to care for the device, given written instructions and the name and number of a 
contact person should you have any questions regarding the device wh ile you are at home .  
What happens if I do not want to be in this research?  
Your participation in this research study is completely voluntary. You may cho ose not to enroll in this 
study and it will not affect the care that you receive. At the completion of  your operation, your surgeon 
will decide which wound treatment to use rather than the decision being made by chance.  
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can change your mind right up to the time that your surgery is to be completed and it will not be 
held against you.  Your care will be the same regardless of your participat ion in the study and there will  
be no consequence of withdrawing. If the Prevena Incisio n Manageme nt System has been used, you 
have the right at any time following surgery to ask that it be removed after thorough discussion with 
your surgeon. Premature removal of the system may be associated with increased risk of infection.  
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me ? 
  Both Prevena  Incision Management System  and Derma bond are current wound treatments  that are 
used commonly to prevent infection of surgical incisions, so the risks of particip ating in this study 
beyond those routin ely associated with an operation on blood vessels requiring groin incision are 
minimal. There are no additional psychological, legal, social or economic risks associated with this 
study. Taking part in this research study will lead to no additional costs t o you .  You and your 
insurance company will be charged for the health care services that you would ordinarily be 
responsible to pay. Allergic reaction which is uncommon for either Prevena  Incision Management 
system or Dermabond may be a potential risk. T o minimize this risk you will not be able to participate 
if you have a  known allergy to adhesives, formald ehyde, cyancoacetate or silver. Loss of 
privacy/ confidentiality  is an unlikely  but possible risk . We will take every effort to assure 
confidentiality.  You will be assigned a study number which we will use to identify all i nformation that 
we collect about you. This  information will be recorded on a case report form  and kept in a locked 
cabinet . Your name and other identifying information will not be put o n the case report form.  
However, your name and other identifying information such as your medical record number, hospital 
account number, hospital discharge date and research study number will be placed on a list to help us  
collect your information corre ctly (for example: to make sure that information from your hospital stay 
is coordinated with information from your follow -up visit with your surgeon). We will keep this list in 
a separate locked cabinet in the study coordinator’s office. Information that w e collect will also be 
Permission to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
 Page 4 of 7 
  
 
IRB Approval  Period  
  HRPP  Revision Date: September 17, 2015  entered  into database on a password protected computer  in the coordinator’s office which will remain 
locked when not in use.  
Will being in this study help me in any way ? 
We cannot promise any benefits to you from your taking part in  this research. However,  information 
obtained from this study may help to determine the best way to prevent infection of groin incisions 
after surgery.  This  may benefit you if you require future surgery on the blood vessels in the groin, and 
would benefit  future patients , surgeons  and hospitals by limiting the time, expense and hardship 
associated with treating groin infections.  
What happens to the information collect ed for the research ? 
Efforts will be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal  inform ation, including your 
hospital medical  and financial records  and surgeon office record , to people who have a need to review 
this information . We cannot promise complete  privacy . Monitors or auditors  from the sponsor  
(Acelity) , the Institutional Review Board ( IRB), will be granted direct access to your medical records 
to conduct and oversee the research. By signing this document you are authorizing this access.  We may 
publish the results of this research. However, we will keep your name and other identifying 
information confidential . A description of this clinical trial will be available on 
http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information 
that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a s ummary of the results. You can se arch this 
Web site at any time.  Federal law provides additional protections of your medical records and related 
health information . These are described in  the HIPAA section of this  document.  
Can I be removed from the resear ch without my OK ? 
 Although unlikely , the principal investigator  of the study can remove you from the research study 
without your approval. Possible reasons for removal would include your failure to see your surgeon for 
follow -up within 25 -40 days after your operation.  
What else do I need to know?    
This research is being funded by Acelity the company that makes the Prevena Incision Management 
System. Although it is very unlikely that you would be injured from taking part in this study, it is 
important th at you tell your study doctor if you feel that you have been injured because of participating 
in this study.  You can tell the doctor in person or call.  You will get medical treatment if you are 
injured as a result of taking part in this study.  Your study  doctor will explain the treatment options to 
you and tell yo u where you can get treatment. Generally, this care will be billed to you, your insurance 
or other third party . Buffalo General Medical Center, Kaleida Health  has no program to pay for 
medical ca re for research -related injury.   
You will not be paid for participating in this study.  
 If you are interested in learning the results of the study you may contact the study coordinator . This 
study is expected to take place during 2016. Results are not li kely to be available until June of  2017.    
 
Permission to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
 Page 5 of 7 
  
 
IRB Approval  Period  
  HRPP  Revision Date: September 17, 2015  HIPAA:  Authorization for the Use and Disclosure of Identifiable Health 
Information for Research Purposes   
This section describes information about you and about your health that will be obtained by the 
researchers when you participate in the research study. Health information is considered 
"protected health information" when it may directly identify you as an individual. By signing this 
form you are agreeing to permit the researchers and/or other parties  (described in detail below) to 
have access to this information. If there are any parts of this form that you do not understand, 
please be sure to ask us for further clarification.  
 
A. What protected health information will be collected about you as part of this research 
study?  
 
            Information from your full medical records  such as but not limited to your past medical 
history, current medications, type of operation performed, postoperative course 
including assessment of your groin incision for healin g, use of antibiotics,  length of stay 
in the hospital and if infection shoul d occur , treatment that was provided during and 
after your hospitalization (up to 40 days following your operation).  
 
            Information from your hospital financial record su ch as but not limited to the total cost 
of your hospital stay, breakdown of costs such as the cost of your operation, nursing 
care, tests o r procedures which may be  complete d, costs of antibiotics, cost of Prevena 
Incision Management System or Dermabond.  The amount of r eimbursement the 
hospital received from your insurer will also be collected.  
B.    Who is authorized to provide or collect this information?  
___√__   KALEIDA Health, Buffalo NY  
___       Principal Investigator or designee  
 
 
C.   With whom may your protected health information be shared?  
 
Your health information may be shared with others outside of the research group for purposes 
directly related to the conduct of this research study or as required by law, including but not 
limited to:  
___√__  Clinical staff not involved in this research study who may become involved in your 
care if it is potentially relevant to your treatment  
___√__  The sponsor of this research study Acelity or its agents  
  
Your information may also be shar ed with individuals or entities responsible for general 
administration, oversight and compliance of research activities. Examples of this include the 
institution's Privacy and Security Officers or other internal oversight staff, Safety Monitoring 
Boards, a n Institutional Review Board, The Research Foundation of the State University of 
New York, University at Buffalo Foundation Services, and accrediting bodies, or with certain 
government oversight agencies that have authority over the research including the Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the National 
Permission to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
 Page 6 of 7 
  
 
IRB Approval  Period  
  HRPP  Revision Date: September 17, 2015  Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP). Your 
information may also be shared with other entities as permitted or req uired by law.  All 
reasonable efforts will be used to protect the confidentiality of your individually identifiable 
health information that may be shared with others as described above.  
 
 
D.  How long will this information be kept by the Principal Investiga tor? 
           √  This authorization will expire at the end of the resear ch study. After that time ,   
authorization may not be used to acquire additional information about you.  
 
E.  What are your rights after signing this authorization?  
 
You have the right to revoke this authorization at any time. If you withdraw your authorization, 
no additional efforts to collect individually identifiable health information about you will be 
made. You should know, however, that protected health information acquired u sing this 
authorization prior to its withdrawal may continue to be used to the extent that the 
investigator(s) have already relied on your permission to conduct the research. If you chose to 
withdraw this authorization, you must do so in writing to the fol lowing individual(s):  
[Insert name and address of individual or position associated with the research study that will be 
responsible for handling such requests.]  
 
If you send us a request to withdraw your authorization, we will forward that request to the 
institutions we have shared it with in order to collect your individually identifiable health 
information.  
 
F.  What will happen if you decide not to sign this authorization?  
 
Refusing to sign this authorization will not affect the present or future care you receive at this 
institution and will not cause any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise 
entitled. If you decide not to sign this authorization, you will not be able to participate in the 
research study.  You will likely receive either  the Dermabond or the Preveena, but no data will 
be gathered on the outcomes from your incisions.   
  
Permission to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
 Page 7 of 7 
  
 
IRB Approval  Period  
  HRPP  Revision Date: September 17, 2015   
Signature Blo ck for Capable Adult  
Your signature documents  your permission to take part in this research . By signing this form you are 
not waiving any of  your legal rights, including the right to seek compensation for injury related to 
negligence or misconduct of those involved in the research.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date  
  
Printed n ame of subject  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 