 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 1 of 19 
 
 
NCT Number - [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
   
Title of the Study:
 
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropylor oduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers: A Sham Device Controlled, 
Single Center Pilot Study 
  
 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 2 of 19 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Background  
The VIBRANT capsule is a novel vibrating device fo r the treatment of gastro intestinal disorders. 
The effect of different vibrations  on the motor functions of the ga strointestinal tract are unclear. 
The study will focus on the stom ach in healthy volunteers.  
 
Hypothesis 
VIBRANT capsule treatment results in accelera tion of gastric emptying and stimulation of 
gastric motility in  healthy volunteers.  
Aim 
To compare the effects of VIBRANT capsule tr eatment and SHAM capsule  treatment on gastric 
emptying and gastric motility  in healthy volunteers.  
Methods 
We shall perform simultaneous  antropyloroduodenal manometry and scintigraphic gastric 
emptying of solids in 24 healt hy volunteers, 6 volunteers per treatment arm with VIBRANT 
capsule programmed to deliver 0, 1, 3 or 5 vibrat ions per minute for a period of 4 hours starting 
15 minutes after ingestion. This is a pilot study to evaluate po tential effects of the VIBRANT 
capsule on stimulation of gastric motor functions. 
 
Significance 
This study will provide new info rmation about the ability of the VIBRANT capsule to impact 
contractility in the stomach and will determine if specific vibrations patterns result in different 
contractile activity.  
In addition, this study will form the foundation for subsequent a pplication of this method for 
treatment of motility and functional disorders of the lower stomach, particularly in patients with 
gastroparesis.   
 
   
 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 3 of 19 
 
 
 
Research Plan 
 
HYPOTHESES AND SPECIFIC AIM 
 
Hypothesis 
VIBRANT capsule treatment results in accelera tion of gastric emptying and stimulation of 
gastric motility in  healthy volunteers.  
Aim 
To compare the effects of th ree different VIBRANT capsule treatment modes (1, 3 and 5 
vibrations per minute) and SHAM capsule treatment on gastric empt ying and gastric motility in 
healthy volunteers. 
 
BACKGROUND  
The VIBRANT capsule’s mechanism of action is st ill unknown, as well as th e effect of different 
vibration patterns. This study will test for th e first time the hypothesis that the VIBRANT 
capsule effects contractility and analyze the e ffects of different vibration pattern on stomach 
contractility. 
Furthermore, there is conti nued unmet need for effective treatments for patients with 
gastroparesis (1).  
 
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS    
Study Design 
This is a randomized, double- blind, sham-controlled, parallel -group pilot study. Twenty-four 
healthy volunteers will be recrui ted, enrolled, and randomized to  one of 4 treatment groups.  
Subjects meeting all inclusion/exclusion criteria w ill be randomized to either sham VIBRANT or 
vibrating VIBRANT capsule at rates of 1, 3 or 5 per minute. The actual studies will be conducted 
on one day. 
 
 Participants 
Male and female subjects, aged  18 to 65 years at screening, w ho meet the following inclusion 
and exclusion criteria will be eligible for enrollment: 
Inclusion criteria  
1. Able to provide written informed consent pr ior to any study proce dures, and be willing 
and able to comply with study procedures 
2. No medical problems or chronic diseases, specifically, no type 2 diabetes mellitus 
 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 4 of 19 
 
 
3. Body mass index of 18-35 kg/m2 
4. Female subjects must have nega tive urine pregnancy tests and must not be lactating prior 
to receiving study medication a nd radiation exposure.  For fe males able to bear children, 
a hormonal (i.e., oral, implantable, or inject able) and single-barrier  method, or a double-
barrier method of birth cont rol must be used throughout the study.  Female subjects 
unable to bear children must have this doc umented in the medical  record [i.e., tubal 
ligation, hysterectomy, or post-me nopausal (defined as a min imum of one year since the 
last menstrual period)].   
Exclusion criteria  
1. Unable or unwilling to provide informed cons ent or to comply with study procedures 
2. Diagnosis of gastroin testinal diseases 
3. Structural or metabolic diseases that affect the GI system 
4. Unable to avoid the followi ng over-the-counter medications 48 hours prior to the baseline 
period and throughout the study: 
a.  Medications that alter GI  transit including laxatives, magn esium and aluminum containing 
antacids, prokinetic s, erythromycin  
b.  Analgesic drugs including NS AIDs and COX-2 inhibitors 
NOTE:  stable doses of thyroid replacement,  estrogen replacement, low-dose aspirin for 
cardioprotection, and birth control (but with adequate backup cont raception as drug-interactions 
with birth control have not been conducted) are pe rmissible.   
5. History of recent surgery (with in 60 days of screening) 
6. Acute or chronic illness or history of illness which, in the opinion of the investigator, 
could pose a threat or harm to  the subject or obscure interp retation of laboratory test 
results or interpretation of study data, such as  frequent angina, Cla ss III or IV congestive 
heart failure, moderate impa irment of renal or hepatic function, poorly controlled 
diabetes, etc. 
7. Any clinically signi ficant abnormalities on physical  examination or laboratory 
abnormalities identified in the medical r ecord, as determined by the investigator 
8. Acute GI illness within 48 hours of initiation of the baseline period 
9. Females who are pregnant or breastfeeding 
10. History of excessive alcohol  use or substance abuse 
11. Participation in an investigational study within the 30 days prior to dosing in the present 
study 
12. Any other reason, which in th e opinion of the investig ator, would confound proper 
interpretation of the study 
 
 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 5 of 19 
 
 
Gastric Motility Studies 
 
Participants will come to the Clinical Research  Unit on the 7th floor of the Charlton Building at 
Mayo Clinic. They will arrive fasting, at a pr edetermined scheduled appointment time. A urine 
pregnancy test will be performe d, when applicable, within 48 hour s of the start of the test.   
 
Following an overnight fast, subjects will unde rgo introduction of the multilumen manometric 
catheter into the pr oximal small intestin e with sensors across the antroduodenal junction. Trained 
technologist (DB) and staff physician (MC) w ill perform the manometry  tube placement in 
accordance with standard practice over the past 25 years. A 4-meter Teflon® (green) guidewire 
and manometry tube will be pla ced transnasally and advanced in to the duodenum with the distal 
end of the manometry tube with in the distal duodenum or prox imal jejunum. The position of the 
manometry tube will be verified using fluoroscopy  to ensure that the 12 manometric sensors that 
are 1 cm apart are located acr oss the antropyloroduode nal junction.  Following placement of the 
manometry tube a 30 minute baselin e motility assessment will be performed followed by the first 
of two VIBRANT OR SHAM VIBRANT CAPS ULES will be administered as randomly 
assigned.  Motility assessment will be performed  for an additional 25- 30 minutes before the 
digestion of the standardized br eakfast test meal.  A single sp ot image will be obtained to 
document the location of the capsule prior to the meal. 
 
Approximately thirty minutes following inges tion of the capsule, subjects will ingest a 
standardized breakfast meal ( 320kcal egg, toast, milk) containing 99mTc. Anterior and posterior 
gamma camera images will be obta ined immediately following inge stion of the meal and every 
15 minutes until 240 minutes.  In addition, ever y 30 minutes one hundred millimeter Visual 
analog scales (VAS) will be recorded to assess levels of nausea, fullness, gas, and abdominal 
pain.  Subjects will be seated in a semi-r ecumbant position (~45 degr ees) for recording of 
motility and obtaining anterior  scintigraphy images, simultane ously.  Following the 90 minute 
scan the subject will ingest a second active VIBRANT or sham cap sule.  Subsequent scans will 
continue at scheduled interval s until 240 minutes afte r the test meal ingestion in order to 
complete the assessment of gastric emptying.  At the conclusion, the subject will be escorted to 
the fluoroscopy room for a spot image to document the location of  both capsules.  Following the 
spot image, the multilumen manometric cathet er will be removed and the subjects will be 
dismissed.  The total duration of the study is ~6 hours.  Subjects will leave the study center at the 
end of the study. 
  
Transit Data Analysis 
 
A variable region of interest pr ogram is used to quantitate th e counts in stomach.  These counts 
will be corrected for isotope decay, and tissue attenuation. 
 
Data will be analyzed as in previous studies  using geometric mean of counts in stomach.  
 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 6 of 19 
 
 
 
Gastric Motility 
See Appendix Radiation Exposure for assessment of  radiation exposure levels from fluoroscopy. 
Each of the channels of the multi-lumen manometric 
tube will be perfused w ith distilled water via a 
pneumohydraulic pump (perfusion rate 0.15mL/min, perfusion pressure 14psi) and attached to a strain gauge 
transducer (model PX-MK099, Edwards Lifesciences, 
Irvine, CA.). One side openi ng has been made in each 
channel of the multi-lumen tube, and the positions of 
these openings will be fluoroscopically placed across the antroduodenal region; thus, the tip of the tube will lie within approximately 10cm of the ligament of Treitz.  Gastrointestinal pressure activity will be recorded in each subject for 1 hour while fasted. Then, each individual will ingest a 320-calorie mixed solid-liquid meal consisting of 2 eggs, bran bread toast, and 240mL 
of skim milk.   
Pressure activity will be r ecorded for 5 hours (2) while 
participants are seated at a 45 degree angle. 
   
Figure 2 shows an example of the inhibition of post prandial antral motility and forces with lipid 
and stimulation by erythromycin (3).  
 
Figure 1. Multi-lumen manometric 
assembly in the upper gastrointestinal tract to measure distal antral motility in postprandial period 
 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 7 of 19 
 
 
Antral pressure activity determines the rate of gastric emptying of solids.  
Figure 3 shows a correlation between distal antral  contraction amplitude and rate of gastric 
emptying (3).  
 
 
Analysis of Manometric Recordings  
Phasic pressure activity in the distal antrum  recorded on the manomet ric tracing will be 
quantified manually. The  most distal antral site w ill be identified as a site recording up to three 
waves per minute which are (a) just  proximal (1 cm) to a site r ecording duodenal-type waves or 
(b) just proximal to a site e xhibiting a mixture of antral-type and duodenal-type waves associated 
with baseline elevation (pyloric-type activity).  For each sequential 15-minute period and for the 
entire 2-hour postcibal period, a motility index (M I) will be calculated using the formula: MI = 
loge (sum of amplitude x number of contractions + 1). The aver age 15-minute antral motility 
index will be then calculated; previous studies have shown that the cumulated slope of antral 
motility indices is linear (4).  
 Statistical Analysis 
for analysis will be: primary endpointsThe 
 
a. Gastroduodenal manometry (GDM) measurement of first hour pos tprandial distal antral 
motility index. 
b. Gastric emptying of solids:T 1/2 and lag time in minutes 
 
will be: secondary endpointsThe  
a. Gastric emptying at 1h  
b. Gastric emptying  at 2h  
c. First 0.5h postprandial dist al antral motility index 
d. Abdominal Symptom assessments-VAS 
 
The effects of the VIBRANT CAPSULE treatme nt on the primary and secondary response 
measures will be assessed using an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with suitable transformation for skewness in the distributi ons of measured para meters (e.g., ANCOVA on 

 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 8 of 19 
 
 
ranks, if necessary).  The covariates considered for inclusion in the analyses will be age, gender, 
and body mass index.   
 
Administrative look 
 
Administrative look will be done when  12 subjects completed the study.   
The objective of the administrative look is to assist in future de velopment of the medical device  
 
The process:  
1. The study site of Mayo who continue to enroll and assess the HV subjects in the study 
continue to be blinded, thus no treatment assignment is revealed  nor any potential bias may be 
associated with the process. 
2. Sponsor Staff especially the clinical team who communicate with the study site staff will 
continue to be blinded. 
3. The sponsor decision making responsible person, w ill receive the data of the 1st 12 subjects ( 
3 /arm : shame, 1,3 and 5 vibrati ng modes ) will be blinded to s ubject numbers and get the data 
per treatment arm with No  Subjects Identification  
4. Since this analysis is for admi nistrative purposes and No changes to the Clinical Trial Protocol 
will be made as a result of l ooking at the data, the P Value rema in Unadjusted ( does not change)  
5. Descriptive Rather than Inferential analysis. 
 
Sample Size Assessment  
 
Table 1 below summarizes data for the primary response measur es and uses the (relative) 
variation (CV%) to estimate the effect size dete ctable with 80% power based on a two-sample t-
test (i.e., assuming the variation values are known) at a two-side d alpha level of 0.05. The effect 
size is the difference in group means as a percenta ge of the overall mean  for each response and 
assumes 6 subjects per group. The ANCOVA shoul d provide 80% power to detect similar 
(pairwise) differences using a pooled estimate of  variation across all thr ee groups and potentially 
even smaller effect sizes by adju sting for important covariates. The data from the scintigraphic 
transit studies are unpublished, but are based on the same methods pr oposed for this study.  
Sample size assessment is based on the results of primary endpoint s in our laboratory [data show 
mean ± SD). The standard devi ation used for the sample size  calculations was calculated from 
the observed number of distal an tral activity in healthy volunteers in the absence of any 
treatment: 11.5±0.6 (SD) (2,4,5).  
 Table 1.  Primary Response Measures  
 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 9 of 19 
 
 
Response Mean SD Effect size dete ctable, n=4 per group, absolute (%) 
Postprandial distal 
antral MI* 11.5 0.6 1.184 (10.3% change) 
Gastric emptying 
T1/2 (min) 121.7 29.6 58.4 min (48% change) 
 
*Based on data from prev ious studies (2,4-6). 
Effect size is the difference be tween means as a percentage of listed mean index between the two 
treatment groups (shown in table with 80% power, α =0.05). Estimated effect sizes are based on 
a paired t-test with expe cted difference in mean of 1.6 motility index units in dist al antral activity 
or 13.6% change in the antral motility index in ACTIVE compared to SHAM (2,4,5). It is to be 
noted that this is on a logarithmic scale and, th erefore, an 10% change constitutes a clinically 
relevant difference.   
 Clinical or Biological Relevance of Change in Antral Motility Index 
 
The magnitudes of the changes detectable are clini cally relevant or have been observed in prior 
studies using pharmacological agents su ch as cisapride and erythromycin. 
 
Effect of Cisapride on Antral Motility Index 
 
Cisapride resulted in a si gnificant increase in the gastric empt ying of solids (p <0.05) compared 
with placebo, and cisapride also tended to increase the postprandi al antral motility (7). The 
difference in the 2-hour antral motili ty index (median values) was 0.75 units. 
 
Table 2. Postprandial Antral Mot ility Index at 2 Hours (median) 
Gastroparesis group (N) 2-h postprand ial median antral motility index 
Cisapride (6) 13.38 
Placebo (6) 12.63 
There was no effect of placebo on gastric emptying in contrast to the effect of cisapride, and 
these effects on the antral motility index were associated with significant changes in gastric 
emptying (particularl y of solids).   
 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 10 of 19 
 
 
Figure 4 (upper panel) shows median gastric emptying 
plots for placebo treatment (baseline and 6 weeks) in 
subjects with gastroparesis and chronic intestinal pseudo-
obstruction, and healthy cont rols. The lower panel shows 
similar data for the subjec ts receiving placebo, with 
baseline and 6-week data presented. Note that cisapride accelerates gastric emptying.   
 
 
 
  
 
Effect on Gastric Emptying 
is in the clinical range that can 1/2 A 48% change in gastric emptying T
be expected to be relevant, as s hown in studies using gastric emptying 
scintigraphy in patients with diabet es and upper GI symptoms (8).  For 
example, the ghrelin agonist RM-131 has such an effect (54%) on 
1/2 gastric emptying T 
Figure 5 shows an example of gas tric emptying profile from a 
patient with type I diabetes treated on se parate occasions with 
131 (relamorelin) - placebo and RM 
 
Therefore, the effect size demonstrable in th e prioposed study would be  clinically relevant, 
justifying the proposed design and sample si ze in each of the three treatment groups.  
 
Strengths and Limitations 
The major strengths of this st udy include the ability to noninvasively measure gastric emptying, 
as well as the resources available in the Clin ical Research Unit on Charlton 7.  Therefore, 
completion of this study is highl y feasible. We have a well-estab lished track record using these 
techniques in patients with divers e lower gastrointestinal functional disorders in previous studies. 
We have sufficient power to de tect clinically releva nt differences between the treatment groups. 
Variability in body size and weight are accounted for by inclusion as cova riates in the ANCOVA 
analysis of transit parameters.  
Feasibility and Time Frame 
This study involves one noninvasive  gastric transit study with si multaneous antropyloroduodenal 
manometry measurement in healt hy volunteers. The study is feasible .  Based on past experience, 
recruitment of study subject s should be uncomplicated.  

 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 11 of 19 
 
 
 
 Anticipated Results and Significance 
We anticipate that VIBRANT capsule (compared to SHAM) will impact stomach contractility. 
and  
will accelerate gastric emptying. Th is study will form the foundati on for subsequent application 
of this method for treatment of motility and fu nctional disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, 
particularly in subjects  with gastroparesis.   
 
HUMAN SUBJECTS SAFETY  
 
Recruitment and Consenting of Participants and Gender/Minority Mix 
 
Twenty-four  healthy participants will be recrui ted from the local community by public 
advertisement as part of the main study protocol.  
  
Subjects will be recruite d by public advertisement:  
Healthy volunteers, aged 18-65 years, are needed  for a study to evaluate the effect of an 
experimental therapy, VIBRAN T capsule, on movement of the stomach. This study 
requires taking study capsule administered or ally once, and noninvasive gastric emptying 
and tube measured gastric motility on one  occasion. Remuneration offered. For more 
boldingh.amy@mayo.edu 6599 or send email to - information, call Amy Boldingh at 538 
 
Informed consent will be obtained by the princi pal investigator or st udy coordinator following 
both a review of the written consent form and a conversation outlining the risks, benefits, and 
goals of the investigation.  Documentation w ill be recorded with signatures of the study 
participant and the individual obtaining consent (on the standard inform ed consent document).  
This study cohort will reflect th e population of Olmsted County, Minnesota with 90% Caucasian, 
5% Asian and 5% other. Previ ous experience would suggest an age range of volunteers from 18-
65 years, with a mean age of approximately 45 y ears. No subpopulations or special classes of 
subjects are involve d in this trial.  
There are no known ethnic or gend er differences in the effects of VIBRANT CAPSULE.  Hence, 
we anticipate the results of our study will be generalizable.  
 
Research Materials   
Facilities and equipment are available for these studies in the GI Physio logy Core Laboratory of 
the Clinical Research Unit on Charlton 7. All da ta retrieved during the study will be used 
specifically for research purposes. 
 
Potential Risks and Protection in Substudy 
The study involves the use of radiat ion that is within limits perm issible for healthy volunteers.  
The PI has >28 years’ experience with these meth ods. The study device safety to date in healthy 
volunteers has been excellent. 
 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 12 of 19 
 
 
Definitions of adverse event and serious adve rse events are included in the main study.  
 
is within permissible limits for human volunteer studies.  All female  Radiation exposure
participants who are still menstruating and have  not been surgically sterilized will have a 
negative pregnancy test with in 48 hours of the study.   
The table shows the radiation organ dose exposure per radiopharmaceutical dosing for the gastric 
emptying tests.  
  
Radiophar- Act  Body Gonads Breast Red Lung Thyroid Bone ULI Colon Stom Blad  Liv Esoph Other   
maceutical mCi  marrow                    _agus-er  - der   - ach   -                     
 10      220    130   20         420     300                 20                                       1.0          20         90                  s.c. ,Tc99m 
(mrad= radiation absorbed dose to organs) 
to the body summarizes the risk  to the whole body as the  or the radiation effective dosee H
individual doses to each of th e organs; effective dose is used  to compare risks among various 
(mrem = radiation  1.0 mCi, He90 mrem SC,-Tc99mray and radionuclide studies:  - types of x
equivalent dose) 
 
Radiation Exposure from Fluoroscopy  
Average time, <1minute; no more th an 2 minutes will ever be used. 
 
 
All imaging will be undertaken by trained technicians in the labor atory with 30 years’ aggregate 
experience using scintigraphic techniques.  
 
BENEFITS 
 
There are no benefits for participants in this study.  Particip ants may choose not to participate.   
 
STUDY REPORT AND PUBLICATION POLICY 

 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 13 of 19 
 
 
 
After conclusion of the study, the investigator will analyze th e data and write a report for 
publication. The study sponsor will have the opportuni ty to review the study data according to 
the conditions stipulated in the contract developed by Mayo Clinic Legal Department. 
Publication rights are specifically  identified in the contract.  
 
BUDGET (attached)  
Budget Justification 
 
PERSONNEL 
 
will be responsible for the clinical  conduct of the study and overseeing the Dr. M. Camilleri, 
 coordinators and technologists.  
will work under the direction of the site Principal Investigator, Dr. M.  Research fellows
. Camilleri 
) will Rhoten, and Michael Ryks orah Duane Burton, Deb Trained technologists ( : Technologists
be involved in the synthesis of ra dioisotopic materials in the "hot  lab" in the CRU in Charlton 7. 
They will also conduct the acquisition of images. The physiologic testing of this study requires 1 
day of participation per subject; there will be 12 participants. The technologists will be 
responsible for the analysis of  scintigraphy imaging. They will place all data in an EXCEL 
spreadsheet for further analysis. 
Clinical research coordina tors will be responsible for recruiting and scheduling : Coordinators
examination of participants and maintenance of study records (case report forms and symptom 
recordings). These coordinators will notify the PI of any advers e events, maintain records and 
documentation for IRB, and work with study monitors. 
: A biostatistician from the Mayo Clinic Department of Biomedical Statistics Data analyst
requires data analyst support for randomization schedule, "clean up" and final analysis of study 
data in this study. This will be accomplished by one of the analysts assigned to his area in the 
Department of Biostatistics. 
 
  
 Vibrating Capsule  
Effect of VIBRANT Capsule on Gastric 
Emptying and Antropyloroduodenal Motility in 
Healthy Volunteers – Study no. V102  Doc. no.215CLD rev.04  Date: Februar
y 1st, 2016  
Page 14 of 19 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
1.  Camilleri M, Parkman HP, Shafi MA, Abell TL,  Gerson L. Clinical guideline: management 
of gastroparesis. Am J Gastroenterol 108:18-37, 2013  
2.  Camilleri M, Brown ML, et al. Relationshi p between impaired gastri c emptying and abnormal 
gastrointestinal motility. Gastroenterology 91:94-99, 1986  
3.  Prather CM, Camilleri M, Thomforde GM, Forstrom LA, Zinsmeister AR. Gastric axial 
forces in experimentally-delayed and accelerat ed gastric emptying.  Am J Physiol 264:G928-
G934, 1993 
4.  Camilleri M, Malagelada JR, et al. Relation between antral motility and gastric emptying of 
solids and liquids in humans . Am J Physiol 249:G580-G585, 1985  
5.  Camilleri M, Malagelada JR, et al. Gastrointe stinal motility disturbances in patients with 
orthostatic hypotension. Ga stroenterology 88:1852-1859, 1985  
6.  Camilleri M, Iturrino J, et al. Performance characteristics of  scintigraphic measurement of 
gastric emptying of solids in healthy part icipants. Neurogastroenterol Motil 24:1076-e562, 
2012       
7.  Camilleri M, Malagelada JR, Abell TL, Brow n ML, Hench V, Zinsmeister AR. Effect of six 
weeks of treatment with cisapride in gast roparesis and intestinal pseudoobstruction.  
Gastroenterology 96:704-712, 1989 
8. Shin A, Camilleri M, Busciglio I, Burton D, Smith SA, Vella A, Ryks M, Rhoten D, 
Zinsmeister AR.  Ghrelin agoni st RM-131 accelerates gastric emptying of solids and reduces 
symptoms in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus.  Clin Gastro enterol Hepatol 11:1453-1459, 
2013    
 
 