Gabapentin Regimens and Their Effects on Opioid Consumption  
 
A randomized controlled trial  
 
Version Date: 3/20/2018  
 
 
Background  and Significance  
 
Gabapentin  is a first -line therapy for treating neuropathic p ain in adults, and is also well known 
as a treatment for epileptic seizures.  Its exact mechanism of effect remains uncertain [1], but 
gabapentin has been found to reduce acute pain on its own [2 –3], to limit cravings and symptoms 
of withdrawal in people addicted to substances [4 –6], and to decreas e nausea [7 –8]. 
Perhaps gabapentin’s greatest benefit is to decrease opioid use in patients as they reco ver from 
surgery.  Patients who take gabapentin in  conjunctio n with opioids after surgery,  or even in the 
two-hour window beforehand [9 –18], take fewer opioid medications and experience little to no 
side-effects du ring the recovery process [19 –24]. 
We wanted to determine the best strategy of administering gabapentin in connection with our 
current approach to perioperative pain management.   We wanted to ba lance gabapentin’s  
obvious usefulness with its own side effects; gabapentin can cause drowsiness and unsteady 
bearing [11, 15 –18] and poses its own small  risk of addiction and abuse [24 ].  We therefore 
propose a two-armed trial to  evaluate different adjunct gabapentin regimens given in the 
perioperative period,  and to identify which manage s patient pain  most effectively and safely.  In 
this evaluation, we will identify the quantity of patients’ opioid consumption, the quality of th eir 
pain management, and the frequency and severity of any side effects they might experience.  
 
Specific Aims  
 
With this project, we intend  to determine whether administering a regimen of gabapentin  after 
surgery can reduce opioid consumption more effectively than the standard of care, which is a 
singl e preoperative dose of 600 mg, followed by a dose of 600 mg each morning during 
postoperative admission .  The experimental  regimen would add one week  of standing gabapentin  
followed by a month of night ly doses .  Furthermore, we would like to know more about 
gabapentin’s potential to cause drowsiness in patients  and whether it has any effect  on their 
ability to sleep after surgery.   Finally, we  want to know how long patients remain on gabapentin  
after surgery . 
 
 
Subject Selection  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
- At least  18 years of age  
- Receiving surgery for total knee replacement (TKR)  
- Opioid naïve  
- Agrees to use tracking diary to monitor opioid  consumption  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
- Over 75 years of age  on the date of surgery  
- If female, pregnant  
- Has received investigational articles < 30 days prior to enrollment or is currently 
receiving investigational products or devices  
- Chronic pain syndrome  
- Taking chronic narcotics and/or taking more than 10 mg of co deine per day, any amount 
of Hydrocodone, over 200 mg of tramadol per day, or any other narcotics prescribed for 
moderate or severe pain  
- Involved in pain clinics for chronic pain, or pain that is not related to the surgical site  
- On long -term gabapentin reg imen  
- Taking Lyrica or Gralise  
- Known history of depression or has been treated for depression with medication  
- Has entertained suicidal thoughts and behaviors  
 
 
Subject Enro llment  
 
Patients who schedule total knee replacement (TKR) with Dr. Wolfgang Fitz at Brigham and 
Women’s Faulkner Hospital and meet all eligibility criteria will be informed about the study  
during their preoperative appointment .  Specific topics discussed will included an introduction to 
the patient -maintained diary to document narcotic medications, and the PI’ s use of gabapentin 
for his surgical patients.   All patients will be offered the chance to discuss with both the RA and 
the Principal Investigator (PI) and ask questions.  
  
Each  qualifying patient will be sent a letter describing the  study and asking the patient to 
consider participating.  After a reasonable elapse of time, the RA will call the patient by phone 
and ask whether the patient agrees to participate.  The patient’s response to this request will be 
recorded in research recor ds.  During this phone call, the RA will confirm that the patient meets 
the inclusion criteria and does not meet any exclusion criterion.  If, later in the study, a patient 
meets any one of the exclusion criteria, he or she will be removed from the study.   
 
Patients’ informed consent will be obtained by the research assistant(s) when they come to the 
hospital for pre -op testing.  If this is somehow impossible, written informed consent may be 
obtained in preoperative holding before surgery.  Upon giving con sent, the patient will be 
randomly assig ned to a treatment group using  computer -generated randomization.  
 
The study will have two treatment arms:  
 
Patients in Group 1 will receive the standard of care as pertains to gabapentin.  This consists of a 
single 6 00 mg dose of gabapentin administered to the patient approximately one to two hours 
before surgery, then a dose of 600 mg each morning  during postoperative admission.   
 
Patients in Group 2 will receive the above standard of care, plus an additional home regimen: 
they will take 300 mg of gabapentin every 8 hours for 1 week , then a single nightly do se of 300 
mg for another month.  
 
Patients in both groups will record the amo unt of pain medications they consume and answer 
enclosed VAS s cales every day in a tracking diary . 
 
 
Study Procedures  
 
Every patient being discharged from the hospital will receive from the nursing staff verbal and 
written instructions — the latter of whic h will be either printed or in electronic form — about 
narcotic medications.  The instructions will explain when to use opioid  medications and how to 
taper off their consumption.  Following discharge, patients will take gabapentin as directed by 
their discharge instructions, and in the process track their opioid consumption on their own in 
their diaries.  They will also document t heir pain, nausea and satisfaction levels according to the 
visual analogue scale (VAS).   
 
At the first post -operative appointment , approximately 9 –10 days following  surgery,  patients’ 
levels of opioid use will be verified and compared to  the amount  record ed in each  diary ; the 
actual number of t ablets  consumed will be compared with  the documented  amount s and with the  
prescription s they received.  Patients receiving  a new prescription will  also receive a matching 
diary for the total length of opioid treatment, including further directions on how to wean 
themselves off the ir opioid medication s.  
 
Our primary outcome measures will be the amount of  patients’  opioid consumption , calculate d in 
total doses of  morphine equivalent , and the total number of days  the patients took  opioids.  Our 
secondary outcome measure s will be VA S scores for surgical site pain (both at rest and during 
physical activity),  nausea , sleep quality,  and satisfaction with pain management — all of which 
are reported on a daily basis within the tracking diary .  Tertiary  outcome measures will be the 
number of patients who are taking gabapentin  beyond the length of time prescribed by the study, 
measured at the second posto perative visit 2 –3 months after surgery.  
 
Additional data including length of stay, postoperative complications including infection and 
readmission, ED visits and routinely collected postoperative functional outcome measures 
(PROMS) will be recorded.   
 
 
Biostatistical Analysis  
 
We will be comparing the two arms of the trial to see whether there exists a statistically 
significant difference between them.  Variables i n which we are interested include total opioid 
consumption,  the amou nt of days spent using opioids , and  the amount of days spent taking 
gabapentin .  We will also record the other outcome measures detailed in the previous section.  
When comparing the branches, a ll analyses will be run at a type I error rate of 5% . 
 
The study will end once we have  enrolled the requisite number of patients in the study and taken 
the diary -based  data from them.   According to previous literature on the opioid -sparing effects of 
gabapentin, experimental groups tend to consume anywhere between 20% and 50% fewer opioid 
medications than control  groups , with the average approximately 35% , and standard deviation 
approximately half the mean  [9, 22, 23, 25].  Powering the study to detect this approximate 
difference, t he total number of patients will be 68, with 34  in each arm.  
 
 
Risks and Discomforts  
 
Members of both interventions are at the standard risk for TKR  patients for long -lasting opioid 
dependence following surgery, which can be about  8%.  Patients who attempt taper off their 
medications too quickly are at risk of experiencing acute post -operative pain.  Pat ients in the 
intervention group , who will be administered gabapentin  for a greater length  of time, may be at 
greater risk for gabapentin dependence  than members of the control group.  
 
 
Potential Benefits  
 
While w e do not guarantee benefits to participation, it is possible that the members of our 
intervention group may taper off their narcotic medications more quickly and more successfully 
than those who receive our standard of care, thus lessening their risk of lo ng-term dependence on 
the medications.  This could result in increased health and satisfaction.  
 
We hope that finding an optimal gabapentin regimen can help patients reduce their narcotic 
consumption after total knee replacements, which will reduce their risk of becoming dependent 
on narcotics for pain management.   Results of the study thus may help improve medication 
regimens for future patients.  
 
 
Monitoring and Quality Assurance  
 
The principal investigator will take responsibility for regular reviews of the study’s progress and 
any concerns regarding subject safety.  Study progress including data completion and entry will 
be discussed at protocol meetings to be held as needed during the duration of the protocol 
activity.  The principal investigator wil l report adverse events or other unanticipated problems to 
PHRC as described in the PHRC policy on Adverse Event Reporting and Unanticipated 
Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others.  
 
Adverse events will be reported immediately to the PI and to the I RB in accordance with the IRB 
adverse event reporting guidelines.  
 
The principal investigator is responsible for adherence to all IRB rules and guidelines.  The 
research coordinator will be responsible for the accuracy and completeness of all forms, entrie s, 
and informed consent.  As an added quality assurance measure, study staff will hold monthly 
meetings to ensure that adherence to protocol is maintained by all of the study staff as well as to 
monitor the status and quality of the study.  Subject data wi ll be kept on a protocol -specific, 
password -protected, Partners Healthcare System -maintained computer that is kept in a locked 
office.  PHS computers maintain the latest anti -virus software and firewall protections.  
 
Patients will be identified only by an identification code, and not by their name, SSN, or hospital 
medical record number.  Research staff will maintain a separate confidential enrollment log 
which matches identifying codes with the patients’ names and addresses available only to IRB -
approved s tudy staff.  
 
All study forms, reports, and other records that are part of the study data collection materials will 
be identified by coded number to maintain patient confidentiality.  All paper records will be kept 
in locked file cabinets.  All electronic records of study data will be identified by coded number.   
References  
 
[1]  Bannister K., Qu C ., Navratilova  E., Oyarzo  J., Xie J., King  T., Dickenson  A.H.,  Porreca  
F. Multiple sites and actions of gabapentin -induced relief of ongoing experimental 
neuropathic pain.  Pain (Aug.  21, 2017),  doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001040 . 
 
[2]  Ozgencil E. , Yalcin S ., Tuna H ., Yorukoglu D ., Kecik Y.  Perioperative administration of 
gabapentin 1,200 mg day -1 and pregabalin  300 mg day -1 for pain following lumbar 
laminectomy and discectomy: a randomised, double -blinded, placebo -controlled study.  
Singapore Medical Journal 52.12 (Dec. 2011): 883 –9. 
 
[3]  Rusy L.M. , Hainsworth K .R., Nelson T .J., Czarnecki M .L., Tassone J .C., Tho metz J .G., 
Lyon R .M., Berens R .J., Weisman S .J. Gabapentin use in pediatric spinal fusion patients: 
a randomized, double -blind, controlled trial.  Anesthesia & Analgesia  110.5 (May 1, 
2010): 1393 –8. 
 
[4]  Stock C.J. , Carpenter L ., Ying J ., Greene T.  Gabapentin versus chlordiazepoxide for 
outpatient alcohol detoxification treatment.  Annals of Pharmacotherapy  47.7–8 (Jul. –
Aug. 2013):  961–9. 
 
[5]  Mason B.J. , Quello S ., Goodell V ., Shadan F ., Kyle M ., Begovic A . Gabapentin 
treatment for alcohol dependence: a randomized clinical trial.  JAMA Internal Medicine  
174.1 (Jan. 2014): 70 –7. 
 
[6]  Leung J.G. , Hall-Flavin D. , Nelson S., Schmidt K.A., Schak K.M . The role of gabapentin 
in the management of alcohol withdrawal and dependence.  Annals of Pharmacotherapy  
49.8 (Aug. 2015): 897–906. 
 
[7]  Grant M.C. , Lee H ., Page A .J., Hobson D ., Wick E ., Wu C .L. The Effect of Preoperative 
Gabapentin on Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting: A Meta -Analysis.  Anesthesia & 
Analgesia  122.4 (Apr. 2016): 976 –85. 
 
[8]  Misra S. , Parthasarathi G ., Vilanilam G .C. The effect of gabapentin premedication on 
postoperative nausea, vomiting, and pain in patients on preoperative dexamethasone 
undergoing craniotomy for intracranial tumors.  Journal of Neurosurgical Anesthesiology  
25.4 (Oct. 2013): 386–91. 
 
[9]  Montazeri K. , Kashefi P ., Honarmand A.  Pre-emptive gabapentin significantly reduces 
postoperative pain and morphine demand following lower extremity orthopaedic surgery.  
Singapore Medical Journal 48.8 (Aug. 2007): 748 –51. 
 
[10] Rai A.S. , Khan J.S., Dhaliwal J., Busse J.W. , Choi S., Devereaux P.J., Clarke H . 
Preoperative pregabalin  or gabapentin for acute and chronic postoperative pain among 
patients undergoing breast cancer surgery: A systematic review and meta -analysis of 
randomized controlled trials.  Journal of Plastic, Reconstructive & Aesthetic Surgery  
70.10 (Oct. 2017): 1317 –28. 
[11]  Arumu gam S., Lau C.S., Chamberlain R.S . Use of preoperative gabapentin significantly 
reduces postoperative opioid consumption: a meta -analysis.  Journal of Pain Research  12 
(Sep.  9, 2016): 631 –40. 
 
[12]  Hassani V., Pazouki A., Nikoubakht N., Chaichian S. , Sayarifard A., Shakib Khankandi 
A. The effect of gabapentin on reducing pain after laparoscopic gastric bypass surgery in 
patients with morbid obesity: a randomized clinical trial.  Anesthesiology and Pain 
Medicine  5.1 (Feb. 1, 2015), doi: 10.5812/aapm.22372.  
 
[13]  Mardani -Kivi M. , Mobarakeh  M.K. , Keyha ni S., Motlagh K.H., Ekhtiari K.S . Is 
gabapentin effective on pain management after arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction? A triple blinded randomized controlled trial.  The Archives of Bone and 
Joint Surgery  1.1 (Sep. 2013): 18 –22. 
 
[14]  Chiu T.W. , Leung C .C., Lau E .Y., Burd A.  Analgesic effects of preoperative gabapentin 
after tongue reconstruction with the anterolateral thigh flap.  Hong Kong Medical Journal 
18.1 (Feb. 2012 ): 30–4. 
 
[15]  Moore A. , Costello J ., Wieczorek P ., Shah V ., Taddio A ., Carvalho J .C. Gabapentin 
improves postcesarean delivery pain management: a randomized, placebo -controlled trial.  
Anesthesia & Analgesia  112.1 (Jan. 2011): 167 –73. 
 
[16]  Menda F. , Köner O ., Sayın M ., Ergenoğlu M ., Küçükaksu S ., Aykaç B.  Effects of single -
dose gabapentin on postoperative pain and morphine consumption after cardiac surgery.  
Journal of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia  24.5 (Oct. 2010): 808 –13. 
 
[17]   Türe H. , Sayin M ., Karlikaya G ., Bingol C .A., Aykac B ., Türe U.  The analgesic effect of 
gabapentin as a prophylactic anticonvulsant drug on postcraniotomy pain: a prospective 
randomized study.  Anesthesia & Analgesia  109.5 (Nov. 2009): 1625 –31. 
 
[18]  Clivatti J. , Sakata R .K., Issy A .M. Review of the use of gabapentin in the control of 
postoperative pain.  Revist a Brasileira de Anestesiologia 59.1 (Jan. –Feb. 2009): 87 –98. 
 
[19]  Pandey C.K. , Navkar D .V., Giri P .J., Raza M ., Behari  S., Singh R.B., Singh U., Singh 
P.K. Evaluation of the optimal preemptive dose of gabapentin for postoperative pain 
relief after lumbar discectomy: a randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled study.  
Journal of Neurosurgical Anesthesiology  17.2 (Apr. 2005): 65 –8. 
 
[20]  Dierking G. , Duedahl T .H., Rasmussen M .L., Fomsgaard J .S., Møiniche S ., Rømsing J ., 
Dahl J .B. Effects of gabapentin on postoperative morphine consumption and pain after 
abdominal hysterectomy: a randomized, double -blind trial.  Acta Anaesthesiologica 
Scandinavica  48.3 ( Mar. 2004) : 322 –7. 
 
[21]  Ho K.Y. , Gan T .J., Habib A .S. Gabapentin and postoperative pain – a systematic review 
of randomized controlled trials.  Pain 126.1 –3 (Dec. 15, 2006): 91 –101. 
 
[22]  Ucak A. , Onan B ., Sen H ., Selcuk I ., Turan A ., Yilmaz A .T. The effects of gabapentin on 
acute and chronic postoperative pain after coronary artery bypass graft surgery.  Journal 
of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia  25.5 (Oct. 2011): 824 –9. 
 
[23]  Clarke H. , Pereira S ., Kennedy D ., Gilron I ., Katz J ., Gollish J ., Kay J.  Gabapentin 
decreases morphine consumption and improves functional recovery following total knee 
arthroplasty.  Pain Research and Managemen t 14.3 (May –Jun. 2009): 217 –22. 
 
[24]  Smith R.V., Havens J.R., Walsh S.L . Gabapentin misuse, abuse and diversion: a 
systematic review.  Addiction  111.7 (Jul. 2016): 1160 –74. 
 
[25]  Menigaux C., Adam F., Guignard B., Sessler D.I., Chauvin M. Preoperative Gabapentin 
Decre ases Anxiety and Improves Early Functional Recovery From Knee Surgery . 
Anesthesia & Analge sia 100.5 (May 2005): 1394 –contents.  