Official title of the study: Use of NIRS to Detect Acute Kidney Injury in Preterm Infants 
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date: 2/23/2017  
Study Application (Version 1.7)  
 
1.0 General Information  
* Please enter the full title of your study:  
Use of NIRS to detect Acute Kidney Injury in preterm neonates  
* Short Study Title  
NIRS for AKI in Preterm Neonates  
* This field allows you to enter an abbreviated version of the Study Title to quickly identify this study.  
2.0 Add Department(s)  
2.1 List departments associated with this study  
Primary Dept?  Department Name  
No Department(s) have been attached to this form.  
 
3.0 Assign key project personnel access to the project.  
3.1 * Please add a Principal Investigator for the study:  
Matthew Harer,  MD 
 
Select if applicable  
Student   Department Chair   Resident  Fellow  
If the Principal Investigator is a Student, Resident, or Fellow, the name of the Faculty Advisor must be supplied 
below.  
3.2 If applicable, please select the Research Staff personnel:  
A) Additional  Investigators  
 
B) Research Support  Staff 
3.3 Please add a Study Contact:  
Matthew Harer,  MD 
 
The Study Contact(s) will receive all important system notifications along with the Principal Investigator. (e.g. The project contact(s) are typically either the Study Coordinator or the Principal Investigator themselves).  
3.4 If applicable, please add a Faculty Advisor:  
3.5 If applicable, please select the Administrative Assistant: (s)  
Administrative Assistant Note  
This role performs routine IRB submissions and has no contact with subjects, their data, records or specimens. Human Subject Protection Training is not required for this role.  
 
4.0 Institutional Review  Board  Oversight  Version 2/23/17 (55) 
4.1 Will you be requesting a deferral?  
Yes No 

 
Will you be requesting a deferral from UW -Madison so that UnityPoint Health - Meriter IRB will be your IRB of record?  
 
● UnityPoint  Health  - Meriter IRB is used  for investigator  initiated research performed by UW 
affiliates through the Meriter and UW -Madison IRB Partnership Agreement.  
● Do not use this form to request UW -Madison to be the IRB of  record.  
 
Yes No 
 
Will you be requesting a deferral from UnityPoint Health - Meriter so that Western IRB will be your IRB of record?  
 
● Western  IRB (WIRB)  is used for multi -site clinical research sponsored by pharmceutical 
companies.  
 
Yes No 
 
5.0 Research Details for UW- Madison Deferrals to UnityPoint Health - Meriter IRB  
5.1 Why do you think UnityPoint Health - Meriter Institutional Review Board should be the IRB of record for your 
research?  
 
Use the Deferral  Criteria  Chart  in the HELP  Bubble  over  in the right  panel  to answer  this question.  Site the 
criteria that applies to your  project.  
 
 
1. all subjects recruited, medical records used, or study activities occur at  Meriter  
2. Studies  involving collection  of data through noninvasive  procedures  routinely  employed in clinical practice 
(except x -rays, microwaves, or devices not cleared/approved for marketing) that involve Meriter and 
UW/UWHC/UWMF  patients  
5.2 Will any of the following subject populations be involved? Check all that apply.  
Neonates 
  Fetuses 
  Prisoners  
  Subjects  recruited from Meriter  Child  and Adolescent  Psychiatry Unit or Merter  Addiction  Medicine 
  Patients from Madison VA, including use of their records or samples obtained from them.  
  Patients from UWHC, including use of their records or samples obtained from them.  
  Patients  from a UWMF  clinic,  including  use of their records  or samples  obtained  from them.  
  None of the  Above  
5.3 Please indicate the number of subjects, samples, and/or records you plan to get from each institution.  
60 
 
Additional Comments  
5.4 For each research procedure in the left column, please indicate where it will occur. Skip to the next question if 
these procedures do not apply to your research.  
 
 
 
  
Research 
Procedure  Meriter  UW Hospital 
&Clinics  UWMF  Name of Other 
Institution Site  Name of Other 
Institution Site  
Record Review   null null   
      
 
5.5 Do you have additional research procedures not listed above? Add them in the table below.  
 
Subject 
Recruitment     null   null   
Specimen 
Banking or 
Collection    null   null   null   
Administration of a drug or implantation of a 
device that has NOT been 
approved by  FDA.    null   null   null   
 
 
 
Research 
Procedure  Meriter  UW Hospital 
&Clinics  UWMF Clinic  Name of Other 
Institution Site  Name of Other 
Institution Site  
Non- invasive 
Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy (NIRS)  
monitoring       
 
 
6.0 Study Type  
6.1 * Study Type - Check only those that apply: iRIS will provide you with only the questions that apply to the type of 
research you are doing. Read the HELP Bubble in the right panel BEFORE checking a Study Type.  
General Biomedical Research 
  Research on Biological  Specimens  
  Program Improvement - Quality  Assurance 
  Record Review  Research 
  Social/Behavioral/Educational  Research - Survey,  Interview,  Questionnaire,  Observation 
  Research at Meriter when Meriter is Not Engaged - See HELP Bubble at  right.  
  Humanitarian  Use Device  
  Other  
If "other" enter information below. Contact IRB Office for additional help on Study Type.  
6.2 Are you doing this project to fulfill an educational requirement?  
Yes No 
 
7.0 Clinical Trials Registration Requirement  
7.1 *Registration at ClinicalTrials.gov may be required in the following situations: Per FDA regulations, most studies 
involving the testing of a drug, biologic, or device must be registered. If publications resulting from this study will be 
published in a member journal of the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) or in a publication 
that adheres to ICMJE standards, the study must be registered. Does this study need to be registered at 
Clinicaltrials.gov?  
Yes 
  Not Applicable  
7.2 If your research is listed on another public website, please provide the URL to the listing for this research.  
 
8.0 Clinical Trials Registration Details  
8.1 Who will register this study at ClinicalTrials.gov prior to the enrollment of the first subject? 

PI- Matthew Harer  
8.2 Help us verify that your protocol is registered on ClinicalTrials.gov Type in the ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier (also 
known as the NCT number) below.  
 
9.0 Study Funding I  
9.1 Instructions for Study Funding Sections  
 
The IRB reviews financial relationships or interests that may adversely affect the rights and welfare of 
subjects. Please answer the following questions completely. You may attach additional documentation if you 
need to explain your answers. SANCTIONS for Failure to Report Financial Conflicts of InterestIf the IRB 
determines that a Researcher has failed to report a financial conflict of interest as required, the IRB may immediately withdraw approval of the protocol and may bar the investigator from any future research at Meriter Hospital for a period of time specified by the IRB.  
9.2 *Does  any of the local research staff, their  immediate family,  or dependents  have  a proprietary  interest  in the 
research, such as current or future ownership, royalties, patents, trademarks, copyright, or licensing agreement, 
including any agent, device, or software being evaluated as part of the research?  
Yes No 
 
 
● Tell who has the interest.  
● Describe the person’s role in relationship to the research.  
● Describe the plan to avoid conflict of interest while working on the research.  
9.3 *Is your research being funded, has it ever been funded, or do you anticipate it being funded by any source, 
besides your own personal funds?  
Yes No 
9.4 * Funding Status  
 
You may select more than one answer.  
 
 
Applied  For/Pending 
  Approved  
  Funding has  Expired  
  Not Applicable (no outside funding in past, present, or  future).  
 
10.0 Study Funding II  
10.1 * Granting Agency or Commercial Sponsor Identify all sources of funding for this project. You can select more 
than one. There must be at least one checkbox selected for each agency/sponsor.  
 
SKIP this question iIf you have not applied for outside funding.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 Sponsor  Funding  Protocol 
Control  Data 
Coordination  Monitoring  Auditing  Pass 
Through 
Funding  
Personal         
Federal - NIH        
Pharmaceutical         
Private - Non-profit  Meriter Foundation        
State Government         
 
 
10.2 * Is the sponsor, a commercial sponsor?  
Yes 
No - my study is grant funded.  
I have no sponsor or outside funding for my study.  
10.3 Study Budget  
 
If you are anticipating outside funding for this research, you will need to submit your study budget.  
You'll upload your study budget later in the Intial Review Submission Packet in the Other Study Documents 
section. 
 
11.0 Locations  
11.1 Where is the research being conducted?  
 
UPH - Meriter Entities  
 
UnityPoint Health - Meriter hospital  
  UnityPoint at Home (formerly Meriter  Home Health)  
  UnityPoint Health - Meriter - Labarotories  
  UnityPoint Health - Meriter  clinics  
  Other UnityPoint Health - Meriter  Entity  
 
Entities Outside of UPH - Meriter 
 
  University of Wisconsin Hospital & Clinics  (UWHC) 
  Other  
If you checked one of the OTHER boxes please explain.  
 
12.0 Research Design & Procedures  
12.1 * Please list all departments, nursing units, etc. that will be involved at Meriter Hospital (e.g. blood bank, 6 
North nursing unit, etc.). Enter the name of the person your study team has been in contact with for each area.  
Read the HELP Bubble in the right panel for more information.  
 
12.2 PURPOSE What is the objective or purpose of your study? If you have specific aims, list them here. At the 
end of each paragraph hit Enter. Then hit Shift + Enter.  
 
Specific Aim 1: To determine if a reduction in renal NIRS in preterm neonates correlates with current 
markers  of neonatal  AKI (decreased urine output  or increased  serum  creatinine)  in the first 7 days  after birth.  
 
Specific Aim 2: To determine if there is a significant reduction or increase in renal NIRS due to the use of medications in the NICU.  
Local Government         
Federal - Other         
Business - Profit         
UW Madison/UW Hospital 
and Clinics         
 
Department / Nursing Unit  Contact Person  
7N, Neonatal ICU  Dare Desnoyers and Carla Griffin  
 
12.3 BACKGROUND What prior information or knowledge exists to support the conduct of this project or study? At 
the end of each paragraph hit Enter. Then hit Shift + Enter.  
 
Preterm birth (< 37 weeks gestation) currently occurs in 1 in 8 deliveries and the majority of these infants are 
born with a low birth weight (LBW; <2.5kg), with many having a very low birth weight (VLBW; <1.5 kg).  
Although LBW is a well recognized risk factor for developing chronic kidney disease (CKD), prematurity and 
VLBW status have  only recently been shown to be associated with later onset CKD. Children born preterm 
or with a VLBW are most at risk for developing CKD due to incomplete nephrogenesis, neonatal nephrotoxin 
exposures, and acute kidney injury (AKI) secondary to complex ne onatal intensive care unit (NICU) 
hospitalizations.  In 2013,  Wisconsin  had over 5,000 babies  born preterm - over 600 of which  were  born with a 
VLBW. If you combine VLBW and LBW babies, the number of children at risk for developing CKD born each year in Wisconsin is over  1200.  
Chronic kidney disease is a widespread public health epidemic associated with increased risks of 
cardiovascular  disease and death.  In Wisconsin,  CKD  has increased 3 fold since  1982 with early  stage CKD 
now affecting over 40,000 and late stage CKD affecting over 3,000 in the state. Along with the rising incidence of CKD there have been associated increased costs –  since 1993 the costs of caring for patients 
with CKD  have increased 5 fold nationally.  The long- term goal of my research  is to evaluate the contribution 
of preterm birth, NICU exposures and specifically AKI to the development of CKD in childhood and adulthood. This past year I published a paper comparing the renal function of former preterm infants at 5 
years of age. In this research study we found that preterm patients with a history of AKI in the NICU were 4 
times as likely to have signs of CKD compared to those without a history of AKI in the NICU. This was 
consistent with pediatric and adult literature that has shown increased risk of CKD f ollowing an episode of 
AKI. It is clear from these studies that AKI is a significant risk factor for development of CKD and prevention 
of AKI should be a focus of all intensive care unit  patients.  
Acute kidney injury in the NICU is not only associated with long term development of CKD, but also with acute morbidity and increased rates of mortality. With AKI occurring in 12 to 40% of preterm infants, it is a 
common occurrence, particularly in the sma llest and most preterm patients. The diagnosis of AKI in the 
NICU is currently based off of a standardized definition of increases in serum creatinine or decreases in urine output. Unfortunately, each of these criteria generally change hours to days after the initial insult 
resulting in the AKI band changes in therapy are generally not made until after the diagnosis. Multiple studies have examined the use of urinary biomarkers to diagnose AKI and many of these are promising for 
early detection of AKI - but these also are most often seen after the kidney injury. Ideally changes in blood 
flow or oxygenation of the kidneys could be detected prior to injury and this would allow clinicians to change therapy immediately.  
Recently there has been increased use of a device to detect tissue oxygenation. Near infrared spectroscopy 
(NIRS) is a non -invasive skin -monitoring device used on patients to determine regional tissue oxygenation. 
Sensors can be placed in multiple locations, but most commonly the head, abdomen or fl ank are used to 
reflect brain, gut and kidney oxygen levels respectively. Studies in animals, pediatric and adult patients have 
shown that NIRS can be used to detect flow -induced changes in oxygen levels in the kidneys. In preterm 
neonates, a recent study showed that renal NIRS can be used to diagnose a hemodynamically significant 
PDA, a risk factor for AKI in nearly all neonatal AKI studies. In term neonates renal NIRS has been used in 
intra and post -operative cardiac surgery patients to detect AKI and has  correlated with changes in both 
serum creatinine and urinary biomarkers. However, no studies currently exist demonstrating the correlation with urinary output or serum creatinine (the markers used for the current definition of AKI) and NIRS 
monitoring in preterm infants.  
NIRS monitoring has been shown to be safe in multiple preterm studies. The sensor is both a light source 
and a detector used to measure the absorption of light by oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin in the 
tissue. The sensor generates no heat and lasts between 1- 4 days before needing to be changed. Normal 
renal NIRS values have been demonstrated in a number of small cohort studies and there are a number of 
factors that can affect the normal values: gestational age, post -menstrual age and hemoglobin. Given the 
large inter -individual variability, several different definitions have been used to define a low renal NIRS value:  
< 25% baseline, > 15 points below baseline and < 65%.  
Given  that AKI is common  in preterm  infants,  can lead to long- term CKD,  and current  methods  of diagnosis 
occur after injury, we propose that NIRS monitors can identify AKI in real time that may result in decreased 
rates of AKI and improved long- term outcomes.  
12.4 ENROLLMENT Describe how subjects will be identified, and enrolled in the study. Indicate if randomization 
occurs and/or how subjects are assigned to study arms or groups if applicable. At the end of each paragraph hit 
Enter. Then hit Shift + Enter.  
 
Goal Enrollment: 60 preterm patients  
Eligibility: All preterm infants < 32 weeks admitted to Meriter UPH NICU 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Preterm neonate < 32 weeks 
2. Admission to Meriter UPH NICU < 48 hours of  age 
3. Application of NIRS < 48 hours of age (Rationale: The most rapid change in renal function is in the first 
week of life. In the first 72 hours the serum creatinine is changing rapidly, reflecting a significant  change in 
renal  blood  flow. Previous  AKI studies  have shown  that 75-80% of AKI in the NICU  occurs in the first week  of 
life. In order  to potentially  capture this AKI episode  we will aim to have NIRS  on patients  as early  as possible, 
but for sure before 48 hours of age. If we started after 48 hours of age we may have potentially already 
missed the period of AKI and the renal NIRS may reflect post AKI oxygenation instead of oxygenation during 
the time of  injury.)  
 
Exclusion  Criteria  
1. Congenital anomaly of the Kidney or Urinary Tract (CAKUT)  
 
Identification of Eligible Infants:  
Each morning the RN Shift Manager will view the NICU census and identfity subjects meeting inclusion criteria for the study. The PI, Matthew Harer, will also check the NICU census daily to idenfity subjects which meet the inclusion criteria.  
12.5 PROCEDURES Describe the study procedures or interventions that will be done at Meriter. If other institutions 
are involved, indicate how Meriter’s involvement compares to the other intistiutions’ involved. At the end of each 
paragraph hit Enter. Then hit Shift + Enter.  
 
Solicitation of Study Interest  
- Once a possible subject is identified, a member of the NICU team caring for the infant (NICU attending, 
NICU  Fellow,  NICU  advanced  practice  provider,  RN shift manager,  or patient's  RN) will speak  with family  to 
determine interest  in participating in the study. If interest  is identified,  the PI or a NICU  fellow  will be notified 
to begin the consent  process.  
 
Solicitation of Informed Consent  
- Once  an interested family  has been identified,  the PI or NICU fellow  will begin  the informed consent 
process.  
Step  One:  The Investigator  (or IRB approved designee)  will explain  the study  to the potential  subject's 
parent verbally, providing all pertinent information (purpose, procedures, risks, benefits, alternatives to participation,  etc.), and will allow  the potential  subject's  parent  ample  opportunity  to ask questions.  
Step  Two:  Following  this verbal  explanation,  the potential  subject's parent  will be provided with a written 
consent form and afforded up to 48 hours to consider whether or not to participate in the research.  
Step  Three:  After  allowing  the potential  subject's parent  time to read the consent  form, an Investigator 
listed  on the consent  form will meet  with the potential  subject's parent  and answer  any additional  questions 
s/he may  have.  
 
- If the parent  of the subject  wishes  to enroll  the subject,  a consent  form will be signed,  copied and given  to 
the family for their  records.  
- If the consenting adult  is a legal  guardian or a minor  parent,  written  proof  (court  document)  will be 
required.  
 
Application of Probe  
- Application of regional NIRS neonatal probe (FDA approved for preterm infants) on top of a piece of 
Mepitel (gel impregnated gauze) barrier to the right or posterior flank above the iliac crest and below the 
costal  margin  (T10-L2) for monitoring or Renal  sat (Rsat)  levels  within  48 hours  of birth by one of the NICU  
 
shift manager RNs.  
- Application of regional  NIRS  neonatal  probe to the central  forehead for measurement  of cerebral  saturation 
(Csat) by one of the NICU shift manager  RNs.  
 
(Rationale for having shift manager RN's place mepitel and sensor: this small group of shift manager RNs 
will be trained to appropriately place the sensor and they are the skin experts for the NICU. They have the 
most expertise in applying skin protectants  like mepitel and also have expertice in applying skin monitors 
and sensors like neonatal EKG probes and pulse oximiters which are similar to the neonatal NIRS probes to be used in this study)  
 
Monitoring of Probe Site  
- Each  neonate will have  the area surro unding  the mepitel  and probe assessed daily for erythema or skin 
changes by the RN taking care of that  baby.  
 
Measurement of Rsat and Csat  
- Rsat and Csat levels will be measured continuously for the first 7 days of  age 
- Sensors will be used for as long as a value returns without signal degradation (average 4 days) 
- Clinicians will be blinded to the saturation values  
 
Record Review  
- Medical records will be reviewied for neonatal, perinatal, and maternal demographics. Vital sign 
infromation,  labs,  medications  and imaging  results  will also be recorded.  This data will be used to correlate 
NIRS values to a variety of perinatal and neonatal factors: vitals, labs, medications, hospitiliztaion events, 
imaging studies. This data will hopefully inform future research on possible interventions to improve NIRS 
values in subsequent populations of preterm  neonates.  
12.6 What is the anticipated DURATION of your project or study?  
 
12-18 months depending on subject recruitment  
12.7 * Does your research involve biospecimen collection?  
Yes No 
12.8 Does your research involve extracting and storing data from medical records? 
Yes No 
 
13.0 Record Review Details  
13.1 Enter the date range for the data you plan to collect (e.g. 1/1/2010 - 12/31/2015).  
 
From: 
 
 
01/01/2018  
 
To: 
 
 
12/31/2018  
13.2 How many records do you plan to access at UnityPoint Health - Meriter?  

60 
13.3 Will you be using records from other institutions?  
Yes No 
 
In the text box below, list the institutions for all the records you plan to use. Give the approximate number of records from  each 
institution.  
For Example:  
 
● 100 records from the Wisconsin State Department of Health and Human Services  
● 50 Records from UW Hospital and Clinics  
● 500 records from Marshfield Clinic  
13.4 Does your record review research involve matching subject data from more than one medical record system?  
Yes No 
 
If YES, list the medical record systems involved and explain the methods you will use to match subject data.  
13.5 Will the data collected be used for purposes other than those described in this application?  
Yes No 
Yes No 
 
14.0 Record Review Support Documents  
14.1 Data Research Summary Form 
 
MANDATORY - You must complete and upload this form to your submission.  
 
● Get the Data Research Summary Form  HERE . 
● Download the form to your  computer.  
● Complete the form, following the instructions on the lower left tab in the excel workbook. Put a 
version number and date in the top left cell (A1). This should match what you enter in the iRIS upload 
screen.  
● Add the completed  form later in the Initial Review  Submis sion Packet  in the Other  Study  Documents 
section.  
14.2 Health Information Management Endorsement  
 
Will subjects sign a consent document that allows you to access their records for research purposes?  
 
Yes No 
 
If you answered NO above, follow the MANDATORY directions below.  
 
MANDATORY for access to Meriter -UnityPoint Health Records for RESEARCH purposes  without subjects' consent.  
 
● Get the Patient Records Endorsement Form  HERE . 
● Download the form to your  computer.  
● Complete the form following the instructions on page 1. 
● Add the completed  signed  form later in the Initial  Review  Submission  Packet  in the Other  Study  

 
Documents section.  
14.3 DATA SECURITY for Non- employees  
 
Are you a UnityPoint Health - Meriter employee?  
HINT : If your paycheck doesn't come from a UnityPoint Health entity, you are not an employee.  
 
Yes No 
 
If you answered NO above, follow the MANDATORY directions below.  
 
MANDATORY for those not employed by a UnityPoint Health entity.  
If you plan to store study data that inlcudes patient identifiers on a non- Meriter server or a non-Meriter device, your plan must 
be endorsed by the UnityPoint Health - Meriter IT Security Officer.  
 
● Get the Electroni c Data Security Endorsement  HERE . 
● Download the form to your  computer.  
● Complete the form, following the directions at the top of the page.  
● Send  the Electronic  Data  Security  Endorsement  (requires  signature)  with the Data  Research 
Summary form to the IT Security Officer for signature.  
● Add the completed  signed  form later in the Initial  Review  Submission  Packet  in the Other 
Documents  section.  
 
15.0 Study Population  
15.1 * Age  
 
Select all that apply:  
0-6 (parental consent only)  
  7-11 (Requires child's assent plus  parental  permission)  
  12-17 (Requires consent plus parental permission)  
  18+ (Requires consent  only)  
 
Enter the specific age range for study population (if overlap or specific within a category):  
 
 
0.00 
 
to 
 
1.00 
 
months 
years  
15.2 * Gender  
Male Female  
Both male and female  
15.3 Is any racial/ethnic group excluded?  
Yes No 

15.4 * What is the number of participants, biological samples, or records you are planning to enroll or review at 
UnityPoint Health - Meriter? 
60 
 
If necessary, provide explanation below:  
15.5 * What is the number of participants, biological specimens, or records that will be enrolled or reviewed at all 
sites?  
60 
 
If necessary, provide explanation below:  
15.6 * Justification for the number of subjects, specimens or records required. Include information about the 
statistical analysis of your data.  
 
Study Population:  
In order to have the ability to identify a difference of renal NIRS in preterm patients with AKI and preterm 
patients without AKI, a total of 60 patients will need to be enrolled. At the time of enrollment all subjects will 
be 'normal' without evidence of AKI. The majority of these patients will likely end up to be preterm patients 
without AKI given an average rate of AKI in the first week of life of 15%. However, with only 9 patients in the 
AKI group and 51 in the no AKI group, we will have the statistical  power necessary to detect a 10 point renal 
NIRS difference in these groups.  
 
Statistical Power calculation:  
renal NIRS average for AKI group = 60 
renal NIRS average for non- AKI group = 70  
 
Standard deviation for AKI group = 10 Standard deviation for non-A KI group = 10  
 
5% alpha  
50% beta 
 
Power calculation for the above would require at least 5 patients in each group.  
 
With a rate of AKI of 15%, out of 60 patients there would be 9 in the AKI group and 51 in the no AKI group.  
15.7 Are vulnerable populations the primary subjects of this study?  
Yes No 
  Pregnant  Women 
  Embryos or  Fetuses  
Neonates/Children/Minors  
  Adults  who cannot  consent  for themsleves  and who require  consent  by a legally  authorized representative. 
  Economically or educationally disadvantaged  persons  
  Limited or  non-readers  
  Subjects  who have  status  relationship  with investigator,  research site, or sponsor  (i.e. employees,  students, 
etc.) 
  Prisoners  
  Institutionalized people (e.g. nursing home residents)  
 

  Others vulnerable to  coercion.  
 
If other, please explain below:  
15.8 * List Subject Inclusion Criteria  
Order  Number  Criteria  
 
1 Admission to Meriter NICU < 48 hours of  age 
 
2 Birth prior to 32 weeks gestational  age 
 
3 renal NIRS applied within 48 hours of  birth 
15.9 * List Subject Exclusion Criteria  
 
Click  the bar below.  Click  Add New Criteria  button.List  the criteria  one statement  at a time, clicking the 
SAVE button each time.  
 
Order  Number  Criteria  
 
1 Congenital abnormalitiy of the kidney or urinary tract  (CAKUT)  
15.10 Provide justification for inclusion or exclusion of any group (gender, race, or other):  
 
16.0 Methodology  
16.1 Specify the activities, procedures or tests that are being performed solely to screen for study eligibility. At the 
end of each paragraph hit Enter. Then hit Shift + Enter.  
 
Each morning the shift manager will evaluate the NICU census for patients meeting inclusion criteria. If eligible, 
the family will be approached by a member of the NICU team caring for the patient (NICU attending, NICU fellow, 
NICU advanced practice provider, RN shift manager, NICU RN caring for the patient) to see if they are interested in hearing about a research study. If the family is interested, the PI (Matthew Harer) will be contacted. If the PI is available for the consent process he will perform the consent. If he is unavailable (out of town, busy taking care of 
patients), one of the NICU MD Fellows will perform the consent process. If either the PI or the Fellow MD is busy taking care of patients this will take priority over getting consent for the research study.  
 
The plan is for recruitment to occur 7 days a week. There may be times when neither the PI or a NICU fellow will be available to consent eligible patients.  
16.2 Help us understand what part of your project is research and what part is standard clinical care. At the end of 
each paragraph hit Enter. Then hit Shift + Enter.  
 
With regards to < 32 week preterm infants admitted to the NICU and monitoring of renal function the current 
standard of care is:  
1. Monitoring of urine output for the first week at  least  
2. Intermittent checking  of serum creatinine  dependent  on severity  of illness (range of  creatinine checks from 1- 7 
in the first 7 days)  
 
Renal and cerebral NIRS monitoring for 7 days with the forehead and flank sensors.  
16.3 Identify study team members who will be intervening or interacting with subjects (e.g. administering surveys, 
conducting physical interventions, etc.) if applicable. Click the drop down arrow in the first column and select study 
personnel.  
 
Key Study Personnel Name Key Study Personnel's Role in Research  
Harer, Matthew, MD  Family consent, set -up of monitor, trouble shooting.  
 
 
- Following grant  funding,  I plan to add the Neonatology  Fellow  MDs to the protocol.  They  will be involved in 
presenting the research project to the families and obtaining informed  consent.  
- The day shift manager RNs will be involved in placing the probes and mepitel on the infants.  
16.4 * Will interviews, questionnaires and/or surveys be part of the study?  
Yes No 
 
17.0 Risks & Benefits  
17.1 Check all the possible risks to participants.  
  Loss of Privacy - see HELP Bubble in right panel for  definition.  
Breach of Confidentiality - see HELP Bubble in right panel for definition. 
Physical harm.  
  Psychological  harm.  
  Other  
17.2 Check all the methods below that tell how you will minimize the risks identified above. Refer to the HELP 
Bubble in  the right panel  for UnityPoint  Health  - Meriter  Security  Requirements  for Protected Health  Information 
(PHI).  
  Use of drapes or barriers for subjects who must  disrobe.  
  Research interviews and interventions are conducted in a private room.  
Collection of sensitive information about subjects is limited to the amount necessary to achieve the aims of the 
research, so that no unneeded sensitive information is collected.  
  Paper  based records  will be kept in a secure UnityPoint  Health - Meriter  location  and only be accessible  to 
personnel involved in the study.  
Electronic and digital files will be stored and accessed in accordance with the UnityPoint Health - Meriter Privacy 
and Security Requirements - see HELP Bubble in right panel.  
When ever feasible, identifers will be removed from study -related information.  
  Audio  and/or  video  recordings  of subjects  will be transcribed and then destroyed  to eliminate  audible or visual 
identification of  subjects.  
  Counseling will be offered to subjects who are distressed from the research intervention.  
  Use of a code list. The code list links de- identified patient/subject data to a patient's identity. For example, in 
medical  record research,  each study  record representing a subject's  information will be assigned a study  number. 
The code list will link study numbers to medical record numbers. Researchers use a code list to enable verifying 
data.  
  Other  
To avoid physical harm a barrier (mepitel gel gauze) will be placed between the skin and probe sensor and the site monitored daily.  
17.3 Identify components of your plan to identify and address unanticipated problems or complications.  
Regular meetings with research staff to identify unanticipated problems. 
Monitoring subject results/outcomes.  
Monitoring data entry procedures for breaches of confidentiality. Reporting all unanticipated problems to the IRB within 5 working days. Complying  with IRB requests to resolve unanticipated problems.  
  Other  
17.4 What type of facility is the local site(s)?  
  Outpatient  Clinic 
Hospital  
  Other  
17.5 What resources are available at the local site(s) to treat emergencies resulting from study -related procedures?  

BLS trained personnel.  
  ACLS trained personnel and crash cart. 
NRP and/or PALS trained personnel.  
  Emergency supplies to stabilize subject until emergency  personnel  arrive.  
  Emergency Response Team within facility.  
  Call 911 
Other: Specify below.  
  Not Applicable 
Patient will be in an ICU 
17.6 *Is there potential for direct benefit to the subject? 
Yes No 
17.7 *Describe how your research may benefit a future patient group or society as a whole.  
 
Future benefits to a similar patient group would be able to detect acute kidney injury as it occurs with renal 
NIRS and change treatments to either prevent it from occuring or decrease the severity. This is not currently 
possible because urine output and creatinine changes occur several hours to days after the kidney injury.  
This may then result in improved long term kidney function for these preterm infants.  
 
18.0 Investigator Details  
18.1 For this protocol, will the Prinicipal Investigator supervise study staff or study sites that will not be under the 
purview of this IRB?  
Yes 
No 
18.2 Does the Principal Investigator have other human subject research projects besides this one?  
Yes No 
 
19.0 Recruitment and Advertising  
19.1 Check any of the following methods that you will use to recruit subjects.  
Direct contact in a medical setting  
  Direct contact in a non- medical  setting  
  Advertising  – Includes  flyers,  brochures,  other  print media,  radio,  TV, internet,  etc. 
  Referrals  
  Letter  
  Other  
Summary of PI's Responsibilities for This Protocol  
How many research staff will the Prinicipal Investigator supervise that are not listed on this protocol?  
List each of the other sites where you will be doing this protocol and how many subjects are targeted for enrollment 
at each site.  
 
Principal Investigator's Other Research Responsibilities  
How many open studies does the PI have?  
How many other sites do you conduct research at?  
How many research staff do you supervise for your other protocols?  
How many active subjects do you have on other protocols?  
 
 
If OTHER, please describe below.  
19.2 * Does your study use recruitment materials such as flyers, brochures or advertisementing media?  
Yes No 
 
If YES . . .All recruitment materials must be approved by Meriter IRB before use. You will be prompted to 
attach your recruitment materials later when you submit your application.  
19.3 * Identify study team members who will recruit subjects for this study? Click the drop down arrow to the right of 
the column. Select study personnel.  
Key Study Personnel Name 
No records have been added.  
Neonatal ICU Shift Manager RNs  
 
20.0 Subject Payment & Research Costs  
20.1 * Subject Payment Information  
 
Will subjects be paid?  
 
Yes No 
 
If Subjects WILL BE PAID . . . Click on the bar below.  
Copy and paste language from the consent document explaining the payment plan (amounts, visits that are paid, when 
payment will be made) in the text box.  
Example: See HELP Bubble in the right panel.  
20.2 * Will there be any costs to subjects associated with their participation in research? 
Yes No 
 
If so, please explain:  
 
21.0 Consent Requirements  
21.1 Which of the following will you be using for your research? 
  WAIVER of CONSENT - Subjects are not asked for their  consent  
  WAIVER  of DOCUMENTATION of CONSENT  - Subjects  receive,  but do not sign,  a consent  or information 
sheet about the research.  
INFORMED CONSENT - Subject signs and keeps a copy of an informed consent document.  
 
22.0 Consent Procedures  
22.1 * Identify study team members who will conduct the consent discussion with the potential subject.  
See the Help Bubble in the right panel for Soliciting Consent Requirements. Below, click the drop down arrow 
to the right of the column. Select study personnel.  
Study Personnel conducting subject consent. 
Harer, Matthew, MD  
 
 
 
 
 
 
22.2 * Where will the consent discussion take place?  
In the patient's hospital room or clinic exam room at Meriter.  
  In a hospital or clinic waiting room at Meriter. 
  In a group  setting.  
  In a group setting with follow -up in a private room. 
  Onlin e, in public or over the phone.  
  Other  
22.3 * How will you be sure there is sufficient opportunity for the subject to consider whether to consent?  
Potential subjects will be allowed to take home the unsigned consent form for consideration before signing.  
Taking the consent home is recommended unless the person is hospitalized.  
Potential hospitalized subjects will be allowed a waiting period of at least 8 hours to consider their decision.  
  Other  
22.4 * Will non- English speaking people be asked to participate in this study? 
See the HELP Bubble in the right panel for special consent requirements.  
Yes No 
22.5 * If you are enrolling non- English speaking subjects, you must have plans for: translating all subject materials 
including the consent document, and conducting the consent discussion in a language understandable to the 
subject, and having ongoing communication with the subject throughout the research and in case of emergency. 
Check all that apply below.  
  After Meriter IRB approves my English language consent and subject materials, I will pay for an independent 
language translation of these materials. I will submit all translations with a certificate of translation to Meriter  IRB. 
  At least one member of the research team is a certified translator approved by Meriter Guest  Services.  
  The research team will use Meriter Hospital Interpreters from Guest Services. A letter of endorsement from 
Interpretive Services will be attached to this  submission.  
  The research team  will hire an interpreter  who has been approved  by the Interpretive Coordinator  at Meriter 
Guest Services. A letter of endorsement from Guest Services will be attached to this  submission.  
  Other plans for accomodating non- English speaking  subjects.  
22.6 * Will illiterate people be asked to participate in th is 
study?  See the HELP Bubble in the right panel for  special 
consent  requirements.  
Yes No 
22.7 * Will adults who can not consent for themselves be asked to participate in this  
study?  See the HELP Bubble in the right panel for special consent  requirements.  
Yes No 
22.8 * Will potential HIV carriers be asked to participate in this  
study?  See the HELP Bubble in the righ panel for special  consent 
requirements.  
Yes No 
22.9 If the study involves minors, describe the processs of parental permission and how the assent of the minor will 
be sought.  
See the HELP Bubble in the right panel for special consent requirements.  
 
The study is minimal risk and we will be seeking consent from one parent.  
 
We will try to enroll babies who parents are minors. If the parents are emancipated minors we will seek their 
consent and if they are not, we will seek consent of the babies' parent's parent.  
22.10 In case of injury, please explain who will pay for the treatment.  
 

 
Meriter NICU  
 
23.0 HIPAA Requirements  
23.1 Which of the following are you using to comply with HIPAA? If you're not sure, click here for a quick guide.  
HIPAA Authorization  
Waiver of HIPAA Authorization  
  Exempt from HIPAA - not looking at or recording any  PHI 
 
24.0 Waiver  of Authorization (revised April  2016)  
24.1 Select the identifiers you will be looking at or recording for study purposes.  
 
Starred identifiers may be used as part of a limited data set.  
 
Name  
  Address (steet, city*, county, state*, zip code*) 
  Telephone / Fax  Numbers  
  Social Security  Number  
Dates  such  as Birth Date*,  Admission  Date*,  Discharge  Date*,  Date of Death,  Other  Date 
  Ages greater tha 89 and all elements of dates indcative of such age. 
  E-mail addresses / URLs 
Medical Record Numbers  (MRNs)  
  Health Plan Beneficiary  Numbers  
  Account  Numbers  
  Certificate / License Numbers  
  Vehicle Identifiers and Serial  Numbers  
  Device Identifiers and Serial  Numbers  
  Biometric  Identifiers  (e.g. finger  or voice  prints,  full face photographic  images) 
Any other unique identifying number, characteristic or  code.  
24.2 List the specific health information you plan to collect for this study (i.e. specific lab values, BMI, gender, 
diabetes, etc.)  
 
Screening NICU Census for potential research subjects:  
- Name 
- Birth Date  
- Gestational  Age 
- Admission date to Meriter -UPH  NICU 
24.3 Will private health information with identifiers be disclosed to a party or parties outside of UnityPoint Health - 
Meriter?  
Yes No 
 
If YES, describe what data you'll be disclosing and to whom below.  
24.4 Describe your plan to protect identifiers from improper user / disclosure.  
 
A de- identified list will be used with a code list to the patient identifiers.  

 
This will be stored on a secured department server.  
24.5 Describe your plan to destroy identifiers at the earliest possible opportunity.  
 
Once a patient from the NICU Census is identified as eligible, we will record their information in a de- 
identified list of eligible patients and keep a code list to the patient identifiers. If the patient is consented and becomes a subject in the study their information will be de- identified as discussed in previous sections. If a 
patient is eligible and not consented, the patient will be coded, and their identifiers kept in a coded list and at the completion of the study the patient identifiers will be discarded. It is important to keep the patient's 
information whom are eligible and not consented so that their demographics can be compared to the 
subjects who completed the study (often asked for during manuscript submission).  
24.6 Explain why the research can not be practicably conducted without this waiver of authorization.  
 
In order to determine which subjects meet inclusion criteria we need to be able to screen the NICU census 
list. 
24.7 Federal Law prohibits the re- use or disclosure of Private Health Information (PHI) in connection with this 
research to any person or entity other than those authorized to receive it, except: as required by law; for authorized 
oversight of the research; or in connection with other research for which the HIPAA Privacy Rule permits the PHI to 
be used or disclosed. Do you agree to abide by these limitations in order to obtain a waiver of authorization?  
Agree Disagree  
 
25.0 Authorization For Release of Medical Information For Research (HIPAA)  
25.1 Complete the Authorization For Release of Medical Information for Research form.  
 
 
1. 
Click the name of the form above to open it. 
2. 
Complete the answers.  
3. 
Leave the subject name and signature lines  blank. 
4. 
Save the form to your drive.  
5. 
You will be prompted in a later screen to attach this form to your submission.  
 
26.0 Investigator Statement - Last Page in Study Application  
26.1 * "I have discussed the protocol with all of my collaborators. The research is NOT underway and WILL NOT 
BEGIN until approved by the Meriter IRB."  
Agree Disagree  
 
