Emotion Regulation Interventions for Alcohol -Related Sexual Aggression  
NCT
: STUDY00 002103  
D
ate: May 16, 2019  
S
tudy Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Study Protocol  
The obj ective of this protocol was t o evaluate the efficacy  of two brief onl ine emotion regulation 
interventions (compared t o control) for r educing alcohol -related se xual aggr ession i n heavy 
episodic dr inking young m en with a sexual a ggression history. The study involve d a proximal 
change experiment asse ssing the e ffects o f two brief onl ine interventions – cognitive 
restructuri ng and m indfulness  – on m en’s sexual aggr ession during an sexual ag gression-
related analogue. 
Recruitment . Participants w ere recruit ed from t he co mmunity t hrough advertisements 
placed in online classifieds,  social net working websites,  community new spapers,  and local 
venues t hat target t he young adult popul ation. A ds state d that single men 21- 30 years ol d were 
needed for a study o f alcohol and male- femal e relationships.  We also  used flyers,  brochures,  
and postcards i n locations l ikely t o reach  young singl e men, su ch as local community co lleges, 
coffee sh ops, and bar s. All advertising m aterials included a UR L for a website that provided 
information about the study . Interested participants  then co mpleted an in itial online e ligibility 
screening followed by an eligibility verification telephone call.  
Retention. Participation involved a one- time visit to the study laboratory. Participants were 
enrolled into the study  and compl eted t he study in the same visit. As  such, longitudinal retention 
efforts were not required.   
Study D esign. After providing informed consent, par ticipants completed questionnaires 
assessi ng information about se xual r isk behav ior, drinking behavior, se xual a ggression, and 
emotion regulati on skills.  They w ere then randomized to receive one of the t hree intervention 
arms  (cognitive restructuring, mindfulness, o r control). A random ized block  desi gn was  used to 
assign par ticipants to experimental co nditions  based on their sexual aggr ession history so that 
aggression backgrounds w ere evenly distribut ed across  the ce lls. After th e intervention, 
participants received either no al cohol ( control be verage) or a high alcohol dose  (target pea k 
BAC = . 08%), read a sexual aggression analogue , and rate d their se xual aggression intentions . 
Statistical Analysis Plan 
Sexual Aggression Intentions. For the sexual r isk intentions ou tcome, w e enrolled 209 
subjects.  The sexual aggression intentions v ariable includes sco res from a scal e on whic h 
participants r ate their l ikelihood of co ntinuing with sexual act ivity af ter a hy pothetical woman 
refused further sexual contact. To test our hy potheses, a series of ANOVAs were conducted to 
examine the main and interactive effects of intervention c ondition and bev erage condition on 
sexual aggression-r elated intentions with planned pairwise comparisons ex amined for both the 
cognitive restructuring and mindfulness conditions compared to the control condition using the 
Sidak procedure to control for alpha inflation and protect against Type 1 error. Similarly, with 
pairwis e comparisons, we explored whether there are any differenc es between the cognitive 
restruc turing and mindfulness conditions  on intervention efficacy. 
Power and S ample Size. The st udy w as pow ered to det ect the m oderation of bev erage 
condition (sober v s. alcohol) on the association between t he interventions (cognitive 
restructuring , mindfu lness, control) and sexual aggression- related intentions . Using G*Power 
3.1, we used an alpha of .05  and power o f .80. Based on a medium effect size f = . 21, this  
would require a sample size of 222, whereas f = .22 required 203 participants.  As such, we 
obtained a sample of 209 participants.  