 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 1 of 29 
 Date: August 17, 2020 
Principal Investigator: Claudia M. Campbell, Ph.D. 
Application Number: IRB00125605 
 
 
 
JHM IRB - eForm A – Protocol  
 
  
 Use the section headings to write the JHM IRB eForm A, insertin g the appropriate material 
in each. If a section is not app licable, leave heading in and i nsert N/A. 
 When submitting JHM IRB eForm A (new or revised), enter the dat e submitted to the field at 
the top of JHM IRB eForm A. 
 
*************************************************************** ************************************ 
 
 
1. Abstract 
a. Provide no more than a one page r esearch abstract briefly stati ng the problem, the research 
hypothesis, and the importa nce of the research. 
 
This laboratory study will evalua te whether a cannabinoid enhan ces the analgesic efficacy of an opioid in 
a clinical sample of chronic pa in patients, laying the foundati on for a larger clinical  trial evaluating the 
utility of cannabinoids as potenti ally opioid-sp aring adjuvants  to chronic opioid t herapy for pain. 
Heightened CNS processing, or cen tral sensitization (CS), occur s across numerous chronic pain conditions 
and is an important treatment t arget in its own right. While ca nnabinoids show initial promise as 
treatments or adjuncts for some chronic pain conditions and pre -clinical data suggest e ffects on CS, little is 
known about the degree to which c ombining cannabinoids with opi oids alleviates CS- mediated chronic 
pain. We propose a within-subj ect, single exposure, double-blin d, placebo-controlled, human laboratory 
investigation of the extent to w hich a cannabinoid enhances opi oid analgesia in a model chronic pain 
population (e.g., patients with knee osteoarthritis). Human lab oratory studies are a n ideal method for this 
initial evaluation because they pr ovide the opportunity to tigh tly control study drug d osing and afford high 
sensitivity of measurements, and e nable tight control of confou nding variables that ma y otherwise exist in 
clinical treatment popu lations and could diff erentially impact outcomes. This approach will minimize the 
number of participants needed t o determine whether a positive s ignal exists while p ermitting rigorous and 
elegant evaluation of the study a ims. Primary study outcomes wi ll include measures of  clinical pain and 
central sensitiza tion, physical functio n, drug effects (e.g., a buse liability, adverse events, cognitive 
performance), and pharmacokinetic ana lyses. The Aims will exami ne the magnitude and duration of 
cannabinoid/opioid combination i n reducing clini cal pain and ce ntral sensitization; t he effects on physical 
functioning, adverse events and indices of abuse liability; and  the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics 
profiles for the individual and combined drugs. This study will  provide the most syst ematic and rigorous 
evaluation of the potential for cannabinoids to enhance analges ic effects of opioids i n human subjects to 
date, and will do so in a relevant  and generalizable clinical p ain population who has CS, which makes 
these results more directly relevant compared to studies conduc ted in healthy populations.  These findings 
will be critical to in forming the efficac y and safety profile f or the advancement of  opioid/cannabinoid 
combination regimens to clinical  trials with chronic pain patie nts.  
 
2. Objectives (include all primary and secondary objectives)  
 Aim 1: Evaluate the magnitude a nd duration of cannabinoid/opioi d combination to reduce clinical 
pain and central sensitization . We hypothesize the cannabinoid/opioid combination will increa se the 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 2 of 29 
 magnitude and duration of  analgesia in clinica l pain report (Hy p1) and QST-derived central sensitization 
(Hyp2), relative to each drug administered alone and relative t o placebo. 
Aim 2: Evaluate the degree to whi ch physical functioning is alt ered by the cannabinoid/opioid 
combination . We hypothesize that the drug com bination will improve physica l function (Hyp3) relative to 
the drugs administe red alone and placebo. 
Aim 3: Compare the subjective , physiological, abuse liability, and cognitive effects of the 
cannabinoid, opioid, and combination. We hypothesize that cannabinoids will not increase adverse 
events (Hyp4), or abuse liabilit y (Hyp5: ratings of positive dr ug effects) relative t o opioids alone and that 
the cannabinoid (alone and in com bination with opioids) will re duce neurocognitive performance (Hyp6), 
relative to the opioi d alone and placebo.  
Aim 4: Evaluate the pharmacokin etic and pharmacodynamic profile  of the cannabinoid, opioid, and 
the combination in OA patients. We hypothesize that the combined dose will result in an altered  
pharmacokinetic (Hyp7) /pharmacod ynamics profile (Hyp8) compare d to either drug alone.  
 3. Background (briefly describe pre-clinical and clinical data, current exper ience with procedures, 
drug or device, and any other rele vant information to justify t he research) 
This laboratory study is the firs t step in addressing an import ant and timely public health problem: Can 
cannabinoids enhance the analgesic effic acy of an opioid and ul timately reduce opioid dosing in people 
with chronic pain?    
Effective adjuncts to opioid therapy are needed to address the critical public health problem of 
prescription opioid abuse.  Chronic pain is a world-wide  health problem and opioids are un animously 
recognized as the most effective  drugs for the relief of pain a nd suffering
1. Opioid prescriptions for 
chronic pain conditions have in creased despite serious conseque nces2-4 and an epidemic of abuse, 
addiction, and accidental deaths5 continues to escalate6. Undoubtedly, there is l egitimate and necessary 
medical use of opioids to provide  analgesia; yet there is a cle ar need for the clin ical community to 
identify effective alternativ es and adjuncts to opioid therapy that can serve as esse ntial components of 
responsible pain management7. 
Opioids reduce pain at a cost.  Opioids are the most effective analgesic for pain reduction an d often 
become an integral component of t reatment, yet result in myriad  complications including escalating doses 
(tolerance), increased falls, c onstipation, respiratory depress ion/death, and hypogonadism8-16. Further, 
due to opioid-induced hyperalgesia , opioids often l ose their ef fectiveness over time , which means that 
patients with chronic pain incur  consequences of continued opio id use without increased pain relief and 
potentially increases in their  pain. It is clear that reducing singular reliance on esc alating doses of opioids 
for effective pain management is  a significant pu blic health ne ed. The best evidence supports use of 
analgesic combinations that have  different mechanisms of action7.   
Cannabinoids produce analgesia.  Although not yet widely accepted a s treatments or adjuncts for  
chronic pain, cannabinoids have s hown initial pro mise for this indication in both preclinical and clinical 
studies17-28. A recent meta-analysis found mode rate-quality evidence to sup port the use of cannabinoids 
for the treatment  of chronic pain8. Specifically, cannabinoids  reduce neuropathic pain29-32 fibromyalgia 
pain33;34 and pain from multip le sclerosis (MS)35-40 as well as central pain in M S patients when used as an 
adjunct to current analgesics41;42 measured out to two year s without tolerance43. Recent reviews suggest 
that they can produce a reduction in opioid use, improve opioid  pain relief, and reduce annual opioid 
overdose mortality by 25%8.  The cannabinoid dronabinol is an FDA-approved synthetic THC analogue 
that is efficacious in reducing pain.   
Central sensitization (CS) heightens clinical pain. A growing literature indi cates that heightened 
CNS processing, or CS, occurs in chronic pain conditions and is  an important treatment target48. CS is 
characterized by a rewiring of pain  transmission that initiates  and/or maintains pa in chronicity and 
heightens pain in a nu mber of clinical pain di sorders, includin g osteoarthritis48. CS results from 
alterations in CNS neurons, incre asing afferent n ociceptive inp ut and uncoupling pain from the presence, 
intensity, or duration of periphe ral stimuli. In humans, CS man ifests as hyperalg esia, allodynia, and 
spreading of pain. It is a mar ker for pain c hronification48;49 and can be reliably a ssessed in laboratory 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 3 of 29 
 studies through applicat ion of noxious stimuli48. Knee osteoarthritis (KOA) i s one of the leading causes 
of pain and impairment in phys ical function in the U.S.50-54 and a growing literatur e, including our own 
work48, documents enhanced central pai n processing at both affected a nd non-affected (dist al) anatomical 
sites55-59. This augmented CNS processing55;57 and deficits in endogenous pain inhibition60-62 are 
associated with clinical pain57 and reduced physical function; w e and others have suggested th at CS may 
be a more important mechanism of  clinical pain amplification in  KOA than radiologic features60;63.  
Human laboratory measures of CS predict clinical outcomes .  Subjects who rate calibrated noxious 
laboratory stimuli as most painful64;65, who show the greatest CNS sensitizability66 and the least 
endogenous pain inhibition67, report the most frequent, di sabling daily pain complaints.  Human 
experimental pain models link an imal and clinical pain studies,  and quantitative sensory testing (QST) 
has specifically been recommende d for testing analgesic compoun ds, and noted as “ideally suited” in 
proof-of-concept and dos e finding studies68.  Variability in psychophysical  pain responses is common and 
strongly parallels the variability in clinical pain69-74.  QST is responsive to drug e ffects in mechanistic 
studies75-77, and predict opioid analgesia78-83, correlate with opioid dosin g in chronic pain patients13;84, are 
responsive to analgesics82;85;86, and are frequently used to dete rmine analgesic efficacy77;87.  We propose 
to focus our testing on two CS-specific tasks, Conditioned Pain  Modulation (CPM), and Temporal 
Summation (TS). CPM  refers to the phenomenon w hereby one longer-lasting noxious st imulus inhibits 
the pain produced by a 2nd brief noxious stimulus (i.e., counter-conditioning)88. Generally, responses to 
the brief noxious st imulus are reduced during concurrent admini stration of the other s timulus to a distant 
body site, with the magnitude of the reduction (decreased sensi tivity) serving a s a measure of the efficacy 
of central inhibitory, analgesic systems67. These effects are not simp ly diversion of attention88;89; CPM 
serves as an indirect inde x of endogenous opioid function90-97. TS refers to the enhancement of pain 
caused by repeated noxious stimulati on; animal studies have sho wn that it involves  sensitization of 2nd-
order dorsal horn neurons (calle d wind-up) in the spinal cord98-100. In humans, TS is thought to reflect 
endogenous pain-modulatory processe s arising from supraspinal s tructures5 and like CPM, TS has also 
been implicated in p athophysiologic models of chronic pain101.   
Central pain agents can inhi bit hyperalgesia and CS.   Both opioids and cannabi noids have central 
effects, some of which are compl ementary. Because cannabinoids modify and mediate the actions of 
NMDA receptors102;103 which attenuates CS in precl inical models of chronic pain26;104, we believe that 
cannabinoids may substa ntially inhibit CS maintained pain in KO A. Additionally, some chronic pain 
conditions characterized by CS are hypothesized to have an unde rlying clinical endocannabinoid 
deficiency that could be rect ified through cannabinoid administ ration105.  No studies to date have 
examined cannabinoids for CS-me diated pain. The proposed design  (using QST) provides a systematic 
and rigorous model for evaluati ng these effects in a relatively  opioid inexperience d clinical population 
(KOA).  While KOA is a peripheral di sease, central mechanisms u nderlie symptom expression107 and 
central pain agents may be usef ul in treating KOA hyperalgesia.    
Combination therapies may pr ovide synergistic effects.  Cannabinoids modulate the function of 
opioids108. There is substantial prec linical evidence in rodents119-122 and primates123-125 that the 
combination of cannabinoids a nd opioids is extremely effective,  with up to a 20-fold increase in efficacy, 
and the combination may circumven t the development of tolerance  compared to either drug alone109. 
However, these non-human animal re sults require systematic and rigorous evaluatio n in human subjects.  
In healthy participants, THC pr oduced an additive analgesic eff ect when combined with morphine on a 
measure of electrical sensitivity110. Among patients, the single Phas e I study of which we are awar e 
reported decreased pain intensit y and increased satisfaction fo llowing oral adminis tration of 10-20mg of 
dronabinol relative to placebo i n patients using their typical,  prescribed dose of opioids111. Titrated 
dronabinol in chronic pain patients receiving a stable dose of opioids conferred signi ficant pain relief, 
reduced secondary problems associ ated with pain, and increased ratings on a self-report  satisfaction scale 
(0-10) compared to baseline111. In a Phase II study, average d aily and worst pain significant ly decreased 
following low and medium dose Na biximols (cannabinoid spray) co mpared to placebo in daily sustained 
release fixed dose opioid thera py for opioid ref ractory cancer pain patients112. No human studies to date 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 4 of 29 
 have used QST to rigorously evalu ate the combination of cannabi noid/opioid-induced analgesia or 
laboratory measures of CS.  
Summary.   Developing effectiv e adjuncts to opioid therapy for chronic p ain management will address 
a life-threatening public health p roblem that has reached epide mic proportions.  Cannabinoids are a 
logical adjunct to effective opi oids due to preclinical finding s and their potential effects on CS, which 
heightens pain, increases chr onification, and likely contribute s to pain-related disa bility.  Studying KOA 
patients in the laboratory provide s an excellent model for esta blishing initial efficacy and safety of 
combination dosing, a ddressing important que stions about the ma gnitude and duration of analgesia, 
effects on physical function and oth er clinical parameters, whi le also addressing key  questions about 
pharmacokinetics and p harmacodynamics. The ultimate goal of this research  is to determine whether the 
drug combination exerts analgesic e ffects on CS, clinical pain and physical functi oning while minimizing 
abuse liability and cognitive deficits in order to advan ce these medications into clinical trials for the 
treatment of chronic pain.  This is a logical first step toward s evaluating combined cannabinoid/opioid 
treatments for chronic pain and f oundational in supporting numerous fu ture evaluations of combination 
treatments for various pain populations.  
 4. Study Procedures  
a. Study design, including the seque nce and timing of study proced ures   
(distinguish research procedures from those that are part of ro utine care). 
 Study Design Overview:  We propose to study the separa te and combined effects of the F DA-approved 
cannabinoid dronabinol (Marinol) and the prototypical opioid hy dromorphone (Dilaudid). Following 
telephone and screening to estab lish study eligibility, a cohor t of n=100  adults with knee osteoarthritis 
(KOA) will complete four differen t within-subject  experimental sessions. Participants will complete one of 
two Phases, receiving either a 4mg or 2mg dose of hydromorphone . Randomization will be split equally 
across the two Phases. During each session, participants will c omplete baseline QST, questionnaires, and a 
neurocognitive battery.  Oral hydromorphone will be administere d in the first session . Subsequent sessions 
will consist of 1 of 3 conditions, and session order will be ra ndomized and counter-balanced. Conditions 
will be 1) placebo; 2) oral drona binol (10mg); and 3) combined hydromorphone and dronabinol (10mg). 
Measures will be repeated thr oughout the session to fully chara cterize the drug effect s. Participants and 
staff will be kept blinded to t he study medications under inves tigation, and participants will be informed in 
the consent form they may receiv e a combination of FDA-approved
 stimulants, benzod iazepines, opioids, 
cannabinoids, over-the-counter medications or placebo, though t he participants will not actually be 
receiving stimulants, benzodiazepines, or over-the-counter drug s. All participants will be provided with 
transportation to and from the ex perimental sessions. Primary o utcomes are measures of clinical pain, 
central sensitizati on, physical function a nd drug effects/adver se events. A subset of participants will 
undergo blood draws for pharmacokine tic (pK) profile. This will  be voluntary and shoul d aid recruitment 
as those that do not want an IV will still be allowed to partic ipate in the study. We will aim to recruit 30 
participants that volunteer to undergo IV/blood drawing procedu res in order to characterize pK.  
 Phase 1: The initial Phase of t his project will include hydromo rphone at a dose of 4mg. 
Phase 2: The second Phase of thi s project will include hydromor phone at a dose of 2mg i n order to evaluate 
drug effects at a re duced opioid dose. 
 
Recruitment.  We will recruit subjects utilizing multiple strategies success fully implemented by our 
research groups, including via re cruitment flyers, brochures an d posters posted throughout Johns Hopkins 
affiliated hospitals and communi ty, print and el ectronic media,  Trialfacts, website postings, and radio 
advertisements. We also have a  list of over 400 previous KOA st udy volunteers who have given permission 
to call them regarding potentia l future study participation – w e will send these previous participants a letter 
introducing the study. Participants will also be recruited dire ctly through flyers, broc hures or posters at the 
Department of Orthopedic Surg ery clinics, who sees high volumes  of KOA patients; an initial search of 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 5 of 29 
 their electronic medical reco rd identified over 3000 Hopkins pa tients who have been diagnosed with KOA. 
These flyers/brochures/posters will invite interested individua ls to call the study coordi nator or complete an 
online initial assessment of eligibility. Our co-investigators may also refer patients to the study. 
Additionally, we will offer $25 t o our participants who refer s omeone to the study tha t is eligible. We 
expect the overall sample to be >50% female,113 and expect a diverse so cioeconomic background 
representative of Baltimore.  
 In order to minimize the need for research -only in-person visit s, telemedicine visits may be substituted for 
in person clinical trial visits o r portions of c linical trial v isits where determined t o be appropriate and where 
determined by the investigator not  to increase the participant’ s risks. Prior to initiating telemedicine for 
study visits the study team will explain to the participant, wh at a telemedicine visit entails and confirm that 
the study participant is in agreement and able to proceed with this method. Telemedicine acknowledgement 
will be obtained in accordance with the Guidance for Use of Tel emedicine in Resea rch. In the event 
telemedicine is not deemed feas ible, the study visit will proce ed as an in-person visit . Telemedicine visits 
will be conducted using HIPAA co mpliant method approved by the Health System and within licensing 
restrictions.  Screening.  Telephone Screening : Following completion of an in itial phone screening, eligible participants 
will be scheduled for additional Screening.  Screening:  Screening will be used to ob tain informed consent, 
and establish preliminary study eligibility. Screening may occu r in-person or as a comb ination of virtual/in-
person. Subjects will review and sig n an informed consent docum ent with a study staff member to begin 
the Screening visit. Virtual consenting will follow IRB guideli nes for virtual consenting procedures and 
will occur prior to any data col lection. Subjects will provide a urine sample that must test negative for illicit 
drugs and pregnancy (for premenop ausal females), will complete a battery of measures  to establish study 
eligibility prior to b eing scheduled for the ir first experiment al session.  Training for t he QST protocol prior 
to study sessions will be completed during in-person screening activities where possible. We may also 
collect a saliva sample for fut ure analyses for those that cons ent to this portion of the study, once allowed. 
Medical eligibility will be de termined based on ECG, a blood sa mple to analyze hepa tic, hematologic, and 
chemistry functioning, a history  and physical, and a knee x-ray  occurring prior to medication 
administration at the first Experimental S ession. Eligible indi viduals will be asked t o complete pain diaries 
over the course of the study to e valuate clini cal pain between sessions.  
 Randomization: The BPRU pharmac y has no subject interaction and  will manage drug randomization/ 
blinding.  
 Experimental Sessions. Upon eligibility confirmation, subjects 
will complete four experimental study sessions (Table 1a or 1b) . 
Sessions will begin at approxi mately 0800 and subjects will be 
asked to refrain from eating prio r to the session in order to 
control dietary intake on th e day of testing. Following provisi on 
of a negative urine sample for  illicit drugs and pregnancy and 
consumption of a calorie-controll ed breakfast (whether eaten in -
person or the participant follows  instructions and guidelines t o 
eat at home), for those in the  pK group, an intravenous line wi ll 
be established on the non-dominan t arm.  After 15 minutes of 
rest, the first 10-14mL blood draw will be taken for those in t he pK group. At  Table 1a.  Phase 1. Study Drug Dosing 
Subjects complete each conditio n
ConditionHydromorphone 
(Oral) Dronabinol
(Oral)
1 4m g 0 (placebo)
Randomized Orde r
2 0 (placebo) 0 (placebo)
3  0 (placebo) 10mg 
4 4m g 10m g
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 6 of 29 
 approximately 0930 participants w ill complete baseline QST, 
physical functioning measures, a nd self-report measures (see 
below). The second 10-14mL blood dr aw (for those in the pK 
group) will be collected and then t wo oral capsules containing 
either active drug or placebo (rando mized in sessions 2-4) will  
be administered at approximate ly 1100. Briefly, subjects will 
complete QST, physical functi oning, cognitive testing, self-
report, and vital sign measures ( as well as blood draws for tho se 
in the pK group) at regular i ntervals following study drug 
administration. Self-report meas ures will include specific opio id 
agonist and antagonist effects, t o assess whether cannabinoids 
are exerting an effect on a part icular category of opioid agoni st symptom, and will capture whether any 
negative effects (e.g., nausea) occu r. Frequent collection will  enable evaluation of time to peak drug 
effects, duration of effects, and ge neral time course of effect s and is a widely used and accepted approach 
in laboratory studies of drug e ffects. During the final assessm ent each day, subjects will complete a Drug 
vs. Money Questionnaire to indica te the dollar value they would  place upon the drug received98, which is a 
well-accepted proxy measure of abu se liability. Study staff wil l document adverse events throughout the 
study and any subject who experience s a strongly unpleasant eff ect of the medications, or wishes to 
discontinue for any reason will be  able to end participation at  any time. Any subject who is experiencing 
strong agonist effects at the  end of the session will be provid ed overnight accommodation in the Clinical 
Research Unit (CRU; which is located on our campus and with who m we have frequent collaborations); 
based on our experience we expect t his to be rare and are budge ting for 20% of sessions to undergo a one-
night CRU stay. 
  
Measures 
Pilot testing indicates it tak es approximately one hour to comp lete the assessment ba ttery (see Table 2).  
Pain Testing: Subjects will complete quantitative sensory testi ng (QST) to comprehensively and 
systematically measure general pa in sensitivity and central sen sitization. This approach will provide data 
regarding the full range of anal gesic effects possible, across a wide variety of psycho-physiologically-
mediated, experimentally-induced  measures of pain perception. S ubjects will complete a baseline QST 
session prior to study drug admin istration on each experimental  session day and the pain testing battery will 
be repeated approximately eve ry 90 mins. The QST battery consis ts of threshold and tolerance, and 
temporal summation, and conditi oned pain modulation (CPM) tests . The threshold responses will be 
conducted in randomized and count er-balanced ord er, and conditi oned pain modulation will always occur 
last. 
Threshold Responses  will be assessed using therm al and pressure stimulation. Thermal threshold:  All 
contact heat stimuli will be deliv ered using a peltier-element- based stimulator (Medoc , Israel). Two trials 
of heat pain threshold will be a dministered using a thermode th at gradually increases i n temperature from a 
pre-set baseline (31oC) until the subject indicates when the stimulus “first feels p ainful” (threshold, HPTh) 
and presses a button (which termi nates the procedure) indicatin g that the pain is into lerable (tolerance, 
HPTo). Pressure threshold : Pressure pain thresholds (PPT h) will be determined at each of  the following 
sites on both sides of the body usi ng a pressure algometer (SBm edic; Sweden): the medial fat pad of the 
knee, patella, trapezius, and thum b. Pressure at the site is gr adually increased at a steady rate and stopped 
when the subject indicates the st imulus is first perceived as p ainful. Thirty-second inter-stimulus intervals 
will be maintained. Trials will be averaged for one HPTh, HPTo,  and PPTh measure. 
Temporal Summation (TS) of Pain  will be assessed using thermal s timuli (TTS) and repetitive 
punctuate stimuli. Sequences of  10 heat pulses are applied and the temperature of each phasic stimulus 
remains the same. Within each se quence, successiv e thermal puls es will be delivered  for a duration of 
approximately 0.5 sec each, with a n approximately 2.5-sec inter -pulse interval. Subjec ts will verbally rate 
the perceived intensity of each thermal pulse on a 0-100 rating  scale. TTS is measured as the differences 
between the highest rated t hermal stimulus and the 1st stimulus57;67.  Mechanical Temporal Summation 
(MTS) will use a set of weighte d pinprick stimulators that exer t forces of 8- 512 mN. The probes are Table 1b.  Phase 2. Study Drug Dosing 
Subjects complete each conditio n
ConditionHydromorphone 
(Oral) Dronabinol
(Oral)
1 2m g 0 (placebo)
Randomized Orde r
2 0 (placebo) 0 (placebo)
3  0 (placebo) 10mg 
4 2m g 10m g
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 7 of 29 
 applied perpendicular to the skin. We will apply both single st imuli and 10-stimulus trains at 1HZ, and will 
record subject’s pain ratings ( 0-100). Single pinprick stimuli are alternated with tra ins of 10 stimuli. The 
difference between the pain rating to the train of stimuli and the single stimuli is then calculated as MTS118.  
Capsaicin : Capsaicin sensitization procedures similar to our frequently used and well-established 
protocols, originally develope d by Peterson and colleagues, wil l be utilzed70. Heat will be delivered using 
the Medoc. The procedure involve s a 35-minute sensitization per iod (conducted during the baseline period) 
with a 1.25inch2 treatment site on the ventral fo rearm. The thermode will be he ated to between 38-45°C 
(depending on the sensitivity of  participants) for 5 minutes an d pain ratings will be collected every one 
minute on the 0-100 rating scale. A n open square raised adhesiv e frame (internal di mensions same as 
thermode, to reduce leakage beyond the site) will then be appli ed and capsaicin cream (10%)71 will be 
spread onto the skin and permitte d to absorb for 30 minutes. Th is induces mild-moderate (48.25+27.93), 
but well tolerated pa in. Capsaicin is t hen removed and the heat  pain threshold and mechanical temporal 
summation (described above) will be conducted again in the area . The treated skin wil l be re-kindled for 
each of the additional QST timepoint by heating the treatment s ite with the thermode  at between 38-45°C 
(again depending on sensitivity) for 5 min. Following each reki ndling episode, heat pain threshold and 
mechanical temporal summation as well as measurement of flare a nd secondary hyperalg esia will be 
conducted. The area of flare (re dness around the capsaicin site ) will be traced to aceta te paper. The area of 
secondary hyperalgesia will be quantified with a probe or von F rey hair by stimulating along eight linear 
paths around the treated site. S timulation starts well outside the hyperalgesic area, a nd continues towards 
the treated skin area until the subject reports a change in sen sation. The border is ma rked on the skin with a 
pen and traced to acetate paper, w hich is subsequently measured . Studies have demonstr ated excellent test-
retest stability in 2o hyperalgesia measureme nts over rekindlings72;73;73 and the procedure is ideal for 
including in paradigms with rep eated testing as the rekindlings  allow for rapid evalu ation of capsaicin 
sensitization (which typicall y necessitates at least 30min each ).  
Cold Pressor Testing and CPM:  A series of procedures design ed to elicit and measure endogeno us 
inhibition of pain will be app lied. Subjects will undergo a ser ies of cold pressor tasks (i.e., the conditioning 
stimuli) consisting of immersion of the hand in a circulating c old water bath. Dur ing hand immersion, 
pressure responses or temporal s ummation will be re-assessed wh ile subjects’ hands remain in the cold 
water. Subjects may remove their  hand at any time. Two minutes after finishing the first immersion, 
subjects will re-immerse the ir hand in the water, and one of th ese tests (pressure response or temporal 
summation) will be re-assessed, e ach separated by 2 min (the te sts will be conducted in random order). A 
CPM Index is quantified as the a verage percent change (across t rials) in PPTh or TS during the cold pressor 
tasks relative to baseline ratings119. One final cold-water immersi on will be performe d at the concl usion of 
the CPM procedures. This will involve a typical cold pressor ta sk, using immersion of the hand until the 
subject’s tolerance is  reached, with a 5-minute uninformed time  limit. 
CS: Temporal summation measures, CP M, and after-sensation response s to these measur ements will be 
combined to create the CS index f or use in statistical analyses  for which we have previously published57. 
Physical Performance Measures w ill objectively assess physical functioning. Patient sel f-report of activity 
relates only modestly to perform ance measures on standardized p hysical tests120-125 and physical 
performance under the effects of t he drugs administered here ar e an essential test of the real-world 
applicability of admin istering such analgesic combinations in t he natural environment. T his set of tests will 
involve a Timed Up and Go (TUG) tes t. Stair climb (which includ es hand rails) and a three-Minute Walk 
(3MW) test, all commonly used m easures of KOA physical function126. The TUG test measures the time it 
takes a subject to rise from a standard chair, walk 3m, and the n return to sitting in t he same chair. In the 
3MW test, subjects are asked to c over as much distance as possi ble in 3 minutes whi le walking laps on a 
standardized indoor course. Each test will be conducted at base line and at projected peak effect to avoid 
participant fatigue.  Self-report Pain Measures: Subjects will complete the Western O ntario McMaster Universities 
Osteoarthritis Scale (WOMAC, 3.1127), the Brief Pai n Inventory (BPI128;129), and a visual analog scale 
(VAS; 0-10 rating of pain) of their  current clinical pain at mu ltiple points within each session. The 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 8 of 29 
 WOMAC is comprised of 24 items and is a well-validated130, widely-used measure that yields three indices 
specific to osteoarthritis (pain, disability, and joint stiffne ss), which are also sen sitive to treatment131. The 
BPI is the most widely-used, best -validated “generic” pain meas ure for assessing chronic nonmalignant 
pain128;129 and includes two primary dimens ions: pain severity and interfe rence with activity132. These 
measures will provide both “disease-specific” and “generic” ind ices of pain and pain-related physical 
dysfunction.  
 Pharmacological Measures of Dr ug Effects: The measures of drug effects comprise both pharmacologically 
and qualitatively nonspecific me asures (e.g., any drug effect) and qualitatively specific measures (e.g., 
liking, good effects, bad effect s); the gold standard method by  consensus panels and the FDA for detecting 
drug effects.133 We will also measure vital signs (e.g,. blood pressure, heart rate, respiration) and pupil 
diameter as physiological res ponses to the study drugs.  Neuroc ognitive testing, using a standard battery 
will also be conducted and is consid ered critical before any ad ditional drug development for 
opioid/cannabinoid combination therapies could proceed. Neuroco gnitive performance (5 minute) 
assessments will assess aspects of cognitive/ psychomotor funct ioning known to be sensitive to the acute 
effects of marijuana and relev ant to functioning in the workpla ce and/or in operating a motor vehicle or 
heavy machinery. All subjects will be trained on the performanc e tasks to a stable baseline level during one 
of the screening session.  Tasks i nclude: 1) Div ided Attention Task (DAT): subjects simultaneously 
perform two different simple ta sks based on visual stimuli pres ented on a computer screen; 2) Digit Symbol 
Substitution Task (DSST):  subjects must hand type patterns pre sented to them on a computer screen for 90 
seconds; and 3) a computerized version of the Paced Auditory Se rial Addition Task (PASAT): subjects are 
provided a string of single dig it numbers on the computer and m ust add the total of t he prior to integers 
presented and respond by selecting the answer using the compute r mouse on the screen. A circular lights 
task will also be included where  participants touch areas that light up on a board. This takes about one 
minute to complete. These tests  have been selected because they  capture a wide range o f cognitive abilities 
and do not require substantial time  for completion (so they wil l not interfere with additional study 
requirements). Co-I Vandrey uses t hese tasks in laboratory exam inations of oral, smoked, and edible 
cannabinoids, which will aid with interpretation. 
 Optional Hair Analysis Substudy:  Participants will be asked whe ther they would like to participate in a hair 
sampling substudy. The study will be considered optional to pre vent disinterest in hair sampling from 
negatively impacting recruitment  for the primary study.  The ra tionale for this substudy i s that hair analyses 
are emerging as an important  method for detecting drug use. Thi s study can contribute valuable information 
to efforts to refine hair analy ses because it administers drugs  that have known abuse potential in a 
controlled manner and at known a nd uniform dose levels. The stu dy PI has been asked by a NIDA Program 
Officer to collect hair samples from willing participants to be  analyzed by the Neuroproteomics and 
Neurometabolomics Center at Nort hwestern University. Samples wi ll be used to improve Maldi Sampling 
Techniques, to determine the degr ee to which accurate identific ation and quantificatio n of levels of opioid 
and cannabinoid exposure in hair s amples from individuals who a re biologically confirmed to have no 
extra-study drug use is possible. P articipants who are enrolled  in the study will be ask ed about interest in 
this substudy and consented int o the substudy via an additional  signature on the consent form (similar to 
consenting to be contacted for fut ure research). The substudy w ill collect a hair sample at the beginning and 
end of the participation period. Sam ples will be collected via the commercially available Hair Test 
Collection Kit from Th erapak and coded by part icipant ID number s so that no PHI will be shared with the 
Center. Samples will be sent a nnually to the Center for analyse s.  
 Optional Saliva Sample: A saliva sample will be collected for g enetic analyses. The se samples will be 
provided for DNA analysis of gene tic variability that may expla in individual differences in the perception 
and experience of pain. In recent  years, it has become clear th at people differ widely in their experience and 
report of pain-related processes , exhibiting profound variabili ty in their sensitivity to noxious stimuli, 
susceptibility to acute and chr onic clinical pain, and response s to analgesics (E dwards 2005;Fillingim 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 9 of 29 
 2005). Currently, many pai n research laboratories are exploring  the associations  of common genetic 
variants in humans with pain sen sitivity or clinical pain condi tions by evaluating common single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (i.e., sites in the  genome where the DNA sequence s of many individual s differ by a single 
base) located on pain-relevant ge nes (Diatchenko, Slade et al. 2005;Diatchenko, Nackley et al. 2006). For 
example, genetic variability at s ites coding for a particular o piate receptor are primary candidates for 
genetic influences on pain since this receptor is the principal  site of action for  both endorphins and 
exogenous opioids (Lotsc h, Skarke et al. 2004).   
  At present, the field of human pa in genetics is in its infancy;  a handful of putative pain-relevant 
polymorphisms have been identif ied, but positive findings have often failed to replicate, and new 
polymorphisms are expected to be identified over the next sever al years (Edwards 2006). Thus, we will 
evaluate several current candidate pain genes, and will also st ore participants’ samples for future evaluation 
as more information becomes ava ilable regarding which polymorph isms are likel y to play a role in shaping 
individual differences in the  perception and experience of pain . The SNPs that we will evaluate based on 
the current literature are in t he genetic regions coding for th e Catechol-O-Methyltranferase gene, the mu 
opioid receptor gene, the delta opioid receptor gene, and the i nterleukin-1 and interleukin-6 genes. 
 
b. Study duration and number of study vi sits required of research participants. 
 Participants will complete one s creening visit and four experim ental session visits. 
 
c. Blinding, including justificati on for blinding or not blinding the trial, if applicable. 
 Participants and staff will be  blinded to both the drugs and th e doses of study medications being 
administered at each study visit.  T his will allow a rigorous t est of the study hypot heses by not biasing 
participants or staff towards di fferential pain ratings. This i s an essential component of the study. As 
described, we will inform particip ants that they may receive a combination of FDA-approved stimulants, 
benzodiazepines, opioids, cannabi noids, over-the-counter medica tions or placebo, thou gh the participants 
will not actually be receiving stimulants, benzodiazepines, or over-the-counter drugs. 
 
d. Justification of why pa rticipants will not r eceive routine care  or will have current therapy 
stopped. 
N/A  
e. Justification for inclusion of  a placebo or non-treatment group . 
 We have included a placebo contro l condition to assist with int erpretation of the st udy results. Since this 
study will not be removing access to a known treatment, we beli eve that inclusion of t he placebo condition 
poses low risk to participants.  
 
f. Definition of treatment failure or  participant re moval criteria . 
 Participants will be removed fro m the study if they remove thei r consent to particip ate, become pregnant, 
refuse to adhere to the study ses sion schedule, or if it become s clear that their con tinued participation could 
put them at increased risk (e .g., develop another chronic pain condition that requires  treatment, onset of a 
medical/psychiatric disorder). T hese decisions will be made in conjunction with the s tudy medical team. 
 
g. Description of what happens t o participants receiving therapy w hen study ends or if a 
participant’s participation i n the study ends prematurely. 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 10 of 29 
 Because we will only be deliveri ng study medications for assess ment during visits and will not ask 
participants to stop taking their  routine medications, there wi ll be no need to taper the use of study 
medications or continue to mon itor drug effects once participan ts are released. 
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
Inclusion Criteria: 1) Age 45 or older, 2) meet the Ame rican College of Rheumatolog y criteria for knee 
OA, 3) report an average pain l evel of >3/10, 4) not have taken  any opioid medications for the past 30 
days, 5) provide a urine sample t hat tests negative for illicit  drugs and pregnancy, 6) b e medically eligible 
to take study medications, 7) patients taking NSAIDs or acetami nophen must be on a stable dose for 30 
days, 8) be fluent in English, and 9) willing to comply with th e study protocol. We will enroll >50% 
women because there is substantia l evidence that men/women diff er with regard to pain perception, 
endogenous cannabinoid receptor density, and response to opioid s and will use sex as a covariate in 
analyses.   Exclusion Criteria: Individuals who 1) have cognitive impairment preventing complet ion of study 
assessment procedures, 2) meet cu rrent DSM-5 criteria for alcoh ol/substance use disorder, 3) meet criteria 
for lifetime history of opioi d use disorder, 4) have taken stim ulants, benzodiazepines, TCA, venlafaxine or 
duloxetine in the past seven days , 5) have a history of clinica lly significant cardiac arrhythmias or 
vasospastic disease, or an abnor mal and clinically-significant ECG, 6) have history/cu rrent evidence of 
significant medical/ psychiatric illness that elevates risk for  experiencing an adverse event (including 
current suicidal ideation), 7) ha ve a known allergy to the stud y medications, or 8) are pregnant or 
breastfeeding. Additional exclusi on criteria due to their effec ts on pain responses inc lude 10) current 
peripheral neuropathy, 11) pres ence of Raynaud's phenomenon, 12 ) active vasculitis or severe peripheral 
vascular disease, 13) current  infection, 14) confirmed diagnosi s of periodic limb move ment disorder or 
restless legs syndrome, 15) syste mic inflammatory or autoimmune  disorders such as rh eumatoid arthritis, 
lupus, etc., 16) seizure disorder , or 17) have a chronic pain c ondition that produces pa in greater than their 
KOA.  6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices 
a. The rationale for choosing the  drug and dose or for choosing th e device to be used. 
 We have strategically select ed hydromorphone and dronabinol for  this study, both drugs will be 
encapsulated by the BPRU pharmac y to ensure double-blind admini stration, and placebo will consist of 
lactose or another benign weight -matched filler. See Table 1 ab ove for drug dosing details. 
 
i. Hydromorphone (Dilaudid) is a potent mu-opioid agonist that we have extensive experience  
administering in contro lled laboratory settings. Hydromorphone is not subject to differences in CYP 
metabolic enzymes so will not r equire us to screen out individu als with recent exposure to CYP 
inhibitors/inducers, or to analyz e/ statistically control for C YP metabolic profiles . The two (2 and 4 mg) 
oral doses of hydromorphone are co mmercially-avail able and regu larly used for analges ia, which increases 
the clinical relevance of these  results. We expect both doses o f hydromorphone to e xert a moderate 
analgesic effect on pain, which i s an important feature because  too strong a dose c ould overwhelm the 
cannabinoid effect and prevent us from effectively evaluating t he study aims. Including both a low and 
moderate dose will provide an elegant assessment of whether a c annabinoid will pr oduce an additive, 
synergistic, or no effect on the  analgesic profile of hydromorp hone.  
ii. Dronabinol (Marinol)  has been strategically chosen for this study because it is a w idely-used, 
commercially-available Schedule II  cannabinoid med ication that is currently indicated for nausea and 
vomiting, and anorexia in AIDS patients, 
but which could be prescribed off-label for the adjunctive 
treatment of clinical pain.  Dronabinol is a synthetic del ta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) p roduct (the 
primary psychoactive compound in ca nnabis sativa (marijuana)), and thus has genera lity with other THC 
compounds (such as smoked or edibl e marijuana products). When a dministered orally ( as proposed here), 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 11 of 29 
 dronabinol reaches peak concentrations in 2-4 hours and is 90-9 5% absorbed but, due to extensive first-
pass metabolism, is only 10-20% bioa vailable. It is excreted in  fecal (35-50%) and ren al (10-15%) waste. 
The elimination half-life is bi phasic, with an initial half-lif e of 4 hours and a terminal half-life of 25-36 
hours, and an active metabolite (1 1-hydroxy-delta-9-THC) is pro duced. There is no current evidence that 
dronabinol is differentially aff ected by P450 status. Dronabino l is sold commercially in 2.5mg, 5mg, and 
10mg dose ranges. We have chosen to administer a 0 m g (placebo) and 10mg dose of dronabinol in 
this study,  which is within the r ange currently prescribed for chemotherap y-induced nausea and vomiting 
and AIDS-related anorexia, and the refore will have direct clini cal applicability. Dronabinol will be 
purchased as a capsule and will be over-encapsulated by our res earch pharmacy to ensure double-blind 
administration procedures. Placebo doses will consist of lactos e or another benign wei ght-matched filler. 
  
Pharmacokinetic (pK) Analyses : Blood samples, drawn on a subset  of participants, wil l enable direct 
comparison of serum drug levels with outcomes for the study aim s (e.g., analgesia and physical 
functioning, subjective and observe r- rated effects, abuse liab ility measures, and cognitive performance). 
We have chosen to sample pK at nu merous timepoints to examine w hether the duration of effects changes 
as a function of drug ad ministration and dete rmine whether beha vioral changes following 
hydromorphone/dronabinol co-admi nistration result from pharmaco logical enhancement or whether co-
administration modifies the met abolic profile of either drug in  such a way that it changes their duration of 
action. pK analysis is considered critical for this initial sta ge of evaluating dr ug-drug interactions135 and 
will directly inform decisions r egarding specific opioid/cannab inoid dose combinations  that may be most 
appropriate to advance into clini cal trials for the treatment o f pain.  
 
b. Justification and safety infor mation if FDA approved drugs will  be administered for non-FDA 
approved indications or if doses o r routes of ad ministration or  participant populations are 
changed. 
 
Hydromorphone: Hydromorphone hydrochloride is a  pure mu opioid agonist that ca n be administered in 
oral, rectal, intramusc ular (IM) or intrave nous (IV) formulatio ns for the indication of acute and/or chronic 
pain. We have chosen to administer hydromorphone because we hav e extensive experience administering 
hydromorphone in all formulations 96; 109-117, and know that it will produce reliable and consistent results 
that will aid interpretatio n of outcomes. Hydromorphone was als o selected as the exem plar opioid for this 
study because it is not subject to differences in CYP metabolic  enzymes and therefore w ill not require us to 
screen out individuals  with recent exposure to CYP inhibiting o r inducing medicatio ns, or to analyze and 
statistically control for CYP metabolic profiles in individual subjects. There is als o no apparent effect of 
gender on the pharmacokinetics of h ydromorphone. We have select ed a low and mid-level dose because 
they are within the range of  doses approved by the FDA. They ar e also sensitive to the QST tests we have 
proposed, and we therefore believe both will provide an ideal o pportunity to evaluate wh ether the curve of 
hydromorphone is shifted as a f unction of dronabinol administra tion.  
 Dronabinol: Dronabinol is a schedule II drug t hat is being ad ministered at 10 mg, which is consistent with 
the range approved by the FDA for therapeutic use in patients w ith chemotherapy-induced nausea and 
vomiting, and loss of appetite i n patients with advanced HIV (A IDS).  Dronabinol is also used off label for 
the treatment of Gilles de la T ourett’s syndrome, general loss of appetite (related to ca ncer), spasticity from 
Multiple Sclerosis, treatment refractory and postoperative naus ea and vomiting, and treatment refractory 
pruritus. When administered ora lly (as proposed here), dronabin ol reaches peak concentrations in 2-4 hours 
and is 10-20% bioavailable. It is  subject to extensive first-pa ss metabolism and is excreted in fecal (35-
50%) and renal (10-15%) waste, w ith an elimination half-life of  19-36 hours.  
We have selected oral dronabinol  because it is FDA approved for  pain conditions and more likely 
than nabilone to be prescribed i n practice due to cost. We beli eve this approach will yield data that can be 
instantly utilized by pain  treatment specia lists, which increas es the generalizability o f our study approach.  
  
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 12 of 29 
 c. Justification and safety infor mation if non-FDA approved drugs without an IND will be 
administered.  
N/A 
 7. Study Statistics 
a. Primary outcome variable: 
Aim 1: Evaluate the magnitude a nd duration of cannabinoid/opioi d combination to reduce clinical 
pain (Hyp1) and central  sensitization (Hyp2) . Hyp1 (pain VAS) and Hyp 2 (CS) will be analyzed using 
repeated 2-factor (Drug x Time) mo dels that examine linear and quadratic effects as well as duration and 
magnitude, and direct and interact ion effects. If large variati on exists across subjects  at baseline, then raw 
data will be transformed to cha nge-from-baseline and analyzed i n drug condition by time models. A 
secondary outcome will be peak c hange from baseline, analyzed a s a function of Drug (1-factor model).  
 
 Aim 2: Evaluate the degree to whi ch physical functioning is alt ered by the cannabinoid/opioid 
combination . Hyp3 will be assessed using the TUG and 6MWT. Time to complet e the TUG task will be 
the primary outcome and will be  evaluated using 2-factor (Drug x Time: Pre to Peak) models.  
 
 Aim 3: Conduct a direct comparis on of the subjective, physiolog ical, abuse liability, and cognitive 
effects of the cannabinoid, opioid, and combination. Hyp4 (adverse events) will be assessed by summing 
the mean number of related mild, m oderate, and severe adverse e vents (separately) and using 1 factor 
models to assess a main effect  of Drug. Hyp5 (abuse liability) will be assessed using the Drug vs. Money 
questionnaire and changes in VAS r atings using 2-factor models (Drug x Time). Hyp6 will evaluate 
changes in neurocognitive perfo rmance, including study session number as a covariate to control for 
practice effects, using 2-factor  (Drug x Time) analyses. Second ary outcomes for this hypothesis will be 
analysis of peak change from baseline for the cognitive outcome s, analyzed using 1-factor (Drug) 
ANOVAs to evaluate a m ain effect of drug.    
 Aim 4: Evaluate the pharmacokinet ic (pK) and pharmacodynamic (p D) profile of the 
cannabinoid, opioid, and the combination in OA patients. Hyp 7 (pK) will be assessed by evaluating 
Cmax (maximum concentration) a nd Tmax (time to m aximum concentr ation) as a function of Drug 
condition using 1-factor models. We will also examine linear an d quadratic effects to e valuate the time 
course of concentration. Linear  and quadratic effects will be m odeled for Hyp8 (pD) and analyzed by 
evaluating VAS and physiological r atings, transformed to change  from baseline, evaluating area under the 
curve and peak change from baselin e to identify main effects of  the Drug condition.  We will then conduct 
multivariate regression analyses to evaluate the degree to whic h the Cmax and Tmax correlate with 
pharmacodynamic outcomes, includi ng abuse liability ratings, VA
S ratings of drug effects, and cognitive 
testing outcomes.    Statistical analyses will be c onducted separately by Phase and use multilevel analyses with an 
autoregressive (AR1) or compound s ymmetry (CS) covariance struc tures (as appropriate for the data set) 
using SAS PROC MIXED
137. Interpretation of drug condition  main effects and interaction s will rely on 
Tukey post-hoc tests. Statistical s ignificance will be set at p  < 0.05. 
 Expected Outcomes: We expect that dronabinol will enhance hydromorphone-induced an algesia to both 
clinical and laboratory-evoked pai n.  Our comprehensive battery  of rigorous, testing procedures provides an 
opportunity to test effects on mul tiple mechanisms of experimen tally-induced pai n. We also expect 
improvement in physical functioni ng under combined dosing, and that the addition of the cannabinoid will 
not significantly increase the  overall abuse liability or adver se event profile.  We do suspect the 
cannabinoid may have cognitive effects (though the degree to wh ich this may happen is not clear). 
 
b. Secondary outcome variables. 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 13 of 29 
 Demographic and drug use charact eristics that are hypothesized a priori to be asso ciated with outcomes 
(e.g., Body Mass Index) will be compared across sex groups and significant differences will be included as 
covariates in the subsequent analyses.  All analyses will be repeated and sex (male/female) will be add ed as 
a factor to the analyses. 
 c. Statistical plan including sampl e size justification and interi m data analysis.  
 This will be the first study to examine interactions between ca nnabinoids and opioids on clinical and 
laboratory-evoked measures of  pain in a population who has chro nic pain and central sensitization. The 
study uses a within-subject, pla cebo-controlled design and no d ata exist upon which t o generate a power 
analysis. We have selected two pr imary outcomes for the measure ment of analgesia: measures of 
conditioned pain modulation and time to hand withdraw latency i n a cold presser test.  
  Mr. Paul Nuzzo, a biostatistici an with extensive experience a nalyzing within-subject laboratory 
tests of drug effects, conducte d a revised power calculation ba sed on new literature that employs methods 
similar to those of this study ( Cooper et al., 2018). Sample si ze estimates were pre mised with a power of 
0.8, alpha =0.05 and calculated effect sizes (Cohen, 1988). The se analyses suggests a sample size ranging 
from 10-15 individuals would be su fficient to detect large effe ct sizes. Because one o f our aims focuses on 
a sex-comparison, we original ly planned to double our enrollmen t. Thus, our sample of 64 completers 
(32/sex) will yield sufficient  power to evaluate direct effects  of study condition on CPM and cold presser in 
both Phases, even at small effect size levels, and will also be  sufficient to ident ify between-session 
differences on pK results
140.  
 
d. Early stopping rules. 
The safety of participants is th e highest priority.  The larges t potential risk of this st udy is cardiovascular in 
nature. This notion is based upon t he results of a published st udy that reported an incr ease in heart rate and 
blood pressure among patients expos ed to the cannabinoid dronab inol who were also undergoing opioid 
withdrawal (of which increase d heart rate and blood pressure is  a known symptom). This group differs 
from our target population in ma ny ways, however out of an abun dance of caution in these early studies, 
we will use this experience to inf orm our safety criteria. We w ill monitor vital signs at all study data 
collection time points and will fo llow procedures that we have developed and successfully used in previous 
studies that adminis tered drugs (e.g., co caine) with known card iovascular risks. Specifically, if a 
participant’s parameters reach these thresholds, then a study p hysician, who will always be available via 
telephone, will be contacted and consulted to determine the app ropriate course of action.  
o Systolic blood pressure: >180mm Hg 
o Diastolic blood pressure: >120mm Hg  
o Heart Rate: > submaximal  heart rate (220 – [age x 0.85)].  
Appropriate courses of action may include observing the partici pant until the parameters return to 
normal or transferring the partic ipant to the Emergency Departm ent (ED). Our research building, which is 
the location in which all study sessions will be conducted, is located across the street from the Johns 
Hopkins Bayview Medical Center (JHBMC) ED. Part icipants who can  walk will be escorted to the ED by a 
study staff member. If there is a ny question in a participant’s  ability to walk safely then 911 will be called 
to have an ambulance dispatch ed for the participant. 
 Additional stopping rules will include not abiding by the CMBR/ BPRU policies a nd procedures, or 
engaging in behaviors towards st aff or other participants that are abusive. Finall y, development of an 
intercurrent illness or condition that changes the participants  risk may result in med ical discharge from the 
study. 
 
8. Risks 
a. Medical risks, listi ng all procedures, thei r major and minor ri sks and expected frequency. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 14 of 29 
 The primary risk to the participant is associated with effects of hydromorphone admin istration during the 
controlled laboratory sessions . Hydromorphone hydrochloride is a pure mu opioid agoni st that can be 
administered in oral, rectal, intra muscular (IM), or intravenou s (IV) formulations for  the indication of acute 
and/or chronic pain. We have c hosen to administer hydromorphone  in oral formulatio n because it has a 
slower onset and lower magnitude  of effects. Co-I Dunn is curre ntly administering hydromorphone in a 
dose and formulation identical t o what is proposed here to opio id-naïve participants as part of a NIDA-
funded R01 and has not observed an y moderate effects or any ser ious adverse effects (IRB00047423). 
When administered orally, hydromor phone effects are detectable in 15 minutes and can last 4-5 hours, 
which provides adequate time to a ssess the effects of dronabino l on opioid analgesic function. 
Hydromorphone was also strategi cally selected as the exemplar o pioid for this study because it is not 
subject to differences in CYP me tabolic enzymes and therefore w ill not require us to sc reen out individuals 
with recent exposure to CYP i nhibiting or inducing medications,  or to analyze and statistically control for 
CYP metabolic profiles in indivi dual subjects. There is also no  known effect of gender on the 
pharmacokinetics of hydromorphone.  a. Hydromorphone: Administration of any drug invol ves some risk because it is not  always possible to 
predict individual response to dr ugs. The most likely risk in t his study is that subjects will experience side-
effects of the drugs that may be  unpleasant. Common side effect s of hydromorphone are light-headedness, 
dizziness, sedation, nausea, vomi ting, sweating, flushing, dysp horia, euphoria, dry mouth, and pruritus.  
Less frequently observed side effects are weakness, headache, a gitation, tremor, uncoordinated muscle 
movements, alterations of mood ( nervousness, apprehension, depr ession, floating feeli ngs, dreams), muscle 
rigidity, paresthesia, muscle tremor, blurred vision, nystagmus , diplopia and miosis, transient hallucinations 
and disorientation, visual disturba nces, insomnia, increased in tracranial pressure, flushing of the face, 
chills, tachycardia, bradycardi a, palpitation, faintness, synco pe, hypotension, hypertension, bronchospasm 
and laryngospasm, constipation, bi liary tract spasm, ileus, ano rexia, diarrhea, cramp s, taste alteration, 
urinary retention or hesitancy, a ntidiuretic effects, urticaria , other skin rashes and diaphoresis. Side effects 
of hydromorphone are generally tem porary, dissipate within seve ral hours, and are dose-dependent. Thus, 
participants may only experien ce side-effects occasionally duri ng the research study. Serious potential 
adverse effects of hydromorphone a dministration that are possib le but extremely unlike ly to be encountered 
in this study are respirator y depression and loss of consciousn ess. The FDA has identified the following 
conditions as increasing the ris k for respiratory depression or  other serious side effects following 
hydromorphone administr ation: patients with status asthmaticus;  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; 
reduced respiratory function;  high blood pressure ; impairment o
f hepatic, pulmonary or renal functions; 
myxedema or hyperthyroidism; adr enocortical insufficiency; gall  bladder disease; acu te alcoholism; history 
of convulsive disorders; history o f head injury; currently taki ng sedatives, hypnotics or phenothiazines; and 
sulfite allergy. Mean exposure to hydromorphone is also increas ed 4-fold among patients with hepatic 
impairment and 3-fold among patien ts with renal impairment.  Th e BPRU has extensive experience 
administering hydromor phone to opioid naïve in dividuals and emp loys well-established and rigorous 
eligibility criteria to ensure that individuals who may be more  prone to experiencing opioid-induced side 
effects will not be adm itted into the study. 
The most serious potential adverse event following hydromorphon e administration is opioid agonist 
overdose, which is characteri zed by respiratory depression, som nolence progressing to stupor or coma, 
skeletal muscle flaccidity, col d and clammy skin, constricted p upils, and sometimes bradycardia and 
hypotension. In serious overdosag e, particularly following intr avenous injection, apnea, circulatory 
collapse, cardiac arrest, and deat h may occur.  We believe the risk of overdose in thi s study to be low for 
the following reasons: we have ext ensive experience in the admi nistration of hydromorphone, we have 
chosen a dose that has been dem onstrated to be safe and tolerab le in similarly opioid inexperienced 
participant populations, we will exclude any individual who has  a medical condition th at may increase the 
risk for respiratory depression a nd/or other adverse events, al l medication doses will be administered by a 
trained research nurse, and participants will be closely monito red by trained staff who will have access to 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 15 of 29 
 the opioid antagonist naloxone to reverse the opioid agonist ef fects. Additional protec tions against the risk 
of hydromorphone side effects, i ncluding overdose, are discusse d in the Protection Against Risks section. 
Hydromorphone has no known inter actions with dronabinol.  
 b. Dronabinol:  The FDA identifies the followi ng adverse effects of dronabinol : cardiovascular 
(hypertension, hypotension, palpita tions, tacharrhythmia, vasod ilation); dermatol ogic (flushing); 
gastrointestinal (abdominal  pain, nausea, vomiting, xerostomia) ; neurological (amnesia, ataxia, confusion, 
coordination problem, dizziness,  somnolence, vertigo), and psyc hiatric (anxiety, delusion of persecution, 
depersonalization, depression, dist urbance in thinking, euphori a, hallucinations), t hough it should be noted 
that the adverse effects were c ollected from studies of patient s undergoing chemo therapy or with advanced 
HIV, which may have decreased the ir threshold for experiencing negative effects. Dro nabinol is listed as 
pregnancy category C, meaning th at preclinical studies have rev ealed adverse effects  on the fetus but that 
no controlled human studies have  been conducted to assess this risk (pregnancy or breast-feeding will be an 
exclusion criterion). The only abs olute contraindication of dro nabinol is allergy or  hypersensitivity to 
cannabinoids or sesame oil. Dr onabinol has moderate – severe in teractions with breast  cancer resistance 
protein inhibitors (topotecan, a taluren), and has moderate inte ractions with the antir etroviral protease 
inhibitor ritonavir (Norvar), w hich is used to treat HIV and AI DS.  
c. Opioid-Cannabinoid Interactio ns: There are limited data avai lable to indicate whether there are 
consistent opioid-cannabinoid i nteractions on physiological out comes. One study that was published in 
1975 evaluated combinations of de lta-9 THC (which is present in  smoked marijuana and dronabinol) and 
the opioid oxymorphone reported tha t the combination of drugs d ecreased CO2  slope and increased 
tachycardia, though heart rate inc reased generally following ex posure to delta-9 THC141. A second, more 
recently published study reported t hat a 40mg dose dronabinol t hat was administere d to participants 
undergoing opioid withdrawal (as a  method of minimizing the wit hdrawal syndrome) also produced 
tachycardia142. This effect was  eliminated once the dose of dro nabinol was reduced to 30mg. We do not 
believe this will be  a problem for thi s study. The second study  only reported negativ e effects when 
dronabinol was adminis tered at the highe st dose approved for hu man consumption by the FDA (40mg) and 
the effect was completely elimin ated once the dose was marginal ly reduced. In addition, this study enrolled 
patients who were opioid depende nt and withdrawing from opioids , and increases in heart rate and blood 
pressure are well-recognized sym ptoms of the opio id withdrawal syndrome. Thus, though we have 
presented these studies to be t ransparent, we do not believe th eir results will necessa rily generalize to our 
patient population. We have listed ou r protections against risk  in the following section. 
 d. Chance That Participants May Begin Abusing Opioids or Cannab inoids Following Exposure to 
Study Drugs: There is a small but potential  risk that exposing non-drug abus ing individuals to doses of 
hydromorphone or cannabinoids may  elicit reinforc ing effects th at could precipitate  subsequent drug-use 
behavior. Enrolling non-drug users in to controlled laboratory s tudies is a conventi onal strategy that has 
been used extensively to evaluat e the abuse liability potential  of numerous drugs of abuse both within our 
laboratory and by other laboratories.  
 e. Discomfort from Pain Testing: Participants will likely find the pain testing procedures uncom fortable 
for a brief period of time. This effect is expected to be trans ient and to produce only mild levels of 
discomfort. Pressure Pain Testing:  There is a slight chance of mild transient bruising associated with use of 
the algometer. In our experien ce, this is quite rare (< 5 % of cases). Thermal Pain testing: There is a very 
small chance that the heati ng device might produce a burn, but the risks associated w ith the relatively small 
amount of heat applied to the skin (maxim um of 122 degrees Fahr enheit or 51 degrees Celsius) are very 
low. The Medoc device has safet y features built into both the h ardware and software.  The risks associated 
with use of this equipment are less than those associated with common household appliances. Punctuate 
Probe Pain Testing:  There is a  very slight chance that the pro be might superficially puncture the skin for 
individuals w ith “thin skin.”  Capsaicin is the main ingredie nt in hot peppers, and is used as  an over the 
counter drug for the treatment o f pain. The dose of capsaicin w e are using is higher than what is available 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 16 of 29 
 over the counter, although it is l ess than half of the dose in a single habanera pepper. Capsaicin does cause 
pain, like a hot pepper may do when it is eaten. Capsaicin may produce some local redness and swelling 
that will disappear within a day. T he area of skin where the ca psaicin is applied could  be sensitive for up to 
48 hours. Capsaicin may cause a bu rning feeling in the eyes or other areas of the body if accidentally 
rubbed onto other skin areas.  Cold Water Testing: There are n o significant risks from immersi on of a hand 
in cold water. Participants are in formed that they  can stop tes ting whenever they would like to do so.  We 
have used the proposed laborator y pain procedures in a number o f previous studies wit h healthy adults and 
chronic pain patients, includi ng patients with KOA. No serious adverse effects were ever reported.  
 f. Blood draws:  For participants that volunteer to undergo this part of the pr oject, some discomfort may be 
associated with the drawing of bl ood samples, and there is a ve ry small chance that phl ebotomy may cause 
hematoma, infection, anemia and m inor pain at the puncture site . However, these procedures are routinely 
performed without incident in medical settings.  
 g. Knee X-Rays: Knee X-rays expose participants t o very low amounts of radiatio n.  Knee x-rays will be 
conducted for research purposes  in the current study, even thou gh it is a procedure that would potentially 
be part of routine c linical care. The benefits of knee x-rays u sually outweigh the minimal risk. Of note, our 
study physician will review inciden tal findings following the i nitial read by Dr. Auste r and we will follow-
up with participants/their pr oviders as appropriate. 
 h. Physical Functioning Tasks: Minimal risks are associated w ith the 3 minute walking task, st air climb 
and timed up and go task.  Participa nts may become fatigued or experience mild discomfort when 
completing the tasks.  i. Hair Testing:  A small amount of hair will be c ut from the head (not pulled).  This is of minimal risk to 
participants.   
 j. Breach of Confidentiality: Although staff members are highly t rained to maintain participa nt 
confidentiality, there is always  a risk that some of the confid ential information colle cted could be revealed 
to people who are not involved i n the research study. This coul d be embarrassing to the participant if the 
participant preferred to keep hi s or her study participation se cret, or if sensitive information became known 
to an individual outside the st udy. We have an extensive histor y of conducting research among substance 
abusers and have instituted sev eral practices to prevent a brea ch from confidential ity from occurring (see 
below); thus, we believe t his risk to be minimal.  
 
b. Steps taken to minimize the risks. 
 a. Protection Against Hydromorphone Risks: We have extensive experien ce in the administration of 
hydromorphone and other opioid agon ists in controlled laborator y settings and therefo re anticipate few 
problems. Any individual who may b e prone to the risks associat ed with hydromorphone will be excluded 
from participating.  Although resea rch staff and participants w ill be blinded to the e xact medication 
provided, both groups will be infor med of the potential side ef fects and risks associ ated with the study drug 
administration. Participants w ill be free to discontinue study participation at any time  without consequence. 
The dose of hydromorphone that is  being administered is consist ent with clinical car e, and is a medium 
level dose for the treatment  of pain. Hydromorphone will always  be administered along with placebo in the 
first session, which will provide a valuable opportunity to exc lude from further partic ipation any participant 
who experiences untoward effects (e.g., nausea, vomiting) resul ting from that dose  of hydromorphone. 
Great care has been taken in s electing the appr opriate drug dos es to ensure hydromorp hone is well-tolerated 
and safe for our participants and participants will also be abl e to discontinue study par ticipation at any time. 
The most serious risk associa ted with hydromorphone administrat ion is respiratory depression. We believe 
this risk is minimal in this st udy for several reasons. First, we are administering a mid-level dose and have 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 17 of 29 
 extensive experience administering this dose at controlled leve ls in healthy controls .  Second, we have 
developed several standard cr iteria that are followed by nursin g staff and research personnel to monitor 
participants who have been provided with a study medication. Al l nursing and research staff are informed 
of these standards, and a list of  these standards is posted in each testing room. The sta ndards are as follows: 
If respiratory rate drops bel ow 12 breaths/minute and is accomp anied by sedation, participants are 
prompted verbally to breath. I n our experience, v erbal and phys ical stimulation is ofte n sufficient to prompt 
breathing and restore a normal re spiratory rate.  If respirator y rate drops further a nd/or if oxygen saturation 
rates fall below 90% s aturation, then patient s are monitored ca refully. Specifically, they will be 
accompanied continuously by a medical and/or nursing staff memb er, evaluated by a staff physician, and 
are given supplemental oxygen at 2L/min via a nasal cannula (av ailable on site in the e xam testing room) if 
deemed necessary by the physician. If clinical evaluation deter mines that a participan t’s sedation level is 
increasing, the opioid antagonist  naloxone can be promptly admi nistered via intramu scular route to produce 
an immediate reversal of opioid e ffects. There have been very f ew incidents thr oughout our >15 year 
experience administering opioid a gonists to human participants in controlled laboratory conditions that 
have necessitated actual interv ention (oxygen and/or naloxone),  however our equipment and 
medical/nursing staff is always pr epared for this possibility. We feel these procedures will sufficiently 
protect participants from possi ble adverse and s erious adverse events.  
 b. Protection Against Dronabinol Risks: The majority of risks that  are known to occur following 
dronabinol administration are psyc hiatric in nature. These risk s are recognized as being transient and 
readily reversible. To mitigate these risks, we will exclude pa rticipants who endor se having previously 
experienced negative effects to cannabinoid products. We will a lso conduct psychiatri c screening during 
the Screening session to ensure that patients with current or h istory of psychiatric events are excluded from 
study participation. Further, all pa rticipants will be informed  about the potential side  effects of the study 
medications and will be permitte d to end study participation at  any time if they experien ce negative events, 
with no consequences.  Finally, we are providing participants w ith taxi service to and from the study 
sessions to ensure no persistent dr ug effects will impact their  driving. We are als o budgeting for the 
potential for a participant to s tay the night at the CRU follow ing study drug exposure. Based on our 
previous experience, we expect t his to be a rare occurrence but  are prepared to make that option available 
as needed.  To protect against risks of incr eased heart rate and tachycardi a following co-adminis tration of opioids and 
cannabinoids we will require a ll participants to be in good car diovascular health prior to study enrollment 
(evidenced by a clean ECG, rev iewed by a study physician). Duri ng sessions, all participants will be 
attached to a vital si gns monitor and will have vital signs col lected at 15 minute inte rvals for the first 2 
hours to ensure safety. The ris k of an opioid/cannabinoid inter action will only occur during a single study 
session, however since staff and pa rticipants will be blind as to the timing of that session, we will employ 
this monitoring schedule for all sessions. We will review data following completion of  5 participants and if 
it becomes evident that tachycar dia is occurring regularly duri ng any sessions, we will reevaluate the dose 
of study drugs being administere d. However we believe that any changes to our dosing strategy are highly 
unlikely and this monitoring schedule will ensure participant s afety during study pa rticipation. 
 
c. Protection Against Risks That  Participants May Begin Abusing  Opioids or Cannabinoids 
Following Exposure to Study Drugs : Another concern is the possibi lity that exposure of participa nts with 
no histories of drug abuse to drugs  in our research setting mig ht in some way increas e the likelihood of 
these individuals to begin abus ing illicit drugs when they retu rn to the community. The Johns Hopkins IRB 
closely monitors this issue, a nd has repeatedly concluded that administering drugs that have reinforcing 
effects to individuals who do not  abuse drugs is not associated  with an increased propensity to begin 
abusing drugs. Administering drugs that may have reinforcing ef fects to non-depe ndent users has 
substantial precedent in laboratory examinations of drug effect s, and we have a rich and extensive history 
of utilizing this practice.  Seve ral research studies that have  directly examined the association between 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 18 of 29 
 study-related drug administrati on and subsequent drug use behav ior have failed to demonstrate that 
controlled, laboratory drug exposure increases the risk for dev eloping future dependence. For example, 
authors of a recent study that administered methamphetamine to a sample of non tre atment-seeking drug 
abusers reported no difference  between-group differences in dru g use behaviors, assessed via the Addiction 
Severity Index, at a 6- month follow-up assessment126. Second, a systematic follo w-up study reported that 
alcohol-dependent volunteers ra ndomly assigned to laboratory st udies either involv ing or not involving 
experimental alcohol consumptio n have not differed in their fol low-up outcomes127. Third, a recent study 
concluded that inves tigational administra tion of intravenous co caine to intravenous inexperienced cocaine 
users did not increase the risk of  recreational intravenous use128. Fourth, a study conducted by our research 
team administered cocaine and/or  opioids to participants with h istories of drug abuse and observed no 
significant changes in number of  days of reported drug use, dol lar amounts reported s pent for various drug 
classes, or any increases in A ddiction Severity Index domain sc ores at a one month follow-up129. Finally, 
the College on the Problems of D rug Dependence, a prestigious i nternational association of drug 
dependence researchers, supports  the practice of enrolling non treatment-seeking ind ividuals into drug 
abuse liability evaluation studi es. Specifically, the College o n Problems of Drug Dependence reported that 
exposure of drug abusers to abuse d drugs in a controlled resear ch setting does not enh ance the desire of an 
individual to use drugs, worse n addiction, or make addiction mo re difficult to treat130. Overall, given the 
substantial data available in t he literature and our own labora tory experience, we feel confident that 
administration of small quantities of psycho active drugs to ind ividuals with recreatio nal histories of drug 
abuse will not be associated w ith future drug use behavior.  
 Participants will also not be informed about the specific medi cation they are receiving, which is a 
common procedure used by our resear ch unit to minimize bias in responding. This proce dure also makes it 
difficult for the pa rticipant to seek out  drugs they may have f ound reinforcing during the study session, thus 
further minimizing the opportuni ty for study participation to i ncrease risk of non-study drug abuse. 
   
d. Protection Against Risks of  Discomfort from Pain Testing:  It is likely that participants will 
experience some acute and transie nt discomfort from the pain te sting session, however we will work to 
mitigate that risk as much as po ssible. First, participants wil l be informed of the  pain testing procedure 
during the informed consent and w ill be able to make an informe d decision regarding their study 
participation. Second, we chose st andardized pain tests that ar e known to produce short-lived effects and 
thus are unlikely to produce any r esidual pain. Third, the meas ures rely on the participant ending the pain 
testing procedure as an outcome m easure, which means that all p articipants are enco uraged to remove 
themselves from the painful st imulus at any time and that they are in control of the magnitude and duration 
of pain they experience. Fourth, we will enforce an upper limit  on all pain measures to  prevent any tissue 
damage from occurring (e.g., hand c annot be in cold pressor tas k for >300 seconds). Fifth, participants will 
be informed that they can revoke  their consent to participate i n the pain testing at a ny time without penalty. 
Specific to capsaicin- one of the  primary risks o f capsaicin is  that it could be accidentally transferred to 
another part of the body. To prevent this from happening, we wi ll make sure the exposure site is well-
marked and that all residual top ical cream is removed with alco hol pads once the cream has been mostly 
absorbed. We will also be able to apply ice to the exposure sit e to reduce any persistent discomfort 
associated with capsaicin. Finally, the participants will be mo nitored by study staff and will have access to 
medical care and concomitant medic ations to treat  residual pain  if necessary. We will also document and 
submit to our IRB all adverse events reported from the pain tes ting session and will follow any 
recommendations they may have r egarding the cessation of pain t esting. Across hundreds of research 
participants with various condi tions, we have had no adverse ev ents deemed greater th an mild (even this 
level AE occurs in < 1/100 cases) related to the use of these d evices.  
 e. IV Placement and Blood Draws: These procedures are routinely per formed without incident in me dical 
settings and will be performed by a  certified phle botomist. Add itionally, these proced ures will only occur 
in a subset of participants t hat volunteer to undergo these pro cedures and can be stopped at any time 
without penalty. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 19 of 29 
  
f. Knee X-Rays: The X-rays will be read by a rad iologist from the Division of R adiology within the 
Russell Morgan Department of R adiology, JHU. If they occur, inc idental findings will  be communicated to 
the study investigators who will communicate the result to the subject and an appropriate referral will be 
made if clinically indicated.   g. Physical Functioning Tasks: Minimal risks are associated w ith the 3 minute walk test, stair  climb and 
timed up and go task, as these activities are part of everyday activity for most people .  Should participants 
feel pain and be unable or unwillin g to continue, they are inst ructed that they may stop at any time.  
 h. Protection Against Risks Asso ciated with Breach of Confident iality: To protect conf identiality, all 
research participants will be a ssigned unique par ticipant ident ification codes that will be used on all study–
related forms and online websites . Documents that include the p articipants’ full names (e.g., signed 
informed consent forms) will be  stored in an independent binder , consistent with FDA Good Clinical 
Practice Guidelines, and will be  kept in a locked room. Confide ntial information will never be shared with 
anyone outside of the research pr ogram without the explicit wri tten permission of the research participant. 
Only selected designated staff members will be approved to shar e confidential inform ation after explicit 
written permission is obtained fro m the participant and the par ticipant will be able to revoke written 
permission at any time. In accord ance with IRB requirements, al l research staff will  be formally trained in 
these procedures. No identifying participant information will b e used in written repor ts, manuscripts and/or 
conference presentations  
c. Plan for reporting unanticipate d problems or study deviations. 
All adverse events will be repor ted to the IRB and other releva nt agencies (e.g., FDA, NIDA) as required. 
The Principal Investigator and Co- investigators are responsible  for reporting such events. 
 
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with bre ach of confidentiality. 
Although there is always a small ri sk that confid entiality will  be breached, we believe this risk to be very 
minimal with the current study.  I t is possible that participan ts’ urine samples may test positive for the 
study drugs for up to 1 week after e ach session. To mitigate an y potential negative impact this may have on 
participants, we will inform them of this potential risk in the  ICF so they may make an informed decision 
regarding their participation de spite this potential consequenc e, and will provide any interested participants 
(who sign a release of informatio n) with a lette r signed from t he study investigator s tating that their urine 
sample may be positive for drugs  that can be considered abusabl e for up to 7 days f ollowing a study 
session.  
 
e. Financial risks to the participants. 
None.  
9. Benefits 
a. Description of the probable bene fits for the participant and fo r society. 
There is no direct benefit of thi s study to the participant. Ho wever, this study will provide the first 
empirical evidence in humans of the ma gnitude and duration by w hich cannabinoids may enhance opioid 
analgesic effects in OA patie nts, using a standardized quantita tive sensory testing (comprehensive pain 
testing) battery. This information will adva nce the use of cann abinoids from treatment -refractory conditions 
to more wide-spread use for pain treatment. A positive result w ill provide new medication targets and will 
help lead efforts to reduce soci etal reliance upon opioids for the treatment of pain. R educed availability of 
opioids will lead to reductions in use/abuse and related proble ms (risky injecti on behavior, opioid 
overdose).   
10. Payment and Remuneration 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 20 of 29 
 a. Detail compensation for participa nts including possible total c ompensation, proposed bonus, 
and any proposed reductions or pena lties for not completing the  protocol. 
This study is moderately intense  so, given the older age (45+) of the population and th e multiple drug and 
pain testing exposures, we have set compensation accordingly. B ased on our extensive experience, 
remuneration will need to compens ate for lost workdays and othe r inconveniences and will need to be high 
enough to encourage continued rete ntion so that we are able to complete the study in the proposed period of 
time. Subjects will earn $100 for the in-person screening visit , and $150 for completing t he first, $200 for 
the second, $250 for the third, and $325 for the fourth experim ental session. For subjects that choose to 
participate in the blood draw ing aspect of the study, an additi onal $100 will be earned for each session. 
Participants will be offered $25 for  each hair sample provided,  for a total of $50 for  the optional substudy. 
We frequently use this approach t o compensate s ubjects for indi vidual sessions AND study completion, and 
found it to successfully promote retention in studies over mult iple weeks. 
 
11. Costs 
a. Detail costs of study procedure(s)  or drug (s) or substance(s) to participants and identify 
who will pay for them.  
All study related procedures wil l be paid by a National Institu te on Drug Abuse grant; participants will not 
incur any direct cost fo r study participation.  
Reference List 
 
 (1)  Portenoy RK. Current pha rmacotherapy of chronic pain. J Pain Symptom Manage  2000;19:S16-
S20. 
 (2)  Dworkin RH, Backonja M, R owbotham MC et al. Advances in n europathic pain: diagnosis, 
mechanisms, and treatment recommendations. Arch Neurol  2003;60:1524-1534. 
 (3)  Riley JL, III, Hastie BA. I ndividual diffe rences in opioi d efficacy for chronic noncancer pain. Clin J 
Pain  2008;24:509-520. 
 (4)  Caudill-Slosberg MA, Schwa rtz LM, Woloshin S. Office visi ts and analgesic prescriptions for 
musculoskeletal pain in US: 1980 vs. 2000. Pain  2004;109:514-519. 
 (5)  Center for Disease Contro l. Drug Poisoning Deaths in the United States, 1980-2008. NCHS Data 
Brief [serial online] 2011;No. 81. 
 (6)  Centers for Disease Cont rol and Prevention. Prescription Drug Overdose in the United States: Fact 
Sheet. CDC [serial online] 2014. 
 (7)  Argoff CE, Albrecht P, Irv ing G, Rice F. Multimodal analg esia for chronic pain: rationale and 
future directions. Pain Med  2009;10 Suppl 2:S53-S66. 
 (8)  Tauben D. Nonopioid m edications for pain. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am
 2015;26:219-248. 
 (9)  Whiting PF, Wolff RF, Des hpande S et al. Cannabinoids for  Medical Use: A Systematic Review 
and Meta-analysis. JAMA  2015;313:2456-2473. 
 (10)  Chang G, Chen L, Mao J. Opi oid tolerance and hyperalgesi a. Med Clin North Am  2007;91:199-211. 
 (11)  Chu LF, Angst MS, Clark D . Opioid-induced hyperalgesia i n humans: molecular mechanisms and 
clinical considerations. Clin J Pain  2008;24:479-496. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 21 of 29 
  (12)  Colvin LA, Fallon MT. Opi oid-induced hyperalgesia: a cli nical challenge. Br J Anaesth  
2010;104:125-127. 
 (13)  Hooten WM, Mantilla CB, S androni P, Townsend CO. Associa tions between heat pain perception 
and opioid dose among patients w ith chronic pain undergoing opi oid tapering. Pain Med  
2010;11:1587-1598. 
 (14)  Mao J, Mayer DJ. Spinal cord neuroplasticity following r epeated opioid exposure and its relation to 
pathological pain. Ann N Y Acad Sci  2001;933:175-84.:175-184. 
 (15)  Mao J. Opioid-induced abnor mal pain sensi tivity: implica tions in clinica l opioid therapy. Pain  
2002;100:213-217. 
 (16)  Tompkins DA, Campbell CM . Opioid-induced hyperalgesia: c linically relevant or extraneous 
research phenomenon? Curr Pain Headache Rep  2011;15:129-136. 
 (17)  Russo EB. Cannabinoids in t he management of difficult to  treat pain. Ther Clin Risk Manag  
2008;4:245-259. 
 (18)  Cichewicz DL. Synergistic  interactions between cannabino id and opioid analgesics. Life Sci  
2004;74:1317-1324. 
 (19)  Dahl V, Raeder JC. Non-opi oid postoperative analgesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand  2000;44:1191-
1203. 
 (20)  Herkenham M, Lynn AB, Little MD et al. Cannabinoid recep tor localization in brain. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A  1990;87:1932-1936. 
 (21)  Jaggar SI, Hasnie FS, Sellaturay S, Rice AS. The anti-hy peralgesic actions of the cannabinoid 
anandamide and the putative CB2 rec eptor agonist palmitoylethan olamide in visceral and somatic 
inflammatory pain. Pain  1998;76:189-199. 
 (22)  Kohli DR, Li Y, Khasabov SG et al. Pain-related behavior s and neurochemical a lterations in mice 
expressing sickle hemoglobi n: modulation by cannabinoids. Blood  2010;116:456-465. 
 (23)  Lynch ME, Campbell F. Canna binoids for treatment of chro nic non-cancer pain; a systematic 
review of randomized trials. Br J Clin Pharmacol  2011;72:735-744. 
 (24)  Martin BR. Cellular effects of cannabinoids. Pharmacol Rev  1986;38:45-74. 
 (25)  Rom S, Persidsky Y. Canna binoid receptor 2: potential ro le in immunomodulation and 
neuroinflammation. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol  2013;8:608-620. 
 (26)  Sagar DR, Staniaszek LE, O kine BN et al. Tonic modulatio n of spinal hyperexcitability by the 
endocannabinoid receptor system i n a rat model of osteoarthriti s pain. Arthritis Rheum  
2010;62:3666-3676. 
 (27)  Ware MA, Adams H, Guy GW. T he medicinal use of cannabis in the UK: results of a nationwide 
survey. Int J Clin Pract  2005;59:291-295. 
 (28)  Ware MA, Doyle CR, Woods R , Lynch ME, Clark AJ. Cannabis  use for chronic non-cancer pain: 
results of a prospective survey. Pain  2003;102:211-216. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 22 of 29 
  (29)  Wallace MS, Marcotte TD, Umlauf A, Gouaux B, Atkinson JH . Efficacy of Inhaled Cannabis on 
Painful Diabetic Neuropathy. J Pain  2015;16:616-627. 
 (30)  Nurmikko TJ, Serpell MG , Hoggart B, Toomey PJ, Morlion B J, Haines D. Sativex successfully 
treats neuropathic pain charact erised by allodyn ia: a randomise d, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
clinical trial. Pain  2007;133:210-220. 
 (31)  Turcotte D, Doupe M, Torabi M et al. Nabilone as an adju nctive to gabapentin for multiple 
sclerosis-induced neuropathic pa in: a randomized  controlled tri al. Pain Med  2015;16:149-159. 
 (32)  Wilsey B, Marcotte T, D eutsch R, Gouaux B, Sakai S, Dona ghe H. Low-dose vaporized cannabis 
significantly improve s neuropathic pain. J Pain  2013;14:136-148. 
 (33)  Fiz J, Duran M, Capella  D, Carbonell J, Farre M. Cannabi s use in patients with f ibromyalgia: effect 
on symptoms relief and hea lth-related quali ty of life. PLoS One  2011;6:e18440. 
 (34)  Skrabek RQ, Galimova L, Ethans K, Perry D. Nabilone for the treatment of pain in fibromyalgia. J 
Pain  2008;9:164-173. 
 (35)  Moreno T, I, Sanchez AJ, G arcia-Merino A. Evaluation of the tolerability and efficacy of Sativex in 
multiple sclerosis. Expert Rev Neurother  2014;14:1243-1250. 
 (36)  Russo M, Naro A, Leo A et al. Evaluating Sativex(R) in N europathic Pain Management: A Clinical 
and Neurophysiological Assessmen t in Multiple Sclerosis. Pain Med  2016. 
 (37)  Wade DT, Collin C, Stott C , Duncombe P. Meta-analysis of  the efficacy and safety of Sativex 
(nabiximols), on spasticity in peopl e with multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler  2010;16:707-714. 
 (38)  Novotna A, Mares J, Ratcliffe S et al. A randomized, dou ble-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-
group, enriched-design study of nabi ximols* (Sativex((R)) ), as  add-on therapy, in subjects with 
refractory spasticity cau sed by multiple sclerosis. Eur J Neurol  2011;18:1122-1131. 
 (39)  Corey-Bloom J, Wolfson T , Gamst A et al. Smoked cannabis  for spasticity in mul tiple sclerosis: a 
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. CMAJ  2012;184:1143-1150. 
 (40)  Langford RM, Mares J, Novotna A et al. A double-blind, r andomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-
group study of THC/CBD oromucosal  spray in combination with the  existing treatme nt regimen, in 
the relief of central  neuropathic pain in patients with multipl e sclerosis. J Neurol  2013;260:984-997. 
 (41)  Rog DJ, Nurmikko TJ, Fried e T, Young CA. R andomized, con trolled trial of cannabis-based 
medicine in central pain  in multiple sclerosis. Neurology  2005;65:812-819. 
 (42)  Svendsen KB, Jensen TS, Bach FW. Does the cannabinoid dr onabinol reduce central pain in 
multiple sclerosis? Randomis ed double blind placebo controlled crossover trial. BMJ  2004;329:253. 
 (43)  Rog DJ, Nurmikko TJ, Young CA . Oromucosal delta9-tetrahy drocannabinol/cannabidiol for 
neuropathic pain associated with  multiple sclerosis: an uncontr olled, open-label, 2-year extension 
trial. Clin Ther  2007;29:2068-2079. 
 (44)  Frank B, Serpell MG, Hughes J, Matthews JN, Kapur D. Com parison of analgesic effects and 
patient tolerability of nabilone  and dihydrocodeine for chronic  neuropathic pain: randomised, 
crossover, double blind study. BMJ  2008;336:199-201. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 23 of 29 
  (45)  Pinsger M, Schimetta W, Vol c D, Hiermann E, Riederer F, Polz W. [Benefits of an add-on 
treatment with the synthetic c annabinomimetic nabilone on patie nts with chronic pain--a 
randomized controlled trial]. Wien Klin Wochenschr  2006;118:327-335. 
 (46)  Turcotte D, Doupe M, Torabi M et al. Nabilone as an adju nctive to gabapentin for multiple 
sclerosis-induced neuropathic pa in: a randomized  controlled tri al. Pain Med  2015;16:149-159. 
 (47)  Toth C, Mawani S, Brady S et al. An enriched-enrolment, randomized withdrawal, flexible-dose, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, pa rallel assignment efficacy study of nabilone as adjuvant in the 
treatment of diabetic peri pheral neuropathic pain. Pain  2012;153:2073-2082. 
 (48)  Woolf CJ. Central sensiti zation: implications for the di agnosis and treatment of pain. Pain  
2011;152:S2-15. 
 (49)  Gebhart GF. Desce nding modulation of pain. Neurosci Biobehav Rev  2004;27:729-737. 
 (50)  Center for Disease Contro l and Prevention. Prelavlence o f disabilities and associated health 
conditions among adults--U nited States, 1999. 50, 120-125. 2001 . MMWR Morbity Mortality 
Weekly Report.  
Ref Type: Report 
 (51)  Lawrence RC, Helmick CG, Arnett FC et al. Estimates of t he prevalence of art hritis and selected 
musculoskeletal disorders in the United States. Arthritis Rheum  1998;41:778-799. 
 (52)  Lawrence RC, Everett DF, Hockberg MC. Arthritis. In: Hun tley R, Cornoni-Huntley J, eds. Health 
Status and Well Being of the El derly: National Health and Nutrit ion Examination I epidemiologic 
follow up study . New York: Oxford Univ ersity Press; 1990;133-151. 
 (53)  Creamer P, Lethbridge-Cej ku M, Hochberg MC. Factors asso ciated with functional impairment in 
symptomatic knee osteoarthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford)  2000;39:490-496. 
 (54)  Guccione AA, Felson DT, A nderson JJ et al. The effects o f specific medical conditions on the 
functional limitations of eld ers in the Framingham Study. Am J Public Health  1994;84:351-358. 
 (55)  Malfait AM, Schnitzer TJ . Towards a mechanism-based appr oach to pain management in 
osteoarthritis. Nat Rev Rheumatol  2013;9:654-664. 
 (56)  Lee YC, Lu B, Bathon JM et  al. Pain sensitivity and pain  reactivity in osteoarthritis. Arthritis Care 
Res (Hoboken )  2011;63:320-327. 
 (57)  Campbell CM, Buenaver LF , Finan P et al. Sleep, pain cat astrophizing and central sensitization in 
knee osteoarthritis patients with and without insomnia. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken )  
2015;67:1387-96. 
 (58)  Bradley LA, Kersh BC, DeBerry JJ, Deutsch G, Alarcon GA,  McLain DA. Lessons from 
fibromyalgia: abnormal pain sen sitivity in knee osteoarthritis.  Novartis Found Symp  2004;260:258-
270. 
 (59)  Kosek E, Ordeberg G. Lack of pressure pain modulation by  heterotopic noxious conditioning 
stimulation in patients with painfu l osteoarthritis before, but  not following, surg ical pain relief. Pain  
2000;88:69-78. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 24 of 29 
  (60)  Bradley LA, Kersh BC, DeBerry JJ, Deutsch G, Alarcon GA,  McLain DA. Lessons from 
fibromyalgia: abnormal pain sen sitivity in knee osteoarthritis.  Novartis Found Symp  2004;260:258-
70; discussion 270-9.:258-270. 
 (61)  Gwilym SE, Pollard TC, C arr AJ. Understanding pain in os teoarthritis. J Bone Joint Surg Br  
2008;90:280-287. 
 (62)  Lundblad H, Kreicbergs A , Jansson KA. Prediction of pers istent pain after total knee replacement 
for osteoarthritis. J Bone Joint Surg Br  2008;90:166-171. 
 (63)  Finan PH, Buenaver LF, B ounds SC et al. Discordance betw een pain and radiographic severity in 
knee osteoarthritis: findings fro m quantitative sensory testing  of central sensitization. Arthritis 
Rheum  2013;65:363-372. 
 (64)  Edwards RR, Fillingim RB. E thnic differences in thermal pain responses. Psychosom Med  
1999;61:346-354. 
 (65)  Fillingim RB, Edwards RR, Powell T. The relationship of sex and clinical pain to e xperimental pain 
responses. Pain  1999;83:419-425. 
 (66)  Edwards RR, Fillingim RB . Effects of age on temporal sum mation of thermal pain: clinical 
relevance in healthy older and younger adults. Journal of Pain  2001;2:307-317. 
 (67)  Edwards RR, Ness TJ, Weige nt DA, Fillingim RB. Individua l differences in diffuse noxious 
inhibitory controls (DNIC): asso ciation with clinical variables . Pain  2003;106:427-437. 
 (68)  Reddy KS, Naidu MU, Rani PU, Rao TR. Human experimental pain models: A  review of 
standardized methods i n drug development. J Res Med Sci  2012;17:587-595. 
 (69)  Campbell CM, Edwards RR . Mind-body interactions in pain:  the neurophysiology of anxious and 
catastrophic pain-related thoughts. Transl Res  2009;153:97-101. 
 (70)  Campbell CM, Bounds SC, Simango MB et al. Self-reported sleep duration associated with 
distraction analgesia, hyperemia , and secondary hyperalgesia in  the heat-capsaicin nociceptive 
model. Eur J Pain  2010. 
 (71)  Campbell CM, Edwards RR . Ethnic differences in pain and pain management. Pain Manag  
2012;2:219-230. 
 (72)  Merry B, Campbell CM, Bue naver LF et al. Ethnic Group Di fferences in the Outcomes of 
Multidisciplinary Pain Treatment. J Musculoskelet Pain  2011;19:24-30. 
 (73)  Campbell CM, Kronfli T, Bue naver LF et al. Situational v ersus dispositional measurement of 
catastrophizing: associations w ith pain responses in multiple s amples. J Pain  2010;11:443-453. 
 (74)  Campbell CM, Buenaver LF, Raja SN et al. Dynamic Pain Ph enotypes are Associated with Spinal 
Cord Stimulation-Induced Reduction in Pain: A Repeated Measures  Observational Pilot Study. Pain 
Med 2015;16:1349-60. 
 (75)  Gracely RH. Experimental pain models. In: Max MB, Porten oy RK, Laska EM, eds. Advances in 
pain research and theapy: The design of analgesic clinical trials.  New York: Raven Press; 1991;33-
47. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 25 of 29 
  (76)  Backonja MM, Walk D, Edwa rds RR et al. Quantitative sens ory testing in measurement of 
neuropathic pain phenomena and o ther sensory abnormalities. Clin J Pain  2009;25:641-647. 
 (77)  Woolf CJ, Max MB. Mechan ism-based pain d iagnosis: issues  for analgesic drug development. 
Anesthesiology  2001;95:241-249. 
 (78)  Edwards RR, Haythornthwa ite J, Tella P, Max MB, Raja SN.  Basal heat pain thresholds predict 
opioid analgesia in patients w ith post-herpetic neuralgia. Anesthesiology . In press. 
 (79)  Yarnitsky D, Granot M, Nahman-Averbuch H, Khamaisi M, Gr anovsky Y. Conditioned pain 
modulation predicts dul oxetine efficacy in pa inful diabetic neu ropathy. Pain  2012;153:1193-1198. 
 (80)  Ahmad S, De Oliveira GSJ, B ialek JM, McCarthy RJ. Therma l quantitative sensory testing to 
predict postoperative pain outco mes following gynecologic surge ry. Pain Med  2014;15:857-864. 
 (81)  Olesen SS, Graversen C, Bouwense SA, van GH, Wilder-Smit h OH, Drewes AM. Quantitative 
sensory testing predicts pregaba lin efficacy in painful chronic  pancreatitis. PLoS One  
2013;8:e57963. 
 (82)  Eisenberg E, Midbari A, H addad M, Pud D. Predicting the analgesic effect to oxycodone by 'static' 
and 'dynamic' quantitative sensor y testing in healthy subjects.  Pain  2010;151:104-109. 
 (83)  Martinez V, Fletcher D, Bouhassira D, Sessler DI, Chauvi n M. The evolution of primary 
hyperalgesia in orthopedic surgery : quantitative sensory testin g and clinical evaluation before and 
after total knee arthroplasty. Anesth Analg  2007;105:815-821. 
 (84)  Chen L, Malarick C, Seefeld L, Wang S, Houghton M, Mao J . Altered quantitative sensory testing 
outcome in subjects with opioid therapy. Pain  2009;143:65-70. 
 (85)  Fillingim RB, Ness TJ, G lover TL et al. Morphine respons es and experimental pain: sex differences 
in side effects and cardiovascu lar responses but n ot analgesia.  J Pain  2005;6:116-124. 
 (86)  Sibille K, Kindler LL, G lover TL, Gonzalez RD, Staud R, Riley JL et al. Individual Differences in 
Morphine and Butorphanol Analges ia: A Laboratory Pain Study. Pa in Medicine 12, 1076-1085. 
2011.  
Ref Type: Journal (Full) 
 (87)  Woolf CJ. Novel analgesi c development: from target to pa tient or patient to target? Curr Opin 
Investig Drugs  2008;9:694-695. 
 (88)  Willer JC, De Broucker T, Le Bars D. Encoding of nocicep tive thermal stimuli by diffuse noxious 
inhibitory controls in humans. J Neurophysiol  1989;62:1028-1038. 
 (89)  Kakigi R. Diffuse noxious inhibitory control. Reappraisa l by pain-related somatosensory evoked 
potentials following CO 2 laser stimulation. J Neurol Sci  1994;125:198-205. 
 (90)  Kraus E, Le Bars D, Besson JM. Behavioral confirmation o f "diffuse noxious inhibitory controls" 
(DNIC) and evidence for a role of endogenous opiates. Brain Res  1981;206:495-499. 
 (91)  Dickenson AH, Le Bars D . Supraspinal morphine and descen ding inhibitions acting on the dorsal 
horn of the rat. [Review] [97 refs]. J Physiol  1987;384:81-107. 
 (92)  LeBars D, Chitour D, Kra us E, Dickenson AH, Besson JM. E ffects of naloxone upon diffuse 
noxious inhibitory contro l (DNIC) in the rat. Brain Res  1981;204:387-402. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 26 of 29 
  (93)  Le Bars D, Chitour D, Kraus E, Clot AM, Dickenson AH, Be sson JM. The effect of systemic 
morphine upon diffuse noxious inhib itory controls (DNIC) in the  rat: evidence f or a lifting of 
certain descending inhibitory c ontrols of dorsal horn convergen t neurones. Brain Res  1981;215:257-
274. 
 (94)  Le Bars D, Guilbaud G, Chitour D, Besson JM. Does system ic morphine increase descending 
inhibitory controls of dorsal  horn neurones involved in nocicep tion. Brain Res  1980;202:223-228. 
 (95)  Le Bars D, Villanueva L, B ouhassira D, Willer JC. Diffus e noxious inhibitory controls (DNIC) in 
animals and in man. Patol Fiziol Eksp Ter  1992;P 55-65.:-65. 
 (96)  Willer JC, Le Bars D, De Broucker T. Diffuse noxious inh ibitory controls in m an: involvement of 
an opioidergic link. Eur J Pharmacol  1990;182:347-355. 
 (97)  Le Bars D, Willer JC, De Broucker T. Morphine blocks des cending pain inhibitory controls in 
humans. Pain  1992;48:13-20. 
 (98)  Arendt-Nielsen L, Peter sen-Felix S. Wind-up and neuropla sticity: is there a correlation to clinical 
pain? Eur J Anaesthesiol Suppl  1995;10:1-7. 
 (99)  Lautenbacher S, Roscher  S, Strian F. Tonic pain evoked b y pulsating heat: temporal summation 
mechanisms and perceptual qualities. 
 (100)  Eide PK. Wind-up and the NMDA receptor complex from a c linical perspective. Eur J Pain  
2000;4:5-15. 
 (101)  Staud R. Evidence of invol vement of central neural mech anisms in generating f ibromyalgia pain. 
Curr Rheumatol Rep  2002;4:299-305. 
 (102)  Hampson RE, Miller F, Palc hik G, Deadwyler SA. Cannabin oid receptor activ ation modifies 
NMDA receptor mediated release of intracellular calcium: implic ations for endocannabinoid control 
of hippocampal neural plasticity. Neuropharmacology  2011;60:944-952. 
 (103)  Sanchez-Blazquez P, Rodr iguez-Munoz M, Garzon J. The ca nnabinoid receptor 1 associates with 
NMDA receptors to produce glutamatergic hypofunction: implicati ons in psychosis and 
schizophrenia. Front Pharmacol  2014;4:169. 
 (104)  Burston JJ, Sagar DR, S hao P et al. Cannabinoid CB2 rec eptors regulate centr al sensitization and 
pain responses associated with os teoarthritis of the knee joint . PLoS One  2013;8:e80440. 
 (105)  Russo EB. Clinical endoca nnabinoid deficiency (CECD): c an this concept explain therapeutic 
benefits of cannabis in migrain e, fibromyalgia, irritable bowel  syndrome and other treatment-
resistant conditions? Neuro Endocrinol Lett  2008;29:192-200. 
 (106)  Redmond WJ, Goffaux P, Pot vin S, Marchand S. Analgesic and antihyperalgesic e ffects of nabilone 
on experimental heat pain. Curr Med Res Opin  2008;24:1017-1024. 
 (107)  Clauw DJ, Witter J. P ain and rheumatology: thinking out side the joint. Arthritis Rheum  
2009;60:321-324. 
 (108)  Scavone JL, Sterling RC, V an Bockstaele EJ. Cannabinoid  and opioid interactions: implications for 
opiate dependence and withdrawal. Neuroscience  2013;248:637-654. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 27 of 29 
  (109)  Smith PA, Selley DE, Sim-Selley LJ, Welch SP. Low dose combination of morphine and delta9-
tetrahydrocannabinol circumvents  antinociceptive tolerance and apparent desensitization of 
receptors. Eur J Pharmacol  2007;571:129-137. 
 (110)  Naef M, Curatolo M, Peter sen-Felix S, Arendt-Nielsen L,  Zbinden A, Brenneisen R. The analgesic 
effect of oral delta-9-tetrahydr ocannabinol (THC), morphine, an d a THC-morphine  combination in 
healthy subjects under expe rimental pain conditions. Pain  2003;105:79-88. 
 (111)  Narang S, Gibson D, Wasan AD et al. Efficacy of dronabi nol as an adjuvant tr eatment for chronic 
pain patients on opioid therapy. J Pain  2008;9:254-264. 
 (112)  Portenoy RK, Ganae-Motan ED, Allende S et al. Nabiximol s for opioid-treated cancer patients with 
poorly-controlled chronic pain: a randomized, placebo-controlle d, graded-dose trial. J Pain  
2012;13:438-449. 
 (113)  Dao TT, LeResche L. Gender differences in pain. J Orofac Pain  2000;14:169-184. 
 (114)  Schoedel KA, Sellers EM. Assessing abuse liability duri ng drug development: changing standards 
and expectations. Clin Pharmacol Ther  2008;83:622-626. 
 (115)  Abdel-Malek Z, Scott MC, S uzuki I et al. The melanocort in-1 receptor is a key regulator of human 
cutaneous pigmentation. Pigment Cell Res  2000;13 Suppl 8:156-62.:156-162. 
 (116)  Antoine DG, Strain EC, Tom pkins DA, Bigelow GE. Opioid abusers' ability to differentiate an 
opioid from placebo in labor atory challenge testing. Drug Alcohol Depend  2013;132:369-372. 
 (117)  Tompkins DA, Lanier RK, Harrison JA, Strain EC, Bigelow  GE. Human abuse liability assessment 
of oxycodone combined with ul tra-low-dose naltrexone. Psychopharmacology (Berl)  2010;210:471-
480. 
 (118)  Rolke R, Baron R, Maier C  et al. Quantitative sensory t esting in the German R esearch Network on 
Neuropathic Pain (DFNS): stand ardized protocol and reference va lues. Pain  2006;123:231-243. 
 (119)  Yarnitsky D, Arendt-Niels en L, Bouhassira D et al. Reco mmendations on terminology and practice 
of psychophysical DNIC testing. Eur J Pain  2010;14:339. 
 (120)  Kennedy DM, Stratford PW, Wessel J, Gollish JD, Penney D. Assessing stabi lity and change of 
four performance measures: a l ongitudinal study e valuating outc ome following total hip and knee 
arthroplasty. BMC Musculoskelet Disord  2005;6:3. 
 (121)  Stratford PW, Kennedy DM, Woodhouse LJ. Performance mea sures provide assessments of pain 
and function in people with advan ced osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. Phys Ther  2006;86:1489-
1496. 
 (122)  Stratford PW, Kennedy DM. P erformance measures were nec essary to obtain a com plete picture of 
osteoarthritic patients. J Clin Epidemiol  2006;59:160-167. 
 (123)  Stratford PW, Kennedy DM, Hanna SE. Condition-specific Western Ontario McMaster 
Osteoarthritis Index was not supe rior to region- specific Lower Extremity Functional Scale at 
detecting change. J Clin Epidemiol  2004;57:1025-1032. 
 (124)  Mizner RL, Petterson SC , Snyder-Mackler L. Quadriceps s trength and the time course of functional 
recovery after total  knee arthroplasty. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther  2005;35:424-436. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 28 of 29 
  (125)  Yoshida Y, Mizner RL, Ramsey DK, Snyder-Mackler L. Exam ining outcomes f rom total knee 
arthroplasty and the relations hip between quadriceps strength a nd knee function over time. Clin 
Biomech (Bristol , Avon )  2008;23:320-328. 
 (126)  Terwee CB, Mokkink LB, Steu ltjens MP, Dekker J. Perform ance-based methods for measuring the 
physical function of patients w ith osteoarthritis of the hip or  knee: a systematic review of 
measurement properties. Rheumatology (Oxford)  2006;45:890-902. 
 (127)  Bellamy N, Buchanan WW, Goldsmith CH, Campbell J, Stitt  LW. Validation s tudy of WOMAC: a 
health status instrument for m easuring clinically important pat ient relevant outcomes to 
antirheumatic drug therapy in pati ents with osteoarthritis of t he hip or knee. J Rheumatol  
1988;15:1833-1840. 
 (128)  Cleeland CS, Ryan KM. Pai n assessment: global use of th e Brief Pain Inventory. Ann Acad Med 
Singapore  1994;23:129-138. 
 (129)  Tan G, Jensen MP, Thornby J I, Shanti BF. Validation of the Brief Pain Inventory for chronic 
nonmalignant pain. J Pain  2004;5:133-137. 
 (130)  Bellamy N. Pain assessment in osteoarthrit is: experienc e with the WOMAC osteoarthritis index. 
Semin Arthritis Rheum  1989;18:14-17. 
 (131)  Altman R, Asch E, Bloch D  et al. Development of criteri a for the classifica tion and reporting of 
osteoarthritis. Classification of  osteoarthritis of the knee. D iagnostic and Therapeutic Criteria 
Committee of the American R heumatism Association. Arthritis Rheum  1986;29:1039-1049. 
 (132)  Keller S, Bann CM, Dodd S L, Schein J, Mendoza TR, Cleel and CS. Validity of the brief pain 
inventory for use in documenting t he outcomes of patients with noncancer pain. Clin J Pain  
2004;20:309-318. 
 (133)  Comer SD, Zacny JP, Dworki n RH et al. Core outcome meas ures for opioid abuse liability 
laboratory assessment studies in hu mans: IMMPACT recommendation s. Pain  2012;153:2315-2324. 
 (134)  Fabre LF, McLendon D. The efficacy and safety of nabilo ne (a synthetic cannabinoid) in the 
treatment of anxiety. J Clin Pharmacol  1981;21:377S-382S. 
 (135)  Zhang L, Zhang YD, Zhao P, Huang SM. Predicting drug-dr ug interactions: an FDA perspective. 
AAPS J  2009;11:300-306. 
 (136)  Stott CG, White L, Wrigh t S, Wilbraham D, Guy GW. A pha se I study to assess the effect of food 
on the single dose bioavailabilit y of the THC/CBD oromucosal sp ray. Eur J Clin Pharmacol  
2013;69:825-834. 
 (137)  Singer JD. Using SAS Proc Mixed to fit mu ltilevel model s, hierarchical models , and individual 
growth models. J Educ Behav Stat  1998;24:323-355. 
 (138)  Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences . 2nd Edition ed. New Jersey: 
Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, 1988. 
 (139)  Barcikowski RS, Robey R. S ample size selection in a sin gle-group repeated measures analysis.  
1985.  Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Am erican Educational Research Association, 
Chicago .  
Ref Type: Report 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 29 of 29 
  (140)  Felch LJ, Di Marino ME, Griffiths RR. A meta-analysis o f psychomotor, subj ect- and observer-
rated effects in abuse liabilit y studies of anxiolytics. In: Ha rris LS, ed. Problems of Drug 
Dependence . Washington, DC: Government  Printing Office; 1995;188. 
 (141)  Johnstone RE, Lief PL, K ulp RA, Smith TC. Combination o f delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol with 
oxymorphone or pentobarbital: E ffects on ventilatory control an d cardiovascular dynamics. 
Anesthesiology  1975;42:674-684. 
 (142)  Jicha CJ, Lofwall MR, Nuzzo PA, Babalonis S, Elayi SC, Walsh SL. Safety of oral dronabinol 
during opioid withdrawal in humans. Drug Alcohol Depend  2015;157:179-183. 