Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  1 of 34  
  
 
Ambulatory   Cancer  Care  Electronic  Symptom  Self-Reporting   for Surgical  
Patients  
 
PROTOCOL  FACE  PAGE  FOR 
MSK NON  THERAPEUTIC  PROTOCOL  
 
Principal  Investigator/Department : Brett Simon,  MD Surgery  
Co-Principal   Investigator(s)/Department : Andrea  Pusic,  MD, MHS 
Jeanne  Carter,  PhD Surgery/Plastic  & Reconstructive  
Surgery/  Gynecology  
Investigator(s)/Department:  Andrew  Vickers,  PhD 
Daniel  Stein,  MD, PhD 
Oliver  Zivanovic,   MD 
Peter  Stetson,  MD, MA 
Vincent  Laudone,  MD 
Nicole  Connor,  RN 
Roberta  Baron,  RN Epidemiology  & Biostatistics  
Health  Informatics  
Surgery/Gynecology  
Office  of Physician -in-Chief  
Surgery/Urology  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Consenting   Professional(s)/Department:  Andrew  Vickers,  PhD 
Brett Simon,  MD, PhD 
Daniel  Stein,  MD, PhD 
Jeanne  Carter,  PhD 
Oliver  Zivanovic,   MD 
Peter  Stetson,  MD, MA 
Vincent  Laudone,  MD 
Nicole  Connor,  RN 
Roberta  Baron,  RN 
Cara  Stabile,  MPH  
Taylor  McCready,  BA 
Elizabeth  Encarnacion,  BA 
Michele  Cavalli,  BA 
Christina  Ashby,  BA Epidemiology  & Biostatistics  
Surgery  
Health  Informatics  
Surgery/  Gynecology  
Surgery/  Gynecology  
Office  of Physician -in-Chief  
Surgery/Urology  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Surgery/Plastic  & Reconstructive  
Surgery/Plastic  & Reconstructive  
Surgery/Plastic  & Reconstructive  
Surgery/Plastic  & Reconstructive  
Surgery/Plastic  & Reconstructive  
 
 
 
 
Participating  Institutions   – If 
multicenter  study   coordinated  by MSK:  PI's Name  Site's  Role  
Brigham  and Women’s  Hospital  Andrea  Pusic,  MD, MHS Consulting  
University  of Rochester  Larissa  Temple,  MD Consulting  
Weill  Cornell  Medical  College  Jessica  Ancker,  PhD Consulting  
Private  Consultant  Amylou  Dueck,  PhD Consulting  
Private  Consultant  Ethan  Basch,  MD, PhD Consulting  
Private  Consultant  Debra  Paget  Consulting  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  2 of 34  
  
 
 
Private  Consultant  Jaime  Blanda  Consulting  
Private  Consultant  Paul Carter  Consulting  
Private  Consultant  Thomas  Chiusano  Consulting  
Private  Consultant  James  Guttridge  Consulting  
Private  Consultant  Amy Malale  Consulting  
Private  Consultant  Magen  Miranda  Consulting  
Private  Consultant  Christine  Nippes,  PA-C Consulting  
Please  Note:  A Consenting  Professional  must  have  completed  the mandatory  Human  
Subjects  Education  and Certification  Program . 
 
 
 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  3 of 34  
  
 
 
Table  of Contents  
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEMA ................................ ................................ ....... 4 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC AIMS ................................ ................................ ................  5 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE ................................ ................................ .....................  6 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ ................................ ... 9 
4.1 Design ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...9 
4.2 Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  11 
5.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ...............  16 
5.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 16 
5.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 16 
6.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  16 
7.0 ASSESS MENT/EVALUATION PLAN ................................ ................................ .................  17 
8.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 18 
9.0 PRIMARY OUTCOMES ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 18 
10.0 CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY ................................ ................................ ....... 19 
11.0 BIOSTATISTICS ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  19 
12.0 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION PROCEDUR ES 
22 
12.1 Research  Participant  Registration  ................................ ................................ .......................  22 
Confirm  eligibility  as defined  in the section entitled  Criteria  for Patient/Subject  Eligibility  ..............  23 
12.2 Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  23 
13.0 DAT A M ANAGEMENT ISSUES ................................ ................................ ........................  24 
13.1 Quality  Assurance ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  27 
13.2 Data and Safety  Monitoring  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 27 
14.0 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS ................................ ................................ ............  27 
14.1 Privacy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  28 
14.2 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE) Reporting  ................................ ................................ ................  29 
14.2.1  ......................................................................................... Error!  Bookmark   not defined.  
15.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES ................................ ................................ ...................  30 
16.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  32 
17.0 APPENDICES ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  34 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  4 of 34  
  
 
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  
 
Patients  undergoing  ambulatory  cancer  surgery  at Josie  Robertson  Surgery  Center  (JRSC)  
at MSKCC  will be eligible  to participate  in a randomized  controlled  trial comparing  two 
different  methods  of symptom  monitoring  while  recovering  from ambulatory  surgery.  The 
study  will evaluate  the differences  in patient -centered  outcomes  and experiences  between  
Team  Monitoring  (symptom monitoring  by the clinical  team,  with nursing  outreach  if 
symptoms  exceed  normal  limits)  and Enhanced  Feedback  (real-time feedback  to patients  
about  expected  symptom  severity,  with nursing  outreach  if indicated)  in response  to the 
patients’  daily  symptom  reporting.  
A total of 2,750  adult patients  and 1,375  caregivers  will be recruited  for this study  at the 
JRSC.  All potential  participants  will be informed  of their rights  as a volunteer  in a research  
study.  Patient  disease  types  will include  breast,  urologic,  gynecologic,  and head  and neck 
cancers,  as well as benign  diseases.  Randomization  will take place  through  the Clinical  
Research  Database  (CRDB).  Patients  will complete  a symptom  assessment  (Recovery  
Tracker)  for the first 10 days after surgery.  Over  the following  20 days,  patients  can tailor 
the survey  to their needs  by choosing  when  they complete  the survey.  Between  days 11- 
30, patients  can report  symptoms  on any day. By leaving  the survey  open  after day 10, 
patients  who develop  new or worsening  symptoms  will have the ability  to report  these  
symptoms  electronically  whenever  they wish.  Conversely,  patients  not experiencing  any 
symptoms  will not be burdened  by additional  surveys.  Outcomes  will be measured  for up to 
60 days and will include  patient  anxiety,  patient  engagement,  caregiver  burden,  urgent  care 
visits,  detection  of adverse  events,  and nursing  interventions.  
The proposed  study  will not evaluate  any investigational  agents  or methods  that are not 
considered  standard  of care for this patient  population.  Therefore,  there  are minimal  risks 
to the patient  population.  In both groups,  if a patient  reports  severe  symptoms,  they are 
instructed  to immediately  contact  their physician’s  office  or seek medical  attention,  as is 
the current  standard  of care.  Alternatives  to participation  in this study  include  the standard  
of care,  which  includes  completing  the Recovery  Tracker  (the Team  Monitoring  arm of 
the study),  or not completing  any surveys  at all. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  5 of 34  
  
 
 
 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  
 
We will perform  a prospective,   two-armed,  randomized  controlled  trial of postoperative  
daily  symptom   reporting   among   patients   undergoing   ambulatory   cancer  surgery,   to 
determine  which  of two approaches  to management  of patient -reported   symptom  data 
is most  effective   from a patient  and caregiver   perspective:  (1) symptom  monitoring   by 
the  clinical   team,   with  nursing   outreach   if  symptoms  exceed   normal   limits   (Team  
Monitoring) , or (2) feedback  to patients  about  expected  symptom  severity,  with patient - 
activated   care as needed  (Enhanced  Feedback) . For symp tom self-reporting,   we will 
use a 20-question  survey  that includes   11  items   from  a validated  instrument,   the 
Patient  Reported  Outcomes  Common  Terminology  Criteria  for  Advers  e  Events  
(PRO -CTCAE1), three  additional  surgical  symptom  questions,  and two questions  about  
seeking  urgent  care or a doctor.  The information   provided   to patients   in the Enhanced  
Feedback  group  will be procedure -specific   and based  on continuously   updated  PRO - 
CTCAE   data  from  previous    patients   who  have  completed   PRO -CTCAE   data.   We 
hypothesize   that Enhanced   Feedback  about  expected  symptom   severity  will  be 
more   effective  than  Team  Monitoring   in improving   patient -centered  outcomes  
(SA1)  and the patient/caregiver experience (SA2). 
 
Specific Aim  1 (SA1): To compare the effectiveness  of Team Monitoring and 
Enhanced  Feedback  with regard  to patient -centered   outcomes,  including:  
SA1a  – urgent  care,  emergency  department  visits,  and readmissions  up to 30 days 
SA1b  – symptom -triggered   interventions.  
Patient  registered  on 
MyMSK  pre-op 
 
Sample  of patients  and 
caregivers  participate  in 
Focus  Groups  & Qualitative  
interviews  post-study  CRC  approaches  
pre-op OR day of 
surgery  
Yes 
Consent  
No 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  6 of 34  
  
 
Specific Aim  2 (SA2): To compare the impact of Team Monitoring  and Enhanced 
Feedback  on the health  care experience  of patients   and their caregivers,  including:  
SA2a  – patient   engagement  
SA2b  – patient  anxiety  
SA2c  – caregiver   burden  
 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  
 
More  than 1.5 million  people  were  diagnosed  with cancer  in the US in 20152; most  
underwent  surgery  as a component  of their treatment.  With health  care cost constraints  and 
recent  technical  innovations,  increasing  numbers  of these  surgeries  are performed  as 
ambulatory  procedures .3 This new model  of short -stay surgery  adds new complexities  to 
the delivery  of high-quality,  patient -centered  care.  Although  there  are many  advantages  to 
shorter  hospital  stays,  there  is also an increased  burden  on patients  and their caregivers.  
Postoperative  symptoms,  such  as pain and nausea,  are common4 and represent  a major  
source  of morbidity5 and distress  for patients.  After discharge,  patients  may have difficulty  
distinguishing  normal  and expected  symptoms  from potentially  dangerous  ones .6 This may 
lead to unnecessary  worry  and health  care use for normal  symptoms,  or worse,  to 
unnecessary  suffering  and serious  adverse  events,  when  worrisome  symptoms  are 
unrecognized  and neglected.  
There  is abundant  evidence  that patient  self-reporting  of symptoms  improves  quality  of 
care,7-9 and thus patients  are increasingly  being  asked  to provide  this information10 as a 
component  of routine  clinical  care.  A key knowledge  gap in patient -centered  care,  however,  
is that we don’t know  the most  effective  way to monitor  and manage  suchdata.11 To address  
this gap, we will conduct  a randomized  clinical  trial among  a diverse  patient  population,  
using  an established  informatics  platform  and well-validated  symptom  assessment  
questions  developed  by the National  Cancer  Institute  PRO -CTCAE.  We will compare  two 
approaches,  each  of which  has demonstrated  effectiveness:  (1) Team  Monitoring — 
symptom  monitoring  by the clinical  team,  with nursing  outreach  if symptoms  exceed  normal  
limits,  and (2) Enhanced  Feedback—real-time feedback  to patients  about  expected  
symptom  severity,  with patient -activated  care as needed.  The information  provided  to 
patients  in the Enhanced  Feedback  group  will be procedure  specific  and based  on 
continuously  updated  PRO -CTCAE  data from previous  patients.  We hypothesize  that 
Enhanced  Feedback  about  expected  symptom  severity  will be more  effective  than Team  
Monitoring  because  patients  will feel greater  self-efficacy  and engagement  in their care.  We 
will evaluate  the following  outcomes:  Aim 1— urgent  care and emergency  department  visits  
and symptom -triggered  interventions;  Aim 2—patient  engagement,  patient  anxiety,  and 
caregiver  burden  (Aim 2), as measured  by validated  patient -reported  outcomes  (PROs)  
measures  and qualitative  interviews.  
Impact  on the health  of individuals  and populations  
 
Ambulatory  surgery  is increasingly  common,  and it places  new burdens  on patients  and 
caregivers.  Enabled  by technical  innovations  in surgery  and anesthesiology,  and driven  by 
pressures  to reduce  costs,  ambulatory  procedures  account  for increasing  proportion  of 
surgeries .3 In the US in 2015,  patients  underwent  approximately  50 million  short -stay (23- 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  7 of 34  
  
 
hour)  or ambulatory  surgery  procedures .12 Although  this approach  may help to contain  
health  care costs,  it places  new burdens  on patients  and caregivers.  Patients  no longer  have 
the physical  and psychological  support  of 24-hour care by nurses  and allied  professionals,  
nor do they receive  daily visits  by their surgeon.  Instead,  they are expected  to manage  the 
recovery  process  largely  at home,  with access  to their clinical  team  only when  they perceive  
that a complication  may be occurring.  In addition,  their caregivers  are asked  to provide  
support  without  the benefit  of knowledge  or clear  expectations  about  what symptoms are 
normal  during  postoperative  recovery.  Focus  group  and survey  data from our institution  
suggest  that caregivers  experience  tremendous  burden,  which  significantly  affects  the 
primary  caregiver’s  health,  psychological  well-being,  and schedule.  
Cancer  patients  undergoing  surgery  are especially  vulnerable  to this new model  of care.  
The lifetime  risk of developing  cancer  is approximately  40%,11 and most  patients  undergo  
surgery  as part of their treatment .13 Major  procedures,  such  as mastectomies,  
prostatectomies,  and hysterectomies,  are now being  performed  as ambulatory  procedures,  
and patients  often  leave  the surgical  center  while  still experiencing  symptoms .5 Patients  
undergoing  cancer  surgery  are particularly  at risk in this new model  of care,  as they are 
often  preoperatively  compromised  both physically  and psychologically  by their diagnoses  
and neoadjuvant  treatments .14,15 From  a psychological  perspective,  these  patients  and their 
caregivers  are often  still struggling  to adjust  to a new cancer  diagnosis  at the time of surgery;  
they may thus feel heightened  anxiety,  which  may overwhelm  coping  skills.  
Potential  benefits  and relevance  for patients  
 
Patients  experience  postoperative  symptoms at home  but may not be able to distinguish  
expected  from worrisome  symptoms.  Following  ambulatory  cancer  surgery,  symptoms  are 
very common  and are a source  of considerable  patient  distress.  Patients  are expected  to 
self-interpret  symptoms  and distinguish  expected  postoperative  symptoms  from those  of 
concern—which  is especially  difficult  when  patients  and caregivers  have no way to know  
what is normal  and expected.  There  is strong  evidence  that physicians  may underestimate  
patient  symptoms,  and patients  are often  reluctant  to report  them .6,16-19 This may lead to 
unnecessary  suffering  and serious  adverse  events  when  worrisome  symptoms  are 
unrecognized  and neglected.  Symptom  self-reporting  can improve  safety  by identifying  
problems  that might  have otherwise  been  unrecognized  and can facilitate  more  efficient  
care before  complications  progress.  Symptom  self-reporting  with feedback  about  expected  
symptom  severity  may also decrease  anxiety  and inefficient  health  care use. 
Gaps  in evidence  and national  interest  
 
Our study  addresses  a high-priority  knowledge  gap. We do not yet know  what is the most  
effective  method  to monitor  and manage  patient  symptom  data after ambulatory  cancer  
surgery.  Monitoring  of symptoms,  with outreach  by the clinical  team  when  severity  
exceeds  the expected  range,  may  identify  problems  at an earlier  stage,  to avoid  or 
minimize  adverse  events,  but it is resource  intensive .11,20,21 Alternatively,  providing  patients  
with feedback  about  expected  symptom  severity  and allowing  them  to activate  care as 
needed  may allow  for the identification  of adverse  events  before  they progress,  while  
also decreasing  patient  anxiety   and unplanned   care,  such  as unnecessary  visits  to the 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  8 of 34  
  
 
emergency  department.  In addition,  patient  focus  groups  have reported  to us that 
feedback  about  expected  symptoms  increases  patient  engagement  in their care and gives  
them  a sense  of empowerment.  
A systematic  review  of randomized  controlled  trials that evaluated   electronic  reporting  
of symptoms  confirmed  that this is a major  limitation  in our knowledge.  Although  progress  
has been  made  to better  understand  how symptom  data might  be best incorporated  
into clinical  care among  nonsurgical  ambulatory  patients,  little work  has  been   done  
among  patients  having  surgery.  Notably,  none  of the 32 randomized  controlled  trials 
identified  in this review  evaluated  symptom  assessment  in surgical  patients.  Furthermore,  
dual PIs Pusic  and Temple  organized  an Agency  for Healthcare  Research  and Quality– 
funded  conference  on PROs in surgery  in January  2015.  This meeting,  cohosted  by the 
American  College  of Surgeons,  engaged  a broad  group  of surgeons,  patient  advocates,  
quality  of life researchers,  and health  informatics  experts.  At this meeting,   a  Delphi  
survey  was conducted,  which  identified  optimal  evaluation  and reporting  of patient - 
reported  symptoms  for clinical  care as a top research  priority.22  Our study   thus provides  
a unique  opportunity  to address  a critical  evidence  gap of utmost  importance  to patients  
and the surgical  stakeholder   community.  
Our study  addresses  an evidence  gap that is directly  in line with the aims  of the Institute  
of Medicine.23-25 By determining  which  of these  two approaches  to monitoring  and 
managing  surgical  patients’  symptoms  is the  most  effective,  we will promote  care that 
is timely,  equitable,  efficient,  and coordinated.  We may also improve  patient  safety  and 
outcomes.  Through  earlier  detection  of worrisome  symptoms,  we can prevent  serious  
adverse  events.  By communicating  normative  data on symptom  burden  to patients,  
reassuring  them  when  they are on track  and encouraging  them  to seek appropriate  
resources  if problems  develop,   we can foster  effective,  patient -centered  care.  
The potential  of this study  to be adopted  into clinical  practice  and improve  delivery  
of care 
Collection  of PRO  data in routine  care is rapidly  expanding,  with data being  collected  
in many  different  clinical  scenarios  and used  in many  different  ways.  We don’t,  however,  
know  how to optimally  use this information  to maximally  improve  patient  care.  We 
hypothesize  here that unnecessary  emergency  department  visits  and serious  adverse  
events  can be reduced  if patients  are provided  with feedback  about  expected  symptom  
severity  and that this will be more  effective  than standard  PRO  monitoring  by the clinical  
team.  If we are correct,  Enhanced  Feedback,  with its resulting  patient -activated  care,  
could  easily  be adopted  by other  facilities  and could  benefit  large  numbers  of patients  
undergoing  cancer  and noncancer  surgery  alike,  in both large - and small -volume  
centers.  A system  that features  feedback  based  on normative  data would  be less costly  
than clinical  team  monitoring  and would  require  less infrastructure  and personnel  for 
monitoring  and follow -up phone  calls.  These   savings—along   with  reduced  
complications,  readmissions,  and emergency  department  visits  and improved  outcomes  
and patient  experience —would  offset  upfront  costs  for information  technology  
infrastructure  and implementation.  We thus anticipate  that our findings  will be rapidly  
adopted   in  a  variety   of  ambulatory  surgery   environments,  including   smaller   centers  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  9 of 34  
  
 
that do not have the personnel  resources  necessary  to provide  intensive  monitoring  of 
patient   symptoms.  
Although  symptoms  may differ  by condition  and treatment,  the key lessons  learned  in 
our study  will support  the implementation  of wider  strategies  for population  health  
management  for any treatment  with burdensome  side effects  or symptoms.  We expect  
that these  tools will be highly  relevant  in designing  coordinated  care models  that target  
improved  health  care value,  such as the Oncology  Care  Model  and the Perioperative  
Surgical  Home.  Thus,  we believe  that the knowledge  gained  here will be highly  
generalizable  and will have a broad  impact  on surgical  care overall.  
There  is abundant  and broad  evidence  that routine  collection  of PROs  and symptoms  
improves  quality  of care.7-10 Such  studies  have confirmed  that PRO  data can improve  
communication  with the clinical  team,  symptom  control,  quality  of life, and patient  
satisfaction . As an example,  study  consultants  Basch  and Dueck  reported  on a large  
randomized  trial that compared  routine  collection  of PROs  with usual  care during  
chemotherapy .11 In this study,  nurses  received  and responded  to email  alerts  when  
symptoms  exceeded  expected  values  or were  noted  to be worsening.  Among  patients  
who received  the PROs  intervention,  quality  of life improved  (34%  v 18%),  and these  
patients  were  less likely  to be seen  in the emergency  department  (34%  v 41%;  P = 
0.02)  or hospitalized  (45%  v 49%;  P = 0.08).  This study  and others  provide  a substantial  
foundation  for the design  of our study  and the selection  of our outcome  measures.  
PROs  measurement  is rapidly  becoming  a standard  of care,  and our study  represents  
an essential  step to ensuring  that patient -reported  data  is  optimally   integrated   into 
health  care systems to provide  the greatest  benefit  to surgical  patients   and caregivers.  
Our team  has tremendous  experience  collecting  and monitoring  PROs  data in routine  
clinical  care.  Using  an informatics  platform  developed  by our study  team  (Vickers,  
Stetson,  Stein,  Basch,  Pusic,  and Temple),  patients  complete  validated  PRO  measures  
at regular  postoperative  intervals  at MSKCC,  and this information  is used  during  clinical  
visits  to improve  patient -centered  care.  In the MSKCC  Department  of Surgery,  more  
than 50,000  patients  have completed  such  PRO  assessments  in routine  clinical  care.  
For example,  on the MSKCC  Breast  Surgery  Service,  8000  patients  have participated,  
completing  more  than 22,000  BREAST -Q surveys  (a PRO  measure  developed  by study  
dual PI Pusic).  Nurses  use this information  to monitor  postoperative  pain and physical  
function  and to provide  referrals  for physical  therapy  and pain management  as needed.  
On the Urology  Service,  more  than 6,000  patients  have participated,  using  validated  
urology -specific   PRO  instruments.  
 
 
4.1 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  
 
4.2 Design  
 
Our study  model  is predicated  on the hypothesis  that daily symptom  assessment  with 
normative  data (Enhanced  Feedback ) will increase  patients’  self-efficacy26 and their 
confidence   that  they  can  manage   their  symptoms   in  the  recovery   period .27    Without  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  10 of 34  
  
 
information  and risk awareness,  patients  may delay  seeking  care,  with severe  
consequences,  and/or  they may experience  unnecessary  anxiety  and fail to cope  with their 
health  conditions.28 The normative  data provided  by the symptom  monitoring  modules  in the 
patient  portal  will empower  our patients,  resulting  in increased  self-efficacy,  and will help the 
patients  to form realistic  expectations,  which  has been  shown  to be a predictor  of decreased  
symptoms  and better  physical  function.27,29 On the basis  of this model,  we predict  that 
patients  may avoid  unnecessary  emergency  department  visits  by better  understanding  
expected  symptoms  and by achieving  more  efficient  and effective  communication  with their 
health  care team.  The aims  our study  and the outcomes  measures  selected  reflect  this 
model.  
 
 
 
Methodological  approach  
The study  is a parallel  group  trial, with 1:1 procedure -stratified  randomization  between  the 
Team  Monitoring  and Enhanced  Feedback  arms.  The two groups  will differ  by how their 
self-reported  symptom  information  is handled:  Enhanced  Feedback  (system  displays  the 
patient’s  self-reported  symptom  data alongside  expected  norms  for that procedure,  and 
patient  initiates  care escalation)  vs. Team  Monitoring  (the patient  completes  self-reported  
symptom  assessment  as per standard  care at MSKCC;  the clinical  team  contacts  the 
patient  if symptoms  are above  expected  levels  or appear  to be worsening).  Note:  When  
patients  report  severe  symptoms  in either  group,  the care team  will receive  an alert and 
patients  will also be instructed  to immediately  contact  the clinical  team.  (Alerts  to the clinical  
team  can only be monitored  during  business  hours,  so all patients  must  seek care after 
hours  in the current  standard  care fashion.)  Our study  design  follows  CONSORT30 and 
PCORI  standards,  including   patient   engagement,   research  methods,  data integrity   and 

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  11 of 34  
  
 
analysis  (including  stratification  by surgical  procedure),  handling  of missing  data,  and 
heterogeneity   of treatment  effect.  
Primary  outcome:  The primary  outcome  for Aim 1, emergency  department  visits  up to 
30 days after ambulatory  cancer  surgery,  is important  to patients  because  emergency  
department  visits  are time-consuming  and may increase  anxiety   and caregiver   burden.  
It is relevant  to health  care systems  and clinicians  because  such  visits  are inefficient  and 
costly  and may erode  trust between  the patient  and provider.  
 
Secondary  outcomes:  
SA1:  We will evaluate  symptom -triggered  interventions   (nursing   follow -up  calls,  
unplanned  clinic  visits  and phone  referral  to clinic,  pain management  referrals,   and 
adverse  event  detection)  and rates  of adverse  events  up to 30 days after ambulatory  
cancer  surgery.  We will also evaluate  the number  of readmissions  up to 30 days.  Adverse 
events  will be defined  according  to the nomenclature  established  in the MSKCC  Surgical  
Secondary  Events  Grading   System.  
 
 
SA2:  We will evaluate  patient  engagement,  patient  anxiety,  and caregiver  burden  with 
the experience   of care using  validated   PROs measures  and qualitative   interviews.  
• Patient  engagement  will be evaluated  preoperatively  and at 2 weeks  and 2 months  
postoperatively  using  the Patient  Activation  Measure  (description  below).  
• Patient  anxiety  will be measured  on a daily basis  for 10 days following  surgery  using  
three  PRO -CTCAE  Anxiety  questions.  
• Caregiver  burden  will be evaluated  at 2 weeks  and 2 months  postoperatively  among  
consenting  caregivers  using  the Caregiver  Reaction  Assessment  (description  below).  
Each participating  patient  will be asked  to identify  a caregiver,  who will then be invited  
to participate.  
• Patient  engagement  and caregiver  burden  will also be evaluated  using  qualitative  
interviews,  with a sample  of each  of the randomized  cohorts,  as described  below.  
4.3 Intervention  
 
The intervention  in our study  will allow  us to determine  which  approach  to the 
management  of patient -reported  symptom  data is most  effective  from a patient  and 
caregiver  perspective.  In both groups,  if a patient  reports  severe  symptoms,  they are 
instructed  to immediately  contact  their physician’s  office  or seek medical  attention . 
Cohort  1: Team  Monitoring  
 
Team  Monitoring  is the current  standard  of care for patients  at JRSC.  In this cohort,  the 
electronic  system  will provide  advanced  informatics  support  for push  notifications  to the 
care team  based  on the severity  of the symptoms  reported.  This platform  promotes  early 
detection  and intervention.  The care team  is alerted  when  patients  experience  symptoms  
out of the expected  range  or if symptoms  are worsening.  Nurses  receive  secure  message  
notifications  and will contact  the patient  by phone  depending  on symptom  severity.  If a 
patient  responds  with a moderate -severe  answer,  the office  team  gets an alert and calls 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  12 of 34  
  
 
the patient  during  business  hours.  Although  nurses  endeavor  to call patients  within  24 
hours,  this may not occur  if symptoms  are reported  on weekends  or holidays.  If the patient  
reports  very severe  symptoms,  they get a bold red alert instructing  them  to call the office  
(or call team  after hours)  immediately  or seek medical  attention.  The actual  response  
thresholds  (i.e., when  to give which  alert)  for each  question  are set individually  and have 
been  refined  based  on feedback  from the office  practice  nurses.  The workflow  associated  
with Team  Monitoring  has been  vetted  by all teams  at JRSC  and has been  operationalized  
for urology,  breast,  and gynecologic  oncology  patients.  
Cohort  2: Enhanced  Feedback  
 
In this cohort,  the electronic  system  will provide  tailored  normative  data visualizations  that 
offer context  and education  to patients  regarding  expected  symptom  severity.  The 
information  provided  to patients  in the Enhanced  Feedback  group  will be  procedure  
specific  and based  on continuously  updated  PRO -CTCAE  data from previous  patients.  
Patients  are thus able to see their own recovery  trajectory  relative  to that of patients  who 
have undergone  the same  procedure.  Care  is patient -activated  in that patients  will use 
the information  about  expected  symptoms  to decide  whether  they should  call the care 
team  (e.g.,  if they are experiencing  symptoms  that are more  severe  or more  prolonged  
than expected).  If a patient  reports  severe  symptoms, they are instructed  to immediately  
contact  their physician’s  office  or seek medical  attention.  In addition,  when  patients  in the 
Enhanced  Feedback  group  report  severe  symptoms,  the care team  will receive  an alert but 
as noted  above,  alerts  to the clinical  team  can only be monitored  during  business  hours,  so 
all patients  must  seek care after hours  in the current  standard  care fashion.  
The JRSC  Recovery  Tracker  Platform  
 
As the current  standard  of care,  patients  undergoing  surgery  at JRSC  are asked  to report  
on 11 items  from a validated  instrument,  the Patient  Reported  Outcomes  Common  
Terminology  Criteria  for Advers  e Events  ( PRO -CTCAE1), three  additional  surgical  
symptom  questions,  and two questions  about  seeking  urgent  care or a doctor  during  the 
first 10 days after surgery.  Over  the following  20 days,  patients  can tailor the survey  to 
their needs  by choosing  when  they complete  the survey.  Between  days 11-30, patients  
can report  symptoms on any day. By leaving  the survey  open  after day 10, patients  who 
develop  new or worsening  symptoms  will have  the ability  to report  these  symptoms  
electronically  whenever  they wish.  Conversely,  patients  not experiencing  any symptoms  
will not be burdened  by additional  surveys.  This system  is currently  being  further  refined  
within  the JRSC  PRO  Workgroup.  
Invitations  to complete  questionnaires  are triggered  automatically  on the basis  of visit and 
operative  schedules  and sent via secure  message  to patients  through  the Patient  Portal.  
The interface  is built with a responsive  design,  so participants  have the option  of using  
the system  via computers,  tablets,  or smart  phones.  Questionnaires  are available  in both 
English  and Spanish.  Nurses  receive  secure  message  notifications  when  patients’  
symptoms  exceed  expected  values  or worsen  and will contact  the patient  by phone  within  
24 hours,  depending  on symptom  severity.  Patient  symptom  responses  integrate  directly  
into our electronic  health  record  in two ways:  (1) into nursing  documentation  templates  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  13 of 34  
  
 
for point -of-care verification  and (2) into the electronic  health  record  reports  after review  
of the data by the care team.  
The PRO-CTCAE symptom  questions 
 
The JRSC  platform  is based  on the PRO -CTCAE  symptom  questions.  In cancer  clinical  
trials,  adverse  events  are collected  and reported  using  the National  Cancer  Institute’s  
CTCAE.  To improve  precision  and patient -centeredness  in the capture  of symptomatic  
adverse  events,  the NCI funded  a team  of investigators  led by Dr. Basch  to develop  a 
library  of PRO  items  to supplement  the CTCAE,  called  the PRO -CTCAE.1 Of the 790 
adverse  events  in the CTCAE,  78 were  identified  as amenable  to patient  self-report.  
For each  of these  adverse  events,  PRO  items were  created  reflecting  the attributes  of 
presence,  frequency,  severity,  interference  with usual  or daily activities,  and/or  amount.  
One to three  attributes  were  selected  for any given  adverse  event,  depending  on the 
nature  of that particular  adverse  event.  In total, 124 individual  items  represent  the 78 
symptomatic  adverse  events  in the PRO -CTCAE  item library.  Each  item includes  a 
plain-language  term for the adverse  event,  the attribute  of interest,  and the standard  
recall  period  of “the past 7 days”  (in the current  study,  we plan to use a 1-day recall  
period  since  patients  are asked  to report  daily).  Cognitive  interviews  previously  
determined  a high level of patient  understanding  and  meaningfulness  of the items ,31 
and a national  multisite  validation  study  led by Dr. Dueck  showed  that items  were  valid,  
reliable,  and sensitive  to change .32 Additional  development  work  by the team  of Drs. 
Basch  and Dueck  included  testing  administration   mode  equivalence,33  relationship  
among  various  recall  periods ,34 and a Spanish  translation .35 PRO -CTCAE  items  were  
selected  for the symptom  monitoring  system  and are now a component  of routine  clinical  
care for MSKCC  patients  undergoing  surgery  at JRSC.  Eleven  PRO -CTCAE  items,  plus 
9 additional  questions  that were  specifically  targeted  to capture  important  post-operative  
problems , evaluate  the symptoms  of patients  recovering  from ambulatory  surgery  in the 
MyMSK  Patient  Portal.  Patients,  nurses,  surgeons,  and anesthesiologists  participated  in 
the selection  of these  items.  The items  assess  symptoms  such  as pain, nausea,  fatigue,  
constipation,  vomiting,  fever,  chills,  dyspnea,  swelling,  discharge,  and redness  . 
Study  outcomes  
 
 Aims  Meas  ure Data  Source(s)  Assessment  Time  Point  
Patient -Centered  Outcomes  SA1    
Em ergency  Department  Visits  SA1a  UCC visit at MSKCC  MSK institutional  database  Up to 30 days  after surgery  
  
 
SA1a   
Emergency  department  visit 
outside  MSKCC  Patient  self-reporting  via Patient  
Portal  and corroborating  phone  call 
to patient  by study  team;  MSK  
institutional  database   
 
Up to 30 days  after surgery  
Readmissions  SA1a  Readmission  to MSK MSK institutional  database  Up to 30 days  after surgery  
  
SA1a   
Admission  outside  MSK  Patient  self-reporting  via Patient  
Portal  and corroborating  phone  call 
to patient  by study  team;  MSK  
institutional  database   
Up to 30 days  after surgery  
Symptom -Triggered  
Interventions   
SA1b   
Nurse  calls due to alerts  Documented  in EMR via clinical  
information  system   
Up to 30 days  after surgery  
 SA1b  Unplanned  clinic  visits  and 
phone  referral  to clinic  Documented  in EMR Up to 30 days  after surgery  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  14 of 34  
  
 
 
 SA1b  Pain managem  ent  referrals  Documented  in EMR Up to 30 days  after surgery  
 SA1b  Adverse  event  
detection  EMR and MSKCC  Surgical  
Secondary  Events  Database  Up to 30 days  after surgery  
Patient  and Caregiver  Health  
Care  Experience SA2    
 
Patient  Engagement   
SA2a   
The Patient  Activation  
Measure36  
Patient self-report  Preoperatively  (day of consent - 
POD1),  2 w eeks (+7/-3 days),  
60 (+/- 14) days  after surgery  
 SA2a  Qualitative  data Semistructured  patient  interview  s 30 (+/- 10) days  after surgery  
 
Patient  Anxiety   
SA2b   
PRO-CTCAE  Anxiety  Items  Patient  self-report  via symptom  
monitoring  module  in the Patient  
Portal   
Daily for 10 days  after surgery  
Caregiver  Burden  SA2c  Caregiver  Reaction  
Assessment49 Caregiver  self -report  2 w eeks (+7/-3 days),  60 (+/- 
14) days  after surgery  
 SA2c  Qualitative  data Semistructured  caregiver  interview  s 30 (+/- 10) days  after surgery  
 
 
Patient -centered  outcomes  
 
We will evaluate  the frequency  of urgent  care center  (UCC)  visits,  readmissions  and 
symptom -triggered  interventions  (pain  management  referrals,  nursing  calls)  through  triggers  
generated  from the informatics  platform  as well as through  thorough  chart  extraction  by the 
clinical  research  coordinator  (CRC)  for 30 days after surgery.  
Patient  and caregiver  health  care experience  
 
The Patient Activation Measure. The Patient Activation Measure36 is a validated PRO 
measure  developed  to evaluate  the engagement  of patients  in their care.  The 
development  process  included  conceptual  definition  and item  generation   through  
patient  focus  groups,  literature  review,  and expert  panel  consensus.  Psychometric  
evaluation  of the scales  was performed  using  Rasch  psychometric  methods,  and 
further  validation  was completed  in a large  national  sample.  This measure  includes  
items  querying  patients  about  their confidence  (self-efficacy)  and knowledge  to take 
action  specific  to their health.36 Items  include  “I am confident  I can tell when  I need  to 
get medical  care”  and “I am confident  I can take actions  that will prevent  or minimize  
symptoms  or problems.”  This PRO  measure  was selected  because  it evaluates  a key 
concept  of interest  in our study,  was rigorously  developed  with qualitative  and 
quantitative  methods,  and has strong  psychometric  properties.  PAM yields  only a total 
score  that will be used  in the analysis.  
The Caregiver Reaction Assessment. The Caregiver Reaction Assessment is a 
validated  instrument  designed  to assess  the impact  of caregiving  on disrupted  
schedules,  self-esteem,  and financial  and health  problems .37 The Caregiver   Reaction  
Assessment  assesses  specific  aspects  of the caregiving  situation,  including  both 
negative  and positive  dimensions  of caregiving  reactions.  The Caregiver  Reaction  
Assessment  (CRA)  consists of 5 subscales,  4 of which  are negative  and 1 positive.  The 
negative  subscales  have higher  scores  indicating  higher  level of burden,  rated  from 1 
(strongly  disagree)  to 5 (strongly  agree).   The four negative  subscales  are: Impact  on 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  15 of 34  
  
 
Schedule  (5 items),  Impact  on Health  (4 items),  Lack of Family  Support  (5 items)  and 
Impact  on Finances  (3 items).  The positive  subscale,  Caregiver’s  Self Esteem  (7 items),  
has lower  scores  indicating  higher  levels  of burden  rated  from 1 to (strongly  disagree)  to 
5 (strongly  agree).  
Five dimensions  of caregiver  reactions  were  identified  through  exploratory  factor  
analysis:  the impact  of caregiving  on disrupted  schedules,  financial  problems,  lack of 
family  support,  health  problems,  and self-esteem.  Reliability  analyses  show  that 
standardized  Cronbach’s  alphas  vary between  0.62 and 0.83 for the  separate  
subscales,  indicating  sufficient  internal  consistencies  and that construct  validity  is 
supported.  This measure  was selected  because  it is well-targeted  to our outcomes  of 
interest  and was developed  among  partners  of patients  with cancer.38 
The PRO-CTCAE Anxiety Items. The PRO-CTCAE Anxiety scale consists of three items 
scored  0–4, for a full-scale  range  of 0–12 (see pages  11 and 12 for PRO-CTCAE 
development  and validation).  These  include:  “How often  do you feel anxiety?” “What  was 
the severity  of your anxiety  at its worst?” and “How much did anxiety  interfere  with your 
usual  or daily activities?” 
Qualitative  patient  and caregiver  interviews  will be conducted  in a subsample  of 
patients  and their caregivers  throughout  the study.  After study  consent,  patients  and 
caregivers  will be invited  to volunteer  for possible  future  in-depth,  semistructured  
qualitative  interviews  (either  individual  or in group  form).  We will approach  patients  (and 
caregivers)  numerous  times  throughout  the course  of the study  until data saturation.  We will 
select  patients  from both randomized  cohorts  and will seek to interview  a heterogeneous  
patient  sample  (i.e., patients  representing  the full spectrum  of established  potential  
participants  (patients  and caregivers)  for possible  interviews  in order  to examine  and 
evaluate  both patient  engagement  and caregiver  burden  (SA2a,  SA2c)  throughout  the study.  
We will ensure  that we have a selection  of volunteers  that represent  a range  of procedure  
types  and ages for all qualitative  interviews.  
 
The entire  study  team,  including  patient  and caregiver  partners  and advocacy  organization  
members  will contribute  to the development  of the interview  guide  (see Appendices  I and 
J). Dr. Jeanne  Carter  will conduct  the interviews,  which  will be recorded  and transcribed  
verbatim.  The data will be coded  using  a line-by-line approach,  where  all concepts  will 
be labeled  by major  and minor  themes.  Coding  will take place  as soon  as possible  after 
an interview  so that findings  can inform  subsequent  interviews  in an iterative  fashion.  
Codes  (i.e., patient  quotations)  and their major  and minor  themes  will be organized  and 
analyzed  using  NVivo  qualitative  analysis  software  (QSR  International).  Patient  
characteristics  (e.g.,  age, disease  condition,  procedure)  will also be incorporated  into the 
qualitative  database  to help identify  groups  that might  experience  the system  differently  
(e.g.,  elderly  patients  or those  with lower  education  levels).  Interviews  will continue  until 
data saturation  is reached  (i.e., no new themes  identified).  On the basis  of our team’s 
previous  experience  with qualitative  research  studies,  we anticipate  reaching  data 
saturation   after approximately   30 patient  and 30 caregiver  interviews.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  16 of 34  
  
 
 
 
 
5.0 CRITERIA  FOR SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
All patients  scheduled  for ambulatory  cancer  surgery  at JRSC  will be eligible.  For patients  
with disabilities  that make  it difficult  to complete  the electronic  surveys  (e.g.,  visual  
impairment,  hand  function  problems),  we will train caregivers  to help with completion  of the 
survey.  The PRO -CTCAE  questions  have already  been  tested  to ensure  that they will be 
easily  understood  by patients  with low literacy  levels.  
Additionally,  patients  will be asked  to identify  a caregiver  to participate  in a 2-week  and 2- 
month  follow -up questionnaire  and possibly  in a qualitative  interview.  Caregivers  will be 
approached  and consented  to participate.  
5.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
 
• All patients  >18 years  of age who are scheduled  for ambulatory  cancer  surgery  at 
JRSC,  and their caregivers,  will be eligible  for study  participation.  
5.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
 
The following  criteria  apply  to both  patients  and their caregivers:  
 
• Inability  to speak  English  
• Inability  to access  a computer,  tablet,  or mobile  phone  
• For patients:  not interested  in/unable  to sign up for the MyMSK  Patient  Portal  
• For caregivers:  Unable  to provide  an email  address  
• Cognitive  impairment  that prohibits  informed  consent  or understanding  of the study  
protocol  
6.1 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
 
Patient  Recruitment  Plan 
 
All patients  who are scheduled  for surgery  at JRSC  will receive  IRB/PB -approved  written  
educational  materials  that describe  the study  (see Appendices  D and H) via the MyMSK  
Patient  Portal,  by email,  or by a letter  mailed  to their home  (see Appendices  F and G). If a 
patient  is not yet signed  up for the MyMSK  Patient  Portal,  the study team  will also include  a 
brief document  that instructs  patients  how to register  (see Appendix  K). 
Patients  will be advised  that they will be approached  to participate  in this study  by phone  
prior to surgery,  at their next clinic  appointment,  or in person  on the day of their surgery.  
They  will be encouraged  to read through  the information  carefully  and to also consider  
whether  there  is a caregiver  in their life who can be approached  to participate  in the 
caregiver  portion  of the study.  The materials  will provide  contact  information  for the CRC  
and the PI of the study  in case  patients  have questions  they would  like addressed  before  
the day of surgery.  The CRC  will then attempt  to contact  eligible  patients  by phone  before  
surgery.  Using  an IRB-approved  verbal  consent  script,  the CRC  will explain  the study  to 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  17 of 34  
  
 
patients.  Written  consent  will not be obtained;  rather,  the CRC  will document  the patient’s 
verbal  consent.  
If the CRC  is not able to contact  the patient  by email,  Patient  Portal,  or phone  prior to the 
day of surgery,  she/he  will approach  the patient  at one of their upcoming  clinic  appointments  
or when  they arrive  at JRSC  for surgery.  The CRC  will describe  the study  in person,  again  
using  the IRB-approved  verbal  consent  script.  Patients  will be approached  on the day of 
their surgery  in the waiting  area,  and the consent  discussion  will happen  in a private  
consultation  room  on the third floor at JRSC.  Patients  will not be approached  in the pre- 
operative  area,  and will be given  as much  time as needed  to decide  whether  or not they will 
participate  in the study.  
Caregiver  Recruitment  Plan 
 
Patients  will be asked  at the time of consent  to identify  a caregiver  whom  they would  like to 
be actively  involved  in their recovery  and may be interested  in participating  in the study.  The 
CRC  will obtain  the caregivers’  contact  information  from the patient.  
Caregivers  can be contacted  in several  ways:  
 
1) If the caregiver  is present  in clinic  with the patient,  the CRC  will approach  the caregiver  
at that time.  
2) If the patient  suggests  contacting  the caregiver  by email  or phone,  the CRC  will proceed  
to contact  the caregiver  using  the preferred  method  of contact  provided  by the patient.  
a. If personal  email  is preferred,  the caregivers  will be provided  written  education  
materials  regarding  the study  via email  (see Appendices  E and H). Caregivers  
will be advised  that they will be approached  to participate  in this study by phone  
prior to surgery  or in person  on the day of the patient’s  surgery.  The materials  
will also provide  contact  information  for the CRC  and the PI for the study,  in case 
caregivers  have questions  they would  like addressed  before  the day of surgery.  
b. If phone  is preferred,  the CRC  will call the caregiver  and invite  them  to 
participate.  
3) If no contact  is made  prior to surgery,  or if the patient/caregiver  requests  to be 
approached  on the day of surgery,  the CRC  will approach  the caregiver  on the day of 
surgery.  
Given  the extent  to which  caregivers  are already  integrated  into the clinical  experience  at 
JRSC,  we estimate  that more  than 50% of caregivers  (n=1,375)  will agree  to participate  in 
the study.  
7.0 ASSESSMENT/EVALUATION  PLAN  
 
The Recovery  Tracker  will be completed  by all patients  for up to 30 days following  their 
surgery.  Patients  will be sent the Patient  Activation  Measure  (PAM)  through  the MyMSK  
Patient  Portal  (see Appendices  A and H). In the event  the electronic  PAM survey  is not 
available,  a hardcopy  version  will be provided  to the patient  to complete.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  18 of 34  
  
 
Caregivers  will be asked  to provide  their email  and will be sent the Caregiver  Reaction  
Questionnaire  and a brief demographic  questionnaire  through  REDCap  (see Appendices  B, 
C, and H). In the event  the electronic  survey  is not available,  a hardcopy  questionnaire  will 
be provided  to the caregiver  to complete.  
 
 # of 
Items  Pre-Op 
(day of consent  
– POD1)   
POD  1-10 POD14  
(+7/-3 days)  POD30  
(+/-10 days)  POD60  
(+/- 14 days)  
Patient        
Recovery   Tracker  
(including   PRO - 
CTCAE   symptoms  
and anxiety  items,  
and additional  
questions)   
 
20   
 
Daily    
Available   to 
complete  if 
desired  
(POD11 -30)  
Emergency  
Department   Visits      X  
Readmission      X  
Adverse   Events      X  
Patient Activation 
Measure  10 X  X  X 
Patient  Interviews      X  
Caregiver        
Caregiver    Reaction  
Assessment  24   X  X 
Caregiver    Interviews      X  
 
 
8.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
 
There  are minimal  risks to all subjects  involved  in any phase  of the study.  Patients  who 
indicate  excessive  anxiety  or distress  will be offered  a referral  to an MSKCC  psychiatry  
professional.   If severe  symptoms are reported,  patients  in both groups  will be instructed  
to immediately  contact  their physician’s  office  or seek medical  attention  and the clinical  
team  be alerted.  
9.0 PRIMARY  OUTCOMES  
 
The primary  outcome  for SA1, emergency  department  visits  up to 30 days after 
ambulatory  cancer  surgery,  is important  to patients  because  emergency  department  visits  
are time-consuming  and may increase  anxiety  and caregiver  burden.   It  is  relevant   to 
health  care systems  and clinicians  because  such  visits  are inefficient  and costly  and may 
erode  trust between  the patient  and provider.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  19 of 34  
  
 
10.0 CRITERIA  FOR REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  
 
Participants  will be considered  off-study  if they do not undergo  an eligible  procedure,  their 
surgery  is not performed  at the Josie  Robertson  Surgery  Center  or they are not discharged  
within  48 hours  of their surgery  (POD2).  All other  participants  will remain  on study  to be 
analyzed  using  an intent -to-treat approach.  
11.0 BIOSTATISTICS  
 
The data analysis  plan corresponds  to our Specific  Aims  as described  on pages   9 and 
10. All statistical  analyses  will be led by coinvestigator  Dr. Andrew  Vickers  (who  has been  
an investigator  on more than 20 randomized  trials and has written  extensively  on trial 
methodology)  and study  consultant  Dr. Amylou  Dueck  (who  contributed   to  the 
development  and is experienced  in analysis  of the PRO -CTCAE  items).  The enrollment  
time frame  for this protocol  is three  years.  
Power  calculation  
 
Sample  size and power  calculations  were  based  on the primary  outcome,  the difference  
in emergency  department  visits  without  admission,  between  the Enhanced  Feedback  and 
Team  Monitoring  arms.  On the basis  of current  MSKCC  data,  we expect  for every  1,000  
eligible  patients  treated  surgically  at JRSC,  69 patients  will make  emergency  department  
isits. We also estimate  that of these  69 patients,  28 will require  readmission,  and hence  
41 will have visits  the emergency  department  unnecessarily.  The majority  of such 
unnecessary  visits  are related  to concerns  about  symptoms,  which  might  be avoided  if 
patients  have a better  understanding  of expected  symptom  severity.  Using  a traditional  
alpha  of 5% and an event  rate of 4.1%  in the control  group,  the power  to detect  different  
relative  risk reductions  is given  below  for a total sample  size of 2,750  patients.  
 
 
 
Relative  Risk Reduction  Power  
33% 45% 
40% 64% 
50% 85% 
67% 96% 
 
 
The primary  analysis  will compare,  between  groups,  the proportion  of patients  with at 
least 1 emergency  department  visit without  admission  within  30 days (SA1a)  of surgery  
by logistic  regression  with randomization  strata  as covariates.  A difference  between  
proportions  will be calculated  along  with a 95% CI by applying  the odds ratio from the 
regression  to the event  rate in the control  group.  A similar  statistical  approach  will be 
taken  for the proportion  of patients  referred  to pain management  and unplanned  clinic 
visits  (SA1b).  For nursing  follow -up calls (SA1b),  phone  referrals  (SA1b)  and rates  of 
adverse  events  (SA1b),  we will use both a binary  approach  (e.g.,  at least 1 nursing  call 
vs. no nursing  call) and analysis  of count  data using  negative  binomial  regression  with 
randomization  strata  as covariates.  For all binary  endpoints,  an event  will be counted  
only if it occurs  within  30  days of surgery.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  20 of 34  
  
 
 
For the endpoints  of patient  engagement  (SA2a)  and caregiver  burden  (SA2c),  we will 
use linear  regression  with randomization  strata  as covariates  for each  subscale  
separately.  For all analyses,  we will report  an estimate  of the difference  between  groups  
along  with a 95% CI and a two-sided  P value  for the null hypothesis  of no difference  
between  groups.  For the endpoint  of patient  anxiety  (SA2b),  as measured  by the PRO - 
CTCAE,  we will enter  daily anxiety  scores  as  a continuous   outcome  variable   into 
a longitudinal  mixed  effects  model  with time,  treatment,  and treatment  by time 
interaction  as predictors  and randomization  strata  as covariates.  As all data are 
collected  after randomization,  both the treatment  term and the treatment  by time 
interaction  term are valid indicators  of a treatment  effect.  We hypothesize  that initial  
anxiety  will be similar  between  groups  and will be related  to immediate  postoperative  
concerns.  Subsequent  anxiety  may be related  to emergent  symptoms,  whether  they 
are considered  worrying  and how they are dealt with. Hence,  we will treat the time by 
treatment  interaction  as the primary  hypothesis  for the purpose  of establishing  the 
treatment  effect  of enhanced  feedback  on patient  anxiety.  
In exploratory  analysis,  the mean  of each  PRO -CTCAE  item (0–4 scale)  will be 
compared  between  groups  during  the 10-day post-surgery  daily reporting  period  using  
the same  longitudinal  mixed  effects  model  described  above  for anxiety  with time,  
treatment,  and treatment  by time interaction  as predictors  and randomization  strata  as 
covariates.  All available  data will be used  in these  models.  This likelihood -based  
approach  to the analysis  of longitudinal  PRO  data provides  valid estimates  of 
intervention  effects  in the presence  of ignorable  missing  data and is known  to be robust  
to nonignorable  missing  data if covariates  and previous  values  of the outcome  explain  
much  of the missingness.  
Supplemental   analysis   will  also  employ   longitudinal   mixed   ordinal   logistic   models   to 
compare  ordinal  PRO -CTCAE  scores  between   arms.  
Data  sources  and data linkage  plans  
 
Many  of the study  endpoints  will be obtained  from MSKCC’s  institutional  database.  
Endpoints  such  as MSKCC  emergency  department  visits,  nursing  follow -up calls,  clinic 
visits,  and intrainstitutional  referrals  are automatically  captured  as part of electronic  
medical  record  (EMR)–enabled  care management.  Emergency  department  visits  at 
outside  institutions  will be captured  by a question  on our daily symptom  surveys  and 
routine  follow -up surveys.  Responses  to the follow  up surveys  will be captured  
electronically  via MSK Engage.  Patients  describing  an emergency  department  visit at an 
institution  other  than MSKCC  are contacted  by clinical  staff for further  details  as a routine  
part of follow -up care.  Adverse  events  are captured  by the MSKCC  Secondary  Surgical  
Event  database.  Outside  emergency  department  visits  and admissions  for patients  
participating  in MSKCC’s  electronic  health  information  exchange  will also be utilized.  
Electronic  health  information  exchange  is carried  out through  organizations  known  as 
Health  Information  Exchanges  (HIEs)  or Regional  Health  Information  Organizations  
(RHIOs).  This data is captured  within  MSKCC’s  institutional  database.  Data for all patients  
who choose  to opt out of the health  information  exchange  program  will not be used.  To 
note:  MSK may join additional  HIEs or RHIOs  in the future.  Any available  HIE or RHIO  
data for participating  patients  will be collected.  PROs  are obtained  through  MSKCC’s  
symptom  monitoring  software,  the same  software  used  to implement  symptom  self- 
reporting.  Covariates  such  as age, sex, and race are routinely  captured  in the MSKCC  
EMR.  Comorbidities  are captured  by an MSKCC  platform  used  to take the baseline  
medical  history  in all surgical  patients  potentially  eligible  for ambulatory  cancer  surgery.  
Caregivers’   responses   to  the  Caregiver   Reaction   Assessment  questionnaires   will  be 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  21 of 34  
  
 
 
collected  via REDCap,  a secure  web application  for building  and managing  online  
surveys  and databases.  In the event  the REDCap  survey  is unavailable,  a hardcopy  form 
will be provided  to caregivers  to complete.  
Sensitivity  analyses  to determine  the impact   of key assumptions  and missing   data 
 
The primary  threat  to validity  is a larger  than expected  number  of emergency  department  
visits  to outside  institutions  and reporting  that varies  systematically  between  groups  (e.g.,  
if patients  in the Enhanced  Feedback  group  are less likely to report  a visit to a non- 
MSKCC  emergency  department).   We will conduct  sensitivity  analyses  by first 
examining  whether  the proportion  of visits  to MSKCC  vs. non-MSKCC  sites  varies  
between  groups.  We will then determine  the number  and distribution  of unreported  
emergency  department  visits  that would  need  to have occurred  to change  our 
conclusions  (e.g.,  if we reject  the null hypothesis  in favor  of the experimental  arm, we 
will determine  the number  of excess  unreported  visits  in the experimental  arm that 
would  result  in a P value  ≥ 0.05).  
Approach  to missing  data for questionnaire items 
 
Baseline  characteristics  between  those  with and those  without  missing  data will also be 
compared  to assess  for bias. The rate of missing  data is expected  to be low. The main  
threat  to data completion  involves  the caregiver  and patient  questionnaires  obtained  at 2 
weeks  and 2 months,  respectively.  In addition  to automated  electronic  reminders,  a 
research  assistant  will follow  up with patients  who have missingdata. Patients  from whom  
no data are obtained  will be classified  as “unable  to contact,” “too busy/uninterested, ” or 
“intervention  related” (e.g.,  a patient  who declines  to complete  the questionnaires  
because  of an experience  earlier  in the trial).  Patterns  of missing  data will be compared  
by treatment  arm. In the unlikely  event  that the rate of missing  data is more than 5%, we 
will impute  missing  data using  multiple  imputation  by chained  equations,  with results  
combined  using  Rubin’s  rules.  The principle  assumptionof such  a method  is that the data 
are “missingat random”  or “missingcompletely at random.”  It seems  at least possible  that 
any missingness  will be nonignorable  on the grounds  that a patient  with a poor level of 
patient  activation  will be less likely to complete  surveys.  We will therefore  repeat  multiple  
imputation,  except  instead  of missing  activation  measures  being  sampled  from a 
distribution  centered  on the mean  they will be sampled  from the 25th and, alternatively,  
10th percentiles.  A similar  approach  will be taken  for the caregiver  measure,  for 
comparable  reasons.  
Heterogeneity  of  treatment  effect  
 
It is possible  that the effects  of Enhanced  Feedback  vary predictably  between  patients.  
Although  it is common  to assess  computer  literacy  as an effect  modifier  in trials of 
patient -facing  software,  we believe  that this is inappropriate   for the current  proposal.  
This is because  both groups  will interface  with the software,  and the difference  between  
the two groups  is not highly  software  dependent.  It does,  however,  seem  plausible  that 
patient  willingness  to make  proactive  decisions  about  their postoperative   care in the 
light of data about  expected  symptoms  would  be mediated  by age, educational  status,  
and the type of procedure  they undergo.  We will therefore  repeat  all analyses  including  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  22 of 34  
  
 
interaction  terms  between  allocation  and age, education,  and procedure.  Educational  
status  is obtained  routinely  at baseline  for all MSKCC  surgery  patients  and will be coded  
as a binary  variable:  education  after high school/high  school  only. The models  will be of 
the following  form (with a linear  case being  shown  for the sake of simplicity):  
 
y=β1 Allocation  + β2 Age + β3 Allocation  × Age + β(Randomization  stratum)  + c 
 
Allocation  is coded  1 for Enhanced  Feedback  and 0 otherwise;  randomization  stratum  
is a categorical  variable.  A similar  model  will be used  for educational  status  and 
procedure  type. We have no particular  reason  to believe  that response  to Enhanced  
Feedback  would  vary by race and ethnicity,  but as a check  to ensure  that our approach  
does not inadvertently  discriminate,  we will conduct  exploratory  analyses  of race and 
ethnicity  using  the structure  of the model  described  above.  
Reporting  plan with assessments  of internal  and external  validity  
 
This is a randomized  trial with good  allocation  concealment,  and therefore   selection  
bias can be discounted.  Patients,  however,  will not be blinded.  This is not an important  
issue  for the primary  endpoint,  which  is emergency  department  visits,  as this is 
objectively  measured  and not susceptible  to reporting  bias.  The  question   of 
performance  bias in terms  of differential  patient   behavior   is complicated  by the fact 
that the aim of the trial is to change  behavior.   Performance  bias by  clinicians   is, 
however,  a concern.  For instance,  it is plausible  that a nurse  speaking  to a study  patient  
by phone  in the days after discharge  might  make  differential  recommendations  about  
the necessity  of an emergency  department  visit depending  on patient  assignment.  
However,  this is an unlikely  scenario  given  the context  of nursing  care at MSKCC.  
Nurses  call large  numbers  of patients,  both those  eligible  for the trial (ambulatory  care 
surgery)  and those  ineligible  (e.g.,   complex  operations   requiring   an in-patient   stay),  
and they are unlikely   to know  which  patients  are and are not on trial. Patients  might  
potentially  reveal  allocation  to nurses during  the phone  call (e.g.,  “I saw on the website  
that…”).  But, again,  as a large  number  of nurses  will be dealing  with a large  volume  of 
patient  calls,  it is unlikely  that allocation  will bias the advice  given  to a significant  extent.  
Regarding  external  validity,  the system  is currently  in use by MSKCC  patients,  but it is 
possible  that these  patients  (a referral  population  in a major  urban  center)  may have 
higher  computer  literacy,  health  literacy,  or numeracy  than the general  population.  We 
recognize  that usability  barriers  that might  seem  trivial  to a highly  technology -focused  
audience  can sometimes  seem  insurmountable  for patients  facing  stress  due to illness  
or treatment  or for patients  who face preexisting  hurdles  in terms  of computer  literacy,  
health  literacy,  or numeracy .39-41 As a result,  we have built in a brief user-centered  design  
stage  supervised  by coinvestigator  Dr. Jessica  Ancker  to review  the  existing  platform  in 
a systematic  fashion,  elicit constructive  feedback  from representative  users,  and perform  
rapid -cycle  modifications  to ensure  usability  and utility  for users.  We anticipate  that this 
intensive  user-centered  design   project  will successfully  adapt  the existing  instrument.  
12.1 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION PROCEDUR ES 
 
12.2 Research  Participant  Registration  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  23 of 34  
  
 
Confirm  eligibility  as defined  in the section  entitled  Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria.  Obtain  
informed  consent,  by following  procedures  defined  in section  entitled  Informed  Consent  
Procedures.  During  the registration  process,  registering  individuals  will be required  to 
complete  a protocol  specific  Eligibility  Checklist.  The individual  signing  the Eligibility  
Checklist  will confirm  whether  or not the participant  is eligible  to enroll  in the study.  Study  
staff are responsible  for ensuring  that all institutional  requirements  necessary  to enroll  a 
participant  to the study  have been  completed.  See related  Clinical  Research  Policy  and 
Procedure  #401  (Protocol  Participant  Registration).  
All participants  will be registered  through  the Clinical  Trial Management  System.  The 
completed  signature  page  of the verbal  script/RA,  a completed  Eligibility  Checklist  and other  
relevant  documents  will be uploaded  via to CTMS.  
12.3 Randomization  
 
At the time of protocol  consent,  it will be explained  to patients  that they will be 
completing  symptom  self-reported  questionnaires  for up to 30 days after surgery  (daily  
for postoperative  days 1 to 10 and then at tailored  time points)  as a component  of 
routine  care,  and they will be asked  whether  they are willing  to be randomized  to 
potentially  receive  additional  information  that may help them  interpret  the severity  of their 
symptoms.  Randomization  will be implemented  through  CRDB,  a fully secure,  
password -protected  database  that ensures  full allocation  concealment.  It will be 
performed  within  1 week  of the patients’  surgical  visit. Randomization  will be stratified  by 
procedure  and will be implemented  by randomly  permuted  blocks  of random  length.  
The trial will not be blinded,  as it relies  on patient  knowledge  (i.e., how a patient’s  scores  
compare  with other  patients’  scores)  as a key part of the intervention.  
Stratification  will be based  the following  surgical  procedure  types:  
• Gynecologic  
o Laparoscopic  or robotic  procedure  
o Laparotomy  
o Other  
• Breast/Plastics  
o Mastectomy  alone  (with or without  sentinel  node  and axillary  node  dissection)  
o Lumpectomy  (with or without  sentinel  node  and axillary  node  dissection)  
o Tissue  expander   placement  
o Other  
• Urology  
o Prostatectomy  laparoscopic  or robotic  
o Partial  or total nephrectomy - laparoscopic  or robotic  
o Laparotomy  
o Other  
• Head  and Neck  
o Thyroidectomy  
o Other  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  24 of 34  
  
 
13.1 DATA MANAGEMENT ISSUES 
 
A Clinical  Research  Coordinator  (CRC)  and a Research  Project  Manager  (RPM)  will be 
assigned  to the study.  The responsibilities  of the CRC  and RPM  include  project  compliance,  
data reporting,  regulatory  monitoring,  problem  resolution  and prioritization,  and coordinating  
the activities  of the protocol  study  team.  
The data collected  for this study,  including  patient  demographic  data,  treatment  variables,  
and survey  responses   will be recorded  by the research  team  in a secure  password - 
protected  database.  
Data collected  for this study  will be entered  into and managed  via a secure  REDCap  
Database.  REDCap,  Research  Electronic  Data Capture,  is an open  source  platform  that 
allows  for the collection  of research  data in a secure manner  over a web based  interface.  
Usage  of the platform  is contingent  on an open  source  license.  The platform  was developed  
by Vanderbilt  University  which  MSK has a standing  agreement  with to allow  the usage  of 
REDCap for academic/research  purposes.  
For this protocol,  electronic  data entry  forms  may be completed  online  by study  staff.  [If 
applicable],  electronic  participant  responses  will also be collected  either  by sending  
participants  a direct  link or having  the participants  fill out the electronic  survey  on site. 
Data will be housed in the Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center’s  (MSKCC)  Jersey  data 
center.  REDCap  has been  approved  by MSKCC’s  Information  Security  to store  PHI. The 
MSKCC  Information  Systems  group  is responsible  for applying  all operating  system  patches  
and security  updates  to the REDCap  servers.  All connections  to REDCap  utilize  encrypted  
(SSL -based)  connections  to ensure  data is protected.  The server  is backed  up nightly  in 
the event  that disaster  recovery  would  be necessary,  and the system  would  need  to be 
rolled  back.  Members  of the Clinical  Research  Administration  supporting  the REDCap  
software  will have access  to REDCap  projects  for the purpose  to ensuring  the proper  
functioning  of the database  and the overall  software  system.  
Permissions  to the database  for both internal  and external  users  will be managed  by the 
REDCap project  manager  or study  staff.  User access  to the data is contingent  on those  a 
part of the study  team  and data sharing  agreements  in place  with third party  entities  if 
applicable.  Project  managers  are responsible  for regularly  auditing  these  permissions  to 
ensure  changes  in staff are reflected  appropriately.  
REDCap  has the ability   maintain  an audit trail of changes  to the database  providing  a 
timestamp as well as the user making  the update.  In addition,  a data resolution  module  
offers  the ability  of opening  and closing  queries  optionally  requiring  justification  when  data 
is being  updated.  Permission  roles for data resolution  are integrated  in REDCap.  
Comprehensive  system logs are also maintained  of user activity  and when  changes  to the 
database  are made.  
Source  documentation  will be available  to support  the computerized  patient  record.  A 
minimal  data set will be entered  into CRDB.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  25 of 34  
  
 
13.0.1  Participating  Sites  Regulatory  Document  
 
Prior to implementing  this protocol  at MSK,  the protocol,  informed  consent  form,  HIPAA  
authorization  and any other  information  pertaining  to participants  must  be approved  by the 
MSK Institutional  Review  Board/Privacy  Board  (IRB/PB).  There  will be one protocol  
document,  and each  participating  site will utilize  that document.  Participating  sites that are 
consulting  should  submit  this protocol  to their IRB according  to local guidelines.  Copies  of 
any site IRB correspondence  should  be forwarded  to MSK.  
The below  describes  the roles of each  consultant  named  to the protocol:  
 
Andrea  Pusic,  MD, Attending  Surgeon  in the Department  of Surgery   at Brigham  and 
Women’s  Hospital,  will serve  as a Co-Principal  Investigator  on the IRB protocol.  As a 
consultant  to MSK,  Dr. Pusic  will have access  to PHI (any identifiers  relevant  to 
study/participant  management  or analysis  of study  outcomes),  and study  data (i.e., 
participant  disease  and demographic  characteristics  and survey  response  data).  
Larissa  Temple,  MD, Attending  Surgeon  in the Department  of Surgery  at University  of 
Rochester  will serve  as an investigator  on this protocol.  As a consultant  to MSK,  Dr. Temple  
will have access  to PHI (any identifiers  relevant  to study/participant  management  or analysis  
of study  outcomes),  and study  data (i.e. participant  disease  and demographic  characteristics  
and survey  response  data).  
Jessica  Anker,  PhD is a consultant  per the PCORI  contract  (IHS-1602 -34355).  Dr. Anker  is 
an expert  in the effects  of health  information  technology  on decisions  and healthcare  quality.  
She is an associate  professor  at Weill  Cornell  Medicine.  In year one, she will supervise  the 
user-centered  design  project.  In years  two and three,  Dr. Anker  will collaborate  on any 
continued  adaptations  of the instrument  suggested   by analysis  of the qualitative  and 
quantitative  data.  Participant  identifiers  will not be shared,  but she will have access  to study  
data pertinent to her work in making the necessary instrument adap tations. 
Amylou  Dueck,  PhD,  is a consultant  per the PCORI  contract  (IHS-1602 -34355).  Dr. Dueck  
has expertise  in the design  and analysis  of cancer  studies  involving  patient -reported  
outcomes.  She contributed  to the development  and is experienced  in the analysis  of the 
PRO -CTCAE  items  used  in the Recovery  Tracker  survey.  Dr. Dueck  will offer her 
professional  expertise  in patient -reported  outcomes  research  and data analysis  to help 
inform  the study  design,  data collection  and analyses,  and future  manuscripts  for 
publication.  She will assess  the validity  and reliability  of the Recovery   Tracker  data.  
Participant  identifiers  will not be shared  (all data will be de-identified  and she will not have 
access  to PHI),  but she will have access  to study  data pertinent  to her work  in performing  
Recovery  Tracker  analyses.  
Ethan  Basch,  MD, PhD is a consultant  per the PCORIcontract  (IHS-1602 -34355).  Dr. Basch  
is an expert  in the development  and evaluation  of patient -reported  outcomes  systems.  He 
will offer his professional  expertise  in patient -reported  outcomes  research  to help inform  the 
study  design,  recruitment  efforts,  study  materials,  and future  manuscripts  for publication.  
Participant  identifiers  will not be shared.  De-identified  data will be shared  if it is necessary  
for the analysis  of study  outcomes  and preparation  of study  manuscripts.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  26 of 34  
  
 
Debra  Paget  is a stakeholder  and consultant  per the PCORI  contract  (IHS-1602 -34355).  
She is a 17-year volunteer  at the patient  advocacy  group,  Support  Connection,  which  
provides  emotional,  educational,  and social  support  ot women  and families  affected  by 
breast  and ovarian  cancer.  Ms. Paget  is also an ovarian  cancer  survivor  and has been  a 
caregiver  for two cancer  patients.  She will offer personal  insight  and constructive  feedback  
on certain  aspects  of the study  design,  recruitment  efforts,  study  materials,  and future  
manuscripts  for publication.  De-identified  data will be shared  if it is  necessary  for the 
analysis  of study  outcomes  and preparation  of study  manuscripts.  
Jaime  Blanda  is a stakeholder  and patient  partner  consultant  per the PCORI  contract  (IHS- 
1602 -34355).  As a former  patient,  she will offer personal  insight  and constructive  feedback  
on certain  aspects  of the study  design,  recruitment  efforts,  study  materials,  and future  
manuscripts  for publication.  De-identified  data will be shared  if it is  necessary  for the 
analysis  of study  outcomes  and preparation  of study  manuscripts.  
 
Paul Carter  is a stakeholder  and patient  partner  consultant  per the PCORI  contract  (IHS- 
1602 -34355).  As a former  patient,  he will offer personal  insight  and constructive  feedback  
on certain  aspects  of the study  design,  recruitment  efforts,  study  materials,  and future  
manuscripts  for publication.  De-identified  data will be shared  if it is necessary  for the 
analysis  of study  outcomes  and preparation  of study  manuscripts.  
Thomas  Chiusano  is a stakeholder  and caregiver  partner  consultant  per the PCORI  contract  
(IHS-1602 -34355).  As a former  patient,  he will offer personal  insight  and constructive  
feedback  on certain  aspects  of the study  design,  recruitment  efforts,  study  materials,  and 
future  manuscripts  for publication.  De-identified  data will be shared  if it is necessary  for the 
analysis  of study  outcomes  and preparation  of study  manuscripts.  
James  Guttridge  is a stakeholder  and patient  partner  consultant  per the PCORI  contract  
(IHS-1602 -34355).  As a former  patient,  he will offer personal  insight  and constructive  
feedback  on certain  aspects  of the study  design,  recruitment  efforts,  study  materials,  and 
future  manuscripts  for publication.  De-identified  data will be shared  if it is necessary  for the 
analysis  of study  outcomes  and preparation  of study  manuscripts.  
Christine  Nippes,  PA-C is a stakeholder  and patient  partner  consultant  per the PCORI  
contract  (IHS-1602 -34355).  As a former  patient,  she will offer personal  insight  and 
constructive  feedback  on certain  aspects  of the study  design,  recruitment  efforts,  study  
materials,  and future  manuscripts  for publication.  De-identified  data will be shared  if it is 
necessary  for the analysis  of study  outcomes  and preparation  of study  manuscripts.  
Amy Malale  is a stakeholder  and patient  partner  consultant  per the PCORI  contract  (IHS- 
1602 -34355).  As a former  patient,  she will offer personal  insight  and constructive  feedback  
on certain  aspects  of the study  design,  recruitment  efforts,  study  materials,  and future  
manuscripts  for publication.  De-identified  data will be shared  if it is necessary  for the 
analysis  of study  outcomes  and preparation  of study  manuscripts.  
Magen  Miranda  is a stakeholder  and patient  partner  consultant  per the PCORI  contract  
(IHS-1602 -34355).  As a former  patient,  she will offer personal  insight  and constructive  
feedback  on certain  aspects  of the study  design,  recruitment  efforts,  study  materials,  and 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  27 of 34  
  
 
future  manuscripts  for publication.  De-identified  data will be shared  if it is necessary  for the 
analysis  of study  outcomes  and preparation  of study  manuscripts.  
13.2 Quality Assurance 
 
Weekly  registration  reports  will be generated  to monitor  patient  accruals  and completeness  
of registration  data.  Routine  data quality  reports  will be generated  to assess  missing  data 
and inconsistencies.  Accrual  rates  and extent  and accuracyof  evaluations  and follow -up will 
be monitored  periodically  throughout  the study  period,  and potential  problems   will  be 
brought     to    the    attention     of    the    study     team     for    discussion   and    action.  
 
Random -sample  data quality  and protocol  compliance  audits  will be conducted  by the study  
team  at a minimum  of two times  per year,  and more  frequently  if indicated.  
Regular  meetings  will be held by the study  team  to discuss  progress and to ensure  that 
the study  timeline  is being  followed.  The data will be stored  carefully  in computer  form,  
with several  forms  of backup.  Data will be available  immediately  when  a patient  
completes  the surveys,  which  will allow  for follow -up collection  of missing or incorrect  
data.  
 
13.3 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
 
The Data and Safety  Monitoring  (DSM)  Plans  at Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
were  approved  by the National  Cancer  Institute  in September  2001.  The plans  address  the 
new policies  set forth by the NCI in the document  entitled  “Policy  of the National  Cancer  
Institute  for Data  and Safety  Monitoring  of Clinical  Trials,” which  can be found  at  
http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/researchers/dsm/index.html . The DSM  Plans  at MSKCC  were  
established  and are monitored  by the Clinical  Research  Administration.  The MSKCC  Data 
and Safety  Monitoring  Plans  can be found  on the MSKCC  Intranet  at  
https://one.mskcc.org/sites/pub/clinresearch/Documents/MSKCC%20Dat a%20and%20Saf   
ety%20Monitoring%20Plans.pdf . 
 
There  are several  different  mechanisms  by which  clinical  trials are monitored  for data,  
safety,  and quality.  There  are institutional  processes  in place  for quality  assurance  (e.g.,  
protocol  monitoring,  compliance  and data verification  audits,  therapeutic  response,  and staff 
education  on clinical  research  QA) and departmental  procedures  for quality  control,  plus 
there  are two institutional  committees  that are responsible  for monitoring  the activities  of our 
clinical  trials programs.  The committees:  Data and Safety  Monitoring  Committee  (DSMC)  
for Phase  I and II clinical  trials,  and the Data and Safety  Monitoring  Board  (DSMB)  for Phase  
III clinical  trials,  report  to the Center’s  Research  Council  and Institutional  Review  Board.  
During  the protocol  development  and review  process,  each  protocol  will be assessed  for its 
level of risk and degree  of monitoring  required.  Every  type of protocol  (e.g.,  NIH sponsored,  
in-house  sponsored,  industrial  sponsored,  NCI cooperative  group,  etc.) will be addressed  
and the monitoring  procedures  will be established  at the time of protocol  activation.  
14.1 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 
 
The following  safeguards  will be used  with respect  to protection  of human  subjects:  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  28 of 34  
  
 
Recruitment  and Informed  Consent:  All potential  patients  will be informed  as to their rights  
as volunteers  in a research  study.  The right to refuse  or withdraw  at any point during  the 
study,  without  compromising  medical  and other  care will be explained.  Verbal  consent  will 
be obtained.  The purpose  of the study  and potential  risks and benefits  associated  with it will 
be stated.  If patients  or caregivers  withdraw  consent  prior to completing  the study,  they will 
no longer  be prompted  to complete  the Patient  Activation  Measure/Caregiver  Reaction  
Assessments.  They  will only be sent the Recovery  Tracker,  which  is sent to all patients  are 
part of the standard  of care at MSKCC.  
Confidentiality  Safeguards:  Patients  will be informed  that information  collected  during  
their participation  in this study is considered  confidential.  All data gathered  will be kept in a 
secured  location.  Patients  will be assigned  code  numbers,  so that names   will not be 
connected  to any information.  Confidentiality  of each  patient’s  data will be protected  with 
utmost  care with all questionnaire  data identified  solely  by a code  number.  A list matching  
subject  names  and code  numbers  will be maintained  on a separate  sheet  of paper  kept in 
locked  storage.  
Sources  of Materials:  Patient  information  will be obtained  from existing  patient  records.  
Patient  responses  to surveys  will be the main  source  of research  material.  Some  of the data 
being  collected  is already  part of the standard  care patients  get after their surgery  at JRSC.  
Any additional  information  will be collected  for research  purposes  only and not used  for any 
other  purposes.  
Potential  Risks:  There  will be minimal  risks to subjects  involved  in the study.  If a patient  
reports  s ever  e symptoms, they are instructed  to immediately  contact  their physician’s  
office  or seek medical  attention.  Patients  may feel some  anxiety  or stress  when  they 
complete  the daily surveys.  They  will be encouraged  to contact  the study  coordinator,  who 
will ensure  that the patient  is contacted  by one of the surgeons  involved  in the study  and 
given  the opportunity  to discuss  any concerns  that they might  have.  
Potential  benefits  of the proposed  research  to the subjects:  There  will not be any direct  
benefit  to subjects  involved  in the study.  
Financial  Costs:  There  will not be any financial  cost to patients.  
 
14.2 Privacy  
 
MSK’s Privacy  Office  may allow  the use and disclosure  of protected  health  information  
pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form.  The use and disclosure  
of protected  health  information  will be limited  to the individuals  described  in the Research  
Authorization  form.  A Research  Authorization  form must  be completed  by the Principal  
Investigator  and approved  by the IRB and Privacy  Board  (IRB/PB).  
The consent  indicates  that individualized  de-identified  information  collected  for the purposes  
of this study  may be shared  with other  qualified  researchers  . Only researchers  who have 
received  approval  from MSK will be allowed  to access  this information  which  will not include  
protected  health  information,  such  as the participant’s  name,  except  for dates.  It is also 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  29 of 34  
  
 
stated  in the Research  Authorization   that their research  data may be shared  with other  
qualified   researchers.  
14.3 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting 
 
An adverse  event  is considered  serious  if it results  in ANY of the following  outcomes:  
• Death  
• A life-threatening  adverse  event  
• An  adverse  event  that  results  in inpatient   hospitalization   or prolongation   of existing  
hospitalization  
• A persistent  or significant  incapacity  or substantial  disruption  of the ability  to conduct  
normal  life functions  
• Important  Medical  Events  (IME)  that may not result  in death,  be life threatening,  or 
require  hospitalization  may be considered  serious  when,  based  upon  medical  judgment,  
they may jeopardize  the patient  or subject  and may require  medical  or surgical  
intervention  to prevent  one of the outcomes  listed  in this definition  
 
Note: Only SAEs  specifically  related  to the protocol  intervention  (Recovery  Tracker  and 
PAM/CRA  survey  completion)  will be reported.  Hospital  admission  for a planned  
procedure/disease  treatment  is not considered  an SAE.  
 
SAE reporting  is required  as soon  as the participant  starts  investigational  
treatment/intervention.  SAE reporting  is required  for 30-days after the participant’s  last 
investigational  treatment/intervention.  Any event  that occur  after the 30-day period  that is 
unexpected  and at least possibly  related  to protocol  treatment  must  be reported.  
Please  note:  Any SAE that occurs  prior to the start of investigational  treatment/intervention  
and is related  to a screening  test or procedure  (i.e., a screening  biopsy)  must  be reported.  
 
All SAEs  must  be submitted  in PIMS.  If an SAE requires  submission  to the HRPP  office  per 
IRB SOP  RR-408 ‘Reporting  of Serious  Adverse  Events’,  the SAE report  must  be submitted  
within  5 calendar  days of the event.  All other  SAEs  must  be submitted  within  30 calendar  
days of the event.  
 
The report  should  contain  the following  information:  
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• The grade  of the event  
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment(s)  
• If the AE was expected  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  
o An explanation  of how the AE was handled  
o A description  of the participant’s  condition  
o Indication  if the participant  remains  on the study  
• If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consen t form 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  30 of 34  
  
 
• If the SAE is an Unanticipated  Problem  Version  Date:  12/21/2018  For IND/IDE  protocols:  
The SAE report  should  be completed  as per above  instructions.  If appropriate,  the report  
will be forwarded  to the FDA by the IND Office  
 
15.1 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
 
Before  protocol -specified  procedures  are carried  out, consenting  professionals  will explain  
full details  of the protocol  and study  procedures  as well as the risks involved  to participants  
prior to their inclusion  in the study.  Participants  will also be informed  that they are free to 
withdraw  from the study  at any time.  
The investigators  are requesting  to waive  the documentation  of informed  consent  for this 
study  for the following  reasons:  
Patients  
 
1. The research  involves  no more  than minimal  risk to the participants.  The majority  of 
the protocol  is part of the standard  care and evaluation  that patients  at JRSC  receive.  
The only exception  is that additional  features  of the system  will be available  to 
patients  who are randomized  to the Enhanced  Feedback  arm. They  will receive  
additional  information  about  expected  symptoms  after their surgery.  In addition  to 
symptom assessment,  all patients  will be asked  to complete  1 survey  at 3 different  
time points  and possibly  to participate  in a 30–60-minute  qualitative  interview  at a 
convenient  time.  
 
2. The waiver  will not adversely  affect  the rights  and welfare  of the research  
participants,  as they will willingly  engage  in the research.  Even  if they provide  verbal  
consent,  if they later decide  not to participate,  they do not have to complete  the 
questionnaires.  Participation  will be entirely  voluntary.  
 
3. If deemed  appropriate  by the PI and granting  organization,  the patients   will be 
provided  with additional  pertinent  information  after participation.  We will be actively  
following  these  patients,  so we will be able to contact  them  easily.  
 
4. The research  cannot  be practicably  carried  out without  this waiver.  Patients  would  
normally  be consented  to this protocol  during  a routine  clinic  visit to consent  to their 
surgery.  Patients  are sent to JRSC  by surgeons  who have clinics  at several  locations  
in the city. It will be physically  impossible  for the CRC  assigned  to this study  to 
consent  all of the patients  in this manner.  
 
We anticipate  that the CRC  will approach  30–40 patients  per day at JRSC,  and it is 
not feasible  for this person  to have a full consent  discussionwitheach of the patients.  
We feel that our proposed  solution  of providing  educational  materials  to the patients  
prior to their surgery  date and having  a member  of the research team  available  to 
answer  any questions  that arise  will allow  us to take all necessary  precautions  to 
ensure  the comfort  and safety  of the patients  who will participate  in this protocol.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  31 of 34  
  
 
 
5. The research  is not regulated  by the FDA.  
 
Caregivers  
 
1. The research  involves  no more  than minimal  risk to the participants.  Caregivers  will 
only be approached  if they are identified  by the patient.  They  will be asked  to 
complete  1 survey  at 3 different  time points  and possibly  to participate  in a 30–60- 
minute  qualitative  interview  at a convenient  time.  The questionnaire  and qualitative  
interview  are not expected  to have any serious  psychological  impact  on the 
caregiver.  
 
2. The waiver  will not adversely  affect  the rights  and welfare  of the research  
participants,  as they will willingly  engage  in the research.  Even  if caregivers  provide  
verbal  consent  on the date of surgery,  if they later decide  not to participate,  they do 
not have to complete  the questionnaire  when  it is sent to them.  Participation  will be 
entirely  voluntary.  
 
3. If deemed  appropriate  by the PI and granting  organization,  the caregivers  will be 
provided  with additional  pertinent  information  after participation.  
 
4. The research  cannot  be practicably  carried  out without  this waiver.  For the same  
reason  that this would  not be feasible  with patients,  documenting  consent  for all 
caregivers  would  be extremely  challenging,  as we expect  a high volume  of 
caregivers  (30–40 per day) to be approached  for participation.  Because  the CRC  will 
be approaching  30–40 patients  and 30–40 caregivers,  we feel it is clearly  impractical  
to require  documentation  of consent  for a study  with sucha  vast scope  but that poses  
no more  than minimal  risk to any of the participants.  
 
5. The research  is not regulated  by the FDA.  
 
All participants  must  provide  their consent  to participate.  This IRB/PB -approved  consent  
script  meets  the requirements  of the Code  of Federal  Regulations  and the Institutional  
Review  Board/Privacy  Board  of this Center.  The consent  script  and the education  
materials  provided  to the patient  will include  the following:  
 
1. The nature  and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits  of the intended  study.  
2. The length  of study  and the likely follow -up required.  
3. Alternatives  to the proposed  study.  (This  will include  available  standard  and 
investigational  therapies.  In addition,  patients  will be offered  an option  of supportive  
care for therapeutic  studies.)  
4. The name  of the investigator(s)  responsible  for the protocol.  
5. The right of the participant  to accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions  and 
to withdraw  from participation  at any time.  
Before  any protocol -specific  procedures  can be carried  out, the consenting  professional  will 
fully explain  the aspects  of patient  privacy  concerning  research  specific  information.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  32 of 34  
  
 
The member  of the research  team  who has the consent  discussion  with the patient  will sign 
the verbal  form and have it scanned  to the patient’s medical  record.  
 
 
16.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Basch  E, Reeve  BB, Mitchell  SA, et al. Development  of the National  Cancer  Institute's  
patient -reported  outcomes  version  of the common  terminology  criteria  for adverse  events  
(PRO -CTCAE).  J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106(9).  
2. SEER  Stat Fact Sheets:  All Cancer  Sites.  http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/all.htm l. 
Accessed  November  9, 2015.  
3. Cullen  KA, Hall MJ, Golosinskiy  A. Ambulatory  surgery  in the United  States,  2006.  Natl 
Health  Stat Report.  2009(11):1 -25. 
4. Grabowska -Gawel  A, Porzych  K, Piskunowicz  G. [Risk  factors  and frequency  of 
postoperative  nausea  and vomiting  in patients  operated  under  general  anesthesia].  
Przeglad  lekarski.  2006;63(2):72 -76. 
5. Apfelbaum  JL, Chen  C, Mehta  SS, Gan TJ. Postoperative  pain experience:  results  from a 
national  survey  suggest  postoperative  pain continues  to be undermanaged.  Anesthesia  and 
analgesia.  2003;97(2):534 -540, table of contents.  
6. Basch  E, Iasonos  A, McDonough  T, et al. Patient  versus  clinician  symptom reporting  using  
the National  Cancer  Institute  Common  Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse  Events:  results  of 
a questionnaire -based  study.  Lancet  Oncol.  2006;7(11):903 -909. 
7. Kotronoulas  G, Kearney  N, Maguire  R, et al. What  is the value  of the routine  use of patient - 
reported  outcome  measures  toward  improvement  of patient  outcomes,  processes  of care,  
and health  service  outcomes  in cancer  care?  A systematic  review  of controlled  trials.  Journal  
of clinical  oncology  : official  journal  of the American  Society  of Clinical  Oncology.  
2014;32(14):1480 -1501.  
8. Valderas  JM, Kotzeva  A, Espallargues  M, et al. The impact  of measuring  patient -reported  
outcomes  in clinical  practice:  a systematic review  of the literature.  Quality  of life research  : 
an international  journal  of quality  of life aspects  of treatment,  care and rehabilitation.  
2008;17(2):179 -193. 
9. Velikova  G, Booth  L, Smith  AB, et al. Measuring  quality  of life in routine  oncology  practice  
improves  communication  and patient  well-being:  a randomized  controlled  trial. Journal  of 
clinical  oncology   : official  journal  of the American  Society   of Clinical  Oncology.  
2004;22(4):714 -724. 
10. Basch  E, Abernethy  AP. Supporting  clinical  practice  decisions  with real-time patient - 
reported  outcomes.  Journal  of clinical  oncology  : official  journal  of the American  Society  of 
Clinical  Oncology.  2011;29(8):954 -956. 
11. Basch  E, Deal AM, Kris MG, et al. Symptom  Monitoring  With Patient -Reported  Outcomes  
During  Routine  Cancer  Treatment:  A Randomized  Controlled  Trial.  Journal  of clinical  
oncology  : official  journal  of the American  Society  of Clinical  Oncology.  2016;34(6):557 -565. 
12. R M. U.S. outpatient  surgery  passes  inpatient,  to 53 million  a year.  Tampa  Bay Times 2010.  
13. DeSantis  CE, Lin CC, Mariotto  AB, et al. Cancer  treatment  and survivorship  statistics,  2014.  
CA Cancer  J Clin. 2014;64(4):252 -271. 
14. de Kok M, van der Weijden  T, Kessels  AG, et al. Patients'  opinions  on quality  of care before  
and after implementation  of a short  stay programme  following  breast  cancer  surgery. Breast.   
2010;19(5):404 -409. 
15. Gil F, Costa  G, Hilker  I, Benito  L. First anxiety,  afterwards  depression:  psychological  distress  
in cancer  patients  at diagnosis  and after medical  treatment.  Stress  Health.  2012;28(5):362 - 
367. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  33 of 34  
  
 
 
16. Basch  E, Iasonos  A, Barz A, et al. Long -term toxicity  monitoring  via electronic  patient - 
reported  outcomes  in patients  receiving  chemotherapy.  Journal  of clinical  oncology  : official  
journal  of the American  Society  of Clinical  Oncology.  2007;25(34):5374 -5380.  
17. Cleeland  CS. Symptom  burden:  multiple  symptoms  and their impact  as patient -reported  
outcomes.  J Natl Cancer  Inst Monogr.  2007(37):16 -21. 
18. Cleeland  CS, Mendoza  TR, Wang  XS, et al. Assessingsymptom distress  in cancer  patients:  
the M.D. Anderson  Symptom  Inventory.   Cancer. 2000;89(7):1634 -1646.  
19. Cleeland  CS, Reyes -Gibby  CC. When  is it justified  to treat symptoms?  Measuring  symptom  
burden.  Oncology  (Williston  Park).  2002;16(9  Suppl  10):64 -70. 
20. Santana  MJ, Feeny  D, Johnson  JA, et al. Assessing  the use of health -related  quality  of life 
measures  in the routine  clinical  care of lung-transplant  patients.  Quality  of life research  : an 
international  journal  of quality  of life aspects  of treatment,  care and rehabilitation.  
2010;19(3):371 -379. 
21. Xiao C, Polomano  R, Bruner  DW. Comparison  between  patient -reported  and clinician - 
observed  symptoms  in oncology.  Cancer  Nurs.  2013;36(6):E1 -E16. 
22. Pezold  ML PA, Cohen  WA, Hollenberg  JP, Butt Z, Flum  DR, Temple  LK. Defining  a 
Research  Agenda  for Patient -Reported  Outcomes  in Surgery:  Using  a Delphi  Survey  of 
Stakeholders.  JAMA  Surg.  2016:[In  press].  
23. Goeschel  C. Crossing  the quality  chasm:  who will lead?  Mich  Health  Hosp.  2002;38(4):12 - 
15. 
24. Gold KS. Crossing  the quality  chasm:  creating  the ideal patient  care experience.  Nurs  Econ.  
2007;25(5):293 -295,  298. 
25. Madhok  R. Crossing  the quality  chasm:  lessons  from health  care quality  improvement  efforts  
in England.  Proc (Bayl  Univ Med Cent).  2002;15(1):77 -83; discussion  83-74. 
26. Lev EL. Bandura's  theory  of self-efficacy:  applications   to oncology.   Sch Inq Nurs  Pract.  
1997;11(1):21 -37;  discussion  39-43. 
27. Foster  C, Grimmett  C, May CM, et al. A web-based  intervention  (RESTORE)  to support  self- 
management  of cancer -related  fatigue  following  primary  cancer  treatment:  a multi -centre  
proof  of concept  randomised  controlled  trial. Supportive  care in cancer  : official  journal  of 
the Multinational  Association  of Supportive  Care  in Cancer.  2016;24(6):2445 -2453.  
28. Sprigg  N, Machili  C, Otter  ME, Wilson A, Robinson  TG. A systematic  review  of delays  in 
seeking  medical  attention  after transient  ischaemic  attack.  J Neurol  Neurosurg  Psychiatry.   
2009;80(8):871 -875. 
29. Brown  CT, van der Meulen  J, Mundy  AR, O'Flynn  E, Emberton  M. Defining  the components  
of  a  self-management   programme   for  men  with  uncomplicated   lower   urinary   tract 
symptoms:  a consensus  approach.  Eur Urol. 2004;46(2):254 -262; discussion  263. 
30. Begg  C, Cho M, Eastwood  S, et al. Improving  the quality  of reporting  of randomized  
controlled  trials.  The CONSORT  statement.  JAMA.  1996;276(8):637 -639. 
31. Hay JL, Atkinson  TM, Reeve  BB, et al. Cognitive  interviewing  of the US National  Cancer  
Institute's  Patient -Reported  Outcomes  version  of the Common  Terminology  Criteria  for 
Adverse  Events  (PRO -CTCAE).  Quality  of life research  : an international  journal  of quality  
of life aspects  of treatment,  care and rehabilitation.   2014;23(1):257 -269. 
32. Dueck  AC, Mendoza  TR, Mitchell  SA, et al. Validity  and Reliability  of the US National  Cancer  
Institute's  Patient -Reported  Outcomes  Version  of the Common  Terminology  Criteria  for 
Adverse  Events  (PRO -CTCAE).  JAMA  oncology.  2015;1(8):1051 -1059.  
33. Benne tt AV, Keeno y K, Shoue ry M, Basch E, Temple LK. Evaluation of mode equivalence 
of the MSKCC  Bowel  Function  Instrument,  LASA  Quality  of Life, and Subjective  Significance  
Questionnaire  items  administered  by Web,  interactive  voice  response  system  (IVRS),  and 
paper.  Quality  of life research  : an international  journal  of quality  of life aspects  of treatment,  
care and rehabilitation.   2016;25(5):1123 -1130.  
34. Mendoza  TR BA MS, Reeve  BB, Atkinson  TM, Li Y, Rogak  LJ, Dueck  AC, Basch  E, on 
behalf  of the National   Cancer  Institute   PRO -CTCAE  Research  Group.   Impact  of Recall  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -293 A(7)  
Approval date: 04 -Dec-2019  
Page  34 of 34  
  
 
 
Period  on the Accuracy of Selected  Items  from the US National  Cancer  Institute’s  Patient - 
Reported  Outcomes  Version  of the Common  Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse  Events  
(PRO -CTCAE).  . Abstract  #2104,  ISOQOL  2014.  
35. Arnold   B, Mitchell   SA,  Lent L, et al. Linguistic   validation   of the Spanish  version  of the 
National  Cancer  Institute's  Patient -Reported  Outcomes  version  of the Common  
Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse  Events  (PRO -CTCAE).  Supportive  care in cancer  : official  
journal  of the Multinational  Association  of Supportive  Care  in Cancer.  2016;24(7):2843 - 
2851.  
36. Hibbard  JH, Stockard  J, Mahoney  ER, Tusler  M. Development  of the Patient  Activation  
Measure  (PAM):  conceptualizing  and measuring  activation  in patients  and consumers.  
Health  Serv Res. 2004;39(4  Pt 1):1005 -1026.  
37. Given   CW, Given  B, Stommel  M, Collins   C, King S, Franklin  S. The caregiver  reaction  
assessment  (CRA) for caregivers  to persons  with chronic  physical  and mental  impairments.  
Res Nurs  Health.  1992;15(4):271 -283. 
38. Nijboer  C, Triemstra  M, Tempelaar  R, Sanderman  R, van den Bos GA. Measuring  both 
negative  and positive  reactions  to giving  care to cancer  patients:  psychometric  qualities  of 
the Caregiver  Reaction  Assessment  (CRA).  Soc Sci Med.  1999;48(9):1259 -1269.  
39. Ancker  JS, Kaufman  DR. Rethinking  health  numeracy:  A multidisciplinary  literature  review.  
Journal  of the American  Medical  Informatics  Association.  2007;14(6):713 -721. 
40. Poynton  T. Computer  literacy  across  the lifespan:  a review  with implications  for educators.  
Computers  in Human  Behavior.  2005;21:861 -872. 
41. Rudd  R, Kirsch  I, Yamamoto  K. Literacy  and Health  in America.  Center  for Global  
Assessment  Policy  Information  Center  Research  and Development  Educational  Testing  
Service;2004.  
 
 
17.0 APPENDICES 
 
Appendix  A: Patient  Activation  Measure  (PAM)  – Short  Form  
Appendix  B: Caregiver  Reaction  Assessment  (CRA)  
Appendix  C: Caregiver  Demographic  Questionnaire  
Appendix  D: Study  Information_Patients  
Appendix  E: Study  Information_Caregivers  
Appendix  F: Recruitment  Letter_Patients  
Appendix  G: Recruitment  Letter_PFACQ  
Appendix  H: Correspondence  Templates  
Appendix  I: Qualitative  Interview  Script_Patients  
Appendix  J: Qualitative  Interview  Script_Caregivers  
Appendix  K: MyMSK   Brochure  
Appendix  L: Recruitment  Voicemail  Script  
Verbal  Consent_Patients  
Verbal  Consent_Caregivers  