STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 SYNOPSIS 5
2 INTRODUCTION 6
2.1 BACKGROUND AND R ATIONALE 6
2.2 BENEFITS AND RISKS TO S UBJECTS 6
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 7
3.1 OBJECTIVE 7
3.2 PRIMARY ENDPOINT 7
3.3 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS 7
3.4 SAFETY ENDPOINTS 7
3.5 PHARMACOKINETIC ENDPOINTS 8
3.6 BIOMARKER RESEARCH ENDPOINTS FOR TARGET ENGAGEMENT AND NEURO -RESTORATION 8
3.7 EXPLORATORY ENDPOINTS 8
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 9
4.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 9
4.2 DISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN 11
5 STUDY ACTIVITIES 12
5.1 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 12
5.2 CONTRACEPTION RECOMMENDATIONS 16
5.3 PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND T HERAPY 17
5.4 PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT T HERAPY 18
5.5 WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS AND DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY 19
5.6 FOLLOW -UP AFTER SUBJECT DISCONTI NUATION OF STUDY DRUG OR FROM S TUDY 20
5.7 STUDY DRUG 20
5.8 RANDOMIZATION/D RUG ASSIGNMENT 24
5.9 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 24
6 SAFETY CONSI DERATIONS 25
6.1 COMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 25
Page 2 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAM PLE SIZE 28
7.1 STATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 28
7.2 DEFINITION FOR ANALYSIS SETS 28
7.3 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 28
7.4 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 29
7.5 INTERIM ANALYSIS 29
7.6 SUBGROUP ANALYSIS 29
8 ETHICS 29
8.1 INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE /INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD 29
8.2 ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE S TUDY 30
8.3 SUBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 30
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM CO MPLETION 30
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURAN CE 30
11 COMPLETION OF THE ST UDY 31
12 REFERENCES 31
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. STUDY DRUG IDENTIFICATION 21
TABLE 2. STUDY DRUG ADMINISTR ATION SCHEDULE 22
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. STUDY SC HEMATIC 10
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY -SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS 32
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 35
APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES 36
Page 3 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX D. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE 37
APPENDIX E. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES 41
APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL 42
Page 4 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Why Is This Study Being Conducted
Elezanumab is an investigational product under development for the treatment of multiple sclerosis 
(MS).  It is a monoclonal immunoglobulin (Ig) of the human immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) isotype that binds 
specifically to the soluble and the membrane -bound forms of repulsive guidance molecule A (RGMa).
Neutralization of RGMa is a novel approach that may potentially provide neurorestoration/regeneration 
and functional recovery in a variety of degenerative central nervo us system (CNS) diseases.  Repulsive 
guidance molecule A is a potent inhibitor of neurite outgrowth and is recognized as an important factor 
in inhibiting neuronal regeneration and functional recovery following CNS trauma or inflammation.  
Elezanumab binds to human repulsive guidance molecule A (hRGMa), but not to related family members 
RGMb and RGMc.
Elezanumab is being evaluated to determine whether this novel approach of neutralization of RGMa 
could lead to neural restoration and improvement in MS -relate d physical function.  This mechanism of 
action is distinct from those used by the immunomodulatory, anti -inflammatory drugs that are currently 
approved for the treatment of MS and, if successful, could serve to fulfill an unmet medical need in MS.
Clinical Hypothesis
Elezanumab will improve physical functioning in subjects with relapsing forms of MS ( RMS ) who have 
disability.
2.2 Benefits and Risks to Subjects
The safety and efficacy data from the elezanumab clinical program support development of elezanumab
in Phase 2 in subjects with RMS .
For further details, please see findings from completed studies, including safety data in the elezanumab 
Investigator's Brochure.1
An internal safety review group will conduct reviews of safety data throughout the conduct of the study.
Considering the coronavirus disease -2019 (COVID -19) pandemic, the benefit and risk to subjects 
participating in this study have been re-evaluated.  Management of these adverse events (AEs) will be 
made on a case -by-case basis with consideration of benefit/risk.  However, based on the limited 
information to date, the population and disease being studied, and the anticipation that 
COVID -19-related risks are not expected to differ substantially between study subjects and the broader 
population of subjects receiving treatment for MS, no change to the benefit/risk balance for subjects in 
this study is expected at this time.
Page 6 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
3.1 Objective
To evaluate the safety and efficacy of elezanumab in subjects with RMS .
3.2 Primary Endpoint
Primary endpoint:
Mean Overall Response Score (ORS) at Week 52.
ORS is a composite score derived from 4 components: 
Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS)
Timed 25 -Foot Walk (T25FW)
9-Hole Peg Test in the dominant hand (9HPT -D)
9HPT in the non -dominant hand (9HPT -ND)
The ORS is scored with a range from –4 to +4 at each assessment.  Scores for each component 
are assessed relative to their basel ine value:  –1 if there is clinically significant worsening, 0 if the 
change does not meet the clinically significant threshold criteria, or +1 if there is clinically 
significant improvement.  The scores for all components are summed at each assessment.
The clinically significant change thresholds for T25FW and 9HPT are defined by a 20% change 
from baseline ( ≥ 20% decrease from baseline for improvement and ≥ 20% increase from 
baseline for worsening).  For EDSS , improvement is defined as a 1 -point decrease (baseline EDSS 
range of 1 to 5.5), or 0.5 -point decrease if the baseline EDSS is 6.0 or greater (baseline EDSS 
range of 6.0 to 6.5).  Corresponding increases in the designated ranges is defined as EDSS 
worsening.
3.3 Secondary Endpoints
1.Disability improvement response rate on the Expanded Disability Status Scale Plus (EDSS +) 
(T25FW, 9 -Hole Peg test [9HPT, either hand], EDSS) at Week 52
2.ORS at Weeks 12, 24, and 36
3.4 Safety Endpoints
Safety evaluations include AE monitoring, serious adverse event (SAE) monitoring , adverse events of 
special interest (AESI) monitoring, physical examinations, neurologic examinations, vital sign 
measurements, clinically significant magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) abnormalities, electrocardiogram 
(ECG) variables, Columbia -Suicide Seve rity Rating Scale (C -SSRS) assessments, and clinical laboratory 
Page 7 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.testing (hematology, chemistry, and urinalysis) as measures of safety and tolerability for the entire study 
duration.
3.5 Pharmacokinetic Endpoints
Samples will be collected for serum elezanumab c oncentrations, elezanumab anti -drug antibody (ADA) 
titers, and elezanumab neutralizing ADAs.  Samples will be obtained at the visits indicated in Figure 1
and Appendix D.  Descriptive summary statistics will be provided for all serum elezanumab
concentrations.  Additional parameters may be estimated if useful in the interpretation of the data.
3.6 Biomarker Research Endpoints for Target Engagement and Neuro -
restoration
Blood samples including serum and plasma will be collected at specified time poin ts (Appendix D) 
throughout the study to evaluate known and/or novel disease -related and target engagement 
biomarkers and their response to treatment.  Types of biomarkers may include nucleic acids, proteins, 
lipids, and/or metabolites.  Biomarker endpoints may include ,but arenot restricted to RGMa, 
neurofilament light (NFL), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and neuro -restoration markers 
[e.g., microRNA -338 (miR -338), myelin basic protein (MBP), proteolipid protein 1 (PLP1), growth 
associated protein -43 (GAP -43), brain -derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), interleukin -10 (IL -10)] that 
may be measured as extravesicular protein and/or nucleic acid cargoes in the plasma.  Other biomarkers 
that may be examined in the blood include matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP -9) and chemokine (C -X-C 
motif) ligand 13 (CXCL13), which have been shown to be elevated in MS patients.  DNA and RNA samples 
(transcriptional profiling) will be collected and may be analyzed from all subjects, unless precluded by 
local regulations or restrictions.  This research may be exploratory in nature and the results may not be 
included with the clinical study report.
3.7 Exploratory Endpoints
1.Disability improvement response rate on the T25FW, 9HPT, either hand, and EDSS at Weeks 12, 
24, 36, and 52, and the EDSS + at Weeks 12, 24, and 36.
2.Change from Baseline on the T25FW and 9HPT, either hand, at Weeks 12, 24, 36, and 52
3.Disability progression response rate on the EDSS+ (T25FW, 9HPT, either hand, EDSS) and for 
each EDSS + component
4. 12- and 24 -week confirmed disability improvement response rate on the EDSS + (T25FW, 9HPT, 
either hand, EDSS) and for each EDSS + component
5.Change from Baseline on t he MSImpact Scale (MSIS -29) version 2 at Weeks 12, 24, 36, and 52 
6.Change from Baseline on the Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS)  at Weeks 12, 24, 36, and 52 
7.Change from Baseline on cognition battery at Weeks 12, 24, 36, and 52: 
Symbol Digit Modaliti es Test (SDMT) –Oral Version
Brief Assessment of Cognition Verbal Memory -Immediate Recall –BAC App Version
Page 8 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Brief Assessment of Cognition Tower of London –BAC App Version
8.Change from Baseline on the Low Contrast Visual Acuity (LCVA) assessments at Week s 12, 24, 
36, and 52
9.Change from Baseline in plasma biomarkers at Weeks 12, 24, 36, and 52
10.Change from Baseline on the MS Individualized Outcome Assessment (Multiple Sclerosis 
Individualized Outcome Assessment [MSIOA] )scale at Weeks 24 and 52
11.Change from Baseline in one week average daily step count and other activity measures (via 
home actigraphy with wearable biosensor) initiated at Weeks 24, 36, and 52
MRI Endpoints
The following imaging tests will be conducted.  Details will be provided in the Statistical Analysis Plan 
(SAP). 
Lesion counts and volumes
Brain and spinal cord atrophy measures 
Magnetization transfer ratio (MTR) 
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) 
4 INVESTI GATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan
This is a 52 -week, Phase 2a, proof -of concept, randomized, double -blinded, parallel -group, 
placebo -controlled multicenter study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of 2 doses of elezanumab in 
adult subjects with relapsing forms of MS who have established disability.
This study will include an approximate 30 -day Screening period.  The Treatment Period will include 
14visits from Baseline (Week 0) every 4weeks through Week 52.  Doses will be administered via 
Intrav enous (IV) infusion at Week 0 (Baseline) and every 4 weeks thereafter through Week 48 for a total 
of 13 doses.  The follow -up period includes 6 follow -up telephone calls that will occur at 
Weeks 56through 76.  All visits during the Treatment Period and Fo llow -up Period will be allowed a 
window of ± 7 days.  Safety parameters such as clinical laboratory test results, ECG, and vital signs will 
be monitored (see Operations Manual [Appendix F]).  Throughout the study and for a period of 
39weeks ( 5half-lives) after the time of last study drug administration, females of childbearing potential 
will undergo monthly pregnancy testing; and for all subjects, AEs will be collected, whether solicited or 
spontaneously reported by the subject.
Eligible subjects will be randomized at theWeek 0 -Baseline Visit to receive either elezanumab  
 as an IV infusion or placebo in a 1:1:1 ratio (Section 5.8and Section 7.3).  Blinded doses will 
be administered int ravenously every 4 weeks for 48 weeks.  Subjects should remain on their current MS 
treatment regimen throughout the study.
Page 9 of 103 

STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.4.2 Discussion of Study Design
Choice of Control Group
The control group will be administered placebo infusion every 4 weeks.  Subjects will be maintained on 
their MS standard of care therapy without any adjustment in their treatment so that management of 
their underlying MS is not compromised.  In addition, no neurorestora tive treatment is available to 
improve physical function.
Appropriateness of Measurements
Standard statistical, clinical, and laboratory procedures will be utilized in this study.  The EDSS scale, 
T25FW, and 9HPT are standard tools for assessing disability in patients with MSand are suitable for 
detecting change.
Suitability of Subject Population
Patients with RMS must have disability in order to enable detection of physical improvement.  Relapses 
occurring during study treatment will confound the ability to detect improvement.  Therefore, a study 
population with reduced risk of relapse is necessary.  Consequently, subjects receiving most approved
immunomodulators for > 6 months will be included as will subjects not receiving immunomodulators 
but who are relapse -free (RF) for > 6months.
Selection of Doses in the Study
The dose levels of  monthly for this study were selected on th e basis of safety and 
biomarker data from two Phase 1 clinical studies.
The safety and tolerability of elezanumab has been demonstrated in ~50 healthy volunteers and 
~20 patients with relapsing MS in Phase 1 studies.  In Study M14 -141, single doses of up t o  
were administered to healthy volunteers.  All dose levels were safe and well tolerated.  With the 
possible exception of headache, no pattern was evident with regard to the nature or frequency of 
treatment -emergent AEsfollowing IV infusion or subcutaneous (SC) injection of elezanumab compared 
with subjects who received placebo.  Adverse events were, in general, mild, sporadic, and self- limiting.  
No dose -related effect was observed with respect to AEs.  No other safety findings were observed, 
including clinical labs, physical and neurological examination, MRI, and ECGs.
In Study M14 -173, single doses of up to  (  infusions on 2consecutive days) and monthly 
doses of up to  were administered to MS patients for up to 4 months.  Si milar to the single -dose 
study in healthy volunteers, no pattern was evident with regard to the nature or frequency of 
treatment -emergent AEsin subjects who received elezanumab compared with subjects who received 
placebo.  A possible transient, non –dose -related, non -clinically significant elevation in blood pressure 
immediately following IV infusion was observed in a few subjects who received elezanumab.  There 
were no notable changes on physical or neurological exam, and no ECG, MRI, clinical laboratory, or 
other vital sign perturbations.  Adverse events, when reported, were mild, sporadic, and self -limiting 
with the exception of two MS relapses that occurred in 1subject receiving placebo and another 
receiving  elezanumab.
Page 11 of 103 

STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Two prespecified cerebrosp inal fluid (CSF) biomarkers demonstrated a concentration -response 
relationship in the Phase 1 studies.  Interleukin -10has been associated with the promotion of 
remyelination, neuroregeneration ,and neuroprotection as well as being able to mitigate inflamm atory 
demyelination.  In Study M14 -173, a statistically significant increase in CSF IL -10 was observed.  The 
increase was observed only in the high dose of  monthly.  Likewise, in the same study, a 
statistically significant decrease in CSF neurofila ment light (NF -l), a marker of neurodegeneration, was 
observed at the  dose when compared with the  dose group.  These data suggest a 
clinically relevant, dose -related pharmacodynamic effect.  Reductions in CSF soluble RGMa were 
observed in bo th Studies M14 -141 and M14 -173.  The maximum reduction was approximately 50% from 
baseline, and the maximum reduction was seen at single doses equal to and exceeding  in 
healthy volunteers and repeat doses equal to or exceeding  monthly in MS patients.  It is 
noteworthy that the maximum CSF reduction in soluble RGMa was achieved in the  dose group, 
which was characterized by a range of CSF ABT -555 concentrations from .  The 
relationship of sRGMa reduction and clinical ef ficacy is not understood.
The elezanumab doses selected for the current study are  every 28 days (Q28D) and 
are expected to be safe and well tolerated based on previous exposures of these doses in healthy 
volunteers and MS patients.  In addition, to ensure patient safety, intense patient safety monitoring 
procedures have been implemented.  An unblinded inte rnal Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) , 
independent from the study team, will review and evaluate safety information including ,but not limited 
to AEs, vital signs, and clinical laboratory assessments.
5STUDY ACTIVITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
A subject will be eligible for study participation if he/she meets all of the following inclusion and none of 
the exclusion criteria.
Inclusion Criteria
Consent
1.Subjects or their legally authorized representative must voluntarily sign and date an informed 
consent , approved by an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB), 
before the initiation of any screening or study -specific procedures.
Demographic and Laboratory Assessments
2.Subject must be an adult male or female , between 18 and 65years of age, inclusive.
3.Body mass index (BMI) is 18.0 to 45.0, inclusive at Screening.  Body mass index is calculated as 
weight in kg divided by the square of height measured in meters.
4.Laboratory values meeting the following criteria within the screening period before the first 
dose of study drug:
Serum alanine transaminase (ALT) < 2 × ULN;
Page 12 of 103 

STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Total white blood cell (WBC) count > 2,500/µL;
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) > 1,300/µL;
Platelet count > 100,000 /µL;
Absolute lymphocyte count > 700/µL;
Absolute lymphocyte count > 500/µL for subjects taking fingolimod (Gilenya) or siponimod 
(Mayzent) or dimethyl fumarate (Tecfidera) or teriflunomide (Aubagio).
Hemoglobin > 9 g/dL.
5.No positive screen fordrugs of abuse, e.g., amphetamines, cocaine, opiates, barbitur ates, 
benzodiazepines as detected at Screening or Day –1.  A positive cannabinoid test is allowed if 
the responsible agent is taken for the management of MS symptoms (either concurrent or 
within the past 30 days).  Positive drug screen resulting from other prescribed medications is 
only allowed at the discretion of the AbbVie study -designated physician.
6.Willing and able to comply with procedures required in this protocol.
Disease Activity
7.Subject meets the diagnosis of relapsing remitting MS ( RRMS ) or secondary -progressive MS 
(SPMS) according to the 2017 revised McDonald criteria and has a brain MRI demonstrating 
lesion(s) consistent with MS.
8.RRMS subjects m ust not have experienced or be recovering from a clinical MS relapse within 
6 months of Screening.
9.SPMS subjects must have experienced a clinical relapse (reported by subject as diagnosed by 
a medical professional) between 6 and 24 months befor eScreening.
10.Baseline EDSS between 2 and 6.5, inclusive,
OR
Baseline T25FW ≥ 8 seconds (if EDSS < 2)
OR
Baseline 9HPT ≥ 33 seconds in either hand (if EDSS < 2)
11.Currently receiving one of the following MS medications for at least 6 months:  glatiramer 
acetate (Copaxone®, others), teriflunomide (Aubagio®), fingolimod (Gilenya®), dimethyl 
fumarate (Tecfidera®), rituximab (Rituxan®), siponimod (Mayzent®) or ocrelizumab (Ocrevus®) 
with no dose changes for at least 6 months before Screening and no anticipated change in MS 
medication or dose during the study.  Dalfampridine -ER (Ampyra®) or fampridine -SR (Fampyra®) 
is allowed if the subject has been on a stable dose for at least 3 months and plans to remain on 
this dose and regimen throughout the study.
OR
Page 13 of 103 
         
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Has not been treated with an MS immunotherapy for the past 6 months (12 months if the 
subject previously received cyclophosphamide, alemtuzumab, rituximab, or ocrelizum ab) before 
Screening.   Has not been treated with dalfampridine -ER (Ampyra®) or fampridine -SR (Fampyra®) 
for at least 3 months before Screening.
Subject History
12.Judged by the principal investigator to be in good general health based upon the re sults of a 
medical history, physical examination, laboratory profile, and a 12 -lead ECG performed during 
the Screening period.
Contraception
13.For all females of child -bearing potential:  a negative serum pregnancy test at the Screening 
Visit and a negative urine pregnancy test before all doses of study drug.
14.Female subjects of childbearing potential practice at least 1 protocol -specified method of 
birth control that is effective from Study Week 0 through at least 39 weeks (5 half -lives) after 
the last dose of study drug.  Female subjects of non -childbearing potential do not need to use 
birth control.
15.Female who is not pregnant, breastfeeding, or considering becoming pregnant during the 
study and f or at least 39 weeks (5 half- lives) after the last dose of study drug.
Exclusion criteria
Disease Activity
1.Prior treatment with any of the following:
Total lymphoid irradiation
Cladribine or mitoxantrone
T cell or T cell receptor vaccination
Stem cell therapy
2.Treatment with IV, oral, or intrathecal corticosteroids (or corticosteroid precursors such as 
adrenocorticotropic hormone ) within the 6 months before Screening if used for the treatment 
of MS flare or disability progression (pre -or post -treatment with corticosteroids within 
6months to prevent immunomodulatory infusion reactions is allowed).  Treatment with 
corticosteroids for non -MS conditions within the 6 months before Screening may be allowed at 
the discretion of the AbbVie study -designated physician. 
Page 14 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Subject History
3.History of known chronic or relevant acute infections including tuberculosis (TB).  Subjects 
with a positive QuantiFERON® TB/purified protein derivative ( purified protein derivative 
(tuberculin) ) test result may participate in the study if further work up (according to local 
practice/guidelines) establishes conclusively that the subject has no evidence of active TB.
4.History of, or positive screening test result for, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
5.History of, or positive screening test result for, hepatitis B virus (HBsAg), or a positive 
screening test for hepatitis C with virus titer > 0 following curative treatment.
6.Onset of active varicella or herpes zoster virus infection or any severe viral infection requiring 
medical attention within 6 weeks before Screening.
7.Exposure to individuals with active varicella zoster virus infections within 21 days before 
Screening.
8.History of active systemic infection during the last 2 weeks before Week 0 -Baseline Visit 
(exception:  viral rhinitis), as assessed by the investigator.
9.Documented active or suspe cted malignancy or history of any malignancy within the last 
5years except for successfully treated nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC) or localized carcinoma 
in situ of the cervix.
10.History of organ transplantation or plans for organ transplantation during the trial.
11.MRI is contraindicated, (i.e., aneurysm clip, metal fragments, internal electrical devices such 
as a cochlear implant, spinal cord stimulator, or pacemaker), contrai ndicated for or allergic to 
gadolinium (including renal impairment, previous diagnosis of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis and 
allergy), subject has claustrophobia that cannot be medically managed, or is not able to lie still 
for at least 1 hour for the imaging procedures.
12.Major surgery performed within 12 weeks before Screening or planned during the conduct 
of the study (e.g., hip replacement, aneurysm repair, stomach ligation), as assessed by the 
investigator.
13.History of clinically si gnificant medical conditions or any other reason, including any physical, 
psychological, or psychiatric condition that in the investigator's opinion would compromise the 
safety or interfere with the subject's participation in this study or would make the s ubject an 
unsuitable candidate to receive study drug or would put the subject at risk by participating in 
the study, history of or abnormal screening lab or imaging results that, in the opinion of the 
investigator, are indicative of any significant cardiac , endocrinologic, hematologic, hepatic, 
immunologic, infectious, metabolic, urologic, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, dermatologic, 
psychiatric, renal, neurologic (other than MS), and/or other major disease that would preclude 
administration of elezanumab or MS immunomodulatory therapy, including any finding on brain 
MRI scan indicating clinically significant brain abnormalities other than MS.
14.History of drug abuse, misuse, or engagement in non -medical use of either prescribed or 
over -the-counter m edication within 2 years before study drug administration or plans to do so 
during the study.
15.History of alcohol abuse within the last 2 years.
Page 15 of 103 
              
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.16.History of an allergic reaction or significant sensitivity to constituents of the study drug (and 
its excipients) and/or other products in the same class.
17.History of epilepsy or unexplained blackouts OR history of a seizure within 6 months of 
screening.  Subjects with febril e seizures before the age of 6 years are allowed.
18.History of treatment -refractory DSM -V defined major depressive disorder within 1 month of 
Screening.
19.History of suicidal ideation within 1 year before Screening, as evidenced by answ ering "yes" 
to questions 4 or 5 on the suicidal ideation portion of the C-SSRS completed at Screening, or any 
history of suicide attempts.
20.Clinically relevant or significant ECG abnormalities , including ECG with QT interval corrected 
for heart rate (QTc) using Fridericia's formula (QTcF) > 450 msec (males) or > 470 msec 
(females).
Contraception
21.Female who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or considering becoming pregnant during the study 
or within 39 weeks (5 half -lives) after the last do se of study drug.
Concomitant Medications
22.Subject has received any investigational product within 30 days or 5 half -lives of the drug 
(whichever is longer) before the first dose of study drug or is currently enrolled in another 
clinical study.  Simultaneous enrollment in a non- interventional study is permitted so long as 
these studies do not assess the EDSS, T25FW ,or 9HPT and are not overly burdensome and likely ,
in the investigator 's opinion , to trigger subject discontinuation. 
23.Subject has any history of receipt of elezanumab before participation in this study.
24.Subject has received any live vaccine, including , but not limited to:  measles/mumps/rubella 
vaccine, varicella zoster virus within 4 weeks before randomization, or expected need of live 
vaccination during study participation including at least 4 weeks after the last dose of study 
drug.
5.2 Contraception Recommendations
Contraception Requirements for Females
Subjects must follow the following contraceptive guidelines as specified:
Females, Non -Childbearing Potential
Females do not need to use birth control during or following study drug treatment if considered 
of non -childbearing potential due to meeting any of the following criteria:
Postmenopausal, age > 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an 
alternative medical cause.
Page 16 of 103 
           
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Postmenopausal, age ≤ 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an 
alternative medical cause AND a follicle -stimulating hormone (FSH) level > 40 IU/L.
Permanently surgi cally sterile (bilateral oophorectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, or 
hysterectomy)
Females of Childbearing Potential
Females of childbearing potential must avoid pregnancy while taking study drug and for at least 
39 weeks (5 half -lives) after the last dose o f study drug.  Females must commit to one of the 
following methods of birth control:
Combined (estrogen and progestogen containing) hormonal birth control (oral, intravaginal, 
transdermal, injectable) associated with inhibition of ovulation initiated at le ast 1 month 
before Screening.
Progestogen -only hormonal birth control (oral, injectable, implantable) associated with 
inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 1 month before Screening.
Bilateral tubal occlusion/ligation, i.e., Essure (can be via hysteros copy, provided a 
hysterosalpingogram confirms success of the procedure).
Intrauterine device (IUD).
Intrauterine hormone -releasing system (IUS).
Vasectomized sexual partner (provided the vasectomized partner has received medical 
confirmation of the surgical success of the vasectomy and is the sole sexual partner of the 
trial subject).
Practice true abstinence, defined as:  Refraining from heterosexual intercourse when this is 
in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject (periodic abstinence [e.g., 
calendar, ovulation, symptothermal, post -ovulation methods] and withdrawal are not 
acceptable).
5.3 Prohibited Medications and Therapy
In addition to the medications listed in the eligibility criteria, prior exposure to any of the following is 
NOT allowed:
1.Noprior treatment with the any of the following:
Total lymphoid irradiation
Cladribine or mitoxantrone
T cell or T cell receptor vaccination
Stem cell therapy
2.Notreatment with any of the following medications or procedures within the 6 months before
Screening:
Natalizumab
Page 17 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Cyclosporine
Azathioprine
Methotrexate
Mycophenolate mofetil
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg)
Any interferon product
3.Notreatment with cyclophosphamide or alemtuzumab within 1 year before Screening.
4.Notreatment with IV, oral, or intrathecal corticosteroids (or corticosteroid precursors such as 
adrenocorticotropic hormone ) for the purpose of treating an MS- flare within the 6 months 
before Screening.  Pre- or post -treatment with corticosteroids to prevent immunomodulatory 
infus ion reactions for allowed concomitant medications is allowed.  Treatment with 
corticosteroids for non -MS conditions within the 6 months before Screening may be allowed at 
the discretion of the AbbVie study -designated physician.
5.4 Prior and Concomitant Therap y
Any medication or vaccine (including over -the-counter or prescription medicines, vitamins, and/or 
herbal supplements) that the subject received since 30 days before Screening or receives during the 
study must be recorded through the post -treatment visit (Week 76).
Non -immunomodulatory therapies used for the treatment of MS symptoms may be allowed at the 
discretion of the AbbVie study -designated physician.
Subjects who experience a suspected MS relapse may be treated with IV methylprednisolone 
 for 1 to 5 consecutive days , or another corticosteroid regimen that is consistent with good 
neurological practice. 
For subjects who experience a sustained reduction in lymphocyte level to below 500/µL for at least 
6months, or a level less than 200/µL on a single confirmed test, the investigator, or their treating 
neurologist if applicable, should consider the need to discontinue or switch their current 
immunomodulatory therapy. 
Any questions regarding concomitant or prior therapy should be raised to the sponsor/AbbVie medical 
contact.  Information regarding potential drug interactions with elezanumab can be located in the 
elezanumab Investigator's Brochure.
Subjects must be able to safely discontinue any prohibited medications before initial study drug 
administration (immunomodulator discontinuation criteria listed above).  Subjects must be consented 
for the study before discontinuing any prohibited medications for the purpose of meeting study 
eligibility.
All allowable concomitant medications must be at a stable dose for at least 30 days before the subject's 
screening visit (6 months for immunomodulators), and it is anticipated that no change in dose will be 
required during the study treatment period.  All medications should remain at stable doses for the 
Page 18 of 103 

STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.duration of the study unless a change in regimen is medically necessary.  All concomitant medications, 
including any change in dose must be recorded with the reason for use, dates of administration, dosages 
and frequency in the electronic case report form (eCRF).
5.5 Withdrawal of Subjects and Discontinuation of Study
A subject may voluntarily withdraw or be withdrawn from the study at any time for reasons including, 
but not limited to, the following:
Clinically significant abnormal laboratory results or AEs, w hich rule out continuation of the study 
drug, as determined by the investigator or the AbbVie Therapeutic Area Medical Director.
The investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject.
The subject requests withdrawal from the study.
Eligibility criteria violation was noted after the subject started study drug and continuation of 
the study drug would place the subject at risk.
Introduction of prohibited medications or dosages along with continuation of the study drug 
would place the subject at risk.
The subject has a positive drug screen, including for cannabis, opioids, and benzodiazepines, 
unless they have been instructed to use the substance by a medical professional.
The subject becomes pregnant while on study drug.
Subject is signi ficantly noncompliant with study procedures, which would put the subject at risk 
for continued participation in the trial. Subjects who missed visits due to COVID -19 investigator 
site closures or opted to refrain from on -site visits during the COVID -19 pandemic will not be 
requested to prematurely discontinue by the sponsor.
For subjects to be considered lost to follow -up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the subject's final status.  At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made an d 1 certified 
letter must be sent and documented in the subject's source documentation.
AbbVie may terminate this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site.  The investigator may 
also stop the study at his/her site if he/she has safety conce rns.  If AbbVie terminates the study for 
safety reasons, AbbVie will promptly notify the investigator.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
During the COVID -19 pandemic, it has been necessary to employ mitigation strategies to enable the 
investigator to ensure subject safety and continuity of care.  Acceptable mitigation strategies are 
identified and included in the Operations Manual in Appendix F.
The investigator should contact the sponsor medical contact before discontinuing a subject from the 
study for a reason other than "planned per protocol," to ensure all acceptable mitigation steps have 
been explored.
Refer to the Operations Manual in Appendix Ffor details on how to handle study activities/procedures.
Page 19 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Interruption/Discontinuation of Study Drug Due to COVID- 19 Infection
During the Treatment Period, a subject with confirmed (viral test positive) or suspected COVID -19 
infection can only be dosed with study drug if the following COVID -19 viral clearance criteria are met:
Symptomatic subjects:  At least 2 negative viral tests in a row, ≥ 24 hours apart aft er at least 
10days have passed since recovery, defined as resolution of fever without use of antipyretics 
and improvement in respiratory symptoms (e.g., cough, shortness of breath)
Asymptomatic subjects:  At least 2 negative viral tests in a row, ≥ 24 hou rs apart after at least 
10days have passed since prior positive result (note:  subjects who develop symptoms will 
follow guidance above for symptomatic subjects)
Delays in study drug dosing due to the above COVID -19 testing guidance for subjects must be discussed 
with the AbbVie medical contact, along with the possibility of premature discontinuation from the 
Treatment Period.  Follow subsequent protocol Section 5.6for subjects who discontinued study drug.  
Frequency or timing of COVID -19 testing and intervals between testing for the above viral clearance 
criteria may be adjusted to account for epidemiologic trends, updated information regarding infectivity, 
and l ocal/institutional guidelines.
5.6 Follow -Up After Subject Discontinuation of Study Drug or from 
Study
If a subject prematurely discontinues study participation (withdrawal of informed consent), the 
procedures outlined for the Early -Discontinuation (ED) Visit should be completed as soon as possible, 
preferably within 2 weeks.  In addition, if subject is willing, a 30 -day follow -up phone call after the last 
dose of study drug may be completed to ensure any treatment -emergent AEs/SAEs have been resolved.
In the e vent a subject withdraws consent from the clinical study, biomarker research will continue 
unless the subject explicitly requests analysis to be stopped.  When AbbVie is informed that the subject 
haswithdrawn and no longer wishes biomarker research to continue , samples will not be analyzed and
no new biomarker analysis data will be collected for the withdrawn subject or added to the existing data 
or database(s).
5.7 Study Drug
Elezanumab (ABT -555) is manufactured by AbbVie as shown in Table 1,below.  For subjects randomized 
to the treatment arms, the solution contained in the study vial(s) of ABT -555 will be diluted in the 0.9% 
Sodium Chloride Injection/Solution for Infusion.  
Page 20 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 1. Study Drug Identification
Investigational 
ProductMode of 
Administration Formulation Strength Manufacturer
ABT-555 Infusion Solution for infusion 
in a vialAbbVie Deutschland 
GmbH & Co. KG, 
Ludwigshafen, 
Germany
Placebo Infusion 0.9% Sodium 
Chloride 
Injection/Solution 
for Infusion, 250 mLN/A Various* 
(See below)
N/A = Not applicable
* Can be sourced from approved marketed products from various commercial manufacturers depending on availability.
0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection/Solution for Infusion will be administered to those subjects not receiving 
active elezanumab (ABT -555) and as a vehicle for administration of elezanumab (ABT -555).  0.9% 
Sodium Chloride Injection/Solution for Infusion will be supplied with commercially available material in 
either bags or bottles, locally sourced by sites.  However, if mandated by local regulation, or in the case 
of exceptional circumstances when sites are unable to procure on their own, AbbVie may supply 0.9% 
Sodium Chloride Injection/Solution for Infusion if necessary.
Treatment Administration
The study drug will be administered intravenously at the visits listed in the Operations Manual 
Section 2.0 ( Appendix F).  AbbVie will provide study drug as liquid in a vial that requires sterile 
preparation.  The time from start of preparation to start of infusion must not exceed 21 hours.  The 
study drug can be adm inistered without regard to food consumption and infusion time is 90 to 
120 minutes.  However, infusion time may be increased in subjects who have experienced possible 
infusion reactions during prior infusions in this study (Operations Manual [Appendix F]Appendix D 
Criteria for Monitoring Elezanumab Infusion Reactions ).Pre-medication with antihistamines or 
corticosteroids before investigational product infusion is not allowed without the consent of the AbbVie 
study -designated physician.    
The first dose of study drug will be administered after all other Week 0 –Baseline procedures are 
completed.  For this reason, it is recommen ded that the study drug is not prepared until eligibility is 
reconfirmed at the Week 0 -Baseline visit.  Timing of the preparation of subsequent doses is at the 
discretion of the site.  
Study drug will be administered by IV infusion at each visit, as shown in Table 2, below .
Page 21 of 103 

STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 2. Study Drug Administration Schedule
Study Drug Treatment Group Administration
Placebo (0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection/Solution 
for Infusion)IV infusions at Week 0 -Baseline visit, then every 4 weeks 
through Week 48
Elezanumab (ABT -555) 
Elezanumab (ABT -555) 
IV = Intravenous
The start and stop time of each study drug infusion will be recorded to the nearest minute.
Packaging and Labeling
Elezanumab (ABT -555) will be provided in a vial as a solution for infusion  packaged in a 
carton, with 1 vial per carton.  One carton is equivalent to 1 kit.  Each kit (vial and carton) w ill be labeled 
per local requirements and this label must remain affixed to the kit.  Upon receipt, study drug should be 
stored as specified on the label and kept in a secure location.  Each kit will contain a unique kit number. 
The commercially sourced 0 .9% Sodium Chloride Injection/Solution for Infusion (250 ml) will not be 
labeled as an Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) before the handling by the unblinded pharmacist 
or qualified designee.  However, after addition of elezanumab (ABT -555) to the 0.9% Sodium Chloride 
Injection/Solution for Infusion to be administered in the active arm, the unblinded pharmacist or 
qualified designee will add a blinded dispensing label.  Likewise, the unblinded pharmacist or qualified 
designee will add a blinded dispen sing label to the 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection/Solution for Infusion, 
to be administered in the placebo arm.  Labels must remain affixed to the material.
If an IMP label on the 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection/Solution for Infusion is mandated by local 
agencies, labels may be applied on the overwrap and will be removed by the unblinded pharmacist 
before administration.
Storage and Disposition of Study Drug
Study drug, elezanumab (ABT -555) must be refrigerated (2° to 8°C), protected from light, and cannot be
frozen.  The investigational product is for investigational use only and is to be used only within the 
context of this study.  The study drug supplied for this study must be maintained under adequate 
security and stored under the conditions specified on t he label until dispensed for subject use or 
destroyed on site as appropriate.
A storage temperature log is to be maintained to document proper storage conditions.  Sites must 
record the refrigerator temperature daily on a temperature log.  Malfunctions or any temperature 
excursion must be reported to the sponsor immediately using the AbbVie Temperature Excursion 
Management System (ATEMS).  Study medication should be quarantined and not dispensed until ATEMS 
deems the medication as acceptable.
0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection/Solution for Infusion should be stored per the locally approved 
commercial label, Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC), or clinical study label. 
Page 22 of 103 

STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The investigational products are for investigational use only and are to b e used only within the context 
of this study.  The study drug supplied for this study must be maintained under adequate security and 
stored under conditions specified on the label until dispensed for subject use or returned to AbbVie.
Subject Identifier Assignment
An interactive response technology (IRT) system will assign a unique identification number to each 
subject at the Screening Visit.  For subjects who do not meet the study selection criteria, site personnel 
must register the subject as a screen failure in the IRT system.
Subjects who are enrolled will retain the subject number assigned to them at Screening Visit throughout 
the study.
Interactive response technology Vendor contact information and user guidelines will be provided to 
each site.
Timing of Dose for Each Subject
Eligible subjects will receive either elezanumab  or placebo as an IV infusion at a 
constant rate by gravity or pump over an interval of 90 to 120 minutes.  The start and stop time of each 
study drug infusion will be recorded to the nearest minute.  Interruptions of infusion administration will 
be recorded to the nearest minute as well.  Blinded doses will be administered intravenously every 
4weeks for 48 weeks (13 total infusions).
Study Drug Accountability
The in vestigator or his representative will verify that study drug supplies are received intact and in the 
correct amounts.  This will be documented by signing and dating a proof of receipt or similar document.  
A current (running) and accurate inventory of stud y drug will be maintained in the IRT system.
Throughout the study and at the study site closeout visit, overall accountability will be performed and 
verified by the AbbVie unblinded clinical research associate (CRA) (Pharmacy CRA).
The unblinded pharmacist or qualified designee will be responsible for maintaining study drug 
preparation records and drug accountability records for study drug as well as the saline IV solution 
dispensed by the site, including product description, manufacturer, and lot numbers. Further details are 
provided in the Pharmacy Manual.
Study Blinding
Subjects in the placebo group will be administered 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection/Solution for Infusion 
that is identical in appearance and volume to the elezanumab solution.  An unblinde d pharmacist or 
qualified designee will receive assignments and prepare the blinded doses across the treatment groups.  
The investigator, study site personnel (except the unblinded pharmacist or qualified designee) and the 
subject will remain blinded to th e treatment assignment throughout the course of the study.
Because of the blinding of this study, deliveries of elezanumab and 0.9% Sodium Chloride 
Injection/Solution, if applicable, will be shipped directly to the pharmacy.  The unblinded pharmacist or 
qualified designee will prepare the dosing of elezanumab (in a blinded manner) following the available 
preparation instructions in the Pharmacy Manual and based on the subject's assigned treatment group.  
Page 23 of 103 

STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.For blinding purposes, identical commercial 0.9% Sodi um Chloride Injection/Solution for Infusion bag or 
bottle will be used in the placebo and elezanumab arms at each site.
For investigational product monitoring, there will be an unblinded AbbVie CRA (also referred to as a 
Pharmacy CRA) for verification of u nblinded preparation documentation.  The unblinded Pharmacy CRA 
will be a separate individual than the blinded CRA to ensure blinding is maintained.
All AbbVie personnel with direct oversight of the conduct and management of the trial (with the 
exception o f AbbVie Drug Supply Management Team, the unblinded CRA and the AbbVie safety review 
group), the investigator, study site personnel, and the subject will remain blinded to each subject's 
treatment throughout the study.
The IRT will provide access to unblin ded subject treatment information in the case of a medical 
emergency.
AbbVie must be notified before breaking the blind, unless identification of the study drug is required for 
a medical emergency, i.e., situation in which the knowledge or the specific blinded treatment will affect 
the immediate management of the subject's conditions (e.g., antidote is available).  AbbVie must then 
be notified within 24 hours of the blind being broken.  The date and reason that the blind was broken 
must be recorded in the s ource documentation and on the eCRF, as applicable.
5.8 Randomization/Drug Assignment
Subjects will be randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to one of two doses of elezanumab or placebo according to 
the randomization schedule generated by the Abbvie statistics departmen t.  An IRTsystem will be used 
to assign subject numbers and drug kits in accordance with the subject's assigned treatment group.  The 
use of the IRT system is described in the Operations Manual Section 3.15 ( Appendix F).
Randomization (Section 7.3) will be stratified between treatment and placebo arms based on t he 
following factors:
Diagnosis of primary -progressive MS (PPMS) vs. SPMS
Presence or absence of background MS immunotherapy
5.9 Protocol Deviations
AbbVie does not allow intentional/prospective deviations from the protocol except when necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects. The investigator is responsible for complying with all 
protocol requirements, written instructions, and applicable laws regarding protocol deviations.  If a 
protocol deviation occurs (or is identified, including thos e that may be due to the COVID -19 pandemic ), 
the investigator is responsible for notifying IEC/IRB, regulatory authorities (as applicable), and AbbVie.
Page 24 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, or oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the 
physical characteristics, identity, quality, purity, potency, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness, or 
performance of a product/device.  Complaints associated with any component of th is investigational 
product must be reported to AbbVie.
Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the biologic or drug component of the product or to the 
medical device component(s).
For a product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the 
labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, device not working properl y, 
or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product and/or device must be reported to AbbVie 
within 24 hours of the study site's knowledge of the event.  Product complaints occurring during the 
study will be followed up to a s atisfactory conclusion.
Medical Complaints/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Event
An AEis defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject 
administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with 
this treatment.  An AEcan therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal 
(investigational) product, whether or not the event is considered causally related to the use of the 
product.
The investigators will monitor each subject for clinical and laboratory evidence of AEson a routine basis 
throughout the study.  All AEswill be followed to a satisfactory conclusion.
An elective surgery/procedure scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an AEif the 
surgery/procedure is being performed for a pre- existing condition and the surgery/procedure has been 
pre planned before study entry.  However, if the pre -existing condition deteriorates unexpectedly during 
the study (e.g., surgery performed earlier than planned), then the deterioration of the condition for 
which the elective surgery/procedure is being done will be considered an AE.
If an AE, whether associat ed with the study drug or not, meets any of the following criteria, it is to be 
reported to AbbVie clinical pharmacovigilance or contract research organization (CRO) (as appropriate)
as anSAE within 24 hours ofthe site's being made aware of the SAE (refer to Section 4.2 of the 
Operations Manual (Appendix F)for reporting details and contact information):
Page 25 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Death of Subject An event that results in the death of a subject.
Life-Threatening An event that, in the opinion of the investigator, would have 
resulted in immediate fatality if medical intervention had not been 
taken.  This does not include an event that would have been fatal if it 
had occurred in a more severe form.
Hospitalization or 
Prolongation of 
HospitalizationAn event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length 
of time or prolongs the subject's hospital stay.  This does not include 
an emergency room visit or visi t to an outpatient facility.
Congenital Anomaly An anomaly detected at or after birth, or any anomaly that results in 
fetal loss.
Persistent or Significant 
Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condition that substantially interferes with 
the activities of daily living of a study subject.  Disability is not 
intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, 
and accidental trauma (e.g., sprained ankle).
Important Med ical Event 
Requiring Medical or Surgical 
Intervention to Prevent 
Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately life -
threatening or result in death or hospitalization, but based on 
medical judgment may jeopardize the subject and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outcomes 
listed above (i.e., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, 
prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity).  Add itionally, any elective or 
spontaneous abortion or stillbirth is considered an important 
medical event.  Examples of such events include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room 
or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.
All AEsreported from the time of study drug administration up to 39 weeks (5 half -lives) from the last 
dose of study drug (Week 48 visit) will be collect ed, whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the 
subject.  In addition, SAEs and protocol -related nonserious AEswill be collected from the time the 
subject signs the study -specific informed consent.
AbbVie will be responsible for Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) reporting for 
the IMP in accordance with global and local requirements.  Additional information about SUSAR 
reporting is presented in the Operations Manual (Appendix F)Section 5.2 SUSAR Reporting.
Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Study Drug
The investigator will rate the severity of each AEas mild, moderate , or severe.  The investigator will use 
the following definitions to rate the severity of each AE:
Page 26 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Mild:   The AEis transient and easily tolerated by the subject.
Moderate:   The AEcauses the subject discomfort and interrupts the subject's usual activities .
Severe:   The AEcauses considerable interference with the subject's usual activities and may be 
incapacitating or life -threatening.
The investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of the AEto the use of study 
drug:
Reasonable Possibility –After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, 
clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is sufficient evidence (information) to suggest 
a causal relationship.
No Reasonable Po ssibility –After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is insufficient evidence 
(information) to suggest a causal relationship.
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may 
indicate a trend or risk to subjects.
Adverse Events of Special Interest
For AESIs, serious and nonserious, meeting predefined criteria, specific questionnaires will be used to 
standar dize the collection of follow -up information.  The AESI questionnaires will be issued within the 
electronic data capture (EDC) system once applicable.  The investigator will enter the information into 
the EDC system once applicable.
The following AESI will be monitored during the study:
Infusion reactions
Further information about AESIs is provided in the Operations Manual (Appendix F)Section 4.1.
Pregnancy
While not an AE, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site 
becomes aware of the pregnancy.  Subjects who become pregnant during the study must be 
discontinued (Section 5.5).  If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject, information regarding the 
pregnancy and the outcome will be collected.
The pregnancy outcome of an elective or spontaneous abortion, s tillbirth or congenital anomaly is 
considered a SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site becomes aware of the 
event.
Page 27 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis will be described and fully documented in the 
statistical analysis plan ( SAP).  The SAP will be finalized before the interim database lock.  The statistical 
analyses will be performed using SAS (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, North C arolina, USA).
7.2 Definition for Analysis Sets
The Modified I TT (mITT) Setincludes all randomized subjects who received at least 1 dose of study drug.  
Subjects will be grouped according to treatment as randomized. 
Multiple sclerosis expert(s) will confirm which subjects experienced a clinical relapse(s) through 
adjudication of study data, including the MS -relapse questionnaire.  The RFSetincludes all subjects in 
the mITT data set without any MS -related relapse during the Treatment Period (from Week 0 to 
Week 52). Subjects will be grouped according to treatment as randomized.
The Minimal Missed Infusion Analysis (MMIA) Set includes all randomized subjects who received at least 
6 infusions total and missed no consecutive infusions before the subject's fina l dose.  Subjects will be 
grouped according to treatment as randomized.
The Safety Analysis Set includes all subjects who received at least 1 dose of study drug.  Subjects will be 
grouped according to treatment received regardless of randomization.
7.3 Statistical Analyses for Efficacy
The ORS scores will be summarized descriptively (including n, mean, standard deviation, minimum, 
median, and maximum) along with the 95% confidence interval at each visit.  The frequency and 
percentage of ORS for –4 to +4 will also be provided by treatment group at each visit.  The ORS for each 
treatment group at scheduled visits and overall will also be estimated using a mixed -effect model for 
repeated measures (MMRM) including treatment group, visit, treatment -by-visit in teraction, and 
stratification factors as fixed effects, with the baseline values for the ORS components ascovariates.
For other continuous efficacy endpoints, the mean, standard deviation, median, minimum and 
maximum will be reported for each treatment gr oup.  The treatment comparison will be conducted 
using MMRM model including treatment group, visit, treatment -by-visit interaction, and stratification 
factors as fixed effects and the baseline value associated with the endpoint as a covariate.
For binary e fficacy endpoints, the frequency and percentage will be provided by treatment group.  The 
treatment comparison will be conducted using a logistic regression model adjusted for the stratification 
factors and baseline score associated with the endpoint.
All efficacy endpoints will be analyzed on mITT population.  The RF and MMIA Sets will be used for the 
primary and other efficacy analyses as specified in the SAP.
Page 28 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Sample Size Estimation
Approximately 165 subjects will be equally randomized 1:1:1 (55 subjects in each treatment group , with 
atarget of 20 SPMS subjects and approximately 35 RRMS subjects per treatment group).  There are
limited prior data to estimate the magnitude of effect and variance for a neurorestorative therapy.  The 
sample size was therefore selected based on operational feasibility, variance seen in prior MS trials, and 
the likelihood of predicting success in subsequent phases of development. 
7.4 Statistical Analyses for Safety
Analysis of the following safety evaluations will be performed dur ing the study:  Adverse events and 
SAEs ,vital signs, laboratory tests, ECG, physical and neurologic examinations, and C -SSRS assessments.
Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis of safety evaluations will be described and fully 
documente d in the SAP.
7.5 Interim Analysis
There are no interim efficacy or futility analyses.
7.6 Subgroup Analysis
The primary efficacy analyses will also be performed in the following subgroups to assess the 
consistency of the treatment effect:
Sex (male, female)
Age (≤ 40 years, > 40 years)
EDSS baseline ( ≤ median, > median)
Diagnosis of MS form ( RRMS, SPMS ) 
Presence of background MS immunotherapy (yes, no)
8ETHICS
8.1 Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitm ent materials, and all subject materials will be 
submitted to the Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board (IEC/IRB) for review and 
approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the informed consent form(s) must be obtained before any 
subject is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will require review and approval by the IEC/IRB 
before the changes are implemented to the study.  In addition, all changes to the consent form(s) will be 
IEC/IRB approved.
Page 29 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, International Council 
for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) guidelines, 
applicable regulations, and guidelines governing clinical study cond uct and the ethical principles that 
have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  Responsibilities of the investigator are specified in 
Appendix B.
In the event of a state of emergency due to the COVID -19 pandemic leading to difficulties in performing 
protocol- specified procedures, AbbVie will engage with study site personnel in efforts to ensure the 
safety of subjects, maintain protocol compliance, and minimize risks to the integrity of the study while 
trying to best manage subject continuity of care.  This may include alternative methods for assessments 
(e.g., phone contacts, virtual site visits, or hybrid visits to minimize subject face -to-face time), alternative 
locations for data collection (e.g., use of a local lab instead of a central lab), and shipping of supplies via 
a direct -to-patient vendor to ensure continuity of treatment where allowed.  Refer to the Operations 
Manual in Appendix Ffor additional details.  In all cases, these alternative measures must be allowed by 
local regulations and permitted by IRB/IEC.  Investigators should notify AbbVie if any urgent safety 
measures are taken to protect the subjects against any immediate hazard.
8.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical 
study identifiers or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie.
9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the 
data reported.  All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, 
accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Clinical site monitoring is conducted 
to ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data 
are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the 
currently approved protocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable local regulatory 
requirement(s). Remote monitoring of data may be employed if allowed by the local regulatory 
authority, IRB/IEC, and the study site.
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial is conducted with a quality management system that will define 
quality tolerance limit s in order to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results.  Data 
will be generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable 
regulatory requirements.
Page 30 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end -of-study is defined as the date of the last subject's last visit.
12 REFERENCES
1.AbbVie.  Elezanumab Investigator's Brochure.
Page 31 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A.STUDY-SPECIFIC ABBREVIATIO NS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
ADA Anti-drug antibody
AE Adverse event
AESI Adverse events of special interest
ALT Alanine transaminase
ANC Absolute neutrophil count
ATEMS AbbVie Temperature Excursion Management System
BDNF Brain -derived neurotrophic factor
BMI Body mass index
CNS Central nervous system
COVID -19 Coronavirus Disease -2019
CRA Clinical research associate
CRO Contract research organization
CSF Cerebrospinal fluid
C-SSRS Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale
CXCL13 C-X-C motif ligand 13
DMC Data Monitoring Committee
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
DTI Diffusion tensor imaging
ECG Electrocardiogram
eCRF Electronic case report form
ED Early discontinuation
EDC Electronic data capture
EDSS Expanded Disability Status Scale
EDSS+ Expanded Disability Status Scale Plus
FSH Follicle -stimulating hormone
GAP -43 Growth associated protein -43
GCP Good clinical practice
GFAP Glial fibrillary acidic protein
HBsAg Hepatitis B surface antigen
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
hRGMa Human repulsive guidance molecule A
Page 32 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.ICH International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for 
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
IEC Independent ethics committee
IEC/IRB Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board
Ig Immunoglobulin
IgG1 Immunoglobulin G1
IL-10 Interleukin -10
IMP Investigational medicinal product
IRB Institutional review board
IRT Interactive response technology
IU International Unit
IUD Intrauterine device
IUS Intrauterine hormone -releasing system
IV Intravenous
IVIg Intravenous immunoglobulin
LCVA Low Contrast Visual Acuity
MBP Myelin basic protein
MFIS Modified Fatigue Impact Scale
MFIS-5 Modified Fatigue Impact Scale
miR-338 MicroRNA -338
mITT Modified intent -to-treat
MMIA Minimal Missed Infusion Analysis
MMP -9 Matrix metalloproteinase 9
MMRM Mixed -effect model for repeated measures
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging
MS Multiple sclerosis
MSIOA Multiple Sclerosis Individualized Outcome Assessment
MTR Magnetization transfer ratio
N/A Not applicable
NF-l Neurofilament light
NFL Neurofilament light
NMSC Non -melanoma skin cancer
ORS Overall Response Score
PK Pharmacokinetic(s)
Page 33 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.PPD Purified protein derivative (tuberculin)
PPMS Primary -progressive MS
QTc QT interval corrected for heart rate
QTcF QT interval corrected for heart rate using Fridericia's formula
RF Relapse -free
RGMa Repulsive guidance molecule A
RMS Relapsing multiple sclerosis
RNA Ribonucleic acid
RRMS Relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis
SAE Serious adverse event
SAP Statistical analysis plan
SC Subcutaneous
SDMT Symbol Digit Modalities Test
SmPC Summary of Product Characteristics
SPMS Secondary -progressive MS
SUSAR Suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions
T25FW Timed 25- Foot Walk
TB Tuberculosis
ULN Upper limit of normal
vs. Versus
WBC White blood cell
Page 34 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B.RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M18 -918:  A Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled, Multiple Dose Study to Assess the 
Safety and Efficacy of Elezanumab when Added to Standard of Care in Relapsing Forms of Multiple 
Sclerosis
Protocol Date:  22March 2021
Clinical research s tudies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the ICHGCP and local regulations and 
guidelines governing the study at the site location.  In signing the Investigator Agreement, the 
investigator is agreeing to the following:
1.Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and Operations Manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying 
AbbVie and the appropriate IRB/IEC, except when necessary to protect the subject from 
immediate harm.
2.Persona lly conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3.Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being used for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requirements relating to informed consent and 
ethics commit tees (e.g., IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4.Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investigation(s) to AbbVie.
5.Reading the information in the Investigator's Brochure/safety material provided, including the 
instructions for use and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6.Informing all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
7.Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all study -related documents until notification from AbbVie.
8.Maint aining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and all of its amendments.
9.Reporting promptly, all changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involving 
risks to human subjects o r others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, 
institution director) and/or directly to the ethics committees and AbbVie.
10.Providing direct access to source data documents for study -related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed)
Page 35 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C.LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Clinical Program Development
Medical Writing
Neuroscience
Data and Statistical Sciences
Data and Statistical Sciences
Clinical Pharmacology
Bioanalytics
Page 36 of 103 

STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX D.ACTIVITY SCHEDULE
The following table shows the required activities across the study.  The individual ac tivities are described 
in detail in Section 3 of the Operations Manual (Appendix F).Allowed modifications due to COVID -19 
are detailed within the Operations Manual.
Page 37 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E.PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Versions
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 30 August 2018
Version 2.0 01 February 2019
Version 3.0 07 August 2019
Version 4.0 25 November 2020
Protocol Summary of Changes
The purpose of this version is the removal of on -site assessments performed at Week s64 and 76 so that 
all visits in the Follow -up period can be conducted virtually.   Other administrative revisions were made 
throughout the protocol, including the synopsis, and to the Operations Manual, to ensure consistency 
with the changes below:
1.Protocol Section 4.1, Overall Study Design and Plan, Figure 1. Study Schematic and Protocol 
Appendix D. Activity Schedule: Remove Week s64 and 76 as an on -site visit. 
2.Update to Appendix F, Operations Manual: Section 2.1, Individual Treatment Period Visit 
Activities and Section 2.2, Individual Post -Treatme nt Period Visit Activities (Week 64 and 
Week 76) to remove vital signs, EDSS, T25FW, 9HPT, urine drug and alcohol test, PK and ADA 
sample collections; Section 3.6 Scales and Questionnaires table to remove EDSS T25FW, 9HPT 
from Follow -up at Weeks 64 and 76.
Rationale:
By January 2021, all study subjects had completed 52 weeks of therapy.  A recent, planned efficacy 
analysis revealed that elezanumab therapy provided no beneficial effects.  A lack of efficacy was 
observed on all endpoints.
The study initially had scheduled in person site visits at Week 64 and Week 76.  The purpose of these 
visits was to perform assessment of the primary endpoint to better understand the durability of 
improvement observed at Week 52.  Because there were no beneficial drug effects at Week 52, there is 
no scientific purpose to having the subjects return for in person visits.  The ongoing COVID -19 pandemic 
also provides a strong justification for NOT having subjects perform unneeded in person site visits.
The collection of safety -related information by phone every 4 weeks through Week 76, including AEs, 
C-SSRS assessments, and pregnancy testing results will continue.
Page 41 of 103 
STUDY M18 -918  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX F.OPERATIONS MANUAL
Page 42 of 103 
p. 2 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1CONTACTS
Sponsor/
Emergency 
Medical 
Contact PhD
AbbVie 
 
1 North Waukegan Road
North Chicago, IL 60064 -6203
EMERGENCY 24 hour Number:
+1 (973) 784 -6402Office:
Mobile:
Mobile 2:
Email:
Safety 
ConcernsNeuroscience Safety Team
Bldg. AP 51 -3
1 North Waukegan Road
North Chicago, IL 60064 -6203Phone: +1 (847) 938 -4191
Email: 
SafetyManagement_Neuroscience@abbvie.com
SAE Reporting 
outside of RAVEEmail: 
PPDINDPharmacovigilance@abbvie.comFax: +1 (847) 938 -0660
Protocol 
Deviations
AbbVie Inc.
1 North Waukegan Road
North Chicago, IL 60064 -6203Phone:
Fax:
Email:
Certified 
Clinical 
LaboratoryCovance Central Laboratories Services, Inc.
8211 SciCor Drive
Indianapolis, IN 46214 -2985Phone: +1-866-762-6209 (toll free)
+1 (317) 271 -1200 (local)
Fax: +1 (317) 273 -4030
Pharmacokinetic 
and High 
Sensitivity 
Exploratory 
Biomarkers 
LaboratoryAbbVie Deutschland GmbH and Co KG
Sample Receiving Team
Knollstrasse 50
67061 Ludwigshafen, GermanyPhone:
Fax:
Email:
Serum RGMA 
LaboratoryAttn:  AbbVie Sample Receiving
D-R43F, Bldg. AP13A, Rm. 2310
c/o:  Delivery Services
1150 S. Northpoint Blvd. 
Waukegan, IL 60085Phone: 847-937-0889
Fax: 847-938-9898
Email: sample.receiving@abbvie.com
Rater 
CertificationVeraSci (formerly NeuroCog Trials [NCT])
3211 Shannon Road, Suite 300
Durham, NC 27707Phone: 919-401-4642
Email: AbbvieMS@VeraScience.com
Page 44 of 103 

p. 3 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Central Imaging 
(MRI)Bioclinica
211 Carnegie Center
Princeton, NJ 08540Phone: +877 -632-9432
Fax: +1-609-936-2602
Actigraphy MC-10
10 Maguire Road, Building 3
Lexington, MA  02421Phone: 857-214-5601
Email: abbviesupport@mc10inc.com
Page 45 of 103 
p. 4 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 CONTACTS 2
2 PROTOCOL ACTIVITIES BY VISIT 6
2.1 INDIVIDUAL TREATMENT PERIOD VISIT ACTIVITIES 6
2.2 INDIVIDUAL POST-TREATMENT PERIOD V ISIT ACTIVIT IES 23
3 STUDY PROCEDURES 26
3.1 SUBJECT INFORMATION AND INFORMED CONSENT 26
3.2 MEDICAL HISTORY 27
3.3 DRUG AND ALCOHOL SCREEN 27
3.4 ADVERSE EVENT ASSESSMENT 28
3.5 PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT M EDICATIONS 28
3.6 SCALES AND QUESTIONNAIRES 28
3.7 PHARMACOKINETIC SAMPLING 35
3.8 BIOMARKER SAMPLING 35
3.9 12-LEAD ELECTROCARDIOGRAM 35
3.10 HEIGHT , WEIGHT AND BMI 36
3.11 VITAL SIGNS 36
3.12 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION 37
3.13 NEUROLOGICAL EXAMINATION 37
3.14 ACTIGRAPHY 38
3.15 ASSIGNMENT OF SUBJECT NUMBERS AND USE OF INTERACTIVE RESPONSE TECHNOLOGY (IRT) 38
3.16 CLINICAL LABORATORY TESTS 39
3.17 MAGNETIC RESONANCE I MAGING (MRI) 41
3.18 DISPENSE STUDY DRUG 42
3.19 SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL FROM S TUDY 43
3.20 UNSCHEDULED VISITS 44
4 SAFETY MANUAL 44
4.1 METHODS AND T IMING OF SAFETY A SSESSMENT 44
4.2 REPORTING ADVERSE EVENTS AND INTERCURRENT ILLNESSES 46
Page 46 of 103 
p. 5 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5 COUNTRY -SPECIFIC REQ UIREMENTS 48
5.1 SAMPLE RETENTION REQUIREMENTS 48
5.2 SUSAR REPORTING 48
5.3 TREATMENT AFTER END OF STUDY 48
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY -SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS 49
APPENDIX B. CRITERIA FOR POTENTI ALLY CLINICALLY SIGNIFICANT (PCS) VALUES FOR ELEZANUMAB
STUDIES 51
APPENDIX C. MS RELAPSE QUESTIONN AIRE 58
APPENDIX D. CRITERIA FOR MONITOR ING ELEZANUMAB INFUS ION REAC TIONS 59
Page 47 of 103 
p. 6 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2PROTOCOL ACTIVITIES BY VISIT
Study visits may be impacted due to the COVID -19 pandemic.  This may include changes such as phone 
or virtual visits, vi sits at alternative locations, or changes in the visit frequency and timing of study 
procedures, among others.  Additional details are provided in the subsequent section.  Every effort 
should be made to ensure the safety of subjects and site staff, while m aintaining the integrity of the 
study.  If visits cannot be conducted onsite due to travel restrictions or other pandemic -related reasons, 
follow the updates below on how to proceed.
2.1 Individual Treatment Period Visit Activities
This section presents a list of activities performed during each visit, organized by visit.
Study procedures may be split over 2consecutive days, with the study drug administration to occur on 
the second day.  At the Week 0 Baseline Visit, the site will conduct actigraphy training with the subject ,
and application of sensors should be done on the same day as the timed 25-foot walk. These activities 
(along with all the pre -dose activities) should occur before dosing.
Activities are grouped by category (Interview, Exam, etc.).  Furthe r information about each activity is 
provided in Section 3.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
During the COVID -19 pandemic , if it is not possible for all study procedures to be performed as specified 
due to travel restrictions or other reasons, the following modifications are allowed:
Some study visits and/or activities may be performed by phone/virtually.  These are indicate d by 
a hashtag (#) in the appropriate visit table(s) below.
During a virtual visit, activities that do not need to be performed are indicated by a minus 
sign ( -).
Some study visits and/or activities may be performed by a local laboratory.  These are indica ted 
by a plus sign (+) in the appropriate visit table(s) below.  All procedures performed at local 
facilities must be performed by appropriately qualified personnel.
Study Visits and/or activities should be performed as scheduled whenever possible.  If it is not 
possible to do so due to the pandemic, the following modifications are allowed:
Study procedures may be split over 7 consecutive days.  The Expanded Disability Status Scale 
(EDSS), 9 -Hole Peg Test (9HPT), or Timed 25 Foot Walk (T25FW) should all occur on the 
same visit day.
MRI assessments may be collected up to 12 weeks after the projected visit for the missed 
timepoints at Week 24 and 52 with the sponsor's consent due to reasons related to the 
COVID -19 pandemic.  However, all MRI assessments pro jected to be obtained on or before 
mid-November 2020 must be completed by the end of November 2020.  To accommodate 
scheduling of the vast volume of projected Week 52 MRIs in December 2020, at the 
discretion of the sponsor, sites may schedule Week 52 MRIs up to -28 days of their 
projected Week 52 visit.
Page 48 of 103 
p. 8 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Initiation of a new immunomodulatory or immunomodulatory dose change within 6 months of 
Screening
Fall outside the 30-dayscreening period
Experienced a nMS relapse within 24months before screening.  
Have a non -clinically significant laboratory abnormality that has now normalized.
If it is anticipated that fewer than 60 days will pass from initial testing to randomization, the following 
procedures do not need to be repeated during rescreenin g:  screening MRI, clinical scales, 
weight/height, medical history (unless subject reported change) , physical exam ination (unless new 
symptoms) , neurological exam ination (unless new symptoms) , and central lab oratory tests. 
Page 50 of 103 
p. 27 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.placed in the subject's medical record.  An entry must also be made in the subject's dated source 
documents to confirm that informed consent wa s obtained before any study -related procedures and 
that the subject received a signed copy.
Information regarding benefits for subjects and information regarding provisions for treating and/or 
compensating subjects who are harmed as a consequence of partic ipation in the study can be found in 
the informed consent form.
Due to the COVID -19 pandemic, it is possible that additional protocol modifications not outlined in this 
protocol may become necessary.  If this situation arises, in addition to the study info rmed consent, 
additional verbal consent may be obtained and documented in subject's source documents before, if 
possible, these adaptations or substantial changes in study conduct in accordance with local regulations.
3.2 Medical History
For all subjects, a complete medical history including subject's history of multiple sclerosis (MS), 
demographics, history of tobacco, alcohol, and drug use will be taken at screening.  Additionally, chronic 
disorders (such as, but not limited to, diabetes, hypertension, and ha y fever) that began before 
Screening and are still present at Screening should be recorded on the medical history form.  All 
psychiatric, neurological, behavioral, and/or cognitive diagnoses that are noted in the subject's medical 
records should also be re corded on the Medical History electronic case report form (eCRF).  Medication 
(prescription or over -the-counter, including vitamins and herbal supplements) use from 30 days before 
informed consent form signature through the end of the study will also be re corded.  The subject's 
medical history will be updated at the Week 0 -Baseline visit.  This updated medical history will serve as 
the baseline for clinical assessment.
3.3 Drug and Alcohol Screen
Subjects should have no history of clinically significant (per investigator's judgment) drug or alcohol 
abuse within the last 2 years.
Urine specimens will be tested for the presence of drugs of abuse.  The panel for drugs of abuse will 
minimally include the drugs listed below.  Any positive result must be assessed fo r clinical significance.  
Depending on the visit, these analyses will be performed by the certified central laboratory chosen for 
the study or by a site with a kit provided by the central lab.  Refer to Inclusion Criterion #5 of the 
protocol for additional urine drug screen information.
Urine specimens will be tested at the Screening visit for the presence of drugs of abuse.  These analyses 
will be performed by the certified central laboratory chosen for the study.
Cannabinoids
Opiates
Barbiturates
Amphetamines
Cocaine
Page 69 of 103 
p. 28 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Benzodiazepines
Alcohol
Phencyclidine
Propoxyphene
Methadone
A positive cannabinoid test is allowed if the responsible agent is taken for the management of MS 
symptoms ( either concurrent or within the past 30 days).  A p ositive drug s creen resulting from other 
prescribed medications isallowed at the discretion of the AbbVie study -designated physician.
3.4 Adverse Event Assessment
Please refer to Section 4.1.
3.5 Prior and Concomitant Medications
Investigators and/or trained site staff will review and record all prior and concomitant medications at 
every visit throughout the study as shown in Section 2.  Refer to the protocol Section 5.4, Prior and 
Concomitant Therapy, for additional information. 
Subjects who are currently receiving intravenous (IV) MS immunotherapies (e.g., ocrelizumab) should 
not receive these agents on the same day as study drug infusion at Week 0.  On subsequent study visits, 
subjects receiving IV immunotherapies should wait to receive the drug for at least two (2) hours after 
the completion of investigational p roduct infusion.  Exceptions to the 2 -hour waiting period between 
infusions after Baseline may be approved on a case -by-case basis but always in consultation with the 
AbbVie TA MD.  Subjects who receive IV immunotherapies the same day as investigational pr oduct 
should have received the immunotherapy at least two (2) times prior and have no history of infusion 
reaction within the last 12 months in response to the immunotherapy.
Corticosteroids (or corticosteroid precursors such as a drenocorticotropic hormone ) are an allowed class 
of medication if used before or after ocrelizumab or other drug infusion to limit infusion reactions. Pre-
medication for study drug infusion is not allowed without the consent of the AbbVie study -designated 
physician.
3.6 Scales and Questionnaires
Diagnostic Tools and Rating Scales
Before the start of the study, designated raters will be certified/trained by VeraSci in the use of all scales 
used in this study.  The objective of this certification/training is to establish uniformity acros s sites in the 
administration, interpretation and scoring of these rating instruments.  It is the responsibility of the 
investigator to ensure that the raters at his/her site are appropriately trained and certified in the use of 
selected rating scales.  Ev ery effort must be made by the investigative sites to ensure that each subject 
is rated by the same rater for each scale throughout their participation in the study.
Page 70 of 103 
p. 29 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.AbbVie, in conjunction with the rater training vendor, NCT, will determine the minimum rat er 
qualifications for each of the rating scales.  All raters must meet these qualifications before participation 
in the training process.  The qualifications of the raters will be verified through the training vendor.  
Individual exceptions to these requirements must be approved by the sponsor via the training vendor.
Administration of selected scales will be audio recorded to allow for central review of the data and to 
ensure consistency and reliability.
Assessments will be performed at the times indicated in Section 2.
Subjects will complete the self -administered patient -reported outcome (PRO) instruments (when 
allowed per local regulatory guidelines).  Subjects should be instructed to follow the instructions 
provided with the instruments and to provide the best possible response to each item.  Site personnel 
shall not provide interpretation or assistance to subjects other than encouragement to complete the 
tasks.   Subjects who are functionally unable to read any of the instruments may have site personnel read 
the questionnaire to them.  Site personnel will encourage completion of the instrument at all specified 
visits and will ensure that a response is entered for all items.
The following Patient Reported Outcome (PRO) instruments will be used in this study:
Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale (MSIS- 29), version 2:  The MSIS -29 version 2 consists of 
29questions; 20 address the physical impact of MS and nine assess the psychological impact.  
Subjects are asked the questions about the impact of MS on their day -to-day life during the 
previous 2 weeks.  For each statement, the subject is asked to circle a number from 1 to 5 that 
best describes their situation (1 = 1 not at all; 2 = a little; 3 = moderately; 4 = quite a bit; 
5 =extremely).  It should take 5 -8 minutes for the subject to complete the scale.
Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS- 5):  The MFIS -5 includes five statements about how fatigue 
affects the individual who has MS.  For each of the five statements, the subject indicates on a 
scale from 0 (never) to 4 (almost always) how their fatigue has affected them over the past 
4weeks.  It should take 2 -3 minutes for the subject to complete this scale.
The following clinician -measured scales will be used in this study:
Columbia- Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS):  The C -SSRS is a systematically administered 
instrument developed to track suicidality across a treatment study.  The instrument is designed 
toassess suicidal behavior and ideation, track and assess all suicidal events, as well as the 
lethality of attempts.  Additional features assessed include frequency, duration, controllability, 
reason for ideation, and deterrents.  The C -SSRS takes less than 5 minutes to administer.  
Any subject noted to have suicidal ideation with plan within the prior month, either via 
answering "yes" to questions 4 or 5 to the suicidal ideation portion of the C -SSRS or via clinical 
interview, or noted to have suicidal behavior based on the positive responses to suicidal 
behavior portion of the C -SSRS, will be evaluated immediately by the study site physician.  The 
AbbVie study designated physician will also be informed.  Appropriate steps will be taken to 
protect the subje ct, including but not limited to possible discontinuation from the study and 
referral for appropriate psychiatric care.  Any such subject at Screening or on Week 0 –Baseline 
will also be excluded from the study.
Page 71 of 103 
p. 30 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Multiple Sclerosis Individualized Outcome A ssessment (MSIOA):  The MSIOA is a novel clinician-
reported outcome assessment that has been developed for this study to identify the impact of 
MS and MS treatment on an individual subject's activities of daily living across multiple domains.  
MS affects subjects differently and the importance of certain abilities is different for each 
subject.  This outcome will determine the areas of daily living (based on existing activities of 
daily living [ADLs] within the MSIS) that are most impacted and most importan t to each subject 
and these will be ranked on a standardized, ordinal rating scale and tracked during the course of 
the study.
Expanded Disability Status Scale Plus (EDSS+) is comprised of the following three scales:
EDSS:  The Expanded Disability Status S cale (EDSS) is a method of quantifying disability in 
multiple sclerosis and monitoring changes in the level of disability over time.  The EDSS scale 
ranges from 0 to 10, with 0 referring to normal neurological examination and 10 referring to 
death.  It cha nges in 0.5 unit increments that represent higher levels of disability.  Scoring is 
based on an examination by a neurologist.  It takes about 15 -30 minutes to conduct the 
neurological examination and do the scoring.
Timed 25 -Foot Walk (T25FW):  The T25FW quantifies the MS subject's mobility and leg 
function during a timed walk over a designated and clearly marked twenty -five foot course.  
The subject is to walk as quickly and safely as possible over the course to the designated 
twenty -five foot mark.  The walk is measured in seconds from the time the initial 
instructions are provided to the subject reaching the twenty -five foot mark.  The subject is 
then instructed to walk quickly and safely following the course back to the starting point.  
Again the time for the walk is recorded in seconds.  The T25FW will be conducted by a 
trained examiner.  The examiner does not necessarily have to be a nurse or physician.  
Assistive devices (i.e., cane, crutches, walker) may be used.  Scoring is the average of the 
two t rial walks.  Additional instructions will be provided for scoring of individuals unable to 
complete the walk due to severity of impairment.  Total time to administer the T25FW is 1 -
5 minutes.
9-Hole Peg Tests (9HPT):  The 9HPT is a standardized measure o f upper extremity mobility 
and will test both the dominant hand and non -dominant hand twice consecutively.  A 9HPT 
kit will be provided for the site to use in administration of this test while the subject is 
seated at a table.  The kit includes a shallow c ontainer in which 9 small pegs are placed, and 
a plastic, wooden or cardboard block which has 9 holes.  The subject will be instructed to 
remove the pegs one at a time as quickly as possible from the shallow dish and place the 
pegs into each of the 9 holes .  Once the pegs are in place the subject is to remove the pegs 
from the holes one at a time as quickly as possible and place the pegs back in the shallow 
container.  The dominant hand will be tested first, twice consecutively and then the non -
dominant hand will be tested twice consecutively.  For each hand, scoring is the average of 
the two trials.  The total time to administer the 9HPT is approximately 10 minutes or less.
Low Contrast Visual Acuity (LCVA):  The LCVA uses an eye chart specifically designed to test low 
contrast vision.  Subjects identify the letters on the chart and recite them to the tester.  
Instructions for the clinic setting use and specific lighting requirements will be provided to the 
site during training by VeraSci.  If possible, this test should be administered in the same room 
and with the same light level at each subject visit.  The rater vendor will also purchase and 
provide all relevant materials in order to support the Low Contrast Visual Acuity Test.  All 
Page 72 of 103 
p. 31 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.participating sites mus t use the LCVA study materials provided by the AbbVie vendor to ensure 
consistency across the study.  The test takes approximately 5 minutes to administer.
Symbol Digit Modalities Test (SDMT ) (oral):   Subjects are presented with a page headed by a key 
that pairs the single digits 1 -9 with nine symbols.  They are then shown a row containing only 
symbols and asked to orally report the correct number in the space below each symbol.  After 
completing the first 10 items with guidance, the subject is timed to d etermine how many 
responses can be made in 90 seconds.  In total, it takes approximately 5 minutes to complete 
the test.
Brief Assessment of Cognition (BAC) App Verbal Memory Test (Immediate Recall):  The subject is 
to read words and is to recall and repea t the words back to the clinician.  It takes approximately 
10 minutes to complete the test.
BAC App Tower of London (BAC App ToL):  The subject is presented a diagram of two images, 
picture A and picture B.  Both pictures have three pegs with colored balls arranged on the pegs.  
The subject is asked to identify how many moves it will take to make the picture A look like 
picture B.  The test takes approximately 10 minutes to complete.
The PRO instruments and clinician -measured scales should be completed at the Week 0 –Baseline visit 
before any discussion of AEs or any review of laboratory findings.  The PRO instruments and clinician 
measured scales should be completed at subsequent visits before any discussion of AEs, any review of 
laboratory findings, and before drug administration.
The following scale must be completed before IP infusion:
Columbia- Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)
The following scales should be completed before IP infusion:
Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS)
Timed 25 -Foot Walk ( T25FW)
9-Hole Peg Test in the dominant hand (9HPT -D)
9HPT in the non -dominant hand (9HPT -ND)
The following scales may be completed during IP infusion:
MS Impact Scale (MSIS -29)
Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS- 5)
Multiple Sclerosis Individualized Outcome Assessment (MSIOA)
Low Contrast Visual Acuity (LCVA) –to be performed in a windowless room and using light box
The following scales may be completed at any time except during IP infusion:
All cognition scales
Page 73 of 103 
p. 32 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
Due to the COVID -19 pandemic, subject visits may be conducted via phone.  PROs eligible for completion 
by interview at such visits are the C- SSRS, MSIS -29, and MFIS -5.  In this situation, sites will read the PRO 
questions and respon se options to the subject and record the subject's responses.  The date and time of 
PRO data collection should be recorded along with who collected the information.  Once the subject is 
able to attend onsite visits, the highest priority for completing miss ed assessments from the previous 
visit is the EDSS, 9HPT, and T25FW and then, if time permits, any of the exploratory outcome measures. 
C-SSRS:  Preferred method is to collect data using direct entry into the iPad provided by VeraSci. 
Paper assessment ca n be utilized as a backup plan in event the tablet is not available at the time 
of the assessment.
MSIS -29 and MFIS -5:  Assessments will be collected using paper assessment forms provided by 
VeraSci for assessments that are administered over the telephone.
Page 74 of 103 
p. 33 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Diagnostic Tools 
and ScalesApprox. 
Duration 
(min.)Patient 
Reported 
Outcome 
(PRO) Or 
Clinician 
Reported 
Outcome 
(ClinRO) ScreeningWeek 0, 
BaselineWeeks 
4, 8Week 
12Weeks 
16, 20Week 
24Weeks 
28, 32Week 
36Weeks 
40, 44, 
48Week 52 
Completion/ 
Premature 
DiscontinuationFollow-
up 
Weeks 
64, 76
EDSS+ (Expanded 
Disability Status 
Scale (EDSS), 
Timed 25 Foot 
Walk (T25FW), 
9-Hole Peg Test 
(9HPT -Dominant 
Hand & 9HP Non -
Dominant Hand)30 -45 ClinRO X X X X X X
MS Impact Scale 
(MSIS -29), 
version 25 - 8 PRO X X X X X
MS Fatigue 
Impact Scale -5 
(MFIS -5)2 - 3 PRO X X X X X
MS Individualized 
Outcome 
Assessment 
(MSIOA)10 -20 ClinRO X X X
Low Contrast 
Visual Acuity 
(LCVA)5 ClinRO X X X X X
Page 75 of 103 
p. 35 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.7 Pharmacokinetic Sampling
Collection of Blood Samples for Elezanumab Assay
Blood samples for analysis of elezanumab serum concentrations will be collected before infusion at 
Week 0 -Baseline and Weeks 12, 24, 36, 52, and Early Discontinuation.  PK samples should not be drawn 
from the same arm (or port) in which elezanumab is administered.  Samples will be collected by
venipuncture into appropriately labeled, evacuated serum collection tubes.
Collection of Blood Samples for Elezanumab Antidrug Antibody (ADA) Assay and Elezanumab 
Neutralizing Antibody (nAb) Assay
Blood samples for elezanumab ADA assay and elezanumab nAb assay will be collected before infusion at 
Week 0 –Baseline and Weeks 12, 24, 36, 52, and Early Discontinuation.
Additional information on the disposition, handling, and measurement methods can be found in the 
Covance Laboratory Manual.
Serum concentrations of elezanumab and relative titers of elezanumab ADA will be determined using 
validated methods at or under the supervision of the Bioanalysis Department at AbbVie.  Any additional 
analytes may be analyzed using non -validated methods.  Serum samples coll ected for elezanumab and 
elezanumab ADA analysis may be used for future assay development or validation activities.  
Elezanumab nAb samples may be used for the analysis of neutralizing anti -drug antibodies.
3.8 Biomarker Sampling
Whole blood samples will be co llected for biomarker research (protocol Section 3.6, Biomarker 
Sampling).  Please refer to Section 2for the schedule of biomarker research sample collections.  All 
biomarker samples should be labeled and shipped as outlined in the study -specific Covance Laboratory 
Manual.
3.9 12-Lead Electrocardiogram
A 12 -lead ECG will be performed at the designated study visits as specified in Section 2.  The ECG should 
be performed before blood collection.
An appropriately trained physician at the site ("local reader") will evaluate the ECGs.  In a timely manner 
following the performance of the ECG, the local reader will sign and date all ECG tracings and will 
provide his/her global interpretation as a written comment on the tracing using the following 
categories:
Normal ECG
Abnormal ECG –not clinically si gnificant
Abnormal ECG –clinically significant
Page 77 of 103 
p. 36 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The automatic machine reading (i.e., machine -generated measurements and interpretation that are 
automatically printed on the ECG tracing) will not be collected.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
In the event this may not be performed due to study modifications related to the COVID -19 pandemic, 
perform the 12 -lead ECG at the next earliest feasible visit.
3.10 Height, Weight and BMI
Height will be measured at Screening only.  Body weight w ill be measured at scheduled visits as 
specified in Section 2.  The subject will wear lightweight clothing and no shoes during weighing.  BMI 
calcu lations will be done at the Screening Visit to assess Inclusion criterion #3 of the protocol. 
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
In the event this may not be performed due to study modifications related to the COVID -19 pandemic, 
body weight will be measured at the next earliest feasible visit.
3.11 Vital Signs
Vital sign determinations of systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, and body temperature will 
be obtained at visits as specified in Section 2.  Blood pressure and pulse rate should be measured and 
documented after the subject has been sitting for at least 3 minutes both before infusion and at the end 
of infusion.  Repeat vital sign determinations should be taken from the same extremity as initial 
determination.
Following infusion, if the blood pressure is elevated above 160 mmHg systolic (and 20 mmHg over pre -
infusion value) OR 105 diastolic (and 15 mmHg over pre -infusion value), then the heart rate and blood 
pressure measurement should be repeated.  If the blood pressure remains elevated above these 
thresholds, the investigator should repeat the measurement after one hour.  If the elevation persists, 
the investig ator should further assess and manage the subject according to standard of care.  If the 
subject is symptomatic (e.g., chest pain, headache, neurologic symptoms, visual disturbances, 
perturbations in other vital signs) or has cardiovascular comorbidities o f concern, an ECG, additional 
cardiac monitoring, and treatment with anti -hypertensive agents at the site or emergency care setting 
should be considered.  If a subject leaves the site with a blood pressure exceeding the above thresholds, 
a follow -up phone call from the site to the subject approximately 12 hours later is recommended and 
the subject should return for an unscheduled follow -up visit approximately 48 hours later with blood 
pressure and heart rate documented by the site.  While not anticipated, s ustained blood pressure 
elevations beyond the thresholds described above should be assessed and managed by the investigator 
or the subject's physician.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
In the event this may not be performed due t o study modifications related to the COVID -19 pandemic, 
vital signs will be measured at the next earliest feasible visit.
Page 78 of 103 
p. 37 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.12 Physical Examination
A complete physical examination will be performed at the designated study visits as specified in 
Section 2.  Height and body weight will be measured at Screening in order to calculate body mass index 
(BMI).  Body weight will also be measured at Week 0 – Baseline and at each treatment visit or upon 
subject discontinuation.  The subject will wear lightweight clothing and not wear shoes when taking 
height and weight at Screening and when taking weight at subsequent visits.  The physical examination 
performed on We ek 0 –Baseline will serve as the baseline physical examination for the entire study.  
Any significant physical examination findings after the first dose will be recorded as AEs.  All findings, 
whether related to an AE or part of each subject's medical his tory, will be captured on the appropriate 
eCRF page.
At any time, a symptom -directed physical examination can be performed as deemed necessary by the 
investigator.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
In the event this may not be per formed due to study modifications related to the COVID -19 pandemic, 
physical examination will be performed at the next earliest feasible visit.
3.13 Neurological Examination
A neurological examination will be performed at the designated study visits as specifi ed in Section 2.  A 
symptom -directed neurological examination will be performed when necessary.  Portions of the 
neurologic exam that are required to complete the EDSS will be performed at visits where the EDSS is 
calculated.  The neurological examination performed at Week 0 -Baseline will serve as the Baseline for 
clinical assessment.  Symptoms identified during screening will not be recorded as ad verse events, 
however, new symptoms or current symptoms that change in severity or frequency after the first 
infusion of study drug will be recorded as adverse events.
The neurological examination will assess:
Mental status – assessment of orientation, speech, and memory.
Cranial nerves –assessment of cranial nerves II -XII.
Motor system –assessment of tone and strength, including assessment for tremor.
Sensory system –assessment of light touch, temperature and distal proprioception
Reflexes –assessment of deep tendon reflexes and plantar responses (Babinski sign)
Coordination –assessment of upper and lower extremities
Gait –gait, including tandem
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
In the ev ent this may not be performed due to study modifications related to the COVID -19 pandemic, 
neurological examination will be performed at the next earliest feasible visit.
Page 79 of 103 
p. 38 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.14 Actigraphy
A wearable sensor will be used (when allowed per local regulatory guideli nes) to enable data capture on 
actigraphy (activity, rest cycles) and daily step count.  If regulatory approval in a participating country 
has not been received by the manufacturer, actigraphy data monitoring will not be done in that country.  
The actigrap hy assessment will use BioStamp nPoint, which is a wireless remote monitoring platform 
intended for use by healthcare professionals and researchers for the continuous collection of 
physiological data in healthcare and home settings.  BioStamp nPoint is des igned to capture objective, 
real-world data from study subjects participating in clinical or academic studies and may be used 
wherever collection of relevant data is needed.  BioStamp nPoint centers on body -worn BioStamp 
Sensors that can be worn for up to 24 hours at a time. 
When BioStamp nPoint is used in the home or outside of the clinic ("Remote") setting, study subjects 
interact with the system through a Mobile Phone Application called the "Link App."  The recharging and 
data transmission hub ("Link Hu b") is used to recharge the sensors and synchronize data from the 
Sensors.  The system is also capable of surface electromyography (sEMG) and monitoring limb and body 
movements during daily living and sleep.  Training will be provided to site staff with in structions for 
subject use.  Refer to Section 2for the required administration times. 
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
In the event this may not be performed due to study modifications related to the COVID -19 pandemic, 
actigraphy data will be captured at the next earliest feasible visit.
3.15 Assignment of Subject Numbers and Use of Interactive Response 
Technology (IRT)
Cont act information and user guidelines for IRT use will be provided to each site.
At the Screening visit, all subjects will be assigned a unique subject number through the use of the IRT 
system.  
IRT has adopted the following numbering convention:
1stdigit -Lead 1
2nd, 3rd, and 4thdigits –3 digit site # 100 –199 (sequence for Canada begins with 200)
5thand 6thdigits –sequential subject number
For subjects who do not meet the study selection criteria, the site personnel must update the IRT 
system and identify the subject as a screen failure.
Subjects who are enrolled will retain their subject number assigned at the Screening visit throughout the 
study.  
Upon receipt of study drug, the site unblinded pharmacist will acknowledge receipt in the IRT system.
Page 80 of 103 
p. 39 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Eligible subjects will be randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to elezanumab or elezanumab  or 
placebo through the IRT.  The IRT system will assign the kit number(s) to be used at each visit for dose 
preparation for a given subject in accordance with the subject's assigned randomized treatment.
3.16 Clinical Laboratory Tests
Blood samples will be collected before study drug administration.  The baseline laboratory test results 
for clinical assessment for a particular test will be defined as the las t measurement before the initial 
dose of study drug.  Laboratory re-tests during Screening are allowed if, in the investigator's opinion, the 
initial result potentially resulted from test variability or was a non -clinically significant perturbation that 
has since resolved.
Clinical Laboratory Tests
Hematology Clinical Chemistry Other Tests
Hematocrit
Hemoglobin
Red blood cell (RBC) count
White blood cell (WBC) count
Neutrophils
Bands 
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Basophils
Eosinophils
Platelet count (estimate no t
acceptable)
Activated partial thromboplastin 
time (aPTT)Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Creatinine
Creatine phosphokinase (CPK)
Total bilirubin
Albumin
Alanine transaminase (SGPT/ALT) 
Aspartate transaminase (SGOT/AST)
Alkaline phosphatase
Sodium
Potassium
Calcium
Inorganic phosphorus
Uric acid
Cholesterol
Total protein
Glucose
Triglycerides
Bicarbonate/CO 2
ChlorideHuman immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV)
Hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg )
Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
Serum pregnancy test
Serum PK
Serum PD
Serum AD A
DNA/RNA pharmacogenetics 
Urinalysis
Specific gravity
Ketones
pH
Leukocytes
Nitrite
Protein
Blood
Glucose
Urine pregnancy test
Microscopic exam
Covance, a certified central laboratory, will be utilized to process and provide results for the clinical 
laboratory tests.  Laboratory reference ranges will be obtained before the initiation of the study.
Instructions regarding the collection, processing, and shipping of these samples will be provided by the 
central laboratory and sent to the followi ng certified laboratory address:
Page 81 of 103 

p. 40 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Covance Central Laboratories Services, Inc.
8211 SciCor Drive
Indianapolis, IN 46214 -2985
All laboratory abnormalities that occur during the study must be evaluated by the investigator to 
determine if they indicate a new di sease process, an exacerbation or worsening of an existing condition, 
or require further action to be taken, and therefore, may need to be reported as AEs.  Accordingly, for 
any values outside of the reference range, the investigator will indicate on the r eport if the result is 
clinically significant (CS) or not clinically significant (NCS).  If a laboratory abnormality meets criteria for a 
potentially clinically significant (PCS) laboratory value, as defined in Appendix B,the investigator must 
either report an associated AE or document in source the reason(s) the finding was not considered an 
AE. 
Any laboratory value that remains abnormal at Completion/Early Discontinuation and was judged to be 
CS, will be followed according to accepted medical standards until resolution of the abnormality.
Pregnancy Tests (Serum and Urine)
A pregnant or breastfeeding female will not be eligible for participat ion or continuation in this study.
Pregnancy testing should not be performed for postmenopausal females.  Determination of 
postmenopausal status is made during screening based on the subject's history.  
A quantitative serum pregnancy test will be performed at Screening and a urine pregnancy test will be 
performed at the Week 0 –Baseline visit for all female of childbearing potential subjects.
The serum pregnancy test will be sent to and performed by the central laboratory.  If the serum 
pregnancy test is positive, the subject is considered a screen failure.  If the serum pregnancy test is 
borderline, it should be repeated ≥ 3 days later to determine subject eligibility.
If the repeat serum pregnancy test is:
Positive, the subject is considered a screen fai lure;
Negative, the subject can be enrolled into the trial;
Borderline > 3 days later, this will be considered documentation of continued lack of a positive 
result and the subject can be enrolled into the study (unless prohibited per local requirements) 
inthe absence of clinical suspicion of pregnancy and other pathological causes of borderline 
results.
Additional urine pregnancy tests will be performed at visits indicated in the Activity Schedule.  The 
results of the monthly at home pregnancy tests must be communicated to the site.  More frequent 
pregnancy tests can be performed throughout the study at the investigator's discretion or if required 
per local/country requirements.
If the baseline urine pregnancy test is negative, then dosing with study drug may begin.
If the baseline or post -baseline urine pregnancy test is positive, dosing with study drug must be 
withheld and a serum pregnancy test is required (as stated above).
Page 82 of 103 
p. 41 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Urinalysis
Urinalysis will be completed by the central laboratory at all visits that state "Central Laboratory Tests" 
per Appendix D, Activity Schedule, in the protocol.  Specified abnormal macroscopic urinalyses defined 
as leukocytes, nitrite, protein, ketones, or blood greater than negative, or glucose greater than normal 
will be f ollowed up with a microscopic analysis at the central laboratory.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
If travel restrictions or other changes in local regulations in light of the COVID -19 pandemic prevent the 
subject from having blo od drawn for laboratory testing at the study site, if possible, arrange for subjects 
to have laboratory work done at a local laboratory, hospital, or other facility.  Local laboratory results 
should be obtained along with reference ranges and kept within t he subjects 'source documentation.  
Local laboratory results should be reviewed by the investigator as soon as possible.
3.17 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
Preparation for the MRI exam before the subject's arrival is critical in order to ensure that all scans can 
be acquired within the allotted time frame and for accommodation of any unforeseen delays.  MRI 
scanner must have a magnetic field strength of 1.5 Tesla or 3 Tesla.  3 Tesla scanners are preferred so 
these should be used whenever both field strengths are available.  The total scan time, not including 
subject position, is estimated to take approximately 50 minutes depending on the type of scanner.  The 
imaging facility is responsible for the MRI safety of subjects who are scanned at the imaging fac ilities, all 
procedures and guidelines for safety consideration should be followed.  A MRI safety questionnaire, if 
part of the standard of care at the investigative site, should be administered to ensure that the subject 
does not have any of the MRI contr aindications.
For imaging session involving gadolinium contrast agent administration, an intravenous catheter for 
gadolinium contrast agent infusion will be inserted according to standard clinical practice to all subjects.  
The subjects will be positioned supine on MRI bed and their head will be positioned within a head coil 
with appropriate foam padding to minimize movement during the scan and to standardize the 
orientation of the head.  The subjects will then be positioned within the MRI scanner for imagi ng.  Scans 
that are of poor quality (e.g., due to head motion during the scan, inadequate coverage of the brain, 
improper positioning of the head, use of incorrect scan or geometry parameters, or noisy image) as 
determined by the MRI technologist, reviewin g radiologist or sponsor, will be repeated at earliest time 
possible and within 15 days of the protocol -required time point. 
Following completion of the MRI scan, subjects will be transported from the imaging center back to the 
study site, if applicable. Sedation is not recommended but is allowed.  Subjects who might need 
sedation should discuss this with the principal investigator before the imaging procedure.  Sites are to 
record any sedation medication on the Concomitant Medications eCRF.  The MRI tech nician is 
responsible for performing brain MRI scans at all protocol -required time points. 
During the course of the study, MRI scans will be performed at three time points:  at Screening (Baseline 
MRI), Week 24 and Week 52/Early Discontinuation.  The screening MRI will be evaluated by the local 
radiologist and the radiologist's report reviewed by the investigator before Dose 1 at Week 0 -Baseline 
visit to determine subject's eligibility.  For the subjects enrolled in the study, the Screening MRI will 
Page 83 of 103 
p. 42 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.serve as the Baseline MRI for assessment of MRI outcome measures.  The time window for MRI is 
± 7days.  MRI scans from all protocol -required time points will be evaluated by a local radiologist, and 
the local radiologist's reports will be reviewed by the site i nvestigator for disease activity.  Sites should 
use the same local radiologist to evaluate all the MRI collected through the entire duration of the study 
to the extent possible. 
The MRI scans will include all or a subset of the following parameters:
3D T1 weighted
T2 FLAIR
MTR
PD/T2
T1 post Gadolinium
DTI
Spine STIR
For each study site, the MRI scanner, associated equipment and imaging parameters may not be 
changed during the length of the study without prior sponsor approval.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Ac ceptable Protocol Modifications
MRI assessments may be collected up to 12 weeks after the projected visit for the missed time points at 
Weeks 24 and 52 with the sponsor's consent due to reasons related to the COVID -19 pandemic.  
However, all MRI assessment s projected to be obtained on or before mid- November 2020 must be 
completed by the end of November 2020.
To accommodate scheduling of the vast volume of projected Week 52 MRIs in December 2020, at the 
discretion of the sponsor, sites may schedule Week 52 M RIs up to –28 days of their projected Week 52 
visit.
3.18 Dispense Study Drug
The unblinded pharmacist or qualified designee, under direct supervision of the unblinded pharmacist, 
will prepare study drug for IV administration.  The unblinded pharmacist or qual ified designee will 
dispense the blinded study solution to the clinic staff for IV administration to subjects beginning at the 
Week 0 –Baseline visit after all other Week 0 –Baseline procedures are completed.  
Each site will be responsible for maintaining drug accountability records including product description, 
manufacturer, and lot numbers for all non- investigational products dispensed by the site.  
Further information about study drug is in protocol Section 5.7.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modifications
In the event that study drug is not able to be administered due to study modifications related to the 
COVID -19 pandemic, bring the subject in as soon as possible for their missed infusion.  Utilize the 
Page 84 of 103 
p. 43 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.allowable visit windows to shif t the subject into their predicted visit schedule.  There needs to be a 
minimum of 14 days between infusions.
3.19 Subject Withdrawal from Study
All attempts must be made to determine the primary reason for discontinuation of study drug or study 
participation .  The information will be recorded on the appropriate eCRF page.  Following 
discontinuation of study drug, the subject will be treated in accordance with the investigator's best 
clinical judgment.
Each subject has the right to withdraw from the study at a ny time.  In addition, the investigator may 
discontinue a subject from the study at any time if the investigator considers it necessary for any reason, 
including the occurrence of an adverse event or noncompliance with the protocol.
Severe allergic reactions or other adverse events that require the immediate interruption of elezanumab 
treatment will be taken into consideration by the AbbVie TA MD for permanent discontinuation from 
further treatment and initiation of appropriate medica l therapy and follow -up.
Any treatment -emergent, clinically significant, symptomatic neurological abnormalities and treatment -
emergent MRI findings will be reported to the AbbVie TA MD and subjects will be considered for 
discontinuation from treatment if c linically indicated.
Subjects at risk of suicide as indicated by answering yes to question 4 or 5 on the C -SSRS and/or 
determined by the investigator to be at risk of suicide, should be promptly referred for appropriate 
follow -up care.  Subjects determined to be at ongoing risk of suicide should be discontinued from study 
participation.
If a subject has a positive drug screen, including for amphetamines, cannabis, opioids, and 
benzodiazepines, the subject will be discontinued from study participation unless allowed to be taken in 
accordance with a physician's prescription.   
If for any reason the subject becomes unable to continue treatment with elezanumab (other than 
missed doses due to COVID -19 pandemic modification), undergo protocol required procedures, or 
otherwise continue to participate in the study, discontinuation should be discussed with the AbbVie TA 
MD.
In the event that a subject withdraws or undergoes early discontinuation from the study, the primary 
reason for discontinuation and any other rea son(s) for the discontinuation from the study will be 
recorded and the Early Discontinuation assessment will be performed as per Section 2and proto col 
Appendix D, Activity Schedule.  The Early Discontinuation visit should be performed as soon as possible, 
preferably within 2 weeks, after discontinuation from the study.  Additional blood samples for drug 
measurement may be collected at the time of discontinuation from subjects who are discontinued due 
to adverse events; the clock time, time in relation to dose and date the sample was taken will be 
recorded.
If a subject is discontinued from the study with an ongoing adverse event or an unresolved labor atory 
result that is significantly outside of the reference range, the investigator will attempt to provide follow -
up until a satisfactory clinical resolution of the laboratory result or adverse event is achieved.
Page 85 of 103 
p. 45 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.A new or worsening neurological sympt om or set of symptoms
Occurring in the absence of fever
Lasting for ≥ 24 hours
Preceded by at least 30 days of clinical stability or improvement
Documentation and follow -up of each suspected relapse will be conducted throughout the study period 
with sched uled and unscheduled neurological assessments.  Subjects will be instructed to inform the 
study site within 48 hours of the onset of relapse symptoms.  When a subject calls to report a suspected 
relapse, the study site personnel will discuss the symptoms w ith the subject and determine whether a 
neurological assessment is indicated.
If so, an unscheduled visit to the study site should be arranged for the subject as quickly as possible, 
preferably within no more than seven (7) days of onset of relapse symptom s.  During each suspected 
relapse, the blinded physician investigator will determine the nature of the relapse and conduct a full 
neurological assessment before reviewing previous neurological assessments.  After completing the 
neurological assessment and the source document, the blinded physician investigator may then discuss 
the new neurological symptoms with the subject.  The study nurse/coordinator may then provide the 
previous neurological examination document to the blinded physician investigator to h elp determine if a 
relapse has occurred and to assess its severity (based on revision of the current and previous 
neurological examinations and discussion with the subject about activities of daily living).
The blinded physician investigator will determine whether a relapse has occurred or not, and whether it 
will count as a qualifying relapse as defined above.
Subjects who experience a suspected MS relapse may be treated with intravenous (IV) 
methylprednisolone  for 1 to 5 consecutive days, or a nother corticosteroid or 
corticosteroid precursor regimen so long as consistent with good neurological practice .  Subjects not 
currently receiving maintenance immunomodulators, must be counseled that immunomodulators have 
been demonstrated to significantly decrease relapse frequency.  Site staff are to ensure eCRFs are 
completed capturing rescue concomitant medication and documenting relapse on the AE eCRF.
They will subsequently be handled as follows:
Subjects may elect to receive no IV methylprednisolone or other corticosteroids /corticosteroid 
precursor as described above and not initiate maintenance immunosuppressive therapy.  As 
stated above, they must be counseled that approved MS immunomodulators have been 
demonstrated to significantly decrease flare f requency in MS subjects.  They will continue to 
receive elezanumab or placebo.
Subjects may receive IV methylprednisolone  for 1 to 5 consecutive days (or other 
corticosteroids /corticosteroid precursor according to good neurological practice) but elect not 
to begin maintenance immunosuppressive therapy.  They must be counseled that approved MS 
immunomodulators have been demonstrated to significantly decrease flare frequency in MS 
subjects.  They will continue to receive elezanumab or placebo.
Subjects may begin receiving an immunomodulator that is recommended by their treating 
physician and is considered to provide the best balance of benefit versus risk.  If the prescribed 
Page 87 of 103 

p. 46 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.medication is one that is allowed in the protocol's Inclusion Criterion #1 0, the subject can 
continue in the trial.  If another immunomodulator is prescribed, they will not receive further 
infusions and should be discontinued from the study.
In the event of a clinical MS relapse, a supplemental AEeCRF form should be completed (See 
Appendix C, Relapse Questionnaire). 
Adverse Events of Special Interest (AESI)
Infusion Reactions
The investigator or qualified designee will evaluate the infusion site area from Week 0 –Baseline 
through the end of the study.  Any observation of infusion site reaction after the start of infusion must 
be recorded as an adverse event (AE).  
Further information on monitoring of elezanumab infusio n reactions is presented in Appendix D.
Collection of Data Regarding Known Complications of the Disease Under Study
Natural progression of MS (including new or wors ening neurological symptoms and signs) is expected in 
the subjects.  Disease progression will be assessed at pre -determined intervals throughout the 
treatment period by standardized criteria (such as the EDSS+, MSIS -29 version 2, MFIS, MSIOA) and 
recorded within the electronic Clinical Outcome Assessments (eCOA) for risk/benefit determinations.  
Therefore, "disease progression" or other similar verbatim terms related to disease status SHOULD NOT 
be recorded on the AE case report form (CRF) pages.  Falls wil l not be recorded as AEs unless they lead 
to other injury or represent a change in frequency or character from pre- randomization falls.
Similarly, the slow progression of pre -existing disease -related signs and symptoms clearly associated 
with the disease d uring the treatment period will not be reported as AEs unless these signs and 
symptoms are judged by the investigator to have become unusually severe or accelerated, or if the 
investigator suspects the deterioration of disease -related signs and symptoms to be potentially related 
to the investigational drug.  If there is any uncertainty about the worsening of an AE being due solely to 
the disease under the treatment protocol, it should be reported as an AE or SAE as appropriate.
Discontinuation from this tre atment protocol because of progression or deterioration of the disease 
should be recorded on the Study Completion eCRF page as discontinuation due to "disease progression" 
and NOT as discontinuation due to an AE.
4.2 Reporting Adverse Events and Intercurrent I llnesses
In the event of an SAE, whether associated with study drug or not, the investigator will notify Clinical 
Pharmacovigilance within 24 hours after the site becomes aware of the SAE by entering the SAE data 
into the electronic data capture (EDC) system.  SAEs that occur before the site having access to the 
RAVE® system, or if RAVE is not operable, should be documented on the SAE non -CRF forms and 
emailed (preferred route) or faxed to Clinical Pharmacovigilance within 24 hours after the site becomes 
aware of the SAE.
Page 88 of 103 
p. 48 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.COVID -19 infections should be captured as adverse events.  If the event meets the criteria for a serious 
adverse event (SAE), then follow the SAE reporting directions per the protocol and above.  The following 
COVID -19-related supplemental eCRFs should be completed (for both serious and nonserious events):
COVID -19 Supplemental Signs/Symptoms
COVID -19 Status Form
If a subject has a confirmed or suspected COVID -19 infection and study drug was interrupted, the 
investigator should contact the sponsor emergency medical contact listed above before reintroducing 
study drug.
5COUNTRY- SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
5.1 Sample Retention Requirements
AbbVie (or people or companies working with AbbVie) will store the biomarker samples and data in a 
secure storage space with adequate measures to protect confidentiality.  The samples may be retained 
while research on elezanumab (or drugs of this class) or MS and related conditions continues, but for no 
longer than 20 years after study completion or according to local requirements.
5.2 SUSAR Reporting
AbbVie will be responsible for Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) reporting for 
the Investi gational Medicinal Product (IMP) in accordance with global and local guidelines and 
Appendix Aof the Investigator Brochure will serve as the Reference Safety Information (RSI).  The RSI in 
effect at the start of a DSUR reporting period serves as the RSI during the reporting period.  For follow -
up reports, the RSI in place at the time of occurrence of the 'suspected' Serious Adverse Reaction will be 
used to assess expectedness.
5.3 Treatment After End of Study
For active subjects randomized to elezanumab or placebo, subjects will continue on study treatment 
throughout the study for a period of up to 52 weeks or until premature discontinuation of study drug.  
At the subject's last study visit, the investigator will discuss the appropriate subsequent treatment with 
the subject.  AbbVie will not provide drug or any other therapy once the subject's participa tion is 
concluded.
Page 90 of 103 
p. 49 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A.STUDY-SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
9HPT 9-hole peg test
ADA Antidrug antibody
ADLs Activities of daily living
AE Adverse event
AESI Adverse event of special interest
aPTT Activated partial thromboplastin time
ALT Alanine aminotransferase
AST Aspartate aminotransferase
BAC Brief Assessment of Cognition
BMI Body mass index
BUN Blood urea nitrogen
ClinRo Clinician reported outcome
COVID -19 Coronavirus Disease -2019
CPK Creatine phosphokinase
CRF Case report form
CS Clinically significant
C-SSRS Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale
D/C Discontinuation
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid
ECG Electrocardiogram
eCOA Electronic Clinical Outcome Assessments
eCRF Electronic case report form
EDC Electronic data capture
EDSS Expanded Disability Status Scale
EDSS + Expanded Disability Status Scale Plus (EDSS +)
HBsAg Hepatitis B surface antigen
HCV Hepatitis C virus
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
IEC Independent ethics committee
IMP Investigational medical product
INR International normalized ratio
Page 91 of 103 
p. 50 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.IRB Institutional review board
IRT Interactive response technology
IV Intravenous
LCVA Low Contrast Visual Acuity
LLN Lower limit of normal
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MFIS-5 Modified Fatigue Impact Scale
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging
MS Multiple sclerosis
MSIOA Multiple Sclerosis Individualized Outcome Assessment
MSIS- 29 Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale
nAb Elezanumab neutralizing antibody
NCS Not clinically significant
PCS Potentially clinically significant
PK Pharmacokinetic(s)
PRO Patient reported outcome
PT Preferred term
RBC Red blood cells
RNA Ribonucleic acid
RSI Reference safety information
SAE Serious adverse event
SDMT Symbol Digit Modalities Test
sEMG Surface electromyography
SOC System organ class
SUSAR Suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction
TA MD Therapeutic Area Medical Doctor
T25FW Timed 25 Foot Walk
ULN Upper limit of normal
WBC White blood cell
Page 92 of 103 
p. 51 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B. CRITERIA FOR POTENTIALLY CLINICALLY 
SIGNIFICANT (PCS) VA LUES FOR ELEZANUMAB 
STUDIES
Page 93 of 103 
p. 57 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Criteria for Potentially Clinically Significant (PCS) Vital Sign Values for Elezanumab Studies
Vital Signs Variables Criterion Potentially Clinically Significant (PCS) Value
Systolic blood pressure (mm Hg) Low ≤ 90 mm Hg and decrease ≥ 20 mm Hg from Baseline
High ≥ 180 mm Hg and increase ≥ 20 mm Hg from Baseline
Diastolic blood pressure (mm Hg) Low ≤ 50 mm Hg and decrease ≥ 15 mm Hg from Baseline
High ≥ 105 mm Hg and increase ≥ 15 mm Hg from Baseline
Heart rate (bpm) Low ≤ 50 bpm and decrease ≥ 15 bpm from Baseline
High ≥ 120 bpm and increase ≥ 15 bpm from Baseline
Temperature High ≥ 38.3°C and ≥ 1.1°C above baseline value
Page 99 of 103 
p. 58 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C.MS RELAPSE QUESTIONN AIRE 
1.Adverse Event Serial number: _
2.Provide Individual Symptom(s) (New or increasing MS symptoms from baseline):
3.Diagnosis made by:   □ Symptoms □ MRI □ Both MRI and Symptoms
4.Change in Neurological Examination from baseline consistent with MS relapse?   □ Yes □ No
5.Have the symptoms lasted at least 24 hours?   □ Yes □ No
6.Have the symptoms occurred in the absence of fever?   □ Yes □ No
7.Has it been more than 30 days since the prior relapse?   □ Yes □ No
8.Is there an alternative etiology for symptoms beside MS Relapse? □ Yes □ No
9.Narrative for course of event for symptom(s) recorded above.  Include details of neurological 
findings, treatment, and response as applicable.  Treatment medications should also be entered 
into the Concomitant Medication eCRF.
10.Date Review Completed by MS Relapse Adjudication Committee (RAC) __________ 
11.RAC panel confirmed MS Relapse?  □Yes □ No
Page 100 of 103 
p. 59 of 59
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M18- 918 Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX D.CRITERIA FOR MONITOR ING ELEZANUMAB 
INFUSION REACTIONS
Infusion Reactions
Potential infusion reactions have been observed in the Phase 1b Study M14 -173, though no reactions 
were consistent with anaphylaxis or required medical intervention.  Subje cts will be closely monitored 
for treatment -related adverse events, especially infusion reactions during all study drug infusions. 
Treatment of Infusion Reactions
Appropriate medical therapy including epinephrine, corticosteroids, intravenous antihistamin es, 
bronchodilators, and oxygen should be available for use in the treatment of such reactions.  Subjects 
should be carefully observed until the complete resolution of all signs and symptoms.  In the event of a 
suspected infusion/anaphylactic reaction, in addition to the standard AE and Concomitant Medication 
eCRFs, a supplemental AESI eCRF should also be completed by site staff.
Reflexive Testing Following Infusion Reactions
If any infusion or suspected allergic -type reaction is observed, a blood draw is r equired within 2 hours 
after the first sign of a reaction for the following laboratory tests:
C3a, C5 complement functional assay, IgE level, and serum tryptase level.
Anaphylactic Infusion Reactions 
In the event of an anaphylactic reaction, blood samples will be drawn after the onset of the reaction for:  
histamine and tryptase.  A blood sample for serum anti -drug antibody (ADA) assessment will also be 
collected within 2 hours of onset of anaphylactic reaction along with 1 hour blood samples for C3a, C5 
complement functional assay, IgE level, and serum tryptase level.  Separate instructions for the 
collection, handling, storage and shipping of these lab samples will be provided in the Covance 
Laborator y Manual. 
Moderate Infusion Reactions 
In situations where an infusion reaction occurs before the end of infusion and leads to clinically 
significant vital signs, skin or persistent gastrointestinal symptoms, treatment should be immediately 
interrupted.  Once symptoms have resolved, re -initiating treatment is allowed with an infusion over 
180 minutes.  If infusion reactions persist despite the use of extended infusion times and medication, 
sites should contact the Therapeutic Area Medical Director regardin g continued subject eligibility. 
In the event of a suspected infusion/anaphylactic reaction, in addition to the standard AE eCRF, a 
supplemental AESI eCRF should also be completed by the site.
Page 101 of 103 