 
VALCHLOR  Therapy in C onjunction with Triamcinolone 0.1% Ointment for the T reatment 
of Conta ct Dermatitis in Subjects  with E arly Stage Cutaneous T -cell Lymphoma   
(Mechlorethamine Induced Dermatitis Avoidance Study (MIDAS) ) 
Protocol # RSLMG-17.10 
 
Brian Poligone, M.D. Ph.D.  
V. July 11th , 2017  
 
 
 
1. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY AND BACKGROUND  
 
1.1. Purpose of the study  
 
To study the efficacy of Triamcinolone in reducing the adverse effects of Valchlor  
therapy , particularly contact dermatitis in subjects  with early stage Mycosis Fungoides.  
 
1.2. Background  
 
Mechlorethamine hydrochloride, commonly known as nitrogen mustard, is an 
alkylating agent that induces apoptosis in malignant T -cells and possibly disrupts 
interactions between keratinocyte -Langerhan cell -T-cell interactions  (1).  This agent 
was first used in the  late 1950’s  as a topical therapy for the treatment of Mycosis 
Fungoides (MF)  (2,3).  Initially, its use involved dissolving lyophilized mechlorethamine 
in water and painting it onto the skin  (4). However, this use was limited due to high 
rates (67%) of cutaneous hypersensitivity which led to its compounding into an 
ointment  (5). Although, this resulted in lower and tolerable rates of delayed type 
cutaneous hypersensitivity (10%) , its shelf life remained low . Ointment based 
mechlorethamine only lasted about a week before it started decomposing  (6). 
Consequently, mechlorethamine started being prepared in a quick -drying, greaseless 
gel ( Valchlor ) composed of 0.016% w/w mechlorethamine, a free radical inhibitor 
(butylated hydroxytoluene) and diethylene glycol monoethyl ether . This formulation  
increased permeability into and solubility within the top layer of the skin (stratum 
corneum)  making it easier to apply. It also shortens the time of r esponse to treatment 
about 16 weeks earlier than when the ointment is used  (7). Valchlor  was approved in 
2013 for the treatment of IA and IB MF, but almost a quarter of the subjects enrolled in 
the study (22%) disc ontinued treatment due to adverse reactions  (7).  
The most common adverse reactions were associated with the skin o r subcutaneous 
tissue disorders. Contact dermatitis was seen in 56% of the subjects treated with 
Valchlor  and 23% of these were moderately severe to severe. Other adverse reactions 
included pruritus (20%), bacterial skin infections (11%), skin ulceration or blistering 
(6%), or skin hypopigmentation (5%). Together, these adverse events encompass 
98% of all adverse events. Despite this, mechlorethamine i s usually recommended as 
Page 1 of 28 
 a primary treatment option for CTCL, as complete responses to topical 
mechlorethamine in early stage MF is associated with a lower risk of disease 
progression  (6,8,9) . Increasing the probability of subjects achieving a response to 
Valchlor  treatment and prevent them from switching therapies could be a possibility if 
skin adverse reactions are managed.  This could be done with the use of topical 
corticosteroids.  
Triamcin olone 0.1% ointment is an anti -inflammatory, anti -pruritic, topical 
corticosteroid with vasoconstrictive actions usually used to treat eczema, dermatitis, 
allergies, and rashes. It’s mechanism of action involves inhibiting the production of 
cytokines that cause inflammation, such as IL -1 (10). In this study, we aim to look at 
the efficacy of Triamcinolone in reducing the adverse effects experienced by MF 
subjects treated with Valchlor , specifically contact dermatitis, pruritus, and skin 
ulceration or blist ering.  
 
2. STUDY DESIGN  
 
2.1. Overview  
 
This is a  two-arm, open -label study that aims to compare the incidence and severity of 
the most common adverse reactions to Valchlor therapy when used with or without  
triamcinolone ointment 0.1% in early stage M F subjects  (Stage IA  and IB) for a period 
of 4 months.   
 
2.2. Rationale for Study  Design  
 
This study  consists of two different therapies adminis tered concurrently to the same 
subject  but on different, discrete, skin lesions.  A minimum of 8  cm2 will be chosen for 
each treatment  arm (Valchlor only or Valchlor and Triamcinolone  ointment 0.1% ). 
Lesions must have similar characteristics (scaliness, erythema, hyper -(hypo -) 
pigmentation, elevation, and total size)  and location , and must be representat ive of the 
disease.  Lesions treated with different treatments should be at least 10  cm away from 
each lesion. Treatment length will con sist of 4 months,  as most of the adverse effects 
experienced in subjects treated with Valchlor  happened within the first 2 weeks of 
treatment and up to 89% of these occurred within the first four months.  
  
Primary Objective:  
 
To determine if Triamcinolone 0.1% ointment significantly reduces the incidence of 
dermatitis on subjects eligible to start Valchlor therapy.   
 
Seco ndary Objective:  
 
To distinguish the nature of contact dermatitis (allergic or irritant) induced by Valchlor 
therapy through skin biopsies, patch testing, and the comparison of  genetic variability 
in all T -cell clones form skin biopsies of subject who develop dermatitis vs baseline.   
 
Exploratory Objective s:  
 
To determine the severity of dermatitis among both treatment arms, if any.  
Page 2 of 28 
  
To if there is any difference in pruritus a nd sleep  disturbance  caused by itch  in lesions  
treated with Valchlor  therapy and Triamcinolone compared to lesions  that are treated 
with Valchlor  only.  
 
To determine rate and severity of ulceration an d skin blistering, and  rate of  skin 
hyper pigmentation i n both treatment groups.  
 
To measure efficacy of Valchlor therapy with Triamcinolone compared to Valchlor in 
subjects with early stage MF.  
 
Primary Endpoint:  
 
Incidence (percentage ) of dermatitis in lesions treated concurrently with Triamcinolone 
0.1% ointment versus those that are not. Dermatitis will be defined as a finding of 
cutaneous inflammatory reaction occurring as a result of treatment. This will be 
assessed as a value of present or not present, and may be confirmed by biopsy of the 
specimen.  
 
Secondary Endpoint:  
 
The presence of allergic vs irritant dermatitis will be characterized through skin 
biopsies sent for pathological review, patch testing, and measuring the genetic 
variability of the T -cell clones through sequencing of the CD3 region of all T -cell clones 
found in skin biopsies collected at timepoints when contact dermatitis develop vs. 
those collected at baseline.  
 
Exploratory endpoints:  
 
SCORAD score differences between lesions  treated with Valchlor  and Triamcinolone 
versus lesions  treated with Valchlor only for a period of 4  months.  
 
To determine if there is  any difference in pruritus  and sleep disturbance caused by itch  
among lesions treated with Valchlor or Valchlor and Triamcinolone , measured  as a 
composite score of pruritus in e ach individual lesion for each treatment arm over a 
period of 4  months.  
 
To determine rate (%)  and severity  of ulceration and skin blistering, and  rate of skin 
hyper pigmentation in both treatment groups  over a period of 4 months .  
 
Efficacy of Valchlor th erapy with Triamcinolone compared to Valchlor over a period of 
4 months using CAILS.  
 
2.3. Rationale for Dosage  
 
Valchlor  and Triamcinolone 0.1% ointment will be administered as described in their 
packaged inserts.  
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 28 
  
3. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RESEARCH POPULATION  
 
3.1. Subject Characteristics  
 
a) Number of Subjects:    
 
Based on statistical analysis performed (Section 13.1), we will need 22 evaluable  
subjects in this study to have a statistically significant difference between both 
treatments. We may recruit up to 28 subject s in this study  to account for retention rate .  
 
b) Gender and Age of Subjects  
 
Males and females of 18 years of age or older will be eligible to participate in this 
study.  
 
c) Racial and Ethnic Origin:    
 
All races and ethnicities will be recruited.  
 
3.2. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
a) Inclusion Criteria:    
 
• Be eligible to receive Valchlor therapy.  
• Be at least of 18 years of age and ability to give informed consent  
• Have stage IA or IB CTCL  
• Subjects  with histologic variants of Mycosis Fungoides such as 
folliculotropic, granulomatous slack skin,  syringotropic MF, or l arge cell 
transformation are eligible.   
• A skin biopsy within the last 60 days before start of treatment . In cases with 
equivocal histological features, the diagnosis may be confirmed with 
clinicopathologic and/or genetic testing consistent with the National 
Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines for Mycosis Fungoides . If 
sufficient tissue is not available to  perform genetic testing, a new biopsy will 
be performed even if the subject  has had a biopsy within 60 days of start of 
treatment.  
• Females of child bearing potential must agree to use two highly effective 
methods of contraception (strongly recommended tha t one of the two forms 
of contraception be non -hormonal such as condom plus spermicide, 
condom plus diaphragm with spermicide, or have a vasectomized partner) 
or use an intrauterine dev ice until 30 days after the last day of drug 
administration . Perimenopausal women must  be amenorrhoeic  for at least 
12 months to be considered of nonchildbearing potential.   
• Males with female partners of child b earing potential must agree to sexual 
abstinence or use two reliable forms of effective contraception 
simultaneously (strongly recommended that one of the two forms should be 
non-hormonal as described above ) during the entire treatment period and 
30 days  after the last dose.  
• Must be able to comply with the study instructions, apply the study 
medication as di rected, and attend all visits.  
Page 4 of 28 
 • Willingness to avoid sun exposure and UVB light in areas to be treated . 
b) Exclusion Criteria:   
 
• Have been treated with topical mechlorethamine within 6 months  in lesions 
followed during this study . 
• Have r eceived any topical therapy directed against MF within 2 weeks of 
start of treatment  in areas intended to be treated in this study.   
• Have received any systemic therapy (oral or injectables) within 3 weeks of 
start of treatment.  
• Not have any intercurrent illness or infection that would interfere with study 
participation  
• Known hypersensitivity to  mechlorethamine or triamcinolone.   
• Breastfeeding, p regnancy , or intention to become pregnant.  
 
 
3.3. Discussion of Subject Population  
 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria are designed for a specific population who can receive 
the drug. While  Valchlor is a topical agent and has not been detected systemically in 
prior studies  when applied topically , fetal harm and malformations  have been repor ted 
for systemic administration of mechlorethamine  (11). Mechlorethamine was 
teratogenic and embryo ‐lethal after a single subcutaneous administration to 
animals.    Therefore , adequate forms of contraception  are described in the eligibility  
criteria and have exclude d pregnancy or those who intend to become pregnant  in this 
study .  
 
Subjects must also have not obtained treatment that could blur the results of the study. 
Therefore, washout periods are essential and an adequate plan to exclude those who 
received potential therapies that could blur results need to be in place.  
 
 
4. SUBJECT IDENTIFICATION, RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT  
 
4.1.  Method of Subject Identification a nd Recruitment  
 
Subjects will be recruited through the site’s clinic , through an princip al investigator 
and/or investigator letter sent to physicians around the area for referrals , online 
advertisement, and flyers . All material that would directly reach to potential subjects 
must be approved by the ethical review board  prior to distribution .  
  
4.2.  Process of Consent  
 
Only individuals who are delegated authority by the PI are authorized to obtain 
consent. The process will be free of coercion and undue influence, and will provide 
enough information and sufficient time to be conducive to rational and thoughtful 
decision m aking by the subject. Subjects will be given  a copy of the  IRB approved  
informed consent at least 24 hours for review of the document, and will be encouraged 
to discuss this study with family and friends.  
 
Subjects will then be  walked through the consent form in a private room, be reminded 
that participation in this study is entirely voluntary , and his/her decision will not affect 
Page 5 of 28 
 the care which he/she is entitled in any way. Subjects can withdraw at any time.  
 
The nature of the study, its purpose,  the pro cedures involved, expectation of duration, 
potential risks and benefits, and any potential discomfort  should be explained . The 
informed consent should be approved by the IRB and should be written in non -
technical language.  
 
The person obtaining consent wi ll assess subject understanding before the consent 
form is signed and dated by the subject  as well as make sure that all the subject’s 
questions have been answered . No study related procedures can be made before 
consent is obtained.  
 
5. METHODS AND STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
The s creening visit will be held 30 days  or less  prior to pre -treatment. From then 
onwards, visits will be held monthly , with unscheduled visits if necessary for up to four 
months.  
 
The following procedures will be done at the following visits:  
 
Screening Visit (30 days or less prior to baseline visit):  
 
• Informed Consent  
• Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
• Measurement of vitals (weight, height, heart rate, blood pressure, and 
respiratory rate).  
• Subjects will be put in to a gown for a CTCL  physical examination  
• Medical history and demographics (DOB, race, sex, ethnicity)  
• Adverse event (AE) evaluation  
• Review of concomitant medications  
• Review of prior CTCL therapies  
• Urine  or Serum  pregnancy test (females  of child bearing potential  only)  
• Identification of potential lesions to be treated  
• Two 3mm or one 6mm skin biops y(-ies) will be performed  if not done within 
60 days of starting treatment for diagnostic and clone testing. Pathology read 
and immunohistochemistry will be performed on the sample. The skin biopsy 
must be taken from lesions that have not been treated topically for at least 
two wee ks. Consequently, skin biopsies may happen at Screening or 
baseline visits including anytime between these visits.  
 
If subject meets enrollment criteria :  
 
Baseline visit (+/ - 3 days):  
 
• CTCL specific p hysical  examination and vitals  
• Photographs ( individual lesions )  
• CAILS  assessment  
• mSWAT  
• VAS 
• SCORAD assessment  
• Physician Global Assessment  
Page 6 of 28 
 • Dispensing of drug and drug log  
• AE assessment  
• Review of concomitant medication s 
• A demo tube may be used to show subjects how to apply the drug at night  
• A body map (as shown in Appendix 2) will be given to the subject  with 
labeling on which treatment (s) goes on what lesions for compliance.  
• Provide written instructions about administration and storage of 
investigational products  
• Urine  or serum  pregnancy t est (if needed ) 
• $50 compensation  
• Skin Biopsy (if necessary)  
 
 
Day 28  visit (+/ - 3 days):  
 
• Physical  examination  specific to study treatment plus vitals  
• Photographs  
• CAILS assessment  
• mSWAT  
• VAS 
• SCORAD assessments  
• Physician Global Assessment  
• Dispensing of drug  
• Drug accountability and compliance  
• AE assessment  
• Review of concomitant medications  
• Skin biopsy ( if needed for contact dermatitis)  
• Urine or serum pregnancy t est (if needed)  
• $50 compensation  
 
Months 2 and 3 (+/- 3 days):  
 
• Physical  examination  specific to study treatment plus vitals  
• Photographs  
• CAILS assessment  
• mSWAT  
• VAS 
• SCORAD assessment  
• Physician Global Assessme nt 
• Dispensing of drug  
• Drug accountability and compliance  
• AE assessment  
• Review of concomitant medications  
• Skin biopsy ( if needed for contact dermatitis)  
• Urine pregnancy te st (if needed ) 
• $50 compensation  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 28 
  
Month 4  (EOT, +/- 3 days):  
 
• Physical  examination  specific to study treatment plus vitals  
• Photographs  
• CAILS assessment  
• VAS 
• mSWAT  
• SCORAD assessment  
• Physician Global Assessment  
• Drug accountability and compliance  
• AE assessment  
• Review of concomitant medications  
• Two 3mm skin biopsies  of Valchlor only treated lesion  (for H&E, and 
Immunoseq ) 
• Two 3mm skin biopsies of Valchlor and TAC lesion (for H&E and 
Immonoseq ) 
• Urine  or serum pregnancy t est (if needed)  
• $50 compensation  
 
Follow -up visit ( Months 5 and 12 +/- 7 days  after last dose ):  
 
• Physical Examination  
• Vitals  
• Photographs  
• CAILS assessment  
• mSWAT  
• VAS 
• SCORAD assessment  
• Physician Global Assessme nt 
• AEs assessment  
• Review of concomitant medications   
• $50 compensation  
• Urine or serum p regnancy test  (if needed)   
 
Unscheduled visits might have any of the procedures mentioned above if PI 
determines them necessary. If clinical progression is noted at any time prior to the 
scheduled assessments for efficacy, CAILS and skin photographs, and any standard 
of care procedure that the PI seems appropriate, should be done at that time to fully 
document disease progression.  If a biopsy is done for contact dermatitis, then some of 
this tissue will be sent for immunosequencing as well.  
 
Patch Testing  
 
If a subject  develops dermatitis  suspected to be due to mec hlorethamine treatment, an 
optional patch testing of the subject  may occur  at any time during the study period .  
Standard patch testing is where a small concentration of mec hlorethamine will be 
placed on the skin for approximately 48 hours.  Clinical follow up occurs both when 
patches are removed from the skin (at appr oximately Day 2, 48 hours+/ - 24 hours) and 
at Day 4, 96 hours  (+/- 24 hours).  General patch testing requires a visit on Days 0 
(patches are placed and initial consultation), Day 2(patches removed and first 
Page 8 of 28 
 evaluation -early response), and Day 4(second eval uation -delayed response).  Patch 
testing to mechlorethamine will be provided at varying concentrations. The subject will 
present for patch testing on a Monday (Day 0), Wednesday (Day 2), and Friday (Day 
4) of one week.  A skin biopsy sample will be collected for immunosequencing.  
 
5.1. Treatment Dosage and Administration  
 
This study consists of two different therapies administered concurrently to the same 
subject but on different, discrete, skin lesions.  
 
A minimum of 8  cm2 will be chosen for each treatment arm. Lesions treated with 
different treatments should be at least 10  cm away from each other.  
 
Lesions must have similar characteristics (scaliness, erythema, 
hyper(hypo)pigmentation, elevation, and total size) as well as  location. Lesions must 
be representative of the disease and not be in face, axillae, or intertriginous groin.  
 
Treatment length will con sist of 4 months,  as most of the adverse effects experienced 
in subjects treated with Valchlor  happened within the first 2 weeks of treatment and up 
to 89% of these occurred within the first four months.  
 
Valchlor  will be applied topically to affected areas at night. It must be applied at least 4 
hours before or 30  minutes after showering or washin g. Treated areas will need to dry 
for 10  minutes after application before covering with clothing.  
 
Triamcinolone will be applied 30  min after taking a shower on a minimum of 8  cm2 per 
treatment arm.  Lesions treated with different treatments should be at least 10  cm away 
from each lesion.  
 
Table 1. Regimen Description  
 
Agent  Premedications;  
Precautions   
Dose   
Route   
Schedule  Cycle 
Length  
Valchlor  Keep 
refrigerated. Use 
immediately after 
removal from 
refrigerator or 
within 30minutes. 
Do not apply to 
face, axillae, or 
groin area  
Wash hands 
thoroughly after 
application.   0.016% w/w 
mechlorethamine 
gel Topical  Every day 
at night  1 
month  
Triamcinolone  Apply on 
completely dry 
skin 30 minutes 
after 
washing/taking a 
shower.  0.1% ointment  Topical  Up to 
three 
times 
daily 
 
Page 9 of 28 
  
A body map will be given to the subject with areas labeled with each treatment 
assigned ; to ensure he/she applies the correct drug on the correct lesion. Subjects 
will be instructed to report to the study staff if a mistake was made when applying 
either Valchlor or Triamcinolone.   
 
Treatment with Valchlor  will be stopped for any grade of skin u lceration, blistering, 
or moderately -severe or severe dermatitis (i.e. marked skin redness with edema).  
 
Treatment limiting AEs will be grade 3 or 4 local dermal irritation s that do not 
resolve to a grade 2 or lower within two weeks off the study drug.  
 
Treatment frequency will be suspended or reduced for a maximum period of 4 
weeks and resume d after irritation improves to a grade 2 or lower. Once AE 
improves, treatment can be restarted at a frequency of once every 3 days. After 
one week, and if dose is t olerated, dose will be increased every other day per week 
and then applied daily if drug is tolerated.  
 
The use of corticosteroids for the treatment of skin irritation in lesions receiving only 
Valchlor is not accepted. Topical emollients or topical  antihistamines are permitted.  
 
Subject s with positive -patch test results (allergic contact dermatitis) associated with 
grade 3 or 4 reactions will be withdrawn from the study.  
 
Triamcinolone will first be applied to select lesions in the morning, once daily and 
used up to three times daily if it helps tolerate any adverse reactions induced by 
Valchlor. Triamcinolone will not be used any more frequently than stated in the 
package insert. Treatment limiting AEs would be the development of striae, miliaria , 
and allergic contact dermatitis.  These scenarios are rare. In the case of striae and 
miliaria, subjects will be dose reduced to three times a week. If an allergic contact 
dermatitis develops, the subjects will be removed from the study.  
 
5.2. Efficacy Assess ments  
 
Evaluation of Skin Disease  
 
Skin Biopsy  
 
If histological diagnosis of CTCL has not been confirmed within 60 days of the Pre -
treatment visit, a biopsy should be done if PI determines necessary. Subjects must 
have appropriate staging to meet study inclusion criteria.  If not enough tissue is left 
over for immunosequencing, an additional biopsy will be required. The skin biopsy 
must be taken from lesions that have not been treated topically for at least two weeks. 
Consequently, skin biopsies may happe n at Screening or baseline visits including 
anytime between these visits.  
 
Subsequent b iopsies to confirm a complete r esponse, transformation of disease, 
disease progression, or skin rash /dermatitis  can be performed at the discretion of the  
princip al investigator and/or investigator .  
 
 
Page 10 of 28 
  
Skin Biopsies for C lone Testing  
 
Skin biopsies will help determine if malignant clones are present before and after 
treatment, and assess how these differ per treatment arm. This will be done in 
collaboration with Adaptive  Biotechnologies  (12).To profile the contact dermatitis, 
immunosequence of contact dermatitis skin samples will also be done. Left o ver DNA , 
protein,  and tissue will be stored for future research with appropriate consent from 
subjects.  
Skin Photographs  
 
Lesions to be treated during this study  will be selected at baseline . These will be  
measured and photographed using a digital camera  dedicated for the study .  
 
Skin photographs should be obtained prior to administration of study drug on Day 1 of 
the first treatment cycle and then as specifi ed in the study p rocedures . 
 
Special care should be taken to shield the subject’s identity. Preference to lesions that 
are not within or close to tattoos should be given, if applicable. Pictures  will then be 
modified to cover identifying tattoos  or unique traits (if possible) if they result in a 
publication.  
 
Composite Assessment of Index Lesion Severity  (CAILS)  
 
CAILS  is an objective, quantitative, method to assess the extent of skin lesions. Skin 
lesions and erythema will be evaluated using CAILS  (13). Two CAILS will be done, 
one for each treatment arm. An area of  at least  8cm2 for each treatment arm will be 
compared . Lesions treated with different treatments should be at least 10cm away 
from each lesion.  
 
Individual index lesion clinical signs and symptoms will be graded at each visit 
according to the scales found in Tables 2 and 3. A Composite Assessment will be 
generated for each time point by a summation of the grades for each index lesion 
erythema, scaling, plaque elevation, hypopigmentation or hyperpigmentation, and area 
of involvement. The index lesion grade at baseline will be divided into the grade at 
each sub sequent study visit to determine the subject ’s response to t reatment. Any 
ratio of the grade obtained at the visit vs. the one obtained at baseline that is >1.0 will 
indicate worsening of disease.  
 
Based upon the ratio and the absence or presence of other  disease manifestations, 
the CTCL response to treatment according to the composite assessment  endpoint will 
be classified by the best to worst response hierarchy of CR, PR, SD, or PD, with the 
excepti on that if PD precedes a better response (CR, PR, or SD)  the subject  will be 
classified as PD, even if the subject  meets response criteria subsequent to the 
progressive disease . Confirmation by at least two assessments separated by at least 
four study weeks is required for a partial or complete response classif ication . If a PR or 
CR is achieved prior to a PD, and subject then meets PD criteria, t hese will be 
considered a relapse .  
 
Page 11 of 28 
 The evaluations of index lesions should be made with non -leading (non -directive) 
questions of symptoms to the subject . Examples of s ymptom -related events should be 
elicited from the subject  to substantiate grading severity. Observations of index lesion 
clinical signs and determination of the index lesion areas should be made with the 
subject  as fully undressed as necessary to evaluate all index lesion areas.  
 
To determine the area of index lesions, the longest diameter and the longest diameter 
perpendicular to this diameter of each index lesion will be measured to the nearest 
millimeter. The lesion area will be the product of these two  diamete rs and then graded 
as in Table 2 . If there is central clearing of an index lesion (clearing of disease within 
the outer boundaries of the lesion), then the product of the largest perpendicular 
diameters of the area(s) of clearing will be subtracted  from the area determined from 
the outer boundary diameters before assigning the appropriate grade as in Table 2 .  
 
Table 2. Grading Scales for Composite Assessment of Index Lesion Clinical 
Signs  
 
Lesion Type  Abnormal Skin  
Scaling  0 No evidence of scaling  on the lesion  
1a  
2 Mild: Mainly fine scales; lesion partially covered  
3a 
4 Moderate: Somewhat coarse scales; lesion partially covered; 
rough surface  
5a 
6 Severe: Coarse, thick scales, virtually all of the lesion 
covered, rough surface.  
7a 
8 Very severe: Coarse, very thick scales; all of the lesion 
covered; very rough surface  
Erythema  0 No evidence of erythema, possible brown hyperpigmentation  
1a  
2 Mild: Light red lesion  
3a 
4 Moderate: Red Lesion  
5a 
6 Severe: Very Red Lesion  
7a 
8 Very severe: Extremely Red Lesion  
Plaque/Tumor 
Elevation  0 0mm: No evidence of plaque above normal skin level  
1a ≥0 to <0.5mm: minimal but definite plaque elevation above 
normal skin level  
2 ≥0.5 to <1mm: Slight but definite plaque elevation  
3a ≥1 to <1.5mm: Mild Elevation  
4 ≥1.5 to <2mm: Moderate Elevation  
5a ≥2 to <2.5mm: Moderate to Marked Elevation  
6 ≥2.5 to < 3mm: Marked Elevation  
7a ≥3 to < 3.5mm: Very marked elevation  
8 ≥3.5mm: Extreme elevation  
Index Lesion  0 0 cm2 (no measurable area)  
Page 12 of 28 
 Area   1 > 0 and ≤ 4 cm2  
 2 > 4 and ≤ 10 cm2  
 3 >10 and ≤ 16 cm2  
 4 >16 and ≤ 25 cm2  
 5 >25 and ≤ 35 cm2  
 6 >35 and ≤ 45 cm2  
 7 >45 and ≤ 55 cm2  
 8 > 55 and ≤ 70 cm2  
 9 >70 and ≤ 90 cm2  
 10 >90 and ≤ 110 cm2  
 11 >110 and ≤ 130 cm2  
 12 >130 and ≤ 155 cm2  
 13 >155 and ≤ 18 0 cm2  
 14 >180 and ≤ 210 cm2  
 15 >210 and ≤ 240 cm2  
 16 >240 and ≤ 270 cm2  
 17 >270 and ≤ 300 cm2  
 18 >300 cm2  
a Intermediate intervals 1, 3, 5 and 7 are to serve as mid -points between the 
defined Grades 0, 2, 4, 6 and 8.  
 
 
Table 3. Response Criteria for Skin  
 
Response  Description  
Complete Response (CR)  CA ratio = 0, no clinically abnormal lymph 
nodes (and no cutaneous tumors, or 
known pathologically positive lymph nodes 
or visceral disease, or other tumor 
manifestations) are found, and a 
cutaneous biopsy documenting absence 
of histologic signs of CTCL fr om a cleared 
lesion is obtained  
Partial Response (PR)  If the CA ratio is ≤ 0.5 and there is a < 
25% increase in the number or aggregate 
area of clinically abnormal lymph nodes, 
cutaneous tumors, or known 
pathologically abnormal lymph nodes or 
visceral di sease; and no new 
pathologically abnormal lymph nodes or 
new visceral disease in a location  
where prior evaluation for disease 
documents the absence of disease within 
30 days of entry in the study  
 
Stable Disease (SD)  
 If none of the other response 
classifications (i.e., CR, PR, or PD) 
accurately describe the disease status, 
then the response classification is SD.  
 
Page 13 of 28 
 Progressive Disease (PD)  If the CA ratio is ≥ 1.25, or there is a ≥ 
25% increase in the discrete number of  
or aggregate area of clinically abnormal 
lymph nodes, cutaneous tumors, known 
pathologically abnormal lymph nodes or 
known visceral disease; or a new 
cutaneous tumor or new pathologically 
positive lymph node or new visceral 
disease in an area documented to  be free 
of disease within 30 days of entry in the 
study  
 
 
Modified Skin Weighted Assessment Tool (mSWAT):  
 
The mSWAT will be used to quantify overall disease involvement in the whole body. 
This tool uses the total area of skin involved based on the bod y surface area . Lesions 
are weighted by lesion characteristic (patch, plaque, and tumor).   
 
 
Table 4. mSWAT  
 
Subjects will be monitored for overall disease burden throughout the study for safety. 
The following response criteria as assessed by mSWAT will be followed:  
 
 

Page 14 of 28 
 Table 5. Response, as assessed by mSWAT  
Response  Definition  
CCR  100% clearance of skin  
PR 50 to 99% clearance of skin disease from baselin e without new tumors 
(T3) in subjects with T1, T2, T4 only skin disease  
SD <25% increase to <50 clearance in skin disease from baseline without 
new tumors (T3) in subjects with T1, T2, or T4 only skin disease  
PD ≥25% increase in skin disease from baseline or development of new 
tumors in those with T1, T2, T4 only skin disease, or loss of response: 
in those with a CR or PR, increase of skin score of greater than the 
sum of the nadir plus 50% baseline score.  
Relapse  Any disease recurrence in those with a CR  
SCORAD (SCORing Atopic Dermatitis) tool  
The extent of dermatitis on subjects will be measured using SCORAD. This tool will be 
used to determine the severity of the dermatitis .  
Given that only specific lesions on the body of each subject will be treated, we will 
consider a maximum score of 100% if the total body surface area treated by specific 
treatment is covered by dermatitis.  This will be determined by calculating the 
percen tage of skin that is covered by dermatitis depending on surface area. This will 
be score “A”.  
The intensity criteria are met by scoring Erythema, Edema/papulation, oozing/crusting, 
excoriation (scratch marks), xerosis (dryness), and thickness  on a scare o f 0-3 
(0=None, 1=Mild, 2=Moderate, 3=Severe). A lesion that is representative of most of 
the subject 's dermatitis should be chosen (not the worst or the best -looking lesion). 
Xerosis must be scored on an area of skin without inflammation.  
These are then ad ded up to give a total score of “B”.  
Subjective symptoms of pruritus and insomnia are then scored using visual analog 
scales that run from 0 -10 (0=none, 10= worst imaginable).  
 
These are then added up to give a total score of “C”.  
 
To calculate the final score the following equation is used:  
 
 Final score = A/5 + 7B/2 + C  
The lowest possible score would be zero and the highest 103 . Scored will be graded 
as outlined on table 6 below.  
Page 15 of 28 
  
Table 6. SCORAD Score and Severity of Dermatitis  Evaluation  
Severity of Dermatitis  Score  
Mild  <25 
Moderate  25-50 
Severe  >50 
 
 
Pruritus and Insomnia Evaluation  
 
A visual analog scale for each treatment arm  will be done  at each timepoint .  Subjects 
will be asked what their overall itchiness is in the lesions receiving specific treatment 
(Valchlor only vs Valchlor and Triamcinolone).  
Figure 1. Grading Scale for Index Lesion Pruritus and Insomnia.  
 
 
 
 
Subjects will be instructed to draw a li ne anywhere along the lines of the VAS scales to 
indicate severity of itch and sleep disturba nce. A VAS score for itch intensity will be 
obtained for each lesion treated and summed up.    
 
 Physician Global Assessment:  
 
The physician global assessment (PGA) represents the principal investigator and/or 
investigator’s overall assessment of  the extent of improvement or wor sening of the 
subject ’s cutaneous disease compared with baseline as shown in table 7. This 
assessment is  designed to consider all cutaneous lesions, including index and non -
index lesions.  
 
 
 
 
 

Page 16 of 28 
  
 
 
 Table 7. PGA  
Grade  Description  Response  
0 completely clear  No evidence of disease; 100% improvement  CCR  
1 almost clear  Very obvious improvement (≥90% to <100%); 
only traces of disease remain  PR 
2 marked 
improvement  Significant improvement (≥50% to <90% 
clear); some of disease remains   
3 moderate 
improvement  Intermediate between marked and mild 
(≥25% to <50%)   
4 slight improvement  ≥10% to , 25%; significant evidence of 
disease remains  Stable  
5 no change  Disease has not changed significantly from 
baseline (10 to -25%)   
6 condition worse  Disease is worse than baseline by ≥25%  PD 
 
5.3. Safety Assessments  
 
Physical exams, vitals, and CTCL assessments  will assess subject safety through out 
the study. AEs and concomitant medications will be assessed at each subject visit. 
Subjects will be instructed to call to schedule an unscheduled visit if they have 
pertinent problems  that cannot wait within the four  scheduled visits. Principal 
investigator and/or i nvestigator will determine if subject needs to come in for an 
unscheduled visit for safety.  
 
5.4. Assessment of Subject Compliance  
 
Compliance to study medication will be measured through follow up with a drug l og. 
Subjects will be given a log to record each application. This log will be reviewed at 
each scheduled visit.  
 
5.5. Costs to the Subject  
 
Study subjects will not be charged for procedures that a re performed solely for 
research purposes  such as CTCL and contact dermatitis specific assessments 
(CAILS , SCORAD, photographs, etc) , and immunosequencing . Triamcinolone and 
Valchlor  will be supplied to subject at no cost. Subjects will be ultimately responsible 
for diagnostic tests, and assessme nts that would otherwise be performed had the 
subject not been in a research study. Such procedures are considered standard of 
care.  
 
5.6. Payment for Participation  
 
Subjects will receive a compensation of  $50.00 per completed visit.  
 
Page 17 of 28 
 5.7. Return of Individual Research Results  
 
Subjects will not be notified about results of the study. However, a publication at the 
end of the study is expected that will show the results of the study. No personal 
identifying information will be used in publications.  
 
6. CONCOMITANT AND DISALLOWED MEDICATIONS  
 
The following medications are prohibited:  
 
• Any therapy against MF other than the one administered during this study  on 
the lesions being evaluated   
• Sun light or UVB exposure on lesions evaluated  
• Subjects may receive other topical treatments in lesions not being followed 
for this study as long as they do not have any systemic effects.   
• The use of systemic steroids  
• Alternative medications, particularly, St. John’s wort.  
 
7. SUBJECT WITHDRAWALS  
 
Subjects will be advised in the written informed consent forms that they have the right to 
withdraw from the study at any time without prejudice. Subjects migh t be withdrawn from the 
study at  discretion of the  principal investigator and/or  investigator if he determines it is in the 
subject’s best interest to discontinue treatment. Subjects may also be withdrawn from the 
research activities if there is subject non -compliance, worsening of disease, intercurrent 
illness, or pregnancy.   
 
Subjects will not be r eplaced and data collected with be used in the analysis unless subject 
revokes consent via written form.  
 
8. STUDY DRUG/DEVICE/BIOLOGIC ADMINISTRATION/ASSIGNMENT  
 
8.1. Study Drug/Device/Biologic  
 
Valchlor  (please see package insert attached) and Triamcinolone 0.1 % ointment 
(package insert also attached).  
 
8.2. Dosage of Study Drug/Biologic  
 
Valchlor  will be applied topically every day for 4 months unless instructed otherwise.  
Triamcinolone will be applied topically every day for 4 months , up to three  times daily . 
Please refer to section 5.1 for details on dose interruptions and reductions.  
 
8.3. Accountability of Investigational Supplies  
 
Drugs will be stored as described in their package inserts:  
 
Valchlor  will be kept refrigerated at temperatures between 2 -8°C.  
 
Triamcinolone will be kept at room temperature (15 -30°C).  
 
Page 18 of 28 
 8.4. Subject Withdrawal of Study Drug  
 
Please refer to section 5.1  for details on dose interruptions and reductions.  
 
 
9. SAFETY AND REPORTABLE EVENTS  
 
9.1. Adverse Event Definition  
 
An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a patient administered a 
pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship 
with the treatment. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign 
(including  an abnormal lab finding), sy mptom or disease temporally associated with 
the use of a medicinal product, whether or not related to the medicinal product.  
 
Each AE must be assessed by the principal investigator and/or investigators as to 
whether or not there is a reasonable possibilit y of causal relationship to Valchlor, and 
documented as either related or unrelated. The determination of the likelihood that 
Valchlor caused the AE must be provided by an investigator who is a qualified 
physician.   
 
9.2. Serious Adverse Event  
A serious advers e event is defined as any adverse medical experience that results in 
any of the following outcomes:  
 
• Death;  
• Life threatening  
• Hospitalization  
• Inpatient new or prolongation of existing hospitalization;  
• Disability/incapacity  
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or   
• Requires medical or surgical intervention to prevent permanent impairment or 
damage.  
 
9.3. Recording Adverse Events  
 
The NCI -CTCAE v4.0 system will be used to grade AEs, both clinical and laboratory. 
AEs will be grouped and tabulated by Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities 
(MedDRA) preferred terms by system organ class. All subjects will be assessed 
regularly for potential occurrence of AEs from the time following the first dose of study 
drug until 30 days  after the last dose or initiation of alternative therapy whichever comes 
first. 
 
The principal investigator and/or i nvestigator will inquire about AEs at all subject visits by 
asking the subject a question such as: “How have you been feeling since your la st visit?” 
All AEs, whether observed by the principal investigator and/or investigator or reported by 
the subject, must be collected and recorded on the appropriate AE page of the CRF and 
as appropriate on the SAE form. The collection of AE information com mences following 
the subject’s written Informed Consent to participate in the study.   If a subject 
experiences an AE, the subject will receive appropriate treatment and supportive care as 
necessary, and the principal investigator and/or Investigator will c ontinue to follow up 
Page 19 of 28 
 until there is a return to the subject’s baseline condition, or until a clinically satisfactory 
resolution is achieved.  
 
Timely and complete reporting of all AEs will aid in identifying any untoward medical 
occurrence, thereby allowing : (1) protection of safety of study subjects; (2) a greater 
understanding of the overall safety profile of the study drug; (3) recognition of dose -
related study drug toxicity; (4) appropriate modification of study protocols; (5) 
improvements in study desig n or procedures; and (6) adherence to worldwide regulatory 
requirements.  
 
All adverse events, whether observed by the principal investigator and/or Investigator, 
elicited from or volunteered by the subject, should be documented.  Each adverse event 
will include a brief description of the experience if no term is available for it, the date of 
onset, the date of resolution, the duration and type of experience, the severity, the 
relationship to inv estigational products , contributing factors, and any action taken with 
respect to the study drug/device.  
 
Standard medical terminology should be used to document AEs on the CRF. The 
subject’s exact description of the event will be recorded in the source documentation. In 
the case of signs and symptoms, the underlyi ng illness or diagnosis will be recorded as 
the event when known.  
 
All AEs will be graded using CTCAE Version 4.0 as  described in Table 8  below:  
 
Table 8. AE Grading C riteria  
 
Grade 1  Mild; asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or diagnostic 
observations only; intervention not Indicated  
Grade 2  
 Moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; 
limiting age -appropriate instrumental ADLa  
Grade 3  Severe or medically significant but not immediately life -threatening; 
hospitalizati on or  
prolongation of hospitalization indicated; disabling; limiting self care 
ADLb  
 
Grade 4  Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated  
Grade 5  Death related to AE  
a: Instrumental ADL refer to preparing meals, shopping for groceries or  clothes, using 
the telephone, managing money, etc.  
b: Self care ADL refer to bathing, dressing and undressing, feeding self, using the toilet, 
taking medications, and not bedridden.  
ADL = Activities of Daily Living  
 
For AEs not contained within CTCAE, Ver sion 4.0, the  principal investigator and/or  
Investigator will assess the severity/grade of an AE according to the five grades above.  
 
Adverse Event Relationship to Study Drug:  
 
The relationship of each AE to the study drug will be evaluated using the following 
guidelines:  
Page 20 of 28 
  
Related  
 
This category applies to any AE (whether serious or not) that appears to have a 
reasonable possibility to the use of Valchlor (i.e., a relationship cannot be ruled out). 
Guidelines to determine whether an event might be cons idered related include (but are 
not limited to) the following:  
1. There is a temporal relationship between the occurrence of the event and the 
administration of Valchlor.  
2. The event abated (diminished) or disappeared when  treatment with Valchlor 
was do wn-titrated, interrupted, or discontinued.  
3. Positive results in a drug sensititvity test (skin test, etc).  
4. Toxic level of the drug as evidenced by measurement of drug concentrations in 
blood or other bodily fluid.  
 
 
Not Related  
 
An AE (whether serious or not) that does not follow a reasonable temporal sequence 
from administration of the drug or that can reasonably be explained by other factors, 
such as underlying diseases, complications, concomitant drugs and concurrent 
treatments.  
 
9.4. Responsibilities for Reporti ng Serious Adverse Events  
 
Principal investigator and/or  investigator will conduct continuous rev iew of data and 
subject  safety. The review will include for each treatment arm: the number of subject s 
enrolled, withdrawals, significant toxicities as described in the protocol, serious adverse 
events both expected and unexpected, dose adjustments, and responses observed. The 
PI maintains a database of all adverse events with toxicity grade and informati on 
regarding treatment required complications, or sequelae.  
 
• Principal investigator and/or investigators are to report the following information 
items to the IRB within 5 days:  
▪ New or increased risk. For example, publications indicating a new 
risk, new r isk in an investigator brochure, FDA black box warning, new 
risk identified in a data safety monitoring report, information or change 
that adversely affects subject safety, or information or change that 
adversely affects the conduct of the research.  
▪ Proto col deviation that harmed a subject or placed subject at risk of 
harm  
▪ Protocol deviation made without prior IRB approval to eliminate an 
immediate hazard to a subject  
▪ Audit, inspection, or inquiry by a federal agency  
▪ Written reports of federal agencies (e. g., FDA Form 483)  
▪ Allegation of Noncompliance or Finding of Noncompliance  
▪ Unauthorized disclosure of confidential information  
▪ Unresolved subject complaint  
▪ Suspension or premature termination by the sponsor, principal 
investigator and/or investigator, or institution  
Page 21 of 28 
 ▪ Incarceration of a subject in a research study not approved to involve 
prisoners  
▪ Adverse events or IND safety reports that require a change to the 
protocol or consent  
▪ State medical board actions  
▪ Information where the sponsor requires prompt rep orting to the IRB  
 
• Fatal serious adverse events will be reported within 24 hours of knowledge  to  
Actelion . Actelion will expedite reports to the FDA and other regulatory authorities as 
appropriate per local and international regulatory reporting requireme nts. 
•  
 
• SAEs that are related and unexpected to the investigational products used in this 
protocol will be reported to the sponsor , IRB, and/or other applicable authorities .  
 
• All SAEs that are possibly related to the stu dy medication  by the Sponsor -Principal 
investigator and/or investigator , must be reported immediately to Actelion Global 
Drug Safety (GDS) as set forth in the IIS agreement and within 24 hours of 
knowledge of the event. Actelion reserves the right to request additional informa tion 
and clarifications on cases forwarded by the Sponsor -Principal investigator and/or 
investigator.  SAE forms should be sent the the following e -mail or fax number:  
 
North America (US and Canada)  
San Francisco, USA  
DrugSafetyUS@actelion.com  
Fax: 1 -866-227-5886  
 
The principal investigator and/or i nvestigator is obligated to immediately report any 
SAE occurring at any time after the subject signs the Informed Consent Form and all 
unresolved adverse events should be followed by t he sponsor -principal investigator 
and/or investigator until th e events a re resolved, the subject is lost to follow -up, or 
the adverse event is otherwise explained. At the last scheduled visit, the sponsor -
principal investigator and/or investigator  should instruct each subject to report, to the 
sponsor -principal investigator an d/or investigator , any subsequent event(s) that the 
subject, or the subject’s personal physician, believes might reasonably be related to 
participation in this study.  
 
 
9.5. Pregnancy Reporting  
 
Any pregnancy  occurring during the course of the study, up until 3 0 days after 
discontinuation of therapy will be reported within 24 hours of the Investigator’s 
knowledge to the Sponsor and regulatory authorities if applicable. Pregnancies will 
be reported using the Actelion Pregnancy Form (Appendix 4) to the following e mail 
or fax:  
 
DrugSafetyUS@actelion.com  
Fax: 1 -866-227-5886  
 
Page 22 of 28 
 Any pregnancy  will be followed until its conclusion and its outcome will be reported to 
the sponsor and regulatory authorities if applicable.  
 
10. RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
 
10.1.  Potential Risks  
 
Valchlor  risks:  
 
• Flammable Gel  
• Embryo -fetal Toxicity  
• Dermatitis  
• Non-melanoma skin cancer  
• Mucosal or eye injury  
• Secondary exposure to Valchlor  
 
Reported in more than  or equal to  5% of subjects:  
  
• Dermatitis  
• Pruritus  
• Bacterial skin infection  
• Hematological abnormalities (decreased hemoglobin, neutrophils, or 
platelets).  
 
Triamcinolone 0.1% ointment Risks:  
 
Triamcinolone Acetonide 0.1% O intment Risks:  
 
Infrequent reactions to topical corticosteroids that occ ur more frequently if an occlusive 
dressing is used (listed in decreasing order of frequency):  
 
• Burning  
• Itching  
• Irritation  
• Dryness  
• Folliculitis  
• Hypertrichosis  
• Acneiform eruption  
• Hypopigmentation  
• Perioral dermatitis  
• Allergic contact dermatitis  
• Skin maceration  
• Secondary skin infection  
• Skin atrophy  
• Striae  
• Miliaria  
 
 Other risks if systemic absorption:  
  
• HPA axis suppression  
• metabolic effects (hypoglycemia, hypokalemia)  
Page 23 of 28 
   
10.2.  Protection Against Risks  
 
Subject s will be followed up after each procedure to ensure safety. Principal 
investigator and/or i nvestigators will pay attention to changes from baseline and use 
standard techniques for skin biopsies and other procedures done.  The subject  will 
assume responsib ility for payment for the treatment of all adverse events.  
 
 
10.3.  Potential Benefits to Subjects  
 
Response to treatment with clearance of disease is possible but uncertain.  
 
10.4.  Alternatives to Participation  
 
Available skin -directed therapies such as topical glucocorticoids, carmustine 
(BCNU), psoralen plus ultraviolet -A radiation (PUVA) and electron beam radiation 
therapy (EBT) can improve skin manifestations and induce temporary remissions.   
 
Systemic therap ies, such as bexarotene, denileukin diftitox injection, photopheresis, 
systemic mechorethamine, cyclophosphamide, vorinostat and methotrexate are 
typically targeted towards advanced stages of CTCL due to their greater potential for 
toxicity.  Various treat ments have also been used in combination.  
 
11. CONFIDENTIALIATY OF DATA AND INFORMATION STORAGE  
 
Confidentiality is the ethical and/or legal right that information, such as research 
data, will be held secret and safeguarded from disclosure unless consent is p rovided 
permitting disclosure. Informed consent will include HIPAA authorization verbiage.  
 
Upon enrollment, each subject will be assigned a unique subject  number (UPN) that 
includes the study number at the front and a three -letter  code.  These will be used 
instead of their n ames whenever possible, such as  when filling in study records. The 
master log that will link these codes with the names of each subject  will be stored in 
a locked cabinet within a locked office . Case report form s and dedicated study 
camera will be kept in a locked cabinet within a locked office under control of PI and 
study staff delegated authority to take photographs . Case report forms will be kept 
within a locked cabinet in a locked office . Photographs obtaine d will be stored 
without any personal identifiers in them, except for a three -letter  code and number 
assigned to each subject  at the start of the study. Only the PI can grant permission to 
research staff to access this data.  
 
12. RESEARCH INFORMATION IN MEDICAL RECORDS  
 
Pathology reports will be stored in the medical record. A note stating that the subject 
is a participant of the study will also be placed on the record.  
 
13. DATA ANALYSIS AND MONITORING  
 
13.1.  Planned Statistical Analysis  
Page 24 of 28 
 Using Fisher’s exact test,  we determined that we will need 22 evaluable subject s to get 
an 83% chance of detecting a significant difference at a two -sided 0.05 significance 
level. This assumes that 90% of subject s treated with Valchlor  along with triamcinolone 
and 44% of those trea ted with Valchlor  only will not get contact dermatitis. This 
calculation takes into account tha t 89% of subjects experience AEs  in a period of 4 
months when they are on VALCHLOR  therapy.  
To look at estimation of response  rates for each treatment group: p revious data 
suggests that the overall response for Valchlor  is 50%. From our experience, the 
response rate for Valchlor  plus triamcinolone is about 70%. With 22 subject s per group 
the 95% confidence intervals for the response rates would be expected to ha ve widths 
of 44% for Valchlor  (expected CI: 28% - 72%) and 41% for Valchlor  plus triamcinolone 
(expected CI: 45% - 86%). These calculations are based on exact binomial Clopper -
Pearson confidence intervals .  
To account for retention rate, up to 28 subject s may be enrolled in this study.  
13.2.  Data and Safety Monitoring  
 
Study principal investigator and/or investigators will conduct continuous review of 
subject  accrual, eligibility, data collection, and subject  safety. Study progress and 
safety will be reviewed in a quarterly basis. All AEs and SAEs that have occurred in 
the prior three months will be reviewed by writing all AEs and SAEs in a cumulative 
spreadsheet listing of all events submitted. A progress rep ort will be written as well. 
AEs and SAEs will be reviewed in order to confirm toxicity grade, expectedness, 
relatedness, sequelae, follow up required, and risk to subjects.  
 
  
14. REFERENCES  
 
1. Edelson RL. Cutaneous T cell lymphoma: the helping hand of dendritic cells. Ann 
N Y Acad Sci 2001;941:1 -11. 
2. Haserick JR, Richardson JH, Grant DJ. Remission of lesions in mycosis 
fungoides following topical application of nitrogen mustard. Cleve Clin Q 
1959;26:144 -47. 
3. Bunn PA, Hoffman SJ, Norr is D, Golitz LE, Aeling JL. Systemic therapy of 
cutaneous T -cell lymphomas (mycosis fungoides and the Sezary syndrome). 
Annals of internal medicine 1994;121(8):592 -602. 
4. Sipos K. PAINTING TREATMENT OF NITROGEN MUSTARD IN MYCOSIS 
FUNGOIDES. Dermatologica 1965;130:3 -11. 
5. Ramsay DL, Meller JA, Zackheim HS. Topical treatment of early cutaneous T -cell 
lymphoma. Hematology/oncology clinics of North America 1995;9(5):1031 -56. 
6. Kim YH, Martinez G, Varghese A, Hoppe RT. Topical nitrogen mustard in the 
manageme nt of mycosis fungoides: update of the Stanford experience. Arch 
Dermatol 2003;139(2):165 -73. 
7. Lessin SR, Duvic M, Guitart J, et al. Topical chemotherapy in cutaneous t -cell 
lymphoma: Positive results of a randomized, controlled, multicenter trial testin g 
the efficacy and safety of a novel mechlorethamine, 0.02%, gel in mycosis 
fungoides. JAMA dermatology 2013;149(1):25 -32. 
Page 25 of 28 
 8. Kim YH, Jensen RA, Watanabe GL, Varghese A, Hoppe RT. Clinical stage IA 
(limited patch and plaque) mycosis fungoides. A long -term outcome analysis. 
Arch Dermatol 1996;132(11):1309 -13. 
9. Kim YH, Liu HL, Mraz -Gernhard S, Varghese A, Hoppe RT. Long -term outcome 
of 525 patients with mycosis fungoides and sézary syndrome: Clinical prognostic 
factors and risk for disease progression. Arch ives of Dermatology 
2003;139(7):857 -66. 
10. Claman HN. How corticosteroids work. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1975;55(3):145 -
51. 
11. FDA. 2013 June 26. VALCHLOR Package Insert.  FDA 
<http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2013/202317lbl.pdf >. 
Accessed 2015 June 26.  
12. Kirsch IR, Watanabe R, O’Malley JT, Williamson DW, Scott L -L, Elco CP, et al. 
TCR sequencing facilitates diagnosis and identifies mature T cells as the cell of 
origin in CTCL. Science Translational Medicine 2015;7(308):308ra158.  
13. Stevens SR, Ke MS, Parry EJ, Mark J, Cooper KD. Quantifying skin disease 
burden in mycosis fungoides -type cutaneous T -cell lymphomas: the severity -
weighted assessment tool  (SWAT). Arch Dermatol 2002;138(1):42 -8. 
 
Appendix 1  Schedule of Activities  
 
 
Visit  0 
(Screenin
g) Day 1  
 
 Day 
1(Patch 
Testing)   
Day 2  
(Patch 
Testing)   
Day 4  
(Patch 
Testing)  Day 28  Months 2 
and 3  EoT Follow up 
(5 and 12 
months)  
Visit Window  -30 days  +/- 3days     +/- 3days  +/- 3days  +/- 3days  +/- 3 days  
Obtain informed consent  X         
Inclusion and exclusion 
criteria/Enroll  X         
Medical history and demographics  X         
Physical Examination  X X    X X X X 
Vital signs  X X    X X X X 
Skin Biopsy (including Pathology 
read and immunohistochemistry)  Xa Xa X   Xa Xa Xba  
CAILS + SCORAD+ mSWAT   X    X X X X 
PGA   X    X X X X 
Identification of lesions  X X        
Pregnancy Test  X X    Xc Xc Xc Xc 
Study drug dispensing   X    X X   
Study drug Accountability       X X X  
Photographs   X    X X X X 
Adverse event review  X X    X X X X 
Immunosequencing   X X   X X X  
Concomitant Medications  X X    X X X X 
Patch Testing   Xc Xc Xc Xc Xc Xc Xc Xc  
Training on how to apply drug   X        
Subject Reimbursement  X X  X X X X X X 
          
          
a) If PI determines necessary or PRN for contact dermatitis  
b) A total of 2 skin biopsies  per treatment arm  will be done at the EOT visit . One for pathological review  and the other one for immunosequencing . 
c) If PI determines it is necessary
 
Appendix II. Body Map  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
