IND 37368  
 
Date: April 18th, 2017  
To: Karim Calis, Pharm.D., MPH, IRB Chair, NICHD IRB  
Recommended  by: 
 
 
 
Joan C. Marini.  M.D., Ph.D., Chief,  Bone  & Extracellular  Matrix  Branch,  NICHD  
 
 
 
Forbes  D. Porter,  M.D., Ph.D., Clinical  Director,  NICHD  
 
Project  Title:  Studies  of Growth  Deficiency  and Growth  Hormone 
Treatment  in Children  with Osteogenesis  Imperfecta  Types 
III and  IV 
 
Principal  Investigator:  Joan C. Marini,  M.D., Ph.D.  
Chief,  Bone  and Extracellular  Matrix  Branch,  NICHD, NIH  
 
Associate  Investigators:  Timothy  Bhattacharyya,  MD, Orthopaedic  Surgeon -BC   
Clinical  and Investigative  Orthopaedics  Section  of the 
Intramural  Research  Program,  NIAMS  
 
Judith Holt, CRNP, MS, BSN  
Nurse Practitioner, Office of the Clinical Director, NICHD, 
NIH 
 
Outside  Collaborators:  Caren  Gundberg,  Ph.D., Department  of Orthopedics, 
Yale  University  
 
Theresa  Hefferan,  Ph.D., Mayo  Clinic,  Rochester  MN 
Estimated  Duration  of Study:  20 years  
Total  Patients  to be Recruited:  60 
 
Normal  Volunteers:  None  
 
Description  of Patient  Population:  Children  with Osteogenesis  Imperfecta  (Types  III and  
IV), and  short  stature,  ages 3 through  15 years.  
2  
 
 
PRECIS:  
 
Growth  deficiency  is a cardinal  feature  of severe  Osteogenesis  Imperfecta  (OI) and  a 
frequent  feature  of mild  to moderate  forms  of this  disease.  Despite  the prevalence  of short 
stature  among  people  with OI, few  studies  have  examined  treatment  options  for this 
feature  of OI. Recombinant  human  growth  hormone  (rGH) is  a treatment  for growth 
deficiency  which  we have  investigated.  In our initial  studies  we have  found that  many  OI 
children  are responsive  to rGH, especially  those  with type IV OI. The  purpose  of this 
protocol  is to examine  the effect  of growth  hormone  treatment  on linear  growth  of 
children  with types  III and  IV OI and  correlate  growth  responsiveness  with growth  
hormone -somatomedin  axis and histomorphometry  parameters  of OI bone.  
3  
 
INTRODUCTION:  
 
Osteogenesis  Imperfecta  (OI) is  a heritable  disorder  of connective  tissue  with bone 
fragility  as the hallmark  feature.  Classical  autosomal  dominant  OI is  caused  by structural 
defects  in the genes  coding  for type  I collagen  (COL1A1  and COL1A2 ). [1] Growth 
deficiency  is the most  striking  secondary  feature  of OI.  Severe  growth  deficiency  is 
always  present  in type III OI and  is a frequent  feature  of moderate  (type  IV) OI.  In 
general,  the degree  of growth  deficiency  parallels  the severity  of the  bone  disease  in 
morphologic  and radiographic  features  but not in fracture  number.  [2] 
 
Typical  growth  patterns  have  been  defined  for classical  autosomal  dominant  OI types. 
Many  of these  children  are small  to normal  size at birth,  but virtually  all Types  III and  IV 
patients  begin  to plateau  in length  beginning  about  12 months.  This continues  through 
about  age 4 years  for Type  IV, when  most  of these  children  begin  to grow at  normal 
growth  rates,  but below  the lowest  percentiles  of the  standard  growth  chart  curve.  It is 
possible  that Type  IV children  could  have  normal  stature  if the plateau  phase  were 
eliminated.  Type  III children  tend to demonstrate  only small  growth  gains.  [3] The 
reasons for this  plateau  phase  are unknown. The  National  Institute  of Child  Health  and 
Development  (NICHD)  has  produced  data addressing  growth  deficiency  in older  OI 
children,  but there  have  been  no efforts  to date focused  on the  plateau  phase  in early 
childhood.  [4] 
 
At a molecular  level,  autosomal  dominant  osteogenesis  imperfecta  is associated  with 
defects  in either  of the  two chains  which  comprise  type I collagen.  [5] Type  I collagen  is 
a heterotrimer,  made  up of two  α1 chains  and one α2 chain,  which  constitutes  the most 
abundant  protein  in bone,  skin,  and tendon.  Inadequate  amounts  or abnormal  forms  of 
type I collagen  can account  for the  matrix  abnormalities,  osteoporosis  and bone  fragility 
of OI.  [6] The  role of skeletal  matrix  abnormalities  in short  stature  is unclear.  Possible  
roles  include  unresponsiveness  of the  target  tissue  to local  and systemic  growth  factors  or 
abnormal  feedback  of target  tissue  on the  endocrine  axis. 
 
There  is now considerable  data available  on normal  growth  markers  in children.  At the 
research  level  of investigation,  unstimulated  12 and  24 hour growth  hormone  sampling 
and somatomedin  generation  testing  have  become  routine  in the evaluation  of growth  in 
children.  [7] Dr. Rose  has also produced  data on unstimulated  6 hour growth  hormone 
sampling.  She has found that  the 6 hour sampling  corresponds  to the 12 hour results.  [8] 
The data most  applicable  to our population  of 1-5 years  of age  were  determined  in pre- 
pubertal  children  below  the age of 8 years.  Unless  our results  show marked 
inconsistencies,  there  is no reason  not to consider  this normative  data comparable  (S. 
Rose,  personal  communication).  Markers  of skeletal  formation  include  osteocalcin,  a 
bone  specific  protein  made  by osteoblasts,  and procollagen  peptide  type I (PICP). Studies 
have  shown that  these  markers  correlate  with age and puberty,  reflecting  higher  levels 
during  periods  of maximum  growth,  and very low levels  as puberty  ends and during 
adulthood.  [9] 
4  
 
 
Markers  of bone  turnover  include  bone  specific  alkaline  phosphatase,  IGF Binding 
Protein -3 (IGFBP -3), and  Growth  Hormone  Binding  Protein  (GHBP). We  have  assessed 
these  values  in the children  currently  enrolled  in the OI growth  hormone  study..  Specific 
normative  data is available  for bone  specific  alkaline  phosphatase  and IGFBP -3.  IGFBP - 
3 normative  data is available  in 2-4 year  ranges,  beginning  at birth.  Recently  bone  
specific  alkaline  phosphatase  during  childhood  (i.e., 2 months  to 18 years  broken  down to  
2 year  intervals)  have  been  established.  [10] In contrast,  normative  data about  GHBP, 
which  indirectly  measures  the circulating  portion  of the  growth  hormone  receptor,  is 
available  but the age ranges  are very broad,  ages 3 to 10 years,  and 10 to  15 years  
 
We began  investigating  the status  of hormones  related  to growth  in 28 children  with 
osteogenesis  imperfecta.  [11] This  original  investigation  was prompted  by the  observation 
that several  children  with OI, who served  as non-endocrine  controls  in GHD studies,  did 
not have  normal  test results.  Our goals  were  to determine  1. whether  there  were  any 
abnormalities  of the growth  hormone  / somatomedin -C axis in this condition,  2. whether 
any abnormalities  correlated  with the type of OI, and  3. whether  OI bone  could  be safely 
stimulated  to grow. The  endocrine  evaluation  of the  OI children  included  a GRF 
stimulation  test, three  standard  GH provocative  tests (Arginine -Insulin  tolerance  test, L- 
Dopa  stimulation  test),  a 24 hour q 20 minute  sampling  for measuring  basal,  unstimulated 
concentrations  of GH and  a somatomedin  generation  test. 
 
Endocrine  evaluation  of 28 patients  at the NIH has  shown that  about  half of them  have  a 
low area under  the integrated  curve  of unstimulated  24 hour growth  hormone  secretion, 
and fail to respond  positively  to a growth  hormone  releasing  hormone  stimulation  test or 
a somatomedin  generation  test. [12] 
 
Complete  evaluation  of the  hormonal  axis related  to growth  in short  children  with OI 
revealed  subtle  deviations  from  normal  in some  of the  children;  there  was no pattern  of 
response  to any test or among  any sequence  of tests  that correlated  with the type of OI or 
the degree  of growth  deficiency.  The only significant  correlation  of test  results  was that 
12 children,  whose  response  to GRH was  comparable  to the GRH response  of GHD  
children  [13],  had a significantly  lower  area under  the 24 hour curve  of unstimulated 
growth  hormone  secretion,  while  14 children  with a normal  response  to GRH also  had a 
normal  area under  the 24 hour growth  hormone  secretion  curve.  Thus,  one group 
appeared  to have  a relatively  hypoactive  growth  hormone  axis even  though,  by standard  
criteria  of GH provocative  tests and the 24 hour GH sampling,  they did not fill the criteria 
of growth  hormone  deficiency.  
 
Furthermore,  the OI children  as a group demonstrated  a blunted  response  in the 
somatomedin  generation  test, with 21/28  children  having  a baseline  IGF-I below  the 
mean  for age  and 18/28  children  having  less than a two-fold stimulation  in response  to 
growth  hormone  injections.  The group with  blunted  IGF-I response  did not correlate  with 
the low GRH -low 24 hour area  group. This  was not surprising  since  one would  not expect 
relatively  low growth  hormone  to be correlated  with unresponsiveness  of somatomedin  to 
growth  hormone  stimulation.  More  problematic  was the interpretation  of IGF -I levels  in 
children,  whatever  their height  or bone  morphology.  IGF-I is known to  be responsive  to 
GH stimulation  and is itself  functionally  defined  in terms  of its  ability  to stimulate  
5  
 
 
sulfation  in bone.  [14] Although  the predominant  quantity  of IGF -I is made  in the liver,  it 
is also made  in multiple  other  tissues  including  bone  itself,  where  its synthesis  has been 
localized  to a region  of the  growth  plate.  [15] The  tissue  of origin  of basal  and GH- 
stimulated  IGF-I is unmeasurable  and so the  functional  significance  of the  test is difficult 
to assess.  In a primary  defect  of bone  matrix,  even  a successful  stimulation  of IGF -I level 
may not represent  an effective  functional  increment  in terms  of growth  stimulation.  
 
The study  of the  growth  response  of OI bone  to growth  hormone  also allowed  us to 
address  the effect  of hormonal  stimulation  on the  secondary  consequences  of abnormal 
bone  matrix  (collagen)  by measurement  of the  histomorphometry  of the  bone.  
There  is in vitro  evidence  demonstrating  that growth  hormone  stimulates  proliferation  of 
osteoblasts  and increases  their production  of collagen  via IGF-I. [3] In the  current 
protocol,  we propose  to examine  iliac crest  biopsies  to determine  if there  is an effect  of 
growth  hormone  on bone  histomorphometric  parameters  apart  from  its effect  on linear 
growth.  Previous  studies  [4] on tetracycline -labeled  iliac crest  biopsies  from  OI children 
have  demonstrated  1. decreased  cancellous  bone  volume  and trabecular  thickness,  2. no 
evidence  of increased  resorption,  3. decreased  synthesis  of an  organized  matrix  in type I 
OI (mild),  4. disorganized  matrix  in type III OI (severe),  consisting  of a mixture  of 
lamellar  and woven  structure  with irregular  tetracycline  labeling,  and 5. poor 
organizati on of cortical  bone  in type III OI, often  with absence  of Haversian  systems.  
 
This protocol  has produced  some  encouraging  results  for rGH treatment  of OI children. 
We have  treated  36 children,  ages 5-12 years  and including  14 type  III and  22 type  IV OI 
children.  During  the treatment  trial, children  receive  0.06mg/kg/day  of Humatrope,  6 
days per  week  for one  year.  Nineteen  of the  36 children  demonstrated  a positive  response 
to treatment.  This responder  group was  composed  predominantly  of children  with type 
IV OI;  13 of the  responders  have  type IV OI and 70% of the  treated  type IV children  
were  growth  responders.  [9] Overall,  half of the  treated  children  responded.  
 
The only bone  metabolic  marker  which  differentiated  responders  from  non-responders 
was procollagen  peptide  type I (p=0.04).  Responders  had higher  PICP than  non- 
responders  at baseline  and after 6 and  12 months  of treatment.  A cut -off PICP value  of 
86 mg/ml  is 73% predictive  of OI response  to rGH.  
 
The total patient  group showed  significant  increases  over baseline  in IGF-I, IGFBP -3, 
Procollagen  Peptide  type I, and  osteocalcin  by 6 months  of treatment.  Bone  specific 
alkaline  phosphatase  was significantly  increased  over baseline  by one  year.  [9] 
 
Bone  histomorphometrics  of responders  show a  significant  increase  in bone  volume/total 
volume,  mineralized  bone  volume/total  volume  and bone  formation  rate/total  volume.  [9] 
 
Our interpretation  of our results  is that there  is a significant  population  of OI children, 
especially  with type IV OI, who respond  to growth  hormone  treatment  with increased 
growth  rates  and positive  changes  in bone  formation.  
6  
 
 
 
 
OBJECTIVES:  
 
(1) To determine  the range  and duration  of growth  responsiveness  of OI bone;  
(2) To determine  the correlation  of this  growth  responsiveness  with the results  of the 
endocrine  evaluation  of the  growth  hormone  somatomedin  axis;  
(3) To determine  the effect  of growth  hormone  on the  density  and histomorphometric 
parameters  of OI bone;  
(4) To determine  the long term benefits  of this  therapy  for final  stature,  trunk  length, 
and pulmonary  function.  
 
STUDY DESIGN  AND METHODS:  
 
 
 
PART  A 
PRE  - TREATMENT  YEAR AND EVALUATION  OF HORMONAL  STATUS  
 
The pre-treatment  interval  will be a one year time period  during  which  children  will be 
serving  as their own baseline  controls.  The visit schedule  will be every  3 months.  Linear 
growth  on each  side of the  body will  be measured  at each visit with 5 lengths  using  a 
supine  length  board.  Other  measurements  at each visit will include  weight,  arm span, 
sitting  height,  upper  and lower  extremity  segments,  and head  circumference.  At 6 month 
intervals,  radiographic  assessments  of spine,  and lower  extremities  will be performed,  as 
well as bone  density  of the  lumbar  spine.  Radiographic  assessments  of bone  age will be 
done  annually.  
 
Children  enrolled  in this protocol  will be co-enrolled  in protocol  97-CH-0064 and  will 
undergo  pulmonary  testing  and neurological  imaging  on the  schedule  for that  protocol . 
For pulmonary  function  testing,  the tests will be completed  at Children’s  National 
Medical  Center.  Children  too young to  cooperate  with the procedures  of pulmonary 
function  testing  will not be sedated  for these  procedures.  Additionally,  neuroimaging 
studies  of the  head  and neck,  including  CT and MRI scan,  will commence  when  the child 
is able to cooperate  without  needing  sedation.  In our experience,  children  age 4-5 years 
are able to hold still for the  CT scan,  which  takes  approximately  5-10 minutes.  If signs  of 
Basilar  Invagination  (BI) are  detected,  the children  progress  to having  MRI scans  every 
year.  
 
An iliac  crest  bone  biopsy  will be obtained  at the beginning  of the  treatment  year for 
growth  hormone.  This biopsy  will be repeated  at the end of the  growth  hormone 
treatment  year.  The biopsies  will be obtained  by Dr. Bhattacharyya  for analysis  in Dr. 
Hefferan’s  laboratory.  The procedure  will be performed  under  general  anesthesia  in the 
operating  room  at the NIH.  
 
During  the pre-treatment  year,  the following  testing  will be done  for endocrine 
evaluation.  
7  
 
 
1. Baseline  CBC  1.5cc  
 
2.  
Somatomedin  Generation  Test [14]  
3.2 cc  / draw  (includes  discard)  
2.0 cc  added  to Baseline  and Day 5 
20.0 cc  total 
 
Our experience  with this test in OI children  shows that  89% demonstrate  a peak 
response  beginning  at 48 hours after  the initial  injection.  Therefore  we plan to do 
the full 6 day  test, but only draw  blood  at baseline  (day 0) and  days 2-5.  To 
evaluate  for the  possibility  of growth  hormone  resistance,  we will measure  GHBP 
and IGFBP -3 at baseline  and day 5 of this  test. 
 
3. IGF-I 
IGFBP -3, GHBP  3.0 cc  
 Bone  Specific  Alk Phos  6.0 cc  
 Osteocalcin,  Type  I Collagen  Peptide  4.0 cc  
 TSH,  FT4, T4 
Glycosylated  Hemoglobin  4.0 cc  
5.0 cc 
 Total  22.0 cc  
These  growth  factors  will be obtained  at 6 month  intervals.  
 
4.  
6 hour growth  hormone  sampling   
1.7 cc/draw  (inc. discard);  32.3 cc  total 
  
or  
 12 hour growth  hormone  sampling  [17] 1.7 cc/draw  (inc. discard);  62.9 cc  total 
 
The 6 hr testing  will be used for patients  with a minimum  weight  of 6.5 kg 
through  12.6 kg. The  12-hour evaluation  will be done  for children  12.7 kg or 
greater.  
 
This endocrine  testing  will be spread  out over the 3-month  visit schedule  to remain  within 
the NIH guidelines  for safe  amounts  of blood  withdrawal  from  children.  Scheduled  visits 
will be inpatient  on the  1 Northwest  Pediatric  unit when  overnight  serial  blood  testing  or 
a bone  biopsy  is scheduled.  Other  scheduled  visits  will be outpatient  day hospital  visits.  
 
VISIT Meas XR BA BMD Growth 
Factor s SGT Seria l 
GH CBC  Bone 
Biopsy Pulm/Neuro 
Baselin e X LE, 
spine X X X   X  Per 97-CH- 
0064  
3 month X     X     
6 month X LE, 
spine  X X  X    
9 month X          
12 month 
(baselin e 
part B) X LE, 
spine X X X   X X  
8  
 
 
PART  B 
GROWTH  HORMONE  TREATMENT  
 
In this  part of the  protocol,  OI children  will be treated  with synthetic  growth  hormone 
(Humatrope®, generously  donated  by Eli  Lilly  and Company)  for one  year to identify 
responders.  Responders  will be identified  as those  children  who are  able to achieve  and 
sustain  a 50% increase  in growth  rate over their baseline.  Responders  will be treated  an 
additional  2 years.  After  the third  year of treatment,  responders  will be defined  as those 
children  who demonstrate  a sustained  increase  of 30% or greater  from  baseline.  Children 
who are  responders  at the 3 year  mark  will be treated  with growth  hormone  through  final 
adult  height.  Final  adult  height  will be defined  as epiphyseal -metaphyseal  union  of the 
distal  femur  and proximal  tibia growth  plates.  We will attempt  to follow  all participants 
through  final adult  height.  
 
The planned  visit schedule  is every  3 months  starting  at the baseline  period  and 
continuing  through  treatment  completion.  
 
Parameters  which  will be followed  during  the treatment  year will be a continuation  of 
those  followed  during  the pre-treatment  year,  and are summarized  in the following  table:  
 
Visit Measure s XR Bone Age Growth 
Factor s Bone 
Densit y Bone 
Biopsy Pulm/Neuro 
PART B 
BASELI NE (Rx 
year, also part A 
12 mo visit)  X X X X X X Per 97-CH- 
0064  
3 MON TH X       
6 MON TH X X  X X   
9 MON TH X       
12 MON TH X X X X X X  
RESPOND ERS  6 
MON TH X X  X X   
12 MON TH X X X X X   
TREATMENT 
END, 3 YEAR 
NON - 
RESPOND ERS X X X X X   
ADU LT 
STATURE X X X X X   
 
All visits  will be outpatient  day hospital  visits  with the exception  of those  visits  when  a 
bone  biopsy  is scheduled.  
 
MONITORING  SUBJECTS,  DOSAGE,  AND CRITERIA  FOR  WITHDRAWAL  OF  
SUBJECTS  FROM THE  STUDY  
 
Treatment  with Humatrope®   will begin  at the 12 month  pretreatment  visit/baseline 
treatment  visit.  The accompanying  parent  will learn  how to  reconstitute  the drug and 
administer  the subcutaneous  injections.  The dose will be 0.06 mg/kg/day  for 6 days  of the 
week.  At the end of 12 months  of treatment,  those  children  who have  responded  with a 
9  
 
 
sustained  50% increase  in growth  rate will remain  on Humatrope®   injections  for an 
additional  2 years.  After  the third  year of treatment,  responders  will be defined  as those 
children  who demonstrate  a sustained  increase  of 30% or greater  above  baseline.  These 
responders  will be treated  through  attainment  of final  adult  height  as defined  above.  
 
STRATIFICATION  AND RANDOMIZATION  
 
All patients  entering  this study  will undergo  the same  protocol  as described  above.  There 
will be no randomization.  
 
HUMAN SUBJECTS  PROTECTIONS  
 
Children  enrolled  in this study  will be limited  to those  with Sillence  Types  III and  IV OI, 
as determined  by clinical  and genetic  criteria.  This disorder  is autosomal  dominant,  and 
occurs  with equal  distribution  in males  and females.  The disorder  has been  described  in 
all races  and has no ethnic  preference.  There  are no exclusionary  criteria  related  to race 
or gender  for this  protocol.  
 
CRITERIA  FOR  PATIENT  SELECTION  
 
Patients  will be recruited  with the goal of including  at least 10 each  of individuals  with 
clinical/biochemical  criteria  of types  III and  IV OI who are  between  3 and  8 years  of age.  
 
1.   Height:  Individuals  with type III OI have  severe  short  stature  by definition; 
individuals  with type IV OI recruited  to the study  will have  height  less than the 3rd 
percentile  for age.  All individuals  will be required  to furnish  growth  records,  especially 
height  and head  circumference,  from  at least the preceding  two years.  
 
2.   Long  bone  status:  Participants  must  have  radiographic  evidence  that long bone 
epiphyses  have  not yet fused.  In addition,  60° or greater  angulation  of a femur  will 
exclude  a child,  pending  surgical  management  or medical  clearance.  
 
3.   Spine:  Prospective  participants  will be evaluated  for scoliosis  and spinal 
compressions.  Participants  with scoliosis  greater  than 40° will be excluded  unless 
evidence  is presented  that the scoliosis  has been  stable  for the  prior  two years. 
Participants  with corrective  rods in  their spine  will be excluded.  
 
4.   Neuro  status:  All patients  will be co-enrolled  in 97-CH-0064, and  will be screened  for 
Basilar  Invagination  through  that protocol.  Children  who are  initially  screened  by spiral 
CT scan with MRI confirmation  and determined  to have  severe  BI will  be excluded  from 
participation  in this study.  Severe  BI is  defined  by NIH data  as distortion  of the  angle 
between  the pons and  medulla  and or compression  of posterior  fossa  contents.  [18] We  
are only beginning  to define  the parameters  of BI in  this population,  and we do not  know  
why some  children  with BI progress  in severity  and some  do not.  Until  those  questions 
are answered,  we feel it would  not be prudent  to stimulate  growth  in a child  we know to 
have  a severe  form  of BI at  enrollment.  
10  
 
 
 
 
5.  Pulmonary  status:  All children  will be co-enrolled  in 97-CH-0064, and  will have 
pulmonary  function  testing  through  that protocol.  Tests  will be scheduled  as required  for 
that protocol;  namely,  PFTs  every  2 years  if normal,  every  year if abnormal.  
 
OFF STUDY  CRITERIA  
 
1. Patients  who develop  scoliosis  greater  than 40° and/or  patients  who progress  to severe 
basilar  invagination  during  the study  will be removed  from  the study.  
Failure  to comply  with the outlined  procedures  (blood  draws,  endocrine  testing,  bone  
biopsies,  and visit schedule)  is also a criterion  for withdrawal  from  the protocol.  
2. Patients  who become  pregnant. 
NATURE  OF PROCEDURES  
 
6 or 12 hour growth  hormone  evaluation:  A heparin  lock will be inserted  prior  to the 
overnight  unstimulated  growth  hormone  evaluation.  Blood  samples  will be collected  for 
growth  hormone  every  20 minutes  for 6 or 12 hours. [17] We  anticipate  that the majority 
of patients  will weigh  enough  for either  the 6 or 12 hour test.  
 
Somatomedin  generation  test: Patients  will be given  a daily  subcutaneous  injection  of 
synthetic  growth  hormone,  0.033 mg/kg,  for 5 days.  [14] Blood  will be drawn  as 
described  in the protocol  section  of this  document.  
 
Tetracycline -labeled  iliac crest  biopsy:  To assess  dynamic  parameters  of bone  formation, 
tetracycline,  which  has high affinity  for hydroxyapatite  in its early  states  of organization), 
will be administered  orally  at a dose of 15 -20 mg/kg/d  (max  900 mg/d)  for two  2-day 
courses  separated  by a 10-day free period.  This generates  two distinct  fluorescent  lines 
along  the actively  forming  bone  surfaces  and allows  exact  assessment  of the  bone 
formation  and mineral  apposition  rates.  Bone  cores  will be taken  from  alternate  iliac 
crests  using  a 5 mm  Bordier  trephine.  Careful  procedure  will allow  collection  of 
specimens  in which  the architecture  of trabecular  and cortical  bone  is maintained. 
Dynamic  and static  histomorphometric  parameters  of bone  formation  and resorption  will 
be measured  according  to the guidelines  of the  ASBMR  Histomorphometric 
Nomenclature  Committee.  [19] 
 
Growth  Hormone  Injections:  Humatrope®   is the synthetic  human  growth  hormone 
manufactured  by Eli  Lilly  and Company.  It is identical  in amino  sequence  to the natural 
human  hormone.  There  is now considerable  experience  with this drug. Parents  will be 
informed  of the  potential  risks  of insulin -resistant  hyperglycemia,  decreased  serum 
thyroxine,  slipped  capital  femoral  epiphysis  and allergic  reactions.  A comprehensive, 
detailed  list of all  potential  risks  is included  in the informed  consent  form.  All patients 
will be given  the dose 0.06 mg/kg/day  for six  days/week.  
11  
 
 
HAZARDS  AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
Endocrine  evaluation  for Parts  A and  B: Participants  in this study  will have  a heparin 
lock inserted  prior  to the overnight  serial  growth  hormone  sampling.  This heparin  lock 
will be used to withdraw  blood  samples  for the  pulsatile  growth  hormone  study.  
 
Our experience  with the somatomedin  generation  test has been  more  positive  with 
separate  venipunctures  for each  sample;  we are not planning  heparin  lock insertion  for 
this stimulation  test. During  the somatomedin  generation  test the patient  will have  the 
discomfort  of daily  subcutaneous  injections.  No additional  side effects  are expected  from  
this short -term administration  of synthetic  growth  hormone.  
 
The maximum  blood  volume  required  for the  endocrine  evaluation  when  all testing  is done  
in one visit is 76 cc,  which  can safely  be obtained  from  a 15.2 kg child.  We expect  to do 
this testing  in 2 separate  visits,  6 months  apart  so as  not to exceed  the safe blood  limit 
parameters  defined  by Clinical  Center  policy.  NIH policy  limits  the volume  of blood 
drawn from  children  to 9.5 milliliters  per kilogram  of body weight  in any 8-week  period  
of time  and 5 milliliters  per kilogram  of body weight  at any one time.  
 
Iliac Crest  Bone  Biopsy:  Bone  biopsies  are now performed  in the operating  room  at the 
NIH with  patients  under  general  anesthesia.  Anesthesiologists  from  the Department  of 
Anesthesia  and Surgical  Services  at the NIH clinical  center  manage  general  anesthesia 
and closely  monitor  risks  associated  with general  anesthesia  such as suppression  of 
respiratory  and cardiac  function.  With  appropriate  sedation,  an iliac crest  biopsy  is a 
relatively  simple  procedure.  Plugging  of the  biopsy  site with Surgicel  or gel  foam, 
together  with placement  of a compressive  dressing,  prevents  bleeding  and also 
encourages  rapid  clot organization.  Two small  stitches  will be used to close  the skin 
wound. In our experience,  the short  course  of tetracycline  administration  has never 
provoked  tooth  staining.  The drug should  be administered  after meals  and long duration 
exposure  to sunlight  prevented  during  those  days.  Rarely,  the drug causes  skin 
hypersensitivity  to sunlight  that may induce  first degree  sunburn. Discomfort  in the hours 
following  the biopsy  is easily  controlled  with pain relievers  such as Tylenol  or Tylenol 
with codeine.  
 
Humatrope®   injections:  Parents  will be taught  to administer  subcutaneous  injections  of 
Humatrope®. They  will use an insulin  syringe  and needle  for this  daily  procedure.  There 
is no discomfort  connected  with the delivery  of the  hormone  itself.  The discomfort  will 
consist  of the  insertion  of a very small  needle  under  the skin and should  be minimal.  
 
 
 
ADVERSE  EVENTS  
 
All serious,  unexpected  adverse  events  (those  not included  in the investigators  brochure), 
related  to the use of Humatrope®   will be reported  to Eli Lilly  and Company.  Unexpected, 
serious  adverse  events  will be reported  to the FDA as  well,  within  15 days  of the  event, 
and within  7 days  in the case of a death  or life -threatening  event.  The known risks  of 
12  
 
 
growth  hormone  administration  are listed  in attachment  I. These  are expected  risks  and 
therefore  will not be considered  reportable  to the FDA.  
 
Adverse  events  that will be reported  to the NICHD IRB  will include  those  events 
reportable  to the FDA and  Eli Lilly.  In addition,  we will report  the following  adverse 
events  related  to the bone  biopsy  procedure:  
 
1. Prolonged  bleeding  at the biopsy  site, which  we define  as bleeding  lasting  longer 
than 24 hours post  biopsy  
2. Post biopsy  infection  at the biopsy  site; defined  as an infection  diagnosed  and 
treated  by the  private  physician  at home  within  7 days  of the  biopsy.  
 
Frequent  fractures  are a cardinal  feature  of patients  with OI.  Fractures  may not be 
consistently  documented  by x-ray or history,  and can occur  in clusters.  For these  reasons, 
fracture  incidence  is not an accurate  measure  of progression  or worsening  of osteogenesis 
imperfecta.  Fractures  are not defined  as reportable  adverse  events.  
 
RADIATION  EXPOSURE  
 
The effective  dose calculation  for the  radiographic  studies  involved  in this protocol  is 
0.43 rem.  The amount  of radiation  in this study  is within  the dose guideline  (0.5 rem) 
established  by the  NIH Radiation  Safety  Committee  for pediatric  research  subjects,  and is 
deemed  a slight  increment  above  minimal  risk. The amount  of radiation  that patients  will 
receive  in this protocol  is equivalent  to the amount  of radiation  exposure  from  natural 
background  sources  in about  a year and a half. The highest  individual  organ  expos ures 
will be to the skin,  muscle,  and bone  surfaces  (4 rem  each).  The radiographic  studies 
described  in this study  are acceptable  to obtain  the desired  research  information,  and 
present  the prospect  of direct  benefit  to the individual  subjects.  The radiographic 
procedures  will be performed  by or under  the supervision  of a radiologist  in the NIH CC 
Radiology  Department.  
 
We invite  the parents  of our patients  to bring  recent  films  taken  at home  which  can be 
copied  at the Clinical  Center  and returned  to them,  thus eliminating  the need  for repeat 
films.  All parents  will be informed  that this is a possibility,  and told to request  that a 
ruler  be placed  on the  long bone  films.  
 
The most  obvious  potential  benefit  that participants  in this study  might  expect  is 
improved  linear  growth  rate, leading  to, over time,  an improved  final adult  stature.  At 
this time,  we cannot  predict  who will  and will not respond,  so this  benefit  is a potential 
for all  participants.  For those  children  who respond  to the growth  hormone,  our earlier 
data showed  an improved  quality  of bone  after 1 year  of growth  hormone  treatment,  as 
well as improved  bone  density.  [9] By adolescence  and adulthood,  many  people  affected 
with OI begin  to develop  cardiac  and pulmonary  abnormalities  that may be secondary  to 
a small  thoracic  cage.  By increasing  linear  length,  to include  trunk  height,  we expect  a 
final potential  benefit  to be prevention  of possible  cardiac  and pulmonary  deficiencies.  
13  
 
 
Informed  consent  will be obtained  from  a parent  or legal  guardian  of all  children 
participating  in this study,  by the  principal  investigator  or an  associate  investigator.  For 
children  who are  7- 8 years  old, an assent  will be obtained  by the  principal  investigator  or 
an associate  investigator.  Children  under  the age of 7 years  will be given  age appropriate 
teaching  for each  procedure  they will be having.  
 
 
DATA and SAFETY MONIORIN PLAN  
 
Study Staff Responsibilities  
The Principal Investigator , Joan Marini, is responsible for all aspects of the study .  
 
Source Documentation  
Joan Marini, MD, PhD,  is responsible for  coordinating data collection  and will review the data for accuracy 
and completeness  within 2 months of each subject visit, including review of patient consent 
documents. An evaluation of patient recruitment, accrual, and retention as specified in the 
protocol will be  ongoing . Review  of literat ure and results of related studies will be assessed 
throughout the study for any impact on patient safety or ethical questions.   
IRB and DSMC Documentation   
All IRB documentation can be found in PT MS. The Principal Investigator , Joan  Marini,  is responsibl e 
for maintaining IRB  documentation, including records of all reviews of the s tudy and submissions 
to the IRB. This protocol does not meet the criteria as outlined in the NIH HRPP SOP 17  for data to 
be submitted to a d ata safety monitoring committee.   Clinical Trial Studies (non IND/IDE) will have 
random audits performed by the NICHD Office of the Clinical Director (policy: 
https://science.nichd.nih.gov/confluence/disp lay/ocd/Protocol+Navigation ). 
Consent:  
“For subjects who were minors at the time of consent and are now age 18 
years or older, the PI has requested a waiver of consent (45 CFR.46.117) 
for continued analysis of their data. The research involves no more than 
minimal risk and a waiver will not adve rsely affect the rights and welfare of 
the subjects. The only record linking the subject and the research would be 
the consent document and the principal risk would be potential harm 
resulting from breach of confidentiality. Continued research could not be  
carried out without the waiver as several protocol participants signed their 
assent more than 10 years ago and the PI has lost touch with about 3/4  of 
the patients . Wherever appropriate, subjects will be provided with additional 
pertinent information rega rding any findings learned from the analysis of 
their data”.  
 
Adverse Event Procedures and Documentation  
All Unanticipated Problems (UP), Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (UADE), Protocol 
Deviations (PD), deaths, and Adverse Events (AE) will be report ed to the IRB or the Clinical 
Director (CD) using PTMS, in accordance with SOP  16. When PTMS is not available, the NIH 
Problem Report Form will be used. 
14  
(https://federation.nih.gov/ohsr/nih/ohrdocs/NIH_Problem_Report_Form_Fillable_DDIR_v1_6 -
11-13_508.pdf ).   
All serious UP’s  and Serious PD’s, a nd will be reported to the IRB and CD as soon as possible 
but not more than 7 days after the PI first learns of the event. Non -serious UP’s will be reported 
to the IRB and CD, and non -serious PD’s to the IRB not more than 14 days after the PI first 
learns of the event. Deaths  will be reported to the  Clinical  Director  within  7 days after the PI 
first learns  of the event.  An aggregated summary of all UP’s, PD’s,  and AE’s will be reported to 
the IRB at the time of Continuing Review (CR).  
 
 Study Completion  
Principal Investigator  will maintain  subjects’ records for  at least  three years after completion 
of the study.    
 
 
EVALUATION  OF RESULTS  
 
The primary  outcome  is the change  in growth  rate from  untreated  to treated  status.  For 
the first year,  a 50% increase  in growth  rate is considered  a positive  response.  We 
suppose  that growth  rate is approximately  normally  distributed.  From  random  chance, 
we estimate  that the probability  of observing  a 50% increase  in growth  without 
intervention  is less than 0.2. Therefore,  we would  like to test the null hypothesis  that the 
proportion  of responders  in the population  is less than or equal  to 0.2 against  the 
alternative  that the proportion  exceeds  0.2. Using  a normal  approximation  to the binomial 
and assuming  the true action  of GH is  to result  in a population  with mean  50% more  than 
the untreated  mean,  we have  91% power  with the sample  size of 20.  
 
Other  protocol  parameters  will be correlated  with linear  growth  responders  versus  non- 
responders,  as well as being  analyzed  for the  group as  a whole.  These  correlations  will 
be made  for both  6 month  and one-year treatment  intervals  throughout  the study.  
 
NATURE  OF FINANCIAL  COMPENSATION  
 
No financial  payments  will be offered  to patients  or their  families.  
15  
 
 
Refere nces 
 
1.  Marini JC, C.E., Osteogenesis Imperfect a, in Manage ment of Geneti c Syndro mes, A.J. Cassidy 
SB, Editor. 2001 , Wiley-Liss: New York. p. 281-300. 
2.  Marini, J.C., Osteogenesis imperfect a: comprehensive manag ement. Adv Pediatr, 1988 . 35: p. 
391-426. 
3.  Ernst, M. and E.R. Froesch, Growth hormone dependent stimulation of osteoblast-like cells in 
serum-free cultures via local synthesis of insulin-like growth factor I. Biochem Biophy s Res 
Commun, 1988 . 151(1): p. 142-7. 
4.  Rauch, F., et al., Static and dynamic bone histomorphom etry in children with osteogenesis 
imperfect a. Bone, 2000 . 26(6): p. 581-9. 
5.  Prockop, D.J. and K.I. Kivirikko, Heritable diseases of collagen. N Engl J Med, 1984 . 311(6): p. 
376-86. 
6.  Prockop, D.J., et al., The biosynthesis of collagen and its disorders (first of two parts). N Engl J 
Med, 1979 . 301(1): p. 13-23. 
7.  Cohen, P., et al., Consensus statement on the diagno sis and treatment of children with idiopathic 
short stature: a summa ry of the Growth Hormone Research Society, the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric 
Endo crine Society , and the European Society for Paediatric Endo crinology Workshop. J Clin 
Endo crinol Metab, 2008 . 93(11): p. 4210-7. 
8.  Rose, S.R. and G. Municchi, Six-hour and four-hour nocturnal sampling for growth hormone. J 
Pediatr Endo crinol Metab, 1999 . 12(2): p. 167-73. 
9.  Marini, J.C., et al., Positive linear growth and bone responses to growth hormone treatment in 
children with types III and IV osteogenesis imperfect a: High predictive value of the 
carboxyter minal propeptide of type I procollagen. Journal of Bone and Mineral Researc h, 2003 . 
18(2): p. 237-243. 
10.  Rauchenzauner, M., et al., Sex- and age-specific reference curves for serum markers of bone 
turnover in healthy children from 2 months to 18 years. J Clin Endo crinol Metab, 2007 . 92(2): p. 
443-9. 
11.  Marini, J.C., et al., The growth hormone and somatomedin axis in short children with osteogenesis 
imperfect a. Journal of Clinical Endo crinology and Metabolism, 1993 . 76: p. 251-256. 
12.  Cotterill , A.M., et al., The insulin-like growth factor I generation test in the investigation of short 
stature. Acta Paediatr Supp l, 1994 . 399: p. 128-30. 
13.  Gelato, M.C., et al., Growth hormone (GH) responses to GH-releasing hormone during pube rtal 
development in normal boys and girls: compa rison to idiopathic short stature and GH deficie ncy. 
J Clin Endoc rinol Metab, 1986 . 63(1): p. 174-9. 
14.  Copeland, K.C., L.E. Underwood , and J.J. Van Wyk, Induction of immuno reaactive somatomedin 
C huma n serum by growth hormone: dose-response relationships and effect on chromatographic 
profiles. Journal of Clinical Endo crinology and Metabolism, 1980 . 50(4): p. 690-697. 
15.  Nilsson, A., et al., Regulation by growth hormone of numb er of chond rocytes containing IGF-I in 
rat growth plate. Science, 1986 . 233(4763 ): p. 571-4. 
16.  Pintor, C., et al., Clonidine acceler ates growth in children with impaired growth hormone 
secretion. Lancet, 1985 . 1(8444 ): p. 1482-5. 
17.  Rose, S.R., et al., Overnight growth hormone concentrations are usually normal in pubertal 
children with idiopathic short stature--a Clinical Research Center study. J Clin Endo crinol Metab, 
1996 . 81(3): p. 1063-8. 
18.  Charnas, L.R., E. Hopk ins, and J.C. Marini. The Dynamic Deformation Sequence of Basilar 
Invagination in Osteogenesis Imperfect a (Abstract). in American Society of Huma n Genetics 
Annua l Meeting. 1997 . Baltimore MD. 
19.  Parfitt , A.M., et al., Bone histomorphom etry:  standa rdization of nomenclature, symbols, and units. 
Report of the ASBMR Histomorphom etry  Nom enclature Comm ittee. J Bone Miner Res, 1987 . 2(6): 
p. 595-610. 