Title: RCT of Fixed vs Titrated Letrozole in Breast Cancer Patient Undergoing IVF  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol ID: 0811010075  
 
WCM IRB -Approval and Amendment  History  
 
Protocol Created  
11/04/2008  
Expedited Approval  
11/17/2009  
 
Amendment -001  
Expedited Approval  
07/14/2010  
   
Amendment -002  
Expedited Approval  
09/21/2015  
   
 
  
 
  
 
Study  Design  (for example, hypothesis,  research  question, standard and experimental procedures, 
special or unusual  equipment  of procedures):  
 
IVF is a process  which  involves  a schedule  of injectable  medication  to recruit  several  follicles,   each containing  
an egg, to be retrieved  under  ultrasound  guidance  where  they can be fertilized.  Embryos  are then selected  to 
be transferred back  into the patient’s uterus  or are cryopreserved  and transferred at a later date.  
 
Letrozole  is a potent  and highly selective  third generation  aromatase  inhibitor  that was developed in the early  
1990’s.  Aromatase is an enzyme  of the cytochrome  P-450 superfamily  and the product  of the CYP19  gene,  
which  catalyzes  the reaction  that converts  androgenic  substances  to estrogens  in many  tissues,  including  the 
granulosa  cells of ovarian  follicles.  Letrozole  competitively  inhibits  the activity  of the aromatase enzyme  and 
has a half-life of approximately  48 hours.  Because of its potent,  sustained  suppression  in the plasma  levels  of 
estradiol,  this drug has been  recently  found  to be superior  to tamoxifen  in the treatment  of advanced -stage  
post-menopausal  breast  cancer.  Conventional  ovarian  stimulation  often  results  in very high estrogen  levels.  
Since  the high estrogen  levels  are often  unsafe  for breast  cancer  patients,  fixed  dose aromatase  inhibitor  
protocols  with Letrozole  were  developed,  to achieve effective ovarian  stimulation  with reduced  estrogen  
levels  to prevent  tumor  progression and short -term cancer  recurrence.  
  
A fixed  dose of Letrozole  has been  used off-label  as an ovulation  induction  agent  in many  centers  to stimulate  
egg development  for infertile  couples  and patients  prior  to undergoing  chemotherapy  for estrogen  sensitive  
cancers.  
 
The purpose  of our study  is to determine  if titrated  dose Letrozole  in comparison  to fixed  dose Letrozole  
during  gonadotropin  stimulation  in IVF in breast  cancer  patients  results  in lower  estradiol  levels  and higher  
mature  oocyte  yield.  
 
In patients  who are scheduled  to undergo  treatment with IVF for fertility  preservation  due to breast  cancer,  we 
would  like to prospectively  randomize  them  to fixed  dose vs. titrated  dose of Letrozole.  Due to time restraints  
for chemotherapy  patients  may present  for ovarian  stimulation  prior  to Day 2 of their menstrual  cycle.  If this 
were  to occur,  a gonadotropin- releasing  hormone  (GnRH)  antagonist  may be started  to suppress  the pituitary  
hormones  for down  regulation  prior to starting  stimulation  medications.  Eligible  subjects  will be  fully informed  RESEARCH PLAN - RCT of Fixed vs Titrated Letrozole  
about  the nature  of the trial. Subjects  could  be enrolled  for IVF treatment  at any point  after breast  cancer  
diagnosis  but before  the initiation  of chemotherapy,  if chemotherapy has been  prescribed  by their oncologist.  
After  obtaining  written  informed  consent,  the subjects  will be screened  based  on inclusion/exclusion  criteria,  
medical  and infertility  history,  ovarian  reserve  (eg, antral  follicle  count,  AMH,  FSH)  and estradiol,  physical  
and gynecological  examination,  oncology  clearance  and the Center’s  standard  screening  evaluations  for IVF 
patients.  A thorough  gynecologic  and endocrinologic  evaluation  will be performed  before  the start of any 
treatment.  Laboratory  assessments  will include  CBC,  chemistry  and lipid profile  (see attached  history and 
physical  form).  Vital signs  including  blood  pressure,  pulse,  and weight  will be assessed  at baseline (prior  to 
start of stimulation  medication),  with preoperative  evaluation,  on day of egg retrieval,  and with post  retrieval  
visits.  
 
Patients  will have  serum  blood  tests for bHCG,  FSH,  AMH,  Estradiol,  and LH and vaginal  sonogram.  Start  of 
stimulation  medication  will proceed  only with documentation  of a serum negative pregnancy  test. Patients  will 
only be eligible  to participate  in the study  for one cycle of in vitro fertilization.  
Patients  who elect  to participate  in the study  will be provided with gonadotropin  medications.  
 
The starting dose  of gonadotropins for both study  groups  would be determined by the patients' age and by 
antral follicle counts  assessed by transvaginal  ultrasound  at the time of initial consultation.  The HMG  form  of 
gonadotropin  may be added to  the FSH formulation,  as needed.  See below:  
Age <35 , Antral  follicle Count  >15 gonadotropin  dose 150 - 225 IU 
Age <35, Antral  follicle Count  <15 gonadotropin  dose 225 - 300 IU 
 
Age 35-39, Antral  follicle  Count  >10 gonadotropin  dose 150 - 300 IU 
Age 35-39, Antral  follicle  Count  <10 gonadotropin  dose 300 - 450 IU 
Age>40  Independent  of antral  follicle  count,  gonadotropin dose 300 - 450 IU. All patients  would  also be 
given  a daily  medication  to prevent  them  from  ovulating (GnRH  e.g. Ganirelix,  Cetrotide),  no later than 
stimulation  day #7 and continuing until  HCG  administration.  
 
Group#1 -Fixed  Letrozole  Group: Provided  their blood  tests and sonograms  were within  normal limits,  patients  
who are randomized  to fixed  dose Letrozole  will start Letrozole  5mg daily  (orally)  and then gonadotropins  2 
days later (Current  Letrozole  protocol  at CRM).  Patients  will be monitored  with blood  tests for estradiol  and 
LH and sonogram  every  1-3 days.  Adjustments  to gonadotropin  dosing will be made  as per usual  protocol  for 
IVF. Letrozole  dose will not change  and will  continue for  up to two weeks  after egg  retrieval.  
 
Group  #2-Titrated  Letrozole  Group:  Provided their blood  tests and sonograms  were  within  normal  limits,  
patients  who are randomized  to the titrated  dose of Letrozole,  will start gonadotropins  in the evening  at the 
start of stimulation  with injectable  follicle  stimulating  hormone  (FSH)  and human  menopausal  gonadotropin 
(HMG).  Oral Letrozole  will be added  to the stimulation  in the following titrated  regimen:  
 
Serum  Estradiol level  <150 pg/ml - No Letrozole  
Serum  Estradiol Level  150-250 pg/ml - 2.5mg  
Serum  Estradiol Level  251-350 pg/ml - 5  mg 
Serum  Estradiol Level   >350 pg/ml -  7.5 mg 
 
The maximal  starting  dose of Letrozole will be 5 mg, regardless  of the initial estradiol level.  The Letrozole  
dose may be reduced  if the appropriate  suppression of estradiol  occurs.  The maximal  increase or decrease  in 
Letrozole  dose will be 2.5 mg/ day. Patients  will be monitored  with blood tests for estradiol and LH and 
sonograms  starting  on the second  day of gonadotropin  stimulation  and every  1-3 days to monitor  response  and 
adjust  medication  dose as per our usual  IVF protocol.  Letrozole  will be stopped  for both groups  on the day 
that HCG  is given  and resumed  after egg retrieval.  All patients  will stay on the same  dose of Letrozole  that 
was required  for their last day of ovarian  stimulation  for up to 2 weeks  after stimulation  to keep  estradiol 
levels  at a minimum.  In addition,  patients  will have  serum  estradiol  levels  drawn  weekly  for 2 weeks  after 
stimulation.  Follow -up vital signs will  be recorded  along with  CBC,  liver function panel,  and cholesterol  panel  
1-2 weeks  after stimulation,  if oncology  treatment  is not started  immediately  after retrieval.  They  will also be 
asked  to return  6 months  to 1 year after completion  of chemotherapy  for AMH  and FSH levels  to evaluate  
ovarian  reserve,  and then followed  on a yearly  basis  by phone/mail  questionnaire  or in person  with an annual  
gynecological  examination.  
 
All study  patients  will be provided with an emergency  24-hour phone  number  to reach  a physician  to report  
adverse  reactions  to medications,  and these  physicians  will file adverse  event  report  forms  to the principal 
investigator  and data safety  monitoring board.  In addition,  they will be asked  to report  any adverse  reactions  to 
medications  during  follicular  monitoring  sonograms.  All decisions  regarding  daily  medication  doses  will be 
determined  by the study  principal  investigator.  Otherwise,  the treatment of ovarian  stimulation,  egg retrieval,  
and cryopreservation  is identical  to non-study  patients  undergoing ovarian  stimulation,  oocyte  retrieval,  and 
embryo/oocyte  cryopreservation.  
 
After  retrieval,  follow -up instructions  will be reviewed.  Patients  will be advised  to refrain  from  embryo 
transfer  for a minimum  of 2 years  after chemotherapy.  Patients  will not be permitted  to undergo  embryo  
transfer  for a minimum  of one year after completing  chemotherapy  and only after clearance  for pregnancy  has 
Gonadotropins  
Ganirelix  
 Retrieval  
Ganirelix  
Letrozole  5 mg/d  
Gonadotropins  been  obtained from  their medical  oncologist.  Patients  will be followed  for five years  on an annual  basis  with a 
follow -up telephone  call from  one of the investigators  inquiring  about  health  status  (see patient  follow -up data 
sheet).  A pregnancy  registry  will be created  for any pregnancy occurring  following  enrollment  in the study.  
Detailed  pregnancy outcome  will be collected between  age 2-5 years  (see baby follow -up data sheet  attached).  
 
 
 
 
 
FIXED  LETROZOLE PROTOCOL  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
cycle days  
 
1  
 
2  
 
3  
 
4  
 
5  
 
6  
 
7  
 
8  
 
9  
 
10  
 
11 …………….  
luteal  phase  menses            
  
 
 
 
 
TITRATED  LETROZOLE PROTOCOL  
 
 
 
cycle days 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 …………….  
luteal  phase   menses  
Ganirelix  
 
 
 
 
ole sta 
2.5 -7.5 
 
 
 
 
rting  d 
mg/d  ( 
 
 
 
 
ose 5 
dose  ba
 
 
 
 
g/d 
on 
 
 
 
 
 
 
estradiol  
Ganirelix  
Retrieval  
Maximal  Letro  
Letrozole titration  
m 
Gonadotropins  
 
 
 
   
 
A2. Rationale and justification for  the study  (for example,  historical  background,  investigator’s personal  
experience,  
pertinent  medical  literature):  
For several  years  in Europe and North America,  aromatase inhibitors have been  used to block estrogen  
production  in the treatment of post-menopausal breast cancer.  Researchers in  the United  States  and Canada  
have  used aromatase  inhibitors  in otherwise healthy women undergoing ovulation inductio n. By blocking  
estrogen production,  many researchers have  found  that ovulation  induction could be performed  with 
significantly  lower doses  of fertility  medications (Fertil Steril  75:305- 9,2001;  Fertil Steril 86(5):1428- 1431;  
Fertil  Steril  85:1774- 7, 2006).  Pregnancy  outcome  was similar  to that of traditional  stimulation  protocols  
(Journal  of the Society for Gynecologic Investigation 11(6):406- 15,2004).  
 
In 2005,  an observational  pilot study  investigated 147  low responder  patients  with previ ously  cancelled  IVF 
cycles.  71 patients were treated with 2.5  mg Letrozole  and FSH and 76 patients  were  similarly treated  
without Letrozole. Antagonist  was added  in both groups during the first  5 days of stimulation. The Letrozole  
group  had more  oocytes retrieved  and higher  implantation rates  (Fertil  Steril  :84(1):82 -7, 2005). In 2006,   
Verpoest  et al. published  a small randomized  prospective pilot study investigating  the effects  of adding 
aromatase inhibitors to ovarian stimulation  for IVF or  ICSI on endocrine parameters,  endometrial thickness  
and pregnancy rates. They  showed that median  estradiol  concentrations were  significantly  lower  in the 
Letrozole group vs.  no Letrozole, whereas  endometrial thickness was significantly greater  in the  Letrozole  
group.  
 
In 2005,  at our  institution, a Letrozole  protocol was  applied  to a population of women  with breast cancer  
undergoing fertility  preservation.  60 women  with breast  cancer,  were  prospectively  followed  after fertility  
preservation procedures with  tamoxifen  alone  or in combination with  low dose  FSH, or  Letrozole  in 
combination with  low dose FSH.  After IVF,  all resultant embryos were cryopreserved.  The combination of  
low-dose FSH with  tamoxifen or  Letrozole  resulted  in higher  embryo  yield  compared  to tamoxifen alone.  
Recurrence rates  did not seem to  be increased. The Letrozole  protocol resulted in lower peak  estradiol levels.  
(J Clin Oncol 23:4347 -4353,  2005).  
 
In 2006,  at out institution, 47 breast cancer  patients  were studied who received 5mg/d  Letrozole and 150- 300 
IU FSH to cryopreserve embryos or oocytes.  Age matched retrospective controls were  selected  from  women  
who underwent  IVF for tubal  disease. Letrozole  with FSH stimulation  resulted  in significantly  lower peak  
estradiol levels and 44%  reduction  in gonadotropin requirement,  compared  to controls. Length of  stimulation,  
number  of embryos  obtained,  and fertilization rates were  similar. The  mean  delay  from  surgery  to 
cryopreservation without delay in  chemotherapy  was 39 days  with 81% of  patients  completing  their 
stimulation  within  the 8 weeks of  surgery.  (J Clin  Endocrinol Metab  91:3885- 3890,  2006)  
 
At our institution,  215 women with breast  cancer  were prospectively  evaluated for  fertility  preservation  
before adjuvant  chemotherapy.  Of those  79, elected  to undergo  controlled ovarian hyperstimulation with 
letrozole 5 mg x 5 days and gonadotropins for embryo  and oocyte  cryopreservation. The remaining  136 
patients  underwent  no fertility -preservation  procedures  and served  as controls. In  the fertility  preservation  
group  the mean  E2 was 406 ±  257 pg/ml.  The hazard  rate for recurrence and the survival rate  after IVF was 
not compromised  in comparison to  the control group  after 23 months. (J Clin Onc 26:2630- 2635, 2008)  
 
References:  
 
1. Al-Fozan H, Al-Khadouri  M, Tan SL, Tulandi T. A randomized  trial of Letrozole versus  clomiphene  
citrate in  women undergoing superovulation.  Fertil Steril.  2004 Dec;82(6):1561- 3. 
 
2. Azim  AA, Costantini -Ferrando  M, Oktay  K. Safety  of fertility  preservation by ovarian  stimulation  with 
letrozole  and gonadotropins  in patients with breast cancer:  a prospective controlled study.  J Clin Oncol.  2008  
Jun 1;26(16):2630 -5. 
 
3. Barroso G, Menocal G,  Felix  H, Rojas- Ruiz  JC, Arslan  M, Oehninger S. Comparison  of the efficacy of the 
aromatase inhibitor  letrozole  and clomiphene  citrate as  adjuvants  to recombinant  follicle -stimulating  hormone  
in controlled ovarian hyperstimulation: a prospective,  randomized , blinded clinical  trial. Fertil Steril.         
2006 Nov;86(5):1428- 31. 
 
4. Dixon  JM, Love CDB,  Bellamy COC,  Cameron  DA, Leonard  RCF,  Smith  H, Miller WR. Letrozole  as 
primary  medical  therapy  for locally advanced  and large  operable breast  cancer.  Breast  Cancer  research  and 
Treatment.  2001;  66:191- 199. 
 
5. Garcia -Velasco  JA, Moreno  L, Pacheco A, Guillén  A, Duque L , Requena A, Pellicer  A. The aromatase 
inhibitor letrozole  increases the concentration of intraovarian  androgens  and improves in vitro  fertilization  
outcome  in low responder patients: a pilot study. Fertil  Steril.  2005  Jul;84(1):82- 7. 
 
6. Jee BC, Ku SY, Suh CS, Kim KC, Lee  WD, Kim SH. Use of letrozole versus clomiphene  citrate  combined 
with gonadotropins in intrauterine  insemination cycles:  a pilot study.  Fertil  Steril.  2006  Jun;85(6):1774 -7. 
 
7. Mitwally  MF, Casper  RF. Aromatase inhibition reduces the  dose of gonadotropin required for controlled  
ovarian hyperstimulation.  J Soc Gynecol Investig. 2004 Sep;11(6):406- 15. 
 
8. Mitwally MF,  Casper RF. Single -dose administration of an aromatase  inhibitor for ovarian  stimulation.  
Fertil  Steril. 2005 Jan;83(1):229 -31. 
 
9. Mitwally  MF, Casper  RF. Use of an aromatase inhibitor  for induction  of ovulation  in patients  with an 
inadequate response to  clomiphene citrate.  Fertil Steril.  2001 Feb;75(2):305- 9. 
 
10. Oktay K,  Buyuk  E, Libertella  N, Akar  M, Rosenwaks  Z. Fertility  preservation  in breast cancer patients:  A 
prospective  controlled  comparison of ovarian  stimulation  with Tamoxifen  and Letrozole  for embryo  
cryopreservation. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2005 July; 23(19): 4347- 53. 
 
11. Oktay  K, Hourvitz  A, Sahin G, Oktem  O, Safro B,  Cil A,  Bang H. Letrozole reduces  estrogen and  
gonadotropin exposure in women  with breast cancer  undergoing ovarian stimulation  before chemotherapy.  J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Oct;91(10):3885 -90. 
 
12. Verpoest WM , Kolibianakis  E, Papanikolaou E , Smitz  J, Van Steirteghem  A, Devroey P . Aromatase 
inhibitors in ovarian  stimulation  for IVF/ICSI:  a pilot study.  Reprod  Biomed  Online. 2006 Aug;13(2):166- 72. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
A3. Primary study  endpoint : 
Mature oocyte yield  
 
 
  
 
 
A4. Primary  objective : 
The purpose  of our study  is to determine  if titrated  dose Letrozole  in comparison  to fixed  dose Letrozole  
during gonadotropin stimulation in IVF  in breast  cancer  patients  results  in 50%  increased mature oocyte yield  
 
 
 
A5. Secondary objectives : 
Peak Serum  Estradiol  Level  (pg/ml)  
FSH ng/ml  on Cycle  Day 2 
AMH ng/ml  on Cycle  Day 2 
Antral  follicle  count  on Cycle  Day 2 
Total days of  stimulation  medications  
Total medication  dose 
Adverse  events from medications  
Total  number  of oocytes  
Number of mature oocytes   
Number  of follicles on day of HCG  
Number  of fertilized  (2PN)  oocytes  (if applicable)  
Number  of good quality embryos  (if applicable)  
Cycle  cancellation  rate 
1 year follow -up breast  cancer  recurrence rate 
2 year follow -up breast  cancer  recurrence rate 
5 year follow -up breast  cancer  recurrence rate 
 
 
A6. Inclusion/Exclusion  criteria:  
Inclusion  Criteria : 
Female breast  cancer  patient  with breast  cancer  diagnosis  undergoing chemotherapy desiring  fertility  
preservation with  oocyte or  embryo  cryopreservation 
Healthy  subject  according to documented  medical history  and physical  examination  who has been  
diagnosed  with breast  cancer  (estrogen  and progesterone  receptor  positive  and/or negative)  
Age less that  45 years at time of informed  consent  
Verbal  or written  clearance  from medical  or surgical oncologist  to undergo  controlled ovarian  
hyperstimulation- IVF. 
Delay  to surgery or  chemotherapy treatment  will not jeopardize  cancer treatment  outcome  
Ovarian stimulation will  not affect cancer  treatment  plan 
Transvaginal ultrasound  scan (US) within one  month  of starting  stimulation with no  clinically significant  
pelvic  mass 
Serum  FSH level  (Day  2-4) less than 25,  since  our center  has documented  pregnancies  with FSH up to 
27miu/ml 
Negative pregnancy test prior to  beginning Letrozole  or gonadotropin therapy  
Willing  and able to  comply with  the protocol  
Voluntary provision of written  informed  consent,  prior  to any  study -related  procedure  that was not  part of 
normal  medical  care,  with the understanding  that the subject  can withdraw  consent  at any time without  
prejudice  to her  future  medical care 
Willingness  to provide follow -up information on herself  and babies  born as part of this study 
 
Exclusion  Criteria : 
Patients  not medically cleared  by their oncologist  
 
Patients  with stage IV  breast cancer based on the poor prognosis, general  health  of the patient,  and higher  
uncertainty with delaying  chemotherapy  
 
Any clinically  relevant abnormal laboratory  value (FSH >25  miu/ml,  renal  function, (greater  than two 
times  normal value), hepatic  function (greater  than two times  normal value), blood biochemistry,  
hematology (elevated white  blood count  greater  than 1.5  times  the normal value, hemoglobin  <10mg/dL,  
thrombocytopenia), abnormal cholesterol  profile  (total cho lesterol ≥ 300mg/dL,  abnormal  LDL  greater  
than 2 times  normal  value,)  based on  a fasting  sample  during the screening  phase  
 
Contraindications for the use of gonadotropins (i.e. Tumors other  than breast cancer, pregnancy,  lactation,  
undiagnosed vaginal  bleeding)  
 
Recent  or current  medical  conditions  where the patient is not medically  stable  to undergo stimulation  or 
egg retrieval, HIV  infection,  diabetes,  cardiovascular  disease, gastrointestinal,  hepatic disease,  
undiagnosed pelvic  mass,  renal or pulmonary disease  
 
History  or presence of  alcohol  or drug abuse  within 12  months of signing  consent  
 
History  of severe  allergic  or anaphylactic  reactions or hypersensitivity to  any of the concomitant  
medication prescribed  as part of the treatment regimen  in this protocol  
 
Administration  of investigational drugs within  three months prior  to signing  the informed  consent  
Use of insulin sensitizing agents  at least one month  prior  to signing  informed  consent  
Any patient  who is not  a candidate for IVF  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A7. Treatment  plan:  (include  amount and frequency  of samples of blood and other  bodily fluids  in 
chart  below)  
 
Bodily  Fluid  Amount  Frequency  Total  
Blood  
5cc  
12-14  
60-70cc 
Urine  20cc  1  
20 cc 
Other       
 
 
A8. Statistical  considerations  (e.g. justification for  sample size or “n”):  
Sample  size: 
The primary  aim of the study  is to determine  if titrated dose  Letrozole  in comparison to fixed  dose Letrozole  
during gonadotropin stimulation in IVF  in breast cancer patients  results  in a 50% increased  mature  oocyte  yield.  
With  a sample  size of 25 patients  per group,  the study  will have 80%  power  (alpha=0.05)  to detect  a difference  in 
the mean  number  of mature  oocytes  of 4.3 between  the titrated  dose group  and the fixed  dose group.  This is  
based on an expected  mature oocyte  yield of 8.7±4.8 in  the fixed dose group and an expected  50% increase  in the 
mature  oocyte  yield  in the titrated  dose group (e.g., [(13.0- 8.7)/8.7  = 50% increase]).  
 
Analysis  Plan : 
The mean  and median  mature  oocyte  yield  will initially  be compared between  the titrated and  fixed  dose groups  
by the two-group t -test and Wilcoxon rank- sum test, respectively,  in an intent -to-treat analysis.   Stratification by 
age group  at the time of randomization  will be taken  into account  by performing  analysis  of covariance  
(ANCOVA) for  the primary  endpoint  (i.e., ooctye yield),  using the stratification factor  (age group)  as a covariate 
in the ANCOVA model  (in addition  to the dose group variable)  (this will also be an intent -to-treat analysis).  The 
ANCOVA procedure recognizes  the reduction  in variability in  the titrated -versus -fixed dose  comparison  that is 
attained by use of stratification  (by age group)  at the time of randomization.  This reduction  in variability will 
increase the  power  of the study  (>80%)  to detect  the hypothesized difference  and will  potentially allow  for the 
detection  of smaller  differences  with the stated  sample  size of 50  patients.  
 
Secondary  continuous endpoints  will initially be compared by the t-test or Wilcoxon rank -sum test, as  
appropriate,  and secondary  categorical  endpoints  will be compared  by the chi -square  test or Fisher’s  exact  test, as  
appropriate.  Similarly,  to account  for stratification  at randomization, ANCOVA  and multivariate logistic  
regression will  be performed for the secondary  endpoints,  as appropriate, by using  age group  as a covariate in the 
multivariate  models.  One-year and 2 -year recurrence- free survival  will be preliminary  assessed by the Kaplan - 
Meier  method and  the log-rank test will be employed for comparing  recurrence -free survival  between  the titrated  
and fixed dose  groups.  
 
Subjects who discontinue  the study  prior  to egg retrieval  will be still be considered  in the primary  intent -to-treat 
analysis  by assigning  a value of zero eggs retrieved for the primary endpoint (i.e., oocyte  yield).   This will 
conservatively  underestimate any observed titrated -versus -fixed  dose effect but  will preserve  the benefit  of 
randomization.  A secondary  analysis will  be performed  to assess the  between dose  group  effect after these  
patients  have been removed, but  this will only be for descriptive  purposes.  
 
All p-values  will be two-sided with  statistical significance  evaluated  at the 0.05 alpha level and 95% confidence  
intervals  will be calculated  to assess the  precision of the obtained  estimates.  All analyses  will be performed  in 
SAS Version  9.1 (SAS  Institute,  Inc., Cary,  NC).  
 
Randomization : 
A series of randomized  blocks  of four will be generated for  the study.  This will provide  assurance  that after four 
patients  are enrolled,  there will be two patients assigned  to the titrated dose  letrozole  group  and two patients  
assigned  to the fixed dose  letrozole group.  The blocked randomization  will be stratified  according  to age group:  
≤32 years,  33-36 years,  and ≥37 years.  This process of blocked randomization  and stratification  ensures  an equal  
distribution between the  two study arms  of patients  in the specified age  groups. The  study research  coordinator  
will have  access to the  computer generated  randomization  file and will make  assignments  accordingly.  
 
  
 
A9. Relative  importance/value  of the trial,  considering “standard”  therapy and published/competing  
trials.  Please  
specify  what  the current  standard of care  is. 
This trial will investigate  if a superior  and safer  controlled ovarian  hyperstimulation  protocol  with Letrozole  
exists for  breast  cancer  patients  for fertility  preservation  and cryopreservation  of oocytes or  embryos.  As 
these patients  cannot  delay chemotherapy,  any improvement in oocyte  yield  would be a significant  benefit.  
WCM IRB -approved approval and amendments History  
 
Protocol Created  
11/04/2008  
Expedited Approval  
11/17/2009  
 
 
Amendment -001  
Expedited Approval  
07/14/2010  
 
  
Amendment -002  
Expedited Approval  
09/21/2015  
   
Renewal -001  
Expedited Approval  
01/26/2010  
 
  
Rene wal-002  
Approved  
01/12/2011  
   
Renewal -003  
Approved  
01/17/2012  
   
Renewal -004  
Expedited Approval  
02/01/2013  
  
Renewal -005  
Expedited Approval  
01/24/2014  
  
Renewal -006  
Approved  
12/17/2014  
  
Renewal -007  
Approved  
12/03/2015  
 
  
Renewal -008  
Approved  
06/22/2017  
  
Renewal -009  
Expedited Approval  
07/20/2018  
 
 