Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Title:  
 
 
 
Date:  
 
 
 
 
 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type1 Diabetes in Adolescence  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
June 26, 2020  
 
 
 
  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
2 
 2.Specific Aims : Large epidemiologic studies show that <25% of adolescents with type 1 diabetes ( T1D) 
achieve targeted glycohemoglobin levels advoc ated by the American Diabetes Association ( < 7.5%) or 
International Society of Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes ( < 7.0%). Optimal s elf-management of T1D requires 
daily insulin replacement by multiple injections or insulin pump, 4-6 daily blood glucose checks , regulation of 
carbohydrate intake and physical activity, prevent ion/correct ion of  glycemic fluctuat ions and perhaps use of a 
continuous glucose monitor . This regimen places pervasive affective, behavioral , cognitive and social demands 
on adolescents with T1D  and their families  and psycho social variables  greatly impact their success  in T1D self -
care. Struggling with maint aining  adequate glycemic control is essentially normative among adolescents, 
suggesting that conventional systems of care are not meeting the needs of this population. A substantial , 
growing literature provides an evidence base for psychosocial screening and  behavioral intervention strategies 
targeting improved coping with the demands of T1D, but this evidence base has not penetrated fully into 
routine T1D care. Rigorous integration of this evidence into routine care for T1D could  yield many benefits .  
Behavioral barriers to effec tive care are major concerns of all stakeholders , but conventional care is not well -
equipped to address the se issues . Concomitantly , the supply of board -certified pediatric endocrinologists is not 
keeping pace w ith growth of the T1D patient population, amplifying the need to validate alternative delivery 
systems  that multiply the effective workforce of T1D health professionals . We will develop and test a novel  
Transdisciplinary Care (TC) approach (conjoint TC vis its conducted by an Advanced Practice Nurse, 
Psycholog y Postdoctoral Fellow and Dietitian ) to improve adolescents’ T1D outcomes  and justify a larger  
randomized controlled trial  (RCT) . In Year 1 , crowdsourcing methods will engage youths with T1D, parents and 
health care providers  (HCP) in planning a feasible, acceptable, safe and effective TC model  that addresses  
youths’ and families’  psychosocial needs  and capitalizes on the expertise of advanced practice nurses co -
manag ing T1D with psychologists and die titians . The Wallander et al.  stress and coping model and the 
D’Zurilla and Goldfried problem solving model provide a sound conceptual framework for the TC model of care. 
The TC team will learn each discipline’s skills  in T1D management, develop a detailed TC manual to guide this 
work and others’ future studies, see adolescents and parents together as a team, screen for potentially 
modifiable psychological impediments to T1D care , and promote families’ coping resources by enhanc ing 
family -centered communication  and problem solving , implement ing empirically validated behavioral  
interventions  and facilitat ing additional appropriate services for complex problems . Telehealth  delivery of TC 
care carries several potential advantages , justifying its inclusion within a RCT  comparing  the effects of UC to 
TC delivered via various modalities on glycemic control and treatment adherence (primary outcomes) as well 
as quality of life and other psychosocial variables (secondary outcomes) . Qualitative and economic  analyses 
will follow the RCT , providing perspectives on mechanisms of TC effects and its sustain ability . Mixed 
qualitative  and quantitative methods will validate  an innova tive model of T1D care for adole scents that could 
then be tested in a future definitive , multi -site RCT. We will address t hese specific aims : 
SPECIFIC AIM 1. In Year 1, with methods used effectively in our ongoing DP3 study of parents of children <6 
years old with T1D, we will engage separate “crowds” of adolescents  with T1D, parents, and HCP s in 
planning /refining  a feasible , safe,  acceptable and eff icacious  Trans -Disciplinary  care model (TC) for T1D in 
adolescence.  This crowdsourcing effort should  yield a TC model  that meet s the needs o f all key stakeholder  
group s, ensuring its feasibility , acceptance  and efficacy . 
SPECIFIC AIM  2. With study oversight by a diverse stakeholder panel  and guided by a detailed intervention 
manual , 150 families of adolescents treated for T1D at Nemours practices in the Delaware Valley or Florida will 
participate in a rigorous  Rando mized Controlled Trial (RCT)  in years 2 and 3 . The RCT will compar e Usual 
Care (UC) with T ransd isciplinary  Care (TC) on glycohemoglobin  (HbA 1C), treatment adherence, health care 
use, T1D-related distress , quality of life, and treatment satisfaction. Delivery mode of TC will also be explored 
(e.g., Face -to-Face, Telehealth, Combined). The proposed  trial will yield substantial  information that coul d 
justify  a definitive future  test of this model , inform  methodological planning for  subsequent studies , and explore 
whether certain modes of delivery (e.g., Telehealth ) are justified for evaluation in future trials . 
SPECIFIC AIM 3. Qualitative interviews of adolescents, parents,  and health care providers  completed at the 
midpoint and end of the RCT  will identify possible mediat ors or moderat ors of TC  efficacy and guide 
refinements to the TC model. We will interview third party payers  about  the feasibility of disse mination of the 
TC model into practice  and collect  health care cost data . These  analyses will  strengthen the justification for a 
future, larger  trial of TC, and guide  refinements to the TC model to further enhance  its efficacy . 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
3 
 3.1. RESEARCH STRATEGY:  SIGNIFICANCE  AND SCIENTIFIC PREMISE  
Barriers to T1D care Epidemiologic studies indicate that <25% of adolescents with T1D achieve the HbA 1C 
target of < 7.5%.1-3 T1D care has advanced greatly  in emphasiz ing the merits of  long-term glycemic control  and 
through reliance on technological advances  (insulin pumps, continuous glucose monitors) .4-11 Adolesce nts 
achieve  poorer  T1D outcomes than  other age groups,12-26 partly due to pubertal insulin resistance .27 But, many 
studies  show that  T1D care interact s with psychological variables at the  levels of individuals,  28-91  
dyads/ families92-97and broader social contexts .98-114 Treatment adherence decline s during adole scence 26-50,92  
and a dolescents tend to derive  less benefit from technological advances in care. 8-22,44 -48,92 
Person -level characteristics of adole scents that impact  T1D self -care include  adjustment and behavioral 
problems,28-45,49,50,92 presence/absence of depression, anxiety disorders and eating disorders,47-90,93,115 -118 
social  support from siblings and peers,91,98,99,101 -114,119 -123and cognitive processes such as executive functioning 
and decisional  competence .124-131 Poor T1D self -care and poor glycemic control re sist change, raising  risks of 
major long term complications and psychiatric disorders. Parents of teen s with T1D struggle to balance  the 
benefits of youths’  self-care autonomy with the risks of  mismanage d T1D. This dilemma is a major stress or for 
parents that may manifest in distress and psychiatric  disorders  in youths and  parents ,71,132 -146  caregiver 
“burnout” and premature parental withdrawal from involvement in care.93,136,147 -159  Premature parental 
withdrawal is associated with many adverse  outcomes .93,136,147 -159  Health y parent -adolescent teamwork, 
emotional affiliation and collaborative T1D problem solving are all associated with favorable outcomes. 98-103, 148-
168 Many features of families also predict T1D outcomes ,96,160 -170 which tend to be worse  with single -parent 
family structur e or low paternal involvement ,160-170 low socioeconomic status,170-174 minority status,171-176 higher  
family conflict,70,73,177 -182 coercive parenting183-185 lower family cohesion186 and more psychosoci al dysfunction in 
family members.71,132,134 -146 Little is known about how interaction s with HCP s may affect T1D outcomes , but 
more  frequen t health care visits predict lower HbA 1C.187-190 Care encounters reflecting  patient -centered 
communication predict greater satisfaction and agreement on the goals of care.187-189 Current models of care 
are ill-equipped to respond to these critical  behavioral barriers to T1D care that affect so many patients and 
families. The  tentative TC model was specifically designed to address these issues, using emp irically validated 
tools  for screening  and intervention  and it will be refined with deliberate stakeholder input . The proposed work  
rests  on the observations that individual psychological characteristics of patients and parents, family /dyadic 
interactions around T1D care, and the broader social context of T1D management affect  adherence  and 
problem solving, which in turn affect T1D outcomes such as glycemic control , quality of life and health care 
use. T1D c are that does not address these issues seriously cannot be broadly effective. 
 
Psychologically informed  T1D care  Research on  psychosocial influences on youths’ T1D outcomes is 
penetra ting T1D care guidelines ,191 and many trials of  psychosocial screening and intervention  have been 
reported . Structured screening protocols have been valida ted in several large studies,192-194 showing that 
screening for psychosocial barriers to effective T1D care is feasible, acceptable and may enhance  
psychosocial outcomes. But, f ew T1D centers  support  routine psychosocial  screening. Growing evidence also 
supports the efficacy of vari ous psychological interventions,195 including treatments for adolescents as 
individual s or in group s,120,196 -205 using cognitive behavior therapy,195,200 motivational interviewing,198,206 -209 and 
skills training target ing coping,210-212 social interactions120,201 -204 or diabetes problem solving.213 Other 
intervention s treat families as the unit of treatment , includ ing Behavioral Family Systems Therapy,214-219 Ellis’ 
research on Multi -systemic T herapy ,220-223 Anderson and Laffel’s studies34,224 -227 of family teamwork 
interventions and the recent Family Management of Childhood Diabetes trial228 that all targeted  promotion of 
healthy youth -parent teamwork  in T1D care. Investigators are now adapting  these interventions for e-health  
delivery to enhance cost effectiveness and access .229-243 Few pediatric T1D centers have well -integrated 
programs that offer these evidence -based services routinely due to lack of availability of behavior change 
professionals with sound T1D expertise , insurance constraints, perceived stigma around  such services, dilution 
of efficacy  of these  interventions when deliver ed in real -world settings, and inadequate communica tion 
between community mental health providers and T1D HCPs . The proposed work emphasize s use of screening 
and intervention methods that can be integrated into typical T1D care, targeting the prevention  of common 
behavioral obstacle s, the remediation of mi ld to moderate issues before they become entrenched and 
facilitation of intensive services for more complex  problems.  The proposed work is thus highly consistent with 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
4 
 the encouragement of inter -professional care in the Affordable Care Act.  As discussed bel ow, telehealth  
delivery  of T1D care230,234 -243 and behavioral interventions192-195 carry many potential advantages, thus 
warranting consideration as a platform for delivering innovative care to adolescents with T1D and their families.  
Models of T1D care  Pediatric endocrinologists often direct T1D care supported by  diabetes educat ors, nurs es, 
dietitians , social work ers or psycholog ists. Access to pediatric endocrinologists is concentrated in the Eastern 
U.S., (1 per 144 yo uth with T1D ) but elsewhere  this ratio is one per 300 -350 patients244 and most  also manage  
other endocrine problems . The supply  of new pediatric endocrinolog ists is not matching  the growth of these 
populations , and so new model s are need ed.244 Pediatric endocrinologists recognize  psychological barriers to 
T1D ca re, but  neither their training , workflow  nor payment practices facilitate  address ing those barriers . An 
alternative care model is needed to address behavioral barriers to T1D care by engaging parents and youth as 
key members of the care team, screening and prevention for psychosocial problems, promoting healthy  
problem solving and communicatio n about T1D care , apply ing empirically validated intervention tools for 
families with mild/ moderate  barrier s and obtaining  more  intensive  servic es for families who need them . 
Engaging several disciplines in T1D care occurs on a spectrum of delivery models .245-249Multidisciplinary 
care, typifying  much U.S. T1D care , engages several  disciplines , but each stays within its  boundaries.  
Interdisciplinar y care deliberately analyzes, synthesizes and harmonizes links between disciplines into a 
coordinated whole. Trans disciplinary  care integrates the disciplin es in a hum anistic context  transcend ing 
traditional boundaries.  Put simply , inter -professional interaction is additive in Multidisciplinary  Care, interactive 
in Interdisciplin ary Care and holistic in Transdisciplinary Care . Research has supported TC models in scientific 
research initiatives involving multiple disciplines248-252 and delivery  of care for many  clinical problems.253-268  
Table 1. Comparison of Multidisciplinary, Interdisciplinary and Transdisciplinary models of care.  
 MULTIDISCIPLINARY  INTERDISCIPLINARY  TRANSDISCIPLINARY  
Professional activities  Additive  Interactive  Holistic  
Knowledge of others’ disciplines  Minimal  Incidental  Intentional and thorough  
Interactions among disciplines  Distinct professional 
boundaries  Coordination of input 
from separate 
disciplines  Integrat ion yields a whole 
exceed ing sum of its 
parts  
Boundaries between disciplines  Distinct and preserved  Blurred  Negligible  
Expanded roles  for all team members  Absent  Limited and passive  Integral to the model  
Subordination of discipline in favor of 
achieving an integrated perspective  Absent  Limited and passive  Integral to the model  
 
Trans -Disciplinary Care (TC) is conjoint  delivery of T1D care by a team of HCP s from different 
disciplines  who share the knowledge ba se and tools of their  respective professions . In this study,  TC 
teams  (Advanced Practice Nurse/APN , Registered Dietitian /RD and Psycholog y Post-Doctoral Fellow /Psy. 
Fellow ) will see families  jointly  at visits and collaborate in care delivery  by inte grating their respective 
knowledge and skill s. Pediatric endocrinologists will monitor  enrolled patients. A TC  model will be refined 
iterativel y based on stakeholder input and tested in a careful randomized controlled trial  (RCT) . We 
hypothesi ze that TC will achi eve better T1D outcomes than  Usual Care . This application is based on the 
premise that current care is failing most adolescents and that careful user -centered design269 and 
testing of an innovative Transdisciplinary model of care can better address psychosocial barriers to  
T1D management , improv ing outcomes  via better  assessment of patients’ needs and resources, better 
cross -discipline and parent -adolescent -HCP communication, and better  collaboration  with families to 
resolve  problems that cross disciplines . This work can validate an innovative TC model, justifying its testing 
in a larger RCT. A pilot evaluation of a telehealth intervention for teens with T1D delivered by a nurse -social 
worker team yielded excellent visit  attendance among adolescents and self-care improvements in the 
intervention group .270.That care mode l did no t employ  evidence -based psychological principles and practices. 
We have based the TC model in a conceptual framework combining the Wallander et al 271 Chronic Disability 
Stress and Coping Model, treating the elements of TC as coping resources withi n that scheme ; and the 
D’Zurilla and Goldfried Problem Solving model,272 a framework that underlies our trials of Behavioral Family 
Systems Therapy for Di abetes214-219 and other intervention trials.213,220,224,225,228,273 -277 TC will encourage 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
5 
 constructive , patient -centered communication via Motivational Interviewing  skills   198,206 -209 and it will promote 
active group  problem solving .  TC team members will use a toolbox of methods from prior studies to resolve  
common clinical  problems198-202,205,213 -220,22 4,228 -243,273,274,278 Multisytemic Therapy in T1D promotes  engaging 
home, school, peer and health care systems in planning  and delivery of that intervention ,220-223 but that work  
has not emphasi zed changing health care delivery to better address psychosocial barriers to care. We expect 
that knowledge and skills of TC team members in one another’s disciplines  will be enhanced and that this will 
improve recognition , analysis  and resolution of each adolescent’s barriers to T1D self -care. 
Growth of Telehealth  Delivery of T1D Care and Psychological Interventions The promulgation of 
telehealth  delivery of T1D medical  care and behavioral health interventions  is likely to continue .230-243,278 
Telehealth  delivery of TC  could facilitate  families ’ access to needed specialized care, capitalize on the 
emergence of systems  for remote monitoring and communication of clinical data , and enable  dissemination of 
TC across geographic and institutional boundaries. Thus, an element of this applicatio n is comparison of TC 
delivered via conventional face to face encounters versus telehealth  delivery , which will be achieved by relying 
on Nemours ’ established relationship with American Well, using its AW9 telehealth platform.  
3.2. RESEARCH STRATEGY: INNOV ATION  
Fewer than 25% of adolescents with T1D achieve the HbA 1C target of < 7.5%. If indeed “every system yields 
exactly the results that it was designed to achieve ”,279 the system of T1D care for adolescents requires  re-
thinking . Youth and their families face challenging affective, behavioral and cognitive impediments  to valued  
T1D outcomes and typical T1D care is ill -equipped to address these issues . Few pediatric T1D centers 
address th ese challenges well since there are too few b ehavior change professionals with T1D expertise , 
reimbursement issues , stigma tization  around such services, reduced efficacy of validated  interventions in real -
world settings, and barriers to communication between mental health providers and T1D HCPs. The proposed 
work would carefully plan and test  a novel  TC model  that identifies and targets  psychologic al barriers to 
optimal care and engages s takeholders in designing and testing the TC model . As in our ongoing grant (DP3 -
DK-108198) w e will use crowdsourcin g 280,281 to elicit stakeholder input to design and test a TC model for 
adolescents with T1D that is acceptable, safe, and effective . We propose  a novel  intervention that could  be 
more effective than usu al multidisciplinary care. TC may reduce demands on pediatric endocrinologists, freeing 
them  to care for  endocrine problems  that clearly require subspecialty experti se. Extensive stakeholder  input , 
focused  qualitative  work before, during and after the RCT and the planned economic analyses also en hance 
the potential impact . Compari son of  face to face with telehealth  delivery of the TC model amplifies the novelty  
of this work. The proposed work could provide justification for similar trials with other medical condition s. 
 
3.3 RESEARCH STRATEGY: PRELIMINARY STUDIES  
The biographical sketches affirm the team ’s extensive  research and clinical expertise  in pediatric T1D, funded 
research (NIH, PCORI, JDRF) and leadership in testing behavioral interventions to enhanc e T1D care. We 
describe  below aspects of the team’s work that are most pertinent  to this application.  
 
T1D Behavioral Intervention RCTs : Dr. Wysocki was PI  for RCTs of Behavioral Family Systems Therapy for 
Diabetes (R01 -DK43802), use of BFST -D to enhanc e adolescents’ use of CGM  (R01 -DK080831), a web -
based shared decision making intervention for insulin pump and CGM candidates (PCORI #805) , the Family 
Management of Childhood Diabetes trial (# N01 -HD-4-3361) and he was  the only non -MD PI in the Diabetes 
Research in Children Network and t he JDRF CGM Study Group  that completed many CGM clinical trials . 
 
Crowdsourced  Design of a Web Resource for Parents : Our use of crowdsourcing (DP3-DK-108198) to 
design and test a social media portal for parents of very young (<6 y.o.) children with T1D will be re -purposed 
in the pr oposed  work . In th e ongoing study, we have enlisted 17 0 Parent Crowd members and 32 U.S. 
pediatric endocrinologists  and other professionals  as HCP  Crowd  members .  A 6-member  Family Advisor y 
Council guides  the research team.  With expert input  from Dr. Karen Aroian, Chatlos Endowed Professor of 
Nursing at the U . of Central Florida , the Parent Crowd answered  open -ended questions and polls about their 
perspectives  as parents of very young children with T1D . To date , 19 open -ended questions have been sent to 
the Parent Crowd, and  a mean of 128 parents (74% of members)  sent free-text re plies averaging ~120 words. 
Also, 7 polls about narrower  issues yield ed similar response rates. Only 18 Parent Crowd members have not 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
6 
 replied to a question  or poll . Systematic coding has yielded a detailed  taxonom y that will drive the content and 
functions of the planned website . The distribution of parallel open -ended questions to the HCP Crowd has just 
begun. We are systematically mapping the resul ting content into website functions that will be iterat ively 
refined with crowd input until a final website has been designed and built. Results to date support an adapted 
Social -Ecological Model framework for organizing the voluminous content that has bee n compiled . A 
randomized controlled trial of website use on parental coping and child outcomes will follow, including 
qualitative interviews of trial participants  at the midpoint and end of the trial. This experience will facilitate the 
design and evaluati on of a TC model of care that is planned with careful consideration of diverse views and is 
acceptable to all stakeholder groups.  Application of these methods to crowdsourced design of the TC model 
should be even more successful given the much larger clini cal population of adolescents with T1D.  
Qualitative Interviews of Stakeholders : We have completed  qualitative interviews of 6 adolescents with T1D, 
6 parents, 5 HCPs  and 3 administrator s with expertise in health care reimbursement about the feasibility of TC. 
These interviews yielded very positive reactions to the TC model, and respondents offered constructive 
suggest ions that could improve its feasibility and acceptability. Parents and adolescents were especially  
enthusiastic about the possibility of telehealth delivery of TC.  Stakeholder input has been incorporated into our 
initial TC design  and these interviews will guide continued qualitative work during  the initial phase of this gra nt. 
Until notice of funding, responding to some complex points will be deferred to the initi al planning phase of this 
grant. Dedication of major time and effort to address those points is not justified until funding is certain.   
3.4. RESEARCH STRATEGY: APPROACH  
Part 1: Crowdsourced Design of the TC Model . In our ongoing DP3 grant , we use crowdsourcing to solicit 
input  of parents of children with T1D  < 6 years old  to plan a social media portal designed for similar parents . 
For the proposed work, w e will recruit  separate “Crowds” of  Parent s (n=100 -120),  Adolescent s (n=100 -120) 
and HCPs (n=~30)  via direct contact with Nemours families  and HCPs , e-mails to T1D HCPs at other U.S. 
centers and posting ads on Diabetes Online Community  sites. These methods  yielde d 170 Parent Crowd 
members  in <1 month and, since T1D is much more common among adolescents, enrolling  parent s and 
adolescent s for this grant  should proceed quickly . Our experience is that demographically diverse Crowds of 
100-120 members will suffice  and, if necessary, more members can be added . Initially, the crowds ’ activities  
will be se gregated, but the Parent and Adolescent Crowds may elect to  comb ine the crowds . We will regularly 
apprise the Parent , Adolescent and HCP Crowds of the nature of responses sent by the other Crowds . 
 
Dr. Karen Aroian  will expertly direct the se qualitative research procedures : 1.) Online distribution of  open -
ended qualitative questions  to adolescents, parents and HCPs to define an acceptable, feasible, and effective 
TC model for testing in the RCT (Aim 1); 2.) Qualitative interviews to obtain  TC team members’ perspectives of 
the structure, process and efficacy of the TC training, once just after training is completed and again 1 year 
later (Aim 2); 3.) Qualitative interviews of TC participants and HCPs  at the midpoint and end of  the RCT about  
their TC care  experiences  (Aim 3); and 4.) Qualitative interviews of representatives of third party payers  after 
the RCT  (Aim 3) . Dr. Aroian will develop q uestions, train coders and interviewers , ensure adequate reliability 
across coders  and work with the research team to incorporate qualitative findings in the design and evalua tion 
of TC . Many  CHDS staff are experienced in qualitative interview ing and coding . The qualitative research 
component will  systematically reveal the key elements of a TC model of care and to identify stakeholders’ 
perspectives of potential benefits and challenges in implementing  TC. Purposive sampling will e nsure diversity 
in family demographics . At least 28% of youth s/parents  will be of African American or  Hispanic race/ethnicity . 
Participants will receive  a summary  of TC and planned  model elements . They  will be asked to relate 
helpful /unhelpful aspe cts of t heir recent T1D care , identify barriers to optimal care and evaluate several 
realistic vignettes of typical TC visits. Preliminary interview findings suggest that communication during T1D 
clinic visits will be an important and productive intervention target. Plans for subsequent questions will be 
adapted as the responses to the ear lier question s are analyzed. In our ongoing work, we have assign ed 
transcripts of responses to 11 trained coders working in four teams, given them one week to reach consensus 
about their assig ned transcripts , followed by a meeting  to further integrate the teams’ findings and suggestions.  
The Parent, Adolescent and HCP Crowds will review behavioral homework assignments, problem solving 
guides, parenting handouts and other  materials from Dr. Wyso cki’s T1D intervention trials ,214-219 and  from 
other published , manualized  trials .206-228,275  The Crowds  will evaluate TC elements includ ing the nature of 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
7 
 psychological interventions integrated into T1D car e, the circumstances /schedule  under which the ad olescent 
and parent would see the physician; the proportion of each visit in which families  would see several TC team 
members together ; and the extent to which team members might see the adolescent privately. C rowds will 
comment  on the merits, feasibility, and acceptability of each such element, and they will be asked to suggest 
improvements . After one round  of Crowd input , the research team will dra ft a detailed outline of a  proposed TC 
model and w ill share it with the Crowds . This  iterative refinement will be re peated until all three Crowd s find the 
final TC model to be  feasible and acceptable . Then , the researchers will engage Nemours administrators 
responsible for billing, coding, and EMR documentation to review the final TC mode l vis a vis  its integration into 
work flow and other practical considerations. A detailed TC manual will promote  transparency and 
reproducibility both within this work and for others’ future work . Certain features are expected to charact erize 
the final TC model: extensive sharing of discipline -specific knowledge/ skills among team members , less 
frequen t MD contacts with TC pa tients, involvement of TC team members concurrently during TC  visits, 
screening for psychosocial impediments to T1D care, promotion of  family -centered communication, shared 
medi cal decision making and  negotiated goal setting, and reliance on motivational interviewing, cognitive 
behavior thera py, problem solving training and other brief interven tions. 
Table 2. Comparison of implementation  of Multidisciplinary and Transdisciplinary Care.   
            Multidisciplinary Care                Transdisciplinary Care  
Visit Structure  Disciplines may see a patient sequentially 
during a visit, often with little prior or later 
interaction about their varied perspectives.  Co-management by HCPs from several disciplines 
who see the adolescent and parent as a team, not 
individually. Visits with one HCP are uncommon.  
Visit Frequency  Approximately quarterly; Difficult to arrange 
more frequent appointments.  Approximately quarterly; More often if necessary with 
individual team members  
Visit Length  Visit duration may be longer for the adolescent 
and parent if several  providers must be seen on 
the same or different days. Total visit duration may be shorter for the family, but 
care providers may be involved with a given family for 
a longer period during a given visit.  
Contact with 
Physician  Visits are MD -centered; MD is seen at each 
visit. Visits are family - and team -centered, with MD as 
consultant. MD is seen annually.  
Role of  Advanced  
Practice Nurse  APN or PA may be the primary provider of T1D 
care to adolescents. . APN or PA provides T1D care to adolescents 
conjointly with dietitian and psychologist.  APN 
acquires skills in psychology and nutrition.  
Role of Dietitian  As needed based on physician judgment.  Routine part of TC visits with APN/PA and 
psychologist.  RD acquires skills in medicine and 
psychology  
Role of  
Psychologist  On referral, usually seen on another day.  Routine part of TC visits with APN/PA  and dietitian.  
Psychologist acquires skills in medicine and nutrition.  
Interaction Among 
Disciplines  Non-systematic, without planned interaction 
among disciplines about their perspectives.  Integral to the model; APN/PA, Dietitian and 
Psychologist seen as  a group at  each visit.  
Boundaries Between 
Disciplines  Distinct professional roles; Disciplines teach 
each other by observation and clinical 
interaction.  Intentional blurring of boundaries. HCPs train each 
other actively in their knowledge bases and skills.  
Contact with  
Diabetes Educator  Diabetes Educator sees adolescents and 
parents at most/all visits.  Diabetes Educator sees adolescents and parents at 
most/all visits.  
Contact with Social 
Worker  As needed based on MD judgment.  As needed, based on T C team judgment.  
Psychosocial  
Screening  Typically not done routinely.  Systematic screening for psychosocial impediments 
to effective care.  
Treatment Planning  Each HCP negotiates a discipline -specific 
treatment plan with each family.  Teams develop treatment plans that reflect joint input 
from the family and each discipline.  
Visit Time Dedicated 
to Behavioral Issues  Little, unless very poor self care is evident.  A major part of every vi sit, emphasizing prevention , 
problem solving and fa mily communication.  
Reliance on 
Evidence Based 
Psychological 
Practice   Mostly for adolescents who are referred for 
serious problems in managing T1D. 
Uncommon during routine follow -up visits.  Proactive, preventive services are emphasized; 
Extensive use of handouts and guides from trials of 
evidence -based treatments.  
Visit Documentation  Each team member separately documents 
his/her own interactions and observations.  TC treatment plan prepared by one team member, 
edited by all team members, entered into the EMR 
and sent to the family and attending MD.  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
8 
 Qualitative interviews about TC training for HCPs will evaluate curriculum  structure , clar ify perceived value of 
curricul um elements, and specify content requiring more emphasis. These will occur at the end of training and 
1 year later after TC HCPs have TC experience. Trained raters will employ a descriptive level of analysis , 
using a well -accepted method of content analysis  with Atlas -ti software  to extract the primary themes emerg ing 
from these interviews.  Dr. Aroian  will help us incorporat e these themes into the TC model  and manual . Table 2 
differentiates Multidisciplinary and Transdisciplinary Care based on our preliminary conceptualization.  
Part 2: Randomized Controlled T rial (RCT) of Trans -Disciplinary  Versus Usual Care  In Years 2-3, we will 
conduct a  rigorous  RCT of the TC model versus  Usual Multidisciplinary Care (UC) in a projected sample of 150 
youth  (11-<17years old)  with T1D. The Senio r Research Coordinator in Jacksonville will randomize p articipants  
to Usual Care (UC: n=50), or  to TC delivered In Person  (TC-IP; n=50) or via Telehealth  (TC-TH; n=50) . 
FIGURE 1. STUDY DIAGRAM  OF ORIGINAL RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL   
Recruitment of 150 Eligible 
Adolescents and Parents
Baseline Evaluation
Face to Face TC
(n=50)Standard Care
(n=50)Telemedicine TC 
(n=50)Randomization
Quarterly 
Follow-Up Evaluations
For 1 Year
 
Participants : The RCT would test the TC model with appropriate clinical candidates who could benefit from a 
relatively low intensity intervention  but who may not need more intensive psychological  services. We will enroll 
150 Nemours T1D patients at Nemours Children’s Hospital (NCH) in Orlando, FL, or the Alfred I. du Pont 
Hospital for Children (AIDHC) in Wilmington, DE  (~75/site), including  ~21 African American and ~21 Hispanic 
youth ( ~28% minorities ). The Facilities and Resources section confirms  the feasibility of the sampling plan. 
Each parent /youth  will sign IRB -approved Parental Permission and Assent Forms  prior to participation . State 
laws require that participants in telehealth sessions must all be physically present in a state in which the 
participating HCPs are licensed and the team will  ensure  this. Youth eligibility criteria are: Age, >11 and <  17 
yrs old; T1D for >  1 yr; Most recent HbA 1C or mean HbA 1C over the prior year 7.5-10.0%, inclusive ; Able to 
complete questionnaires in English ; No other medical obstacles to participation  per the treating MD ; No 
concurrent enrollment in other T1D studies , and no T1D clinic visits in the preceding 12 months in which two or 
more care providers saw the patient together . Parent eligibility  criteria ar e: Biolog ical parent /legal  caregiver of 
an enrolled patient; At least weekly involvement in  T1D care; Able to complete questionnaires in English ; Plans  
to continue T1D care at Nemou rs for >1 yr; No reporting of the family for child protection complaints within the 
prior 3 years . Two parents of the same child ma y enroll , but they would  jointly complete  one set of  
questionnaires.  HCP s (MDs, Advanced Practice Nurses , Dietitian s, Social Workers and Psycholog ists) who 
have provided care to study participants also contribute data  and will provide informed consen t.  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
9 
 Experimental Design : Two TC team s (APN, RD and Psy. Fellow) will be constituted and trained , one each  at 
NCH  and AIDHC . A backup for each team member will also be identified and trained. Families will be 
randomized by Dr. Wysocki’s staff to TC-IP (n=50), TC-TH (n=50) or UC (n=50 ), using a prepared 
randomization list, stratified by insulin modality (pump or injections) and HbA 1C (< or > 8.7%) . We rejected 
randomiz ation  by sites due to logistical obs tacles and since site differences might obscure detection of 
treatment effects . Randomization at the level of families reduc es those concerns but introduces contamination 
issue s as TC elements could intrude  into UC visits. Efforts to counter this potential  confound  are described 
below. Each youth/ parent will receive the assigned care (TC or UC) for approximately 4 successive follow -up 
visits  across approximately 12 months. This period is adequate  to detect clinically meaningful changes in 
HbA 1C and adherence . The design also permits exploratory analyses of modality of care (Face -to-Face vs. 
Telehealth), gender, race and ethnicity as moderators of treatment outcomes.  
 
Treatment Conditions : The original RCT design is shown above . Treatment conditi ons include Usual Care 
and Transdisciplinary Care delivered in person or through telehealth. Elements of TC care are employed with 
some adolescents with T1D at AIDHC (i.e. , APN and Psychologist see some patients together) ; this is much 
less true at NCH. AI DHC patients who have had such a visit within 12 months are ineligible for this study.  
Usual Care (UC)  will include the multidisciplinary health care, education and supports that are routinely 
available to Nemours families of youth with T1D. This includes ~quarterly clinic visits with a pediatric 
endocrinologist or advanced practice nurse, with referrals to a certified diabetes educator, dietitian, social 
worker or psychologist as deemed clinically necessary by that HCP. T1D visit data will be extracted fro m 
Nemours EMR for each adolescent. Parental reports of care received elsewhere will be recorded. An EMR 
“Smart Form” used in several of Dr. Wysocki’s studies enables electronic capture of granularT1D visit data. 
Over 90% of Nemours T1D patients are on inte nsified regimens, i.e., insulin pum p (~60%) or multiple daily 
insulin injections (~40%) using a “basal -bolus” approach and dietary carbohydrate counting. Treatment targets 
are HbA 1C <7.5% (<7.0% if deem ed safe  by attending MD ) and minimization of symptomat ic or severe 
hypoglycemia. A small, but growing, number of patients use continuous glucose monitors as part of their care.  
Transdisciplinary Care  will include all elements of UC T1D care, but quarterly T1D visits will consist of co -
management by an APN, RD  and a Psychology Fellow who will provide care to the adolescent and parent(s) 
as a team during each visit. TC will consist of the model resulting from the qualitative interviews and 
crowdsourcing data from the Parent, Adolescent and HCP Crowds. A central TC feature will be active 
incorporation of evidence -based psychosocial care for T1D into visits based on empirically supported 
conceptual frameworks. The TC model derives from the Wallander et al 271 Chronic Disability Stress and 
Coping model in conceptual izing TC visits as coping resources to help adolescents and parents identify 
address impediments to family management of T1D. The TC model also derives from the D’Zurilla and 
Goldfried Problem Solving model 272 since visits will emphasize applying a system atic problem solving and 
family communication framework to each family’s self -identified T1D challenges. TC visits will include 
interaction with all three team members jointly, with subsequent interaction between the parent/youth or both 
with a subset of t his team as decided by family and team consensus during the visit. The TC team will partner 
with a pediatric endocrinologist who will have the discretion to see any TC patient as deemed necessary and to 
see these patients for routine care as often or as in frequently as the physician deems necessary. The three 
Crowds will set the “default” frequency of scheduled visits with the endocrinologist during Year 1 (possibly once 
each at study entry and end of study).  
 
TC visits will recognize and normalize the cha llenges of T1D care, and use constructive, family -centered  
communication, active problem solving regarding behavioral barriers to optimal T1D care, and negotiated 
problem solving plans to achieve families’ T1D goals. TC team members will be trained in Moti vational 
Interviewing to enhance their patient -centered communication skills. The TC Psy. Fellow will assure that 
problem solving plans or behavioral interventions are appropriate to the adolescent’s developmental status, 
that family -team negotiations yiel d measurable, achievable, and sustainable short -term goals and that these 
plans are documented carefully in the EMR. The final TC model is likely to have certain features, including 
extensive sharing of discipline -specific knowledge and skills among team m embers, reduced frequency of MD 
contacts with TC patients, conjoint involvement of all TC team members during TC visits, psychosocial 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
10 
 screening of all TC patients and families at study entry, active reliance on motivational interviewing, patient -
centered c ommunication, shared medical decision making and negotiated goal setting during visits, and use of 
a “toolbox” of low -intensity behavioral interventions targeting common behavioral barriers to care. Family 
handouts and guides developed in behavioral interv ention trials will be used with TC families.206-228,275  Results 
of study questionnaires may lead to referrals for further assessment or intervention external to the study.  
The TC team who will see each family together will not include Social Workers or Diabetes Educators. This 
decision was based on concerns revealed in our preliminary studies that too many professionals would be 
overwhelming to families, cumbersome logistically and too expensive for this mechanism. Services of these 
professionals can be considered a “given” in any well -resourced T1D clinic and will be available to all study 
participants. The decision to exclude them from the TC teams will be re -visited with the Adolescent and Parent 
Crowds in Year 1 of the proposed work.  
Transdisciplinary  Care: In Person (TC -IP) versus Telehealth  (TC-TH) Delivery  TC-IP involves face -to-face 
sessions with the TC team meeting together with the family at the diabetes clinic. TC -TH will be the same as 
TC-IP except T1D visits will occur with families at their h omes or other remote location via a HIPAA -compliant 
telehealth platform such as American Well AW9 ( https://www.americanwell.com/aw9 -launched -at-himss/ ). This 
platform has been used by Nemours CareConnect in Florida since 2015 an d in Delaware since May, 2016. 
Patients/parents can access CareConnect from any PC, Apple or Android device. Technical support from 
Nemours Telehealth is budgeted.   
FIGURE 2. STUDY DIAGRAM  OF REVISED RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TC-IP/TH TC-TH/CH  
TC-IP 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
11 
  
Changes to Experimental Design and Treatment Conditions related to COVID -19 Precautions  In March 
of 2020, Nemours began transitioning all T1D clinical care visits to telehealth as a precaution against spread of 
the novel coronavirus, COVID -19. About one third of the families randomly assigned to TC -IP had completed 
the study. Those randomize d to TC -IP and part way through the study and those recently randomized to TC -IP 
were not able to complete face-to-face visits . After considering the options of : 1) halting delivery of all TC care 
across all arms of the study  until in person care was possi ble again; and, 2) providing TC -IP families with TC 
delivered through telehealth, our study DSMB recommended the latter. Because we could not predict when in 
person visits would again be allowed and suspending TC care would result in a smaller “dose” of th e 
experimental treatment, the option to alter delivery mode was chosen to gather as much information as 
possible about the potential efficacy of TC and to explore additional questions about mode of delivery (e.g., 
feasibility, family preference).  
Families who had already received some TC -IP visits were transitioned to receiving TC through telehealth and 
were reclassified as “TC -IP/TH.” Those randomized to TC -IP who had received no TC -IP visits but were due 
for clinical care also received TC through teleheal th and moving forward will be allowed to choose (to the 
extent allowed by precautions) whether they want to receive TC visits in person or remain with telehealth. They 
are being tracked as “TC -TH/CH.” See Figure 2 above. Because these new arms of the study  will be small and 
combine IP and TH delivery of TC, all TC arms of the study will be combined for primary comparisons against 
UC and comparisons will be made between the TC groups (size permitting) to explore whether delivery mode 
is important for outcome s. It is important to note that UC appointments are , for now, also being delivered 
through telehealth. This previously available  option for UC was not widely used.  
TC T eam Training : An optimal test of TC requires that team members have requisite knowledge , skills and 
practical experience at trial initiation. Careful training also promotes integrity of the TC arms of the study. Key 
elements of TC are sharing of knowledge and skills among disciplines and lowering of inter -professional 
boundaries. TC team t raining will comprise:  1.) Knowledge of TC  and its di stinction from other models; 2.) 
Teaching one another about the evidence base and clinical practices for each of the team’s professions ; and 
3.) Experiential learning in applying  TC with s imulated patients and then actual clinical cases. Reaching 
agreement on what comprises TC is also a prerequisite to achieving it in the RCT. TC team members will 
discuss directed readings,282,283   categorize hypothetical programs as Multi -, Inter - or Tran s-Disciplinary 
models, and interview colleagues about T1D care at their institutions and evaluate them from a TC 
perspective. Q ualitative interviews of te am members during the RCT will guide  refinements  to TC training and 
implementation, yielding an empiri cally validated TC curriculum for future RCTs.  
Team members will collaborate on a curriculum for teaching the others about their disciplines, with content 
guided by diabetes organizations.282,283  The researchers will develop test items for a TC Knowledge  Test 
covering the knowledge base of each discipline, such as sample items from CDE Certification Exam practice 
tests on managing T1D in adolescents. As was done for another of Dr. Wysocki’s NIH grants, training will 
include two full -day experiential semin ars at a one -month interval offered by a Certified Motivational 
Interviewing Trainer, to equip the TC team members with key MI skills. Practical experience will be gained in 
the following month and the team will audio -record simulated or real clinical inte ractions for review at the 2nd 
session. Team members will practice these skills in their clinical work and give each other feedback to refine 
these skills. Once  each team member achieves a score of >90% on the TC Knowledge Test, the curriculum 
will turn to  experiential, team -building activities to equip the team members to co -manage patients with T1D, 
first with “simulated” and later with real clinical cases, including both face to face and telehealth delivery 
experience. Several of Dr. Wysocki’s staff are experienced simulated patients/parents. These sessions will 
involve the TC team conducting a simulated clinic visit with a “patient” and a “parent”. Once the TC team has 
gained comfort with simulated patients, they will extend this to the care of a few T1D  patients who are ineligible 
for the RCT. TC teams will collaboratively evaluate clinical problems and negotiate problem solving plans with 
families. Evalua tion of TC training will consist of scores on the TC K nowledge Test for  each HCP  and two 
qualitative  interviews,  once at the end of train ing and again after 1 year of TC experience. These data will 
guide  refinement of the TC curriculum and manual  for training  HCPs  in TC delivery  in a future multi -site trial.  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
12 
 Prevention of TC -UC Contamination : Treatment integrity  and internal validity of the RCT will be optimized by 
minimizing intrusion of TC elements into UC visits . We seek to prevent receipt of elements of the TC model of 
care during UC visits, including seeing multiple HCPs  simultaneously, use of motiv ational interviewing or 
problem solving communication training methods during visits, receipt of behavioral and psychological 
interventions that are explicitly integrated with the patient’s T1D care and education, and the intentional 
blurring of profession al roles that are critical to the TC model. More TC teams would be ideal, but not 
affordable.  Adolescents will be ineligible for the study if they have had one or more T1D clinic visits in the prior 
year that mimic TC (More than one health care provider se eing the adolescent concurrently) UC patients will 
continue to see the ir established  HCPs . Thorough training of study clinicians about the need to segregate the 
TC and UC arms will further reduce contamination.   A post-visit checklist completed by parents and a post -
study questionnaire completed by HCPs  providing care in the past year to study participants will assess the 
extent to which contamination occurs.  Feedback to, or retraining of, project staff will be done if necessary . We 
will verify via EMR docu mentation any UC visits that include instances of multiple clinicians seeing the 
patient/family together . UC patients/families need ing psychological services will be referred to psychologists 
who are not TC team members . We will document  any psychological or psychiatric interventions received by 
UC pa tients outside of the study. It would be unethical for the researchers to constrain UC patients from 
receiving needed mental health  interventions outside of the study.  
Measuremen t Schedule and Protocol :  
Measures will be obtained at clinic visits at Baseline and ~quarterly for 1 year. Primary outcomes are change in  
HbA 1C and the Diabetes Self Management Profile Self -Report Form total score over 1 year. Other planned  
measures  will be reviewed and refined by the Adolescent and Parent Crowds during RCT planning. To 
promote retention , encourage timely completion of questionnaires  and minimize missing data, each adolescent 
will receive $ 40 credited to a gift c ard when all measures  scheduled for a given study visit are completed. Also, 
adolescents will receive a $10 bonus if they complete all of the questionnaires within 7 days of the research 
team’s e -mail containing a link to the REDCap platform for questionnaire administration at  Baseline, 6 and 12 
months. Online completion of questionnaires will be available for those with internet access using REDCap. 
Those who do not complete questionnaires online before visits can do so at visits via PC, tablet or hard copy or 
online during TC  visits. Table 3 shows the measurement schedule, including estimated participation burden per 
measure. Respondents are indicated by A (Adolescent), P (Parent) or HCP (Health Care Provider). 
Participation burden has been minimized in several ways. Questionn aire completion is limited to study visits at 
0, 6 and 12 months rather than every quarterly visit. Questionnaire completion time at the Baseline visit is 75 -
80 minutes for parents and adolescents and 65 -70 minutes at 6 and 12 months. Online completion of 
questionnaires via REDC ap can minimize inconvenience by enabling participants to complete questionnaires 
at convenient times or over several distinct periods.  
 
Table 3. M easurement schedule.                   ~Quarterly Clinic Visits  
 Measures  Burden 
(Min/V isit) 0 3 6 9 12 
Demographic Information (P)        10      
HbA1C; Device downloads; Glycemic variability; Hypoglycemia Diary (A,P)  20      
Appointment keeping; Health Care Use, Costs, Time expended (P; EMR)   5      
Type  1 Diabetes and Life Measures (A,P)  15      
Diabetes Self Management Profile -Self Report (A,P)  15      
Problem Areas in Diabetes Scale (A,P)  15      
Collaborative Parent Involvement Scale (A)  5      
Family -Centered Care Self -Assessment Tool  (A,P) 10      
Diabetes -Specific Risk -Taking Inventory (A)  10      
                            
Readiness A ssessment for Emerging Adults with Diabetes Diagnosed in Youth (A) 5      
Diabetes Care Inventory  (HCP)  5      
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
13 
 Demographic information : This form records  child and parent age, gender, race, ethnicity, family composition, 
education, occupational category, socioeconomic status284 and certain details of  the child’s medical  history.  
Adolescents will be asked if wish to provide their cell phone numbers to permit  text message reminders from 
the research team about questionnaire completion. It will be made clear that this is entirely optional.  
Glycohemoglobin (HbA 1C) will be measured at the NCH  or AIDHC labs , or at insurer -mandated labs  certified 
by the National Gl ycohemoglobin Standardization Program, to index  recent glycemic control.285,286 TC-TH 
patients can do this at many  Nemours satellite  clinics  so results will be available at visits.  
Device  downloads : Youth will receive  $5 credited to a gift c ard for downloading a glucose meter , insulin pump 
or continuous glucose monitor  prior to each study  visit. These data will quantify  monitoring frequency /use, 
mean and SD of blood glucose, mean daily glycemic excursions, other glycemic variability measures287-289 and, 
for insulin pump users, mean daily frequency of premeal bolus infusions . 
Hypoglycemia Diary : This measure , used in Dr. Wysocki’s recent studies , record s episodes of moderately 
severe hypoglycemia (requiring help) or severe hypoglycemia (with seizure or loss of consciousness). This will 
be submitt ed by parents via REDCap just after each study visit . 
Health care use, costs  and time  expended : At each visit, parents will complete a form used in the JDRF CGM 
trial for  tracking health care use and costs to capture direct and indirect costs of the youth’s care.290,291 We will 
use EHR data to measure the interval between electronically recorded check -in (or login for TC -TH) and 
check -out times (logout for TC -TH). Parents will also estimate time  expended f or each  visit, including travel .  
Diabetes Self Management Profile -Self Report Version (DSMP -SR): Among  T1D adherence measures ,292-302  
the 24 item DSMP -SR assesses  self-care behaviors that typify current T1D care  and it has a mean correlation 
of .48 with HbA 1C,  of .79 and pa rent-youth correlat ion of  .63. 297-300 
Type 1 Diabetes and Life (T1DAL ) Measures : Separate versions of this quality of life questionnaire 303-304 have 
been developed for 8 -11 year olds with T1D (36 i tems), 12 -17 year olds with T1D (44 items), parents of 8 -11 
year olds with T1D (47 items) and parents of 11 -17 year olds with T1D (50 items). Empirically derived 
condensed versions of these instruments are undergoing validat ion.  
Problem Areas in Diabetes Scale (PAID ): (Teen and P arent brief versions ). Respondents  rate their agreement 
with 14 (Teen) or 15 (Parent)  statements related to their worry and burden about their diabetes.  306-308 Items are 
rated on a 6-point scale from “not at all” to  “serious probl em”, and higher scores reflect  less perceived 
burden/worry.  Wasserman et al.309 recently validated the condensed versions of both scales . 
Diabetes -Specific Risk -Taking Inventory (DSRI) : The DSRI is a 34 -item adolescent report measure that 
assesses the freq uency with which adolescents (ages 15 -18) engage in diabetes -specific risk -taking 
behaviors.310  Adolescents report the frequency of each behavior on a 5 point likert scale, with the options of 
“Daily (5), Weekly (4), Monthly (3), Every few months (2), Yea rly (1), Never (0), and Not Applicable.”   A mean 
score is used, with a higher score indicating more frequent diabetes -specific risk -taking behavior.   In a 
validation study with 224 adolescents, the DSRI demonstrated excellent internal reliability (α = .90) . 
Family -Centered Care Assessment (FCC A): The FCC A 311  is a consumer -driven measure of the degree to 
which medical care received for a specific medical condition achieves ten accepted principles of family 
centered care. There are parallel, validated, 24 -item forms for completion by parents and adolescents.  
Colla borative Parent Involvement Scale (CPI) : The 12-item CPI obtains  youth s’ level of teamwork  in T1D care  
with a specified  adult .157 Those living with two parents will complete  the CPI separately abou t each. Higher total 
scores indicate that the youth perceiv es more T1D collaborati on with  that caregiver. Cronbach’s  was .93 and 
.96 for youths’ ratings of primary and secondary caregivers , respectively.   
The Readiness Assessment for Emerging Adults Diagnosed with Diabetes in Youth (READDY) : The READDY 
is a 13 item self -assessment of adolescents’ readiness to transfer from pediatric to adult care for T1D. The 
scale has been validated by researchers at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital and Children’s Hospital of Seattle 
and a publication reporting these findings is under editorial review at this time.  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
14 
 Diabetes Care Inventory (DCI) : This 17 item scale  was developed by the research team to assess the nature of 
diabetes care provided to each participant in the study and to gauge the extent to which elements of 
Transdisc iplinary Care are being provided to participants. Completed by healthcare providers, the measure 
includes questions regarding the provider’s approach to care (i.e., use of motivational interviewing), the extent 
of their collaboration with providers outside  of their discipline, the nature of their communication with other 
providers, and the format of care visits (e.g., multiple providers in the room at the same time). Aspects of the 
measure are based upon a provider -completed measure of use of motivational i nterviewing techniques .312 The 
DCI will be completed by all endocrinologists , nurse  practitioner s, dietitians, social workers , and psychologists  
seeing the patient during the course of the study (identified through the patient’s EHR) after the final study visit 
for each enrolled adolescent.   
Post-RCT Qualitative Interviews : These interviews (See Appendix) will obtain parent/adolescent views  of the 
TC process, factors affecting its efficacy, advantages/disadvantages of the model, and suggested refinements. 
Qualitative interviews of representatives of third party payers will seek their views of the viability of the TC 
model, based on the RCT r esults and costs relative to UC. Audio recordings of i nterviews will be transcribed 
verbatim  and coded by trained coders under the supervision of Dr. Aroian . 
 
Analytic Plans  Primary endpoints are change in HbA 1C and DSMP -SR total score ( treatment adherence ) over 
1 year. Secondary endpoints are: # of severe hypoglycemic event s (Hypoglycemia Diary ); measures of 
glycemic variability at each visit; and questionnaires obtained quarterly . The Full Analysis Set will include those 
who provide data at > 1 follow -up visit. The Completer Analysis set will include those who provide data at all 
follow -ups. Efficacy analyses will be done on both sets.313-315 We will use multiple imputation for treatment of 
missing data.313-315 Obtained  data will be summarized in graphs an d tables. Categorical variables will be 
summarized by frequencies and percentages; continuous variables by mean, median, standard deviation (or 
SEM ), minimum and maximum. Data will be summarized by primary group (UC  and TC), secondary group 
(TC-TH, TC -IP, TC-IP/TH, TC -TH/CH)  and measurement  points.316,317  Model assumptions will be checked 
before analyses , and  appropriate transformations or non -parametric methods will be used  when indicated . For 
summarization  of normally distributed data, group means and SEM  will be presented. In case of substantial 
deviation from normality, boxplots will be presented. Exploratory subgroup analyses (e.g. race, ethnicity, 
gender, SES, secondary group ) will be conducted as needed.318,319 Most tests will be performed against a t wo-
sided alternative at the α = 0.05 significance level and a 95% confidence interval and/or a p -value will be 
provided for inferential purposes. Data from both clinics will be pooled for analyses.316,317 All analyses will be 
done using the most recent ver sion of SAS, SPSS, R or M -Plus.315-322 Demographic variables (age, gender, 
race, ethnicity, family structure , marital status, SES) and baseline values of primary and secondary end points, 
and questionnaire results will be summarized by group. If the normal ity assumption holds , t-tests of continuous 
baseline variable s and Fisher exact test/chi -square test/CMH test for categorical variable s will be used to 
compare the TC  and UC groups at baseline ; one -way ANOVA will be used for comparisons of secondary  
groups . The statistician will select  analytic methods based on data distributions and any imbalanced baseline 
scores.323 Linear mixed effects modeling (continuous outcomes) or generalized linear mixed model ing 
(categorical outcomes)  is planned for the hypotheses below .315-322 Treatment group (UC vs TC) and 
demographic characteristics will be  fixed effects in these models , while site, physician, and within -subject 
effects will be random effects . The same analyses will be attempted for  secondary groups, sample size 
permitting. We will use Holmbeck’s  methods324 to evaluate baseline demographic variables and questionnaire 
scores as moderat ors of  TC-UC effects on primary outcomes  and to evaluate mediat ion of effects on primary 
endpoints. Candidate mediators are variables  that are obtained serially concurrent with the primary endpoints  
at >3 visits.  
Sample S ize and Statistical Power : Recruitment ended at the end of March 2020. A total of 115 families 
were recruited. Allowing for some attrit ion prior to randomization, a sample of 1 00 patients ( 65 TC and 35 UC ) 
yields 87.4% power to detect a clinically meaningful group differences in mean HbA 1C  of 0.5% (~0.7 SD) 
versus the alternative of equal means using a  t test with p = .05. Limiting recruitment to those with HbA 1C = 7.5 -
10.0% is anticipated to reduce  the SD from 1.5% for the general adolescent T1D  population to 0.7%, boosting 
effective statistical power for the RCT. The predicted 12-month means are 8.1% (TC) and 8.6% (UC) . If the SD 
is 1.0%, our power is reduced to 71.3%; if it is 1.5 % as in the general population , our power is 50.9%.  This 
sample size also achieves power of 78.2% to detect a clinically meaningful mean differences in the DSMP -SR 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
15 
 total score of 7.0 points ( ~0.6 SD) at 1 year . The estimated mean values are 63.0 (TC) and 56.0 (UC).  This 
preliminary trial will yield rich data that could be used to guide the sampling plan for a future, more ambitious , 
multi -center trial.325-327 The following hypotheses will be tested :  
 
Hypothesis 1 : Compared with UC patients , those randomized to TC  will have significantly more favorable 
primary ( HbA 1C and DSMP -SR scores ) and secondary (frequency of severe hypoglycemia and level of 
glycemic variability ) diabetes management outcomes at their 6, 9, and 12 month follow -up visit s.   
Hypothesis 2 : Compared with UC patients, those randomized to TC  will demonstrate more favorable scores 
on the T1DAL , PAID, and CPI at follow -up measurements.  
Hypothesis 3 : Significantly higher scores will be obtained on the DCI completed by HCPs describing TC care 
compared to HCPs describing UC care.  
Hypothesis 4 : Effects of TC  on HbA 1C and DSMP -SR scores will be moderated by demographic variables 
(youth age, family  SES, # of adult caregivers in the home) and by baseline scores on the T1DAL , PAID, and 
CPI. More benefit from TC will accrue to  youth who are younger, from two -parent families with higher SES, and 
with more favorable scores on the  T1DAL , PAID and CPI . 
Hypothesis 5: Effects of TC on HbA 1C and DSMP -SR scores will be mediated by changes in scores on the 
T1DAL , PAID, and CPI. More benefit from TC will accrue to  youth with favorable changes in T1DAL , PAID and 
CPI scores during the 12 months of the study . 
Hypothesis 6 : TC-TH adolescents  will keep significantly more  appointments than either TC -IP or UC youths . 
Limitations : Aspects of this application could have been done differently : 1.) Randomiz ation  at the level of 
patients/families was selected over randomizing sites in a Cluster RCT design. A Cluster RCT could reduce  the 
potential for contamination, but it introduces problems in that differences between Nemours sites could 
obscure detection of trea tment effects. We opted for randomization of patients/families to treatments  with 
concomitant efforts to minimize possible contamination. Since this funding mechanism seeks to develop 
preliminary data to support a larger multi -site RCT in the future, empir ical evaluation of our success in 
detecting, preventing and managing possible contamination effects would be an important feature of a future 
application of that type. 2.) The original structure of the RCT as a 3 -arm trial (UC vs TC -IP vs TC-TH) 
introduces  added complexity and expense and may decrease the sample size available for each study arm. 
Since  telehealth  delivery of subspecialty care for chronic conditions may be  the wave of the future, it is prudent 
to capitalize on the availability of the DP3 mec hanism to provide initial data on if  and how teleh ealth  delivery of 
the proposed TC intervention may be superior to conventional face to face delivery of that same care. 
Unfortunately, precautions due to COVID -19 spread has limited the TC -IP arm of the tri al but comparisons are 
possible between UC and TC -TH as originally planned.  3.) The enrolled sample represents a period of marked 
developmental change. We have not planned specific adaptations to the TC model, but a key role of the 
Psychology Post -Doctoral  Fellow will be assurance that negotiated  interventions are developmentally 
appropriate for each adolescent.       
Time Frame :  The first few months of the 36 month study period will include hiring/assigning project staff, 
writing a procedure manual, obtaining IRB approval , constituting the Parent, Adolescent and HCP Crowds  and 
starting qualitative interviews of stakeholders. Qualitative analyses of stakeholder responses to crowdsourc ing 
questions will continue through month 6, and we will then ensure that themes derived from th ose analyses  are 
reflected in planning of the TC model and in training the TC HCPs. TC training will begin  at month 6 and  
continue for about 6 months, during which the team s will practi ce the TC model with simulated parent -
adoles cent dyads and several study -ineligible dyads. Recruitment and data collection for the RCT will begin 
near the end of Year 1  and will continue  until the midpoint of Year 3. Statistical analysis of RCT results, cost -
effectiveness analyses , post-study qualit ative interviews of parents, adolescents, HCPs and other stakeholders 
and dissemination of study results will occur during the latter half of Year 3 . 
3.5. OVERALL IMPACT  Conventional multidisciplinary care for T1D in adolescents is not meeting their needs 
and it is not yielding acceptable health or psychological outcomes. A fresh look at how care is delivered to this 
population, careful user -centered design of an alternative model of care and rigorous testing of a well -
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
16 
 articulated tr ansdisciplinary care mod el will  set the stage for a definitive multi -site randomized clinical trial. The 
proposed work could change  how adolescents with T1D  receive  health care  by rigorously  valida ting a novel , 
manualized model of care that appli es evidence -based assessment and i nterventio n methods targeting known 
psychosocial  mechanisms . Figure 2 illustrates that the TC model is designed to shift the center of the HbA 1C 
distribution to the left by helping adolescents achieve clinically significant improvement in glycemic control. The 
TC model could yield a substantial return on investment in improved health and quality of life, efficient use of 
scarce human resources, reduction of excess health care use, and lower costs , and the findings may apply to 
other pediatric chronic conditions.  
Figure 2. Transdisciplinary Care is expected to 
shift the center of the HbA1Cdistribution to the left
051015202530
<6% 6% 7% 8% 9% 10% 11% 12% 13% 14%UC
TCPercentage of HbA1Cvalues in each range
 
 
4. INCLUSION AND ENROLLMENT REPORT (Not Applicable)  
 
5. BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES CITED  
 
1. Petitti DB, Klingensmith GJ, Bell RA, et  al. Glycemic control in youth with diabetes: the SEARCH for 
diabetes in Youth Study. The Journal of P ediatrics. 2009;155(5):668 -672. 
2. Clements MA, Foster NC, Maahs DM, et al. Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) changes over time among 
adolescent and young adult part icipants in the T1D exchange clinic registry. Pediatric diabetes. 2015.  
DOI: 10.1111/pedi.12295  
3. Carlsen S, Skrivarhaug T, Thue G, et al. Glycemic control and complications in patients with type 1 
diabetes –a registry ‐based longitudinal study of adolescents and young adults. Pediatric diabetes. 2016.  
DOI: 10.1111/pedi.12372  
4. Tamborlane WV. Fulfilling the promise of insulin pump therapy in childhood diabetes. Pediatric 
diabetes. 2006;7(s4):4 -10. 
5. Wood JR, Laffel LMB. Technology and intensive management in youth with type 1 diabetes: state of 
the art. Current diabetes reports. 2007;7(2):104 -113. 
6. Sherr J, Cengiz E, Tamborlane WV. From pumps to prevention: recent advances in the treatment of 
type 1  diabetes. Drug discovery today. 2009;14(19):973 -981. 
7. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group . The effect of intensive treatment of 
diabetes on the development and progression of long -term complications in insulin -dependent diabetes 
mellitus. N Engl J  Med. 1993;329(14):977 -986. 
8. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group . The Effect of Intensive Treatment of 
Diabetes on the Development and Progression of Long -term Complications in Insulin -dependent 
Diabetes Mellitus . Journal of Pediatrics . 1994;14(3):286 -287. 
9. Virk SA, Donaghue KC, Wong TY, Craig ME. Interventions for Diabetic Retinopathy in Type 1 Diabetes: 
Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. American journal of ophthalmology. 2015;160(5):1055 -1064.  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
17 
 10. American Diabetes A. Standards of medical care in diabetes —2016: Summary of revisions. Diabetes 
care. 2016;39(Supplement 1):S4 -S5. 
11. Tamborlane WV, Gatcomb P, Held N, Ahern J. Implications of the DCCT results in treating children and 
adolescents with diabetes. Clinical Diabetes. 1994;12(5):115 -117. 
12. Ziegler R, Rees C, Jacobs N, et al. Frequent use of an automated bolus advisor improves glycemic 
control in pediatric patients treated with insulin pump therapy: results of the Bolus Advisor Benefit 
Evaluation (BABE ) study. Pediatric diabetes. 2015  Jun 15. doi: 10.1111/pedi.12290. [Epub ahead of 
print] . 
13. Wood JR, Moreland EC, Volkening LK, Svoren BM, Butler DA, Laffel LM. Durability of insulin pump use 
in pediatric patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(11):2355 -2360.  
14. Svoren BM, Volkening LK, Butler DA, Moreland EC, Anderson BJ, Laffel LM. Temporal trends in the 
treatment of pediatric type 1 diabetes and impact on acute outcomes. The Journal of pediatrics. 
2007;150(3):279 -285. 
15. Court JM, Camer on FJ, Berg ‐Kelly K, Swift PGF. Diabetes in adolescence. Pediatric Diabetes. 
2009;10(s12):185 -194. 
16. Weissberg -Benchell J, Antisdel -Lomaglio J, Seshadri R. Insulin pump therapy a meta -analysis. 
Diabetes care. 2003;26(4):1079 -1087.  
17. Yeh H -C, Brown TT, Maruthur N, et al. Comparative effectiveness and safety of methods of insulin 
delivery and glucose monitoring for diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Annals of 
internal medicine. 2012;157(5):336 -347. 
18. Wu YP, Graves MM, Roberts MC, Mitchell AC. Is insulin pump therapy better than injection for 
adolescents with diabetes? Diabetes research and clinical practice. 2010;89(2):121 -125. 
19. Mameli C, Scaramuzza AE, Ho J, Cardona -Hernandez R, Suarez -Ortega L, Zuccotti GV. A 7 -year 
follow -up retrospective, international, multicenter study of insulin pump therapy in children and 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Acta diabetologica. 2014;51(2):205 -210. 
20. Slover RH, Welsh JB, Criego A, et al. Effectiveness of sensor ‐augmented pump therapy in children and 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes in the STAR 3 study. Pediatric diabetes. 2012;13(1):6 -11. 
21. Bergenstal RM, Tamborlane WV, Ahmann A, et al. Sensor -augmented pump therapy for a1c reduction 
(star 3) study results from  the 6 -month continuation phase. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(11):2403 -2405.  
22. Tamborlane WV, Beck RW, Bode BW, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring and intensive treatment of 
type 1 diabetes. The New England journal of medicine. 2008;359(14):1464 -1476.  
23. Tanenberg R, Welsh J. Patient behaviors associated with optimum glycemic outcomes with sensor -
augmented pump therapy: insights from the star 3 study. Endocrine Practice. 2014;21(1):41 -45. 
24. Hofer S, Heidtmann B, Raile K, et al. Discontinuation of insulin p ump treatment in children, 
adolescents, and young adults. A multicenter analysis based on the DPV database in Germany and 
Austria. Pediatric diabetes. 2010;11(2):116 -121. 
25. Shulman R, Stukel TA, Miller FA, Newman A, Daneman D, Guttmann A. Insulin pump us e and 
discontinuation in children and teens: a population -based cohort study in Ontario, Canada. Pediatric 
diabetes. 2016 , Jan. 8 , doi: 10.1111/pedi.12353. E -pub ahead of print.  
26. Gonder -Frederick L, Shepard J, Peterson N. Closed -loop glucose control: ps ychological and behavioral 
considerations. Journal of diabetes science and technology. 2011;5(6):1387 -1395.  
27. Amiel SA, Sherwin RS, Simonson DC, Lauritano AA, Tamborlane WV. Impaired insulin action in 
puberty. New England Journal of Medicine. 1986;315(4) :215-219. 
28. Helgeson VS, Siminerio L, Escobar O, Becker D. Predictors of metabolic control among adolescents 
with diabetes: a 4 -year longitudinal study. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2009;34(3):254 -270. 
29. Hoey H. Psychosocial factors are associated with metabolic control in adolescents: research from the 
Hvidoere Study Group on Childhood Diabetes. Pediatric Diabetes. 2009;10(s13):9 -14. 
30. Grey M, Davidson M, Boland EA, Tamborlane WV. Clinical and psychosocial factors associated with 
achievement of t reatment goals in adolescents with diabetes mellitus. Journal of adolescent health. 
2001;28(5):377 -385. 
31. Holmes CS, Chen R, Streisand R, et al. Predictors of youth diabetes care behaviors and metabolic 
control: A structural equation modeling approach. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2006;31(8):770 -784. 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
18 
 32. Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous Glucose Monitoring Study G. Factors predictive of 
use and of benefit from continuous glucose monitoring in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 
2009;32(11): 1947 -1953.  
33. La Greca AM, Follansbee D, Skyler JS. Developmental and behavioral aspects of diabetes 
management in youngsters. Children's Health Care. 1990;19(3):132 -139. 
34. Laffel LMB, Brackett J, Ho J, Anderson BJ. Changing the process of diabetes care improves metabolic 
outcomes and reduces hospitalizations. Quality Management in Healthcare. 1999;7(3):53.  
35. Rohan JM, Delamater A, Pendley JS, Dolan L, Reeves G, Drotar D. I dentification of self ‐management 
patterns in pediatric type 1 diabetes using cluster analysis. Pediatric diabetes. 2011;12(7):611 -618. 
36. Johnson SB, Silverstein J, Rosenbloom A, Carter R, Cunningham W. Assessing daily management in 
childhood diabetes. Health Psychology. 1986;5(6):545.  
37. Schmidt LE, Klover RV, Arfken CL, Delamater AM, Hobson D. Compliance with dietary prescriptions in 
children and adolescents with insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus. Journal of the American Dietetic 
Association. 1992;92( 5):567 -570. 
38. Wang JT, Wiebe DJ, White PC. Developmental trajectories of metabolic control among White, Black, 
and Hispanic youth with type 1 diabetes. The Journal of pediatrics. 2011;159(4):571 -576. 
39. Weissberg -Benchell J, Glasgow AM, Tynan WD, Wirtz P, Turek J, Ward J. Adolescent diabetes 
management and mismanagement. Diabetes care. 1995;18(1):77 -82. 
40. Burns KL, Green P, Chase HP. Psychosocial correlates of glycemic control as a function of age in 
youth with insulin -dependent diabetes. Journal of Ad olescent Health Care. 1986;7(5):311 -319. 
41. Delamater AM, Davis SG, Bubb J, Santiago JV, Smith JA, White NH. Self -monitoring of blood glucose 
by adolescents with diabetes: technical skills and utilization of data. The Diabetes Educator. 
1989;15(1):56 -61. 
42. Guilfoyle SM, Crimmins NA, Hood KK. Blood glucose monitoring and glycemic control in adolescents 
with type 1 diabetes: meter downloads versus self ‐report. Pediatric diabetes. 2011;12(6):560 -566. 
43. Joyce P, Hood K, Case D, et al. Caregiver reports of provider recommended frequency of blood 
glucose monitoring and actual testing frequency for youth with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes research and 
clinical practice. 2012;95(1):68 -75. 
44. Helgeson VS, Honcharuk E, Becker D, Escobar O, Siminerio L. A focus on bl ood glucose monitoring: 
relation to glycemic control and determinants of frequency. Pediatric diabetes. 2011;12(1):25 -30. 
45. Wysocki T, Green L, Huxtable K. Blood glucose monitoring by diabetic adolescents: compliance and 
metabolic control. Health Psychol ogy. 1989;8(3):267.  
46. Olinder AL, Kernell A, Smide B. Missed bolus doses: devastating for metabolic control in CSII ‐treated 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Pediatric diabetes. 2009;10(2):142 -148. 
47. Diabetes Research in Children Network Study G. Psych ological aspects of continuous glucose 
monitoring in pediatric type 1 diabetes. Pediatric diabetes. 2006;7(1):32.  
48. Berlin KS, Davies W, Jastrowski KE, Hains AA, Parton EA, Alemzadeh R. Contextual assessment of 
problematic situations identified by insuli n pump using adolescents and their parents. Families, 
Systems, & Health. 2006;24(1):33.  
49. Jacobson A, Hauser S, Lavori L, et al. Adherence among children and adolescents with IDDM over a 
four-year longitudinal follow -up: The influence of patient coping a nd adjustment. J Pediatr Psychol. 
1990;15:511 -526. 
50. Jacobson AM, Hauser ST, Wertlieb D, Wolfsdorf JI, Orleans J, Vieyra M. Psychological adjustment of 
children with recently diagnosed diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care. 1986;9(4):323 -329. 
51. Cohen DM, Lu mley MA, Naar -King S, Partridge T, Cakan N. Child behavior problems and family 
functioning as predictors of adherence and glycemic control in economically disadvantaged children 
with type 1 diabetes: a prospective study. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2004;29(3):171 -184. 
52. Dantzer C, Swendsen J, Maurice -Tison S, Salamon R. Anxiety and depression in juvenile diabetes: a 
critical review. Clinical psychology review. 2003;23(6):787 -800. 
53. Bernstein CM, Stockwell MS, Gallagher MP, Rosenthal SL, Soren K. Mental health issues in 
adolescents and young adults with type 1 diabetes prevalence and impact on glycemic control. Clinical 
Pediatrics. 2013;52(1):10 -15. 
54. Herzer M, Hood KK. Anxiety symp toms in adolescents with type 1 diabetes: association with blood 
glucose monitoring and glycemic control. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2010;35(4):415 -425. 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
19 
 55. Grey M, Lipman T, Cameron ME, Thurber FW. Coping behaviors at diagnosis and in adjustment one  
year later in children with diabetes. Nursing Research. 1997;46(6):312 -317. 
56. Rausch JR, Hood KK, Delamater A, et al. Changes in treatment adherence and glycemic control during 
the transition to adolescence in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes care. 2012;35(6): 1219 -1224.  
57. Jaser SS, White LE. Coping and resilience in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Child: Care, Health and 
Development. 2011;37(3):335 -342. 
58. Grey M, Whittemore R, Tamborlane W. Depression in type 1 diabetes in children: natural history and 
correlates. Journal of psychosomatic research. 2002;53(4):907 -911. 
59. Johnson B, Eiser C, Young V, Brierley S, Heller S. Prevalence of depression among young people with 
Type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. Diabetic Medicine. 2013;30(2):199 -208. 
60. Plener  PL, Molz E, Berger G, et al. Depression, metabolic control, and antidepressant medication in 
young patients with type 1 diabetes. Pediatric diabetes. 2015;16(1):58 -66. 
61. Hood KK, Huestis S, Maher A, Butler D, Volkening L, Laffel LMB. Depressive symptoms in children and 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes association with diabetes -specific characteristics. Diabetes Care. 
2006;29(6):1389 -1389.  
62. Wu YP, Hilliard ME, Rausch J, Dolan LM, Hood KK. Family involvement with the diabetes regimen in 
young people: the role of adolescent depressive symptoms. Diabetic Medicine. 2013;30(5):596 -602. 
63. Hood KK, Rausch JR, Dolan LM. Depressive symptoms predict change in glycemic control in 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes: rates, magnitude, and moderators of change. Pediatric diabetes. 
2011;12(8):718 -723. 
64. Riley AR, Duke DC, Freeman KA, Hood KK, Harris MA. Depressive Symptoms in a Trial Behavioral 
Family Systems Therapy for Diabetes: A Po st Hoc Analysis of Change. Diabetes care. 
2015;38(8):1435 -1440.  
65. Hassan K, Loar R, Anderson BJ, Heptulla RA. The role of socioeconomic status, depression, quality of 
life, and glycemic control in type 1 diabetes mellitus. The Journal of pediatrics. 2006 ;149(4):526 -531. 
66. Borschuk AP, Everhart RS. Health disparities among youth with type 1 diabetes: A systematic review of 
the current literature. Families, Systems, & Health. 2015;33(3):297.  
67. Luyckx K, Seiffge -Krenke I, Hampson SE. Glycemic Control, Co ping, and Internalizing and 
Externalizing Symptoms in Adolescents With Type 1 Diabetes A cross -lagged longitudinal approach. 
Diabetes Care. 2010;33(7):1424 -1429.  
68. Rohan JM, Rausch JR, Pendley JS, et al. Identification and prediction of group -based glyce mic control 
trajectories during the transition to adolescence. Health Psychology. 2014;33(10):1143.  
69. Rohan JM, Huang B, Pendley JS, et al. Predicting health resilience in pediatric type 1 diabetes: A test 
of the resilience model framework. Journal of pe diatric psychology. 2015;40(9):956 -967. 
70. Jaser SS, Grey M. A pilot study of observed parenting and adjustment in adolescents with type 1 
diabetes and their mothers. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2010;35(7):738 -747. 
71. Eckshtain D, Ellis DA, Kolmodin  K, Naar -King S. The effects of parental depression and parenting 
practices on depressive symptoms and metabolic control in urban youth with insulin dependent 
diabetes. J Pediatr Psychol. 2010;35(4):426 -435. 
72. Jaser SS, Whittemore R, Ambrosino JM, Lindem ann E, Grey M. Mediators of depressive symptoms in 
children with type 1 diabetes and their mothers. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2008;33(5):509 -519. 
73. Herzer M, Vesco A, Ingerski LM, Dolan LM, Hood KK. Explaining the family conflict -glycemic control 
link through psychological variables in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Journal of behavioral 
medicine. 2011;34(4):268 -274. 
74. Berlin KS, Rabideau EM, Hains AA. Empirically derived patterns of perceived stress among youth with 
type 1 diabetes and relati onships to metabolic control. Journal of pediatric psychology. 2012; 37(9) 990-
998 
75. Kovacs M, Mukerji P, Iyengar S, Drash A. Psychiatric disorder and metabolic control among youths with 
IDDM: a longitudinal study. Diabetes care. 1996;19(4):318 -323. 
76. Lawrence JM, Standiford DA, Loots B, et al. Prevalence and correlates of depressed mood among 
youth with diabetes: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study. Pediatrics. 2006;117(4):1348 -1358.  
77. Knight A, Weiss P, Morales K, et al. Identifying Differences in Risk Factors for Depression and Anxiety 
in Pediatric Chronic Disease: A Matched Cross -Sectional Study of Youth with Lupus/Mixed Connective 
Tissue Disease and Their Peers with Diabetes. The Journal of pediatrics. 2015;167(6):1397 -1403.  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
20 
 78. McGrady ME, Laffe l L, Drotar D, Repaske D, Hood KK. Depressive Symptoms and Glycemic Control in 
Adolescents With Type 1 Diabetes Mediational role of blood glucose monitoring. Diabetes Care. 
2009;32(5):804 -806. 
79. Ingerski LM, Laffel L, Drotar D, Repaske D, Hood KK. Correl ates of glycemic control and quality of life 
outcomes in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Pediatric diabetes. 2010;11(8):563 -571. 
80. Northam EA, Lin A, Finch S, Werther GA, Cameron FJ. Psychosocial well -being and functional 
outcomes in youth with type 1 diabetes 12 years after disease onset. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(7):1430 -
1437.  
81. Pollock M, Kovacs M, Charron -Prochownik D. Eating disorders and maladaptive dietary/insulin 
management among youths with childhood -onset insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 1995;34(3):291 -296. 
82. Colton PA, Olmsted MP, Daneman D, et al. Eating disorders in girls and women with type 1 diabetes: a 
longitudinal study of prevalence, onset, remission, and recurrence.  Diabetes care. 2015;38(7):1212 -
1217.  
83. Reynolds KA, Helgeson VS. Children with diabetes compared to peers: Depressed? Distressed? 
Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 2011;42(1):29 -41. 
84. Colton P, Olmsted M, Daneman D, Rydall A, Rodin G. Disturbed Eating Be havior and Eating Disorders 
in Preteen and Early Teenage Girls With Type 1 Diabetes A case -controlled study. Diabetes Care. 
2004;27(7):1654 -1659.  
85. Colton PA, Olmsted MP, Daneman D, Rodin GM. Depression, disturbed eating behavior, and metabolic 
control i n teenage girls with type 1 diabetes. Pediatric diabetes. 2013;14(5):372 -376. 
86. Jones JM, Lawson ML, Daneman D, Olmsted MP, Rodin G. Eating disorders in adolescent females 
with and without type 1 diabetes: cross sectional study. Bmj. 2000;320(7249):1563 -1566.  
87. d'Emden H, Holden L, McDermott B, et al. Disturbed eating behaviours and thoughts in Australian 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Journal of paediatrics and child health. 2013;49(4):E317 -E323.  
88. Caccavale LJ, Nansel TR, Quick V, Lipsky LM, Laff el LM, Mehta SN. Associations of disordered eating 
behavior with the family diabetes environment in adolescents with Type 1 diabetes. Journal of 
developmental and behavioral pediatrics: JDBP. 2015;36(1):8 -13. 
89. Steel JM, Young RJ, Lloyd GGd, Clarke BF. Clinically apparent eating disorders in young diabetic 
women: associations with painful neuropathy and other complications. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed). 
1987;294(6576):859 -862. 
90. Whittemore R, Kanner S, Singleton S, H amrin V, Chiu J, Grey M. Correlates of depressive symptoms in 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Pediatric diabetes. 2002;3(3):135 -143. 
91. Borus JS, Laffel L. Adherence challenges in the management of type 1 diabetes in adolescents: 
prevention and interven tion. Current opinion in pediatrics. 2010;22(4):405.  
92. Wysocki T, Hough BS, Ward KM, Allen AA, Murgai N. Use of blood glucose data by families of children 
and adolescents with IDDM. Diabetes Care. 1992;15(8):1041 -1044.  
93. Berg CA, King PS, Butler JM, Ph am P, Palmer D, Wiebe DJ. Parental involvement and adolescents’ 
diabetes management: The mediating role of self -efficacy and externalizing and internalizing behaviors. 
Journal of pediatric psychology. 2011;36(3):329 -339. 
94. Anderson B, Ho J, Brackett J, F inkelstein D, Laffel L. Parental involvement in diabetes management 
tasks: relationships to blood glucose monitoring adherence and metabolic control in young adolescents 
with insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus. The Journal of pediatrics. 1997;130(2):257 -265. 
95. Ellis DA, Podolski C -L, Frey M, Naar -King S, Wang B, Moltz K. The role of parental monitoring in 
adolescent health outcomes: Impact on regimen adherence in youth with type 1 diabetes. Journal of 
Pediatric Psychology. 2007;32(8):907 -917. 
96. Hilliard ME, Holmes CS, Chen R, Maher K, Robinson E, Streisand R. Disentangling the roles of 
parental monitoring and family conflict in adolescents' management of type 1 diabetes. Health 
Psychology. 2013;32(4):388.  
97. Gruhn MA, Lord JH, Jaser SS. Collabor ative and Overinvolved Parenting Differentially Predict 
Outcomes in Adolescents With Type 1 Diabetes. 2016 , March 21.  E-Published ahead of print.  
98. Bearman KJ, La Greca AM. Assessing friend support of adolescents' diabetes care: the diabetes social 
suppo rt questionnaire -friends version. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2002;27(5):417 -428. 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
21 
 99. Burroughs TE, Harris MA, Pontious SL, Santiago JV. Research on social support in adolescents with 
IDDM: A critical review. The Diabetes Educator. 1997;23(4):438 -448. 
100. Wu YP, Rausch J, Rohan JM, et al. Autonomy support and responsibility -sharing predict blood glucose 
monitoring frequency among youth with diabetes. Health Psychology. 2014;33(10):1224.  
101. Palladino DK, Helgeson VS. Friends or foes? A review of peer  influence on self -care and glycemic 
control in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Journal of pediatric psychology. 2012;37(5):591 -603. 
102. Wysocki T, Greco P. Social support and diabetes management in childhood and adolescence: 
influence of parents and fr iends. Curr Diab Rep. 2006;6(2):117 -122. 
103. Carcone AI, Ellis DA, Weisz A, Naar -King S. Social support for diabetes illness management: 
supporting adolescents and caregivers. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2011;32(8):581.  
104. Drew LM, Berg C, Wiebe DJ. The mediat ing role of extreme peer orientation in the relationships 
between adolescent –parent relationship and diabetes management. Journal of Family Psychology. 
2010;24(3):299.  
105. Hains AA, Berlin KS, Davies WH, Parton EA, Alemzadeh R. Attributions of Adolescents  With Type 1 
Diabetes in Social Situations Relationship with expected adherence, diabetes stress, and metabolic 
control. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(4):818 -822. 
106. Berlin KS, Hains AA, Kamody RC, Kichler JC, Davies WH. Differentiating Peer and Friend Social 
Information -Processing Effects on Stress and Glycemic Control Among Youth With Type 1 Diabetes. 
Journal of pediatric psychology. 2015 ;40(5):492-499 
107. Hains AA, Berlin KS, Davies WH, et al. Attributions of teacher reactions to diabetes self -care behaviors . 
Journal of pediatric psychology. 2009;34(1):97 -107. 
108. Hains AA, Berlin KS, Davies WH, Smothers MK, Sato AF, Alemzadeh R. Attributions of adolescents 
with type 1 diabetes related to performing diabetes care around friends and peers: the moderating role  
of friend support. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2007;32(5):561 -570. 
109. Hanson CL, Henggeler SW, Harris MA, et al. Contributions of sibling relations to the adaptation of 
youths with insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus. Journal of consulting and clin ical psychology. 
1992;60(1):104.  
110. Wennick A, Huus K. What it is like being a sibling of a child newly diagnosed with type 1 diabetes: an 
interview study. European Diabetes Nursing. 2012;9(3):88 -92. 
111. Helgeson VS, Lopez LC, Kamarck T. Peer relationsh ips and diabetes: retrospective and ecological 
momentary assessment approaches. Health Psychology. 2009;28(3):273.  
112. Helgeson VS, Palladino DK. Agentic and Communal Traits and Health Adolescents With and Without 
Diabetes. Personality and Social Psycholo gy Bulletin. 2012;38(4):415 -428. 
113. Jackson C, Richer J, Edge JA. Sibling psychological adjustment to type 1 diabetes mellitus. Pediatric 
diabetes. 2008; 28(9):308-311. 
114. La Greca AM, Auslander WF, Greco P, Spetter D, Fisher EB, Santiago JV. I get by w ith a little help 
from my family and friends: Adolescents' support for diabetes care. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 
1995;20(4):449 -476. 
115. Peveler RC, Bryden KS, Neil HAW, et al. The relationship of disordered eating habits and attitudes to 
clinical o utcomes in young adult females with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2005;28(1):84 -88. 
116. Bächle C, Lange K, Stahl -Pehe A, et al. Symptoms of eating disorders and depression in emerging 
adults with early -onset, long -duration type 1 diabetes and their asso ciation with metabolic control. PloS 
one. 2015;10(6):e0131027.  
117. Wisting L, Bang L, Skrivarhaug T, Dahl -Jørgensen K, Rø Ø. Adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes –The 
Impact of Gender, Age, and Health -Related Functioning on Eating Disorder Psychopathology. Public 
Library of Science . 2015;10(11):e0141386.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141386. eCollection 2015.  
118. Hanlan ME, Griffith J, Patel N, Jaser SS. Eating disorders and disordered eating in type 1 diabetes: 
Prevalence, screening, and treatment options. Current diabetes reports. 2013;13(6):909 -916. 
119. La Greca AM, Bearman KJ, Moore H. Peer relations of youth with pediatric conditions and health risks: 
Promoting social support and healthy lifestyles. Journal of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics. 
2002 ;23(4):271 -280. 
120. Pendley JS, Kasmen LJ, Miller DL, Donze J, Swenson C, Reeves G. Peer and family support in 
children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Journal of pediatric psychology. 2002;27(5):429 -438. 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
22 
 121. Sato AF, Berlin KS, Hains AA, et al. Te acher Support of Adherence for Adolescents With Type 1 
Diabetes Preferred Teacher Support Behaviors and Youths' Perceptions of Support. The Diabetes 
Educator. 2008;34(5):866 -873. 
122. Sleeman F, Northam EA, Crouch W, Cameron FJ. Psychological adjustment of  well siblings of children 
with type 1 diabetes. Diabetic Medicine. 2010;27(9):1084 -1087.  
123. Thomas AM, Peterson L, Goldstein D. Problem solving and diabetes regiman adherence by children 
and adolescents with IDDM in social pressure situations: A reflect ion of normal development. Journal of 
Pediatric Psychology. 1997;22(4):541 -561. 
124. Lin A, Northam EA, Rankins D, Werther GA, Cameron FJ. Neuropsychological profiles of young people 
with type 1 diabetes 12 yr after disease onset. Pediatric diabetes. 2010; 11(4):235 -243. 
125. Wysocki T, Harris MA, Buckloh LM, et al. Self -care autonomy and outcomes of intensive therapy or 
usual care in youth with type 1 diabetes. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2006;31(10):1036 -1045.  
126. Wysocki T, Harris MA, Wilkinson K, S adler M, Mauras N, White NH. Self -management competence as 
a predictor of outcomes of intensive therapy or usual care in youth with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 
2003;26(7):2043 -2047.  
127. Gioia GA. BRIEF: Behavior rating inventory of executive function:  Professional manual.  Psychological 
Assessment Resources; 2000.  
128. McNally K, Rohan J, Pendley JS, Delamater A, Drotar D. Executive functioning, treatment adherence, 
and glycemic control in children with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(6):1159 -1162. 
129. Miller VA, Drotar D. Decision -making competence and adherence to treatment in adolescents with 
diabetes. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2007;32(2):178 -188. 
130. Wysocki T, Iannotti R, Weissberg -Benchell J, et al. Diabetes problem solving by yout hs with type 1 
diabetes and their caregivers: measurement, validation, and longitudinal associations with glycemic 
control. Journal of pediatric psychology. 2008;33(8):875 -884. 
131. Perantie DC, Lim A, Wu J, et al. Effects of prior hypoglycemia and hypergl ycemia on cognition in 
children with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Pediatric diabetes. 2008;9(2):87 -95. 
132. Duke DC, Geffken GR, Lewin AB, Williams LB, Storch EA, Silverstein JH. Glycemic control in youth 
with type 1 diabetes: Family predictors and mediators.  Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2008;33(7):719 -
727. 
133. Fortenberry KT, Berg CA, King PS, et al. Longitudinal trajectories of illness perceptions among 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Journal of pediatric psychology. 2014: 39(7):687 -696. 
134. Main A, W iebe DJ, Van Bogart K, et al. Secrecy From Parents and Type 1 Diabetes Management in 
Late Adolescence. Journal of pediatric psychology. 2015;40(10):1075 -1084.  
135. Agarwal S, Jawad AF, Miller VA. A multivariate model exploring the predictive value of demog raphic, 
adolescent, and family factors on glycemic control in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Pediatric 
diabetes. 2015 Oct 21 . doi: 10.1111/pedi.12331. [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID: 26486450; 
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4840099.  
136. Wiebe DJ, Gelfand D, Butler JM, et al. Longitudinal associations of maternal depressive symptoms, 
maternal involvement, and diabetes management across adolescence. Journal of pediatric psychology. 
2011;36(7):837 -846. 
137. Mackey ER, Struemph K, Powell PW, Chen R, Streisand R, Holmes CS. Maternal depressive 
symptoms and disease care status in youth with type 1 diabetes. Health Psychology. 2014;33(8):783.  
138. Drew LM, Berg C, King P, et al. Depleted parental psychological resources as mediators of the 
association of income wi th adherence and metabolic control. Journal of Family Psychology. 
2011;25(5):751.  
139. Butler JM, Berg CA, King P, et al. Parental negative affect and adolescent efficacy for diabetes 
management. Journal of Family Psychology. 2009;23(4):611.  
140. Grey M. C oping and Psychosocial Adjustment in Mothers of Young Children with Type 1 Diabetes. 
Child Health Care. 2009;38(2):91 -106. 
141. Hessler D, Fisher L, Polonsky W, Johnson N. Understanding the Areas and Correlates of Diabetes -
Related Distress in Parents of Te ens With Type 1 Diabetes. Journal of pediatric psychology. 2016.  
doi: 10.1093/jpepsy/jsw002 . 
142. Horsch A, McManus F. Brief report: Maternal posttraumatic stress symptoms are related to adherence 
to their child’s diabetes treatment regimen. Journal of hea lth psychology. 2014;19(8):987 -992. 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
23 
 143. Caccavale LJ, Weaver P, Chen R, Streisand R, Holmes CS. Family density and SES related to 
diabetes management and glycemic control in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Journal of pediatric 
psychology. 2015; 40(5):500 -508. 
144. Kovacs M, Iyengar S, Goldston D, Obrosky DS, Stewart J, Marsh J. Psychological functioning among 
mothers of children with insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus: a longitudinal study. Journal of consulting 
and clinical psychology. 1990;58( 2):189.  
145. Eilander MMA, de Wit M, Rotteveel J, et al. Diabetes IN develOpment (DINO): the bio -psychosocial, 
family functioning and parental well -being of youth with type 1 diabetes: a longitudinal cohort study 
design. BMC pediatrics. 2015;15(1):1.  
146. Whittemore R, Jaser S, Chao A, Jang M, Grey M. Psychological experience of parents of children with 
type 1 diabetes a systematic mixed -studies review. The Diabetes Educator. 2012;38(4):562 -579. 
147. Lord JH, Young MT, Gruhn MA, Grey M, Delamater AM, Jaser SS. Effect of race and marital status on 
mothers’ observed parenting and adolescent adjustment in youth with type 1 diabetes. Journal of 
pediatric psychology. 2014; 40(1):132 -43. 
148. Zhang L, Ellis DA, Naar -King S, Moltz K, Carcone AI, Dekelbab B. Effects of Socio -Demographic 
Factors on Parental Monitoring, and Regimen Adherence Among Adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes: A 
Moderation Analysis. Journal of Child and Family Studies. 2016;25(1):176 -188. 
149. Wiebe DJ, Berg CA, Fortenberry KT, et al. Physician reco mmendations about maternal involvement in 
adolescent diabetes management. Diabetes care. 2008;31(4):690 -692. 
150. Anderson BJ, Auslander WF, Jung KC, Miller JP, Santiago JV. Assessing family sharing of diabetes 
responsibilities. Journal of Pediatric Psycho logy. 1990;15(4):477 -492. 
151. Young MT, Lord JH, Patel NJ, Gruhn MA, Jaser SS. Good cop, bad cop: quality of parental involvement 
in type 1 diabetes management in youth. Current diabetes reports. 2014;14(11):1 -12. 
152. Whittemore R, Liberti L, Jeon S, Cha o A, Jaser SS, Grey M. Self -Management as a Mediator of Family 
Functioning and Depressive Symptoms With Health Outcomes in Youth With Type 1 Diabetes. West ern 
journal of nursing research. 2014 ;36(9):1254 -1271 
153. Lewin AB, Heidgerken AD, Geffken GR, et al . The relation between family factors and metabolic 
control: The role of diabetes adherence. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2006;31(2):174 -183. 
154. T Markowitz J, C Garvey K, Mb Laffel L. Developmental changes in the roles of patients and families in 
type 1 diabetes management. Current diabetes reviews. 2015;11(4):231 -238. 
155. Helgeson VS, Reynolds KA, Siminerio L, Escobar O, Becker D. Parent and adolescent distribution of 
responsibility for diabetes self -care: Links to health outcomes. Journal of Pedia tric Psychology. 
2008;33(5):497 -508. 
156. Wiebe DJ, Berg CA, Korbel C, et al. Children’s appraisals of maternal involvement in coping with 
diabetes: Enhancing our understanding of adherence, metabolic control, and quality of life across 
adolescence. Journa l of Pediatric Psychology. 2005;30(2):167 -178. 
157. Wiebe DJ, Croom A, Fortenberry KT, et al. Parental involvement buffers associations between pump 
duration and metabolic control among adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Journal of pediatric 
psychology. 2010;35(1):1152 -1160 . 
158. Wysocki T, Nansel TR, Holmbeck GN, et al. Collaborative involvement of primary and secondary 
caregivers: Associations with youths' diabetes outcomes. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 
2009;34(8):869 -881. 
159. Wysocki T, Taylor A, Hou gh BS, Linscheid TR, Yeates KO, Naglieri JA. Deviation from developmentally 
appropriate self -care autonomy: Association with diabetes outcomes. Diabetes Care. 1996;19(2):119 -
125. 
160. White K, Kolman ML, Wexler P, Polin G, Winter RJ. Unstable diabetes and unstable families: A 
psychosocial evaluation of diabetic children with recurrent ketoacidosis. Pediatrics. 1984;73(6):749 -
755. 
161. Eilander M, de Wit M, Rotteveel J, Snoek FJ. Low Self -Confidence and Diabetes Mismanagement in 
Youth with Type 1 Diabetes Me diate the Relationship between Behavioral Problems and Elevated 
HbA1c. Journal of diabetes research. 2016. doi: 10.1155/2016/3159103. Epub 2015 Nov 23. PubMed 
PMID: 26682230; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4670876 . 
162. Butler DA, Zuehlke JB, Tovar A, Volkening LK, Anderson BJ, Laffel L. The impact of modifiable family 
factors on glycemic control among youth with type 1 diabetes. Pediatric diabetes. 2008;  9(4):373 -381. 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
24 
 163. Thompson SJ, Auslander WF, White NH. Comparison of single -mother and two -parent families on 
metabolic control of children with diabetes. Diabetes care. 2001;24(2):234 -238. 
164. Harris MA, Greco P, Wysocki T, Elder -Danda C, White NH. Adolescents with diabet es from single -
parent, blended, and intact families: Health -related and family functioning. Families, Systems, & Health. 
1999;17(2):181.  
165. Hilliard ME, Wu YP, Rausch J, Dolan LM, Hood KK. Predictors of deteriorations in diabetes 
management and control i n adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Journal of Adolescent Health. 
2013;52(1):28 -34. 
166. Hanson CL, Henggeler SW, Rodrigue JR, Burghen GA, Murphy WD. Father -absent adolescents with 
insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus: A population at risk? Journal of Appli ed Developmental 
Psychology. 1988;9(2):243 -252. 
167. Wysocki T, Gavin L. Paternal involvement in the management of pediatric chronic diseases: 
Associations with adherence, quality of life, and health status. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 
2006;31(5):501 -511. 
168. Hilliard ME, Rohan JM, Carle AC, Pendley JS, Delamater A, Drotar D. Fathers’ involvement in 
preadolescents’ diabetes adherence and glycemic control. Journal of pediatric psychology. 
2011;36(8):911 -922. 
169. Hilliard ME, Rohan JM, Rausch JR, Delam ater A, Pendley JS, Drotar D. Patterns and predictors of 
paternal involvement in early adolescents’ type 1 diabetes management over 3 years. Journal of 
pediatric psychology. 2014;39(1):74 -83. 
170. Seiffge -Krenke I. “Come on, say something, dad!”: Communica tion and Coping in Fathers of Diabetic 
Adolescents. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2002;27(5):439 -450. 
171. Hanson CL, Henggeler SW, Burghen GA. Race and sex differences in metabolic control of adolescents 
with IDDM: a function of psychosocial variables?  Diabetes Care. 1987;10(3):313 -318. 
172. Willi SM, Miller KM, DiMeglio LA, et al. Racial -ethnic disparities in management and outcomes among 
children with type 1 diabetes. Pediatrics. 2015;135(3):424 -434. 
173. Glasgow AM, Weissberg -Benchell J, Tynan WD, et al. Readmissions of children with diabetes mellitus 
to a children's hospital. Pediatrics. 1991;88(1):98 -104. 
174. Angus VC, Waugh N. Hospital admission patterns subsequent to diagnosis of type 1 diabetes in 
children: a systematic review. BMC health services research. 2007;7(1):1 -10. 
175. Delamater AM, Albrecht DR, Postellon DC, Gutai JP. Racial differences in metabolic control of children 
and adolescents with type I diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care. 1991;14(1): 20-25. 
176. Hsin O, La Greca AM, Valenzuela J, Moine CT, Delamater A. Adherence and glycemic control among 
Hispanic youth with type 1 diabetes: Role of family involvement and acculturation. Journal of Pediatric 
Psychology. 2010;35(2):156 -166. 
177. Bobrow E S, AvRuskin TW, Siller J. Mother -daughter interaction and adherence to diabetes regimens. 
Diabetes Care. 1985;8(2):146 -151. 
178. Anderson BJ, Vangsness L, Connell A, Butler D, Goebel ‐Fabbri A, Laffel LMB. Family conflict, 
adherence, and glycaemic control i n youth with short duration type 1 diabetes. Diabetic medicine. 
2002;19(8):635 -642. 
179. Hilliard ME, Guilfoyle SM, Dolan LM, Hood KK. Prediction of adolescents' glycemic control 1 year after 
diabetes -specific family conflict: the mediating role of blood g lucose monitoring adherence. Archives of 
pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 2011;165(7):624 -629. 
180. Miller -Johnson S, Emery RE, Marvin RS, Clarke W, Lovinger R, Martin M. Parent -chld relationships and 
the management of insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus.  Journal of consulting and clinical psychology. 
1994;62(3):603.  
181. Seiffge -Krenke I, Laursen B, Dickson DJ, Hartl AC. Declining metabolic control and decreasing parental 
support among families with adolescents with diabetes: the risk of restrictiveness. Journal of pediatric 
psychology. 2013;38(5):518 -530. 
182. Wysocki T. Associations among teen -parent relationships, metabolic control, and adjustment to 
diabetes in adolescents. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 1993;18(4):441 -452. 
183. Sood ED, Pendley JS, Delamater AM, Rohan JM, Pulgaron ER, Drotar D. Mother –father informant 
discrepancies regarding diabetes management: Associations with diabetes -specific family conflict and 
glycemic control. Health Psychology. 2012;31(5):571.  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
25 
 184. Herge WM, Streisand R, Che n R, Holmes C, Kumar A, Mackey ER. Family and youth factors 
associated with health beliefs and health outcomes in youth with type 1 diabetes. J Pediatr Psychol. 
2012;37(9):980 -989. 
185. Iskander JM, Rohan JM, Pendley JS, Delamater A, Drotar D. A 3 -year pro spective study of parent –
child communication in early adolescents with type 1 diabetes: Relationship to adherence and glycemic 
control. Journal of pediatric psychology. 2015;40(1):109 -120. 
186. Moreira H, Frontini R, Bullinger M, Canavarro MC. Caring for a  child with Type 1 diabetes: Links 
between family cohesion, perceived impact, and parental adjustment. Journal of Family Psychology. 
2013;27(5):731.  
187. Katz ML, Laffel LM, Perrin JM, Kuhlthau K. Impact of type 1 diabetes mellitus on the family is reduced  
with the medical home, care coordination, and family -centered care. The Journal of pediatrics. 
2012;160(5):861 -867. 
188. Markowitz JT, Volkening LK, Laffel LMB. Care utilization in a pediatric diabetes clinic: cancellations, 
parental attendance, and menta l health appointments. The Journal of pediatrics. 2014;164(6):1384 -
1389.  
189. Croom A, Wiebe DJ, Berg CA, et al. Adolescent and parent perceptions of patient -centered 
communication while managing type 1 diabetes. J Pediatr Psychol. 2011;36(2):206 -215. 
190. Datye KA, Moore DJ, Russell WE, Jaser SS. A review of adolescent adherence in Type 1 diabetes and 
the untapped potential of diabetes providers to improve outcomes. Current diabetes reports. 
2015;15(8):1 -9. 
191. Delamater AM, de Wit M, McDarby V, Malik J, Acerini CL. Psychological care of children and 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Pediatric diabetes. 2014;15(S20):232 -244. 
192. Schwartz DD, Cline VD, Axelrad ME, Anderson BJ. Feasibility, acceptability, and predictive validity of a 
psychosocial screening program for children and youth newly diagnosed with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 
Care. 2011;34(2):326 -331. 
193. Zenlea IS, Mednick L, Rein J, Quinn M, Wolfsdorf J, Rhodes ET. Routine behavioral and mental health 
screening in young children with type 1 diabete s mellitus. Pediatr Diabetes. 2014;15(5):384 -388. 
194. Schwartz D, Axelrad M, Anderson B. Psychosocial risk screening of children newly diagnosed with type 
1 diabetes: a training toolkit for healthcare professionals. MedEdPORTAL; 2013.  Available from: 
https://www.mededportal.org/publication/9643  
195. Hood KK, Rohan JM, Peterson CM, Drotar D. Interventions with adherence -promoting components in 
pediatric type 1 diabetes meta -analysis of their impact on glycemic control. Diabetes Care. 
2010;33(7):1658 -1664.  
196. Kichler JC, Kaugars AS, Marik P, Nabors L, Alemzadeh R. Effectiveness of groups for adolescents with 
Type 1 diabetes mellitus and their parents. Families, Systems, & Health. 2013;31(3):280.  
197. Boardway RH, Delamater AM, Tomakowsky J, Gutai JP. Stress management training for adolescents 
with diabetes. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 1993;18(1):29 -45. 
198. Stanger C, Ryan SR, Delhey LM, et al. A multicomponent motivational intervention to improve  
adherence among adolescents with poorly controlled type 1 diabetes: a pilot study. Journal of pediatric 
psychology. 2013;38(6):629 -637. 
199. Carpenter JL, Price JEW, Cohen MJ, Shoe KM, Pendley JS. Multifamily group problem -solving 
intervention for adheren ce challenges in pediatric insulin -dependent diabetes. Clinical Practice in 
Pediatric Psychology. 2014;2(2):101.  
200. Holmes CS, Chen R, Mackey E, Grey M, Streisand R. Randomized clinical trial of clinic -integrated, low -
intensity treatment to prevent deter ioration of disease care in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes care. 2014;37(6):1535 -1543.  
201. Grey M, Whittemore R, Jeon S, et al. Internet psycho -education programs improve outcomes in youth 
with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(9):2475 -2482.  
202. Serlachius AS, Scratch SE, Northam EA, Frydenberg E, Lee KJ, Cameron FJ. A randomized controlled 
trial of cognitive behaviour therapy to improve glycaemic control and psychosocial wellbeing in 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Journal of health psychology. 2014. doi:10.1177/1359105314547940 . 
203. Greco P, Pendley JS, McDonell K, Reeves G. A peer group intervention for adolescents with type 1 
diabetes and their best friends. Journal of pediatric psychology. 2001;26(8):485 -490. 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
26 
 204. Salamon KS, Hains AA, Fleischman KM, Davies WH, Kichler J. Improving adherence in social 
situations for adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM): a pilot study. Primary care diabetes. 
2010;4(1):47 -55. 
205. Herbert LJ, Sweenie R, Kelly KP, Holmes C , Streisand R. Using qualitative methods to evaluate a 
family behavioral intervention for type 1 diabetes. Journal of Pediatric Health Care. 2014;28(5):376 -385. 
206. Channon SJ, Huws -Thomas MV, Rollnick S, et al. A multicenter randomized controlled trial o f 
motivational interviewing in teenagers with diabetes. Diabetes care. 2007;30(6):1390 -1395.  
207. Knight K, Bundy C, Morris R, et al. The effects of group motivational interviewing and externalizing 
conversations for adolescents with Type -1 diabetes. Psych ology, Health & Medicine. 2003;8(2):149 -
157. 
208. Viner R, Christie D, Taylor V, Hey S. Motivational/solution ‐focused intervention improves HbA1c in 
adolescents with Type 1 diabetes: a pilot study. Diabetic Medicine. 2003;20(9):739 -742. 
209. Gregory JW, Ro bling MR, Bennert K, et al. Development and evaluation by a cluster randomised trial of 
a psychosocial intervention in children and teenagers experiencing diabetes: the DEPICTED study. 
Health Technology Assessment. 2011;15(29):1 -202. 
210. Grey M, Boland EA , Davidson M, Li J, Tamborlane WV. Coping skills training for youth with diabetes 
mellitus has long -lasting effects on metabolic control and quality of life. The Journal of pediatrics. 
2000;137(1):107 -113. 
211. Grey M, Boland EA, Davidson M, Yu C, Sullivan -Bolyai S, Tamborlane WV. Short -term effects of 
coping skills training as adjunct to intensive therapy in adolescents. Diabetes care. 1998;21(6):902 -908. 
212. Grey M, Boland EA, Davidson M, Yu C, Tamborlane WV. Coping skills training for youths with diabet es 
on intensive therapy. Applied Nursing Research. 1999;12(1):3 -12. 
213. Cook S, Herold K, Edidin DV, Briars R. Increasing problem solving in adolescents with type 1 diabetes: 
the choices diabetes program. The Diabetes Educator. 2002;28(1):115 -124. 
214. Wysocki T, Greco P, Harris MA, Bubb J, White NH. Behavior Therapy for Families of Adolescents With 
Diabetes Maintenance of treatment effects. Diabetes Care. 2001;24(3):441 -446. 
215. Wysocki T, Harris MA, Buckloh LM, et al. Effects of behavioral family system s therapy for diabetes on 
adolescents’ family relationships, treatment adherence, and metabolic control. Journal of Pediatric 
Psychology. 2006;31(9):928 -938. 
216. Wysocki T, Harris MA, Buckloh LM, et al. Randomized Trial of Behavioral Family Systems Therap y for 
Diabetes Maintenance of effects on diabetes outcomes in adolescents. Diabetes Care. 2007;30(3):555 -
560. 
217. Wysocki T, Harris MA, Buckloh LM, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of behavioral family systems 
therapy for diabetes: Maintenance and gene ralization of effects on parent -adolescent communication. 
Behavior therapy. 2008;39(1):33 -46. 
218. Wysocki T, Harris MA, Greco P, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of behavior therapy for families of 
adolescents with insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2000;25(1):23 -
33. 
219. Wysocki T, Miller KM, Greco P, et al. Behavior therapy for families of adolescents with diabetes: Effects 
on directly observed family interactions. Behavior Therapy. 1999;30(3):507 -525. 
220. Ellis DA,  Yopp J, Templin T, et al. Family mediators and moderators of treatment outcomes among 
youths with poorly controlled type 1 diabetes: Results from a randomized controlled trial. Journal of 
pediatric psychology. 2007;32(2):194 -205. 
221. Ellis DA, Frey MA, N aar-King S, Templin T, Cunningham P, Cakan N. Use of multisystemic therapy to 
improve regimen adherence among adolescents with type 1 diabetes in chronic poor metabolic control 
a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care. 2005;28(7):1604 -1610.  
222. Ellis DA, Naar -King S, Frey M, Templin T, Rowland M, Cakan N. Multisystemic treatment of poorly 
controlled type 1 diabetes: Effects on medical resource utilization. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 
2005;30(8):656 -666. 
223. Ellis DA, Templin T, Naar -King S, et al . Multisystemic therapy for adolescents with poorly controlled 
type I diabetes: Stability of treatment effects in a randomized controlled trial. Journal of consulting and 
clinical psychology. 2007;75(1):168.  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
27 
 224. Nansel TR, Laffel LM, Haynie DL, et al. Imp roving dietary quality in youth with type 1 diabetes: 
randomized clinical trial of a family -based behavioral intervention. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2015 May  
8;12:58. doi: 10.1186/s12966 -015-0214 -4. 
225. Katz ML, Volkening LK, Butler DA, Anderson BJ, Laff el LM. Family ‐based psychoeducation and care 
ambassador intervention to improve glycemic control in youth with type 1 diabetes: a randomized trial. 
Pediatric diabetes. 2014;15(2):142 -150. 
226. Anderson BJ, Brackett J, Ho J, Laffel L. An office -based interv ention to maintain parent -adolescent 
teamwork in diabetes management. Impact on parent involvement, family conflict, and subsequent 
glycemic control. Diabetes Care. 1999;22(5):713 -721. 
227. Laffel LMB, Vangsness L, Connell A, Goebel -Fabbri A, Butler D, And erson BJ. Impact of ambulatory, 
family -focused teamwork intervention on glycemic control in youth with type 1 diabetes. The Journal of 
pediatrics. 2003;142(4):409 -416. 
228. Nansel TR, Iannotti RJ, Liu A. Clinic -integrated behavioral intervention for families of youth with type 1 
diabetes: randomized clinical trial. Pediatrics. 2012;129(4):866 -873. 
229. Markowitz JT, Cousineau T, Franko DL, et al. Text messaging intervention for teens and young adults 
with diabetes. Journal of diabetes science and technology. 2014;8(5):1029 -1034.  
230. Lehmkuhl HD, Storch EA, Cammarata C, et al. Telehealth behavior therapy  for the management of type 
1 diabetes in adolescents. Journal of diabetes Science and Technology. 2010;4(1):199 -208. 
231. Kumar VS, Wentzell KJ, Mikkelsen T, Pentland A, Laffel LM. The DAILY (Daily Automated Intensive 
Log for Youth) trial: a wireless, por table system to improve adherence and glycemic control in youth 
with diabetes. Diabetes technology & therapeutics. 2004;6(4):445 -453. 
232. Mulvaney SA, Ritterband LM, Bosslet L. Mobile intervention design in diabetes: review and 
recommendations. Curr Diab Rep. 2011;11(6):486 -493. 
233. Mulvaney SA, Rothman RL, Dietrich MS, et al. Using mobile phones to measure adolescent diabetes 
adherence. Health Psychology. 2012;31(1):43 -50. 
234. Kumah -Crystal YA, Hood KK, Ho Y -X, et al. Technology use for diabetes problem  solving in 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes: relationship to glycemic control. Diabetes technology & therapeutics. 
2015;17(7):449 -454. 
235. Harris MA, Hood KK, Mulvaney SA. Pumpers, skypers, surfers and texters: technology to improve the 
management of dia betes in teenagers. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism. 2012;14(11):967 -972. 
236. Iafusco D, Galderisi A, Nocerino I, et al. Chat line for adolescents with type 1 diabetes: a useful tool to 
improve coping with diabetes: a 2 -year follow -up study. Diabetes tec hnology & therapeutics. 
2011;13(5):551 -555. 
237. Giani E, Laffel L. Opportunities and Challenges of Telemedicine: Observations from the Wild West in 
Pediatric Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes technology & therapeutics. 2016;18(1):1 -3. 
238. Burke BL, Hall RW, Dehn el PJ, et al. Telemedicine: Pediatric Applications. Pediatrics. 2015;136(1):293 -
308. 
239. Wood CL, Clements SA, McFann K, Slover R, Thomas JF, Wadwa RP. Use of telemedicine to improve 
adherence to American Diabetes Association standards in pediatric type 1  diabetes. Diabetes 
technology & therapeutics. 2016; 17(12):7-14. 
240. Izquierdo R, Morin PC, Bratt K, et al. School -centered telemedicine for children with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus. The Journal of pediatrics. 2009;155(3):374 -379. 
241. Bashshur RL, Shannon GW, Smith BR, Woodward MA. The empirical evidence for the telemedicine 
intervention in diabetes management. Telemedicine and e -Health. 2015;21(5):321 -354. 
242. Balkhi AM, Reid AM, Westen SC, Olsen B, Janicke DM, Geffken GR. Telehealth interventions to 
reduce management complications in type 1 diabetes: A review. World journal of diabetes. 
2015;6(3):371.  
243. Harris MA, Freeman KA, Duke DC. Seeing is believing: using Skype to improve diabetes outcomes in 
youth. Diabetes care. 2015;38(8):1427 -1434.  
244. Lee J M, Davis MM, Menon RK, Freed GL. Geographic distribution of childhood diabetes and obesity 
relative to the supply of pediatric endocrinologists in the United States. The Journal of pediatrics. 
2008;152(3):331 -336. 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
28 
 245. Choi BCK, Pak AWP. Multidisciplinarit y, interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity in health research, 
services, education and policy: 1. Definitions, objectives, and evidence of effectiveness. Clinical and 
investigative medicine. 2006;29(6):351.  
246. Choi BCK, Pak AWP. Multidisciplinarity, interdisciplinarity, and transdisciplinarity in health research, 
services, education and policy: 2. Promotors, barriers, and strategies of enhancement. Clinical & 
Investigative Medicine. 2007;30(6):224 -232. 
247. Choi BCK, Anita WP. Multidisciplinarity, int erdisciplinarity, and transdisciplinarity in health research, 
services, education and policy: 3. Discipline, inter -discipline distance, and selection of discipline. 
Clinical & Investigative Medicine. 2008;31(1):41 -48. 
248. Natural Sciences Engineering and Research Council of Canada . Guidelines for the preparation and 
review of applications in interdisciplinary research. Ottawa, Canada: NSERC. URL: 
http:www.nserc.ca/professors_e.asp?nav=profnav&lbi+intre  (Accessed February, 2012).  2004.  
249. Picard M, Sabiston CM, McNamara JK. The need for a transdisciplinary, global health framework. The 
Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine. 2011;17(2):179 -184. 
250. Soskolne C. Transdisciplinary approaches for public health. Paper pre sented at: Epidemiology . 2000.  
11, S122  
251. Stokols D, Harvey R, Gress J, Fuqua J, Phillips K. In vivo studies of transdisciplinary scientific 
collaboration: lessons learned and implications for active living research. American journal of preventive 
medicine. 2005;28(2):202 -213. 
252. Reilly C. Transdisciplinary Approach: An Atypical Strategy for Improving Outcomes in Rehabilitative 
and Long ‐Term Acute Care Settings. Rehabilitation Nursing. 2001;26(6):216 -244. 
253. Dyer J A. Multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and transdisciplinary educational models and nursing 
education. Nursing education perspectives. 2003;24(4):186 -188. 
254. Kessler D. Transdisciplinary approach to pediatric undernutrition. Developmental Behavioral Ne ws. 
1999. Online: URL: http://www.dbpeds.org/section/fall_1999/kessler.html . Accessed January 8, 2006  
255. Innes K, Crawford K, Jones T, et al. Transdisciplinary care in the emergency department: A qualitative 
analysis. Internat ional Emergency Nursing. 2015.  doi: 10.1016/j.ienj.2015.07.003.  
256. Katon W, Russo J, Von Korff M, et al. Long ‐term Effects of a Collaborative Care Intervention in 
Persistently Depressed Primary Care Patients. Journal of general internal medicine. 2002;1 7(10):741 -
748. 
257. Katon WJ, Roy -Byrne P, Russo J, Cowley D. Cost -effectiveness and cost offset of a collaborative care 
intervention for primary care patients with panic disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry. 
2002;59(12):1098 -1104.  
258. Chia CLK, Mantoo SK, Tan KY. ‘Start to finish trans ‐institutional transdisciplinary care’: a novel 
approach improves colorectal surgical results in frail elderly patients. Colorectal Disease. 
2016;18(1):43 -50. 
259. Ciccarelli MR, Gladstone EB, Richardson EAJA. Imple mentation of a Transdisciplinary Team for the 
Transition Support of Medically and Socially Complex Youth. Journal of pediatric nursing. 
2015;30(5):661 -667. 
260. Vyas RM, Alperovich M, Grayson BH, McCarthy JG, Rodriquez ED. From Multidisciplinary to 
Interdi sciplinary to Transdisciplinary Care: An Evolution in Craniofacial Surgery. Plastic and 
reconstructive surgery. 2015;135(4):796 -797. 
261. Galvin JE, Valois L, Zweig Y. Collaborative transdisciplinary team approach for dementia care. 
Neurodegenerative disea se management. 2014;4(6):455 -469. 
262. Simard M, Gagné A -M, Lambert RD, Tremblay Y. A transdisciplinary approach to the decision -making 
process in extreme prematurity. BMC research notes. 2014;7(1):450.  doi: 10.1186/1756 -0500 -7-450. 
263. Patel MI, Moore D,  Blayney DW, Milstein A. Transforming cancer care: Are transdisciplinary 
approaches using design -thinking, engineering, and business methodologies needed to improve value 
in cancer care delivery? Journal of Oncology Practice. 2014;10(2):51 -54. 
264. Gordon RM, Corcoran JR, Bartley -Daniele P, Sklenar D, Sutton PR, Cartwright F. A transdisciplinary 
team approach to pain management in inpatient health care settings. Pain Management Nursing. 
2014;15(1):426 -435. 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
29 
 265. Gittell JH, Fairfield KM, Bierbaum B, et al. I mpact of relational coordination on quality of care, 
postoperative pain and functioning, and length of stay: a nine -hospital study of surgical patients. 
Medical care. 2000;38(8):807 -819. 
266. Jacob V, Chattopadhyay SK, Sipe TA, et al. Economics of collaborative care for management of 
depressive disorders: a community guide systematic review. American journal of preventive medicine. 
2012;42(5):539 -549. 
267. Katon W, Russo J, Lin EHB, et al. Cost -effectiveness of a multicondition collaborative care intervention: 
a randomized controlled trial. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2012;69(5):506 -514. 
268. Lin EHB, Von Korff M, Ciechanowski P, et al. Treatment adjustment and medication adherence for 
compl ex patients with diabetes, heart disease, and depression: a randomized controlled trial. The 
Annals of Family Medicine. 2012;10(1):6 -14. 
269. LeRouge C, Wickramasinghe N. A review of user -centered design for diabetes -related consumer health 
informatics tec hnologies. Journal of diabetes science and technology. 2013;7(4):1039 -1056.  
270. Rhodes ENF, J., Waldman, G, Post, J., Mednick, L., Askins, M., Denhoff, E., Potter, J., Melvin, P., & 
Wolfsdorf, J. . Using telehealth to improve diabetes management in adoles cents. Paper presented at 
the Pediatric Academic Societies, Balti more Maryland, May 2,  2016.  
271. Wallander JL, Varni JW, Babani L, Banis HT, DeHaan CB, Wilcox KT. Disability parameters, chronic 
strain, and adaptation of physically handicapped children and  their mothers. Journal of pediatric 
psychology. 1989;14(1):23 -42. 
272. D'Zurilla TJ, Goldfried MR. Problem solving and behavior modification. Journal of abnormal psychology. 
1971;78(1):107 -126. 
273. Harris MA, Spiro K, Heywood M, et al. Novel Intervention s in Children’s Health Care (NICH): Innovative 
treatment for youth with complex medical conditions. Clinical Practice in Pediatric Psychology. 
2013;1(2):137 -145. 
274. Rechenberg K, Whittemore R, Grey M, Jaser S. Contribution of income to self ‐management an d health 
outcomes in pediatric type 1 diabetes. Pediatric diabetes. 2014; 17(2):120 -126 
275. Robling M, McNamara R, Bennert K, et al. The effect of the Talking Diabetes consulting skills 
intervention on glycaemic control and quality of life in children wit h type 1 diabetes: cluster randomised 
controlled trial (DEPICTED study). BMJ. 2012;344: 2359 -2376 . 
276. Husted GR, Thorsteinsson B, Esbensen BA, Hommel E, Zoffmann V. Improving glycaemic control and 
life skills in adolescents with type 1 diabetes: A randomi sed, controlled intervention study using the 
Guided Self -Determination -Young method in triads of adolescents, parents and health care providers 
integrated into routine paediatric outpatient clinics. BMC pediatrics. 2011;11( 1):1-12. 
277. Murphy HR, Wadham C , Hassler ‐Hurst J, Rayman G, Skinner TC. Randomized trial of a diabetes self ‐
management education and family teamwork intervention in adolescents with Type 1 diabetes. Diabetic 
Medicine. 2012;29(8):249 -254. 
278. Mulvaney SA, Anders S, Smith AK, Pittel EJ, Johnson KB. A pilot test of a tailored mobile and web -
based diabetes messaging system for adolescents. Journal of telemedicine and telecare. 
2012;18(2):115 -118. 
279. Nelson EC, Batalden PB, Godfrey MM. Quality by design: a clinical microsystems approach.  John 
Wiley & Sons; 2011.  
280. Brabham DC, Ribisl KM, Kirchner TR, Bernhardt JM. Crowdsourcing applications for public health. Am 
J Prev Med. 2014;46(2):179 -187. 
281. Brabham DC. Crowdsourcing. The MIT Press Essential Knowledge Series. Massachusetts Institut e of 
Technology Cambridge; 2013.  
282. American Association of Diabetes E. The art and science of diabetes self -management education: a 
desk reference for healthcare professionals.  Chicago, IL ; 2012.  
283. National Certification Board for Diabetes Educators.  NCBDE Practice Exam. 2012;  
http://www.ncbde.org  (accessed 2/13/12).  
284. Nakao K, Treas J. The 1989 socioeconomic index of occupations: Construction from the 1989 
occupational prestige scores.  National Opinion Research Center C hicago; 1992.  
285. Goldstein DE CM, Durban JW et al. Harmonization of Gylcohemoglobin measurements; Clinical 
Laboratory Standards Institute. Approved Guideline C44 -A. 2002:22.  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
30 
 286. Little RR, Rohlfing CL. The long and winding road to optimal HbA1c measurement. Clinica Chimica 
Acta. 2013;418:63 -71. 
287. Kovatchev BP, Otto E, Cox D, Gonder -Frederick L, Clarke W. Evaluation of a new measure of blood 
glucose variability in diabetes. Diabetes care. 2006;29(11):2433 -2438.  
288. Kovatchev BP, Cox DJ, Gonder -Frederick LA, Young -Hyman D, Schlundt D, Clarke W. Assessment of 
risk for severe hypoglycemia among adults with IDDM: validation of the low blood glucose index. 
Diabetes care. 1998;21( 11):1870 -1875.  
289. Ryan EA, Shandro T, Green K, et al. Assessment of the severity of hypoglycemia and glycemic lability 
in type 1 diabetic subjects undergoing islet transplantation. Diabetes. 2004;53(4):955 -962. 
290. Huang ES, O'Grady M, Basu A, et al. Th e cost -effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring in type 1 
diabetes. Diabetes care. 2010;33(6):1269 -1274.  
291. Lee JM, Rhee K, O'Grady M J, et al. Health utilities for children and adults with type 1 diabetes. Med 
Care. 2011;49(10):924 -931. 
292. Ianno tti RJ, Nansel TR, Schneider S, et al. Assessing regimen adherence of adolescents with type 1 
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(10):2263 -2267.  
293. Wysocki T, Buckloh LM, Antal H, Lochrie A, Taylor A. Validation of a self ‐report version of the diabetes 
self‐management profile. Pediatric diabetes. 2012;13(5):438 -443. 
294. Lewin AB, Storch EA, Williams LB, Duke DC, Silverstein JH, Geffken GR. Brief report: normative data 
on a structured interview for diabetes adherence in childhood. Journal of pediatric psycho logy. 
2010;35(2):177 -182. 
295. La Greca AM, Swales T, Klemp S, Madigan S. Self care behaviors among adolescents with diabetes. 
Ninth Annual Sessions of the Society of Behavioral Medicine. 1988: (Abstract) A42. 
296. Lehmkuhl HD, Cammarata C, Meyer K, et al. Psychometric properties of a self -report measure of 
adherence to the diabetes regimen. Children's Health Care. 2009;38(1):76 -90. 
297. Lewin AB, LaGreca AM, Geffken GR, et al. Validity and reliability of an adolescent and parent rating 
scale of type 1 diabe tes adherence behaviors: The Self -Care Inventory (SCI). Journal of Pediatric 
Psychology. 2009;34(9):999 -1007.  
298. Hanson CL, Henggeler SW, Burghen GA. Social competence and parental support as mediators of the 
link between stress and metabolic control in adolescents with insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus. 
Journal of consulting and clinical psychology. 1987;55(4):529 -533. 
299. Schilling LS, Dixon JK, Knafl KA, et al. A new self -report measure of self -management of type 1 
diabetes for adolescents. Nursing research. 2009;58(4):228 -236. 
300. Schneider S, Iannotti RJ, Nansel TR, et al. Identification of distinct self -management styles of 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2007;30(5):1107 -1112.  
301. Harris MA, Wysocki T, Sadler M, et al. Validatio n of a structured interview for the assessment of 
diabetes self -management. Diabetes care. 2000;23(9):1301 -1304.  
302. Diabetes Research in Children Network Study G roup. Diabetes self management profile for flexible 
insulin regimens: Cross -sectional and lon gitudinal analysis of psychometric properties in a pediatric 
sample. Diabetes Care. 2005;28(8):2034 -2035 . 
303. Hilliard ME. Developing a Measure of Diabetes Health -related Quality of Life across the Lifespan - 
Preliminary Qualitative Finding.  Paper presen ted at the American Diabetes Association 76th Scientific 
Sessions, New Orleans, LA. June,  2016.  
304.     Wasserman RM, Eshtehardi, S.S., Weissberg -Benchell, J., Anderson, B.J. & Hilliard, M.E. Screening 
for diabetes distress and depressive symptoms in yout h with type 1 diabetes (T1D). Poster presented 
at the American Diabetes Association 76th Scientific Sessions, New Orleans, LA, June. 2016.  
305. Suchman AL, Roter D, Green M, Lipkin Jr M. Physician satisfaction with primary care office visits. 
Medical care.  1993;31(12):1083 -1092.  
306. Shapiro, JB, Vesco, AT, Weil, LEG, Evans, MA, Hood, KK, Weissberg -Benchell, J. Psychometric 
properties of the Problem Areas in Diabetes: Teen and Parent of Teen versions. J Pediatr Psychol, 
2017, (e -publ); 1 -11.doi: 10.1093/jpepsy/jsx146.  
307. Weissberg ‐Benchell J, Antisdel ‐Lomaglio J. Diabetes ‐specific emotional distress among adolescents: 
feasibility, reliability, and validity of the problem areas in diabetes ‐teen version. Pediatric diabetes. 
2011;12(4pt1):341 -344. 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
31 
 308. Graue M, Haugstvedt A, Wentzel -Larsen T, Iversen MM, Karlsen B, Rokne B. Diabetes -related 
emotional distress in adults: reliability and validity of the Norwegian versions of the Problem Areas in 
Diabetes Scale (PAID) and the Diabetes Distress Scale (D DS). International journal of nursing studies. 
2012;49(2):174 -182. 
309. Wasserman RM, Eshtehardi, S.S., Weissberg -Benchell, J., Anderson, B.J. & Hilliard, M.E. Screening 
for diabetes distress and depressive symptoms in youth with type 1 diabetes (T1D). Pos ter presented 
at the American Diabetes Association 76th Scientific Sessions, New Orleans, LA, June. 2016.  
310.      Wasserman, R. M., Gonynor, C., Anderson, B . A., & Schwartz, D. D. Development of a  
            diabetes -specific  risk-taking inventory (DSRI) for adolescents and young adults with type 1 diabetes.      
            Diabetes, 2016, 65  (Suppl 1): 2226 -PUB . 
311. Wells, N, Bronheim, S, Zyanski, S, Hoover, C. Psychometric evaluation of a consumer -developed 
Family -Centered  Care Assessment Tool. Matern cChild Health J, 2015, 19 : 1899 -1909. doi: 
10.1007/s10995 -015-1709 -y. 
312. Rubak, S., Sandboek, A., Lauritzan, T., Borch -Johnsen, K., & Christensen, B. An education and training 
course in motivational interviewing influence. British Journal of General Practice, 2006;  56:429 -436.  
313. Cohen J, Cohen P, West SG, Aiken LS. Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for the 
behavioral sciences.  Routledge; 2013.  
314. Stevens JP. Applied multivariate statistics for the social  sciences.  Routledge; 2012.  
315. Zelterman D. Applied linear models with SAS.  Cambridge University Press; 2010.  
316. Brown H, Prescott R. Applied mixed models in medicine.  John Wiley & Sons; 2014.  
317. Mead R, Gilmour SG, Mead A. Statistical Principles for  the Design of Experiments: Applications to Real 
Experiments.  Vol 36: Cambridge University Press; 2012.  
318. Fitzmaurice GM, Laird NM, Ware JH. Applied longitudinal analysis.  Vol 998: John Wiley & Sons; 2012.  
319. Garson GD. Hierarchical linear modeling: G uide and applications.  Sage; 2012.  
320. Heck RH, Thomas SL. An Introduction to Multilevel Modeling Techniques: MLM and SEM Approaches 
Using Mplus.  Routledge; 2015.  
321. Muthén LK, Muthén BO. Mplus User’s Guide (7th edn). Muthén and Muthén Los Angeles, CA; 2012.  
322. Chiang AY. Analysis of Clinical Trials Using SAS®: A Practical Guide. Technometrics. 2012.  
323. Carlsson MO, Zou KH, Yu C -R, Liu K, Sun FW. A comparison of nonparametric and parametric 
methods to adjust for baseline measures. Contemporary clinic al trials. 2014;37(2):225 -233. 
324. Holmbeck GN. Toward terminological, conceptual, and statistical clarity in the study of mediators and 
moderators: examples from the child -clinical and pediatric psychology literatures. Journal of consulting 
and clinical psychology. 1997;65(4):599 -610. 
325. Muthén LK, Muthén BO. How to use a Monte Carlo study to decide on sample size and determine 
power. Structural Equation Modeling. 2002;9(4):599 -620. 
326. Nylund KL, Asparouhov T, Muthén BO. Deciding on the number of clas ses in latent class analysis and 
growth mixture modeling: A Monte Carlo simulation study. Structural equation modeling. 
2007;14(4):535 -569. 
327. Aberson CL. Applied power analysis for the behavioral sciences.  Routledge; 2011.  
 
 
  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
32 
 6. PROTECTION OF HUMAN PAR TICIPANTS  
Nemours’ Office of Human Subjects Protection is nationally accredited by the Accreditation Agency for Human 
Research Protection Programs (AAHRPP) and is one of the few strictly pediatric programs to have attained 
this distinction. NOHSP operates two Instit utional Review Boards under its Federal -Wide Assurance: Nemours 
IRB 1, and Nemours IRB 2, which was chaired by Dr. Wysocki  (FWA# 00000293). Since the two IRBs are 
each empowered to review and approve research occurring at any Nemours location, the present  research will 
be submitted to the Nemours IRB 1 as the IRB of record and Dr. Wysocki will recuse himself from deliberations 
related to this work.  
The proposed research consists of both qualitative (crowdsourcing and qualitative interviews) and quantitativ e 
(RCT) components. These two components of the application are treated separately in the section below.  
Human participants’ involvement, characteristics and design  
Qualitative research component : About 100 -120 adolescents with T1D, and 100 -120 of their pa rents, and ~30 
T1D HCPs will be recruited via flyers mailed to U.S. T1D referral centers, e -mails to T1D HCPs, internet 
announcements, and handouts at national conferences to constitute the membership of the respective crowds. 
Current Nemours T1D patients who are at least 16 years old and who otherwise meet the eligibility criteria for 
the RCT portion of the proposed work, (and their parents) will also be recruited for this component, since the 
patients would be too old to be eligible for the planned RCT. T he intent is to enlist as many members as 
possible who are not affiliated with Nemours as a patient, parent or HCP so that prospective Nemours 
participants remain naïve to the RCT aims and procedures and thus remain eligible for participation in the 
RCT. P arents, adolescents and HCPs will enroll as members of the pertinent Crowd after authenticating an 
IRB-approved electronic parental permission, adolescent assent or informed consent form, as was done for our 
current NIH DP3 grant and PCORI -funded shared de cision making study. About 5 -10 representatives of third 
party payers from Nemours service regions in Florida and the Delaware Valley will be recruited to participate in 
qualitative interviews about the feasibility of the TC model from that perspective.  M embers of the Parent, 
Adolescent and HCP Crowds will provide written narrative responses to open -ended questions about their 
perceptions of a proposed Trans -Disciplinary Care (TC) model. HCPs will participate first and their 
perspectives will be reflected in a revised TC model, followed by solicitation of perspectives of that model from 
the Adolescent and Parent Crowds. This process will be repeated as the TC Model is iteratively refined and 
ultimately finalized. The TC model emerging from this iterative pr ocess will be the model to be tested in the 
RCT.  
HCPs on the Orlando and Wilmington TC teams for this study will be interviewed at the completion of TC team 
training and again one year later to obtain their perspectives of the training curriculum and of t he structure, 
process and outcomes of TC care.  
Adolescents with T1D and their parents who are randomized to TC will undergo qualitative interviews as they 
leave the study concerning their perspectives after experiencing the TC model of care delivery, its advantages 
and disadvantages and possible influences on efficacy.  
Finally, representatives of third party payers will be interviewed after the initial RCT results have been analyzed 
and their perspectives will be sought regarding how these data might be in terpreted from their companies’ 
perspectives.  
Quantitative (RCT) Research Component : The RCT will enroll 150 youth who have established care for T1D at 
either Nemours Children’s Hospital in Orlando, Florida or Alfred I. du Pont Hospital for Children in Wi lmington, 
Delaware. At least one parent or other legal caregiver of each adolescent must also participate. About 75 
participants will be enrolled at each site. Oversampling of racial/ethnic minorities is expected to yield a sample 
comprised of at least 21 African -American and at least 21 Hispanic adolescents (At least 28% of the sample 
will be racial or ethnic minorities). Each parent will sign an IRB -approved Parental Permission and Informed 
Consent Form and thereafter each youth will sign an IRB -approved Assent Form prior to collection of any 
research data. Enrollment criteria for youth are: Age, At least 11, but not yet 17, years old at enrollment; T1D 
for at least 1 year; Most recent HbA 1C or mean value over the prior year 7.5% to 10.0% inclusive; Able t o 
complete study questionnaires independently; No other chronic medical conditions that, in the opinion of the 
treating physician, represent obstacles to study completion. Enrollment criteria for parents are: Biological 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
33 
 parent or legally appointed caregive r of an enrolled patient; Primary or shared responsibility for monitoring the 
medical care of the youth with T1D; Able to complete study questionnaires in English; Stated intent to continue 
medical care for T1D at Nemours Children’s Clinic for 12 months fo llowing enrollment. Two parents of the 
same child may participate, in which case one set of the parent -administered questionnaires will be completed 
at each assessment point by both parents together. Randomization will be at the level of families; for any 
family with two or more eligible adolescents, all of those adolescents would be randomized to the same 
condition. The HCPs who will implement the clinical aspects of this protocol will also be viewed as research 
participants and will sign IRB -approved Info rmed Consent Forms prior to their involvement in the research. 
These persons will complete questionnaires and post -study qualitative interviews about their satisfaction with 
the respective care models and they will also be the subject of certain questionna ires completed by parents 
and adolescents. Also, HCPs who see study patients will complete certain questionnaires and a qualitative 
interview about their perceptions of the TC model at the end of the study. Data for cost -effectiveness analyses 
will be coll ected throughout the study from parents and from participants’ electronic medical records and 
analyzed after the RCT is complete.  
Sources of research data  
Qualitative research component : Transcripts of crowdsourced responses to questions posed to the Adolescent, 
Parent and HCP Crowds will be downloaded directly from Yammer.com and then edited to remove any 
identifying information. Each response will be coded for qualitative themes as described above. Qualitative 
interviews of representatives of key sta keholder groups will be audio -recorded and then transcribed verbatim 
without any personal identifiers used. Once transcribed, the audio recordings will be erased, eliminating any 
link between the interview respondents and their comments.  
Quantitative Resea rch Component : The data for the study will consist of blood samples for glycohemoglobin 
tests (HbA 1C), hypoglycemia diaries, glucose meter downloads, measurement of health care utilization and 
costs and a variety of questionnaires and interviews that perta in to family management of diabetes. The 
measurement schedule for the study appears in a table in the Approach section. Copies of the measures are 
provided in an Appendix to this application.  
Potential risks  
Qualitative research component : The Crowdsourcin g component of the research carries the risks associated 
with privacy and confidentiality in that other crowd members will be able to see and read responses uploaded 
by any other crowd member. Participants are free to enter a response or not to any questio n posed to the 
crowd.  
It is difficult to imagine any risks of participation in answering crowdsourcing questions or qualitative interviews 
for adolescents with diabetes, their parents, HCPs or representatives of third party payers. The only 
conceivable ri sks are threats to privacy and confidentiality. These risks are considered negligible since the 
interview questions will address quite innocuous content that is unlikely to be upsetting or to threaten the 
participants’ employment, finances, health or socia l status in any way. Participants in the Adolescent, Parent, 
or HCP Crowds can simply decline to answer any question(s) that they see as threatening in any way. In our 
ongoing crowdsourcing study involving parents of very young children with T1D, we have n ot observed any 
clinically significant emotional or psychiatric complications associated with study participation. In fact, a number 
of parents have volunteered that their study participation was comforting and therapeutic.   
Quantitative Research Componen t: As an RCT, it is possible that adolescents randomized to either the Usual 
Care or Trans -Disciplinary Care treatments might fare more poorly than if they had been randomized to the 
other treatment. Each youth’s attending pediatric endocrinologist will ha ve access to the TC team’s progress 
notes regarding each of these patients and will retain the discretion of seeking additional consultation or other 
indicated services for such patients as that physician sees fit.  
Adequacy of protections against risks  
Qualitative research component : Transcripts of written responses will be stripped of identifiers before being 
forwarded to trained coders. All crowd members will be taught to respect the confidentiality of other crowd 
members. Members will also be aware that answering a given question is entirely optional and so they can 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
34 
 choose to refrain from entering a written response. Participants also have the option of sending a given 
response to the facilitator only rather than to the entire crowd.  
Recordings of in -person interviews will be transcribed verbatim without participants’ identities. Once 
transcribed in this way, the recordings will be erased, thus eliminating any possibility that participants could be 
identified if the security of the transcribed data were so mehow compromised. Audio recordings will not be 
saved to Nemours computer network since the files on the entire network are backed up nightly, meaning that 
no file on the network at the time of the backup can ever be completely deleted.  
Quantitative Resear ch Component : Medical management of each enrolled patient will continue to be under the 
supervision of each adolescent’s attending endocrinologist and the endocrinologists will have the discretion to 
intensify the patient’s treatment, seek consultation of other professionals or pursue any other reasonable 
course of action deemed necessary in the patient’s best interests.  
Potential benefits to participants and others  
Qualitative research component : Participants in our ongoing crowdsourcing study have volunte ered reports 
indicating that sharing personal and sensitive experiences and feelings has had therapeutic effects for them by 
helping them to realize that their reactions are normal and shared by others in the same situation. 
Nonetheless, the consent docume nts make no claim for the prospect of direct benefits and that is how we 
would intend to portray the proposed work if this grant is funded.  
There are no likely direct benefits to parents, adolescents or HCPs who participate in the qualitative interviews.  
Quantitative Research Component : Participants randomized to any of the RCT study conditions could realize 
improved glycemic control, better treatment adherence, and better quality of life, although this is probably more 
likely for those randomized to TC -IP and TC -TH. There are unlikely to be any direct benefits to the HCPs who 
complete questionnaires about team function the end of the study. However, TC team members could benefit 
by expanding their knowledge and skill repertoires that they could apply in the ir T1D clinical care to patients 
not enrolled in this study.  
Importance of the knowledge to be gained  
Qualitative interview  component : The knowledge to be gained in this aspect of the proposed work is essential 
to finalizing the optimal design of the Trans -Disciplinary Care model so that it is perceived as acceptable, 
feasible, safe and effective by all pertinent groups of stakeholders. Engagement of stakeholders in all phases 
of the research enterprise is a cornerstone of patient -centered outcomes research . 
Quantitative Research Component : The RCT will determine if Trans -Disciplinary Care is more efficacious than 
Usual Care in terms of glycemic control, treatment adherence and various measures of psychological 
adjustment to diabetes among adolescents and it  will analyze the incremental cost -effectiveness of 
implementing this model of care. The RCT will also explore whether face to face versus telehealth delivery of 
TC care yields differences in any of the measured outcomes. Since adolescents with T1D often s truggle with 
management of this condition, empirical and economic validation of an alternative model of care would be 
extremely valuable from a public health standpoint.  
Data and safety monitoring plan  
Qualitative research and crowdsourcing component : There does not appear to be a need for a Data and Safety 
Monitoring Plan for these aspects of the proposed research since the study poses negligible risks and is not a 
clinical trial. There are no expected adverse events for this study. Unanticipated probl ems or complaints 
related to the research will be handled in accord with the relevant NOHSP Policy and Procedure governing 
such events.  
Quantitative Research Component : Please see the appendix and separate document entitled “DSMP_FINAL” 
for a comprehensive  description of the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan.  
7. REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES  
We expect to enroll about 50% female adolescents with T1D, and we expect that about 80 -90% of participating 
parents will be women. Among HCPs and representatives  of third party payers, we expect at least 50% 
representation of females, but this will be dependent upon the specific employees who are eligible for 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
35 
 participation. We plan oversampling of racial/ethnic minorities so that both the Qualitative and Quantitat ive 
components of the research enroll a sample reflecting at least 25% representation of racial and ethnic 
minorities. The race/ethnicity distribution of HCP Crowd members may be slightly less diverse than that for the 
Adolescent and Parent Crowds. Separat e Targeted/Planned  Enrollment Tables for the Crowdsourcing/ 
Qualitative Research and RCT aspects of the proposed work accompany this application.  
8. TARGETED /PLANNED  ENROLLMENT TABLE  
Study Title:  Trans -Disciplinary versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence  
  
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH COMPONENT : 120 adolescents with type 1 diabetes; 120 
parents of youth with type 1 diabetes; 30 HCPs; 1 0 representatives of third party payers.  
TARGETED/PLAN NED ENROLLMENT: Number of Participant s  
Ethnic Category  Sex/Gender  
 Females  Males  Total  
Hispanic or Latino  15 15 30 
Not Hispanic or Latino  105 105 210 
Ethn ic Category: Total of All Participan ts * 120 120 240 
Racial Categories   
American Indian/Alaska Native  0 0 0 
Asian  3 3 6 
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 
Black or African American  12 12 24 
White  105 105 210 
Racial Categories: Total of All Participan ts * 120 120 240 
  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
36 
 Targeted/Planned Enrollment Table  
Study Title:  Trans -Disciplinary versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence  
 RANDOMIZED, CONTROLED TRIAL : 150 adolescents with type 1 diabetes; 150 
parents.  
TARGETED/PLANNED ENROLLMENT: Number of Participants (Adolescents)  
Ethnic Category  Sex/Gender  
 Females  Males  Total  
Hispanic or Latino  11 10 21 
Not Hispanic or Latino  64 65 129 
Ethn ic Category: Total of All Participan ts * 75 75 150 
Racial Categories   
American Indian/Alaska Native  0 0 0 
Asian  0 0 0 
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 
Black or African American  10 11 21 
White  65 64 129 
Racial Categories: Total of All Subjects *  75 75 150 
TARGETED/PLANNED ENROLLMENT: Number of Participants (Parents)  
Ethnic Category  Sex/Gender  
 Females  Males  Total  
Hispanic or Latino  15 6 21 
Not Hispanic or Latino  110 19 129 
Ethnic Categ ory: Total of All Participan ts * 125 25 150 
Racial Categories   
American Indian/Alaska Native  0 0 0 
Asian  0 0 0 
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 
Black or African American  15 5 21 
White  110 19 129 
Racial Categories: Total of All Subjects *  125 25 150 
 
 
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
37 
  
9. REPRESENTATION OF CHILDREN  
All patients with T1D will be below the age of 17 at enrollment. The 11 -<17 year old age range was chosen 
since this is the age range during which T1D adherence issues emerge and in which effective management of 
the condition becomes increasingly challenging. Major epidemiologic studies indicate that this age group 
achieves targeted levels of HbA1c infrequently (< 25% of patients) compared with other age groups.  
10. VERTEBRATE ANIMALS (Not Applicable ) 
 
11. SELECT AGENT RESEARCH (Not Applicable)  
 
12. MULTIPLE PI LEADERSHIP PLAN  (Not applicable)  
 
13. CONSORTIUM/CONTRACTUAL  ARRANGEMENTS  
Karen Aroian, Ph.D., Chatlos Professor of Nursing at the University of Central Florida College of  Nursing, will 
provide expert consultation in qualitative research methods and community -based participatory research for 
this work. The details of her involvement are summarized in the research strategy and her time and effort is 
reflected in the budget a nd budget justification.  
 
14. LETTERS OF SUPPORT  
Dr. Aroian’s letter of support accompanies this application.  
 
15. RESOURCE SHARING PLAN  
Upon acceptance for publication of journal articles addressing the primary specific aims and hypotheses as 
delineated in this application, the final data set will be stripped of all HIPAA -defined personal identifiers and 
then archived in a data repository that is accessible to interested members of the public. Even though the final 
dataset will be stripped of identifiers prior to release for sharing, there may remain the possibility of deductive 
disclosure of subjects with unusual demographic characteristics. Thus, we will make the data and associated 
documentation available to users only under a data -sharing agreement tha t provides for: (1) a commitment to 
using the data only for research purposes and not to attempt to identify any individual participant; (2) a 
commitment to securing the data using appropriate computer technology; and (3) a commitment to destroying 
or retu rning the data after analyses are completed.  
 
Other “deliverable” resources that can be made available to interested parties after the proposed work is 
complete will include the curriculum for training health care providers in the Trans -Disciplinary Care m odel, and 
the procedure manual for this study that will detail the structure, process and evaluation of the care model. 
These resources could be exceptionally valuable should the proposed work progress on to the design and 
implementation of a more ambitiou s and definitive multi -center trial of the TC model.  
  
Transdisciplinary Versus Usual Care for Type 1 Diabetes in Adolescence     Alderfer, M.A.  
38 
  
APPENDIX  
 Tentative qualitative interview questions for parents, adolescents and health care providers about the 
structure and process of a tentative trans -disciplinary care model  
 Tentative qualitative  interview questions for members of the trans -disciplinary care team regarding the 
adequacy of the TC training curriculum  
 Revised  post-RCT qualitative interview questions for parents  and adolescents about the advantages 
and disadvantages of trans -discipli nary care  
 Tentative post -RCT qualitative interview questions for representatives of third party payers about the 
economic viability of trans -disciplinary care, given the results of the RCT  
 Copy of parent -completed health care utilization record used in the  JDRF continuous glucose 
monitoring trial.  
 Copies of questionnaires to be administered during the RCT.  
 NIDDK approved DSMP/DSMB description for randomized controlled trial  
 