Page 1 of 6  BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI  
 
Project Title: The  Use of Intranasal  Calcitonin  to Improve  Pain and Activity  in Elderly  Pelvic  
Ring Injuries  
IRB Number:  2013172  
Version Number:  2 
Version Date:  09/1 3/201 9 
Principal Investigator:  Brett D. Crist, MD  
Funding Source:  AOTNA Grant             
 
 
 
 
1. Include p rimary, secondary , and exploratory objectives.  
Primary Objective: To compare acute pain over a three- month period in geriatric patients 
with pelvic ring injuries who receive intranasal salmon calcitonin with those who do not receive intranasal salmon calcitonin  
Secondary Objective: To compare function and activity over a three -month period in 
geriatric patients with pelvic ring injuries who are treated nonoperatively and receive intranasal salmon calcitonin with those who do not receive intranasal salmon calcitonin. Exploratory objective: To compare radiographic healing in geriatric patients with pelvic ring injuries who receive intranasal salmon calcitonin with those who do not receive intranasal salmon calcitonin  
2. Include b ackground and rationale for initi ating the study. I nclude s pre-clinical and 
clinical data, current experiences with procedures, drug, or device, and any other relevant information to justify the research.  
It is anticipated that geriatric patients who sustain pelvic ring injuries and are treated nonoperatively will demonstrate  decreased  pain scores  and improved  
subjective  and objective function if they are started on intranasal salmon calcitonin 
within 5 days of injury compared to patients who do not receive intranasal salmon calcitonin. It is anticipated the decreased pain and improved activity/function will prevent complicati ons associated with extended periods of  bedrest.  
 
   
1. Include the p roduct, dose, route, and regimen.  
200 IU  of ISC(
intranasal salmon calcitonin ) daily for three months  
 
2. Include the r ationale for choosing the drug/biologic  and dose , or for choosing the device 
to be used.  
Intranasal salmon calcitonin (ISC) has been demonstrated to decrease pain and improve the level of activity in patients with acute vertebral osteoporotic compression fractures when administered within the first 5 days of onset of pain/injury. Recently, randomized I. Research Objectives /Background  
II. Drugs/Biologics/Devices  
Page 2 of 6  clinical trials have demonstrated calcitonin to be superior to NSAIDS in promoting early 
ambulation and preventing functional deterioration in patients with acute osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures.  
2. Include t he standard reference therapy against which the study product is being 
compared, or if the reference is a placebo.  Include justification for inclusion of a placebo 
or non- treatment group. The study product is being compared to geriatric patients who 
are being treated nonoperatively and receive standard of care that does not include  
intranasal salmon calcitonin . 
Many  geriatric patients with pelvic ring injuries who are treated 
nonoperatively.  However, a ll patients  will be prescribed calcium and vitamin D supplementation.  
   
1. Describe the r ecruitment process;  including how  and where recruitment will take place.  
Recruitment will take place in the Emergency Room or at University of Missouri Main 
Hospital.  Patients who have pelvic ring injuries will be screened for enrollment.  
2. Describe any screening/b aseline procedures.  
Patients will be screened by an  attending orthopaedic  traumatologist determining  the type 
of pelvic ring injury based on x- rays and CT scans and decide upon operative treatment 
vs. nonoperative treatment. Patients who are deemed to benefit from nonoperative treatment will be screened for enrollment. Any patients who meet the criteria for a ge will 
then be further screened for inclusion and exclusion criteria as outlined below. 
 
 
  
1. Describe the consent process; including who will be approached for  consent and what 
type of consent will be obtained from each subject population, if there is more than one.  
Study personnel will approach patient about research study in the emergency room  or on 
the designated floor where they are admitted . Inform ed consent will be obtained at that 
time. 
 
 
 
1. List the i nclusion and exclusion criteria.  
2. Inclusion:  
• Males  or females  over the age of 65 who sustain  isolated  pelvic ring injuries via a 
low-energy mechanism.  
 Exclusion:  
• An open pelvic ring fracture  
• Concomitant acetabular fracture  
• They are on ISC prior to enrollment  
• Use of medications for the treatment or prevention of Osteoporosis with the exemption of Vitamin D and Calcium supplementation   
• Allergic or have contraindications to calcitonin  or salmon   III. Recruitment Process  
IV. Consent Process  
V. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Page 3 of 6  • Sustain  other injuries  in their spine (excluding transverse and spinous 
process fractures)  or lower  extremities   
• Unwilling to participate in the study  
• Nonambulatory at baseline  
• Neurologic deficit associated with the pelvic ring injury 
3. Describe r estrictions on participation and appropriate screening procedures to ensure that 
the restrictions are maintained , including pregnancy testing. 
• All patients meeting inclusion criteria will be screened by study personnel.   
 
   
1. Include anticipated enrollment number in this study. Include a break -down in numbers if 
there is more than one subject population. 
• 60 patients; 25 each group; 10 screen  fails  
2. Include s tatistical analysis or other justification for the number of subjects enrolled.  
  
    
1. Include s tudy procedures/design/plan ; include the sequence and timing of study 
procedures (distinguish research procedures from those that are part of routine care). Include s tudy duration and number of study visits required. 
After obtaining informed consent, the following will be obtained:  
 
Baseline:  Treatment group will be prescribed 200 IU of ISC daily for a period of 3 
months. The control group will not be prescribed  calcitonin.  Participants  will 
complete  research only  Iowa pelvis score questionnaire, SF-36 questionnaire and 
visual analogue scale (VAS) to assess s ubjective pain and function. Two -week 
follow up visit post discharge : participants  will complete Iowa pelvis score 
questionnaire, SF-36 questionnaire and VAS to assess subjective pain and function. Participants  will be referred for a standard of care DEXA bone density scan if they 
have no previous diagnosis of osteoporosis and no history of previous scan within  a 
year.  Six weeks post discharge :  participants will complete Iowa pelvis score 
questionnaire, SF-36 questionnaire and VAS to assess subjective pain and function. Participants  will undergo standard of care radiographic analysis of pelvic ring 
injury with AP/inlet and outlet pelvic x -rays 4. Twelve weeks post discharge:  
Participants  will complete Iowa pelvis score questionnaire, SF -36 questionnaire 
and VAS to assess subjective pain and function. Participants will undergo standard of care radiographic analysis of pelvic ring injury with AP/inlet and outle t pelvic x -
rays - Participants will perform a timed up and go (TUG) test. 
 
2. Blinding, including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial. Describe un -
blinding procedures.  VI. Number of Subjects  
VII. Study Procedures/ Design/Treatment Plan  
Page 4 of 6  After informed consent is obtained, all patients who meet eligibility criteria will be 
randomized into one of two groups. Randomization will be achieved by numbering 50 sealed white envelopes (25 control, 25 treatment). There is no blinding to the randomization. It would be difficult to blind the participants, or the research personnel. We do not believe there will be any significant bias that can be corrected with blinding.  
 
 
Treatment: 200 IUof ISC daily for a  period of 3 month 
 Control: Will not be prescribed calcitonin (ISC)  
 
3. Justification of why participants will not receive routine care or will have current therapy stopped.  Patients will receive routine care during this study.  
4. Definition of treatment failure or participant removal criteria.  
Patients will be removed if they do not return to their follow -up visits or do not complete 
the study specific tasks.  
5. Description of what happens to participants receiving therapy when study ends or if participation in the study ends prematurely. Routine care will continue per the physician’s standard of care treatment.  
6. Include sub- studies or banking information (correlative/special studies)  
None  
  
1. Describe r easonably foreseeable risks  or discomforts to the subjects and s teps to  
minimize risks . This study is expected to have minimal risk to the patient since we are 
using the FDA approved dosage for this study. This risk will be minimized by going over the purpose of the study with the patient before obtaining consent, and allowing withdrawal from the study at any time.  
 
2. Describe any s topping rules. Stopping rules would include any reactions or side effects to 
ISC or per the provider’s  discretion.  
 
3. Include the p lan for reporting unanticipated problems or deviations. This plan must 
include a five -day reporting requirement to the IRB once  becoming aware of an event.  
    
   
1. Include b oth direct and indire ct benefits for either  the individual or society.  
The benefit to society is to provide data that will eventually lead to decrease pain in patients with pelvic ring fractures by using 
intranasal Calcitonin within 5 days of injury.   VIII.  Potential Risks/Adverse Events  
IX. Anticipated Benefits  
Page 5 of 6  No direct benefits will be promised.   Subjects can expect to help add to public knowledge 
about the effect of pelvic rings fractures in elderly patients.  
   
 
 
1. Describe the amount, method, and timing of disbursement.  Compensation can include  
checks, cash, gifts, extra/course credit, etc.  
Subjects will be paid $10 for each visit they complete but will only receive one check 
once they finish their 12 week visit.  Subjects will be paid $30 at their final visit.  
  
 
 
1. Detail costs of study procedures, drugs, biologics, or devices and identify who will cover 
the cost.  All costs are being covered by the AOTNA grant. No additional costs to the 
participants for being enrolled in the study. Participants will pay for all standard of care costs.  
 
Cost:  
$1,800 – Calcitonin Costs ($72 per participant x 25 participants)  
$1,500 – Participant Stipend ($30 per participant x 50 participants)  
$6,500 – Study Coordinator (0.7 calendar months, 5.9% effort, of assistance, covering salary and benefits for this effort)  
Total: $9,800  
 
 
 
 Describe the plan to monitor the data , if necessary . A plan is required for treatment and/or 
intervention studies, sensitive data are being collected, there is a possibility for subjects to experience adverse events, etc.  Adverse 
events will be reported to the IRB as necessary within 5 days 
of becoming aware of the event.  
1. The plan should include when something needs to be reported  
2. The frequency of the monitoring, such as points in time or after a specific numbe r of 
participants are enrolled  
3. Who will conduct the monitoring, such as a data board, medical monitor, investigator, 
independent physician; the  specific data to be monitored  
4. Procedures for analysis a nd interpretation of the data  
5. Actions to be taken upon specific events or end points   
6. Procedures for communication from the data monitor to this site.  
 
 
  X. Compensation  
XII. Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
XIV. References/Appendices  XI. Costs  
 
Page 6 of 6   
1. Include f indings from a literature search or pilot study must be outlined including 
appropriate detailed references to earlier studies and data.  
 
1. Karponis A, Rizou S, Pallis D, Zafeiris CP, Georgiou DF, Galanos A, Giannoulis 
F, Lyritis GP. Analgesic effect of nasal salmon calcitonin during the early post -
fracture period of the distal radius  fracture.  J Musculoskelet  Neuronal  Interact.  
2015 Jun;15(2):186- 9. 
2.  Knopp JA, Diner BM, Blitz M, Lyritis  GP, Rowe BH. Calcitonin for 
treating acute pain of osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures: a systematic review of randomized, controlled trials. Osteoporos Int. 2005 Oct;16(10):1281- 90. 
3. Lyritis  GP, Paspati  I, Karachalios  T, Ioakimidis  D, Skarantavos G, Lyritis 
PG. Pain relief from nasal salmon calcitonin in osteoporotic vertebral crush fractures. A double blind, placebo- controlled clinical study. Acta Orthop 
Scand Suppl. 1997 Oct;275:112- 4.  
4.  Lyritis GP, Tsakalakos N, Magiasis B, Karachalios T, Yiatzides A, Tsekoura M. Analgesic effect of salmon calcitonin in osteoporotic vertebral fractures: a double -blind placebo-  controlled study. Calcif Tissue Int. 1991 
Dec;49(6):369 -72.  
5. 5. Hoch A, Ozkurtul O, Pieroh P, Josten C, Bohme, J. Outcome and 2- Year 
Survival Rate in Elderly Patients With Lateral Compression Fractures of the Pelvis. Geriatr Orthop Surg Rehabil. 2017 Mar;8(1):3- 9. 
6. Leslie MP, Baumgaertner MR. Osteoporotic pelvic ring injuries. Orthop Clin North Am. 2013 Apr;44(2):217- 24. Review.  
7. Henriksen K, Byrjalsen I, Andersen JR, Bihlet AR, Russo LA, Alexandersen P, Valter I, Qvist P, Lau E, Riis BJ, Christiansen C, Karsdal   MA; SMC021 investigators. A randomized, double -blind, multicenter, 
placebo -controlled study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of oral salmon 
calcitonin in the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women taking calcium and vitamin D. Bone. 2016 Oct;91:122- 9.  
8.  Endo N, Fujino K, Doi T, Akai M, Hoshino Y, Nakano T, Iwaya T. Effect of elcatonin versus nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory medications for acute 
back pain in patients with osteoporotic vertebral fracture: a multiclinic randomized controlled trial. J Bone Mi ner Metab. 2017 Jul;35 (4):375- 384.  
9. Ito A, Yoshimura M. Mechanisms of the analgesic effect of calcitonin on chronic pain by alteration of receptor or channel expression. Mol Pain. 2017 JanDec;13:1744806917720316. 
10. Yoshimura M, Furue H, Ito A. Anti -nociceptive effect of calcitonin  on 
chronic  pain associated  with osteoporosis. Clin Calcium.  2001 
Sep;11(9):1153- 7. 
11. Ito A, Furue H, Yoshimura M. Recent insights into mechanisms for analgesic effect by calcitonin. Nihon Rinsho. 2007 Nov 28;65 Suppl 9:386 -
90. 
 