1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title:   
rPlan Multimedia Dual Protecti on Intervention to Reduce Health Disparities 
 
NCT number: 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Most recent update/approval date: 
4/4/2017 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
     
2 
 
 
miPlan: A multimedia dual protection intervention to reduce hea lth disparities 
 
Detailed Protocol 
 
 
1. Background 
 
This research aims to extend previous studies which have used h ealth interventions with 
digital media to provide pregnancy prevention counseling to dev elop and assess the 
acceptability and efficacy of miPlan , a three-part intervention that includes a precounseling app 
that promotes dual protection (STI and pregnancy prevention), motivational interviewing-
informed counseling, and concomitant printed educational materi als. The research will proceed 
in two phases. In Phase I, we will assemble a 10-member stakeho lder advisory team to 
enhance the  PreCounselor  app to focus on dual protection, train reproductive health cou nselors 
in motivational interviewing, and create concomitant printed ed ucational materials. In Phase II, 
the feasibility, acceptability, and effectiveness of the interv ention will be assessed among young 
women (ages 15-25). 
 
Disparities in STI/HIV and Unintended Pregnancies among Young A frican American 
Women 
Young AA women (15-19 years) experience significant reproductiv e health disparities, with a 
chlamydia rate nearly six times and a gonorrhea rate sixteen ti mes those of their white 
counterparts.9 If untreated, these infections can lead to infertility or life -threatening ectopic 
pregnancy.9 Further, AA women have a 1 in 32 lifetime chance of contractin g HIV.10 Nationally, 
49% of all conceptions are unintended, with high rates for Afri can Americans (AA) of all ages 
(67%) and for women ages 15-19 (82%).2 Unintended pregnancy is associated with abortion, 
delayed or no prenatal care, and multiple increased health risk s for infants and children.11 
Recognizing the significant inequity in unintended pregnancies and STI/HIV rates among young 
AA women is an important first step to creating effective sexua l and reproductive health 
interventions.   
Limited Use of Highly Effective Contraceptive Methods  
Most contraceptive methods are highly (>90%) efficacious  but are prone to user error, 
compromising effectiveness  in real-world settings. 48% percent of women with unintended 
pregnancies report using contraception during the month of conc eption.12 Most young women 
rely on short-acting or coitally-dependent methods like oral co ntraceptive pills (OCs) or 
condoms.13 Half of young women report imperfect OC use, with about 25% mi ssing ≥2 pills in a 
cycle.14 However, long-acting reversible contraceptive (LARC) methods l ike the intrauterine 
device (IUD) require few use behaviors while providing effective  (>99%) and long-lasting  (3-10 
years) protection against pregnancy.15 Yet, <7% of women using contraception in the United 
States (US) use LARC, with rates lowest among those at highest risk of unintended 
pregnancy.13  
 
 
3 
 
Need for Novel Dual Protection Interventions 
The significant reproductive health disparities of young AA wom en demonstrate the need for 
novel interventions that promote dual protection and account fo r their unique reproductive health 
challenges and life contexts. The few clinic-based intervention s designed to increase dual 
protection have largely been unsustained or have failed to resu lt in statistically significant 
effects.16-18 Young women receiving a computer-based, tailored intervention reported increased 
dual method use, but no change in STIs and unintended pregnanci es compared to controls.19 
Reanalysis of the data showed 32% initiated dual method use, bu t only 9% sustained use.20 A 
video counseling intervention for AA and Latino female adolesce nts increased condom use at 
three months post-intervention, but not at 12-month follow-up.21 However, we should remain 
hopeful about reducing such disparities. In a large-scale study , when barriers to all 
contraceptive methods were lowered and LARC was presented as th e optimal method, rates of 
LARC uptake surpassed 65% and pregnancy and abortion rates decl ined.15,22 While efforts have 
traditionally focused on improving condom use, there is evidenc e that youth rely on many dual 
protection strategies.23 Thus, interventions must address multiple types of “dual prote ction”.24 
 
Need for Scalable, Brief Interventions 
Brief, inexpensive, practical, and theoretically-based interven tions may hold promise for 
reaching large numbers of people. A growing body of research25-27 suggests that brief 
interventions relying on more than just information can be succ essful.28-33 Interventions with 
strong behavioral models, focused information, and opportunity to address potential barriers to 
change tend to report stronger effects.28,29  
Importance of E-health, Health Information Technology and Couns eling Aids 
Interactive  multimedia programs present a novel platform for delivering int erventions.34 Digital 
media provides an opportunity to scale interventions and reach the broad population of youth 
necessary to reduce STI rates. Tailored, theory-based digital i nterventions have been effective 
in smoking cessation,35 reducing repeat births among low-income AA adolescent mothers,32 
promoting adherence to antiretroviral medications,36 and increasing awareness of diabetes 
complications.37 Users of a touchscreen computer intervention were significantl y more likely to 
choose highly effective contraception.38 Multiple programs have su ccessfully taken advantage of 
clinic wait times37,39-41 without obstructing patient flow. HIV-positive users of a coun seling tablet 
found it reduced social bias, promoted honesty in discussing se nsitive topics, and promoted 
privacy.42  
Key Theories and Approaches Informing this Intervention  
The Transtheoretical Model (TTM) and its Stages of Change paradigm posits that in changing  
behaviors, individuals progress through sequential stages of Pre-contemplation, Contemplation, 
Preparation, Action  and Maintenance . Transition between steps requires a core set of change 
processes.49 Women seeking contraception are most likely in Pre-contemplation  or 
Contemplation  stages for adopting dual method use including LARC. For Pre-contemplation , the 
4 
 
key change process is enhancing awareness. Video vignettes that  present co mmon behavioral, 
normative, and control beliefs, constructs from the Theory of Planned Behavior  (TPB), can 
address acquisition of a new behavior. For those who are in or move to the Contemplation  
stage, the key necessary change process is to “tip” decisional balance. Motivational 
interviewing (MI)  teaches that an efficient and effective strategy for helping t o “tip” the 
decisional balance is to explore and resolve ambivalence, somet hing not typically used in less 
effective counseling processes, which tend to impose a solution . We will employ elements of 
motivational interviewing, which we term MI-informed counseling , including: collaborating as 
partners, empathic understanding, autonomy support, and self-ef ficacy support. Consistent with 
our conceptual model, a Risk Reduction framework for dual protection is incorporated. LARC 
with condoms is the optimal option, but it is not the only opti on. Risk reduction frames 
prevention behaviors along a continuum rather than in binary te rms, recognizing opportunities 
for incremental behavior change, especially when behaviors are suboptimal.50 Thus, STI/HIV 
messages will also center on behaviors including condom use, pa rtner negotiation, limiting the 
number of sexual partners, STI testing after unprotected sex, a voiding alcohol and drug use, 
and use of expedited partner therapy. These behaviors reduce ri sk even among condom 
users.24 Finally, both women and men will be portrayed in videos to ens ure that the educational 
messages are patient-centered, salient, authentic, and relevant . Human-Centered Design 
(HCD),  a design approach recently applied to health care, ensuring tha t interventions meet the 
needs of the community of users,  will be used to create a usable, sustainable intervention .51 
In HCD, the designer and end-user collaborate to create solutio ns in an iterative process of 
rapid prototyping with key stakeholder participation. Resulting  interventions are based on 
available technology, address true barriers, and are matched to  a realistic understanding of 
behaviors, skills, and informational needs. We will use HCD bes t practices such as iterative low-
fidelity prototyping and multiple course corrections before a f inal solution is achieved.  
 
2. Hypotheses 
We hypothesize that post-intervention, patients using miPlan  will report: 
H1 a significant increase in contraceptive continuation and condo m use  
H2 significantly fewer episodes of unprotected sex 
H3 significantly greater levels of self-efficacy and confidence fo r dual protection  
H4 significantly improved sexual health attitudes regarding STI/HI V prevention behaviors 
H5 significantly fewer negative experiences with condoms and fewer  condom use errors and 
problems. 
Ultimately, miPlan  has the potential to significantly impact racial and ethnic he alth disparities in 
STI/HIV and unintended pregnancy. 
 
 
 
5 
 
3. Methodology 
 
Aim 1:  Develop the miPlan  intervention by (1) enhancing the pretested PreCounselor  app to 
focus on dual protection, (2) training reproductive health coun selors, and (3) creating 
concomitant printed educational materials.  
 
Convene a Stakeholder Advisory Team. A 10-member Stakeholder Advisory Team of young 
women  (n=4), young men (n=4), and clinic staff  (n=2) will be convened to assist in miPlan  
development, followed by quarterly meetings throughout the proj ect. Young men will help 
capture the dyadic nature of pregnancy and STI prevention, part icularly condom use 
motivations, behavioral intentions, and negotiation , framing open dialogue across genders as 
essential to reproductive health. Men’s input will be critical in identifying salient decisional 
balance/self-efficacy beliefs regarding target behaviors and fo r developing relevant STI/HIV 
prevention videos for miPlan . The Advisory Team will ensure that miPlan  reflects the 
experiences and needs of participants. Members will receive $30 0 over 2 years. 
 
Develop the  MiPlan  app. We will rely on our extensive experience creating counseling ap ps 
with clinic populations using HCD.48 Prior to committing resources to app development, we will 
“mock up” miPlan  with the Advisory Team, relying on the many assets already crea ted for 
PreCounselor  (e.g., graphics, text, video).51 Early paper and pencil sessions help to develop 
algorithms for dual protection decision-making, app pages, and educational content. We then 
“walk through” multiple app scenarios, role-playing users at di fferent stages of change for dual 
method use and various dual protection strategies. We will iter atively revise the elements with 
each round until members are in agreement with the content and form. Next, a tablet with voice 
recordings and Powerpoint slides will simulate the user experie nce. We will recruit users in the 
clinic waiting room (n=7) to use the app prototype in 20 minute  sessions, filming their hands as 
they use it, taking notes as they navigate aloud, and making ch anges in response to their 
feedback, allowing for immediate course corrections in the user  session (compensation=$20). 
We anticipate 5-7 sessions to finalize design decisions. We wil l create additional videos 
focusing on STI prevention behaviors by recruiting youth who ar e successfully using the 
method, asking them to address common behavioral, normative, an d control beliefs (TPB 
constructs) in their testimonials. We envision that at least on e of these videos will include young 
men. The final elements will be programmed as the miPlan  app.  
 Develop Educational Materials . We will create short paragraphs addressing condom use, 
incorporating up-to-date, evidence-based contraceptive and STI guidelines.45,46,54 Materials will 
avoid medical jargon, use short sentences, and focus on general  and method-specific 
information and strategies to build self-efficacy and prevent r elapse. They will feature the same 
images as the miPlan  app to reinforce counseling. The Advisory Team will review and  
recommend changes to materials and we will assess readability. Dr. Holmquist has expertise in 
medical and sexuality education and curriculum development and will lead this activity. 
 Training in Motivational Interviewing (MI)-informed Counseling . We will train two research 
assistants (RAs) to serve as contraceptive counselors. Separate  counselors will ensure swift 
6 
 
recruitment and minimize clinic interruptions. Training will in clude how to use the miPlan  app, 
identify and address ambivalence, and support strategies for ma naging anticipated barriers. Dr. 
Quinn, an experienced MI counselor, will oversee training, prov iding didactic presentations on 
core concepts of the TTM, including stages and process of chang e and decisional balance. Dr. 
Holmquist will oversee training related to condoms and contrace ptive methods.  
 
Aim 2: Conduct a pre/post feasibility, acceptability, and effectivenes s assessment of miPlan  to 
examine improvement in dual met hod use, enhancement of contrace ptive adherence 
and continuation, increase of condom use, and decrease of STI/H IV infection. 
Recruitment and Enrollment.  All research activities will take place at the DCAM at the 
University of Chicago and select Planned Parenthood-IL clinics( Austin, Englewood, and/or 
Roseland).. We will pre-test the app and study procedures with 5 participants 
(compensation=$50), following the protocol planned for the pilo t study. At their clinical visit, 
participants who meet the inclusion criteria (n=100) will be re ferred by clinic staff to a trained on-
site RA, who will explain the study and complete the informed c onsent process. Inclusion criteria 
are: (1) Being AA female and sexually active with a male partne r(s) within the past 6 months; (2) 
Age 15-25 years; (3) Initiating contraception; (4) Not currentl y pregnant or intending pregnancy 
within the next 6 months; (5) English speaking; and (6) Not cur rently using LARC. As Illinois law 
ensures the rights of minors to receive confidential reproducti ve health care without parental 
consent, we will seek a waiver of parental consent for particip ation of those 15-17 years old. 
 
Pre-Intervention Baseline (T1) Procedures. Participants will complete a 10-15 minute 
questionnaire on the miPlan  app (See appendices). The RA will provide a brief orientation to the 
miPlan  app. After viewing miPlan , participants will be guided through a MI informed 
conversation using a worksheet to document the discussion on co ntraceptives knowledge and 
usage. The completed worksheet will be given to the participant  and a copy will be kept for the 
participant’s records. (10 min). The participant will receive e ducational materials and a 
strategies worksheet to discuss with their clinician. The parti cipant will also be given an STI test.  
Participants will be compensated $30.  
Post-Intervention (T2) Procedures.  At 6-weeks post-enrollment, participants will complete a 
15-25 minute phone survey to gauge dual method use, contracepti ve adherence/uptake, 
frequency of unprotected penile-vaginal/anal intercourse (PVI/P AI), and risk reduction 
behaviors. Participants will be compensated $20.     
Follow-Up (T3) Procedures.  At 3 months post-enrollment, participants will complete a 15-2 5 
minute in-clinic survey to gauge maintenance of dual protection  behaviors, contraceptive 
adherence/uptake, frequency of penile vaginal intercourse/penil e anal intercourse, risk reduction 
behaviors, decisional balance/self-efficacy, and an STI test. P articipants will receive $40. We 
will also conduct a 3-month retrospective chart review to captu re interceding visits (e.g., initial 
contraceptive method selection, method switching, etc.) and dia gnoses (e.g., pregnancy, 
STI/HIV). Participants unable to come in to clinic for their fo llowup visit or who do not wish to 
come to clinic will be offered an at-home STI screening kit, to  be mailed to the address they 
7 
 
provide. Participants who wish to be sent a kit will be mailed a endo-cervical screening kit, via 
USPS priority mail, with pre-paid postage and instructions for using the administering the self 
swab to themselves and packaging and mailing the completed kit back to Ci3. No identifying 
information will be included in the mailing, and all costs with  mailing and processing will be paid 
by Ci3. All participants will be offered the at-home screening option upon reaching their three 
month follow-up event, and can complete the survey over the pho ne or online.  
 
 
4. Duration 
We are requesting IRB approval for a portion of Aim 1 to develo p and pilot test the miPlan app 
and Aim 2 which cover months 3-21 of the overall study.  
 
5. Location 
The study will be conducted at the Duchossois Center for Advanc ed Medicine (DCAM) at the 
University of Chicago . The DCAM is home to adult primary and s pecialty clinics, pediatric 
specialty clinics, and outpatient diagnostic and treatment faci lities of the University of Chicago 
Medicine. The will also be additional sites at Planned Parenhoo d-IL clinics, Austin, Englewood, 
and/or Roseland.  
 
  
6. Special Precautions 
 
The primary risks are loss of confidentiality and potential dis comfort associated with answering 
sensitive questions about STIs, HIV, and sexual risk behaviors.  All participants will be assigned 
a unique study identifier. Once all data has been collected, id entifying subject information 
(including name) will be stripped from the database and from tr anscripts of focus group and in-
depth interviews Informed consent s with the subjects’ names wil l be stored at the University of 
Chicago and only accessible to designated research staff. Conse nt forms will be stored in a 
locked filing cabinet in a locked office at the University of C hicago. Reports, manuscripts, and 
presentations will never include identifying information. With respect to potential discomfort 
associated with answering sensitive questions, subjects will be  informed that they can skip any 
question they do not want to answer without penalty and that th ey can opt out of the study at 
any time without penalty. Participants are informed of these pr otections in the consent forms 
and all relevant study documents.  
7. Experimental Controls 
 
Not applicable. This is a pre- and post- intervention  
 
8. Type and number of subjects 
During Aim 1, we will recruit users in the clinic waiting room (n=7) to use the app prototype in 20 
minute sessions, filming their hands as they use it, taking not es as they navigate aloud, and 
making changes in response to their feedback.   During Aim 2, we will pre-test the app and all study procedures  with 5 women. In the pre- and 
post-intervention, we will recruit 100 young women (ages 15-25)  from the waiting room of a 
gynecology clinic at the University of Chicago and select Plann ed Parenthood-IL clinics.    
 
8 
 
9. Statistical Analysis 
Feasibility & Acceptability : Descriptive statistics will be used to analyze the proportion s and 
central tendency for satisfaction, helpfulness, appropriateness , and usefulness of miPlan . 
Effectiveness:  Outcome variables will be meas ured in the following ways: Chi- square or Fisher’s 
Exact Test (categorical variables); t test and Mann-Whitney U test (continuous variables); and 
multinominal logistic and linear  regression models. Multinomial  logistic regression models will be 
used based on multiple categories for dual method (e.g., use of  oral contraceptive with 
condoms; implant with condoms; or IUD with condoms). Linear reg ression and probability 
models will be used with the categorical dual method collapsed (e.g. any dual method). 
Covariates will be initially screened for potentially significa nt relationships with variables using 
bivariate testing and those attaining a p<.20 will be assessed in multivariable analyses. 
Because outcome variables may have missing values due to attrit ion, primary data analyses will 
be performed: (1) with only complete cases (women for whom ther e were no missing values) 
and (2) using multiple imputation.59 Sensitivity analyses will be performed to address extreme 
outlying variables. We will conduct comparisons of demographic and baseline attributes among 
drop-outs versus retained participants.  
 
10. Risks and Benefits 
Potential risks consist of the actual interview data collection  process and potential breaches of 
confidentiality Participants may feel embarrassed with some of the questions that deal with 
sexual health and sexual behavio r. However, participants will b e allowed to opt out of the study 
and to not respond to questions they are uncomfortable with wit hout any penalty. Study records 
that identify the participant will be kept confidential; howeve r there is a risk of loss of 
confidentiality. Participants will be informed of these risks, protections against loss of 
confidentiality, and their rights to skip any question and to w ithdraw from the study at any time in 
the consent forms and all relevant study documents. In addition , there is potential risk to 
confidentiality if a 15–17 year old reports sexual abuse or if any participant reports suicide risk 
or intent to harm someone else during any study visit. All univ ersity employees are required to 
report suspected cases of abuse or neglect and we are ethically  bound to address issues of 
suicide risk. All participants are told in the consent that sta tements of potential harm to self or 
others require reporting. We have extensive experience dealing with this issue, and specific 
procedures are in place (described in detail below) for referra ls and strict confidentiality of 
reports. We will take the utmost caution to protect the confide ntiality of responses and have 
detailed these procedures below.  
 
The potential benefits of this research far outweigh the risks.  First, African American women are 
the group most affected by unintended pregnancy and STIs. Despi te these factors, there are 
few evidence-based interventions that have been specifically de veloped and tailored for the dual 
protection needs of young African American women. We propose to  develop and pilot test an 
innovative mobile app-based intervention to prevent/reduce STI and pregnancy-related risk 
behaviors. The intervention has the potential to reach large nu mbers of young women. Women 
who participate in the study may benefit from receiving informa tion about pregnancy and STI 
prevention strategies that may not be provided in standard of c are or available through other 
mechanisms (e.g., sexual health education, STI clinic informati on, etc.). Possible risks (i.e. 
discomfort answering questions, potential confidentiality breac hes) are outweighed by the new 
knowledge gained regarding the potential of an app-based interv ention to reduce STI/pregnancy 
risk among young African American women. We have adequate safeg uards to protect against 
these risks and will alert the University of Chicago IRB of any  problems. 
9 
 
 
11. Monitoring of Safety 
The PI is responsible for monitoring the data, assuring protoco l compliance, and conducting the 
safety reviews at the specified frequency. The Research Manager  will oversee day-to-day 
compliance. This protocol presents minimal risks to the subject s and adverse events or other 
problems are not anticipated. The PI and Research Manager will be responsible for monitoring 
the data, assuring protocol compliance, and conducting the safe ty reviews at regular intervals 
which must be conducted at a minimum of every 6 months (includi ng when re-approval of the 
protocol is sought). During the review process, the PI and Rese arch Manager will evaluate 
whether the study should continue unchanged, require modificati on/amendment, or close to 
enrollment. The PI, IRB and the Research Manager will ensure th at any deviations from the 
protocol or safety concerns are reported according to instituti onal guidelines. Data and study 
risk will be assessed throughout the study. 
 
 
   
12. Payments 
During Aim 1, clinic waiting room users (n=7) who will use the app prototype in 20 minute 
sessions will receive $20 compensation for their participation.  
 During Aim 2 of the research, pre-test participants (n=5) will receive $50 for their participation. 
Pre- and post-intervention participants will receive up to $90 (Time 1-baseline: $30; Time 2- 6 
weeks: $30; Time 3- 3 months: $30) for participating in the int ervention.  
 
13. Informed Consent 
Study coordinators and designated research staff will obtain wr itten consent from all 
participants. Research staff will describe the study procedures  and anticipated risks and 
benefits to ensure the study participants understand the study.  We will document that the 
informed consent process occurred. One copy of the informed con sent will be provided to the 
subject and one copy will be placed in the in the subject's res earch files. Participants will be 
reminded that their participation is completely voluntary and t hey are free to withdraw from the 
study at any time. All subjects will be re-consented and sign n ew consent forms if there are any 
changes to the informed consent form (i.e. something occurs tha t changes the risk/benefit ratio 
of the study). Written consent will be obtained at the beginnin g of the prototyping, pilot testing, 
and intervention session s and the study will be explained in d etail and before the each phase 
begins. In all instances, participation in the sessions (protot yping, pilot test, and intervention) will 
occur immediately after the consent is obtained.  
Consistent with our previous studies in this population, we do not require parental consent for 
study enrollment. Parental consent may decrease participation r ates because some  young 
women will fear that their personal information may be disclose d as a result of participation. In 
addition, Illinois law ensures the rights of minors age 13 year s or older to receive confidential 
sexual/reproductive health care (including STI/HIV testing, dru g or alcohol abuse counseling, 
etc.) without parental consent. That being said, there may be s ome participants who fear 
parental consent. The nature and scope of the proposed research  do not pose more than 
“minimal risk” to participants (45 CFR Part 46.102): “the proba bility and magnitude of harm or 
discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater in and o f themselves than those ordinarily 
encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological 
examinations or tests.” To compensate for waiver of parental co nsent, participants receive a 
10 
 
formal individual assessment of capacity to consent to ensure t heir understanding of study 
goals, procedures, and risks from disclosure of sensitive infor mation. Consistent with national 
policy recommendations from the Society for Adolescent Medicine , requiring parental 
permission for the proposed study would have a number of possib le negative effects, including: 
(1) reducing the validity of the findings by effectively elimin ating potential participants unwilling 
to share permission forms with their parents/guardians; and (2)  adding little in the way of actual 
subject protection, given the minimal risk of study participati on. 
 
 Both study participants and parents are informed that the PI a nd/or research staff is required by 
Illinois law to report any self-reported or suspected incidents  of child abuse or neglect. These 
will be reported to the Illinois Department of Children and Fam ily Services (IDCFS). As the 
mandated reporter, the PI will initiate this procedure, followi ng the university guidelines on these 
types of incidents.    
 
Therefore, the proposed research protocol will seek a waiver of  parental consent from the 
University of Chicago IRB. All consent forms will be securely s tored in a locked filing cabinet in a 
locked office at the University of Chicago.  
 
 
14. Confidentiality 
Only the principal investigator and the immediate research staf f will have access to the raw 
data. No one outside of the institution will have access to the  data. All data will be stored on 
secure network servers that are backed up nightly and password protected.  
 
15. Bibliographic References 
Please see attached 
 
16. Recruiting Methods 
Participants in the iterative design process, pre-test and pilo t will be recruited by research staff 
from the clinic waiting room at University of Chicago and selec t Planned Parenthood-IL clinics. 
A qualified member of the research staff will conduct eligibili ty screening to ensure participant 
eligibility. This member of the research staff will also work w ith clinicians in order to identify 
potentially eligible patients who have scheduled appointments d uring the recruitment phase of 
the study.  These patients will be telephoned in advance and in formed that they may be able to 
participate in the study during their medical visit.  Eligible participants will be consented and 
enrolled. Research activities will take place at the University  of Chicago and select Planned 
Parenthood-IL clinics. The informed consent process will inform  the participant that participation 
is completely voluntary and that a decision not to participate will not affect her care at the 
University of Chicago or Planned Parenthood.   
17. Primary Physician Notification 
Not Applicable 
18. Interdepartmental Coordination  
Not Applicable 
19. Pregnancy Test 
Not Applicable 
11 
 
20. Rationale for Exclusion 
Because the present study is focused on preventing STIs and pre gnancy among young African  
American women, we will exclude non-African American subjects. We also will exclude any 
prospective participant with a cognitive deficit that precludes  providing informed assent/consent.  
 
21. Medication Infusion 
Not Applicable 
  
 