 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title of Research  Project: 
Glutamate -opioid interactions  in alcohol drinking behaviors  
Principal  Investigator:  
Suchitra Krishnan -Sarin, Ph.D. Yale Academic Appointment:  
Associate Professor  
Campus Address:  
S-208, 34 Park Street, New Haven, CT 06519 
Campus Phone: 
203-974-7595 Fax: 
203-974-7606 Pager: E-mail: 
suchitra.krishnan -sarin@yale.edu  
Protocol Correspondent Name  & Address (if different than PI): 
Dana Cavallo,  34 Park Street, New Haven CT 06519 
Campus Phone: 
203-974-7607 Fax: 
203-974-7606 E-mail: 
dana.cavallo@yale.edu  
 
tment: 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
1. Performing  Organizations:   Identify the hospital, in-patient or outpatient facility,  school or other 
agency that will serve as the location  of the research.  Ch oose all that apply: 
 
a. Internal Location[s] of the Study:  
Magnetic Resonance Research  Center      PET Center  
(MR-TAC)   YCCI/Church  Street Research Unit (CSRU) 
Yale Cancer Center YCCI/Hospital Research Unit (HRU) 
Yale-New Haven  Hospital      YCCI/Keck  Laboratories  
Specify Other Yale Location       Cancer Data Repository/Tumor Registry  
 
b. External Location[s]:  
APT Foundation, Inc.      Haskins Laboratories 
Connecticut Mental Health Center      John B.  Pierce Laboratory, Inc. 
Veterans Affairs Hospital, West Haven       Other Locations,  Specify: CMU 
 
c. Additional  Required  Documents  (check all that apply): N/A 
*YCCI-Scientific  and Safety Committee (YCCI -SSC) Approval Date:  
*Pediatric Protocol  Review Committee (PPRC)  Approval Date:  
YALE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL  OF MEDICINE  
HUMAN INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE  
 
Application  to Involve Human Su bjects in Research 
SECTION I: ADMINISTRATIVE  INFORMATION  
SECTION II: GENERAL  INFORMATION Faculty Advisor:(required if PI is a student, 
resident, fellow or other trainee)
 N
   
Campus Address:  
Campus Phone: Fax: Pager: E-mail:  
 
Page 1 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
*YCC Protocol Review Com mittee (Y RC-PRC)Approva l Date: 
*Dept. of Veterans  Affairs, West Haven  VA HSSApprova l Date: 
*Radioactive Drug  Research Committee (RDRC)Approval Date:  
YNHH-Radiation  Safety Committee (YNHH-RSC)Approval Date:  
Magnetic Resonance Research  Center PRC (MRRC-PRC)Approval Date:  
YSM/YNHH Cancer Data Repository (CaDR) Approval Date:  
Dept. of Lab Medicine request  for services  or specimens  form 
*Approval from  these committees  is required before final  HIC approval is  granted. See 
instructions  for documents  required for initial submission  and approval of the  protocol.  Allow 
sufficient  time for these requests.  Check with the oversight  body for their time requirements.  
 
2. Probable Duration of  Project: State the expected duration of the project, including all follow-up 
and data analysis activities.  5 years 
 
3. Targeted  Enrollment:  What is the  number of subjects: 86 non -treatment- seeking, alcohol- 
dependent,  family history positive heavy  drinkers 
a. targeted for enrollment  at Yale for this protocol?  86 participants  
If this is a multi-site study, what is the  total number of subjects  targeted across all sites? 
b. expected to sign the consent form?  172 
c. expected to complete some or all interventions for  this protocol? 86 
 
4. Research  Type/Phase: (Check all that apply) 
 
a. Study Type 
Single Center Study 
Multi-Center Study 
Does the Yale PI serve as the PI of the multi- site study?  Yes No 
Coordinating Center/Data Management  
Other: 
 
b. Study Phas
e N/A 
x  Pilot Phase I Phase II Phase III Phase IV 
Other (Specify) 
 
c. Area of Research:  (Check all that apply) Note that these are overlapping definitions and  more 
than one category  may apply to your research protocol. Definitions  for the following can  be 
found 
in the instructions  section 4c: 
Clinical Research:  Patient-Oriented Clinical Research:  Outcomes  and 
Clinical Research:  Epidemiologic and Behavioral  Health Services 
Translational Research #1 (“Bench-to-Bedside”)  Interdisciplinary  Research 
Translational Research #2 (“Bedside- to-Community”)  Community -Based Research  
 
5. Is this study  required to be registered in a public database?  Yes No 
If yes, where is it registered?  
Clinical Trials.gov  registry 
Other (Specify) 
 
6. Will this research study utilize clinical care services  at Yale New Haven Hospital or YMG?  
Yes No 
Page 2 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
If  yes, might these be billable  to the subject,  the sponsor, grant  or other third  party payer? 
Yes No 
If you answered  "yes", please register this study in the IDX/GE system  at 
http://www.yalemedicalgroup.o rg/pfs/forms/10000/NewStudyRequest.pdf  
 
7. Are there any  procedures involved  in this protocol that will be performed  at YNHH or one of its 
affiliated entities?  Yes _X     No   If Yes, please answer  questions a through c and note 
instructions  below.  If No, proceed to Section III.  
a. Does your YNHH privilege delineation  currently  include the specific procedure that you will 
perform? Yes 
 
b. Will you be using any new equipment or equipment that  you have not used in the past  for 
this procedure? No 
 
c. Will a novel approach  using existing equipment be applied?  No 
 
If you answered  “no” to question 7a, or "yes" to question 7b or c,  please contact  the YNHH 
Department  of Physician  Services (688-2615) for prior approval before  commencing with your 
research protocol . 
 
 
 
1. Funding Source: Indicate all  of the funding source(s) for this study. Check all boxes that  
apply. 
Provide information regarding  the external  funding source.  This  information  should include 
identification  of the agency/sponsor, the funding mechanism  (grant or contract),  and whether 
the award  is pending or has been  awarded.  Provide the M/C# and  Agency name (if grant - 
funded).  If the funding source associated with  a protocol is “pending” at  the time of the 
protocol submission to the HIC (as is the case for most NIH submissions),  the PI should note 
“Pending” in the appropriate section  of the protocol application,  provide the  M/C# and  
Agency name (if grant -funded) and further note that University  (departmental) funds support 
the research  (until such time that an award is made). 
 
PI Title of Grant Name of Funding 
Source F unding F unding Mechanism  
 
Suchitra Krishnan- Sarin, 
Ph.D. Glutamate -opioid 
interactions  in 
alcohol drinking 
behaviors  NIAAA  Internal 
External  Grant-M# 140141 
Contract#  
John  Krystal  Center for  
Translational Neuroscience of 
Alcohol NIAAA  Internal 
External  Grant-M# 
Contract#  SECTION III: FUNDING, RESEARCH  TEAM AND TRAINING  
Page 3 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
2. Research  Team:  List all members of the research team.  Indicate under the affiliation  
column whether the investigators or study personnel  are part of the Yale faculty  or staff, or 
part of the faculty  or staff from a collaborating institution,  or are not formally affiliated with 
any institution. ALL members  of the research  team MUST complete Human  Subject 
Protection  Training  (HSPT) and Health Insurance Portability  and Accountability  Act 
(HIPAA) Training  before they  may be listed on the protocol.  See NOTE below.  
 
 
 
***My signature here indicates  that I have read, am in compliance with, and will continue to  be in 
compliance with the HIC’s  Protocol-Specific Conflict of Interest policy  and the University’s  policy 
on Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment.  NOTE: The HIC will remove from  the 
protocol any personnel  who have not signed the application and/or completed  required  training.  A 
personnel  protocol amendment will need to be submitted  when training is complete or signature is  
provided.  
 
 
N ame Signature  
*** P Protocol-
Related COI? Affiliation  
Principal  Investigator  Suchitra Krishnan -Sarin, Ph.D.  Yes No Yale faculty 
Role: Co-I Stephanie O’Malley   Yes No Yale faculty 
Role: Project Manager  Dana Cavallo, Ph.D.  Yes No Yale faculty 
Role: Data Manager  Elain e LaVelle  Yes No Yale staff  
Role: Research  Nicholas Franco 
Assistant    
Yes No Yale staff  
Role: Research  Tricia Dahl  
Assistant Thomas Liss 
Role: Postdoc                    Krysten Bold    
Yes No Yale staff  
Role: Research  Heather LaVallee  
Assistant Alissa Goldberg 
Maggie Mae Mell   
Michael Kleinberg  
Cameron DeLeone 
  Ye   XNo Yale staff  
    
Role: Study Nurse Denise Romano,  FNP, APRN  Yes No Yale staff  
Role: Therapist  Grace Kong 
  Yes No Yale staff  
Role: Study physician  Julia Shi, M.D.  Yes No Yale faculty 
Role: Co-PI John Krystal, Ph.D.  Yes No Yale faculty 
Role: Study Jeane 
physician  tte Tetrault, M.D.  Yes No Yale faculty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
Page 4 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
 
 
 
 
As the principal  investigator of this research project, I certify that: 
 The information provided in this application  is complete and  accurate.  
 I assume full  responsibility for the protection of human subjects  and the proper conduct of the 
research. 
 Subject safety will be of paramount concern, and every effort will be made to protect subjects’ 
rights and welfare. 
 The research  will be performed  according  to ethical  principles  and in compliance with  all federal, 
state and local laws, as well as institutional  regulations  and policies regarding the protection of 
human subjects.  
 All members of the research team  will be kept apprised of research  goals. 
 I will obtain approval for this research study and any subsequent revisions prior to my initiating the 
study or any  change and  I will obtain  continuing approval of this study  prior to the expiration  date 
of any approval period. 
 I will report to the HIC any serious injuries  and/or other unanticipated problems involving risk to 
participants.  
 I am in compliance with  the requirements  set by the University  and qualify to serve as  the 
principal investigator  of this project or have acquired  the appropriate approval from  the 
Dean’s Office or Office  of the Provost, or the Human  Subject Protection  Administrator  at 
Yale-New Haven  Hospital, or have a faculty advisor. 
 I will identify  a q ualified successor should I cease my  role as principal investigator and  facilitate a 
smooth transfer of investigator responsibilities.  
 
 
PI Name (PRINT)  and Signature Date  
 
  
 
 SECTION IV: 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR /FACULTY  ADVISOR/ DEPARTMENT  CHAIR 
AGREEMENT  
As the faculty advisor of  this research project, I certify that: 
 The information provided in this application  is complete and  accurate.  
 This project has scientific value and merit and that the student or trainee investigator has the 
necessary  resources to complete the project  and achieve the aims. 
 I will train the student investigator in matters of appropriate research  compliance,  protection  of 
human subjects  and proper conduct of research.  
 The research  will be performed  according  to ethical  principles  and in compliance with  all federal, 
state and local laws, as well as institutional  regulations  and policies regarding the protection of 
human subjects.  
 The student  investigator  will obtain approval for this research study and  any subsequent revisions 
Prior to initiating the study or revision and will obtain continuing approval prior to the expiration  
of any approval period. 
 The student  investigator  will report to the HIC  any serious injuries  and/or other unanticipated 
problems involving risk to participants.  
 I am in compliance with  the requirements  set forth by the University  and qualify to serve as  
the faculty  advisor of this project. 
 
Page 5 of 52 
Advisor Name (PRINT) a 
Page 5 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Department Chair’s Assurance Statement 
 
Do you know of any real or apparent institutional  conflict of interest (e.g., Yale ownership  of a 
sponsoring company,  patents, licensure)  associated  with this research project? 
Yes (provide a description  of that interest in a separate letter addressed  to the HIC.) 
No 
 
As Chair, do you have any real or apparent protocol- specific conflict  of interest between yourself and 
the sponsor of the research project,  or its competitor or any interest in any intervention  and/or method 
tested in the project that might compromise this research project? 
Yes, and I agree to submit the  Protocol- Specific Conflict of Interest Disclosure Form.  
No 
 
I assure the HIC that the principal investigator and  all members of the research  team are qualified  by 
education, training, licensure and/or experience to assume participation  in the conduct of this research  
trial. I also assure that the principal investigator has departmental support and  sufficient resources  to 
conduct this trial appropriately.  
 
 
Chair Name (PRINT) and Signature Date 
 
 
Department  
 
YNHH Human Subjects  Protection Administrator Assurance Statement 
Required when the study is conducted solely at YNHH by YNHH health  care providers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 As Human Subject Protection  Administrator (HSPA) for YNHH,  I certify that: 
 I have read  a copy of the protocol and approve it being conducted at YNHH. 
 I agree to submit a  Protocol-Specific Conflict of Interest Disclosure  Form if I am aware of any real 
or apparent institutional  conflict of interest. 
 The principal  investigato r of this study  is qualified to serve as  P.I. and had the support of the hospital 
for this research project. 
YNHH HSPA  Name (PRINT) and Signature  Date 
Page 6 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
 
 
 
1. Statement of Purpose:  State the scientific aim(s)  of the study,  or the hypotheses to be tested. 
 
Development  of new and effective strategies  to treat alcoholism  should be based on our 
understanding of the behavioral  and neurochemical mechanisms  mediating  alcohol reward and 
drinking. Initiation and progression  of alcohol-seeking behaviors  involve complex  interactions  in 
the cortico -striatal circuitry between neurotransmitters  like dopamine and opioids that  signal 
reward in the nucleus accumbens and  engage stimulus response habits  in the dorsal striatum, as 
well as glutamatergic projections from  the prefrontal  cortex and basolateral  amygdala to the 
nucleus accumbens  that are involved in the  reinstatement  of alcohol  drinking. 
 
In HIC # 9912011476 and HIC  # 0602001068,  we examined  the independent roles  of 
dysfunctions in the glutamatergic and  opioidergic circuits  in mediating  alcohol-drinking 
behaviors, using an alcohol drinking paradigm (ADP) for heavy drinkers developed  by our group 
(O’Malley,  Krishnan- Sarin et al., 2002). Using an NIH funded grant in HIC # 9912011476, we 
showed for the first time that the opioid antagonist  naltrexone (NTX) significantly  reduced 
drinking in drinkers  with a positive family  history (FH) of alcoholism  (FHP; Krishnan -Sarin et 
al., 2007) but increased  drinking in those without a FH of alcoholism  (FHN), with no consistent  
changes in alcohol  craving and stimulation.   Similarly,  interim analyses from HIC # 0602001068 
indicate that the glutamate (NMDA) antagonist memantine (MEM) significantly  reduced alcohol 
stimulation  and craving with emerging,  modest reductions in drinking (Krishnan -Sarin et al., 
2009a) in FHP  drinkers, with  no consistent  changes in FHN drinkers. This exciting evidence 
provides the first  demonstration  of distinctive roles  for the glutamatergic and  opioidergic  
systems in FHP drinkers; specifically,  blocking opioid receptors  with NTX appears to reduce 
stimulus response habits and alcohol drinking, while  blocking NMDA receptor  function with 
MEM appears to reduce alcohol reward. 
 
In the current  proposal we would like to conduct an important extension of this work. We will 
test the hypothesis that by targeting  both opioidergic  and glutamatergic mechanisms, one may  
synergistically  target multiple neurochemical  and behavioral processes,  leading to optimal 
reduction of alcohol drinking. This pilot trial  will be conducted in  FHP drinkers in whom  we 
have observed reduction  in alcohol reward with MEM and in alcohol drinking with NTX. We 
will test the efficacy  and tolerability  of the combined  use of MEM  and NTX. We will also test 
the efficacy  and tolerability  of the combined use of N- acetyl cysteine and NTX. N- 
acetylcysteine (NAC),  an acetyl pro-drug of cysteine is another agent which  can be use to target 
the glutamatergic system.  NAC is believed to produce its effects by stimulating  the cysteine - 
glutamate  exchanger  and thus altering  synaptic glutamate levels.  A significant potential  
advantage of NAC is better tolerability,  which may make it a  better glutamate -altering agent to 
use in combination with  NTX.  Finally, we will also evaluate the predictive  utility of impulsive  
responding,  implicit alcohol motivational tendencies, and  variations in genes  for opiate receptors 
and for signal transduction proteins  linking dopamine and  glutamate receptors  upon alcohol 
drinking behaviors. 
 
The following specific aims will be tested: 
 
Primary Aim 1: Evaluate the effects  of pretreatment  with a combination  of naltrexone (NTX; 
50 mg) and memantine (MEM; 20 mg) or N-acetylcysteine (NAC;  2400 mg) on drinking in 
FHP drinkers. SECTION  V: RESEARCH  PLAN 
Page 7 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Primary Hypothesis: Combination  treatment with NTX and  MEM or NAC, when compared  
with NTX alone,  will reduce number of drinks consumed during the self -administration  period. 
Exploratory hypothesis : Combination  treatment with NTX and  MEM will reduce time to first 
drink and  increase the average time to consume each  drink, during the self -administration  
phase. 
 
Primary Aim 2: Evaluate the effects  of pretreatment  with a combination  of naltrexone (NTX; 
50 mg) and memantine (MEM; 20 mg) or NAC (2400 mg) on alcohol craving  in FHP drinkers 
Hypothesis : Combination  treatment with NTX and  MEM or NAC, when compared  with NTX 
alone, will reduce alcohol craving  (Yale Craving Scale) during the self -administration  period 
Exploratory hypothesis : Combination  treatment with NTX and  MEM will reduce craving  in 
response to the alcohol  cue presented  just prior to the priming drink period. 
 
Primary Aim 3: Evaluate the effects  of pretreatment  with a combination  of naltrexone (NTX; 
50 mg) and memantine (MEM; 20 mg) or NAC (2400 mg) on alcohol- induced stimulation  in 
FHP drinkers. 
Hypothesis : Combination  treatment with NTX and  MEM or NAC, when compared  with NTX 
alone, will reduce alcohol- induced stimulation  (Biphasic Alcohol  Effects Scale) during the self - 
administration  period. 
 
Secondary  Aim: Examine the tolerability  of co-administration  of NTX and MEM and NTX 
and NAC 
 
Exploratory  Aims: Examine  the influence of innov ative predictors  of treatment  response, 
including: 
 Impulsive propensity and implic it alcohol associations 
 Opioidergic (OPRM1) and signal  transduction proteins that moderate the function of 
NR2B-containing NMDA receptors  (Fyn kinase, STEP) genotypes  
 Pavlovian to Instrumental transfer propensity 
 
2. Background: Describe the background information that  led to the plan  for this project. Provide 
references  to support the expectation  of obtaining  useful scientific data. 
 
Alcohol use, abuse, and dependence are a huge public health  problem in the  United States and 
worldwide. Epidemiological  evidence suggests  that almost 17.6 million adults in the U.S. are 
abusing alcohol or are alcohol dependent  (Grant et al., 2004), emphasizing the  importance of 
developing optimal interventions  for the treatment of  this disorder. At  present, three medications  
have been approved by  the FDA in the U.S.  for the treatment  of alcohol  dependence:  disulfiram,  
naltrexone, and  acamprosate. However,  the treatments effects for these agents range from 
minimal to modest,  and they are minimally  utilized in clinical community settings (Garbutt et al., 
1999; Krishnan- Sarin et al., 2009b). Therefore,  there is a significant need for other medications, 
or combinations of medications,  that are more efficacious  in reducing alcohol use.  
 
A cornerstone to the development of pharmacotherapy  to reduce alcohol drinking rests in a 
detailed understanding of the neurotransmitters  involved in mediating  alcohol’s effects. Alcohol 
influences a variety  of neurotransmitt ers, such as opioids, dopamine, serotonin,  gamma amino 
butyric acid,  and glutamate,  and each one of these neurotransmitter systems  has been shown to  
play a role in many of alcohol’s  effects, including but not limited  to alcohol  reinforcement,  
craving, and withdrawal  (Krishnan- Sarin et al., 2009; Krystal  and Tabakoff, 2002). While most 
clinical trials have focused on single pharmacological  agents with single mechanisms  of action,  
Page 8 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
the above evidence suggests that it would be important  to investigate the efficacy  of combining 
drugs that  influence multiple  neurotransmitter systems.  In fact the development of combination  
therapies that have minimal side effects and can be used to produce optimal  reductions  in alcohol  
drinking in habitual drinkers by targeting different behaviors is a  major priority of treatment  
development (e.g., Kranzler, 2000). 
 
Naltrexone and alcohol  drinking:  
 
Naltrexone’s  efficacy in reducing alcohol drinking is believed to be mediated  through 
interactions  between the endogenous opioid syst em and dopamine systems, specifically  through 
antagonism  of the mu-opioid receptors.  The most commonly  used dose of naltrexone of 50 
mg/day has been shown to result in complete occupancy  of the brain mu-opioid receptors  
(Weerts et al., 2008). Clinical  trials indicate that  treatment seeking  drinkers who  receive 
naltrexone at a dose of 50  mg/day in combination with  a behavioral intervention have lower 
levels of relapse to drinking during the treatment  period. However,  it is important to note that  not 
all the clinical  trials conducted with  naltrexone over the past  decade have observed significant 
improvements in drinking treatment outcomes  (e.g. Krystal et al., 2001), and two  recent meta- 
analytical  reports suggest that naltrexone has  small to modest  efficacy in preventing relapse to 
drinking (Bouza et  al., 2004; Srisurapanont and  Jarusuraisin, 2002).  Moreover,  while naltrexone 
is relatively well tolerated,  the potential  risk of hepatotoxicity at high doses requires  caution in 
use in those with  liver disease.  A more recent multi-site trial which used a higher dose of 
naltrexone (100 mg/day) with medical management  to enhance compliance found significant 
reductions of alcohol drinking with naltrexone, although  again with a small effect  size in the 
overall sample (Anton et al., 2006). 
 
Many investigations have attempted  to unders tand the modest  efficacy of naltrexone by  
evaluating  its mechanism  of action  as well as understanding factors  that predict treatment  
response to naltrexone. Naltrexone is believed to produce its effects by blocking the GABAergic  
neurons that tonically inhibit the  dopamine neurons that  project to the nucleus accumbens  from 
the ventral  tegmental area (see Johnson, 2008). From  a behavioral  perspective,  early studies 
conducted in social  drinkers observed  that administration  of a single dose of naltrexone (50 mg) 
followed by  an alcoholic drink resulted  in more sedation and  less stimulating  effects of alcohol  
(Swift et al., 1994), and  that reduction in alcohol -induced stimulation  was only observed in those 
who had a high risk of developing alcoholism (King et al., 1997). More recent examinations  of 
naltrexone in alcohol- dependent  drinkers using self-administration  paradigms  (Davidson  et al., 
1999; O’Malley et al., 2002; Drobes et  al., 2003) and clini cal trials (e.g. Richardson et  al., 2008) 
suggest that the efficacy  of naltrexone may  be related to  its ability  to reduce  craving or urge to 
drink. Myrick et al. (2008) observed that naltrexone reduced  alcohol-cue-induced activation  of 
the ventral  striatum. Similarly,  naltrexone reduced  alcohol-induced stimulation,  positive mood, 
and craving experienced  in response to an  intravenous dose of alcohol  in alcohol -dependent 
drinkers (Ray  and Hutchinson, 2007). However,  our evidence from  HIC # 9912011476 suggests  
that naltrexone -induced reducti on in drinking in FHP  drinkers is not accompanied  by any 
consistent changes  in alcohol craving  or stimulation.  
 
Evaluati
ons of predictors of treatment response to  naltrexone have identified many  factors 
including the presence of a family  history of alcoholism and variants of the mu -opioid receptor 
gene (OPRM1  gene).  Our work in HIC # 9912011476 found that  alcoholics  with a family 
history of alcoholism appear to respond better,  with greater reductions  in alcohol  consumption 
than those who  have a negative family  history of alcoholism (Krishnan -Sarin et al., 2007). 
Moreover,  individuals  who have a variant of the OPRM1  gene (or the gene for the mu-opioid 
Page 9 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
receptor where naltrexone produces its effects) have better response to naltrexone treatment in 
most (Oslin et al., 2003; Oroszi et al., 2009; Anton  et al., 2008) but not all  (Gelernter et  al., 
2007) clinical  trials. 
 
In summary, the opioidergic system is an important modulator of alcohol  effects and the opioid 
antagonist  naltrexone has been  shown to be effective at  reducing alcohol drinking. Existing  
evidence also  suggests that naltrexone may reduce alcohol  drinking by attenuating  craving for 
alcohol and that variants of the OPRM1  gene and  family history of alcoholism may  predict 
treatment response.  However,  the overall efficacy  of naltrexone in reducing  alcohol drinking is 
rather modest, with  most clinical trials documenting a medium effect size. Interestingly,  in our 
earlier project  (HIC # 9912011476 ),  while we observed  significant naltrexone- induced 
reductions in drinking in FHP drinkers, these changes  were not accompanied  by consistent  
changes in alcohol  craving or alcohol reward. All the above evidence suggests that there is room 
for improvement  and a great need for medicati on approaches that have greater efficacy  in 
reducing alcohol use.  
 
Glutamate and alcohol addiction:  
 
The amino acid  L-glutamate is the major excitatory  amino acid neurotransmitter in the central 
nervous system. The glutamate system is involved in  fast synaptic transmission  as well as 
plasticity and higher cognitive functions.  Glutamate produces  its effects by binding to one of 
three different  types of ionotropic postsynaptic  receptors:  the N-methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA)  
receptor, the alpha -amino-3-hydoxy-5- methylisoxazole -4-propionate (AMPA), and  the kainate  
receptor (Parsons  et al., 2005). Glutamate also  produces some  of its effects by binding to 
metabotropic  glutamate receptors  (mGluR’s) located  in the perisynaptic and presynaptic regions  
(Gass and Olive, 2008). Most important,  glutamate is one of the primary  neurochemical 
substrates of synaptic plasticity,  and it is believed that neuroadaptations in glutamatergic  
transmission  produced by  chronic drug  use leads  to compulsive drug use (Gass  and Olive, 2008; 
Koob et al., 2009; Kalivas  et al., 2005). 
 
Alcohol appears to have  paradoxical  effects on this system,  with increases in extracellular levels  
of glutamate observed  in a variety of brain regions, both after administration  of low doses  of 
alcohol as well as following withdrawal  from chronic  alcohol use. The NMDA receptor is one of 
the primary  high-affinity targets for ethanol in the brain (Grant and Lovinger, 1995), and  acute 
ethanol administration  dose-dependently attenuates  NMDA receptor function (Grant  and 
Lovinger, 1995; Hoffman  et al., 1990; Lovinger et al., 1989). Ethanol- induced modulation of 
NMDA receptor function is observed at  doses of ethanol that  produce intoxicating  behavioral 
effects in animals  (Woodward,  1999). NMDA receptors  in many brain regions, including the 
cerebral cortex, septum,  amygdala,  hippocampus,  locus coeruleus, cerebellum,  and the VTA and  
nucleus accumbens,  are sensitive  to this effect of ethanol (see Gass and Olive, 2008). Preclinical  
studies indicate that chronic exposure to ethanol inhalation  enhances  glutamatergic synaptic  
transmission  in the nucleus (Nie et  al., 1993), suggesting that NMDA receptors  are up-regulated 
by chronic ethanol  exposure. During ethanol withdrawal,  this glutamatergic up -regulation and  
subsequent  enhanced  Ca2+ influx contribute to ethanol withdrawal and  associated  neurotoxicity 
(Hoffman  et al., 1990; Tsai  et al., 1995; Tsai  and Coyle, 1998). NMDA receptors  also appear to 
be essential  for developing tolerance to many of ethanol’s  behavioral effects (Rafi-Tari et al., 
1996; Szabo et  al., 1994; Wu et  al., 1993). Ethanol also  appears to inhibit the function  of AMPA  
and KA receptors,  but these  receptors  seem to be less sensitive to inhibition by  ethanol, which  is 
only observed at  higher concentrations. 
Page 10 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Preclinical  drug discrimination  studies indicate that  NMDA antagonists  have ethanol- like 
discriminative stimulus properties, particularly  at higher training doses of ethanol (Grant  and 
Columbo, 1993; Hundt et  al., 1998). There have been some examinations  of sub-anesthetic doses  
of NMDA antagonists  in humans (Krupitsky  et al., 2001; Krystal  et al., 1998; Petrakis  et al., 
2004; Schultz  and Soyka, 2000). Anecdotal  reports from healthy human subjects indicate that  
NMDA antagonists  like PCP (Luby et al., 1959) and ketamine (Krystal  et al., 1994) produce 
ethanol-like subjective effects.   Studies conducted in alcohol -dependent subjects  reported that 
ketamine’s  euphoric effects  were associated  with sedation and  cognitive impairment.  Similar to 
the preclinical  studies, lower doses of ketamine  were judged  to be more  alcohol-like and similar 
to 1-2 standard drinks, while  higher doses of ketamine  were judged  to be similar  to 8-9 alcoholic 
drinks (Krystal et al., 1998; Krupitsky et al., 2001; Petrakis  et al., 2004). 
 
The above evide nce suggests that the NMDA -related actions of ethanol may contribute to its  
behavioral effects.  Therefore,  drugs modulating this component of ethanol’s  effects should 
attenuate ethanol  intoxication and reward. In support of this, extensive preclinical  and molecular  
evidence suggests that NMDA receptor antagonists  reduce operant  responding for alcohol  and 
alcohol self-administration  (Bienkowski  et al., 1999; Holter et  al., 1996; Holter et  al., 2000; Lin 
and Hubbard, 1995), deprivation-induced alcohol drinking (Vengeliene et  al., 2005), cue -induced 
reinstatement of alcohol drinking (Backstrom  and Hyttia, 2004; Bachteler  et al., 2005), 
acquisition  of conditioned  place preference for  alcohol (Biala  and Kotlinska,  1999; Boyce - 
Rustay and Cunningham, 2004), and  sensitization  to the locomotor- stimulating  effects of alcohol 
(Broadbent and  Weitemier,  1999; Meyer and  Phillips, 2003; Kotlinska et  al., 2007).Acamprosate,  
or calcium acetyl homotaurinate, an NMDA receptor modulator  (Harris, 2002; Pope and  
Lovinger, 2000), is FDA approved for the treatment of alcohol drinking, and has  been shown in 
preclinical  and clinical  studies to reduce alcohol consumption  (Chick, 2003; Heyse et  al., 1998; 
Stromberg  et al., 2001; Spanagel et al., 1996; Heyser et  al., 1998; Vengeliene et  al., 2007). 
However,  more recent clin ical evidence questions the  efficacy of this agent in reducing alcohol 
drinking (Anton et al., 2006). Topiramate, another  agent that targets the kainate and AMPA 
glutamatergic  system as well as extrasynaptic GABA-A receptors (see review by Krystal et al., 
2006), has also shown preliminary  efficacy in reducing alcohol drinking in clinical RCT (Johnson 
et al., 2007; see review by Kenna and colleagues, 2009);  however, the agent’s adverse event profile 
may limit its utility. 
 
Memantine:  
 
Memantine is a non-competitive NMDA antagonist with  secondary  effects of blocking alpha-7 
nicotinic receptors  (Arcava et  al., 2005; Zakharova et  al., 2005). A significant advantage of 
memantine is it’s selectivity  as an NMDA antagonist,  as well as its tolerability  and lack of abuse 
liability, in contrast  to some other agents  like amantadine,  ketamine,  and dextromethorphan 
which also block NMDA receptors  (Danysz et al., 1997; Kohler et  al., 1997). There is extensive 
evidence of the safety  and tolerability  of memantine  (Kavirajan,  2009), and it is FDA approved 
for the treatment of moderate to severe Alzheimer’s  disease. Unlike ketamine,  memantine does  
not have profound perceptual effects.  Memantine  also increases  intracortical  inhibition, reduces  
intracortical  facilitation  (Schwenkreis et  al., 1999) and  enhances  vigilance in healthy elderly 
volunteers (Schultz  et al., 1996), with  no significant  effects on on mood, attention,  or immediate  
and delayed recall (Schugens  et al., 1997). Memantine  was well tolerated in randomized  double- 
blind, placebo -controlled trials for patients  with moderately  severe to severe dementia and 
moderate to severe Alzheimer’s  disease, as well as vascular dementia (Lundbeck, 2002; Reisberg  
et al., 2003; Winblad and Poritis,  1999). The most common adverse events observed in clinical  
trials are diarrhea,  insomnia,  dizziness, headache,  constipation , and confusion (Jarvis  and Figgit, 
Page 11 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
2003). Memantine is recommended  in doses of up to 20 mg/day for the treatment  of dementia  
but has also been evaluated at  doses of up to 40 mg/day in placebo -controlled  trials of 
neuropathy (Forrest labs, unpublished data).   Importantly,  evidence from  our HIC # 0602001068 
project also indicates  that this agent was well tolerated in FHP drinkers (see preliminary  section). 
 
In regard to alcohol effects, preclinical  evidence suggests that memantine attenuates alcohol - 
withdrawal -induced neurotoxicity  in hippocampal  neurons (Stepanyan  et al., 2008), po tentiates the 
ataxic effect of alcohol (Chen and Holmes, 2009), and  reduces alcohol  drinking in a schedule- 
induced polydipsia  paradigm (Escher and Mittleman,  2006). Bisaga  and Evans  (2004) observed 
that memantine  (in doses of 15 and 30 mg) was well tolerated and reduced alcohol  craving in 
moderate social drinkers and resulted only in mild dissociative  effects when  combined with 
alcohol. Memantine,  in doses of 20 mg/day and 40 mg/day, produced dose-dependent  decrease in 
cue-induced alcohol  craving in recently abstinent, alcohol -dependent  participants  (Krupitsky  et al., 
2007). Two  open-label trials with memantine, at a dose of 20 mg/day, reported improvement  in 
alcohol-related dementia (Cheon et al., 2008) and reduction in alcohol drinking and urges to drink 
(Arias et al., 2007). More recent evidence from a small 16 week, double-blind, placebo-controlled  
trial of a 40 mg/day dose in alcohol-dependent  drinkers did not demonstrate  any significant 
benefits for  memantine  (Evans et al.,  2007); while the results of this trial raise questions about  the 
efficacy of memantine  as a stand-alone agent, it is also important  to note that this trial did not 
examine differences  in efficacy by family history of alcoholism.  
 
Pilot evid
ence from our ongoing project suggests that memantine’s effects are related to dose as 
well as family history of alcoholism; specifically,  we observed that  in FHP drinkers, memantine  
reduced alcohol-induced stimulation and alcohol  craving at both the 20 mg/day and 40 mg/day 
doses with  emerging evidence for modest reductions  in drinking at the 40 mg/day dose. In contrast, 
memantine  did not have any effects on alcohol stimulation, craving, or  drinking behaviors  in FHN 
drinkers at  either of the doses examined.  
 
N-acetyl cysteine: 
 
N-acetylcysteine (NAC)  is an N-acetyl pro-drug of the naturally  occuring amino acid  cysteine. 
This agent is FDA-approved for use as a mucolytic agent  for bronchopulmonary disorders (e.g. 
Grandjean  et al., 2000) and as  an oral or intravenous  antidote to treat acetaminophen  poisoning 
(Smilkstein  et al., 1988).  NAC  is a precursor of glutathione synthesis  and is available worldwide 
in intravenous, oral  and nebulizer  forms and is also sold over the counter in  health food stores. 
NAC has been found to stimulate cysteine -glutamate exc hange, thereby increasing  non-synaptic 
glial release of glutamate  (e.g. Baker et al., 2003) which  then stimulates  inhibitory  presynaptic 
metabotropic  glutamate autoreceptors  to decrease vesicular release of glutamate.   This 
mechanism  is believed to mediate the reduced  reinstatement of drug seeking behavior observed 
in animal models with  the use of this agent (Baker et al., 2003; Madayag  et al., 2007; Moran  et 
al., 2005).  Kalivas  and colleagues  (2008) have postulated that  since drug self-administration  
down regulates the cysteine -glutamate exchanges (Kau  et al., 2008) the upregulation of the 
exchanger via NAC administration  may directly normalize  drug-induced changes. 
While there have been no tests of the  influence of NAC on alcohol  behaviors there is extensive 
evidence with  other substances.   For example, NAC reduces cocaine use in cocaine dependent 
rodents (e.g.  Madayag et al., 2007; Moran  et al., 2005).  Preliminary  clinical trials  suggest that 
NAC is well tolerated with minimal  side effects  and that it decreases cocaine craving  and use in 
cocaine dependent humans (Larowe et  al., 2006; Mardikian  et al. 2007).  More recent  evidence 
suggests that NAC restores the ability  to induce long -term-potentiation  and long-term-depression 
in cocaine treated  rats, possib ly by indirectly  stimulating  mGluR2/3  and mGluR5 receptors  
Page 12 of 52 
Page 12 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
(Moussawi  et al., 2009).  Similarly  encouraging results have been observed  in preclinical  work 
with opioid dependence (Zhou and  Kalivas, 2008) and clinical studies involving obsessive 
compulsive disorder (Lafleur et  al., 2006), pathological  gambling (Grant et al., 2007) and  
nicotine dependence (Knackstedt et  al., 2008). 
 
A significant  advantage  of this agent is the fact that it has been safely used for several  decades in 
adults and children (Mucomyst Package insert)   and in studies  evaluating  long-term treatments  
with this agent for chronic bronchitis have found that it was cost-effective to use and generally 
well tolerated with mild, most commonly  gastrointestinal  adverse effects  (Grandjean et al., 
2000). Memantine,  on the other hand, is associated more side effects;  the tolerability  of NAC 
relative to memantine is a strength. 
 
In the proposed study,  we will test the influence of  NAC on alcohol drinking and alcohol- 
induced behaviors including stimulation,  sedation and craving using the same  ADP as our 
ongoing memantine study.  We propose to use a dose  of 2400 mg/day of NAC which was 
observed to be safe and  tolerable in cocaine dependent participants  (e.g. Larowe et  al., 2006). 
 
Why combine memantine/NAC  and naltrexone?  
 
Habitual alcohol  use in alcohol-dependent heavy  drinkers may be dependent not just on 
continued alcohol  reward but also on conditioned incentive processes,  like cue-induced craving 
and automated  motivational tendencies,  which are  mediated  by complex interactions  between 
different neurochemical  processes  (Johnson et  al., 2008; Krishnan- Sarin et al., 2009; Koob  and 
Le Moal, 2008). Therefore,  alcohol drinking in habitual, alcohol-dependent  drinkers could be  
optimally reduced by combined treatment with agents that influence different behavioral  and 
neurochemical  effects of alcohol. Modulation of  ventral striatal dopaminergic  function by  various 
neurotransmitters  including glutamate, GABA, and opioids plays a crucial role at every stage of the 
addiction process, including initiation, maintenance,  and relapse (Vengeliene et al., 2008). While it 
is very difficult to pinpoint which system contributes  most to transition from initiation to 
compulsive  alcohol use, it is widely believed that agents which target these systems may work 
synergistically  to reduce ventral striatal activity and thus reduce reward and associated  processes.  
 
There is con
siderable evidence of direct and indirect interactions between  the glutamate  and opioid 
systems in mediating  reward. The glutamatergic  system has been shown to play a very important  
role in addiction to opioids like methadone  (see review by Guo et al., 2009). The mu-opioid 
receptor system is an important  modulator  of glutamatergic  function in rat central amygdala 
neurons (Zhu and Pan, 2005), and NMDA and  mu-opiate receptors are co-localized in the nucleus 
accumbens  (Gracy et al., 1997) and nucleus  tractus solitarius  (Huang et al., 2000). Mu-receptor 
antagonists  have been shown to reduce glutamater gic response to acute alcohol administration in 
the nucleus accumbens (Nie et al., 1993). More recent evidence also suggests that chronic alcohol 
use may lead to increased recruitment  of functional  mu- and delta-opioid receptors on glutamate  
neurons of the central nucleus of the amygdala that may be involved in maintaining  conditioned 
place preference for alcohol (Zhu et al.,  2009). 
 
The above evidence suggests that two agents that might work synergistically  to reduce alcohol 
drinking behaviors  are glutamatergic  agents like memantine/NAC  and naltrexone. This hypothesis  
is directly supported by the work of Kuzmin and colleagues (2008), who examined  the effects of 
naltrexone  in combination with memantine  on operant alcohol self-administration  in rats. The 
results of this investigation  suggest that memantine  at a dose of 1 mg/kg significantly  enhanced the 
effect of a low dose of naltrexone  (0.1 mg/kg) in inhibiting  alcohol self-administration.  This 
Page 13 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
evidence suggests that memantine, when  combined with low-dose naltrexone, may block alcohol 
reinforcement  and that this combination may have therapeutic value in the treatment of alcohol 
drinking. 
 
We propose that  combining  naltrexone with  memantine/NAC  will target distinctive  mechanisms  
underlying alcohol -drinking behavior.  The combination  will optimally  suppress ventral striatal 
dopaminergic activity, improve striatal functioning,  and restore control over alcohol-drinking 
behavior, and  lead to optimal reduction in alcohol-drinking behaviors. 
 
3. Research  Plan: Provide an orderly scientific description  of the study design and research 
procedures  as they directly affect the subjects.  
 
This project will  use a within-subjects, crossover design  to examine  the effects  of naltrexone 
with or without memantine or NAC on drinking and other alcohol- related behavioral  measures  in 
alcohol-dependent or abusive heavy  drinkers with  a positive family  history of alcoholism  (FHP). 
Non-treatment- seeking heavy drinkers will  participate in three ADP lab sessions, occurring prior 
to medication  and after the first and second weeks of medication  treatment.  They will also 
participate in two follow-up appointments  at one week  and one month after participation.  The 
baseline ADP  will be used to familiarize subjects  with the laboratory procedures and  reduce 
order effects  in the subsequent ADP  sessions. Each ADP will involve consumption of a priming  
alcoholic drink  (0.03 mg%) at 3 pm followed  by three one-hour choice drinking periods. During 
each hour subjects will choose between  4 alcoholic drinks (0.015  mg% each) or equivalent  
monetary  rewards ($3 per drink). During each 6-8-day medication  outpatient treatment period (up 
to 13 days) , subjects will receive naltrexone and  be randomized to receive either 20 mg of 
memantine,  2400 mg of NAC or placebo, and medication  doses will be tapered up and adverse 
events recorded on a daily  basis. 
 
The study will consist of five phases: 1) Phase 1 (Screening): We obtain informed consent and  
evaluate eligibility  for the study using clinical assessments  and physical exams, if eligible,  
participants  will be scheduled  for the rest of  the study,  2) Phase 2 (Baseline): Participants  will 
complete some memory and mood tasks, participate in the PIT task,  and complete  a baseline 
alcohol drinking paradigm (ADP),  3) Phase 3 (Med 1): The first 6-8day outpatient medication  
phase during which participants will  come into our clinic every day  to take the medication  
combination  they have been assigned  and participate in the second  ADP on the  last day of 
medication,  (participants may  be asked to take the medication  for up to 13 days, based on 
scheduling for their overnight  stay) Also,  in the event that  a medication  appointment will  be 
missed because the participant is unable to come to the clinic the following  day, he/she will be 
given an extra dose of medication  to take home for the next day. The participant will  be called  
the next day as a reminder to take the medication  and will also be asked about any  adverse 
events. 5) Phase 4 (Washout):  At least 6-8 day washout  phase (length of wash out based on 
hospital scheduling) and  6) Phase 5 (Med 2): Participants  will be randomized  to receive another 
medication  combination  for 6-8 days which will culminate  in the third ADP (again, this is based 
on scheduling for the overnight at  the hospital  and can be extended to 13 days ). In the ev ent that 
a participant is unable to make it to one of the overnight visits, and  needs to discontinue one of 
the medication  periods early due to personal circumstances,  we would  like to have the option of 
restarting the medication.  We do not believe that  this will increase risk  to participants  since they 
would have already taken the medications  during an earlier phase.  It is essential that 
participants  complete  all parts of the study for us to be able to use the data to evaluate the 
effects of combining naltrexone and  memantine on drinking behaviors. 
Page 14 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Once all phases are complete, participants  will be scheduled  for a 1-week follow up appointment. 
We will record any remaining  adverse events  and assess drinking behavior.  A clinical  
psychologist will talk to all participants about  their drinking behavior and  if they are interested  
will provide them  with treatment referrals. The one- week and one-month follow -up sessions will  
be conducted with all participants, even  those who drop out during the course of the study. 
 
Recruitment:  
 
Participants  will be recruited  through specific advertisements  placed in local newspapers,  
postings and  promotional materials (e.g., magnets) distributed  in community  locations (bars, 
alcohol/coffe e shops, grocery stores), and advertisements  on free community  TV channels.  We 
have also had success with recruiting  participants  from postings on Craigslist  and social 
networking sites. We have created  a Facebook  page for our study and have also developed our 
own study URL, www.paidalcoholstudy.com, which links subjects  to confidential  surveys that  
assess some preliminary  eligibility  criteria and  provides preliminary information about the 
project. We have had a lot of interest in our URL  and survey, and  most people who  access the 
survey report hearing about the study through the internet  (86.6%) with  a minority  reporting that 
they saw flyers in the community  (7%). The results of the survey are then accessed by the 
research staff, and individuals who  seem eligible are contacted.  Individuals who  call in response 
to ads and flyers contact us directly.   Subjects will also be referred  to this study  by research staff 
on protocol  #0903004912.  Detailed  procedures  on the referral  process are outlined in protocol 
#0903004912 and  have been  approved by the Yale HIC. 
Each potential participant’s  eligibility  will be assessed by a research  staff member who  will then 
contact them and set them up for the initial intake appo intment. We do not anticipate any  
problems with  recruiting  these subjects  since their  profile is similar to that of the participants we  
have been recruiting  for our ongoing projects and we have been quite successful in our 
recruitment  efforts. Informed consent will be obtained from  all subjects, and they will be 
screened by a physician  for contraindicating  medical or psychiatric conditions  and will receive 
complete physical  and laboratory workup, including EKG. 
 
Justification  for Drinking  Criteria:  
 
We will recruit alcohol-dependent or abusive heavy  drinkers who  consume between 20-65 drinks 
per week for women  and 25-70 drinks per week for men. The lower limits reflect alcohol 
consumption that just exceeds the WHO Brief  Intervention Study  Group guidelines (WH O 
guidelines) for non-hazardous drinking, which  are no more than 4 drinks/day 4-5 days per week 
for men (20 drinks) and no more than 3 drinks/day 5 days  per week for women (15  drinks). The 
upper limits were chosen to ensure that  we chose subjects whose typical  drinking quantities 
would be unlikely to exceed the amount of alcohol that  would be available to them  for possible 
administration  during the laboratory session. These criteria are similar to the ones being used in 
our ongoing work with  memantine in HIC # 0602001068. 
 
 
Justification  of Age Criteria and for Excluding  Children and Adolescents  Under 21 Years of  
Age: 
 
We will not use subjects under 21 years of age in this study. First and foremost, this is an alcohol 
self-administration  study in which we will be offering drinkers an opportunity  to consume alcohol, 
and in the State of Connecticut  the legal age limit for drinking alcohol is 21. Secondly,  subjects 
Page 15 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
below the age of 21 have probably been drinking alcohol for a shorter duration of time and will 
have different patterns of drinking from older drinkers, which may affect drinking during the self- 
administration  paradigm and confound study results. The upper age  limit was determined  using 
our pilot data (see Krishnan -Sarin et al., 2007) which  indicates that the majority  of the subjects  
who participated  in our ongoing study were in this age range.  
 
Justification  for choice of memantine dose:  
 
We will evaluate the effects  of 20 mg/day of memantine.  Most clinical trials conducted with  
memantine in patients with dementia have used doses of 10 or 20 mg/day.  Also, memantine has  
been used in doses of 15 and  30 mg/day in moderate, non- dependent  drinkers (Bisaga and  
Evans, 2004) and  has been shown to reduce cue- induced craving in doses of 20 and  40 mg/day 
in alcohol -dependent drinkers (Krupitsky  et al., 2007). But most important,  our choice of this 
dose is based on our most recent analyses of our final data,  which suggests that 20 mg of 
memantine reduced  alcohol-induced stimulation  and also seemed to reduce alcoh ol craving and 
drinking. The dose of memantine  will be tapered up slowly to reduce incidence of adverse 
events.  We designed  these procedures based on our experience with  using memantine in the 
current HIC # 0602001068 project.  Our data from  this protocol indicates  that the total number 
of adverse events  experienced  by participants receiving  either the 40 mg  or 20 mg dose of 
memantine did not differ from those receiving  placebo. 
 
 
Justific
ation for choice of naltrexone dose:  
 
We will use naltrexone in a dose of 50 mg/day.  This is the dose of naltrexone that  is FDA 
approved for the treatment of  alcohol dependence and has been most commonly used in most 
clinical trials (Anton et al., 2005; O’Malley et al., 1992; Volpicelli  et al., 1992) and  laboratory 
studies (Davidson et  al., 1999; O’Malley et al., 2002; Anton et  al., 2004). This dose also  
produces complete  blockade of the mu -opioid receptors  (Weerts et al., 2008). The 100 mg/day 
dose has also shown efficacy  in many recent clinical trials (e.g., Anton et  al., 2006), and  our 
own preliminary  evidence suggests  that this dose may produce greater reduction in drinking in 
FHP drinkers than the 50 mg dose. However,  in the proposed “proof of concept” trial  we did not 
want to run the risk of missing the signal  for a synergistic effect  of memantine  or NAC by 
combining it with a dose of naltrexone, which  had a large effect of its own. Moreover,  now that 
we are combining two medications  we want to use a lower dose of naltrexone to minimize  side 
effects from the combined pha rmacotherapy.  
 
Justification  for choice of N-acetyl cysteine dose: 
 
N-acetylcysteine (NAC)  is an N-acetyl pro-drug of the naturally  occuring amino acid cysteine. 
This agent is FDA-approved for use as a mucolytic agent  for bronchopulmonary disorders (e.g. 
Grandjean et al., 2000) and as  an oral or intravenous  antidote to treat acetaminophen  poisoning 
(Smilkstein  et al., 1988).  We propose to use a dose of 2400 mg/day of NAC which was 
observed to be safe and  tolerable in cocaine dependent participants  (e.g. Larowe et al., 2006). 
 
Procedures 
Recruitment,  Baseline Assessments,  Physical Exam and PIT Task 
Potential subjects will be recruited as described  earlier. Participants  will be scheduled  for an 
appointment  at the Substance Abuse Center in the Connecticut  Mental Health Center or at the 
Page 16 of 52 
Page 16 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Substance Abuse Treatment  Unit, New Haven,  CT, where informed  consent will  be obtained 
prior to any other procedures. Then the intake battery  will be administered  to assess eligibility   
for the study. At  this intake  appointment  FH of alcoholism will be assessed  using the FHAM  (see 
assessments section, below). The research  assistant will schedule a physical exam (including 
EKG) and  routine laboratory work, and  hepatic, kidney, and thyroid function tests  will be 
conducted by an APRN. A detailed medical history will be obtained from all subjects and 
pregnancy  tests for all females. Subject characteristics  and medical history will be reviewed by the 
PI to ensure that the subject meets all the eligibility criteria. The subjects will then be scheduled  to 
meet with the study physician (Dr. Julia Shi), who will also review their eligibility for the study and 
review their medical history information and EKG. If eligible to participate,  and if they have also 
consented  to participate in the genetic study, we will draw plasma samples for this purpose . For 
those participants without the use of a phone or cell phone and  may be difficult  to reach for the 
next 20 appointments  after the initial  intake, we will provide them  with a disposable study cell 
phone to enhance communication  and attendance  at all appointments.  Urine will  be collected  to 
test for drugs and  ethylglucuronide, a metabolite  of ethyl alcohol that will be used as a biomarker  
of alcohol  consumption  at baseline and the ADP sessions.  
 
After subjects  are deter mined to be eligible,  they will participate in the Pavlovian  Instrumental 
Transfer (PIT) Task. This task  will use a sucrose  reinforcer,  and so measure PIT  as a general  
tendency and not an alcohol specific tendency.  In this part of the study, subjects will be asked to 
taste different  stimuli. The stimuli will be delivered as liquids. Stimuli  will be stored  in a 
refrigerator and  brought to  room temperature before use. Liquids will  be delivered with our 
custom designed gustometer built by Dr. Small (in collaboration with  colleagues  in the Pierce 
shop).  This set up has been used  successfully  by Dr. Small’s lab for the past 9  years (Small et  al. 
2003; Small  et al. 2004; Veldhuizen  et al. 2007; Small et al. 2008; Veldhuizen  et al. 2010; 
Veldhuizen  et al. 2011; Veldhuizen  et al. 2011; Veldhuizen  et al. 2012). In brief, the liquid 
delivery consists of a computer  running E- Prime, controlling a series of programmable syringe  
pumps with  60ml syringes  and beverage tubing attached. New tubing and syringes are used for 
each subject. Our stimuli will contain either a taste (juice or bitter) or a neutral solution. All  
solutions will  be prepared  in the laboratory using commercially  available tastes. The tastes  might 
include sucrose,  glucose, sodium chloride, citric acid, quinine hydrochloride, sodium 
bicarbonate, potassium chloride, capsaicin,  and artificial sweeteners  such as aspartame,  
acesulfame potassium,  and sucralose.  The juice will consist of three different  flavors of Gatorade 
that the subjects  will choose . 
 
Alcohol-Drinking Paradigm  
The procedures  for all the alcohol-drinking sessions will be similar. Participants  will be asked to 
arrive at the Hospital  Research Unit (HRU) of Yale New Haven  Hospital,  New Haven,  at 9 am. 
They will be told not to consume any  alcohol after 10 pm on the previous  evening. We  will 
assess breath  alcohol levels upon arrival  and conduct urine drug tests. If the breath alcohol 
levels are positive but below 0.05 and  decreasing,  then the participant  will be allowed to 
continue. If the urine drug  tests are positive and/or breath  alcohol levels are 0.05 or greater,  then 
the session  will be rescheduled. The drinking sessions will be conducted in  a private room in the  
HRU. The participants  will stay in these rooms fro m time of admission  to discharge.  
Table1 below provides a detailed  timeline of the procedures.  Participants  will complete the 
impulsivity  and alcohol association  tasks at the beginning of the lab  session, and this data will 
be used to examine  medication  effects and relationship  to drinking behaviors. The alcohol - 
drinking session will start at 3 pm with  the priming  dose period, which  will be followed by  three 
one-hour drinking periods (4 -5 pm, 5-6 pm, and 6-7 pm), and will conclude at  7 pm. 
Page 17 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
 
a. Exposure to alcohol cue:  Ten minutes prior to the start  of the priming  dose (PD) period 
(i.e., 2:50 pm), the research  assistant will walk into the participant’s room  with the glasses,  
the alcohol,  and the mixers. The research  assistant will then proceed with the mixing of 
the priming  drink of alcohol in front  of the participant. When  done, he/she will leave the 
drink on the table,  instruct the participant not to consume  the priming  drink until 
they are told to do so and leave the room.  At 2:59 pm the research  assistant will walk 
back into the room and ask the subject  to report on how much  alcohol craving they are 
experiencing.  At 3 pm the research  assistant will walk back into the room and tell the 
participants  that they have five minutes  to consume the PD  of alcohol  and will then again 
leave the room,  and the PD period will  commence.  
 
b. Priming dose (PD) period: The PD of alcohol that is provided at  3 pm will  contain a dose 
of 80 proof alcohol designed to raise blood alcohol levels  to 0.03 mg% of alcohol, and  
subjects will have 5 minutes  to drink it. The purpose of the PD is to provide a standard  
dose for evaluating the effects  of medications  on the responses to a standard drink of 
alcohol and to model a “lapse” situation.  
 
c. Absorption Period  and Ratings of Ethanol Effects: A 50-minute absorption  period will  
follow during which the subjective and physiological effects  of this priming  dose of 
alcohol in combination  with memantine will  be monitored. Using  this procedure, we  will 
be able to closely  monitor changes in subjective effects  (alcohol craving, 
stimulation/sedation) during the rising  and falling limbs of  the blood alcohol  curve. 
 
d. Alcohol 
self-administration  (SA) periods: Following  the PD, participants  will be exposed 
to three one-hour SA  periods designed  to model a “relapse” situation.  During each SA 
period they will be permitted  to drink up to four alcoholic drinks designed to raise BALs  
by 0.015 mg% of alcohol, or to receive cash (equivalent to the  price of each drink that is 
not consumed).  The first SA period will begin at 4 pm, when  the research  assistant will 
take 4 prepared  drinks into the room  along with  a "tab" sheet worth $12. The participant  
will be informed that  these 4 drinks will  be available to him/her for the next 60 minutes  
(i.e., until 5 pm).  S/he can choose either to drink or to keep  the money; each drink will  
cost $3. For example, if  the participant  chooses to drink only one drink in the next one 
hour, s/he will  earn $9. The money will be given  to them the next morning before they 
leave the hospital.  The second and  third SA periods will  begin at 5 pm and  6 pm, 
respectively,  and will be similar to the SA  period. Thus, participants  can choose to  
consume up to 12 additional  drinks over this 3-hour period or to receive up to $36 to take  
home the next morning. 
 
e. Beverage content  and mixers:  The YNHH Investigational  Pharmacy  will calculate the 
alcohol dose for each  participant.  In the priming  drink, the dose will  be designed to raise 
blood alcohol  levels to 0.03 mg%  and will be based on the formula specified by Watson 
(1989) which takes into account  gender, weight,  and age of the subject. The subsequent  
drinks provided in the SD  blocks are designed  to raise BAL by 0.015 mg% each,  using the 
same formula.  The alcohol doses will be delivered to the HRU unit and any unused doses 
will be returned to the  pharmacy.  
 
Alcohol
ic beverages  administered  during this study will consist  of 1 part 80 proof liquor 
of the subject's  choosing to 3 parts  mixer chosen from a selection of equicaloric,  
noncaffeinated, non- carbonated drinks. The research assistant will prepare the drinks 
Page 18 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
using the alcohol  doses prepared by the YNHH pharmacy.  Participants  would have 
already chosen their mixers on an  earlier day. Specifically,  they will be asked to choose 
two mixers and choice of alcohol  (vodka, rum  etc.) from a list that will be provided  to 
them at the intake appointment. Based  on our previous experience,  we have found that 
subjects prefer being offered a choice of alcoholic beverages  and mixers, thereby  
providing a closer approximation to their own drinking experiences.  The pharmacy  will 
prepare 2 syringes  (5cc each) of the specified liquor(s) and  deliver them to the HRU the 
morning of or the day before the subject’s ADP#1. The liquors  will be mixed with the 
subject’s chosen mixers, same ratio as drinking session (e.g. 1 part liquor to 3 parts  
mixer). The subject  will sample each  drink once settled into  their room and  will be 
instructed  to swish it around in their mouth and  then spit it out. Once the subject  has made 
their selection,  we’ll call the pharmacy  to confirm their choice.  Frozen plastic cubes will  
be used to chill each drink without diluting  them and the prepared  drinks will be  covered 
with saran wrap to avoid any evaporation of alcohol during the drinking period. Drinks 
will be prepared ten minutes prior to each drinking hour. 
 
f. Assessments during and after the three choice periods: During the second, third and 
fourth hour of the laboratory session, drinking behavior will  be videotaped for later 
analysis, and craving and stimulation/sedation will be assessed  every thirty minutes. The 
range of assessments,  however, is limited to avoid interfering  with the evaluation  of 
drinking behavior.  In order to monitor blood alcohol levels  we will draw three ml of 
blood from  the subjects  every 10 minutes  during the first  hour (i.e., at 2:10, 2:20, 2:30, 
2:40, and 2:50). After the priming dose, blood draws  (3 ml) for blood alcohol 
determination will  occur every 60 minutes  (i.e., at 4, 5, 6, 7, and  8 pm), regardless  of 
whether the participant chooses an  alcoholic beverage.  This frequency of assessments 
provides a sensitive assessment  of blood alcohol levels (as was demonstrated in our 
naltrexone study) without unduly disturbing the subject’s drinking behavior. These 
changes can then be correlated  to the subjective changes  produced by  alcohol at  these 
same time points. 
 
  
 
Table 1 
 
PERIOD  TIMING  PROCEDURES  
ADP 10 am Breath alcohol levels, AUQ, YCS, TLFB, SAFTEE,  CADSS, Vitals 
Administer last doses of medications  
 11 am Approach  Avoidance Task, Impulsivity tasks; Self report and Laboratory  
measures 
 12 pm Lunch and Smoke Break for smokers  
 1 pm Insertion of IV for blood alcohol draws 
 2 pm Start of baseline; AUQ, YCS, BAES, Vitals; Smoke break  for smokers 
 2:30 pm AUQ, YCS, BAES, Vitals 
 2:45pm YCS 
 2:50 pm Alcohol cue exposure to preparation  of priming drink (PD) 
 2:59 pm YCS 
 3 pm Priming dose period: Instruct participant  to consume  PD (0.03g/dl) in five 
minutes 
Page 19 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
 
 3:10 pm Blood alcohol, AUQ, YCS, BAES 
 3:20 pm Blood alcohol, AUQ, YCS, Vitals 
 3:30 pm Blood alcohol, AUQ, YCS, BAES 
 3:40 pm Blood alcohol, AUQ, Vitals 
 3:50 pm Blood alcohol, AUQ, YCS, BAES 
 4 pm 
First tray 1st Self-administration  (SA) period:  Bring in first tray of 4 drinks (each 
designed to raise BAL by .015 g/dl) and  drinking tab ($12); Instruct 
participants  on choice  of drinks versus money. 
 4:30 pm AUQ, YCS, BAES 
 5 pm 
Second tray Blood alcohol, AUQ, BAES, Vitals @ 4:55 pm 
2nd SA period: Remove first  tray and bring in second tray:  Present participant  
with 4 drinks (eac h will raise BAL by .015 g/dl) and drinking tab ($12); 
repeat instructions  
 5:30 pm AUQ, YCS, BAES 
 6 pm 
Third tray Blood alcohol, AUQ, BAES, Vitals @ 5:55 pm 
2nd SA period: Remove second  tray and bring in third  tray: Present 
participant  with 4 drinks (each will raise BAL by .015 g/dl) and drinking tab 
($12); repeat instructions  
 6:30 pm AUQ, YCS, BAES 
 7 pm Blood alcohol, AUQ, BAES, YCS, Vitals 
 7:30 pm Dinner 
 8 pm Breath Alcohol, AUQ, YCS, BAES, Vitals 
 9 pm Breath Alcohol, AUQ, YCS, BAES, Vitals 
 10 pm Breath alcohol, AUQ, YCS, BAES, Vitals 
Discharge  7 am Breath alcohol, AUQ, YCS, Vitals, CADSS, BPRS 
 
g. End of alcohol self-administration  period and overnight  stay in HRU:  The alcohol 
administration  portion of the study will end at 7:05 pm. Following this, breath alcohol 
levels and craving will be assessed  every 30 minutes until the subject's  breath alcohol level 
falls below 0.02. Participants  will then be given dinner and  will stay in the hospital 
overnight. This  overnight  stay will serve multiple  purposes: 1) to ensure that subjects  do 
not continue to drink  following  exposure to alcohol in this paradigm,  2) to ensure that  they 
are safe and  are not discharged  while still intoxicated,  and 3) to motivate subjects to drink 
during the session by ensuring that they do not have an  opportunity to have access  to more 
alcohol later that same day.   The next morning participants  will be assessed  using craving 
and withdrawal  measurements,  they will provided with breakfast,  and they will then be 
discharged  between 8 and 9 am.  
 
Study Medication  (Naltrexone/Memantine/NAC) Administration  and Stabilization:  6-8 Days  
All subjects will receive naltrexone treatment and  be randomly assigned to receive either  
memantine 20 mg, NAC 2400 mg  or placebo  for seven days as outpatients. The randomization 
schedule will  be generated  by the Data Management  and Biostatistics  Component  statisticians  
and provided to the pharmacist. They will take the final dose of 50 mg  NTX + 20 mg MEM or 
2400 mg NAC or placebo, when  they will complete  the alcohol self-administration  paradigm 
described  below. Doses  of naltrexone and memantine  will be tapered up as follows 
Page 20 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
 
GROUP Day 
1 Day 
2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 Days 6-8 (up 
to 13) 
Naltrexone 25 
mg 50 
mg 50 mg 50 mg 50 mg 50 mg 
Memantine/  
NAC/placebo  0/0/0 
mg 0/0/0 
mg 5/600/0 
mg 10/1200/0  
mg 20/1200/0  
mg 20/2400/0  
mg 
 
Subjects will come to our clinic each  day to take their medications  at 10 am. During these 
appointments  they will complete  assessments.  These procedures  will 1) ensure compliance with  
medication administration,  2) monitor side effects  during naltrexone and  
memantine/nacetylecysteine dose escalation,  and 3) monitor tolerability  of naltrexone, 
memantine,  and NAC co-administration.  During this period, subjects  will be asked to continue  
normal drinking behavior similar to  the procedures  used in our preliminary studies.  
 
In the event  that a subject cannot come to the clinic daily, other arrangements will  be made, such as 
giving the participant  more than one dose of their medication  at a time and using a daily  phone call  
as both a reminder  to take the medication  and as a means to monitor adverse events. We will allow 
this up until the final two doses of medication  prior to the ADP.  This arrangement  will be 
determined  by the investigator  and her staff based on the participant’s other  obligations and 
compliance. 
 
Follow-up Appointments  
Subjects will participate in a one-week follow-up appointment during which drinking over the 
past week will be determined using TLFB techniques and  any remaining  adverse events will be 
monitored. At  this appointment a brief motivational intervention will be provided to encourage 
the subject  to address  their alcohol problem and  an immediate referral  to treatment will be made 
if subjects are interested.  Even though the subjects  participating in this study  are not seeking 
treatment for their drinking, we  feel that their participation  in this project provides us with a 
“teaching  moment” to address  their drinking behavior. We have found that similar  brief advice 
resulted in decreases in alcohol-drinking behavior and increased motivation  to quit drinking (Sinha 
et al., 1997). As previously  done, this intervention will be based on the principles  of Miller’s 
Motivational  Enhancement  Therapy (MET) (Miller et  al., 1992). We will provide subjects with 
personalized feedback  regarding their physical exam and laboratory  findings, and on the influence 
of drinking on their health. We will also review with them the potential benefits of quitting 
drinking. If interested,  subjects will also be given  the option of participating  in one of our alcohol 
treatment studies. We will also provide them with the NIAAA brochure “Rethinking  Drinking.”  
 
Subjects will also participate in a one-month follow-up appointment  during which  information 
about their drinking  since their prior appointment  will be assessed  using the Time -Line Follow- 
Back Interview.  This interview provides us with  another opportunity to provide subjects  with 
additional information  about treatment if they are interested.  This data will also be used to 
evaluate the risks and benefits for subjects  participating in this protocol (O'Malley  et al., 2002; 
Anton et al., 2004). 
 
Assessments  
a) Socio-demographic/General  Information: At  intake, demographic data, medical  history, and 
family psychiatric history will be assessed  with interviews  and self-report forms that provide 
data on age, race, socioeconomic status,  marital status, educational and  occupational levels, 
and significant medical history. These are adapted  from previous diagnostic and clinical  
studies at this center. 
Page 21 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
b) SCID: The Structured  Clinical Interview for  DSM-IV (SCID)  (First et al.,1996) will  be used 
to determine psychiatric  diagnoses.  This interview assesses DSM -IV current and  lifetime 
psychiatric diagnoses  for anxiety,  mood, psychotic, alcohol  and substance use,  somatoform, 
and eating disorders. 
c) Psychiatric  Family History by Interview,  the FHAM:  As a source of pedigree information,  the 
psychiatric status  (including substance abuse/dependence, mood disorder,  ASPD, etc.) of all 
first- and second-degree biological  relatives will be obtained from  each subject (including 
parents) using the family  history method (FHAM-Family History Assessment  Module) 
developed by  COGA. DSM-IV criteria will be used to diagnose  all biological  family 
members. The FHAM is a reliable method  for obtaining family history information  and the 
specificity  and sensitivity  of the FHAM  for the diagnosis  of substance dependence is quite  
good (Rice et  al., 1995). We  will administer the FHAM  in three steps.  First, the structure of 
the family  pedigree is drawn and reviewed with the informant. Next, psychiatric screening  
questions are asked about all  relatives in the pedigree.  Then, based  on the responses to the 
screening  questions, symptom checklists  are completed  for each first-degree relative,  spouse, 
or other relative well  known to the informant.  
d) Time-Line Follow-Back Assessment  Method: This interview procedure will  be used to obtain 
quantity/frequency alcohol consumption  data for each  day during the 90-day period prior to 
the study, during the outpatient stabilization  period, and  during the three- month follow-up 
(Sobell and Sobell, 1992). Subjects  are given  a blank calendar covering the time interval to  
be re-constructed  and are asked  to reconstruct  retrospectively  their drinking behavior over 
that interval. The process  is facilitated  by establishing  anchor points (e.g., holidays, 
anniversaries,  major national events,  etc.). It can be scored to provide the number of days on 
which various levels of consumption occurred.  The time-line method  has good test -retest 
reliability  and good validity  for verifiable  events. It has been used in numerous studies  to 
compare pre- to post-treatment drinking. 
e) Craving Measures:  
Alcohol Urge Questionnaire (AUQ) (Bohn et al., 1995): The AUQ is an 8 item questionnaire, 
derived from a larger 49 item "Questionnaire of Alcohol Urges,"  that assesses desire for a 
drink, expectation  of positive effect  from drinking, and  inability to avoid drinking if alcohol 
was available.  The AUQ is a reliable and  valid scale for the measurement  of self-reported 
alcohol urges, and scores have been shown to be strongly related to alcohol  dependence 
severity (as measured  by ADS scores) and to cognitive preoccupation with alcohol. Its 
brevity and time frame for ratings (i.e., right now) makes it suitable for administration  during 
the alcohol  drinking period. 
Yale Craving Scale (YCS):  We have been collaborating  with Linda Bartoshuk to develop this 
craving measure based on psychophysiological  scaling methods. In her work on individual  
differences  in the ability to taste bitterness, Dr. Bartoshuk and colleagues  (Marks et al., 1988) 
used magnitude -matching procedures  (Stevens and Marks, 1980) in which participants  
matched the intensity of perceived  bitterness to sounds. By  doing so, the problem of differences  
in how labels (e.g., very strong) are applied was circumvented by making the            
comparison to a standard that  is unrelated to taste. The resulting scale, Labeled Magnitude  
Scale (gLMS) (Bartoshuk  , 2002), has been extended to measure hedonic ratings for foods, and  
we have adapted it for rating craving for tobacco and alcohol. It is not subject  to the ceiling 
effects that often occur in craving research (Sayette et al., 2000). We have been collecting  
craving data using this scale in our ongoing projects and  the findings  from this scale have 
been found to parallel  those obtained using the Alcohol Urge questionnaire. A significant  
advantage of this scale is that following completion  of baseline training to  match perceived 
intensity of craving to the perceived  brightness  from the sun, each  assessment timepoint only 
consists of a single visual  analog scale of craving,  making it very easy to administer. 
Page 22 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
f) Clinical Institute Withdrawal  Assessment  for Alcohol- Revised (CIWA-Ar): This is a modified, 
shorter version of the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Scale for Alcohol  which is equally  
efficient and reliable as  the original scale without a significant loss in accuracy.  The CIWA - 
Ar is a 10 item scale that  contains alcohol  withdrawal signs and symptoms  that include 
nausea/vomiting, tremor,  headache,  anxiety, agitation, orientation, sweating,  and auditory, 
visual, and  tactile disturbances.  This tool often guides the clinical  management of  alcohol 
(Sullivan et al., 1991) withdrawal (for a review,  see Saitz  and O'Malley,  1997) and  is used 
extensively  in research on alcohol  withdrawal  (Sellers et al., 1991; Saitz  et al., 1994). 
g) Psychiatric and  mood symptoms:  We  will assess changes in these symptoms during Days 1- 
13 using: 
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS ) (Chapman  et al.,1980):  A clinician-rated 
general assessment  measure used  to measure psychosis (positive symptoms),  emotional  or 
motivational deficits (negative symptoms),  and thought disorder. 
Clinician–Administered  Dissociative States  Scale (CADSS) (Bremner et  al., 1998): A 19 
item self-report questionnaire with  eight observer ratings designed to assess perceptual,  
behavioral, and  attentional  changes that occur during dissociative experiences  from NMDA 
receptor antago nists (Krystal et al., 1994). 
h) Intellectual  Functioning: In  order to obtain an  assessment  of general  intellectual functioning 
and a reference point for other cognitive assessments, we will  complete the two subtest short- 
form of Block Design and Information from  the WAIS -III (Weschler,  1997). This  
combination  correlates  at .87 with the Full Scale IQ. 
i) Impulsivity  and Automatic  Motivational  Measures:  Change from occasional  to compulsive  
drug use may be less dependent  on positive reinforcement  and more dependent on implicit 
processes that automatically  evaluate the motivational  significance of the alcohol cue for affect 
regulation. Such processes  may include “fast” impulsive  responses which  automatically  orient 
the individual  to either approach or avoid the stimulus and “slower,”  more reflective processes 
involving conscious  deliberation  and emotion regulation. We will assess using impulsive  
responding  using measures which encompass several  clinically  relevant core components 
such as rapidity of response, degr ee of planning, and disregard  of future consequences.  
Additionally,  we will also measure implicit alcohol -affect associations  as well as individual 
variations in the ability  of incentive stimuli to control behavior. We will evaluate changes  in 
impulsivity  and implicit alcohol  associations  at baseline and  then after each  medication  
period. Pavlovian to  Instrumental transfer task  will be assessed at baseline only. 
j) Padua Inventory (Sanavio,  1988): consists of 60 items describing  common obsessional and  
compulsive behavior and allows  investigation  of the topography of such problems in normal 
and clinical symptoms.  
k) Chronic Stress  Scale (CSS) (Turner et  al., 1995): This  measure is used to assess a person’s 
perception  of ongoing and enduring sources of stress in their life conditions.  The chronic 
stress scale (CSS) includes  a list of 51 items about common life conditions  and situations  
(e.g., financial  issues, work, marriage and  relationship, parental,  family, social life). The 
interviewer  reads each item aloud and asks the respondent to reply with not true (0),  
somewhat  true (1), or very  true (2). 
 
Self Reports: 
a) The Behavioral Inhibition  System/Behavioral Activation System (BIS/BAS) (Carver and  
White, 1994; Gray,  1981) will  assess behavioral activation  and inhibition, which have been  
proposed as  biological systems underlying behavior and  affect. This measure has  been shown 
to have good convergent, discriminant,  and predictive validity in which  it measures 
sensitivity  rather than the person’s  typical experience.  The BIS will be used to tap  the 
Page 23 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
component of impulsivity  related to decreased  sensitivity  to the negative consequences  of 
behavior. 
b) Barratt Impulsiveness  Scale (BIS)(version  11) (Patton et  al.,1995) : This 30 item self- 
report instrument  provides a trait measure of impulsiveness  and yields four scores:  a total 
score, nonplanning activity, cognitive impulsivity,  and motor impulsivity.  Cronbach alpha 
coefficients  range from  .79-.83. 
c) Short Inventory of Problems  (SIP) [153a]: A brief version  of the Drinker  Inventory of 
Consequences  (DrInC), this is a 15-item test that measures physical, social, intrapersonal,  
impulsive,  and interpersonal  consequences of alcohol consumption.  Subjects indicate 
whether each  item occurred in the previous 12 months. 
d) Self Rating of Effects of Alcohol (SRE) [153b]: This 5-item self-report contains questions 
related to the number of drinks required for up to four different  effects early in the drinking 
career. 
e) Alcohol Expectancy Questionnaire (AEQ)  [153d]: This 68-item questionnaire is an 
empirically derived self-report form designed  to measure the degree to which individuals 
expect alcohol to produce a variety  of general and specific positive effects.  
f) Negative Alcohol  Expectancy (NAEQ) [153e]: This 60-item self-report provides assesses  
the current level of motivation  to restrain/stop  drinking and the constituent  components of the 
current level of motivation.  The NAEQ  also identifies negative expectancies  that may serve 
as a deterrent  and represent motivation  to stop or restrain drinking. 
g) Sensation Seeking  Scale (SSS) [153f]: 40 -item self report  measures  individual differences  
in optimal levels  of stimulation  and arrival. 
h) Depression  Anxiety Stress  Scale (DASS) [153g]: This 42-item self-report which measures 
the negative emotional states of  depression, anxiety  and stress. 
g) Biphasic Alcohol Effects  Scale (BAES) (Martin et al., 1993): This  14 item self-report, 
adjective rating scale will be used to measure the stimulant  and sedative effects  of alcohol 
during the priming  dose on Day 7. This  instrument  has been found to be sensitive to 
memantine and  naltrexone's  effects on alcohol intoxication (pilot date, Kranzler et  al., 2000; 
Reynolds et  al., 2004; Swift et  al., 1994). 
h) Childhood Trauma  Questionnaire ( Bernstein,  et al. 1994): This 28-item self-report 
inventory that provides brief,  reliable, and valid screening  for histories of abuse and  neglect. 
It inquires about five types of maltreatment - emotional, physical,  and sexual abuse, and  
emotional and  physical neglect. Also included is a  3 item Minimiziati on/Denial  scale for 
detecting false-negative trauma reports. 
i) Drinking Motives Questionnaire (DMQ )(Cooper et  al. 1992): contains 15 reasons why 
people might  be motivated to drink alcoholic beverages.  Participants  rate on a 4- point scale 
how frequently each of the 15 listed  reasons motivate them  to drink alcoholic  beverages.  The 
measure yields three scale scores  reflecting  different motives for drinking alcohol. 
j) Brief Self-Control Scale (Tangney et al., 2004): provides a rapid brief assessment  of self- 
control and  regulation. 
k) Sensitivity to Punishment and Sensitivity to Reward Questionnaire (SPSRQ )(Torrubia et  al., 
2001): consists of 48 yes-no items that included questions  about habitual behaviours in  
response to cues of punishment, frustrative non -reward and novel stimuli as well as stimuli 
related to reward  and approach -related tendencies.  
l) The Self-Report Habit Index (SRHI) (Verplanken & Orbell, 2003).: a 12-item index of habit 
strength developed on the basis  of features  of habit; that  is, a history of repet ition, 
automaticity  (lack of control and  awareness,  efficiency),  and expressing  identity. 
m) UPPS Impulsive Behavior Scale (Whiteside & Lynam, 2003): a 45- item self-report 
questionnaire which distinguishes four facets  of impulsivity:  urgency, lack  of premeditation,  
Page 24 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
lack of perseverance,  and sensation-seeking. It is scored on a 4-point scale from Strongly 
Agree to Strongly Disagree.  
 
Laboratory Measures:  
a) BART (Lejuez et al., 2002): This is a computerized  behavioral task  which measures risk- 
taking propensity by having the subject press  a button to inflate a balloon. The more the 
balloon is inflated, the greater the reward,  however, if the balloon pops, the reward  is 
eliminated.  The subject  must balance potential  gain against potential risk of loss. 
b) Experientia l Discounting Task (EDT) (Reynolds  and Schiffbauer,  2004): This delay- 
discounting task exposes participants  to choice consequences  during test administration.  The 
EDT involves  multiple blocks of choices,  one for each  delay. Choices are made between  a 
standard amount that is delivered immediately  and is certain and a probable amount that is 
delayed and uncertain. The EDT is sensitive to various levels  of alcohol  dosing (i.e., between 
0 and 0.8g/kg) (Reynolds et al., 2006). 
c) Alcohol approach-avoidance task (AAT) (Wiers et al., 2009): We  chose to use the AAT to 
assess automatic alcohol -affect associations  since it has been used to show that heavy  
drinkers with  a G allele of the OPRM1  gene have stronger automatic approach tendencies  for 
alcohol. The AAT is an alcohol variety of the Approach  Avoidance task  developed by  Rinck 
and Becker (2007) and  measures approach bias for alcohol related stimuli. The subject  
pushes or pulls computer presented  stimuli according to a content irrelevant  feature, the tilt 
of the stimulus. Pushing  the joystick  gradually  decreases  stimulus size,  while pulling 
gradually  increases stimulus size.  The zooming feature also  generates a sense of approach  or 
avoidance (Neumann,  2000). Reinout  Wiers will provide consultation  to our group on the 
AAT. 
d) The Implicit Association  Test (IA T) (Greenwald  et al., 2003): This task measures implicit 
affective asssociations  with the alcohol. Using a computerized  sorting task, individuals 
simultaneously classify two target conditions,  ‘alcohol’ (ie.,  wine, beer, pint, vodka, whiskey, 
wine cooler) versus  ‘soft drink’ (coca cola,  juice, orange soda,  root beer, sparkling water, 7- 
up) , and two affective categories  relevant to drinking, ‘pleasant’ (ie. talkative,  excited, 
cheerful, happy, funny, lively),  versus ‘unpleasant’ (i.e., nauseous, listless,  awful, miserable,  
sad, annoying).  IAT effects will be calculated  with the D600  scoring algorithm.  Internal 
consistency for biploar  alcohol-related affective IAT was .79 in (Houben, in press); the 
bipolar IAT predicted  drinking above explicit measures and outperformed five other variants 
of the IAT(e.g., unipolar positive, uniplor negative  IAT). 
e) A Pavlovian  Instrumental  Transfer Test (PIT) will be completed  to examine  individual 
variation in the ability  of incentive sti muli to control behavior. This task will use a sucrose  
reinforcer,  and so measure PIT  as a general  tendency and not an alcohol specific tendency. 
Prior studies  have explored the neural mechanisms  of PIT with  monetary  (Talmi et al., 2008) 
and juice reinforcement  (Bray et al., 2008). PIT involves three distinct training phases: (1) a 
Pavlovian  phase, (2) an instrumental learning phase and  (3) a transfer phase. Multiple trials  
occur in each phase. 
g) Ratings of Drinking Behavior During the Alcohol Self -Administra tion Period: Subjects 
will be videotaped during the alcohol  self-administration  portion of the study  on Day 6. 
These videotapes will  be rated by two independent raters who will indicate the onset and  
offset of each sip of alcohol. Using  this data, dependent measures will be constructed  
including time until the first  sip and average time to consume each  drink. 
h) Blood Alcohol Levels: Blood samples will be drawn  to measure plasma levels of  blood 
alcohol (BAC) during the priming dose and  during the alcohol  self-administration  paradigm 
on day 6. Blood samples  will be stored at -4°C and will be analyzed  using gas 
chromatographic techniques  at the HRU  Laboratory.  
Page 25 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
i) Psychophysiological Measures:  These will  include heart rate and blood pressure monitored  
using a Critikon  Dinamap  while skin temperature will be measured  using Yellow Springs 
Instruments  4600 precision thermometer.  The cuff of the Dinamap  will be on the subject's  
dominant arm while the probe of will be attached  to the middle  finger of the subject's  non- 
dominant arm.  These data will be further used to examine the safety of using the medication  
combination  during alcohol self -administration.  
 
4. Statistical  Considerations: Describe the statistical analyses  that support the study design. 
 
All outcomes  will be summarized  descriptively  and assessed for normality  prior to analysis  using 
normal probability plots and Kolmogorov  test statistics.  Transformations  or nonparametric 
analyses will be performed  as necessary.  In the mixed models described  below, the correlati on 
between repeated measures on an  individual will  be modeled using random effects  and/or 
structured  variance-covariance matrices.  The best-fitting variance-covariance structure will  be 
determined  by information  criterion.  The mixed -effects approach is advantageous in that it is 
unaffected  by randomly missing  data and allows greater flexibility  in modeling the correlation  
structure of repeated-measures data (Gueorguieva and Krystal, 2004). In the models  below, we  
will test for order effects,  although any such effects  should be greatly  minimized with the 
inclusion of the baseline session. All tests will be two-sided and considered  statistically  
significant  at alpha=.05. Significance levels  for secondary  comparisons will  be adjusted  for 
multiple tests using the Bonferroni correction,  basing the adjustment  on the number of 
conceptually  related statistical tests within each hypothesis. 
 
Aim 1: Total number of drinks consumed during the self-administration  period will be compared  
among treatment conditions  using linear mixed models with treatment (NTX vs. NTX+MEM/NAC)  
included as a within-subjects factor. In these models, we will also consider baseline drinking, as 
assessed by using the 90 day TLFB obtained at intake, as a potential covariate. Non-significant  
covariates will be dropped for parsimony. A significant treatment  effect, where total  number of 
drinks is reduced during combination  NTX+MEM/NAC  treatment  compared  to NTX alone, will 
be supportive of our hypothesis. Secondary measures of alcohol -drinking typology such as 
average time to consume  each drink and inter-sip interval will be analyzed  using similar models  
as described  above, whereas time to first drink during  the ad-lib drinking period will be analyzed  
using survival models with subject-specific frailties to account for correlation of the repeated 
survival outcomes within  individuals.  
 
Aim 2: Scores on the
 Yale Craving Scale will  be the primary outcome in this aim and will 
represent the dependent variable in a linear  mixed model evaluating combination  treatment 
effects of NTX and  MEM/NAC on alcohol craving. The model will  include treatment (NTX vs, 
NTX+MEM/NAC)  and time (see study time points, Table 1) as within-subjects explanatory  factors, 
and random subjects effects. The interaction  between treatment and time will be modeled and 
interpreted  using graphical displays and appropriate post -hoc tests. We anticipate a significant  
treatment by time interaction  explained  by greater reductions in craving  over time  among 
combination  NTX+MEM/NAC  compared  to NTX a lone. A secondary  measure of craving,  the 
Alcohol Urge Questionnaire,  will be analyzed  using the same model described  above. We will 
also explore the influence NTX vs. NTX+MEM/NAC  on YCS alcohol craving in response to the 
alcohol cue exposure just prior to the start of the priming  drink period using a similar model.  
 
Aim 3: Alcohol-induced stimulation,  measured  by the Biphasic Alcohol Effects  Scale (BAES),  
will be analyzed  using the same model  described  for alcohol craving in Aim 2. A significant 
treatment by time interaction,  explained  by reduced alcohol  stimulation  to due to combination  
Page 26 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
NTX+MEM/NAC  treatment,  compared  to NTX alone, will be supportive of our hypothesis. A 
secondary  analysis will conduct similar comparisons  on the sedation scores obtained using the 
BAES. 
 
Exploratory Aims  
Exploratory analyses will evaluate the quantity and quality of adverse events observed with 
NTX+MEM/NAC  treatment.   We will also explore the effects  of NTX and  NTX+MEM/NAC  
treatment on the reaction  time outcomes  of Implicity Association  Task and the alcohol 
Approach-Avoidance Task, as  well as the behavioral and  self-report impulsivity  measures.  
Exploratory analyses will also examine impulsive propensities and  responses on the PIT task, as 
predictors  of treatment response. We will  also evaluate potential  correlations  between the 
behavioral effects  of alcohol and  impulsivity  measures as well as the presence of glutamate  
(STEP/FYN) and  opioid (OPRM1) gene polymorphisms. 
 
Power Analysis 
This is a pilot trial and we will use the data to determine  initial tolerability  and effect size estimates 
for future trials. We will recruit a total of 30 completers  in this trail, 10 in each group. 
 
 
 
1. Identification  of Drug, Device or Biologic: What is (are) the name( s) of the drug(s), device(s)  
or biologic(s) being used? Identify whether FDA approval has been granted and for what 
indication(s). 
 
Memantine,  or 1-amino-3, 5-dimethyladamantane hydrochloride, is a  moderate affinity 
noncompetitive NMDA antagonist with  voltage-dependent binding characteristics.  FDA 
approved as  a pharmacotherapy  for the treatment  of moderate to severe Alzheimer’s  disease. 
 
Naltrex
one is an FDA approved drug that is used in the treatment  of alcoholism and opioid 
addiction. 
 
N- acetyl cysteine is FDA approved for use as  a mucolytic  agent for bronchopulmonary disorders 
(e.g. Grandjean  et al., 2000) and  as an oral or intravenous antidote to treat acetaminophen  
poisoning (Smilkstein  et al., 1988).  NAC  is a precursor of glutathione synthesis and  is available 
worldwide in intravenous, oral  and nebulizer forms and is also sold over the counter in health 
food stores. 
 
All protocols which utilize a drug, device or biologic not approved by,  but regulated by, the FDA 
must provide the following  information: Not applicable to  this research  project 
 
The new agent being  used in this protocol, NAC,  is freely available over the counter in health food  
stores and has been used off-label safely for a wide  number of indications at  the doses  proposed. 
Therefore,  we do not feel we would  need an IND for this protocol. 
 
i. What is the  Investigational  New Drug (IND) or Investigational  Device Exemption (IDE)  
number assigned by the FDA? 
ii. For IDE’s: Did the FDA approve this  IDE as a Category  A (experimental/investigational)  
or as a Category B (non-experimental/investigational)?  
iii. Who holds  the IND or IDE? SECTION VI: RESEARCH  INVOLVING  DRUGS, DEVICES, BIOLOGICS  & PLACEBOS  
Page 27 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
The clinical  investigation  of a drug product that  is lawfully marketed in the United  States may be 
exempt from the requirements  for filing  an IND. If there is no IND and an exemption is being 
sought, complete the following:  Exempt 
 
i. Is the intention  of the investigation  to report to the FDA as a well-controlled  study in 
support of a new indication for use or to be used to support any  other significant change in  
the labeling for the drug? Yes No 
ii. If the drug that is undergoing investigation is lawfully  marketed as a prescription drug 
product, is the  intention of the investigation  to support a significant change in the 
advertising for the product? Yes No 
iii. Does the investigation  involve a route of administration  or dosage level  or use in 
populations or other factor that  significantly  increases the risks (or decreases the 
acceptability  of the risks)  associated  with the use of  the drug product? Yes No 
iv. Will the investigation  be conduc ted in compliance with  the requirements  for institutional 
(HIC) review and  with the requirements for informed consent of the FDA regulations  (21 
CFR Part 50  and 21 CFR Part  56)?      Yes       No 
v. Will the investigation  be conducted in  compliance with  the requirements  regarding  
promotion  and charging for investigational drugs? Yes No 
 
2. Background  Information: Provide a description  of previous  human use, known risks,  and data 
addressing dosage(s),  interval(s),  route(s) of administration,  and any other facto rs that might 
influence risks. If this is the  first time this drug is being administered  to humans, include relevant 
data on animal models. 
 
Memanti
ne has been used in the treatment  of patients with Parkinson’s  disease [48], dementia 
[49-51] and  neurogenic bladder  dysfunction in spasticity  [52].  The drug was also found to be 
stimulating  or vigilance -enhancing in comatose patients [53]. Memantine  induces open-channel 
blockade of NMDA receptors  and has been observed to be partially  trapped in NMDA receptor  
channels. There have been a number of studies  of memantine in healthy  volunteers. Memantine 
has been shown to increase intracortical  inhibition  and reduce intracortical  facilitation  [54] and 
found to have no significant effects  on mood, attention or immedia te and delayed verbal and 
visuospatial memory  [55]. Memantine has  vigilance -enhancing effects in health elderly  
volunteers [56]  but no effects  on a series of perceptual  and psychomotor tasks, including 
temporal discrimination,  reaction time, critical flicker fusion frequency and signal detection  [57]. 
Memantine is completely  absorbed from the  GI tract and maximum plasma  concentrations  occur 
between 3-8 hours after oral administration.   It is 100% bioavailable after oral administration  and 
has been shown to have a linear pharmacokinetic profile that is not influenced by  age, sex or 
food (Forest  Labs, data on file).  Approximately 80% of the agent circulates  as unchanged parent  
drug, the mean terminal elimination  half-life is 60-100 hours and  it is eliminated  renally [43]. 
Memantine was  well tolerated  in randomized  double-blind, placebo -controlled  trials for patients 
with moderately  severe to severe dementia,  moderate to severe Alzheimer’s  disease as  well as 
vascular dementia [43, 58, 59].  The most common adverse events observed in clinical  trials are 
diarrhea, insomnia,  dizziness,  headache,  constipation , and con fusion [60]. In patients with severe 
renal impairment or hepatic problems the use of memantine  has not been systematically  
evaluated  and is not recommended.  
 
Naltrexone,  an opioid antagonist, is widely used in the treatment of opioid addiction and  more 
recently has been found to be beneficial  in the treatment of alcoholism.  Numerous  studies have 
found naltrexone use to be safe and rarely associated with toxicity or severe side effects.   The 
most frequent reported side effects are gastrointestinal in nature.   Those include epigastric pain, 
Page 28 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
nausea and  vomiting.   Other, less frequent side effects  include nervousness, dizziness,  
headaches,  blurred vision, low energy,  fatigue, sleepiness,  joint and muscle pain  and insomnia. 
Hepatotoxicity,  the most serious potential side effect, has been shown in studies using very high 
doses of naltrexone (1400 to 2100 mg per  week).  At the doses used in this study  naltrexone has 
not been reported to produce hepatotoxic effects.   However,  we will monitor liver function tests 
prior to the study and exclude individuals with evidence of significant hepatocellular injury 
(AST, ALT >3x normal established  in pregnant and nursing women, they will be excluded  from 
participation.  Naltrexone can  also precipitate or exacerbate opiate withdrawal,  as a results 
subjects with abuse or dependence on opiates will be excluded  from the study  on the basis of 
self-report and urine drug screens. 
 
Since naltrexone is an opiate antagonist,  alternative nonopioid methods  of analgesia can  be used. 
In an emergency  situation requiring opioids, the amount of opioids necessary  for analgesia may 
be greater than usual, and the resulting  respiratory  depression may  be deeper and  more 
prolonged.   As a result, a rapidly acting analgesic which  minimizes respiratory  depression is 
preferred and the amount of the analgesic administration  titrated to the needs of the patient in a 
setting equipped and staffed for cardiopulmonary resuscitation.   As a result, subjects will be 
given a card showing that they may be receiving  naltrexone.  This card will provide detailed  
information to medical  personnel  describing the special  precautions necessary  in the event  that 
the subject  should require pain  management.   In addition, this card  will have a code number on it 
that can be used to identify which medication  the subject  is on.  A phone number of the 
pharmacy  and for the physician  on call at the Connecticut  Mental Health Center will  be listed on 
the card in the event  of an emergency  in which it is necessary  to determine whether the subject is 
on active naltrexone.  
 
NAC (also known 
as Acetylcysteine)  has been safely used for several  decades in adults and 
children as  a long-term treatment for chronic bronchitis.  It has been found to be cost -effective to 
use and generally well tolerated with mild, most commonly  gastrointestinal  adverse effects.  This 
dose of NAC  (2400 mg) was observed  to be safe and tolerable in cocaine dependent participants 
(e.g. Larowe et  al., 2006). 
 
3. Source: 
a) Identify the source of the drug, device or biologic to be used. 
All study medications  will be purchased from appropriate vendors through the 
Investigational Pha rmacy of YNHH.  
 
b) Is the drug or device provided free of charge?  Yes No 
If yes, by whom? 
 
4. Preparation  and Use: Describe the method of preparation, storage, stability information, and  for 
parenteral  products, method of sterilization  and method of testing sterility and pyrogenicity.   NA 
 
5. Use of Placebo: x Not applicable  to this research  project 
This is not a treatment trial.   We need a placebo  condition to identify the individual versus 
combined  effects of naltrexone and  the glutamatergic  agents (memantine or NAC).  
 
Provide a justification  which addresses  the following:  
 
a. Describe the safety  and efficacy  of other available therapies  (if any). This is not a 
treatment trial or a treatment seeking  population of heavy  drinkers 
Page 29 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
b. State the maximum total length of time a participant may  receive placebo while on the 
study. 16 days 
c. Address the greatest  potential harm that may come to a participant  as a result of not 
receiving effective therapy  (immediate or delayed onset.) Not a treatment seeking 
population 
d. Describe the procedures  that are in place to safeguard  participants  receiving  placebo. Not 
a treatment  seeking population 
 
6. Use of Controlled  Substances:  
Will this research project involve the use of controlled  substances  in human subjects?  
Yes No See instructions  to view controlled  substance listings. 
 
If yes, is the use of the controlled substance considered:  
Therapeutic: The use of the controlled  substance,  within the context of the research, has the 
potential to benefit the research  participant.  
Non Therapeutic: Note, the use of a controlled  substance in a non therapeutic research  study 
involving human subjects may  require that  the investigator obtain a Laboratory Research 
License. Examples  include controlled  substances  used for basic imaging,  observation or 
biochemical studies or other non- therapeutic purposes. See Instructions for further information.  
 
7. Continuation  of Drug Therapy After Study  Closure Not applicable to  this project 
Are subjects  provided the opportunity to continue to receive the study drug(s) after the study has 
ended? Yes No 
If yes, describe the conditions under which  continued access  to study drug(s) may  apply as well 
as conditions for termination  of such access. 
 
 
 
1. Recruitment  Procedures: How will potential subjects be identified,  contacted and  recruited?  
Attach copies of any recruitment  materials that will be used. 
 
Flyers Internet/Web  Postings Radio 
Posters  Mass E-mail Solicitation  Telephone  
Letter Departmental/Center Website Television  
Medical Record Review Departmental/Center Research  Boards Newspaper  
Departmental/Center Newsletters  Web-Based Clinical Trial Registries  
Other (describe):  use of promotional materials in community (e.g., magnets) 
Clinicaltrials.gov  Registry (do not send  materials to HIC) 
 
1a.  Assessment of Current Health  Provider Relationship  for HIPAA Consideration:  
Does the Investigator or any member of the research  team have a direct  existing clinical 
relationship  with any potential subject? 
 
Yes, all subjects 
Yes, some of the subjects  
No 
If yes, describe the nature of this relationship. 
 
2. Subject Population  Provide a detailed  description  of the targeted  involvement of human  
subjects for this research project. SECTION  VII: HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Page 30 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
86 healthy heavy drinkers who  are not currently seeking treatment for their drinking behavior, 
between 21-55 years of age. 
 
3. Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria: What are the criteria  used to determine subject inclusion or 
exclusion? How will eligibility  be determined,  and by whom? 
Inclusion criteria:  
1)  Ages 21-55 
2) Able to read English at 6th grade level  or higher and to complete study evaluations  
3) Meet DSM-IV criteria  for alcohol  dependence or abuse (assessed  using the SCID)  
4) Family history criteria (assessed  using the FHAM;  see Assessment  section) 
Family history positive subjects : At least one first-degree relative with alcoholism as 
determined  by the FHAM 
Family history negative subjects :  No first degree relative with  alcoholism and  no 2nd degree 
relative with  alcoholism unless the participant  cannot answer details about the 2nd degree 
family member’s  drinking consequences on the  FHAM. 
(Average weekly  alcohol consumption of standard drinks of at  least 25-70 drinks for men  
and 20-65 drinks for  women) 
5) No more than 3 days  abstinence/week  in order to maximize  the likelihood that subjects will 
choose to drink during the laboratory sessions 
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1) Individuals who  are seeking  alcohol treatment  or have been in alcohol  treatment within  the 
past 6 months 
2) Current DSM-IV dependence  criteria for other substances, other than  nicotine 
3) Positive test results at more than  one baseline appointment on urine drug  screens conducted 
for opiates,  cocaine, benzodiazepines, and  barbiturates  
4) Regular use of psychoactive drugs including anxiolytics  and antidepressants 
5) Psychotic or otherwise severely  psychiatrically disabled; scores above 2 SD of the mean  on 
the Wisconsin Psychosis Proneness scale 
6) Medical conditions that  would contraindicate the consumption of alcohol  
7) Medical conditions that  would contraindicate the use of naltrexone such as  hepatic 
dysfunction 
8) Medical conditions that  contraindicate the use of memantine or NAC such as asthma, 
seizures, kidney disease, repeated urinary tract infections,  or liver disease 
9) Individuals taking medications  that might interact with memantine,  including amantadine or 
rimantadine; dextromethorphan; carbonic anhydrase  inhibitors such  as acetazolamide,  
dicholrphenamide, or methazolamide; or  potassium  citrate 
10) Any history of neurological trauma or disease,  delirium, or hallucinations, or hepatic,  
cardiovascular,  metabolic,  endocrine,  or gastrointestinal disease  
11) Subjects who at any intake appointment  have a Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment  
Scale score of 8 or greater,  or who report any history of significant or repeated  alcohol 
withdrawals  will be excluded  from the study and referred for standard alcohol 
detoxification. This  is to reduce the likelihood that subjects enrolled in the study  will 
experience withdrawal  symptomatology if they reduce their drinking.  
12) Women who  are pre gnant, nursing, or refuse to use a reliable  method of birth control;  urine 
pregnancy tests will be completed  at intake and  prior to administration  of alcohol  
13) Subjects who report disliking spirits will be excluded  because hard liquor will be provided 
during the alcohol  administration  components of t he study. 
14) Subjects who have taken Naltrexone within  3 weeks immediately  preceding  admission  to 
the treatment period, all other inverstigational  drugs will  require a 4 week washout period. 
Page 31 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
15) Subjects who report any use during the 30 days  prior to randomizat ion of the following: 
anxiolytics,  beta blockers, central  nervous system  stimulants,  hypnotics, non -therapeutic 
doses of neuroleptics  and antidepressants,  drugs with psychotropic activity,  or drugs which  
cause excessive sedation  
16) Subjects who have donated blood within  the past six weeks 
 
Additional  PIT exclusion  criteria: 
17) Known (history of) taste or smell dysfunction 
18) History of oral nerve damage  
19) Food allergies  or sensitivities (for example nuts, lactose, artificial sweeteners)  
20) A diagnosis  of diabetes 
21) Chronic use of medication  that may affect taste 
22) Conditions  that  may  interefere  with  gustatory  or  olfactory  perception  (colds,  seasonal 
allergies).  
 
 
3.a. Will email or telephone correspondence be used to screen  potential subjects  for eligibility  prior 
to the potential  subject coming to the research  office? Yes No 
 
3.b. If yes, will identifiable health  information be collected  during this screening  process and 
retained by the research team?  Yes No 
 
4. Subject Classifications:  Check off all classifications  of subjects that will be invited to enroll 
in the research  project. Will subjects,  who may require additional  safeguards  or other 
considerations, be enrolled in the study?  If so, identify the population of subjects requiring 
special safeguards  and provide a justif ication for their involvement. 
 
Children Healthy Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus 
Non-English Speaking Prisoners Economically  disadvantaged persons 
Decisionally  Impaired Employees   Pregnant women and/or fetuses 
Students Females of childbearing potential  
 
4a. Is this research proposal designed to enroll  children who are wards  of the state as potential 
subjects? Yes No (If yes, see Instructions section VII  #4 for further requirements)  
 
 
 
1. Consent Personnel:  List all members of the research  team who will be obtaining consent/assent.  
Nicholas Franco, Dana Cavallo, Tricia Dahl, Thomas Liss, Suchitra Krishnan -Sarin 
 
2. Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting  and conditions under which consent/assent will  
be obtained, including parental permission  or surrogate permission  and the steps taken to ensure 
subjects’ independent decision -making. 
At the start of the intake session, all  subjects will receive an  explanation of the  study including 
its risks, benefits, and procedure s, and will be given an opportunity to withdraw from the study. 
Following the resolution  of any questions, the subject will be asked to sign the consent form, if 
he/she agrees  to participate.  SECTION  VIII: CONSENT/ ASSENT PROCEDURES  
Page 32 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
3. Evaluation of  Subject(s) Capacity  to Provide Informed  Consent/ Assent: Indicate how the 
personnel obtaining consent will  assess the potential subject’s  ability and capacity to consent to 
the research  being proposed. 
Subjects with limited decision making capacity will not be enrolled  in this study. 
 
4. Documentation  of Consent/Assent: Specify the documents that will be used during the 
consent/assent process. Copies of all  documents should be appended to the protocol,  in the same  
format that they will be given to subjects.  
Adult consent form 
 
5. Non-English Speaking  Subjects: Explain provisions in place to ensure comprehension  for 
research involving non-English speaking subjects. Translated  copies of all  consent materials  
must be submitted  for approval prior to use. 
Due to the intensity and complexity  of the design  of this study we will only enroll  English 
speaking subjects. 
 
6. Waiver of  Consent: Will you request either a waiver of consent, or a waiver  of signed  consent, 
for this study? If so, please address the following:  
This section is not applicable to  this research  project 
Waiver of consent: (No  consent form  from subjects will be obtained.) 
a. Does the research  pose greater than  minimal risk to subjects? Yes No 
b. Will the waiver adversely  affect subjects’ rights  and welfare? Yes No 
c. Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without the waiver? 
d. Where appropriate,  how will  pertinent information  be returned  to, or shared with subjects 
at a later date?  
 
Waiver of signed  consent: (Verbal  consent from  subjects will be obtained.) 
This section is not applicable to  this research  project 
a. Would the signed consent form be the only record linking  the subject  and the research? 
Yes No 
b. Does a breach of confidentiality  constitute the principal risk  to subjects?  Yes No 
OR 
c. Does the research  pose greater than  minimal risk? Yes No AND 
d. Does the research  include any  activities that would require signed  consent in a non- 
research context? Yes No 
 
7. Required  HIPAA Authorization: If the research  involves the creation,  use or disclosure of 
protected health information  (PHI), separate subject authorization  is required under the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule. Indicate which of the following forms are being provided: 
Compound Consent  and Authorization form  
HIPAA Research  Authorization Form  
 
8. Request for waiver  of HIPAA  authorization: (When requesting a waiver of HIPAA  
Authorization for either the entire study, or for recruitment  purposes only) 
 
Choose one: For entire study: For recruitment  purposes only: X 
i. Describe why  it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s  authorization for 
use/disclosure of this data- Data is collected  over the phone and  through Qualtrix so it 
wouldn’t be practical to obtain authorization  to use this data. 
Page 33 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
ii. If requesting a waiver of signed  authorization, describe why it would be impracticable 
to obtain the subject’s  signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data; 
 
By signing  this protocol application,  the investigator assures  that the protected  
health information  for which a Waiver of Authorization has been requested  will not 
be reused or disclosed  to any person or entity  other than those listed  in this 
application,  except as required  by law, for authorized  oversight of this research 
study, or as specifically  approved for use in another study by an IRB. 
 
Researchers  are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individ uals outside of the Yale 
HIPAA-Covered entity must be accounted  for in the  “accounting for disclosures log”, by subject 
name, purpose, date, recipients, and a description  of information  provided.  Logs are to be 
forwarded to the Deputy HIPAA Privacy Office r. 
 
 
1. Risks: Describe the reasonably  foreseeable risks,  including risks to subject  privacy, discomforts, 
or inconveniences associated  with subjects participating  in the research.  
The major potential risks in this study  are related to administration  of alcohol, memantine,  N- 
acetyl cysteine, naltrexone, and  the blood draw  during the physical exam and alcohol drinking 
period. 
 
1) Memantine:  
An NMDA antagonist, has been approved by the FDA for the treatment of moderate to severe 
Alzheimer’s disease in the US. Numerous  studies have found memantine  to be safe and associated  
with few side effects. In a study of 252 patients, 17% of memantine -treated patients and 10% of 
placebo-treated patients discontinued treatment because of adverse events during 28-weeks of 
treatment.  The most common side effects occurring with equal frequency  in memantine  and 
placebo groups included agitation, urinary incontinence, urinary tract infections, insomnia and 
diarrhea. Side effects occurring at a higher rate in memantine -treated patients included dizziness 
(7%), headache (6%), constipation  (6%), confusion (6%), insomnia (less than 1%) and 
hallucinations  (less than 1%). Since memantine  could also cause drowsiness  or dizziness,  
participants  will be told to use caution when driving, operating machinery  or performing  other 
hazardous  activity. Memantine  is in FDA category B which means that it is not expected to be 
harmful to an unborn baby but since there has been minimal use of this agent in a young patient 
population (such as the one in this proposal) we have chosen to be cautious and exclude women 
who are pregnant or nursing. Such individuals  could not be included  in the current proposal 
anyway since we are administering  alcohol to all subjects. The major route of memantine  
elimination  is renal and therefore the use of this drug in patients with renal impairment  is not 
recommended.  There is also some question about its use in those with seizure disorders of liver 
disease. Since liver disease is often seen in alcohol-dependent  subjects we are proposing  to exclude 
individuals  with kidney disease, liver disease or seizure disorder. 
 
Since mema
ntine is an NMDA antagonist  and other NMDA agents like PCP and ketamine are 
known to have some abuse liability, various studies have evaluated the abuse liability of memantine.  
In both rat and monkey drug-discrimination  studies, memantine  did partially substitute for PCP but 
with significant  decreases in rates of responding  [165, 166]. In the monkey studies, memantine  had 
weak reinforcing potential only at higher doses and in the clinical trials with memantine  there were 
no evidence of drug seeking behavior. Therefore  it does not appear likely that memantine  has 
significant  potential for abuse. As is our practice with other similar studies, all subjects will be 
given a card showing that they may be receiving memantine.  This card will provide detailed SECTION  IX: PROTECTION  OF RESEARCH  SUBJECTS  
Page 34 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
information  to medical personnel about the drug.  In addition, this card will have a code number on 
it that can be used to identify which medication  the subject is on. A phone number of the pharmacy  
and for the physician on call at the Connecticut  Mental Health Center will be listed on the card in 
the event of an emergency  in which it is necessary  to determine whether the subject is on active 
memantine.  
 
2) N-acetyl cysteine 
N-acetyl cysteine is FDA approved for use as  a mucolytic  agent for bronchopulmonary disorders 
(e.g. Grandjean  et al., 2000) and  as an oral or intravenous antidote to treat acetaminophen  
poisoning (Smilkstein  et al., 1988).  It is also used for chest pain (unstable angina ), bile duct 
blockage in infants, amyotrophic lateral  sclerosis (ALS, Lou Gehrig’s disease), Alzheimer’s  
disease, allergic reactions to the anti -seizure drug phenytoin ( Dilantin), and an eye infection  
called keratoconjunctivitis. It is also used for reducing levels of a type of cholesterol  called 
lipoprotein  (a), homocysteine  levels (a possible risk  factor for heart disease) and  the risk of heart 
attack and stroke in patients with serious kidney disease. 
 
Some people use N-acetyl cysteine for chron ic bronchitis , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), hay fever, a lung condition called  fibrosing alveolitis, head and neck cancer,  and lung 
cancer. It is also used for treating  some forms of epilepsy ; ear infections ; complications  of 
kidney dialysis; chronic fatigue  syndrome (CFS);  an autoimmune disorder  called Sjogren’s  
syndrome; preventing sports injury complications; radiation treatment; increasi ng immunity  to 
flu and H1N1 (swine) flu; and for detoxifying  heavy metals such as mercury,  lead, and  cadmium.  
 
N-acetyl cysteine is also used for preventing alcoholic liver damage;  for protecting  against 
environmental pollutants  including carbon monoxide, chloroform,  urethanes and  certain 
herbicides;  for reducing toxicity of ifosfamide  and doxorubicin, drugs  that are used for cancer  
treatment;  as a hangover remedy;  for preventing kidney damage due to certain  X-ray dyes; and 
for human  immunodeficiency virus ( HIV). 
 
N-acetyl cysteine is safe for most adults. It can cause nausea,  vomiting,  and diarrhea or 
constipation . Rarely, it can cause rashes,  fever, headache,  drowsiness, low blood pressure,  and 
liver problems.  
 
3) Naltrexone 
Naltrexone has  been shown to have an  effect on the embryo  in the rat and the rabbit  when given 
in doses approximately 140 times  the human  therapeutic dose. Naltrexone, an opioid antagonist, 
is widely used in the treatment of  opioid addiction and more recently has been found to be 
beneficial  in the treatment of  alcoholism . Numerous studies  have found naltrexone use to be safe  
and rarely associated  with toxicity or severe side effects. The most frequent reported  side effects 
are gastrointestinal  in nature. Those include  epigastric pain,  nausea and  vomiting.  Other, less 
frequent side effects  include nervousness, dizziness, headaches,  blurred vision, low energy,  
fatigue, sleepiness,  joint and  muscle pain  and insomnia.  Hepatotoxicity, the most serious 
potential side effect,  has been shown in studies using very high doses of naltrexone (1400 to 
2100 mg per week).  At the doses used  in this study  naltrexone has not been  reported to produce 
hepatotoxic effects.   However,  we will monitor liver function  tests prior to the study and exclude 
individuals with  evidence of significant hep atocellular injury (AST, ALT >3x normal established  
in pregnant  and nursing women, they will be excluded from  participation.   Naltrexone can  also 
precipitate or exacerbate opiate withdrawal,  as a results subjects with abuse or dependence on 
opiates will be excluded  from the study on the basis  of self-report and  urine drug screens. 
Page 35 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Since naltrexone is an opiate antagonist,  alternative nonopioid methods  of analgesia can  be used. 
In an emergency  situation requiring opioids, the amount of opioids necessary  for analgesia may 
be greater than  usual, and the resulting  respiratory  depression may  be deeper and  more 
prolonged.   As a result, a rapidly acting analgesic which  minimizes respiratory  depression is 
preferred and the amount of the analgesic administration  titrated to the needs of the patient in a 
setting equipped and staffed for cardiopulmonary resuscitation.   As a result, subjects will be 
given a card showing that they may be receiving  naltrexone.  This card will provide detailed  
information to medical  personnel  describing the special  precautions necessary  in the event  that 
the subject  should require pain  management.   In addition, this card  will have a code number on it 
that can be used to identify which medication  the subject  is on.  A phone number of the 
pharmacy and for the physician  on call at the Connecticut  Mental Health Center will  be listed on 
the card in the event  of an emergency  in which it is necessary  to determine whether the subject is 
on active naltrexone.  
 
4) Alcohol: 
A number of medical  conditions could  potentially  be worsened by  acute alcohol administration  
(e.g., liver disease,  cardiac abnormality, pancreatitis,  diabetes, neurological problems, and  
gastrointestinal disorders). As  a result, subjects  with medical problems as  revealed by physical 
exam and laboratory findings will be excluded from the  study. 
Alcohol may also cause nausea in high doses; however,  nausea is not expected  at the dose being 
used in this sample of heavy drinkers. Subjects will not be drinking to levels more than they 
typically consume in their own  drinking context and with the exception  of the priming dose, they 
determine the amount of alcohol  consumed. 
Another area of potential risk to subjects  under the influence of alcohol  involves their safety 
during the experimental procedures.  Although impairment of gross  motor coordination in heavy  
drinkers is rare at the alcohol dose used  in this study, all subjects will be under the supervision of 
the experimenters  to prevent possible accidents  such as falls. Subjects will not leave the 
laboratory during the self -administration  procedure. By  staying in the YCCI  or CNRU overnight,  
the possibility  that the subject might leave the session and continue to drink  alcohol thereby 
placing themselves  at risk for accidents is prevented.  
Alcohol is a reinforcing agent, which may  cause changes  in behavior including repetitive or 
excessive alcohol  consumption. Because of this, the  administration  of alcohol to alcoholics  in 
treatment could potentially  impede the progress of their recovery.  In addition, the administration  
of alcohol  to sober alcoholics living  in the community presents a possible risk of relapse.  As a 
result, we will be recruiting  non-abstinent non-treatment seeking  alcoholics  in keeping with  the 
National Advisory Council on Alcohol Abus e and Alcoholism's  (1989) recommended  guidelines 
on ethyl alcohol administration.  At completion  of the study, we will make a serious and 
concerted  effort to link the  subject with treatment  for their alcohol problems. This  will be done 
by giving the subject  objective feedback  about the fact  that their drinking exceeds standards for 
avoiding hazardous drinking, providing a brief  one session  motivational intervention  for their 
drinking, and  by arranging  for alcohol  treatment services if they are interested.  In our previous 
and ongoing work, several participants  quit drinking and many others reduced their drinking in 
the three months following  this intervention (Sinha R, Krishnan- Sarin S, Farren  C, O’Malley  SS. 
Naturalistic follow -up of drinking behavior following participation  in an alcohol administration  
study.  Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment  1999; 17: 159 -62). 
 
5) Interactions  of Memantine and  Alcohol: 
There are no known interactions  of co-administering  memantine  and alcohol.  In a study by 
Bisaga and Evans [40] in moderate drinkers, memantine  by itself produced  some increase in 
dissociative symptoms  which were further slightly increased by alcohol. Since, in this study, 
Page 36 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
participants  will be taking  memantine on an outpatient basis,  we will monitor via face-to-face 
daily contact for side effects from memantine.  
 
6) Interactions  of NAC and Alcohol: 
There are no known interactions  of co-administering  NAC and alcohol. Since, in this study, 
participants  will be taking  NAC on an outpatient  basis, we will monitor via face- to-face daily  
contact for side effects from NAC. 
 
7) Interactions  of Naltrexone and Alcohol: 
There are no known risks  to contraindicate the administration  of alcohol to subjects on 
naltrexone. It has been shown that  pharmacokinetics properties of naltre xone and ethanol  are not 
altered on simultaneous  administration  of both agents.  
 
8) Intravenous Access: 
Insertion of an  intravenous catheter involves  risk for hematoma  at the site of the venous  
puncture. Very  rarely, venous puncture can also result in a  blood clot  or infection.  
 
9) Blood and Urine Collections: 
Screening  blood and  urine collections  are performed  primarily  as safeguards to subjects and 
should add  no risks other than  those normally associated  with these procedures.  Subjects will 
have approximately  40 cc of blood drawn  at the intake appointment to determine liver and  
kidney functioning, 30 cc of blood for the genetics  portion (see below) and  during the fourth 
phase (self -administration) of the study  we will draw approximately  30 cc of blood. Therefore, 
the total amount of blood drawn  during the study (100 mls or approx. 3.4 oz) is well within the 
HIC guidelines of 450 cc within  eight research weeks and the blood loss poses  minimal risk in 
healthy subjects. We will advise subjects  against donating blood for six weeks following study 
participation. 
 
10)  Rating Scales and Questionnaires: 
These are all noninvasive and  should add  no risk. The major disadvantages  are the time taken to 
complete them,  and possible breach  of confidentiality. Our past experience with these measures  
indicates that they are acceptable to subjects.  Careful efforts aimed at maintaining  confidentiality  
will be made. 
 
11) Alcohol Withdrawal:  
We will not ask participants  to alter their drinking behavior during their participation in the 
study.  However,  there is always the possibility  that some participants  may reduce or stop 
drinking during the outpatient period while on the study medication.   Therefore,  we will inform 
that that some individuals  who reduce or stop their drinking can  experience alcohol  withdrawal  
symptoms  such as mild agitation,  anxiety, restlessness, tremor,  loss of appetite  and difficulty  
sleeping or even  more severe (but  rare) symptoms like  extreme restlessness,  nervousness, 
disorientation, confusion, hallucinations (hearing  and seeing  things that are not there) and  
seizures, but these are extremely  rare. We will monitor them daily during their visits to our 
clinic and  will also inform them that if they experience worsening of withdrawal  symptoms  
(CIWA > 8) we may have to hospi talize them  and give them  medications  that are typically  used 
to treat and manage withdrawal  including benzodiazepines,  such as chlordiazepoxide (librium),  
and other medications  such as carbamazepine (tegretol).  
 
12) Genetic Bloods:   
Page 37 of 52 
Page 37 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Donation of 30 ml of blood for genetics  studies will be part of every Informed  Consent 
document.  All participants  will be given the option of participating in the genetic portion of the 
study.  Subjects  will be informed of possible risks  and benefits of participat ion in genetics  
research, will be informed of the potential  genomewide scope of the genotyping effort, and will 
be informed that  their DNA samples  will be retained  indefinitely  (banked). Participants  will also 
be given the option of withdrawing  from the study after blood samples  have been  obtained;  
alternatives  provided  will include destruction or de- identification  of sample.  A Certificate of 
Confidentiality  from NIAAA has  been obtained to  further protect  the confidentiality  of this 
information." 
13) PIT task: 
There are no known risks associated  with consumption  of any of the odors or liquids that 
subjects will encounter. All are commercially  available products that subjects will have likely 
encountered  before. Subjects with food allergies or sensitivities (for example nuts, lactose, 
artificial sweeteners,  red food dye) will be excluded. 
 
2. Minimizing  Risks: Describe the manner  in which the above-mentioned risks will be minimized.  
 
1) Memantine:  
Effective screening  will exclude all  subjects who would be at greater ris k for complications  
because of medical,  neurological or psychiatric illnesses.  Individuals currently  dependent on 
other drugs will  be screened  out.   Subjects maintained  on memantine study medication  will be 
issued "keyed" cards which allow health  professionals to break  the double blind by  calling, the 
Yale-New Haven  pharmacy  switchboard  which answers  24 hours a day. Subjects will  also be 
monitored during daily medication  visits for troublesome side effects  during the course of the 6 
day outpatient period. Although memantine is in FDA category B, there have been  few trials 
where it has been administered  to younger women.  Therefore,  the following precautions  will be 
taken for women: 1) urine pregnancy tests will be performed  at intake, prior to starting  the 
medication,  and on the day  of the alcohol  self-administration  session. Pregnant or nursing 
women will be excluded  from participation, and  encouraged  to seek advice  about the risk  of 
heavy drinking, encouraged  to seek alcohol treatment and  if interested  referred to other cessation  
programs;  2) women must agree to use a reliable  method of birth control while they are in the 
study. They will be asked to alert  the principal investigator if  she departs from her birth control  
plans or if, in spite of adherence to these plans, she thinks she might be pregnant. 
 
2) Naltrexone:  
Effective screening  will exclude all  subjects who would be at greater risk  for complications  
because of medical,  neurological or psychiatric illnesses.  Individuals currently  dependent on 
other drugs will be screened  out.  Subjects who are using opiates will  be excluded to avoid any 
possibility  of the subjects experiencing naltrexone precipitated  opiate withdrawal.  The risk of 
hepatotoxicity will be minimized by excluding subjects with  a history of cirrhosis  or 
significantly  elevated liver enzyme tests.  Subjects maintained  on naltrexone study medication  
will be issued "keyed" cards  which allow health professionals to break the double blind by  
calling the CMHC pharmacy.  Subjects will also be constan tly monitored for  troublesome side 
effects during the course of the 12 day outpatient and three days inpatient period. 
Given the uncertain  effects of naltrexone during pregnancy, the following precautions  will be 
taken for women:  1) urine pregnancy tests will be performed  at intake, and pregnant or nursing 
women will be excluded  from participation, and  encouraged  to seek advice  about the risk  of 
heavy drinking, encouraged  to seek treatment  and if interested  referred to other cessation  
programs;  2) women must agree to use a reliable  method of birth control while they are in the 
Page 38 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
study and to alert the principal investigator if she departs  from her birth control plans  or if, in 
spite of adherence to these plans, she thinks she might be pregnant. 
 
3) NAC: 
Effective screening  will exclude all  subjects who would be at greater risk  for complications  
because of medical,  neurological or psychiatric illnesses. Individuals currently  dependent on 
other drugs will  be screened  out.  There is a concern that N-acetyl cysteine might cause 
bronchospasm in people with asthma, so participants  will be excluded  if they have asthma. 
Given the uncertain  effects of NAC during pregnancy,  the following precautions  will be taken 
for women:  1) urine pregnancy tests will be performed  at intake, and pregnant or nursing 
women will be excluded  from participation, and  encouraged  to seek advice  about the risk  of 
heavy drinking, encouraged  to seek treatment  and if interested  referred to other cessation  
programs;  2) women must agree to use a reli able method of birth control while they are in the 
study and to alert the principal investigator if she departs  from her birth control plans  or if, in 
spite of adherence to these plans, she thinks she might be pregnant. 
 
4) Alcohol Challenges:  
The alcohol  challenges  will be conducted by personnel experienced  in alcohol challenge 
research. As described  above, all  subjects will be under supervision to prevent possible 
accidents.  At the end of the challenge session  all subjects will  be kept in the  HRU where they 
will stay overnight to prevent the possibility that they would continue drinking after the session 
and place themselves  at risk of accidents.  Although we have never  had a subject chose to leave a 
session early, should a subject insist on leaving the research  setting prematurely,  we will provide 
transportation  back to their residence.  This contingency is explicitly  addressed  in the consent 
form. Clearly, subjects are free to discontinue the experiment at  any time.  However,  if a subject  
chose to discontinue participation  after alcohol has been  administered  we will require them  to 
stay in the HRU until their  blood alcohol level is below 0.04 and they will then be provided with 
a ride home. Furthermore, at the Principal  Investigator’s discretion,  a participant  will be 
discontinued if he/she does not drink any of the choice  drinks at ADP 1. This absence  of drinking 
creates a floor effect  and does not allow for  evaluation  of change in drinking behavior at ADP 2 and 
ADP 3 after taking study medication.  Given the cost of the hospital visits,  it does not seem  
reasonable  to continue participants whose  data will not be meaningful.  Participants will  be told that 
the study doctor may  discontinue his/her participation  based on data collected at the first ADP. 
 
5) Research Records:  
Right to privacy for participation  in this research will be protected through anonymous  coding of 
data and proper storage of research records. Access will be limited to the PI and her designates  
involved in the study. A certificate  of confidentiality  has been obtained from NIAAA. Safeguards  
include screening  by experienced  professionals in order to ensure that  the inclusion and  
exclusion criteria are met before patients are entered  in the study,  including physical  exam and 
laboratory tests. 
 
6) PIT task: 
We will screen all subjects both on the telephone  and when they arrive for their appointment to 
ensure that they do not have food allergies, which may interfere with the study. Researchers  will 
keep in close communication with subjects while they are completing this study, and subjects 
experiencing discomfort can  discontinue the study.  
Page 39 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
3. Data and Safety Monitoring  Plan: Include an  appropriate Data and  Safety Monitoring Plan 
(DSMP) based  on the investigator’s  risk assessment  stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the 
final determination  of the risk  to subjects.) For more  information, see the Instructions, page 24. 
a. What is the  investigator’s assessment  of the overall risk level for subjects 
participating  in this study? This protocol is a moderate risk  protocol and therefore 
requires a data safety  and monitoring plan. 
b. If children are involved,  what is the investigator’s  assessment  of the overall risk 
level for the children participating  in this study? N/A 
c. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
 
1) Personnel  responsible for the safety  review and its frequency:  
We will be accessing  the Data and  Safety Monitoring Board  (DSMB) developed for the Center  
for Translational Neuroscience on Alcoholism  (John Krystal, PI). The DSMB is multi- 
disciplinary  and includes representatives  with expertise in the primary  components of the 
proposed trial.  The following  individuals will be on the DSMB  as voting members:  
 
Robert Swift, MD, PhD., Prof Psych  (Brown)/ASOS  Res Provid. VAMC  Chmn, DSMB  
Robert Stout, PhD., Director, Decision  Sci. Int., Statistician,  DSMB 
Howard Zonana, MD.,  Dir, Dept Psychiatry  Ethics Committee,  IRB Rep, DSMB 
Lisa Newton,  PhD., Prof. Applied Ethics, Fairfield Univ. Ethicist, DSMB 
This DSMB will follow the  operational guidelines  outlined in the YCCI  OR CNRU plan  for 
DSMB. 
 
We hope to recr
uit subjects at  a rate of about 1-2 per month, thus, the  DSMB will review safety 
reports two times a year. More frequent  meetings  will be scheduled if  indicated by interim 
findings. 
 
2) The risks associated with the current study  are deemed  moderate for the 
following  reasons:  
Given the now established  safety and validity of the current medications  in our 
prior work,  we do not view the proposed  studies as high risk. 
Although we have assessed  the proposed study  as one of moderate risk,  the poten tial 
exists for anticipated  and/or unanticipated adverse events,  serious or otherwise, to occur  
since it is not possible  to predict with certainty the absolute risk  in any given individual 
or in advance of first-hand experience with  the proposed study methods. Therefore,  we 
provide a plan  for monitoring  the data and  safety of the proposed study as follows: 
 
3) Attribution  of Adverse Events:  
Adverse events  will be monitored  for each subject participating  in the study and  
attributed  to the study  procedures / design by the principal investigator,  Dr. Suchitra Krishnan- 
Sarin according  to the following categories:  
a.) Definite:  Adverse event is clearly  related to investigational  procedures(s)/agent(s).  
b.) Probable:  Adverse event is likely  related to investigationa l procedures(s)/agent(s).  
c.) Possible:  Adverse event may  be related  to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).  
d.) Unlikely: Adverse event is likely  not to be related  to the investigational 
procedures(s)/agent(s).  
e.) Unrelated:  Adverse event is clearly  not related  to investigational 
procedures(s)/agent(s).  
 
4) Plan for 
Grading Adverse Events:  
Page 40 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
The following scale will  be used in grading the severity  of adverse events noted during 
the study: 
1. Mild adverse event  
2. Moderate adverse event  
3. Severe 
 
5) Plan for Determin ing Seriousness  of Adverse Events:  
Serious Adverse Events: 
In addition to grading the adverse event, the PI  will determine whether the adverse event 
meets the criteria for  a Serious Adverse Event  (SAE). An adverse event  is considered 
serious if it: 
1. is life-threatening  
2. results in in-patient hospitalization  or prolongation of existing  hospitalization  
3. results in persistent  or significant disability  or incapacity  
4. results in a congenital  anomaly or birth defect OR 
5. results in death 
6. based upon appropriate medical  judgment,  may jeopardize the subject’s  health 
and may require medical  or surgical  intervention  to prevent one of the other 
outcomes listed in this definition,  or 
7. adversely  affects the risk/benefit  ratio of the study 
An adverse event  may be graded as severe but still not meet the criteria  for a Serious  
Adverse Event. Similarly,  an adverse event may be graded as moderate but still meet the 
criteria for an SAE. It is important for the PI to consider the grade of the event as  well as 
its “seriousness” when  determining whether reporting  to the HIC  or HSC is necessary.  
 
6) Plan for 
reporting  serious AND unanticipated  AND related  adverse events,  
anticipated  adverse events occurring  at a greater frequency  than expected,  and 
other unanticipated problems  involving  risks to subjects or others  to the HIC or 
HSC. 
The investigator will report  the following  types of adverse events to the HIC or  HSC: a) 
serious AND unanticipated AND possibly,  probably or definitely  related events; b)  
anticipated  adverse events occurring with a greater frequency  than expected; and  c) other 
unanticipated  problems involving risks to subjects or others. 
These adverse events or unanticipated  problems involving risks to subjects or others will 
be reported to the HIC or HSC within 48 hours of it becoming known to the investigator, 
using the appropriate forms found on the website.  
 
7) Plan for reporting  adverse events  to co-investigators on the study,  as appropriate  
the protocol’s  research  monitor(s),  e.g., industrial sponsor, Yale Center for Clinical 
Investigation Research  Subject Advocates  (RSAs), Cancer Center's  Quality 
Assurance,  Compliance  and Safety Committee  (QUACS)  Protocol  Review 
Committee (PRC),  DSMBs, study  sponsors,  funding and regulatory  agencies,  and 
regulatory  and decision-making bodies 
 
For the current  study, the following individuals,  funding, and/or regulatory  
agencies will be notified (choose those that  apply): 
 
X All Co-Investigators listed on the protocol. 
X Yale Center for Clinical  Investigation Research  Subject Advocates  (RSAs) 
 
Page 41 of 52 
Page 41 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
□ Quality Assurance and  Compliance and  Safety Committee (QUACS)  
X National Institutes of Health 
□ Food and Drug Administration  (Physician -Sponsored  IND # ) 
□ Medical Research Foundation  (Grant ) 
 
The principal  investigator, Dr.  Krishnan- Sarin, will conduct a review of all adverse 
events upon completion  of every study subject. The principal investigator  will evaluate 
the frequency  and severity of the adverse events and determine if modifications  to the 
protocol or consent  form are required.  
 
4. Confidentiality  & Security of Data: 
 
a. What protected  health information about subjects will be collected and used for the research? 
Name, address, telephone number, email address SS #, and birth date will be collected from 
subjects 
b. How will the research  data be collecte d, recorded and stored? Research will be collected  in a 
private room by  a research assistant, recorded in binders, and  stored in a locked, secure location.  
c. How will the digital data be stored?  CD DVD Flash Drive Portable Hard  
Drive Secured Server Laptop Computer Desktop Computer  Other 
d. What methods and  procedures will be used to safeguard  the confidentiality  and security of 
the identifiable study data and the storage media indicated above during the subject  
participation  in the study? Study data will be password protected on secured server, and 
paper data will  be kept in a locked, secure location. 
e. What mechanisms  are in place to ensure the proper use and  continued protection of these 
data after the subject participation  in the study has ceased? Study data will continue to be 
kept in a locked, secure l ocation after each  subject’s participation  has ceased. 
f. What will be done with the data when the research is completed?  Are there plans to destroy 
the identifiable  data? If yes, describe how, by whom and when identifiers  will be destroyed. If 
no, describe how the data and/or identifiers  will be secured. Study data will be archived in a 
secure storage facility,  data will not be destroyed.  
g. Who will have access to the protected health information?  (such as the research sponsor, the 
investigator, the research staff, all research monitors,  FDA, QUACS, SSC, etc.) The PI and 
study personnel. A CMHC record containing PHI will also be kept in a locked file at CMHC. 
h. Which external  or internal  individuals  or agencies  (such as the study  sponsor, FDA,  QUACS, 
SSC, etc.) will have access to the study data? Principal investigator  and her research team, 
YCCI Hospital Research Unit and CMU and CMHC. 
i. If appropriate, has a Certificate  of Confidentiality  been obtained? A certificate has been 
obtained from  NIAAA 
j Are there any  mandatory  reporting requirements?  (Incidents of child  abuse, elderly  abuse, 
communicable diseases, etc.) Child abuse,  elder abuse  and intent to harm self or others. 
 
5. Potential  Benefits: Identify any benefits that  may be reasonably  expected to result from the 
research, either to the subject(s) or to society  at large. (Payment  of subjects is not considered  
a benefit in this context of the risk  benefit assessment.)  
 
This study will not directly  benefit the partic ipants. The results of this laboratory -based drinking 
paradigm will provide help advance knowledge in the area of development of pharmacotherapies  
for alcohol  drinking.  An  additional benefit to subjects  is that they will be offered feedback  about 
Page 42 of 52 
Page 42 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
their drinking  and active referral to treatment for their alcohol problems should they so desire.  
Most alcohol abusers have impairments  in their psychosocial  functioning as a result of their 
drinking and can benefit from treatment.  The proposed study  may be a conduit for some to 
receive treatment  and for others to reduce their drinking on their own. Although the direct  benefit 
is not great  for subjects,  given the potential benefit to developing effective treatments  for 
alcoholism,  the risk-benefit ratio appears favorable.  
 
Furthermore,  the results of  this laboratory- based drinking paradigm will provide an  important 
initial signal  regarding the potential efficacy  of the combination of naltrexone and  memantine or 
Nacetylcysteine in reducing alcohol dri nking. There is a  great need for the development  of new 
agents and combination  of agents to treat alcohol dependence,  particularly  in subpopulations  of 
drinkers. This  laboratory paradigm  will also provide information  regarding the mechanism  of 
action of these agents and thus significantly  contribute to the literature.  
 
 
 
1. Alternatives: What other alternatives  are available to the study subjects outside of the research?  
NA-This is not a treatment study. However,  participants will be provided with a  motivational 
interview upon completion of the inpatient and  outpatient portions of this study to provide 
feedback on their drinking.  If they request a referral  for treatment  to cut back or quit drinking at  
this time, we will provide them with  referral options. 
 
2. Payment
s for Participation  (Economic Considerations): Describe any  payments  that will be 
made to subjects  and the conditions for receiving  this compensation.  
Because this study  may not h ave direct  benefits to the individual particip ant, subjects  will be 
offered payment for their  participation.  Subjects will have the opportunity to receive up to $2103 
for completing  all phases of the study. Payment  for the screening  interview will be $50, and  they 
will receive an  additional $50 f or the physical examination; we have found  that payments  for 
these appointments  encourages  attendance as  scheduled. Subjects will also receive $50 for the 
PIT task, $150 for participating  in the first  ADP, up to $160 for taking  medication during Med 1 
(6-8 days, up to 13 days if necessary ), $200 for participating in the second ADP, $40 for 
complying  with the 6-8 day washout procedures, up to  $160 for taking medication  during Med 2 
(6-8 days, up to 13 days if necessary ), $250 for participating  in the third alcohol-drinking 
paradigm,  and a bonus of $200 for completing all  3 drinking paradigms  given the within -
subjects design. Subjects will earn an additional  $10 per day for transportation during phases 2, 
3 and 5. Subjects will also receive an  additional $10 for keeping each scheduled  appointment, 
once they are enrolled  (after the physical  exam) for a total of $190. Subjects will also have the 
opportunity to earn  an extra $36 during each  of the self- administration  periods as  well as $75 
for computer tasks  done at the outpatient and  inpatients appointments.   Lastly, they will earn 
$30 for completing  each of the two  follow-up appointments.  This progressively increasing  
payment structure was developed in order to motivat e subjects  to complete all phases  of the 
study, since obtaining complete data in this  within-subjects crossover  study is the key to 
achieving  the goals of the project. We are trying to avoid early drop out by using increasing  
incentives for completion  of the entire  study. Subjects will be reimburse d $20 for valet  parking 
at Yale New Haven  Hospital for  overnight stays  during the ADP’s. They will also be 
compensated  $25 if they are asked  to come back for any repeat lab work (blood or EKG). 
If a participant  comes in to be consented and  decides, after learning more about the study, 
he/she is not interested  in participating, we will discontinue the intake appointment and  
compensate you $10 for his/her time.  SECTION  X: RESEARCH  ALTERNATIVES  AND ECONOMIC  CONSIDERATIONS  
Page 43 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
  
 
3. Costs for Participation  (Economic Considerations): Clearly describe the subject’s costs 
associated with participation  in the research,  and the interventions or procedures of the study that 
will be provided at  no cost to subjects.  
The subject  will incur no costs to participate in this research and  will receive a full physical 
exam at no cost. 
 
4. In Case of Injury: This section is required for any research involving more than minimal risk.  
a. Will medical treatment  be available if research-related injury occurs? Yes, but injury is 
unlikely 
b. Where and  from whom may  treatment  be obtained? At YNHH 
c. Are there an y limits to the treatment  being provided? No 
d. Who will pay for this treatment?  The participant  or their insurance carrier will  be expected  
to pay for the cost  of the treatment.  
e. How will the medical  treatment be accessed  by subjects? Nurses at HRU or ED at YNHH 
  
 
References  
 
Anton, R. F.,  Drobes, D. J., Voronin, K.,  Durazo-Azizv, R. & Moak, D.  (2004). Naltrexone 
effects on alcohol  consumption in a clinical  lab paradigm:  temporal effects  of drinking. 
Psychopharmacology , 173, 32- 40. 
Anton, R. F.,  Moak, D.  H., Latham, P., Waid, L. R., Myrick,  H., Voronin, K., et al. (2005). 
Naltrexone combined with  either cognitive behavioral or motivational enhancement  
therapy for alcohol  dependence.  Journal of Clinical  Psychopharmacology , 25, 349-357. 
Anton, R. F.,  O'Mal ley, S. S., Ciraulo,  D. A., Cisler, R. A., Couper, D., Donovan, D.  M., et al. 
(2006).  COMBINE Study Research Group. Combined pharmacotherapies and behavioral 
interventions for alcohol  dependence:  the COMBINE  study: a randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA, 295, 2003-2017. 
Anton, R. F.,  Oroszi, G., O'Malley,  S., Couper, D.,  Swift, R., Pettinati, H., et al. (2008). An 
evaluation  of mu-opioid receptor (OPRM1) as  a predictor of naltrexone response in the 
treatment of alcohol dependence: results from the Combined  Pharmacotherapies  and 
Behavioral  Interventions for Alcohol  Dependence (COMBINE) study.  Archives of 
General Psychiatry , 65,135-144. 
Arias, A. J., Feinn,  R., Covault, J., & Kranzler, H. R. (2007). Memantine for Alcohol 
Dependence:  An Open-label Pilot Study. Addictiv e Disorders & Their Treatmen t, 6, 77- 
83. 
Bachteler,  D., Economidou, D.,  Danysz, W., Ciccocioppo, R., & Spanagel,  R. (2005). The  
effects of acamprosate and neramexane on cue-induced reinstatement of ethanol-seeking 
behavior in rat.  Neuropsychopharmacology, 30, 104-110. 
Bäckström,  P.& Hyytiä, P. (2004). Ionotropic glutamate receptor  antagonists  modulate cue- 
induced reinstatement of ethanol-seeking behavior. Alcoholism,  Clinical and 
Experimental Research,  28, 558-565. 
Bartoshuk, L. M. (2002).  Labeled scales (e.g. category, Likert, VAS) and  invalid cross- group 
comparisons. What we have learned from genetic variation in taste. Food Quality and 
Preference, 14, 125 -138. 
Becker, G. S. & Murphy, K. M. (1988).  Theory of rational addiction.  Journal of Political  
Economy, 96, 675-700. 
Page 44 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Benjamin,  D., Grant, E.R., & Pohorecky, L.A. (1993). Naltrexone reverses  ethanol-induced 
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens  in awake, freely  moving rats. Brain 
Research, 621, 137 -140. 
Bernstein,  D. P., Fink, L., Handelsman, L., & Foote, J.  (1994). Initial reliability  and validity of a 
new retrospective measure of child  abuse and  neglect. American  Journal of Psychiatry,  
151 (8), 1132-1136. 
Biała, G. & Kotlińska,  J. (1999). Blockade of the acquisition of ethanol -induced conditioned 
place preference by N-methyl-D- aspartate receptor  antagonists.  Alcohol, 34, 175-182. 
Bienkowski, P., Koros,  E., Kostowski, W., & Danysz, W. (1999) Effects of  N-methyl-D- 
aspartate receptor antagonists on reinforced  and non-reinforced  responding for ethanol in  
rats. Alcohol, 18,131-137. 
Bisaga, A. & Evans, S.M. (2004). Acute  effects of memantine in combination  with alcohol in 
moderate drinkers. Psychopharmacology, 172, 16-24. 
Bohn, M. J., Krahn,  D. D., & Staehler, B.A. (1995). Development  and initial validation of a 
measure of drinking urges in abstinent  alcoholics.  Alcoholism: Clinical  and Experimental 
Research, 19, 600-606. 
Bouza, C., Angeles,  M., Muñoz, A.,  & Amate, J. M. (2004). Efficacy  and safety of naltrexone 
and acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol dependence: a systematic  review. Addiction , 
99, 811-828. 
Boyce-Rustay J.M. & Cunningham, C.L.  (2004). The role of NMDA receptor  binding sites in 
ethanol place con ditioning.  Behavioral  Neuroscience,  118, 822-834. 
Braithwaite SP, Paul S, Nai rn AC, Lombroso PJ.  (2006). Synaptic plasticity: one STEP  at a time. 
Trends Neurosci.  29(8):452-8 
Bray S, Rangle  A, Shimojo S, Balleine B,  O'Doherty  J. The neural  mechanisms  underlying the 
influence of pavlovian cues  on human  decision making. The Journal of Neuroscience  
2008;28(22) :5861-5866 
Bremner, J.D., Krystal,  J.H., Putnam, F.W., Sothwick, S.M., Marmar,  C., Charney, D.S., et  al. 
(1998). Measurement  of dissociative states  with the Clinician -Administered  Dissociative  
States Scale (CADSS).  Journal of Traumatic Stress , 11, 125-136. 
Broadbent, J.  & Weitemier,  A. Z. (1999). Dizocilpine (MK -801) prevents  the development of 
sensitization  to ethanol  in DBA/2J mice. Alcohol and Alcoholis m, 34, 283-288. 
Carver, C.S. & White, T.  (1994). Behavioral  Inhibition, Behavioral Activation,  and Affective  
Responses to  Impending Reward  and Punishment: The BIS/BAS  Scales. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology , 67, 319-333. 
Chapman, L.J., Edell, W.S., & Chapman,  J.P. (1980).  Physical anhedonia, perceptual  aberration,  
and psychosis proneness. Schizophrenia  Bulletin, 6, 639-653. 
Chen, Y. C. & Holmes, A. (2009). Effects  of topiramate and  other anti -glutamatergic drugs  on 
the acute intoxicating  actions of ethanol in mice: modulation  by genetic strain and stress. 
Neuropsychopharmacology,  34, 1454- 1466. 
Cheon, Y., Park, J., Joe, K.  H., & Kim, D. J. (2008) The effect  of 12-week open-label memantine  
treatment on cognitive function improvement in patients  with alcohol-related dementia.  
The International  Jour nal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 11, 971-983. 
Chick, J., Lehert,  P., & Landron, F.  (2003). Does acamprosate improve reduction of drinking as  
well as aiding abstinence?  Journal of Psychopharmacology , 7, 397-402. 
Cooper, M.  L., Russell, M., Skinner,  J. B., & Windle, M. (1992). Development and  validation of 
a three-dimensional measure of drinking motives. Psychological  Assessment , 4(2), 123- 
132. 
Davidson, D., Palfai, T., Bird, C. & Swift, R. (1999). Effects  of naltrexone on alcohol  self- 
administration  in heavy drinkers. Alcoholism: Clinical  & Experimental  Research , 23, 
195-203. 
Page 45 of 52 
Page 45 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Drobes, D.  J., Anton,  R. F., Thomas, S. E., & Voronin, K.  (2003). A clinical  laboratory paradigm  
for evaluating  medication effects  on alcohol  consumption: naltrexone and nalmefene.  
Neuropsychopharmacology,  28, 755-764. 
Escher, T. & Mittleman,  G. (2006). Schedule- induced alcohol drinking:  non-selective effects  of 
acamprosate and  naltrexone.  Addictive Biology,  11, 55-63. 
Evans, S. M, Levin, F. R., Brooks, D.  J., & Garawi, F. (2007). A pilot double-blind treatment  
trial of memantine for  alcohol dependence.  Alcoholism: Clinical  and Experimental 
Research,  31, 775-782. 
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L. Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B.W. (1996). Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders, Research Version, Patient Edition. New York,  
Biometrics  Research,  New York State Psychiatric  Institute. 
Garbutt, J. C., West, S. L.,  Carey, T. S., Lohr, K.  N., & Crews, F. T. (1999). Pharmacological  
treatment of alcohol dependence: a review of the evidence. JAMA , 281, 1318-1325. 
Gass, J. T. & Olive, M. F. (2008). Glutamatergic substrates  of drug addiction  and alcoholism.  
Biochemical  Pharmacology,  75, 218-265. 
Gelernter,  J., Gueorguieva, R. , Kranzler,  H. R., Zhang, H., Cramer, J., Rosenheck, R., et  al. 
(2007). 
VA Cooperative Study  #425 Study Group. Opioid receptor gene (OPRM1,  OPRK1, and 
OPRD1) variants  and response to naltrexone treatment  for alcohol dependence: results  
from the VA Cooperat ive Study.  Alcoholism: Clinical  and Experimental Research,  31, 
555-563. 
Gracy, K. N., Svingos , A. L., & Pickel, V. M. (1997). Dual  ultrastructural  localization  of mu- 
opioid receptors  and NMDA-type glutamate  receptors  in the shell  of the rat  nucleus 
accumbens. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 4839-4848. 
Grant, B. F., Stinson, F.  S., Dawson,  D. A., Chou, S. P., Ruan, W. J., & Pickering, R. P. (2004). 
Co-occurrence of 12-month alcohol  and drug use disorders and personality disorders in 
the United  States: results  from the National  Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and  
Related Conditions. Archives of General Psychiatry , 61, 361-368. 
Grant, K. A. & Columbo, G.  (1993). Discriminative stimulus effects of ethanol: effect  of training 
dose on the substitution of  N-methyl-D- asparate antagonists.  Journal of Pharmacology 
and Experimental Therapeutics , 264, 1241-1247. 
Grant, K. A. & Lovinger, D. M. (1995).  Cellular and behavioral neurobiology of alcohol:  
receptor-mediated neuronal processes. Clinical Neuroscience, 3, 155-164. 
Gray, J.A. (1981). A critique  of Eysenck's  theory of personality. In H.J. Eysenck  (Ed.): A model 
for personality . Springer- Verlag: Berlin. 
Greenwald  A, Nosek B, Banaji M. Understanding and  using the implicit  association  test: I. An 
improved scoring algorithm . Journal of Personality Social  Psychology 2003;85:197-216 
Griffiths, R. R., Troisi, J. R., II, Silvermian,  K., & Miumford, G.  K. (1993). Multiple choice 
procedure: an  efficient approach  for investigating  drug reinforcement  in humans. 
Behavioural Pharmacol ogy, 4, 3-13. 
Gueorguieva, R. V.  & Krystal, J. (2004). “Move Over ANOVA:  Progress in Analyzing Repeated 
Measures  Data and  Its reflection  in Papers Published  in the Archives of General  
Psychiatry.” Archives of General Psychiatry , 61, 310-317. 
Guo, Y., Wang, H. L., Xiang, X. H. & Zhao, Y. (2009). The role of glutamate and  its receptors in 
mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic  regions in opioid addiction. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Review, 33, 864-873. 
Harris, B. R., Prendergast,  M. A., Gibson, D. A., Rogers, D. T., Blanchard, J.  A., Holley, R. C., 
et al. (2002). Acamprosate inhibits the  binding and neurotoxic effects  of trans-ACPD, 
suggesting a novel site of action  at metabotropic  glutamate receptors.  Alcoholism: 
Clinical & Experimental  Research , 26, 1779-1793. 
Page 46 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Heyser, C. J., Schulteis,  G., Durbin, P., & Koob, G.  F. (1998). Chronic acamprosate eliminates  
the alcohol  deprivation effect  while having limited effects on baseline responding for 
ethanol in rats.  Neuropsychopharmacology, 18, 125-133. 
Hoffman,  P. L., Rabe, C. S., Grant,  K. A., Valverius, P., Hudspith,  M., & Tabakoff, B. (1990). 
Ethanol and  the NMDA  receptor. Alcohol, 7, 229-231. 
Holter, S. M., Danysz,  W., & Spanagel,  R. (1996). Evidence for alcohol anti -craving properties 
of memantine.  European Journal of Pharmacology , 314, RI-R2. 
Holter, S. M., Danysz,  W., & Spanagel,  R. (2000). Novel uncompetitive N -methyl-D-aspartate 
(NMDA)-receptor antagonist MRZ  2/579 suppresses ethanol  intake in long-term ethanol- 
experienced  rats and generalizes  to ethanol  cue in drug discrimination  procedure. Journal  
of Pharmacology and Experimental  Therapeutics , 292, 545-552. 
Houben K,  Nosek B, Wiers R. Seeing  the forest  through the trees: A comparison of different  IAT 
variants measuring implicit alcohol associations.  Addiction  in press. 
Huang, J., Wang, H., Pickel, V. M. (2000). Rostrocaudal variation in targeting of N-methyl-D- 
aspartate and mu-opioid receptors in the rat medial nucleus of the solitary tract. Journal 
of Comparative Neurology,  421, 400-411. 
Hubbell, C.  L., Czirr, S. A., Hunter, G. A., Beaman, C. M., LeCann, N. C., & Reid, L.D. (1986). 
Consumption of ethanol  solution is potentiated  by morphine and attenuated  by naloxone 
persistently  across repeated daily administrations.  Alcohol, 3, 39-54. 
Hundt, W., Danysz,  W., Holter , S. M., & Spanagel, R. (1998). Ethanol and  N-methyl-D- aspartate 
receptor complex interactions:  a detailed  drug discrimination  study in the rat. 
Psychopharmacology , 135, 44- 51. 
Jarvis, B. & Figgit, D. P. (2003). Memantine.  Drugs and Aging , 20, 465-476. 
Johnson, B.  A., Rosenthal,  N., Capece, J. A., Wiegand,  F., Mao, L., Beyers, K., et al. (2008). 
Topiramate for Alcoholism Advisory Board; Topiramate for  Alcoholism  Study Group. 
Improvement of physical  health and quality of life  of alcohol -dependent individuals with 
topiramate treatment: US  multisite randomized  controlled trial. Archives of Internal 
Medicine, 168, 1188-1199. 
Kalivas, P. W. (2005).  How do we determine which drug- induced neuroplastic changes are 
important?  Nature Neuroscience,  8, 140-141. 
Kavirajan, H. (2009). Memantine:  a comprehensive review of safety and efficacy. Expert 
Opinion on Drug  Safety, 8, 89-109. 
Kenna GA,  Lomastro  TL, Schiesl A, Leggio L, Swift RM. (2009). Review  of topiramate: an  
antiepileptic for the treatment of  alcohol dependenc e. Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 2, 
135-142. 
Koob, G. F., Kenneth Lloyd, G., & Mason, B. J. (2009). Development  of pharmacotherapies  for 
drug  addiction:  a Rosetta stone approach. Nature  Reviews. Drug Discovery , 8, 500-515. 
Koob, G.F.  & Le Moal, M. (2008). N eurobiological  mechanisms  for opponent motivational  
processes  in addiction. Philosophical  Transactions  of the Royal  Society of London. Series  
B, Biological Sciences, 363, 3113- 3123. 
Kotlinska, J., Pachut a, A., Dylag, T., & Silberring, J. (2007). The role of neuropeptide FF 
(NPFF) in the expression of sensitization  to hyperlocomotor effect of morphine and  
ethanol. Neuropeptides , 41, 51-58. 
Kranzler, H.R., 2000. Pharmacotherapy  of alcoholism: gaps in knowledge and opportunities for 
research. Alcohol and Alcoh olism, 35, 537–547. 
Kranzler, H. R., Modesto- Lowe, V., & VanKirk, J. (2000). Naltrexone vs. Nefazodone for 
Treatment  of Alcohol Dependence. A Placebo-Controlled Trial. 
Neuropsychopharmacology , 22, 493-503. 
Page 47 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Krishnan- Sarin, S., Cavallo, D.,  Shi, J., Franco , N., Pittman, B., O'Malley,  S., et al. (2009a). 
Memantine effects  on human ethanol  consumption:  initial impressions.  Alcoholism: 
Clinical & Experimental  Research,  33(6S), 290A. 
Krishnan- Sarin, S., Krystal,  J. H., Shi, J., Pittman, B., & O'Malley,  S. S. (2007). Family history 
of alcoholism  influences  naltrexone-induced reduction in alcohol  drinking. Biological  
Psychiatry,  62, 694-697. 
Krishnan- Sarin, S., O’Malley,  S., Krystal,  J. (2009b). Treatment  implications. Alcohol Research  
and Health,  31, 400-407. 
Krupitsky, E. M., Burakov, A.  M., Romanova, T.  N., Grinenko, N.  I., Grinenko,  A. Y., Fletcher, 
J., et al. (2001). Attenuation  of ketamine effects  by nimodipine in recently  detoxified  
ethanol dependent men: psychophannacologic implications of  the interactionof  NMDA 
an L-type calcium  channel antagonists.  Neuropsychopharmacology , 25, 936-947. 
Krupitsky, E.  M., Neznanova,  O., Masalov, D., Burakov, A. M., Didenko, T., Romanova,  T., et 
al. (2007). Effect of memantine  on cue-induced alcohol craving  in recovering  alcohol- 
dependent  patients. American Journal of Psychiatry , 164, 519 -523. 
Krystal JH, Staley  J, Mason GF, Petrakis IL, Kaufman J, Harris RA, Gelernter JE, Lappalainen  J. 
GABA A receptors and alcoholism: Intoxication, dependence,  vulnerability,  and treatment.  
(2006). Arch Gen Psychiatry ;63:957-68. 
Krystal JH, Tabakoff B.  Ethanol abuse,  dependence, and  withdrawal:  neurobiology and clinical 
implications.  In: Psychopharmacology: a fifth generation of progress.  Davis KL, 
Charney D, Coyle JT, Nemeroff C (eds), Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: Philadelphia,  
2002;1425- 1443 
Krystal, J. H., Crame r, J. A., Kroll, W., Kirk,  G., Rosenheck,  R. A., & The Veteran Affair 
Naltrexone Cooperative  Study 425 Group. (2001). Naltrexone in the treatment  of alcohol  
dependence . New England Journal of Medicine, 345, 1734- 1739. 
Krystal, J. H., Karper, L. P., Seibyl,  J. P., Freeman,  G. K., Delaney,  R., Bremner J. D., et al. 
(1994). Subanesthetic effects  of the noncompetitive NMDA antagonist,  ketamine,  in 
humans, Psychotomimetic,  perceptual,  cognitive, and neuroendocrine responses.  Archives 
of Genetic Psychiatry,  51,199-214. 
Krystal, J. H., Petrakis, I. L., Webb, E.,  Cooney, N.  L., Karper, L. P., Namanworth,  S., et al. 
(1998) Dose- related ethanol-like effects  of the NMDA  antagonist,  ketamine,  in recently 
detoxified alcoholics.  Archives of General  Psychiatry,  55, 354 - 360. 
Krystal, J.H., Webb, E.,  Cooney, N.,  Kranzler, H. R., & Charney, D. S. (1994). Specificity  of 
ethanol like  effects elicited by serotonergic and  noradrenergic mechanisms.  Archives of 
General Psychiatry , 51, 898-911. 
Kuzmin, A.,  Steinback,  T. & Liljequist,  S. (2008). Memantine enhances  the inhibitory effects of 
naltrexone on ethanol  consumption. European  Journal of Pharmacology , 584, 352-356. 
Lejuez, C.W., Read,  J.P., Kahler, C.W., Richards,  J.B., Ramsey,  S.E., Stuart, G.L., et  al. (2002). 
Evaluation  of a behavioral measure of risk taking: the Balloon Analogue Risk Task 
(BART). Journal of Experimental  Psychology.  Applied, 8, 75-84. 
Lin, N. & Hubbard, J. I. (1995). An  NMDA receptor antagonist  reduces ethanol preference in 
untrained but not trained rats. Brain Research  Bulletin, 36, 421-424. 
Lovinger, D.  M., Whit e, G., & Weight, F. F. (1989). Ethanol inhibits NMDA-activated ion 
current in hippocampal neurons. Science, 243, 1721-1724. 
Luby, E. D., Cohen, B.  D., Rosenbaum,  G., Gottlieb, J., & Kelley, R. (1959). Study of new  
schizophrenomimetic drug – sernyl.  Archives of Neurological Psychiatry , 81, 363-369. 
Lundbeck, H.  (2002). Summary of product characteristics.  Ebixa (memantine hydroch loride). 
Valby, Denmark,  1-13. 
Marks, L. E., J. Stevens, C., Bartoshuk, L., Gent, J. F.,  Rifkin, B., & Stone, V.  K. (1988). 
Magnitude matching:  The measurement  of taste and smell.  Chemical  Senses, 13, 63-87. 
Page 48 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Martin, C. S., Earleywine,  M., Musty,  R. E., Perrine, M. W., & Swift, R. M. (1993). 
Development  and validation of the Biphasic Alcohol Effects  Scale. Alcoholism: Clinical  
& Experimental Research , 17, 140-146. 
Meyer, P. J. & Phillips, T. J. (2003). Sensitivity  to ketamine,  alone or in combination with  
ethanol, is altered in mice selectively  bred for sensitivity  to ethanol's  locomotor effects.  
Alcoholism: Clinical  & Experimental  Research,  27, 1701- 1709. 
Miller, W.R., Zweben,  A., DiClemente,  C.C., & Rychtarik,  R.G. (1992). Motivational 
Enhancement Therapy  manual: A clinical  research guide for therapists  treating 
individuals with  alcohol abuse and  dependence. National Institute on Alcohol  Abuse and 
Alcoholism , Rockville,  MD. 
Myrick, H., Anton, R. F., Li, X., Henderson, S., Randall, P. K.,  & Voronin, K.  (2008). Effect of 
naltrexone and ondansetron on alcohol  cue-induced activation  of the ventral striatum in  
alcohol-dependent people. British  Journal of Addiction , 65, 466-475. 
Neumann R, Strack F. Approach and  avoidance;  the influence of proprioceptive and  
exteroceptive cue on encoding of affective information.  Journal of Personality Social  
Psychology 2000(79) :39-48 
Nie, Z., Yuan, X.,  Madamba, S.G., & Siggins, G.R. (1993). Ethanol decreases  glutamatergic  
synaptic transmission in rat nucleus accumbens  in vitro: naloxone reversal.  Journal of 
Pharmacology and Experimental  Therapy, 266, 1705 -1712. 
National Advisory Council on Alcohol Abuse and  Alcoholism  (2005): Recommended  Council 
Guidelines on Ethyl Alcohol Administration  in Human Experimentation. Revised May 
2005. 
O'Malley,  S. S., Jaffe,  A. J., C hang, G., Schottenfeld,  R. S., Meyer, R. E., & Rounsaville,  B. 
(1992). Naltrexone and coping skills therapy  for alcohol dependence.  A controlled study. 
Archives of General Psychiatry , 49, 881-887. 
O'Malley,  S. S., Krishnan- Sarin, S., Farren,  C., Sinha, R., & Kreek, J. (2002). Naltrexone 
decreases  craving and alcohol self -administration  in alcohol-dependent subjects and 
activates the hypothalamo- pituitary-adrenocortical  axis. Psychopharmacology , 160, 19- 
29. 
Oroszi, G., Anton, R. F.,  O'Malley,  S., Swift,  R., Pettinati,  H., Couper, D.,  et al. (2009). OPRM1  
Asn40Asp predicts  response to naltrexone treatment: a haplotype- based approach.  
Alcoholism Clinical  and Experimental Research,  33, 383-393. 
Oslin, D. W., Berrettini,  W., Kranzler,  H. R., Pettinati, H., Gelernter,  J., Volpicelli,  J. R., et al. 
(2003). A functional polymorphism of the mu-opioid receptor gene is associated  with 
naltrexone response in alcohol -dependent patients. Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 1546- 
1552. 
among male hazardous  drinkers. Journal  of Studies on Alcohol  2006;67: 926-933. 
Parsons CG, Danysz W, Zieglgansberger W. Excitatory  amino acid neurotransmission. (2005). 
Handb Exp  Pharmacol.  169:249-303 
Patton, J.H., Stanford, M.S., & Barratt, E.S. (1995). Factor structure of the Barratt  impulsiveness  
scale. Journal of Clinical  Psychology , 51, 768-774. 
Petrakis, I. L., Limoncelli,  D., Gueorguieva, R., Jatlow, P., Boutros,  N. N., Trevisan, L., et al. 
(2004). Altered  NMDA Glutamate Receptor Antagonist Response in Individuals  With a 
Family Vulnerability  to Alcoholism.  American  Journal of Psychiatry , 161, 776-782. 
Pope, R.L., & Lovinger , D. M. (2000). Interaction  of acamprosate with  ethanol and  spermine on 
NMDA receptors  in primary  cultured neurons. European Journal of Pharmacology, 394, 
221-231. 
Rafi-Tari, S., Kalant, H., Liu, J. F., Silver, I., & Wu, P. H.  (1996). Dizocilpine prevents  the 
development of tolerance to ethanol -induced error on a circular maze test. 
Psychopharmacology , 125, 23- 32. 
Page 49 of 52 
Page 49 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Reisberg,  B., Doody, R., Stoffler, A., Schmitt, F., Ferris, S., Moebius,  H. J., et al. (2003). A 
randomized  placebo controlled  study of memantine,  an uncompetitive NMDA antagonist,  
in patients  with moderate to severe Alzheimer's  disease. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 348, 1333-1341. 
Reynolds, B., Richards, J. B., & de Wit, H. (2004). Ethanol  effects on experiential  and 
hypothetical measures  of delayed  discounting  in humans . Poster presented  at the 30th 
Annual Association for Behavior Analysis  Convention,  Boston, MA.  
Reynolds, B., Richards, J. B., & de Wit, H. (2006). Acute- alcohol effects on the Experiential 
Discounting Task (EDT) and a question- based measure of delay discounting.  
Pharmacology, Biochemistry,  and Behavior,  83, 194-202. 
Reynolds, B. & Schiffbauer, R. (20 04). Measuring  state changes in human  delay discounting: An  
experiential  discounting task. Behavioural  Processes , 67, 343-356. 
Rice, J. P., Reich, T., Bucholz,  K. K., Neuman,  J., Fishman,  R., Rochberg, N.,  et al. (1995). 
Comparison of direct interview and  family history of diagnoses of alcohol dependence. 
Alcoholism Clinical  and Experimental Research, 19, 1018- 23. 
Richardson,  K., Baillie, A., Reid, S., Morley,  K., Teesson, M., Sannibale,  C., et al. (2008). Do 
acamprosate or naltrexone have an  effect on daily drinking by reducing craving for 
alcohol? Addiction , 103, 953-959. 
Rinck, M. & Becker, E. S. (2007). Approach and  avoidance in fear  of spiders. Journal of 
Behavior Therapy and Experimental  Psychiatry , 38, 105-120. 
Saitz, R., Mayo-Smith, M . F., Roberts, M. S., Redmond,  H. A., Bernard, D. R., Calkins, D. R., et 
al. (1994). Individualized treatment  for alcohol withdrawal. A randomized  double-blind 
controlled trial.  JAMA, 272, 519- 23. 
Saitz, R. & O'Malley,  S. S. (1997). Pharmacotherapies  for alcohol abuse. Withdrawal and  
treatment.  Medical Clinics of North American , 81, 881-907. 
Sanavio E.  (1988) Obsessions and compulsions: the Padua Inventory. Behavioral  Research  
Therapy, 26(2):169- 77. 
Sayette, M. A., Shiffman, S., Tiffany,  S. T., Niaura, R. S., Martin, C. S., & Shadel, W. G.  (2000). 
The measurement  of drug craving. Addiction,  95 (Suppl2), 189 -210. 
Schugens,  M. M., Egerter, R., Daum,  I., Schepelmann,  K., Klockgether, T.,  & Loschmann, P. A.  
(1997). The NMDA antagonist memantine impairs classical eyeblink conditioning in 
humans. Neuroscience Letters, 224, 57-60. 
Schulz, H.,  Jobert, M., Coppola, R., Herrmann, W. M., & Pantev, M. (1996). The use of diurnal, 
vigilance changes  in the EEG to verify vigilance-enhancing effects of memantine  in a 
clinical pharmacological  study. Neuropsychobiology , 33, 32-40. 
Schultz, C. G. & Soyka, M. (2000). Dextromethorphan challenge in alcohol- dependent  patients 
and controls. Archives of General Psychiatry , 57, 291-292. 
Schwenkreis, P., Witscher,  K., Janssen, F.,  Addo, A.,  Dertwinkel,  R., Zen, Z. M., et al. (1999). 
Influence of the N-methyl-D- aspartate antagonist  memantine on human  motor cortex 
excitability.  Neuroscience Letters , 270,137-140. 
Sellers, E. M., Higgins,  G. A., Tomkins,  D. M., Romach, M. K.  & Toneatto, T.  (1991). 
Opportuni ties for treat ment of psychoactive substance use disorders with  serotonergic 
medications.  Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 52, 49-54. 
Sinha, R., Catapano,  D., & O’Malley,  S. S. (1997, June 12-17). Stress reactivity and stress- 
induced cocaine craving. Paper presented  at the Annual Meetings of the College on 
Problems of Drug Dependence,  Nashville,  TN. 
Small, D. M., M. D. Gregory, et al. (2003). "Dissociation  of neural representation  of intensity 
and affective valuation in human gustation." Neuron 39(4):  701-11. 
Small,  D.  M.,  M.  G.  Veldhuizen,   et  al.  (2008).  "Separable  substrates   for  anticipatory  and 
consummatory chemosensation  of food." Neuro n: in press. 
Page 50 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Small, D. M., J. Voss, et al. (2004). "Experience-dependent neural integration  of taste and smell 
in the human  brain." Journal of Neurophysiology 92: 1892-1903. 
Sobell, L. C. & Sobell, M. B. (1992). Timeline follow-back: a technique for assessing self- 
reported ethanol consumption. Measuring  Alcohol Consumption: Psychosocial  and 
Biochemical  Methods. J. Allen and R. Z. Litten. Totowa, NJ, Humana Press, Inc.: 41-72. 
Srisurapanont,  M. & Jarusuraisin, N.  (2002). Opioid antagonists  for alcohol  dependence.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,  CD001867. 
Stepanyan, T.  D., Farook, J. M., Kowalski,  A., Kaplan, E., Barron, S., & Littleton, J. M. (2008). 
Alcohol withdrawal- induced hippocampal neurotoxicity in vitro  and seizures in vivo are 
both reduced  by memantine.  Alcoholism: Clinical  & Experimental Research, 32, 2128- 
2135. 
Stevens, J. C. & Marks, L. E. (1980). Cross- modality matching functions generated  by 
magnitude  estimation.  Perception  and Psychophysics,  27, 379-389. 
Stromberg,  M.F., Mackler, S.A., Volpicelli,  J.R., & O'Brien, C.P. (2001). Effect  of acamprosate 
and naltrexone, alone or in combination, on ethanol consumption.  Alcohol, 23,109-116. 
Sullivan, J., Sykora, K., Schneiderman,  J., Naranjo, C. A., & Sellers, E. M. (1991). Assessment  
of Alcohol Withdrawal:  the revised clinical institute withdrawal  assessment  for alcohol  
scale (CiWA -Ar). British Journal of Addictions , 84, 1353- 1357. 
Swift, R. M., Whelihan, W., Kuznetsov,  O., Buongiomo,  G. & Hsuing, H.  (1994). Naltrexone- 
induced alterations  in human  ethanol intoxication.  American  Journal of Psychiatry , 151, 
1463-1467. 
Szabo, G.,  Tabakoff, B., & Hoffman, P. L. (1994). The NMDA receptor antagonist dizocilpine 
differentially  affects environment -dependent and  environment-independent ethanol 
tolerance.  Psychopharmacology, 113, 511-517. 
Talmi D, Seymour B,  Daya n P, Dolan R. Human Pavlovain -Instrumental  Transfer. The Journal 
of Neuroscience 2008;28(2) :360-368. 
Tangney JP, Baumeister  RF, Boone AL.  (2004). High  self-control predicts good adjustment,  less 
pathology, better  grades, and interpersonal  success. Journal of Personality.  72(2):271- 
324. 
Torrubia, R, ÿvila, C, Moltó, J and Caseras, X. (2001). The Sensitivity  to Punishment  and 
Sensitivity  to Reward Questionnaire (SPSRQ) as  a measure of Gray's anxiety and 
impulsivity  dimensions. Personality and Individual Differences . (31), 6, 837-862. 
Tsai, G. & Coyle, J. T. (1998). The role of glutamatergic neurotransmission  in the 
pathophysiology of alcoholism. Annual Review of Medicine,  49,173-184. 
Tsai, G., Gastfriend,  D. R., & Coyle, J. T. (1995). The glutamatergic basis of human alcoholism. 
American  Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 332-340. 
Turner, R., J., Wheaton,  B., Lloyd, D., A. (1995). The Epidemiology of Social Stress. American  
Sociological  Review, 60(1), 104- 125. 
Veldhuizen,  M., D. Gitelman,  et al. (2012). "An fMRI Study of the Interactions  Between the 
Attention and the Gustatory  Networks." Chemosensory Perception  5(1): 117-127. 
Veldhuizen,  M. G., G. Bender, et al. (2007). "Tasting in the absence of taste:  modulation  of early 
gustatory cortex by attention to taste."  Chemical  Senses 32: 569-581. 
Veldhuizen,  M. G., D. Douglas, et al. (2011). "The Anterior Insular Cortex Represents  Breaches 
of Taste Identity Expectation." The Journal of Neuroscience 31(41): 14735-14744. 
Veldhuizen,  M. G., D. Nachtigal,  et al. (2010). "The insular taste cortex contributes  to odor 
quality coding." Frontiers in Human  Neuroscience 4: 58. 
Veldhuizen,  M. G. and D. M. Small (2011). "Modality- Specific Neural Effects of Selective 
Attention to Taste and  Odor." Chemical  Senses 36(8): 747-760. 
Page 51 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017
 
Vengeliene,  V., Bachteler,  D., Danysz, W., & Spanagel, R. (2005). The  role of the NMDA 
receptor in alcohol  relapse: a pharmacological  mapping study using the alcohol 
deprivation effect.  Neuropharmacology , 48, 822-829. 
Vengelienem  V., Bilbao, A., Molander, A.  & Spanagel,  R. (2008).  Neuropharmacology of 
alcohol addiction.  British Journal of Pharmacology, 154, 299 -315. 
Verplanken, B, Orbell, S (2003). Reflections  on Past Behavior: A Self-Report Index of Habit  
Strength. (33), 6, 1313–1330. 
Volpicelli,  J. R., Alterman,  A. I., Hayishida, M., & O’Brien, C. P. (1992). Naltrexone in the 
treatment of alcohol dependence. Archives  of General Psychiatry , 49, 876-880. 
Watson, T.  E. (1989). Total body water and  alcohol levels: updating the fundamentals.  In K. E. 
Krow & R. D. Batt (Eds.), Human Metabolism of  Alcohol. CRC Press, FL, 41-66. 
Weerts, E. M., Kim,  Y. K., Wand, G.  S., Dannals,  R. F., Lee, J. S., Frost,  J. J., et al. (2008). 
Differences  in delta- and mu-opioid receptor blockade measured  by positron emission  
tomography in naltrexone- treated recently abstinent alcohol-dependent  subjects. 
Neuropsychopharmacology,  33, 653-665. . 
Weschler,  D. (1997). Weschler  Adult Intelligence Scale- Third  Edition. San Antonio: 
Psychological  Corporation. 
Whiteside,  SP; Lynam, DR (2003). Understanding the role  of impulsivity  and externalizi ng 
psychopathology in alcohol abuse:  application  of the UPPS impulsive behavior scale.  
Experimental and clinical psychopharmacology 11 (3):  210–7. 
Wiers, R. W., Rinck, M ., Dictus, M., & van den Wildenberg,  E. (2009). Relatively  strong 
automatic  appetitive action-tendencies in male  carriers of the OPRM1  G-allele. Genes, 
Brain, and Behavior , 8, 101-106. 
Winblad, B.  & Poritis, N. (1999). Memantine in severe dementia:  results of the 9M- Best  Study 
(benefit and efficacy in severely demented  patients during treatment with memantine).  
International  Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry , 14,135-146. 
Wise, R. A.  (1996). Neurobiology of addiction. Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 6, 243-251. 
Woodward, J. J. (1999). Ionotropic glutamate receptors  as sites of action for ethanol in the brain. 
Neurochemistry International , 35, 107-113. 
Wu, P. H.,  Mihic, S. J., Liu, J. E, Le, A. D., & Kalant, H. (1993). Blockade of chronic tolerance 
to ethanol by  the NMDA antagonist,  (+)-MK-801. European Journal  of Pharmacology , 
Zakharova ES, Dan ysz W, Bespalov  AY (2005) Drug  discrimnation analysis of  NMDA receptor  
channel blockers as nicotinic receptor antagonists  in rats. Psychopharmacology (Berl).  
2005 179(1):128- 35. 
Zhu, W. & Pan, Z. Z. (2005). Mu -opioid-mediated inhibition of glutamate synapt ic transmission  
in rat central amygdala neurons. Neuroscience,  133, 97-103. 
Zhu, S., Tai,  C., MacVicar,  B. A., Jia, W., Cynader, M. S. (2009). Glutamatergic stimulation  
triggers rapid Krüpple- like factor 4 expression in neurons and the over expression of 
KLF4 sensitizes  neurons to NMDA-induced caspase-3 activity.  Brain Research , 23, 49- 
62. 
Page 52 of 52
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY HIC ON 07-DEC-2016 Approved -  Valid through 23-JUN-2017