 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 1 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
  
Use Of An In-Home Non-Stre ss Test Device For Remote 
Fetal Monitoring In A Local High-Risk Obstetric Population 
(Airstrip) 
 
Protocol Summary 
 
 
 
IRB Approval Date of Current Version: 8/31/2018 
University of Utah IRB #: IRB_00077591 
Sponsor: AIRSTRIP OPERATIONS 
 
Principal Investigator: Erin Clark 
Internal Staff and  Sub-Investigators: Kelli Barbour 
Emily Callaway 
External Sub-Investigators:  
 
This document was created using the ERICA Online System at the University of Utah. The document is created 
from study information approved by the IR B on the date listed above.  Any alteration to the original content of this 
document may not be considered to repres ent the study as approved by the IRB.  
  
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 2 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 Background and Introduction 
 
In the setting of high-risk pre gnancies, non-stress tests (NST)  relying on fetal tococardiography 
technology have been used to hel p identify potential ongoing fe tal compromise that would result 
in stillbirth/intrauterine fetal  demise (IUFD) within seven day s after the NST has been 
completed.  The true power of the  NST lies in its negative pred ictive value of 99.85%; its 
negative predictive value is much lower at 10-40%.1 Follow-up fetal monitoring for an abnormal 
NST (called a non-reactive NST)  is generally non-invasive, but requires the patient to be 
evaluated in a medical facilit y where ultrasound is available o r where extended monitoring can 
be done.1 NSTs are routinely used for high- risk pregnancies in which the re is a higher risk of 
intra-uterine fetal demise (IUFD ) secondary to maternal, fetal,  or pregnancy-related 
complications.  Common indications  include pre-gestational diab etes, chronic hypertension, 
previous IUFD, intrauterine gr owth restriction, fetal gastrosch isis, and preeclampsia.2 
NSTs are generally performed in a n in-hospital setting (antepar tum unit or triage area) or in an 
outpatient clinical setting.  In order to perform the test a be d, mid-level provider, interpreting 
physician, and an NST machine must be available.  Most clinics and hospitals are limited in the 
number of NSTs that can be performed at any given time secondar y to NST machine and spatial 
limitations. A few studies looked a t remote NSTs using telephon e-photograph pairing; the 
earliest studies were performed i n the late 1970s.  The majorit y of these studies were done before 
the Internet was available to t he public and before the routine  use of Bluetooth™ and internet-
based technologies. The results of  these studies are encouragin g – indicating the interpretable 
NST monitoring strips can be obtai ned in remote locations and t ransferred to a central location 
for reading. 2-8 
In additional to feasibility asse ssments, cost studies (includi ng cost-effectiveness studies) of 
remote fetal monitoring systems f rom the late 1980s to the earl y 2000s have shown decreased 
costs for at-home fetal monito ring, even when a midlevel provid er conducts in the in-home 
testing. 9-12 
While the majority of these studi es have looked at provider app lied devices, there are studies that 
show patients can be taught how t o use an NST device reliably a nd are able to perform the 
monitoring to a similar level as midlevel providers. 3,6,13,14 Studies of patient satisfaction for 
fetal in-home monitoring indicate that remote testing is accept able to patient and associated with 
a high level of satisfaction.13,15 
A few studies have looked at diffe rences in outcome between wom en remotely monitored and a 
control group.  Pan, et al., found t hat the NST remote group ha d a higher number of abnormal 
NSTs and Apgars, but decreased asp hyxia compared to women monit ored at home via kick 
counts.16 Other studies have shown decr eased number and length hospitali zations for remote 
fetal monitoring.5,13,17  Another study showed decreased anxiety among women receiving 
remote monitoring done by a midleve l provider compared to conve ntional prenatal care.18 
Since the 1970s and even the 1990s, healthcare systems have evo lved, as has information 
technology and mobile health (mHea lth) platforms.  Newer and mo re efficient systems of 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 3 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 electronic fetal monitoring have  been developed, allowing for r emote monitoring of obstetric 
patients in labor.  No studies in the last decade have validated or evaluated the u tility of 
modern at-home, patient applied, remote NST monitoring systems,  nor have any studies 
looked at the steps required to in tegrate at-home NST monitorin g into an existing medical 
system.  
The Airstrip® Sense4Baby™ syste m device is FDA-approved for pro vider-applied use and is 
currently undergoing FDA review  for home monitoring use.  Studi es conducted by Airstrip® 
have shown that it is feasible t o obtain interpretable NSTs in a provider-applied setting using the 
system device. <SOURCE> In their formative study, Sense4Baby™ s howed success rates of 
turning on and interacting with the  device, as well as collecti on of fetal heart tracing (FHT) and 
tocometric data, in 92.5% of patie nts (95% Confidence Interval ± 4.4%). Information from the 
formative study were used to imp roved the interface and workflo w.  In their summative study, 
patient success in following all  steps including obtaining FHT and tocometric data was 99.5% 
(95% Confidence Interval ± 1.85%).  <SOURCE, Scripps feasibility  data> During this study, the 
company also found that interpre tability of obtained data did n ot differ significantly between 
domiciliary and clin ical locations.   
Significance  
Modern in-home NST machines tha t relay monitoring results throu gh the Internet have been 
developed, but feasibility and s atisfaction studies have not ye t been conducted, particularly in 
high-risk populations.  If these types of machines are found to  be usable and safe for patients to 
use and can be integrated with m inimal difficulties into the ex isting healthcare system, use of at-
home fetal monitoring may allow patients to save time and money  related to travel for NSTs 
previously only available thr ough healthcare centers.  In-home NST use may also be cost-
effective for the healthcare sys tem by increasing the capacity and flexibility to conduct 
NSTs.  Based on previously conducte d studies, remote monitoring  may also be cost-effective in 
the ability to reduce duration a nd frequency of inpatient monit oring. 
The aim of this present study is to evaluate the feasibility of  integrating an at-home NST 
program into an existing healthcar e system, to evaluate the int erpretability of N STs obtained at 
home within a high-risk obstetr ic population, to assess the num ber of abnormal and/or 
uninterpretable NST episodes in curred in a domiciliary setting,  and define the subsequent patient 
care algorithm. Additionally, we wi ll determine the patient and  healthcare provider satisfaction 
and explore associated costs, benefits, and effectiveness for t he healthcare system and patient. 
With the results of this study, w e plan to perform a larger stu dy with a high-risk population 
residing remote from t he healthcare center. 
 
 
 
Purpose and Objectives 
 
Mobile connectivity has the possi bility to impact medical care of many patient populations, 
including pregnant patients.  Non- stress tests (NST) for pregna nt patients are currently conducted 
in clinical settings and are not  routinely performed remotely.  For rural and distant patients, this 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 4 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 means the need to travel for extended periods of time, multiple  times per week, in order to 
receive these tests.   Clinical f acilities are also limited in the number of patients to whom they 
can provide clinical care by the phys ical space available for N STs. 
NST technology has been developed th at enables remote NST monit oring. Preliminary data 
suggests that patients can relia bly obtain a NST with self-appl ication and have similar levels of 
satisfaction compared to patients receiving NSTs within a clini cal setting.  
We propose to test the Airstrip® Sense4Baby™ NST device in a lo cal high-risk population in 
order to assess the feasibilit y of integrating an at-home NST m onitoring program into an 
established health care system , as well as to evaluate patient and provider satisfaction associated 
with at-home monitoring. 
Research questions  
Primary Research Questions : 
Can the Airstrip® Sense4Baby™ non- stress test device be integra ted into an exis ting health care 
system in a manner that produces i nterpretable NSTs and allows timely interpretation and 
management by the healthcare provider?  
If the device can be integrated, w hat steps are required and wh at are potential stumbling blocks 
for integration? 
  
Secondary Research Questions:  
-How often do uninterpretable a nd/or abnormal NSTs occur?  
-What is the care algorithm f or these types of NSTs and how do these differ from patients 
receiving NSTs in clinic?  
-Are the patients and healthcare  providers satisfied with the u se of the NST device at home 
compared to receiving an NST in the specified clinic?  
-What is the cost-effectiveness  of this approach for the health  system and for patients? 
 
  
Study Population 
 
Age of Participants: Pregnant women ages 18 and older  
 
Sample Size: 
At Utah: 60   
All Centers: 60 
 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 5 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 Inclusion Criteria: 
Target population:  The target population is hi gh-risk pregnant women. 
Accessible population:   The accessible population is high- risk obstetric patients rec eiving care 
throughout the University of Uta h Healthcare system and who rec eive their NSTs at MFDC. 
 Singleton gestation 
 Estimated gestational age of 32 0/7 -37 6/7 weeks 
 Physician order for twice weekly NSTs 
 Live within 60 mile radius of t he University of Utah University  Hospital or a hospital 
with an obstetric inpatient unit 
 Reliable access to and connectiv ity with wireless Internet 
 Reliable for communication and follow-up 
 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
 Multifetal gestation 
 Maternal age less than 18 
 Plans to move prior to end of pregnancy 
 No or limited access to internet and/or phone 
 
 
 
Design  
 
Observational Research 
Prospective Clinical Research 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Procedures 
 
Recruitment/Participant Identification Process: 
Participants will be recruited by IRB approved research staff.   Patients may be referred by 
their primary obstetrician, but w e will not specifically ask pr oviders to recruit patients.  
Flyers and brochures will be pl aced in public areas throughout our recruitment catchment area 
including:  University of Utah m edical school, hospital and hos pital clinics, campus boards, 
restrooms, etc.  
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 6 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 We will screen patient appointment logs to determine women who may be eligible for this 
study.  The inclusion/exclusion cri teria will be reviewed with each patient's chart.  Potentially 
eligible patients will be ide ntified and invited to enroll upon  presenting for a scheduled NST in 
the University of Utah Materna l Fetal Diagnostic Center.  
  
 
 Informed Consent: 
Description of location(s) where consent will be obtained:  
Consent will be obtained at clini cs within the University of Ut ah covered entity. This may 
include: Madsen Clinic, Clinic 4 a nd the Maternal Fetal Diagnos tics Center.  
 
Description of the consent process(es), including the timing of consent:  
Pregnant women who m eet the pre-screening c riteria will be flag ged as potential participants. 
When she comes to her prenatal c linical visit, we will approach  her and explain the study. 
Patients are given a copy of the  consent document and the study  is explained. We give the 
patient ample time to read the consent document and ask questio ns. If she is interested in 
participating in the study, we will have her sign the consent d ocument at the current visit. If 
the patient wants extra time t o consider whether or not she wis hes to participate, additional 
time will be granted and follow-up will be arranged.  
 
Procedures: 
Study Design  
Phase I  
This initial study is designed a s a pilot study of a small grou p of local high-risk obstetric 
patients.  This will be a prospective single-cohort study.  
Patients with physician-ordered tw ice-weekly NSTs scheduled in the OB Diagnostic Center at 
University of Utah Hospital will be eligible for enrollment. St udy participants wil l be recruited 
to use the Airstrip® Sense4Ba by™ system machine on a weekly bas is until the time of 
delivery, while also receiving an i n clinic NST weekly. Researc h study personnel will notify 
the ordering obstetric provider regarding patient participation  in this study (via  the electronic 
medical record system and email).  Participants will receive an  in-clinic NST with the 
Airstrip® Sense4Baby™ device, will be taught how to use the dev ice, and asked to 
demonstrate their ability to use the device.  If the participan t successfully demonstrates use of 
the monitor, the device will be g iven to the patient to use at a scheduled time each week.  The 
patient will be given educationa l materials, including a visual s-enhanced, short quick start 
guide.  
For her remote NST monitoring, the  patient will receive a virtu al NST appointment. At the 
time of the scheduled appointment, the patient will apply the m onitor and the NST will be read 
by the mid-level provider staffi ng the testing center after a t hirty-minute strip has been 
recorded and transmitted to the  database.  The NST will also be  interpreted by the maternal-
fetal medicine physician, according to the established workflow . The patient will be notified of 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 7 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 the result by a telephone call fr om the mid-level provider and appropriate follow-up arranged 
according to the NST management algorithm developed for this st udy.  If the patient has 
trouble with using the device at home, the patient will be able  to talk with the mid-level 
provider via telephone to  troubleshoot issues. 
The patient will also continue to receive an NST in clinic week ly, allowing each patient to 
serve as her own control in ter ms of NST interpretability, freq uency of non-reactive NSTs, and 
satisfaction.  Weekly on-site vis its will also allow for educat ional opportuniti es and trouble-
shooting. These NST schedules wi ll be repeated on a weekly basi s until delivery or until the 
provider discontinues the NST order.  
Delivery and maternal / neonatal outcome information will be co llected from the electronic 
medical record. Patients will be c ontacted after delivery to as sess overall satisfaction with the 
NST at home versus in clinic. 
Phase II  
Upon completion of phase I enrollm ent (n=30), a second phase of  enrollment will 
begin.  Having demonstrated at-hom e NST interpretability and fe asibility of integration into 
the healthcare system, the next  step will be to use the remote NST testing to demonstrate 
feasible use in rural/remote settings.  This will involve enrol lment of up to 30 additional 
subjects.  Inclusion/exclusion cr iteria, enrollment procedures,  and study procedures will be 
identical to phase I recruitmen t, with the exception of the fol lowing: 
1. Participants may receive NSTs up to twice weekly at home.During  regularly scheduled 
obstetric visits (every 1 to 2 w eeks depending on gestational a ge and circumstances), 
NSTs will be performed on site whi ch will allow for educational  opportunities and 
trouble-shooting.However, we will remove the requirement for on ce weekly on-site 
testing at the Universi ty of Utah Hospital. 
2. The requirement to be within a 60 mile radius of University Hos pital will be 
removed.Instead, the requireme nt will be to be within a 60 mile  radius of a hospital 
with an obstetric unit.Eligibilit y will be assess ed upon enroll ment and the nearest 
obstetrical hospital will be id entified and recorded in the ele ctronic medical record 
(NST nursing documentation and wit hin the pink “sticky note” wi thin the obstetrical 
episode). Clinical algorithms w ill be the same, except the refe rral hospital for urgent 
and emergent evaluations will be the closest hospital with an o bstetrical unit. The 
interpreting NST nurse and physicia n will determine the recomme nded course of 
action and will communicate to the patient, per established pro tocols.The NST nurse 
and physician will also communicate to the responsible obstetri c care provider at the 
nearest hospital for continuity of care. 
Device Specifications and Logistics  
NST transmission  
NSTs obtained at home will be transmitted via technology includ ed in the system in 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 8 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 conjunction with the patient’s hom e wireless Internet system (F igure 1). 
The Sense4Baby™ system measures  the physiological parameters, t hen transmits wirelessly 
over Bluetooth the measured data to a proprietary application s oftware running on a gateway 
device (Samsung phone), which then transmits it wirelessly (3G,  4G, or Wi-Fi) to a HIPAA- 
compliant, web database for storage. A provider, using any web browser on any capable 
computing platform, can then review the data via a custom web p ortal once the patient has 
ended the monitoring session and transmitted the data. 
 
Figure 1: Diagram of information transmission  
  
During the monitoring, the patient will be able to see the resu lts of the monitoring, which can 
help guide the patient to troubleshoot problems they are having  (Figure 2). 
  
 
Figure 2: Picture of patient-viewable monitor  

 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 9 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
   
 
Figure 3: Image of gateway device with monitoring screen visibl e 
  
NST data storage  
Upon the transmission of the NST data, it is stored on the secu re, Sense4Baby™ HIPAA 
compliant database.  The architect ure and system design has bee n developed to ensure that 
HIPAA guidelines are in place to ensure patient information pri vacy. Two servers are utilized 
to enhance security, one server is dedicated to the web portal,  and the other server is used to 
store database information.  Acce ss to the portal software is a llowed only to authenticated 
users (via login names and password). Strong password rules (e. g. minimum 8 characters, 
special characters, renewal after  set periods, etc.) are employ ed. All data communication is 
encrypted (HTTPS), and all packet s containing patient data are de-identified. Data is stored 
encrypted, and de-identified as w ell (encryption keys, and iden tification look-up keys are 
stored in a separate database, on the same server). 
Access to NST storage data  
For every site (clinic, doctor’s office, hospital, etc.) where the system is deployed (referred to 
as a “deployment”), a designated Site Administrator will be gra nted permissions (by 
Sense4Baby,™ Inc.) to create us ers and assign them roles (nurse , physician, etc.; the role 
defines the level of access granted to users) who will be ident ified via a username (an email is 
used), and a unique password (whi ch the users themselves create ; the Site Administrator does 
not know this password). 
NST troubleshooting  
A Quick Start Guide will be provided to the patients and partic ipating healthcare 
providers.  The midlevel provider and the study personnel will be immediately available to 
help troubleshoot. 
Patient and midlevel provider communication and troubleshooting  will be facilitated through use of a 
web-based, HIPAA-compliant  video communication solution provid ed by the University of Utah 
Department of Telemedicine (Doxy.me).  The patient will be trai ned on how to use this video-based 

 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 10 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 technology at their initial study visit.  
Study Procedures  
Patient education  
After the patient is screened and enrolled in the study, the pa tient will be oriented to the 
Airstrip® Sense4Baby™ system and taught how to use the device –  a picture of the device is 
provided below (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4: Picture of Sense4Baby™ device in carrier  
This instruction will take place in the Maternal Fetal Diagnost ic Center (MFDC) by study 
personnel.  The patient will be asked to demonstrate the follow ing manufacturer-evaluated and 
–recommended steps to ensure the patient can adequately use the  system: 
1. Turn on and unlock the gateway 
2. Connect gateway to internet 3. Start the Sense4Baby™ application 4. Log-in 5. Navigate to the pairing screen 6. Insert the Toco in the dongle (this automatically turns the Central Unit on) 
7. Successfully pair the PulseOx 8. Successfully pair the Central Unit 9. Uses adequate amount of transducing gel 

 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 11 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 10. Position the Central Unit on the abdomen, in a position sui table to hear the Fetal Heart 
Rate 11. Attach the TOCO on the abdom en in a correct  orientation 
12. Secure the TOCO (with belt) 13. Secure the Central Unit (with belt) 14. Reset the TOCO to baseline 15. Collect FHR and TOCO data 16. Upload data to server   The patient’s first NST will be ob tained in clinic via the Sens e4Baby™ system.  After 
ensuring appropriate use and attai nment of an interpretable, re active, and reassu ring NST, the 
patient will be discharge d to home with the system. 
NST appointment flow  
At the time of the patient’s appo intment, the midlevel provider  will call the patient to verify 
the appointment and ensure she is  starting the NST.  After this  verification, the  provider will 
communicate with the patient tha t he/she will call the patient in approximately 30 minutes to 
review the tracing and discuss results. 
To initiate a monitoring/NST session, the patient will login in to the Sense4Baby™ application 
on the gateway (via authenticat ed user name and password). She would then connect (pair) the 
application with the 2 Bluetoot h sensors (Central Unit and puls e oximeter), which initiates a 
monitoring session. 
The midlevel provider will utiliz e the portal to assess the int erpretability of the NST strip.  If 
the patient has trouble with the  equipment or the midlevel prov ider identifies problems with 
the NST session, the patient a nd provider will troubleshoot acc ordingly.  The individual 
identifying the issue will ca ll the other.  Troubleshooting the  equipment will follow the 
manufacturers suggestions.  Troubleshooting the NST strip will follow the created clinical 
algorithms.  After a final dispos ition is decided, the encounte r will be documented and closed. 
NST billing  
As a standard of care, NST sessi ons, whether in-home or in-clin ic, will be billed according 
standard NST billing guidelines. 
NST session moderating  
The midlevel provider assigned to NSTs at the MFDC will log int o the Sense4Baby™ portal 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 12 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 after the patient has transmitted the session data and assess t he interpretabilit y of the acquired 
NST.  If the acquired data is non- interpretable, the provider w ill call the patient and ask them 
to replace the monitoring system and try again for a defined pe riod of time.   
NST interpretation  
Initial interpreta tion will be done by the midlevel NST provide r.  Final interpretation will be 
completed by the maternal-fetal medicine physician according to  established clinical 
algorithms. The interpretation wor kflow is identical for on-sit e and remote NSTs, with the 
exception that communication with the patient will be done by t elephone. 
At-home NST follow-up procedure (see associated figure)  
For a reactive NST, the patient w ill be told that the NST is re assuring and that they should 
present for their next schedul ed in-clinic appointment.  For a non-interpretable but overall 
reassuring NST despite in-home tr oubleshooting, the patient wil l be asked to present within 
the same calendar day to the MDF C or to the Obstetric Emergency  Services (OBES) 
depending on the time of day and the availability of clinic app ointments.  For a non-reactive 
NST, the patient will be asked t o immediately present to the MD FC or to the Obstetric 
Emergency Services (OBES) depe nding on the time of day or the a vailability of clinic 
appointments. 
Follow-up evaluation of a non-re active NST will be done in acco rdance with the clinical 
standard of care at MDFC and OBES. 
To help facilitate any necessar y follow-up before the end of th e business day, we will strongly 
encourage participating patients to schedule their off-site NST  appointments in the morning. 
For an NST considered by the mid level provider to be urgent acc ording to established national 
heart rate tracing guidelines (a bsent variabil ity with recurren t decelerations, sinusoidal pattern, 
prolonged bradycardia), the midl evel provider will seek immedia te physician review by the 
on-site MFM.  If the on-site MFM agrees with the urgent nature of the NST, the midlevel 
provider will discuss the findi ngs with the patient and instruc t the patient to present 
immediately to the OBES at UUMC or the nearest hospital with an  obstetric unit.  If the 
patient is unable to transport  herself, an ambulance will be ca lled to transport the patient to the 
nearest obstetric unit. 
Figure 5:  Algorithm for actions based on in-home NST interpret ation  
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 13 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 Data Collection Instrument  
A data collection sheet will be developed and utilized in the s tudy.  A demographics intake 
sheet will be used when enrolli ng patients.  Satisfaction quest ionnaires will be administered to 
study participants and involved pr oviders.  Patient satisfactio n questionnaires will be 
conducted after the second in-hom e NST, at 2 weeks intervals af ter the initial survey if the 
patient is still pregnant, and at  6 weeks postpartum.  Provider  questionnaires will be conducted 
at the end of the study after all patients have be en enrolled.  An additional questionnaire will 
be administered to providers regarding the accessibility of the  NST monitoring segments and 
interpretability – this will be conducted at the end of the stu dy.  Surveys will be built using 
REDCap.  NST documentation within  the electronic medical record  (EPIC) will be according 
to the current NST workflow for on-site NSTs; details regarding  management of 
uninterpretable or non-reactive NSTs will be extracted. Obstetr ic outcomes will be extracted 
from the patient’s electr onic medical record (EPIC).  
Inclusion/exclusion criteria for  which patients were screened o ut will be collected. Reasons 

 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 14 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 eligible patients dec lined study participation will also be col lected. 
 
 
Procedures performed for research purposes only:   
Standard of care for this populat ion includes 2 NSTs per week c onducted in the out-patie n
clinic.  Participants for this  study will have 1 NST completed in clinic and will complete 1
NST at home, per week.   Phase II  participants may complete bot h NSTs at home if they m
appropriate eligibility criteri a.  The only difference with hom e NSTs is that the NST devi c
patient-applied and the test is c onducted at the patient's home .  The test itself, and the 
interpretation, are not different  than standard of care testing . Use of the device at home wi
not change the patient's standar d of care (twice weekly NSTs).  The results of the home a n
clinic testing will be us ed to inform clinical  care in the same  way.  Inadequate / 
uninterpretable tracings are a risk for both home and clinic NS T monitoring and will requ i
further assessment per the described algorithms. 
Related questionnaires, as descri bed in study procedures sectio n above, are for research 
purposes only. 
              
 
 
 
Statistical Methods, Data An alysis and Interpretation 
 
Sample size calculations:  As this is a pilot study relyi ng mostly on descriptive statisti cs, we 
will initially enroll 10 high-ris k patients for proof-of-concep t and to troubleshoot problems in 
system logistics.  We will then enroll 20 high-risk patients to  assess the refined system. 
Data Collection Instrument  
A data collection sheet will be developed and utilized in the s tudy.  A demographics intake sheet 
will be used when enrolling patient s.  Satisfacti on questionnai res will be administered to study 
participants and involved providers .  Patient satisfaction ques tionnaires will be conducted after 
the second in-home NST, at 2 week s intervals afte r the initial survey if the patient is still 
pregnant, and at 6 week s postpartum.  Provider questionnaires w ill be conducted at the end of the 
study after all patients have been enrolled.  An additional que stionnaire will be administered to 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 15 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 providers regarding the accessibility of the NST monitoring seg ments and interpretability – this 
will be conducted at the end of the study.  Surveys will be bui lt using REDCap.  NST 
documentation within the electronic medical record (EPIC) will be according to th e current NST 
workflow for on-site NSTs; deta ils regarding management of unin terpretable or non-reactive 
NSTs will be extracted. Obstetri c outcomes will be extracted fr om the patient’s electronic 
medical record (EPIC).  
Inclusion/exclusion criteria f or which patients were screened o ut will be collected. Reasons 
eligible patients dec lined study participation will also be col lected. 
Variables  
Covariates:  
 Pregnancy details 
 EGA at enrollment 
 Indication for NST testing 
 Obstetric history  
o Gravida 
o Para 
o Obstetric complication(s) 
 Medical comorbidities 
 Substance use  
o Blood pressure at each NST appointment 
o Pregnancy outcomes  
 Delivery data 
o Presentation at delivery 
o Infant status – liveborn versus stillbirth (antepartum versus i ntrapartum) 
o Gestational age at delivery 
o Reason for delivery 
o Mode of delivery 
o Indication for mode of delivery if operative 
o Neonatal gender 
o Birth weight 
o Apgars  
 Highest level of care required for neonate 
 Highest level of care required for patient 
 Maternal days hospitali zed after delivery 
 Neonatal days hospitali zed after delivery 
o Adverse outcomes/obstetric complications 
o Reason for declining study 
o Demographics  
 Maternal age 
 Maternal BMI 
 Maternal height 
 Maternal weight 
 Race 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 16 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
  Ethnicity 
 SES indicators 
o Residential zip-code  
 Percent of inhabitants at ___%  of the federal poverty level 
o Home rental versus ownership 
o Marital status 
o Employment status 
o Individual annual income 
o Family annual income 
o Family wealth 
o Family size 
o Highest level of education 
o Years of education 
Outcome:  
 Primary outcome  
o Description of feasib ility of integration of  NST into healthcar e system - Steps 
required to integrate in home NS T monitoring into the current h ealthcare system  
 Obtainability of NSTs 
 Schedule-ability of NSTs 
 Interpretability 
 Secondary outcome  
o NST related  
 Percent of satisfactory NSTs obtained 
 Time required by NST staff 
 Time required by patients 
 Number of abnormal NSTs 
 Length of NSTs 
 Frequency of follow-up needed 
 Frequency of appropriate follow-up according to algorithm 
o Patient satisfaction 
o Provider satisfaction 
o Frequency and type of complications identified 
Analysis  
Analytic approach  
Data analysis will use mostly de scriptive statistics – parametr ic and nonparametric statistics will 
be used as indicated ( Chi-squared or Fisher’s e xact test will be use d for nominal/binary  
outcomes; Student’s t tests, Wilcoxin rank sum, or Mann-Whitney  U will be used for continuous 
and ordinal variables as needed). 
Data management  
Data for this study will be obtai ned from medical records, as w ell as from administered surveys 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)    IRB_00077591 
Page 17 of 17    IRB Approval 8/31/2018 
 of patients and providers.  St udy data will be saved in an onli ne encrypted Redcap™ 
database.  Access will be granted on ly to investigators partici pating in the study. 
Data analysis  
We will analyze descriptive and analytic statistics using Stata ™ Version 13 (Texas). 
 
 