Version #: 3 IRB# 261131  
Date: 20 200915  Page 1   
 
 
Study Title : Impact of COVID -19 on Marshallese Communities in the U.S.  
 
Principal Investigator :  Pearl Anna McElfish, PhD  
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences Northwest  
1125 North College Avenue  
Fayetteville, AR 72703  
Telephone: 479- 713-8680 
Email: pamcelfish@uams.edu  
 
Co-Investigator : Holly Felix , PhD  
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences Northwest  
1125 N orth College Ave nue 
Fayetteville, AR 72703  
Telephone : 479- 684-5117 
Email: felixholly@uams.edu 
 
 
 
Study location : University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences Northwest  
4301 West Markham Street  
Little Rock, AR 72205   
Title: Impact of COVID -19 on Marshallese Communities in the U.S.  
PI: Pearl McElfish  
Version #: 3 IRB# 261131  
Date: 20200915  Page 2  Background and Rationale  
While there is much we do not know about the differential effects of COVID -19, early data 
shows that minority communities are disproportionally effected by the virus.1-4 There are many 
factors that may increase the likelihood of contracting COVID -19 including: 1) community 
spread because of lack of access to testing in low -income communities, 2) wor k environments 
that may increase exposure, 3) more densely populated housing that reduces the ability to social 
distance, 4) limited understanding of preventive measures due to literacy and language barriers, 
5) constrained financial resources to stay home  and not work, and/or 6) lack of trust in the health 
care system.  The Marshallese are a Pacific Islander population experiencing significant health 
disparities with some of the highest documented rates of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)  of any 
population in the world.5-7 Estimated type 2 diabetes rates among Marshallese in the United 
States range from  25% -50%, 400% higher than the general US population.5,8 People with 
diabetes are more likely  to experience severe symptoms and complications when infected with 
COVID -19; however, those that manage their diabetes well are less li kely to become extremely 
ill fro m the virus .9 In order to reduce the disparities caused by COVID -19 and ultimately 
compare the effectiveness of prevention interventions among the low -income minority 
communities most effected by COVID -19, it is critical to understand minority populations’: 1) 
risk exp osure, 2) knowledge of preventive recommendations, 3) barr iers and facilitators to 
implementing preventative recommendations, 4) barriers and facilitators to COVID -19 testing 
when appropriate , and  self-care behaviors during COVID -19. 
 
Specific Aims  
Aim 1:  Document COVID -19 risk exp osure  for Marshallese community members.  
Aim 2:  Document Marshallese community members’ knowledge of preventive 
recommendations.  
Aim 3:  Document barriers and facilitators to implementing preventative recommendations . 
Aim 4 : Document Marshallese community members’ barriers and facilitators to COVID -19 
testing  when appropriate.  
Aim 5:  Document self -care behaviors during COVID -19. 
Aim 6:  Explore COVID -19 pandemic related barriers and facilitators to diabetes self -
management among Marshallese adults with T2DM.  
Aim 7 : Assess the effect of the COVID -19 pandemic on diabetes self -management activities 
among Marshallese adults with T2DM. 
 
Study Design  and Procedures  
Up to 2000 Marshallese will complete an online  or telephone survey. Up to 100 participants will 
be invited to complete a n in-depth qualitative interview.  
The study will be advertised by posting an informational  flyer on social media . The flyer wi ll 
contain a link to the study information sheet  and survey documents. S tudy team members will 
also reach out to study participants via phone or electronic mediums (e.g. email, text, or 
messenger). S tudy staff will send potential participants a link to an electronic survey using 
REDcap.10 The REDcap system will include electronic documentation of consent prior to 
completing the survey. Participants electing to access the survey through a telephone int erview 
rather than the online process will be read the study information sheet before the survey 
instrument is completed. For those randomly selected to complete an in- depth qualitative 
interview, study team members will recruit them via phone or electronic mediums (e.g. email, 
text, or messenger) and schedule the interview by phone or secure web connection such as 
Title: Impact of COVID -19 on Marshallese Communities in the U.S.  
PI: Pearl McElfish  
Version #: 3 IRB# 261131  
Date: 20200915  Page 3  ZOOM , Skype, or Facebook . 
 
Study Population  
We will recruit up to 2000 Marshallese participants for the study. As part of UAMS IRB study 
#207034, the study team has recruited 386 Marshallese participants.11 378 of t hese participants 
have consented to be contacted for future studies. Additional Marshallese participants will be 
recruited through our engagement network if needed to rapidly reach recruitment goals. 
Community based recruitment will be achieved by posting t he survey information on websites 
and Facebook.  
Participant inclusion criteria : 
1) Self-reported Marshallese 
2) 18 years of age or older  
3) Live in the Continental  U.S. or Hawaii  
 
Measures/outcomes  
Using a mixed -methods concurrent triangulation design,12-18 the study team will utilize a survey 
and interview guide. Our survey and interview will be based on CDC risk assessments19,20 and 
utilize the NIH funded COVID -19 items th at are part of the PhenX Toolkit .21 See survey 
attached.  Those participants with T2DM will be asked to complete questions pertaining to 
diabetes management during COVID -19. 
 
Potential risks to study participants are minimal and no greater than usual care or standard health 
screenings. There is a potential risk for loss of confidentiality. Measures to protect the 
confidentiality of study participants will be implemented as described in the Data Handling and 
Recor dkeeping section. The alternative to participating in the interventions is to not participate in 
the interventions. Further, any participant can choose to leave the study at any time.  
 
Remuneration:  Each participant who completes the survey will receive a $20 Walmart gift card 
for remuneration and each person who completes the qualitative interview will receive an 
additional $40 Walmart  gift card in remuneration.  Participants will only receive gift ca rds for the 
part of the study they complete.  
 
Protections against risk. All data collectors involved in the interventions will have received 
training on: pa rticipant consent proc edures, the study protocol, human subject s protection, 
HIPAA regulations, survey administration, maintaining confidentiality of study participants, 
mandatory reporting, and appropriate treatment of participant data. Access to study data will be 
limited to only those personnel who need it to complete relevant job duties. All da ta, regardless 
of whether it is identifiable or not, will be stored in a locked file cabinet in a locked room, or on 
a secure UAMS server that requires two -factor authentication. 
 
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Human Subjects and Others  
There will be no direct benefits to the study participants; however, knowledge gained from the 
study could potentially benefit patients in the future.   
Title: Impact of COVID -19 on Marshallese Communities in the U.S.  
PI: Pearl McElfish  
Version #: 3 IRB# 261131  
Date: 20200915  Page 4  Data Capture  
The survey will be captured through REDcap10 or telephone interview and will take 
approximately  30 minutes to complete. Qu alitative interviews will be conducted by phone or 
secure web connection such as  ZOOM , Skype , or Facebook. A semi -structured interview guide 
will be used to ensure consistency across the interviews. The interview guide will also allow 
participants to discu ss in their own words their lived experiences related to COVID -19. Each 
interview will have an anticipated duration of one hour. Qualitative data from interviews will be 
audio recorded, transcribed, and translated verbatim. 
 
Data Handling and Recordkeeping  
The Principal Investigator and study team will carefully monitor study procedures to protect the 
safety of research subjects, the quality of the data, and the integrity of the study. Access to study 
data will be limited to only those personnel who need it  to complete relevant job duties  and who 
have completed all required trainings for study activities and in maintaining confidentiality. 
Participant identification numbers will be used to track study forms. All records will be retained 
consistent with the U AMS Administrative Guide (seven years after final reporting or publication 
of a project).  
 
Data Analysis  
In a mixed -method concurrent triangulation design, study data is analyzed separately and then 
combined during the interpretation phase.12-18 This method will allow us to cross -validate and 
confirm study findings to provide a more complete illumination of the research question. The 
mixed -method concurrent triangulation design will allow us to overcome the inherent 
weaknesses of using qualitativ e or quantitative methods separately. Quantitative data analysis of 
the survey results will include descriptive as well as inferential statistical techniques, including 
correlation, t -tests, and non- parametric tests. Given the descriptive nature of the stu dy aims, the 
analytic strategy will focus on presenting results of item- level descriptive analyses, with an 
emphasis on frequencies and proportions. Inferential analyses will focus on comparing groups of 
respondents who may be expected to have differences in risk exp osure, knowledge, barriers and 
facilitators from one another (e.g., comparisons between respondents with different education 
and/or income levels, English proficiency, job sectors). For inferential analyses, alpha will be set 
at .05 two- tailed, and effect size indicators will be included. 
 
For each descriptive and inferential analysis, each respondent's data will be included if she or he 
responded to the relevant items, regardless of the amount of missing data for that respondent on 
other items. However, there will be no attempt to impute missing responses for any items. For 
each analysis, the number of included responses will be reported.  
 
Researchers with qualitative research experience will code the text of the open -ended questions 
for emergent  themes. In order to rapidly assess the large number of open -ended responses, a 
coding template is the most appropriate and effective strategy to analyze the text.22,23 The initial 
coding template will categorize responses based on the a priori  themes .. As the data is coded, 
emergent themes will be identified and incorporated into the template. The data will then be 
extracted from the open -ended responses and incorporated into the codebook in order to provide 
illustrative excerpts from the responses for  each theme or domain they best represent. 
Confirmation coders will then review the data. Finally, the study team will confirm that the data 
and illustrative excerpts are applied to the correct domain by critically reviewing each analytic 
Title: Impact of COVID -19 on Marshallese Communities in the U.S.  
PI: Pearl McElfish  
Version #: 3 IRB# 261131  
Date: 20200915  Page 5  product to ensure  rigor and reliability. Any discrepancies in interpretation will be discussed and 
resolved via consensus of the three coders.  
 
Ethical Considerations  
This study will be conducted in accordance with all applicable government regulations and 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences research policies and procedures. This protocol and 
any amendments will be submitted and approved by the UAMS Institutional Review Board 
(IRB).  
 
Study team members will share the recruitment flyer on social media and also reach out to 
potential participants via phone or electronic mediums. Those potential participants who express 
interest in taking part in the study will be sent a link to an electronic survey using REDcap.10 The 
REDcap system will include written information about the study  prior to completing the survey. 
Participants electing to access the survey through a telephone interview rather than the online 
process will be read the study information sheet before the survey instrument is completed. For 
those randomly selected to complete an in -depth interview, study  team members will recruit 
them via phone or electronic mediums (e.g. email, text, or messenger). Prior to collecting 
qualitative data, the study information sheet will be provided again prior to data collection.  
 
This is a minimal risk study and a waiver of documentation of consent is requested. The research 
involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects and the research involves no procedures for 
which written consent is normally required outside of the research context.  
 
Dissemination of Data 
Results  of this study may be used for presentations, posters, or publications. The publications 
will not contain any identifiable information that could be linked to a participant. The study will 
be listed on clinicaltrials.gov in accordance with ( funder and/or journal) requirements. 
Aggregated results may be returned to participants in an infographic that is provided by  e-mail to 
the participants  if we have their email address . We will also work with stakeholders to 
disseminated aggregated information in town ha ll meetings.   
Title: Impact of COVID -19 on Marshallese Communities in the U.S.  
PI: Pearl McElfish  
Version #: 3 IRB# 261131  
Date: 20200915  Page 6   
References  
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19) Situation 
Summary. https://www.cdc.gov/coron avirus/2019 -ncov/cases- updates/summary.html . Published 
2020. Accessed April 20, 2020.  
2. National Institutes of Health. Coronavirus (COVID -19): Cases of Coronavirus Disease (COVID -19) in 
the U.S. https://www.nih.gov/health -information/coronavirus . Published 2020. Accessed April 20, 
2020.  
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. COVID -NET: A Weekly Summary of U.S. COVID -19 
Hospitalization Data. https://gis.cdc.gov/grasp/COVIDNet/COVID19_5.html . Published 2020. 
Accessed April 20, 2020.  
4. Yancy C. COVID -19 and African Americans. JAMA. 2020.  
5. Federation. ID. IDF Diabetes Atlas. Brussels, Belgium2019.  
6. Yamada S, Dodd A, S oe T, Chen T, Bauman K. Diabetes mellitus prevalence in out -patient Marshallese 
adults on Ebeye Island, Republic of the Marshall Islands. Hawaii Medical Journal. 2004;63(2):45 -51. 
7. Reddy R, Shehata C, Smith G, Maskarinec G. Characteristics of Marshallese  with Type 2 Diabetes on 
Oahu: A Pilot Study to Implement a Community -Based Diabetic Health Improvement Project. 
Californian Journal of Health Promotion. 2005;3(4):36 -47. 
8. McElfish P, Rowland B, Long C, et al. Diabetes and hypertension in Marshallese adu lts: Results from 
faith -based health screenings. J Racial Ethn Health Disparities. 2017;4(6):1042 -1050.  
9. American Diabetes Association. COVID -19. https://www.diabetes.org/coronavirus -covid- 19. 
Published 2020. Accessed June 24, 2020, 2020.  
10. Harris P, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde J. Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational 
research informatics support. J Biomed Infrom. 2009;42(2):377 -381.  
11. McElfish PA, Long CR, Kaholokula JK, et al. Design of a comparative effectiveness randomized 
controlled trial testing a faith -based Diabetes Prevention Program (WORD DPP) vs. a Pacific 
culturally -adapted Diabetes Prevention Program (PILI DPP) for Marshallese  in the United States. 
Medicine. 2018;97(19):e0677.  
12. Bergman M. Advances in Mixed Methods Research: Theories and Applications.  London: SAGE 
Publications Ltd; 2008.  
13. Creswell JW. Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches , 4th Edition.  
SAGE; 2013.  
14. Creswell JW, Plano Clark VL. Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods Research.  2nd ed: SAGE; 2010.  
15. Creswell J, Plano Clark V, Gutmann M, Hanson W. Advanced mixed methods research designs. In: 
Tashakkori A, Teddlie C, eds. Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research.  Thousand 
Oaks, CA: SAGE; 2003:209 -240.  
16. Johnson R, Onweugbuzie A, Turner L. Toward a definitions of mixed methods research. Journal of 
mixed methods research. 2007;1(2):112 -133.  
17. Johnson R,  Onwuegbuzie A. Mixed methods research: A research paradigm whose time has come. 
Educational researcher. 2004;33(7):14 -26. 
18. Sale JE, Lohfeld LH, Brazil K. Revisiting the Quantitative -Qualitative Debate: Implications for Mixed-
Methods Research. Qual Quant. 2002;36(1):43 -53. 
19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Public Health Recommendations after Travel -Associated 
COVID -19 Exposure.  Published 2020. Accessed April 20, 2020.  
20. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Public Health Recommenda tions for Community -Related 
Exposure. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019 -ncov/php/public -health -recommendations.html . 
Published 2020. Accessed April 20, 2020 . 
21. Toolkit P. COVID -19 Protocols. https://www.phenxtoolkit.org/covid19/ . Published 2020. Accessed 
April 21, 2020.  
22. King N, Cassell C, Symon G. Using templates in the thematic analysis of text. In:  Cassell C, Symon G, 
eds. Essential guide to qualitative methods in organizational research.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications; 2004.  
Title: Impact of COVID -19 on Marshallese Communities in the U.S.  
PI: Pearl McElfish  
Version #: 3 IRB# 261131  
Date: 20200915  Page 7  23. Nadin S, Cassell C. Using data matrices. In: Cassell C, Symon G, eds. Essential guide to qualitative 
methods in org anizational research.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2004.  
 