Phase 1 - The Use of Rhythmic Light Therapy to Entrain Gamma Oscillations and 
the Circadian System in Patients With Alzheimer's Disease
PI: Mariana Figueiro
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Document Date: 2-1-2024
Contact PD/PI: Figueiro, Mariana G.  
Page 1 Research Strategy   
 A. Specific Aims  
Data suggest that approximately 40% of the estimated 5.5 million older (65+) Americans with Alzheimer's dis - 
ease (AD) suffer from severe dysfunction of sleep -wake and circadian systems, manifesting clinically as sun - 
downing, excessive daytime sleepiness,  nocturnal wandering, agitation, and day -night reversal, which  
substantially increases the burden of caregivers. 1, 2 In people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), an “at risk” 
or potential prodromal stage of dementia, sleep -wake disturbance is evident in up to 60% of patients. 3, 4 It has 
also been  shown  that coherent  40 Hz neural  oscillation  is a fundamental  frequency  of healthy  brain  activity 5 and 
it is believed to play a role in attentional selection and memory operations. 6 ADRD patients in particu lar, have 
reduced  gamma  oscillations.  Animal  studies  showed  that exposing  mice  to flickering  lights  at 40 Hz reduces  Aβ42 
levels in cortical regions of the  brain.  
Our team has published various studies showing the positive impact of a tailored lighting intervention (TLI) de - 
signed  to promote  circadian  entrainment  in persons  with ADRD.  In addition,  we recently  collected  and published 
on exciting  pilot data showing  that light modulating  at 40 Hz increases  gamma  power  and gamma/theta  coupling, 
both associated  with increase  in memory  and cognition.  In Aim 1, we will investigate  how the light  delivering 
40 Hz to promote gamma wave entrainment (rhythmic light [RL]), affects subjective sleep and cognition 
in a controlled  laboratory  study.  A lab study  will allow  us to collect  electroencephalogram  (EEG),  perform 
cognitive tests, and observe the response in those with MCI compared to a healthy control group (HC).  
Aim 1: In a randomized,  placebo -controlled,  mixed -design  laboratory  study,  we will demonstra te the effect  of 40 
Hz RL on: 1) brain response (EEG), 2) cognitive performance (working memory task), and 3) subjective 
sleepiness (questionnaires). We will recruit 20 adult MCI and 20 healthy, age -matched controls (HC) to 
participate in this study. It is  hypothesized that compared to the placebo intervention (i.e., random flicker): 1) 40 
Hz RL will increase gamma (40 Hz) neural oscillation and increase theta -gamma coupling, 2) improve cognitive 
performance and 3) reduce subjective sleepiness. We also hypo thesize that gamma power will be reduced in 
MCI participants and the effect size of the intervention will be greater in MCI participants than in the  HC. 
We will, for the first time, demonstrate that a practical, effective, tailored, nonpharmacologica l 
intervention  using light that promotes circadian entrainment (TLI) and deliver neurostimulation (40 Hz 
RL) can be used to improve sleep and cognition in older adults with MCI and mild AD living at home or 
in inde - pendent  or assisted  living  facilities,  thereby  possibly  mitigating  significant  financial  and social  
burdens, including  decreasing  cognitive  deterioration  in this population.  Moreover,  given  recent  
evidence  linking the importance of sleep in the development of AD, the proposed studies can have a 
signif icant impact on the progression of the disease MCI and mild  AD. 
Aim 1: Participant Recruitment. Population/Sample: Community Persons Living with Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI) or mild Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Healthy Age -matched Controls (HC).  
a. Study s ites: Participants will be recruited from the Capital District  and NYC area  in conjunction with 
physicians who have access to the clinical population. Our team have demonstrated the ability to recruit older 
adults, including those with  AD and their caregiv ers, in 3 recent  NIH-funded  trials.  As in prior successful  trials,  
recruitment  methods  will include: (1) provider referral, (2) on -site (in assisted living) by research staff, (3) flyers 
placed in participating sites  or through  advertising  in the community,  and (4) social  media.  We plan to collect  
equal  numbers  of participants  in winter  and summer  to account  for a possible  effect  of season  and equal  number  
of males  and females.  
b. Procedures: Dr. Figueiro’s  team, with referrals from local physicians already working with her, will enroll 40 
participants (20 controls) for Aim 1 . Participants must be diagnosed with amnestic MCI or mild AD, as defined 
by a Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  (MoCA)87 score  between  17 and 25. For the healthy  controls, the inclusion 
criteria are: must not be diagnosed with MCI or ADRD (MOCA score above 25). All participants must  not be 
taking  sleeping  medication  or oral melatonin,  those  taking  antidepressants  will be included,  but type of medicine 
and dosage intake will be monitored, must score a 5 or less in the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and 
must not have any of the exclusion criteria below. Study participants who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria 
will discuss i nformed consent for study participation, using procedures and consent forms approved by the 
Institutional Review  Board.  
 
 
 
Contact PD/PI: Figueiro, Mariana G.  
Page 2 Research Strategy   
 Aim 1 - Screening Assessments  
a. Cognitive  screening  utilizing  the MoCA:  The MoCA87 is a one-page,  30-point  test that can be administered 
in 10 minutes.  It assesses  short -term memory,  visuospatial  abilities,  executive  functions,  attention,  concentration 
and working memory, language, and orientation to time and place. In a validation study, it was shown to be a 
promising  tool for detecting  mild cognitive  impairment  and early  AD onset  compared  to the MMSE.  According  to 
Nasreddine et al.,87 the sensitivity and specificity of the MoCA for detecting MCI (n = 94 participants) were 90% 
and 87%, respectively, compared to 18% and 100%, re spectively, for the MMSE. The sensitivity and specificity 
of the MoCA for detecting early AD (n = 93 participants) were 100% and 87%, respectively, compared to 78% 
and 100%,  respectively,  for the MMSE.  MCI/mild  AD participants  must  have  a MOCA  score  between  17 and 25. 
The control group participants must have a MOCA of 25 or  greater.  
b. The Clinical  Dementia  Rating  Scale  Sum  of Boxes  (CDR -SOB) . CDR  will be obtained  through  semi -struc - 
tured interviews of patients and informants, and cognitive functioning will be rated in 6 domains of functioning: 
memory, orientation, judgment and problem solving, community affairs, home and hobbies, and personal care. 
Each  domain  is rated  on a 5-point  scale  of functioning  as follows:  0, no impairment;  0.5, questionable  impairment; 
1, mild impairment; 2, moderate impairment; and 3, severe impairment (personal care is scored on a 4 -point 
scale without a 0.5 rating available). The global CDR score will be computed using online algorithm ( www.bio - 
stat.wustl.edu/~adrc/cdrpgm /index.html ). The CDR -SOB score is obtained by summing each of the domain box 
scores, with scores ranging from 0 to 18. We will include those in boxes 0.5 -4.0 (Questionable cognitive impair - 
ment to very mild dementia) and 4.5 -9.0 (mild dementia). The CDR demonstrates good reliability88, 89and has 
been validated against neuropathologic  finding.90-92 
c. Sleep disturbance using the PSQI: The PSQI is a tool that can be used to measure sleep quality in clinical 
populations, composed of 19 items that generate 7 com ponent scores (subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, 
sleep duration, habitual sleep efficiency, sleep disturbances, use of sleep medication, and daytime dysfunc - 
tion).93 The sum of the 7 component scores yields a single global score. A global score >5 is considered to 
indicate sleep disturbances. For Aim 1, we will include those who have scores <5 (no sleep  disturbances).  
Aim 1 - Study Assessments  
a. Electroencephalogram (EEG). EEG recordings will be taken 2 times per experimental session using a Bio - 
Semi  ActiveTwo system (BioSemi, Amsterdam, NL). Prior to each session, electrodes will be applied to the 
participants’ scalps according to the international 10 –20 system. 94 Four electrodes will be placed along the 
midline of participants’ crania at locations Fz (frontal), Cz (central), Pz (parietal), and Oz (occipital). Reference 
electrodes  will be placed  on the earlobes  at locations  A1 and A2. To record  blinking,  an electrode  will be placed 
under each participant’s right eye for electrooculographic (EOG) measurements. The power at 40 Hz, 4 –8 Hz 
(theta),  and 30–55 Hz (low gamma)  frequency  ranges  will be calculated  at each  electrode  site. Entrainment  to 
the 40 Hz rhythmic  stimulation  will be assessed  in terms  of increases  in power  at 40 Hz. Theta -gamma  coupling 
will be assessed using the modulation index (MI), 95 wherein each phase of theta (0 –360◦ interval) was binned 
into eighteen 20◦ intervals. The standard Hilbert transform will be applied to obtain time series of theta phases 
and amplitude envelope of low gamma. The composite time series will then be constructed, which will yield the 
amplitude of low gamma oscillation at each phase of the theta rhythm. The mean amplitude of gamma at each 
theta bin will be calculated and normalized by dividing each bi n value by the sum over the bins, resulting in the 
phase -amplitude  distribution  function.  The gamma  amplitude  MI by theta  phase  will be calculated  by measuring 
the divergence of the observed amplitude distribution from a uniform  distribution.  
b. Subjective Sleepiness. Participants will be asked to report a Karolinska Sleepiness Scale (KSS) 96 score 2 
times per experimental session. The KSS outcome prompts participants to rate how sleepy or alert they are 
feeling  on a scale  ranging  from 1 to 9, where 1 = “very  alert,”  3 = “rather  alert,”  5 = “neither  alert nor sleepy,”  7 = 
“sleepy, but no difficulty remaining awake,” and 9 = “very sleepy, fighting sleep, an effort to remain  awake.”  
c. Working  Memory  (WM)  Task : This complex  operation  span  task has been  used  to examine  WM in MCI,  AD, 
97 and healthy older adults. 98 The WM task contains 9 practice (not included in final score) and 20 test trials. 
Participants view a serial visual display of letters and math problems. They are asked to hold the letters in 
memory while simultaneously determining if the simple math probl ems are correct (e.g., 7+5=13). The letter 
strings are 4 -8 letters long + 4 repetitions of each. Each of the simple math equation is on the screen for 3000 
ms and each  letter  is presented  for 1000  ms. Participants  are instructed  to press  the “M” key with their right hand 
if the simple  math  equation  is correct  and press  the “V” key with their left hand  if the equation  is not correct.  Math 
performance  is measured  in percent  correct.  Similar  to Unsworth  et al., 99 we will only include  data in the analysis 
if participants can performed equal and/or greater than 75% correct on the math equations. After each trial, a 
Contact PD/PI: Figueiro, Mariana G.  
Page 3 Research Strategy   
 question mark appears on the screen to signal the response period. Participants are asked to enter the letters in  
the same  order  they were presented.  The recall  part of the task will not be timed,  and participants  are not able to 
go to the next trial until the correct number of letters is entered. Then, a “Ready?” prompt appears on the screen 
and participants will press the space bar to start the next trial. Four breaks are inserted throughout the task. 
Participants are tes ted in the WM task before and after each experimental condition. Performance is as - sessed 
by calculating Accuracy and Reaction Time  (RT).  
 
d.  Questionnaires to assess Fatigue, pain and depressive symptoms: Four questionnaires will be collected 
one time at t he first session.   
• The Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS)  uses contains nine statements that rate the severity of fatigue 
symptoms  on a rating from 1 to 7, which measures the severity of fatigue and its effect  on a 
person's activities and lifestyle . 
• Self-Descri ption Inventory  measur es levels of self -evaluative behavior in terms of favorable and 
unfavorable personality attributes . 
• The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) is a 21 -item, self -report rating inventory that measures 
characteristic attitudes and symptoms of depression . 
• The Short -form McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF -MPQ -2) assesses the major symptoms of both 
neuropathic and nonneuropathic pain. Previous research has demonstrated its reliability, validity, 
and responsiveness in diverse samples of patients with ch ronic pain.  
 
Aim 1 - Experimental Protocol  
a. Allocation. HC and MCI participants will be randomly 
assigned  to one of the 2 experimental  conditions  (40 Hz RL 
and Placebo RL) in a counterbalanced order (Fig. 5). All 
subjects will experience both  conditions.  
b. Data  collection.  The experimental  protocol  for the study 
is shown  in Fig. 6. Participants  will complete  a sleep –wake 
diary during all weeks of the experiment, starting 1 week 
prior to beginning the study. These diaries will document 
bedtimes, rising times,  caffeine consumption, and quality 
of sleep. The experimental sessions will start at 14:00 on 
each experimental day which will be separated by 1  week.  
Sessions will initiate with a 10 -minute adaptation period to 
a low -level ambient light (e.g., 3000K) providing illumi - 
nance  of 15 lux at participants’  eye level on a vertical  plane,  
 Fig. 5. Diagram of proposed flow for the participants  
in Aim 1. N: no. of participants; HC: healthy control; 
MCI: mild cognitive impairment; RL: rhythmic light  

Contact PD/PI: Figueiro, Mariana G.  
Page 4 Research Strategy   
  
followed  by a pre-exposure  data collection  period  (T1),  including  KSS,  EEG,  and WM task.  Based  on their  
groupings  participants  will experience  either  40 Hz RL, or Placebo  RL conditions  for a duration  of 1 h, followed  
by the second  data collection  period  (T2) (see Fig. 6).  
 
Description  of the lighting  interventions  is below.  Participants  will be  asked  to remain  awake  and keep  their eyes  
open  during  the entire  session.  They  will also be asked  to refrain  from body movement and excessive blinking 
during EEG recordings, which should be 3 minutes, to avoid the occurrence of EOG artifacts in the EEG data.  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. The experimental protocol for the 
study. KSS: Karolinska Sleepiness Scale; 
EEG: electroencephalogram; HC: healthy 
control; MCI: mild cognitive impairment; 
WM: Working Memory task, RL: rhythmic 
light; T1 and T2: data collection periods.  
 
 
 
 
 
Aim 1: 40 Hz RL Device Descripti on 
The flicker  frequency  of the 40 Hz RL used  in Aim 1 will be 40 Hz and the stimulation  will be a square  wave  with 
a 50 % duty cycle (i.e., 12.5 ms light - on and 12.5 ms light -off). In the Placebo RL condition, the duty cycle will 
be delivered  with a random interval  determined  by a Poisson  process  with an average  interval  of 40 Hz. Both RL 
and Placebo RL conditions will provide a 30 lux of red light on a vertical plane at the eye level. The red light will 
be used  because  it does  not affect  the circadian  system;  therefore,  we will be able to attribute  observed  effect  to 
the flicker frequency utilized. We hypothesize that the improvement in cognition and subjective sleepiness will 
be greater in the 40 Hz RL compared to the random RL and the effect will be l arger in persons with  MCI.  
 
