1 
  
 
 
THE ROLE OF OREXIN IN HUMAN PANIC  DISORDER  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL  
 
February 1, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  
 
Andrew W. Goddard , M.D.  
UCSF Fresno  
155 N . Fresno St ., #338  
Fresno, CA 93701  
 
2 
    
THE ROLE OF OREXIN  IN HUMAN PANIC DISORDER  
 
 
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
Orex ins  
Hypocretins (orexins), a more recently identified class of pro -arousal neuropeptides, are synthesized 
by neurons in the lateral and posterior hypothalamus.1 The main described orexins, orexin A (ORX A)  
and orexin B  (ORX B) , are both cleaved from a common precursor peptide, prepro -orexin.2  Orexin A, 
a 33 amino -acid residue peptide, appears to be conserved across many mammalian species. Orexin  
B contains 28 amino acids. Orexins  promote a variety of behaviors including alertness, vigilance, 
locomotion, fight -flight responses, and feeding.  The physiological effects of the orexins are mediated 
via 2 G -protein coupled receptors, ORX1 and ORX2 .3,4  Orexin A binds with greater affinity to the 
ORX1 receptor, while orexin A and B bind with similar affinity to the ORX2 receptor.   
 
Orexins and Animal Fear Models  
Orexins have been implicated in anxiogenesis in some animal fear models.  For example,  central (icv) 
injection of orexin A in mice induced anxiety -like responses in the light -dark exploration test and 
elevated plus maze.   
Using an established, γ-aminobutyr ic acid (GABA) -deficit, rodent model of panic -vulnerability,5,6 our 
Indiana University preclinical anxiety collaborators provoked a panic -like response in rodents with an 
anxiogenic sodium lactate (NaLac) infusion, which response was blunted following either site -specific 
orexin (ORX) gene silencing or systemic pretreatment with an ORX1 antagonist.7  
In addition, ORX neurons (peptidergic neurons in the lateral h ypothalamus) were shown, in turn, to 
stimulate discrete efferent sites within an emotional network (e.g., bed nucleus of the stria terminalis) 
to elicit specific behavioral components of the panic -response following sodium lactate. Taken 
together,  these results support the concept that ORX hypersecretion or ORX neuronal overactivity 
could also be present in human PD.   
            
Orexins’ Emerging R ole in Human Anxiogenesis / P anicogenesis   
Similar to the NaLac  model animals, humans with PD have been reported to have cortical and 
subcortical GABA deficits .8-11  If these GABA deficits also extend to impairment of G ABAergic 
inhibition of DMH ORX neurons in PD patients, as predicted  by the NaLac animal model,  they may 
result in ORX hypersecretion, increased sympathetic activation, and panicogenesis.  
There have been few clinical studies of ORX metabolism or function in human anxiety populations.  
However, we have recently generated human pilot data in our laboratory, studying the effects of a 
well-documented anxiogenic stimulus (35% CO 2 inhalation) on behavioral, physiological, and 
biochemical (plasma ORX A; assayed by a standard RIA kit) measures, in 1 PD patient and 2 healthy 
volunteers (see Table 1 , below). In this paradigm, the PD patient had a mild panic episode associated 
3 
 with marked early elevati ons in plasma ORX levels, relative to the volunteers who had minimal 
anxiety, consistent with a role for ORX in the initiation or elaboration of the human panic res ponse.  
 
 
Table 1.  Plasma OR X Responses to 35% CO 2 Challenge  
Plasma Orexin (ORX A) Levels (in pg/ml)          
 Time (mins):  Baseline         +1           +15                       
PD #1      23.6                 73.1         26.2                        
Vol. #1          34.8                 53.2        29.4                     
Vol. #2              43.3                 34.3        40.1  
 
 
We also demonstrated that, in contrast to human subjects without any axis I psychiatric disorder or 
with depression alone without panic, only subjects who had high panic scores but no depression had 
significantly elevated CSF ORX levels7 (see Fi gure 1, below).  
 
 
Figure 1.  Panic symptomatology  associate d with elevated CSF  ORX in suicide attempters  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The ORX hyperactivity hypothesis of panic that has been evinced from this work is highly innovative, 
and promises to broaden our understanding of the neurobiology of human panic disorder (PD), as 
well as provide new treatment directions.  
 
While there are limitations with using plasma ORX A as a measure of CNS ORX funct ion, one 
research group has recently published human data indicating that resting state CSF and plasma ORX 
A levels are highly correlated.12 

4 
 Accordingly, the central hypothesis of this translational human pilot projec t, and a more definitive  
project based on it, is as follows:  PD is a human anxiety disorder associated with specific cortical and 
subcortical GABA deficits that result in disruption of normal inhibitory regulati on of pro -arousal ORX 
neurons. This disruption promotes excessive ORX release, sympathetic activation,13 and vulnerability 
to spontaneous or chemically induced panic.  Pretreatment with an ORX1 receptor antagonist14,15 prior 
to chemical challenge, as proposed in this submission, is therefore expected to block the evoked 
panic response.  
 
 
Rationale for the Use of CO 2  Inhalation  
 
The 35% CO 2 challenge is well documented in the literature as being reliable, safe, and easy to 
administer .16,17 The procedure has acceptable test -retest reli ability ,18 and may be used to monitor 
improvement in clinical status following the administration of antipanic medications .19  
 
Approximately 70% of PD patients will have a panic attack in resp onse to this challenge , which 
close ly resembles a real -life panic .20  Therefore, in addition to resting/baseline measurement of 
plasma  ORX A, we also will examine CO 2-evoked levels of plasma ORX A in PD patients, and we will 
correlate these responses wi th other behavioral and physiological pa rameters recorded during the 
CO 2 test.  The PI has ha d considerable experience us ing PD challenge paradigms in clinical research 
contexts, and  he is very familiar  with the application of the 35% CO 2 challenge .21,22 
 
PROJECT AIMS AND EXPECTED RESULTS  
 
The project is a 1 -year study that gathers pilot data relating to the role of orexin in human panic 
disorder. The effect sizes generated from this pilot work will permit planning and powering of a larger -
scale study . It is anticipated that we will complete the study  over the course of one year.   
 
Specific Aim 1  will be to provide a preliminary demonstration that acute administration of the first -in-
class, FDA -approved insomnia agent, suvorexant,14,23 a mixed ORX1/2 receptor antagonist, will block 
35% CO 2-induced panic symptoms in panic disorder (PD) patients, via amelioration of central ORX 
neuronal hyper activity (as reflected in blunted plasma ORX responses to CO 2 challenge).   
 
To address  Specific Aim 1,  we will use a prospective, parallel -group, repeated -measures design to 
compare behavioral, physiological , and biochemical (plasma ORX) responses in 2 independent, 
unmedicated groups of PD outpatients (n=6 in each group) at baseline/resting state and after panic 
provocation due to brief (1 minute) inhalation of a 35%  CO 2 / 65% O 2 gas mixture.  PD patients will be 
randomized, in a double -blind manner, to receive either a single, oral dose of the mixed ORX1/2 
receptor antagonist, suvorexant (10 mg dose), or identical placebo, 120 minutes before CO 2 
challenge.   
Exploratory a im:  To acquire DNA samples for future c andidate gene/DNA analysis. Genes of 
interest with respect to ORX metabolism are the preproORX gene and genes that code for the 
receptors ORX1 and ORX2.          
  
5 
 Expected results:   It is expected that, compared to placebo, suvorexant pretreatment  will bl unt 
behavioral, physiological , and biochemical (plasma ORX) responses to 35%  CO 2 in PD, due to 
suppression of CNS ORX hyperactivity. The effect sizes generated from the pilot work will permit 
planning and powering of a larger -scale study, t o definitively address S pecific Aim 1. 
 
 
INNOVATION  
The current work promises to determine the human applicability of a novel pathophysiologic concept 
generated from preclinical science, in this instance the ORX hyperactivity hypothesis of panic/anxiety.  
Our proposed st udy will perform rapid clinical testing of the ORX hypothesis with a view to identifying 
a new class of anxiolytic agents (ORX1 antagonists) .15 
This translational, experimental medicine approach is expected to haste n proof -of-concept test ing of 
novel anxiolytics for PD  and for all anxiety syndromes where panic attacks are an important clinical 
feature. Not only does the ORX hyperactivity hypothesis promise to inform new treatment 
development, but it may also shed lig ht on therapeutic mechanisms of standard antipanic treatments, 
such as SSRIs .24  In addition, ascertainment of the utility of plasma ORX as a biomarker of illness  
state and clinical improvement  could immediately impact practice.   
Furthermore, such a finding may well have future transdi agnostic implications with regard to  the 
pathogenesis of panic symptoms that occur in a variety of psychiatric syndromes ( e.g., other anxiety 
disor ders, trauma -related disorders)  and in medical disorders with panic as a component , such as 
chronic obstructive pulmonar y disease and chronic asthma.    
              
Public Health Impact  of the Project  
PD is a common psychiatric condition with a lifetime prevalence of up to 4% in the general 
community.25,26  It is frequently a chronic relapsing or persistent illness, even after standard 
treatments.27 It can profoundly aff ect functioning and quality of li fe; is often associated with serious 
co-morbidity (particularly with MDD, other anxiety disorders, and substance abuse) ;28,29 and 
predisposes to suicide attempt s.30,31 It is clear that  new, more potent  antipanic treatments are 
urgently needed.     
 
 
STUDY PROCEDURES (see Table 2)   
 
Rationale for the Proposed Design  
Our design adopts a “fast -fail” experimental medicine approach to testing our treatment hypothesis , 
there by avoiding an expensive we eks-long clinical trial design with  the prospect of exposing patients 
to an extended period of  placebo and adverse events  (e.g., fatigue, somnolence) .  A single , standard 
10 mg dose of suvorexant has documented CNS/soporific effects ,32,33 is highly bioavailable , and  
6 
 takes 120 minutes to achie ve peak plasma concentration .  Though suvorexant  is a mixed ORX1/2 
antagonist  (the ORX1 receptor has generally been more linke d to fear behaviors ),34,35 it binds to both 
ORX receptors with nanomolar affinity  and high selectivity .14 To date, a major challenge for ORX  
studies of  anxiety and mood disorders  has been to establish  the validity of CSF and plasma ORX as  
indices of brain ORX function. The 2014 market release of suvorexant  now permits rigorous cross -
validation  of these  measures.   
As mentioned above, w e selected the CO 2 test paradigm because  it is an extremely well -validated, 
safe, and easy -to-administer test,  and it  closely reproduces naturalistic panic .18,20,36 In addition,  ORX 
neurons are known to be chemosensitive ,37 and animal work  has recently demonstrated ORX 
neuronal excitability in parallel with  CO 2-evoked anxiety .35   
 
Recruitment  and Clinical Care  
Patient recru itment , the screening visit (study visit 1), and the follow -up (study exit) visit will be 
conducted at the  UCSF Fresno Clinical Research Center (CRC) .  The study intervention visit (study 
visit 2)  will be co nducted in an exam room in East Medical Plaza (University Neurology Associates) . 
Patients will be referred from a variety of sources including local physicians , psychiatrists  and 
psychologists;  paid advertisements appearing in local newspapers ; free advertisements in the local 
Craigslist “volunteers” section ; and from internal medical center clinics (the UPA and ACC outpatient 
clinics).      
 
 
Patient Selection and Preliminary Evaluation (Study Visit 1—Screening Visit )  
 
Patients between the ages of 18 and 65 years will be admitted to the study after they have given their 
written informed consent  to participate . Study participants will also be given the choice whether to give 
their additional written informed consent to provide a blood sample for future DNA analysis.    
 
Patients will undergo a complete medical and psychiatric evaluation  by a study doctor assisted  by the 
appropriate study/hospital staff  (see Table 2), including history taking, physical examination, 
diagnostic interview,  electrocard iogram, laboratory tests  (comprehensive metabolic panel, CBC, free 
T4, urine pregnancy test, urinalysis ), urine toxicol ogy screen, and urine  pregnancy test in women of 
child-bearing potential .   
 
 
 
Inclusion criteria:  To participate in the study , patients must meet the following inclusion criteria:  
 
 Men and women between the ages of 18 and 65 years are eligible for inclusion in this study.  
 
 
 They must be in stable physical health as determined by a medical evaluation (see Table 2), 
including physical examination, electrocardiogram, laboratory findings ( comprehensive 
metabolic panel, CBC, free T4, urine pregnancy test , urinalysis ), urine toxicology screen, and a 
negative urine pregnancy test in women of child -bearing potential.   
7 
  They must satisfy the new DSM -5 clinical criteria for a current principal diagnosis of PD38 as 
confirmed by a semi -structured, diagnostic interview, the MINI,39 administered by the PI, Dr. 
Goddard.  
 
 Since clinical depression (MDD) is associated with CSF ORX abnormalities ,40 only patients 
with a current PD without  MDD  will be enrolled .  They will also be required to have a current 
Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) total score <12.41  
 
 They will be off all regular psychiatric medications  and avoid drinking grapefruit juice  for at 
least 2 weeks prior to the 35% CO 2 test. 
 
 They must not be pregnant or breastfeeding a baby; and women of childbearing potential must 
be using birth control while on this study.  
 
Exclusion  criteria:  The following is a list of the exclusion criteria in reference to this study:  
 
 any history of a psychotic disorder, bipolar disorder, MDD, depression NOS, obsessive 
compulsive disorder, an eating disorder, post -traumatic stress disorder , or generalized anxiety 
disorder  
 
 medical conditions for which suvorexant could be contraindicated, such as narcolepsy  
 
 any other sleep disorder42 
 
 a substance use disorder , as defined by the DSM -5, within 6 months of the screening visit  
 
 ongoing use of psychiatric medications in the  2 weeks prior to the 35% CO 2 test 
 
 current use of certain drugs,43 including  
 
o strong CYP3A inhibitors (such as ketoconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole, 
clarithromycin, nefazodone, ritonavir, saquinavir, nelfinavir, indinavir, boceprevir, 
telaprevir, telithromycin, and conivaptan);  
o moderate CYP3A inhibitors (such as amprenavir, apr epitant, atazanavir, ciprofloxacin, 
diltiazem,  erythromycin , fluconazole, fosamprenavir , imatinib, verapamil);    
o strong CYP3A inducers (such as rifampin, carbamazepine and phenytoin);  
o digoxin  
 
 history of any neurological disorder affecting the CNS  
 
 history of uncontrolled or serious medical illness  
 
 a history of hypersensitivity or allergy to suvorexant  
 
 pregnancy or lactation status , or unwillingness to use birth control while on this study, for 
women of child -bearing potential  
 
8 
  compromised  lung function (e.g., COPD, emphysema, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, lung 
cancer)  
 
 inability to fast the requir ed amount of time prior to study v isit 2 
 
 a positive test for cannabi noids, opiates, benzodiazepines, amphetamines, cocaine and 
metabolites  
 
 out-of-range lab values  
 
 an abnormal EKG  
 
 a score > 12 on the Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS)  
 
 inability  or unwilling ness  to avoid drinking grapefruit juice for two weeks prior to the 35% CO2 
challenge test  
 
 a history of sudden onset of muscle weakness (cataplexy)  
 
Note s regarding the urine toxicology tests and benzodiazepine screening:  The purpose 
of the urine screening is twofold: (1)  study validity ( patients are excluded if the screening 
reveals use of certain substances, when by histo ry patients have denied taking); ( 2) patient 
safety ( the sedative effects of the study drug  and a controlled substance, such as a 
benzodiazepine or pain medicine, could be additive). Substances screen ed for include 
cannabanoids, opiates, benzodia zepines, a mphetamines, cocaine, and  metabolites.  
 
If the PI believes that any subjects are a “borderline case” for inclusion / exclusion, he will discuss the 
issue with the Safety Monitor or the patient’s primary care doctor, as appropriate.  
 
    
 
 
 
TABLE 2 :  STUDY PLAN & SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES  
     Visit  1 2 3 
Screening (2 hr) CO2 Test visit (3.5 
hrs) Follow -up (exit) visit 
(0.5 hr)  
Days/Weeks    About 1 week after 
visit 1   About 1 week after 
visit 2  
Informed consent – 
orexin study  X    
9 
 Informed consent – 
DNA sample  X   
Psych Hx/Diagnosis 
Interview/MINI  X    
Inclusion/exclusion 
criteria  X    
Medical history  X    
Physical examination  X    
Vital signs  X X (pre -, during, and 
post-CO2)  
ECG  X    
Comprehensive 
metabolic panel; CBC 
w/diff; free T4  X    
Urine  pregnancy test 
(females)  X    
Urinalysis  X    
Urine toxicology 
screen  X    
Urine benzo screen    X  
SUVOREXANT 
10MG/PLACEBO.   X (120  mins pre CO 2)  
 OREXIN LEVELS    X (pre -, during & 
post- CO2 challenge )  
DNA sample  (optional: 
obtained only if 
additional consent 
form is signed)    X  
PDSS/CGI clinical 
scales    X (completed by a 
study doctor pre -
CO2)  
Visual Analog Scales 
(Anxiety) and Panic 
Symptoms Scale 
(PSS)   X (completed by 
subjects pre-, during, 
and post -CO2)  
Interview with MD to 
verify return to 
baseline    X 
10 
 Referral to appropriate 
doctor to treat panic (if 
desired)    X 
 
 
 
35% CO 2 Inhalation Test Procedures (Study Visit 2, see Table 3)  
   
After the screening visit  (visit 1) , patients will  be scheduled in about 1 week for the CO 2 challenge test 
(study visit 2 ), which will take place an exam room in East Medical Plaza (University Neurology 
Associates) . 
 
Upon arrival for study visit 2 , each participant will receive a consecutive study code. The master list of  
study codes will be linked with a random assignment of suvorexant and placebo.  The randomization 
schedule will be generated by Paul Mills, PhD, using a computer program. The pharmacy will 
maintain an independent list of the study codes and randomization assignments (to either 10mg 
suvorexant or placebo).    
The foll owing instruments will be us ed by the PI  or sub -I to assess baseline PD clinical severit y just 
prior to the CO 2 test:  
  
 the Clinician's Global Impressions of severity of illness (CGI -S)44  
 the Panic Disorder Severity S cale (PDSS)45  
 
The following instruments will be administered to subjects at baseline and serially throughout the test:  
 
 a change -sensitive, patient -rated, Vertical  Analog Scale (VAS) mood ratings (5  mood states 
including fear, nerv ousness, anxiety, rated 0 -100)46 
 a Patient Panic Symptom scale (PSS; 27 items, each rated 1 -4)46  
 
The PI or sub -I will be present when  the subject takes the study drug or placebo ( -120 minutes ; see 
Table 3 ). At that time, and until the CO 2 inhalation test is about to begin ( -120 mins to 0 mins), the 
Research Coordinator will be present in the room . From the time of the CO 2 inhalation test  (0 mins)  
until the patient leaves accompanied by  a friend or family member  (+60 mins) , both the Research 
Coordinator and the PI or sub -I will be present in the room.  
 
 
Table 3   CO 2 Inhalation Test Procedures  
  Timing          Activity/Procedural Step     Measures  
   
 
-130 mins                           
Patient welcomed to the CRC.  Taken to the testing 
room.  Baseline behavioral ratings and vital signs 
obtained. 7 cc blood drawn (ORX)  PDSS, CGI -S; 
Vital Signs (VS);  
ORX  
-120mins  Administer single oral dose of suvorexant 10 mg or 
identical -appearing placebo with water.   
-10 mins   Obtain pre -CO 2 test baseline behavioral and 
physiological (vitals) measures.  VAS (5 items), 
PSS; VS  
11 
 -5 mins  Plastic mask attached, and patients on room air for 
5 minutes.   7cc blood drawn (ORX)  ORX level  
 
 
0 mins  Blindly switch  to 35% CO 2 / 65% O 2 gas mixture 
inhalation for 60 seconds.     
 
 
+1 mins   
Monitoring for panic/anxiety symptoms, ORX  VAS, PSS, VS,  
ORX  
 
+5 mins   
Monitoring for panic/anxiety symptoms  VAS, PSS, VS  
 
+15 mins   
Monitoring for panic/anxiety symptoms, ORX  VAS,PSS,ORX, 
VS 
+30 mins  7 cc blood drawn (ORX)  ORX  
+60 mins  Monitoring for panic/anxiety symptoms . If patient 
stable discharge from the CRC , accompanied by a 
family member, friend, or caregiver . VAS,PSS VS  
 
 
 
ORX and DNA blood s amples : Blood samples for ORX ELISA  analysis will be collected, prepared  
and processed by the study coordinator s. The samples will be collected into 7 ml Vacutainer tubes 
(#VT -6450) which contain EDTA (lavender top). The tubes will be shaken gently several times 
immediately after collection to promote anti -coagulation. Blood will then be transferred to centrifuge 
tubes and centr ifuged at 1,0 00 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C. 1 mL plasma samples will be removed, and 
stored in a -80°C freezer located in the CRC.47 From those subjects who have provided their 
(additional informed consent to allow a blood sample to be collected for future DNA analysis, a 
sample of this centrifuged blood (after the plasma has been removed) will be banked in a -80°C 
freezer located in t he CRC  for future candidate gene/DNA analysis. Genes of interest with respect to 
ORX metabolism are the preproORX gene  and genes that code for the receptors, ORX1 and ORX2.       
 
          
 
 
Suvorexant /Placebo Medication , and Rescue Medication  
 
The pharmacotherapy will be supervised by the PI, Dr. Goddard, who is very experienced in the 
treatment of patients participating in clinical trials.   
 
Suvorexant: 10mg  tablets  will be used. Patients who receive suvorexant vs placebo will receive a 
total of one 10mg dose . Tablets will be formulated into capsules by Script Life Pharmacy, Clovis, CA, 
in order to be identi cal in appearance to placebo. It is acceptable to CRMC pharmacy that Script Life 
Pharmacy compound the study drug.  
 
Matching placebo  capsules : These will be prepared by Script Life Pharmacy, Clovis, CA, to appear 
identical to the suvorexant  caps mentioned above.  It is acceptable to CRMC pharmacy that Script 
Life Pharmacy compound the placebo.  
12 
  
Lorazepam:  0.5 tablets will be used. (As explained below, b ased on the PI’s clinical interaction with 
and observations of the patient, lorazepam 0.5 mg po will be available for use as a rescue medication 
if patients have a pronounced or prolonged CO2 panic response following CO2 administration .) 
These will be purchased from Script Life Pharmacy, Clovis, CA .  It is acceptable to CRMC pharmacy 
that Script Life Pharmacy provide the lorazepam . 
 
Drug safety  data:  A summary of drug safety  data for suvorexant can be found i n the FDA -approved 
package  insert .43 In non -elderly adults treated up to a month on a dose of 10 mg, the most common 
adverse reaction reported was somnolence, 2%, compared to <1% for placebo.  
 
Storage  and d ispensing : All investigation/study products will be stored at and dispensed by  the 
CRMC  Pharmacy .  
 
Accountability:  The study drug , placebos , and lorazepam  must only be used as directed in the 
protocol. Records of overall dispensing will be maintained separately from the cas e report forms 
recording the medication  dispensed to each patient.  The PI and CRMC pharmacist will make sure 
that unused or expired stu dy medications are destroyed in an appropriate manner.  Per the CRMC 
Pharmacy, unused medications are to be returned to the Pharmacy and their destruction  will be  
verified by  2 pharmacists.  
 
Methods for ensuring blinding : The CRC study coordinator will inte ract with the CRMC pharmacist 
to obtain appropriate medication f or each patient, according to the randomization schedule. Two sets 
of study blinds/codes will be kept in sealed envelopes inside a small box in a locked cabinet : one 
within the UCSF -F CRC , and  one within the UPA clinic.   
 
 
Methods for unblinding the study:  The treatment code must not be broken except in medical 
emergencies when the appropriate management of the subject necessitates knowledge of the 
treatment randomization. In the event of such a patient emergency, the medication blind will be revealed 
to the appropriate emergency medical staff by the coordinator or PI. Treatment codes will not be broken 
for the planned analyses of data until all decisions on the evaluability of the data fro m each individual 
subject have been made and documented.  
 
Follow -up Contacts  
 
After subjects complete their participation in study visit 2, and as an extra measure to ensure their 
ongoing well -being, we will  
 Make a follow -up phone  call to subjects the day after  study visit 2 , to ask them how they are 
doing, and to verbally verify that a family member stayed with them the appropriate amount of 
time after study visit 2.  
 Complete one follow -up visit  with each subject and the PI or a s ub-I at the CRC  to ensure that 
subjects have returned to baseline . 
13 
  
From time of enrollment through return to baseline, subjects will be enrolled in the study 
approximately two weeks.  
 
Because subjects’ participation in the study does not provide any trea tment for their condition, after 
subjects complete their participation in the study, they will be offered the opportunity to receive up to 
four treatment visits from the PI or a sub -I for their panic disorder, after which they will be referred 
back to thei r primary care provider. If subjects choose not to accept the treatment visits, they will be 
referred back to their primary care provider after the follow -up visit (described above).  
 
Adverse Events/Safety Monitoring  
 
Side effects will be assessed clinically at the patient’s  study visit by the PI , via serial vital sign 
monitoring and behavioral monitoring .  The PI will prese nt a 6 -monthly report  of study progress to the 
UCSF -Fresno/CRMC IRB . This will facilitate recognition of any patterns of advers e events, and 
provide feedback on managing these better as the study progresses.   
 
Based on the PI’s clinical interaction w ith and observations of the patient, l orazepam  0.5 mg po will 
be available for use as a rescue med ication if patients ha ve a pronounced or prolonged CO 2 panic  
response following CO 2 administration.  There is evidence in psychiatric patients that acute 
benzodiazepine ingestion/overdose may not greatly alter CS F ORX levels ,40 and hence plasma ORX 
data obtained if patients have had rescue medication may still have validity.  
Because of the small risk of somnolence in our study subjects, we will require that subjects not drive 
home after stu dy visit 2. The day of study visit 2 , before any drug is administered, investigators will 
ensure that the subjects have a plan to be accompanied by a family member, friend or caregiver, and 
that this individual will be in the subjects’ company for the remainder of 7 hours from the time they 
took the drug. This individual must ensure their transport home and report any adverse events to the 
investigator at (559) 320 -0580.  
In the unlikely event of an adverse reaction requiring medical or psychiatric care, p atien t coverage will 
be available 24/7  through the UCSF -Fresno psychiatry on -call schedule , who will be informed that the 
PI is available to be contacted via cell phone or email at any time . On-call activities and interaction 
are not charged in Psychiatry. In the unlikely event of additional ED or urgent care treatment, this will 
be covered by UCSF , depending on a number of factors .  
 
 
All adverse events that qualify as Unanticipated Problems will be reported to the IRB within 10 days; 
any subject deaths will be reported to the IRB within 24 hours of a member of the study team learning 
about the death.  
 
The Safety  Monitor  
 
The PI will present this project to Wee Kiat (David) Lee, MD , the Safety Monitor,  for an initial review 
shortly  after IRB approval .  Thereafter, 3 monthly monitoring reviews will be conducted with the PI 
presenting a brief synopsis of adverse events, reasons for drop -out, and study progress.  If there is 
a serious adverse event (e.g. patient hospitalized for medical or psychiatric reasons during the  
protocol, or a patient death), an emergency meeting with the Safety Monitor will be convened.   
   
14 
  
 
 
Data M anagemen t and Statistical C onsiderations   
 
The study coordinator s, working together with the study research manager, will be responsible for 
overseeing data collection and accuracy of record keeping.  All of the hard copy research data will be 
kept in locked file cabinets  in the study manager’s office .  Only the PI , sub -Is study coordinator will 
have access to these files, ensuring the security of the hard copy records.  Each subject will be given 
a unique alphanumeric code and this will serve as the only connection between the locked files, the 
hard-copy forms, and the e lectronic database.  All forms to be used in the study will only contain this 
alphanumeric code to protect personal health information and maintain HIPAA compliance.  
Additionally, other procedures to ensure confidentiality will follow the regulations and policies of 
UCSF Fresno and CMC.  
Data will be collected on hard -copy forms and then verified by the study coordinator, who will be 
trained to search for potential errors. Any questionable or illegible entries will be brought to the PI’s 
attention in a regu larly recurring research meeting (used to monitor recruitment, data collection, and 
protocol compliance).  A full review of new data acquired in the previous week will be performed and 
those subjects passing the final verification will have their forms pla ced into the secure file cabinets. 
The forms not passing verification will be addressed immediately.  
The electronic database used to house these data until analyses are needed will be a Microsoft 
Access database created uniquely for this project  and kept on the UCSF server .  The database will 
be password protected and only certain users will be given access to the folder containing the 
database. All data will be de -identified and the key will be kept in a locked drawer in the study 
manager’s offi ce. This will protect the electronic data against any unauthorized persons from entering 
the dataset and jeopardizing the integrity of the data.  All versions of the forms in the Microsoft 
Access database will have interfaces nearly identical to the hard c opy forms for ease and efficiency of 
entry. This will substantially limit the number of typographical errors by alerting data entry personnel 
when an entry does not match the list of possible entries dictated by the form. As this project  matures 
into the d ata analysis stage, data will be queried and exported to statistical software for data analysis.  
All data anal yses will be performed using SPSS  version 22 . Continuous variables will be summarized 
separately in the two PD patient  groups  using descriptive statistics, in cluding mean, SD , minimum 
and maximum values. Categorical variables  (e.g., presence/ absence of a CO 2-panic  episode ) will be 
summarized using frequency counts and percentages. Ba seline demographic data  will be compared 
betwe en the two groups . Dichotomous and ordinal  variables w ill be examined using Fisher’ s exact 
tests , and continuous  measures (e.g. , peak change  from baseline  in CO 2-evoked VAS  anxiety,  and 
peak change  from baseline  in plasma ORX) with Wilcoxon  rank sum  tests . Effect sizes will be 
generated to facilitate planning of a definitive  study.    
 
Since our current pilot data ( see p. 3) are so limited, the data generated t hrough this study  will enable 
us to est imate power requirements for a  larger study,  and to fine-tune the protocol .  A speculative 
power estimate for the larger study, b ased on our current plasma ORX/CO 2 findings , is as follows:  
 
If we assume  a mean±SD  peak change value  of 50±25 pg/ml for the PD/p lacebo gro up, and 30±25 
pg/ml for the PD/s uvorex ant group,  we would have 80% power to detect this difference , with =0.05, 
utilizing a 2 -tailed  Students t -test, with 25 patients in each group.   
15 
  
The pilot study timeline will be as follows: 3 months  to start up and obtain  IRB approval; an 8-month  
enrollment  period, recruiting 1-2 patients  per mon th; and a  final month for analysis, poste r 
development, and development of a grant application  to fund a definitive study of the research 
questions being addressed by this pilot work .   
 
References  
1. de Lecea L, Sutcliffe JG. The hypocretins/orexins: Novel hypothalamic neuropeptides involved in different 
physiological systems. Cell Mol Life Sci . 1999;56(5 -6):473 -480. 
2. Sakurai T. The neural circuit of orexin (hypocretin): Maintaining sleep an d wakefulness. Nat Rev Neurosci . 
2007;8(3):171 -181. 
3. Kato H, Hosoda H, Fukuda T, Masushige S, Kida S. Characterization of the promoter of the mouse 
preproorexin gene. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem . 2007;71(3):840 -843. 
4. Samson WK, et al. Both type 1 and typ e 2 receptors transmit the behavioral effects of orexin/hypocretin. The 
FASEB Journal . 2007;21(5):A462.  
5. Shekhar A, Keim SR, Simon JR, McBride WJ. Dorsomedial hypothalamic GABA dysfunction produces 
physiological arousal following sodium lactate infusions . Pharmacol Biochem Behav . 1996;55(2):249 -256. 
6. Johnson PL, Truitt WA, Fitz SD, Lowry CA, Shekhar A. Neural pathways underlying lactate -induced panic. 
Neuropsychopharmacology . 2008;33(9):2093 -2107.  
7. Johnson PL, Truitt W, Fitz SD, et al. A key role for orexin in panic anxiety. Nat Med . 2010;16(1):111 -115. 
8. Goddard AW, Mason GF, Almai A, et al. Reductions in occipital cortex GABA levels in panic disorder 
detected with 1h -magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2001;58(6):556 -561. 
9. Deadwyler SA, Porrino L, Siegel JM, Hampson RE. Systemic and nasal delivery of orexin -A (hypocretin -1) 
reduces the effects of sleep deprivation on cognitive performance in nonhuman primates. J Neurosci . 
2007;27(52):14239 -14247.  
16 
 10. Shin YW, Dzemidzic M,  Jo HJ, et al. Increased resting -state functional connectivity between the anterior 
cingulate cortex and the precuneus in panic disorder: Resting -state connectivity in panic disorder. J Affect 
Disord . 2013;150(3):1091 -1095.  
11. Long Z, Medlock C, Dzemidzic  M, Shin YW, Goddard AW, Dydak U. Decreased GABA levels in anterior 
cingulate cortex/medial prefrontal cortex in panic disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry . 
2013;44:131 -135. 
12. Strawn JR, Pyne -Geithman GJ, Ekhator NN, et al. Low cerebrospin al fluid and plasma orexin -A 
(hypocretin -1) concentrations in combat -related posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology . 
2010;35(7):1001 -1007.  
13. Goddard AW, Ball SG, Martinez J, et al. Current perspectives of the roles of the central norepin ephrine 
system in anxiety and depression. Depress Anxiety . 2010;27(4):339 -350. 
14. Yang LP. Suvorexant: First global approval. Drugs . 2014;74(15):1817 -1822.  
15. Bonaventure P, Yun S, Johnson PL, et al. A selective orexin -1 receptor antagonist attenuates st ress-
induced hyperarousal without hypnotic effects. J Pharmacol Exp Ther . 2015;352(3):590 -601. 
16. Papp LA, Klein DF, Martinez J, et al. Diagnostic and substance specificity of carbon -dioxide -induced panic. 
Am J Psychiatry . 1993;150(2):250 -257. 
17. Perna G , Barbini B, Cocchi S, Bertani A, Gasperini M. 35% CO2 challenge in panic and mood disorders. J 
Affect Disord . 1995;33(3):189 -194. 
18. Coryell W, Arndt S. The 35% CO2 inhalation procedure: Test -retest reliability. Biol Psychiatry . 
1999;45(7):923 -927. 
19. B ertani A, Caldirola D, Bussi R, Bellodi L, Perna G. The 35% CO2 hyperreactivity and clinical 
symptomatology in patients with panic disorder after 1 week of treatment with citalopram: An open study. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol . 2001;21(3):262 -267. 
17 
 20. van Beek N , Griez E. Reactivity to a 35% CO2 challenge in healthy first -degree relatives of patients with 
panic disorder. Biol Psychiatry . 2000;47(9):830 -835. 
21. Schoepp DD, Wright RA, Levine LR, Gaydos B, Potter WZ. LY354740, an mGlu2/3 receptor agonist as a 
novel  approach to treat anxiety/stress. Stress . 2003;6(3):189 -197. 
22. Levine L, Gaydos B, Sheehan D, et al. The mGlu2/3 receptor agonist, LY354740, reduces panic anxiety 
induced by a CO2 challenge in patients diagnosed wityh panic disorder. Neuropharmacology . 2002;43(2):294.  
23. Michelson D, Snyder E, Paradis E, et al. Safety and efficacy of suvorexant during 1 -year treatment of 
insomnia with subsequent abrupt treatment discontinuation: A phase 3 randomised, double -blind, placebo -
controlled trial. Lancet Neurol . 2014;13(5):461 -471. 
24. Salomon RM, Ripley B, Kennedy JS, et al. Diurnal variation of cerebrospinal fluid hypocretin -1 (orexin -A) 
levels in control and depressed subjects. Biol Psychiatry . 2003;54(2):96 -104. 
25. Kessler RC, McGonagle KA, Zhao S, et al. L ifetime and 12 -month prevalence of DSM -III-R psychiatric 
disorders in the united states. results from the national comorbidity survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1994;51(1):8 -
19. 
26. Weissman MM, Bland RC, Canino GJ, et al. The cross -national epidemiology of panic disorder. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry . 1997;54(4):305 -309. 
27. Pollack MH, Otto MW, Rosenbaum JF, et al. Longitudinal course of panic disorder: Findings from the 
massachusetts ge neral hospital naturalistic study. J Clin Psychiatry . 1990;51 Suppl A:12 -16. 
28. Keller MB, Hanks DL. Course and outcome in panic disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry . 
1993;17(4):551 -570. 
29. Roy -Byrne PP, Stang P, Wittchen HU, Ustun B, Walt ers EE, Kessler RC. Lifetime panic -depression 
comorbidity in the national comorbidity survey. association with symptoms, impairment, course and help -
seeking. Br J Psychiatry . 2000;176:229 -235. 
18 
 30. Weissman MM, Klerman GL, Markowitz JS, Ouellette R. Suicida l ideation and suicide attempts in panic 
disorder and attacks. N Engl J Med . 1989;321(18):1209 -1214.  
31. Markowitz JS, Weissman MM, Ouellette R, Lish JD, Klerman GL. Quality of life in panic disorder. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry . 1989;46(11):984 -992. 
32. Sun H, Ke nnedy WP, Wilbraham D, et al. Effects of suvorexant, an orexin receptor antagonist, on sleep 
parameters as measured by polysomnography in healthy men. Sleep . 2013;36(2):259 -267. 
33. Herring WJ, Snyder E, Budd K, et al. Orexin receptor antagonism for treatm ent of insomnia: A randomized 
clinical trial of suvorexant. Neurology . 2012;79(23):2265 -2274.  
34. Flores A, Valls -Comamala V, Costa G, Saravia R, Maldonado R, Berrendero F. The hypocretin/orexin 
system mediates the extinction of fear memories. Neuropsychop harmacology . 2014;39(12):2732 -2741.  
35. Johnson PL, Samuels BC, Fitz SD, Lightman SL, Lowry CA, Shekhar A. Activation of the orexin 1 receptor 
is a critical component of CO2 -mediated anxiety and hypertension but not bradycardia. 
Neuropsychopharmacology . 2012;37(8):1911 -1922.  
36. Perna G, Battaglia M, Garberi A, Arancio C, Bertani A, Bellodi L. Carbon dioxide/oxygen challenge test in 
panic disorder. Psychiatry Res . 1994;52(2):159 -171. 
37. Williams RH, Jensen LT, Verkhratsky A, Fugger L, Burdakov D. Control o f hypothalamic orexin neurons by 
acid and CO2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2007;104(25):10685 -10690.  
38. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders -5th edition (DSM -
V). 5th edition ed. Washington, D.C.: American P sychiatric Association; 2013.  
39. Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, et al. The mini -international neuropsychiatric interview (M.I.N.I.): 
The development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD -10. J Clin 
Psychi atry. 1998;59 Suppl 20:22 -33;quiz 34 -57. 
40. Brundin L, Bjorkqvist M, Petersen A, Traskman -Bendz L. Reduced orexin levels in the cerebrospinal fluid of 
suicidal patients with major depressive disorder. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol . 2007;17(9):573 -579. 
19 
 41. Mont gomery SA, Asberg M. A new depression scale designed to be sensitive to change. Br J Psychiatry . 
1979;134:382 -389. 
42. Mignot E, Lammers GJ, Ripley B, et al. The role of cerebrospinal fluid hypocretin measurement in the 
diagnosis of narcolepsy and other hy persomnias. Arch Neurol . 2002;59(10):1553 -1562.  
43. BELSOMRA (suvorexant) [package insert]. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck; revised August 2014.  
44. Guy W. ECDEU assessment manual for psychopharmacology. Washington, DC: US Department of Health, 
Education, a nd Welfare; 1976.  
45. Shear MK, Brown TA, Barlow DH, et al. Multicenter collaborative panic disorder severity scale. Am J 
Psychiatry . 1997;154(11):1571 -1575.  
46. Goddard AW, Woods SW, Sholomskas DE, Goodman WK, Charney DS, Heninger GR. Effects of the 
serot onin reuptake inhibitor fluvoxamine on yohimbine -induced anxiety in panic disorder. Psychiatry Res . 
1993;48(2):119 -133. 
47. Thompson JP, Watt P, Sanghavi S, Strupish JW, Lambert DG. A comparison of cerebrospinal fluid and 
plasma urotensin II concentrations  in normotensive and hypertensive patients undergoing urological surgery 
during spinal anesthesia: A pilot study. Anesth Analg . 2003;97(5):1501 -1503.  
  