Official Title: Evaluation of the Wits Workout Wellness Program for Older Adults  
Document: Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Study ID: [REMOVED] 
Document Date: March 17 , 2021 
  
Research Design 
Wits Workout Program Evaluation  
Background and Rationale  
 About 11% of the U.S. older adult population is at risk for or has subjective cognitive decline1. While some factors 
that affect brain health cannot be changed, research has shown that certain lifestyle changes such as participating in 
regular physical activity, staying socially engaged, and maintaining good heart health make a positive difference that can 
delay or reduce cognitive decline1,2,3.  However, few cognitive brain health programs exist, and those that do  are 
targeted to a specific audience (i.e., Alzheimer’s and related dementias). Additionally, these existing  programs primarily 
focus on one health domain (i.e. physical activity, diet)4.5 without the additional focus on multi -health do mains , which 
also includes elements such as intellectual engagement, social isolation, stress, sleep, and self -efficacy.  Thus, there is a 
need for a more holistic cognitive health program aimed toward the general older adult population and particularly those that are underserved (i.e., low income, racialized, rural).  
Drawing on existing research conducted at the University of Illinois (UI) and other academic institutions, UI 
Extension Family Life Educators developed Wits Workout , a multi -modal workshop ser ies designed to enhance brain 
health among people ages 50 and older. Wits Workout addresses multiple factors that affect cognitive health such as 
physical activity, stress, sleep, social isolation . The holistic workshop series is designed to be lay -leader led, interactive, 
and experiential. P reliminary evaluations demonstrate that this educational series serves a need in reducing isolation, 
increasing physical activity, promoting intellectual engagement, and enhancing overall brain health in older participa nts, 
all of which complement current aging brain health research.  
 Overall Aim s 
The aims of the study are to (1) Determine the feasibility and acceptability of Wits Workout among 120 intervention 
group recipients who receive the program at 8 locations in Illinois ; and (2) Use a randomized trial to examine the 
preliminary efficacy of Wits Workout on changes in the primary outcomes of cognitive functioning, and secondary 
outcomes of self-efficacy, socialization, sleep, stress and physical activi ty levels following the 12 -week intervention (3 
months) and explore maintenance effects at 6 months (3 -months post-intervention) compared to a waitlist control . 
Hypotheses:   At three and six-month posttests, intervention participants compared to controls w ill differentially 
improve with respect  to (1) PROMIS
6,7 self-reported cognitive  function measures; (2)  scores on the Telephone Interview 
for Cognitive Screening (TICS) ; and (3)  self-efficacy, socialization, sleep, stress and physical activity levels.  
 
Research Design 
We propose to conduct a two -arm randomized controlled trial with a treatment (workshop) group and wait -list 
control group. We will assess participant outcomes at baseline, immediately post -workshop  (3-months)  and at 6- month s 
to assess maintenance of treatment effects.    
Intervention.  Wits Workout  will take place over 12 weeks, one hour per week. The training will be delivered by 5 UI 
Extension faculty educators who were trained by the Extension faculty educators  who developed the program. Each 
week includes a themed module with  four activities and a training component featuring  educational topics such as a) 
exercising regularly; c) engaging the brain with new and intellectually stimulating challenges; d) participating in social 
activities; e) getting enough sleep; and f) reducing stress . The worksho p will be offered in- person in 8 areas with a target 
of 20 attendees per urban workshop and 12 attendees per rural workshop for a total of 120 workshop participants. The waitlist control participants  (n=120)  will be offered the worksho p after the 6 -month study period is completed.  All 
COVID safety requirements will be in place at the workshop sites. A fidelity assessment tool will be developed by the 
research team and implemented at all program sites. All Wits Workout leaders will be observed teaching two sessions of 
the program by one of the study investigators . After the first observation occurs, the fidelity evaluator will debrief with 
the leader and the evaluator will follow up with a written evaluation that includes strengths, areas of improvement (including ways in which they adhered and/or strayed from the program content and facilitation techniques outlined in the Wits Workout Leader’s Guide), and suggestions for increasing fidelity in their teaching. A second  observation will 
occur within the several weeks of the first observation with the goal of continuous process improvement from the first to the second evaluation. UI faculty educators leading the workshops will record 
attendance over the 12 weeks and report to the investigative team. Attrition as well as completion rates will be documented based on workshop attendance.  
      Sample.  We will o ffer Wits Workout to a minimum of 240 older adults (120 treatment 
and 120 delayed treatment controls) in three  urban and f ive rural  areas of  Illinois (see 

Table 1 ). 
Qualitative Outcomes.  We will conduct focus groups with participants 3 months after  the conclusion of the 
workshops to learn more about the impact of the workshop on participant’s health behaviors and their thoughts about 
how the program was delivered and evaluated.     
Outcome Measures .  We will examine the effects of participation in Wits Workout on the primary outcome of 
cognitive functioning and  secondary outcomes of  improved social sat isfaction, self -efficacy, quality of life and sleep, 
reduced stress, and increased physical activity  using the following measurements:  Cognitive functioning will be assessed 
using the PROMIS  Cognitive Function - Short Form 8a6,7 and the Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status (TICS). 8,9 TICS is 
a brief, standardized test of cognitive functioning designed to be measured over the telephone . Social-satisfaction will 
be assessed using the  Cutrona Social Provisions Scale10. Self-efficacy will be asses sed using the PROMIS Item Bank v1.0 - 
General Self -Efficacy .6 Sleep will be assessed using the Pittsburg Sleep Quality Index (PSQI).13 Stress will be assessed 
using the Perceived Stress Scale.14 Physical activity  will be assessed using the Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly  
(PASE).15  
Participant inclusion/exclusion criteria : 1) age 50+; 2) English speaking /understands English; 3) No self -reported 
serious mental illness or diagnosis of Alzheimer’s or other dementia related disease, and a score of 27 or higher on the TICS cognitive assessment during the screening call . 
Procedures  
Participants will be recruited through UI Extension utilizing community partners, the Extension website, Extension 
newslette rs, and multiple media outlets, including news releases, fliers, and social media. Upon registering for the 
program, participants will be contacted and invited to take part in the research study. Those interested will be screened for inclusion into the study with a brief telephone interview which includes the TICS assessment . 
Participants who are eligible will be sent a consent form and baseline assessment. University of Illinois at Chicago  will provide institutional review board 
approval . All survey assess ments  will be administered 
online unless  a participant is unable to complete the 
survey online in which case s/he  will be offered the 
opportunity to take the survey via phone with a 
researcher or to receive a paper copy with a self -
addressed, stamped return envelope. Once the 
baseline assessment  is complet ed, participants will be randomized into two groups  by a member of the research team . 
The treatment group will  receive the 12 -week workshop and  the waitlist contro l group will receive the treatment after 
the six-month posttest is complete  (see Figure 1). The first posttest and TICS will be administered by a member of the 
research team  to both the workshop and control group s immediately following t he end of the 12 -week program (3 
months). The 6 -month follow -up assessment and TICS will be administered 3 months after the end of the program to 
both the workshop and control groups  by a member of the research team . Reminders to complete the survey will be 
sent by a research team member by email and/or phone. Participants will be provided a $20 gift card upon completion 
of each survey that will be administered  by a research assistant .  A “reunion” event will take plac e three months after 
the last Wits Workout  session  for the workshop group only. The reunion will give participants an opportunity to 
reconnect informally and it will enable the research team to conduct  the follow -up focus group s. Qualitative methods 
are particularly well suited for the assessment of simulated changes in behavior and will provide us richer detail than the 
surveys alone
16.  
Power Analysis and Sample Size Estimation . In the cognition literature, a 1 -3 point decrease in the Mini Mental 
State Exam score has been shown to be indicative of a meaningful decline. Our primary outcome, cognitive functioning,  
will be assessed using the TICS  -- a telephone version of Mini Mental State Exam which is administer ed in person. Both  
measures correlate highly.9,10 Among older adults with normal cognition, which is our target sample for this trial, an 
effect size of 0.29 was considered clinically meaningful.11 With this more conservative effect size of .20, an alpha of .05/6 
= 0.008 9a djusted for multiple outcome measures and comparisons across rural and urban samples), for 3 time points 
(0-12-24 weeks), power set to .80, and an estimated correlation of .50 among measures, we need a total of 208 
participants. Accounting for ~15% attriti on, we will target to recruit a total of 240 participants for this trial.  
Data Analysis  
Qu antitative data . We will conduct 3x2 repeated measures ANOVAs to examine time (pre vs. post vs. follow -up), 

group (intervention vs. waitlist control), and interaction effects. The quantitative measures that will be evaluated using 
this statistical model include measures of social satisfaction and support, perceived well -being and quality of life, 
physical activity and exercise, self -efficacy, and the cognitive functioning scores. Covariates such as demographics [age, 
biological sex, geographic location (rural vs. urban)], and attendance to the Wits Workout program will be accounted for in the analyses. As a secondary analysis, we will also examine correlations between the demographic characteristics and the study outcomes. Drs. Gothe and Payne have experience in analyzing similar large datasets from randomized controlled trials using these analysis strategies.  
Qu
alitative data.  Dr. Bobitt will conduct the focus groups using a guide to f acilitate the discussion. The guide will 
include nine questions that will provide more in-depth detail about outcomes experienced by the  participants (i.e. In 
what ways did participating in Wits Workout  impact your health behaviors ?) as well as questions that will provide details 
about their perception of the  program (i.e. What suggestions do you have to improve  the program?).   We will audiotape 
and transcribe the focus groups. Three research team members will review all transcripts to develop an initial code 
book. We will then apply the codebook to a subsample o f the transcripts  individually then meet to  discuss any areas 
where we are not coding consistently and adjust the codebook accordingly. We will then apply the same technique to another subsample of transcripts. Once we are certain that coding is consistent and the codebook  is finalized, Dr. Bobitt 
will code the transcripts using NVivo QSR qualitative software. She will use an inductive thematic analysis process to analyze the data. Themes will be discussed and finalized with the research team.   
 
 