Version 5  – 1/17/1 9 
 
Page 1 of 10 
 The Impact of Holding on Stress and Bonding in Mother -Infant Pairs during Therapeutic Hypothermia  
Research P rotocol | IRB Number: 1183063   
Introduction : The inability to hold an infant being treated with therapeutic hypothermia in the neonatal 
intensive care unit has been subjectively reported by ours and other research groups as a significant source of 
stress for parents1-7. We aim to assess the impact of holding on endocrinological markers of stress and bonding . 
Specifically , we plan to collect salivary  cortisol and oxytocin levels  from infants undergoing therapeutic 
hypothe rmia and their mothers prior to  and immediately  after a 30-minute holding period. We anticipate 
elevated oxytocin and decreased cortisol levels as quantitative marker s of increased bonding and stress 
reduction in the mother -infant dyad after holding.  
Background : Therapeutic hypothermia is a standard of care intervention that has been consistently shown to 
increase disability -free survival in term infants with neonatal encephalopathy8-13. Infants treated with 
therapeutic hypothermia often have central lines, are on continuous electroencephalogram  (EEG)  monitoring, 
and are intubated.  Due to concerns for dislodging equipment and potential for warming the infant, parents 
historically have not been permitted to hold their infants during therapeutic hypothermia . While therapeutic 
hypothermia has important n eurological benefits to the newborn, prior research conducted with nurses and 
parents indicates that the experience is psychologically traumatic1,2,4,5,14. A parent’s inability to hold their infant 
during therapeutic hypothermia is often cited as a major impediment to parent -infant bonding2. 
For prematurely born infants , not treated with therapeutic hypothermia , skin -to-skin care has emerged as a 
therapeutic intervention that substantially improves bonding between mothers  and infants15. It has also been 
shown to have an analgesic effect on infants16 and cortisol lowering effects17 on mothers and infants. Likewise, 
oxytocin, a hormone produced by the pituitary gland and associated with  maternal -infant bonding and stress 
reduction, has been shown to increase in mothers while they hold their infants18. Previous research demonstrates 
correlation between salivary and serum ox ytocin levels19. Skin-to-skin care has led to reduced salivary cortisol 
levels and increased salivary oxytocin levels in 28 premature infants a nd their parents.20  
Holding a newborn is a critical moment, described as the moment in which the new parent  feels like a parent for 
the first time2.  Holding a baby is a necessary precursor to feeding a baby w hich is a fundamental maternal 
instinct.  Barriers to holding are perceived as barriers to feeding which can disrupt the maternal bond with an 
infant.  In prematurely born infants, the inability to feed a baby is associated with a higher level of maternal 
stress21.  High levels of stress matter because maternal d epression and anxiety frequently occur in the NICU22 
and research on very preterm infants has shown alterations in language development and higher anxiety traits in 
children of mothers who expressed higher levels of stres s23.  
Increased bonding and reduced stress may lead to improved neurodevelopmental outcomes for infants being 
treated with therapeutic hypothermia and lower rates of ps ychological trauma for mothers . We anticipate the 
sampling of salivary cortisol and oxytocin will quanti tatively demonstrate a n endocrinological biomarker for 
stress reduction and increased bonding for mother -infant dyads who are being treated with therape utic 
hypothermia. Th e results of this study will support and promote protocolized holding interventions  for infants 
during therapeutic hypothermia , in a similar vein as skin -to-skin care  for the prematurely born patient  
population.  
Preliminary Data : A mixed methods study completed by our team demonstrated  feasibility of holding 
medically stable infants for 30 minutes during therapeutic hypothermia (manuscript under review at  Acta 
Paediatrica ). There we re no reported adverse events during  holding  including dislodging of central lines or EEG 
Version 5  – 1/17/1 9 
 
Page 2 of 10 
 leads or early termination of holding due to vital sign or other infant instability . A thin foam barrier was placed 
between the mother and infant to prevent unintentional rewarming.  The mean infant temperature  prior to 
holding was 33.4ºC and at completion of holding the mean temperature was 33.5ºC (p=0.18).  There was no 
significant bradycardia (heart rate less than 80 bpm), hypotension (mean arterial pressure less than 40 mmHg) 
or oxyg en desaturation (less tha n 93%) (Figure 1). Mothers and nurses responded to survey questions with 
overwhelming enthusiasm for the perceived benefits of holding. Nurses reported that holding during 
hypothermia seemed safe. Additionally, m others responded to our survey with reports of lower stress levels and 
improved ability to bond with their baby after holding.  
 
Figure 1: A: Temperature by case; B: Heart rate by case; C: Mean arterial pressure by case; D: Oxygen 
saturation by case; bold  horizontal lines are the mean for the 30 minute period of holding for each case.  
Hypothesis  
We hypothesize  that measurable increases in salivary oxytocin levels, coinciding with the reported qualitative 
increased levels of bonding , will be observed after the holding period . We anticipate the reported stress 
reduction  after holding  to be quantified by measurable decreases in salivary cortisol levels. We hypothesize 
these hormone changes will be present in both the mother and the infant  when compared to samp les taken 
without the holding intervention .  
Primary outcome:  To compare the change in the level of oxytocin  in maternal saliva  between  two conditions; 
one assessing the difference between oxytocin levels before and immediately after a 30 -minute period of 
holding during therapeutic hypothermia  compared to the  second condition in which pre and post -levels of 
salivary oxytocin surrounding a 30-minute period of “no t holding”  are obtained .  
Secondary outcomes:  

Version 5  – 1/17/1 9 
 
Page 3 of 10 
 1. To compare the change in the level of cortisol in maternal saliva  between the same two conditions  
2. To compare the change in the level of oxytocin and cortisol in infant saliva  between  the same  two conditions  
3. Comparison between the holding and “not holding” conditions of infant vital signs includi ng temperature, 
heart rate, mean arterial blood pressure and oxygen saturation collected  30 minutes  prior to holding, every 2 
minutes during, and 45 minutes after holding .  
4. Subjective maternal reports of the experience of holding the infant during hypot hermia and responses to 
questions about stress level and bonding.  
5. Subjective nurse report about the experience of supporting holding.  
Significance  
The subjective evidence of psychological stress for mothers  in the neonatal intensive care unit  (NICU)  has been 
well-reported in prior research. This is exceptionally challenging  for mothers  of infants undergoing therapeutic 
hypothermia, who historically have not been permitted to hold their infants d ue to concerns for dislodging 
equipment and potential infant re-warming . Our previous research has demonstrated feasibility  of holding 
infants during therapeutic hypothermia. This study aims to elucidate quantitative data to support holding as a  
potential standard intervention during therapeutic hypothermia. We aim to measure the proposed benefits of 
holding  by using endocrinological biomarkers .  Future research may use these biomarkers to noninvasively 
(saliva , not blood) assess the impact of stress and bonding on  neurodevelopmental outcomes  in infants treated 
with hypothermia , as well as a myriad of other clinically stressful  scenarios in the NICU.  
Methods : 
Study Design: This is a single center, prospective randomized controlled crossover mixed methods study of the 
effect of a 30 -minute holding intervention on salivary levels of cortisol and oxytocin  in mothers and infants 
treated with therapeutic hypothermia . 
Power Calculation:  The power calculation was performed using the dat a from the Vittner paper20 for our 
primary outcome, the maternal oxytocin response to holding.  The maternal oxytocin level was chosen as the 
primary outcome for several reasons. First, we are c onfident in the ability to obtain sa livary samples from an 
adult and second  because several of the mothers in the pilot study  reported symptoms during or after holding 
that would be consistent with increased oxytocin levels such as uterine contractions and /or increased breast milk 
production.  
A sample size of 15 from a finite population of infants treated with hypothermia annually (N=40), will have 
80% power to detect a d ifference in means of 113 pg/ml, (a first condition µ=275 pg/ml and a second condition 
µ=162 pg/ml) assuming a conservative estimate for standard deviation of 175 pg/ml using a paired t -test with a 
0.05 two -sided level of significance. Of the 40 babies treated with therapeutic hypothermia each year, 25 -33% 
are expected to meet exclusion crit eria.  
Location: A convenience sample of infants undergoing therapeutic hypothermia and their mothers will be 
recruited from the neonatal intensive care unit at Maine Medical Center.  
Inclusion/exclusion criteria: Inclusion criteria will be ; gestational age at birth of 35 weeks or greater, absence of 
clinical or electrographic seizures during the first 24 hours of therapeutic hypothermia , and designation as 
“clinically stable” by the attending neonatologist with the infant on room air, nasal c annula, continuous positive 
Version 5  – 1/17/1 9 
 
Page 4 of 10 
 airway pressure  or intubated  on conventional ventilator . Exclusion criteria will be use of inhaled nitric oxide for 
persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn, high frequency oscillator ventilation, presence of  
electrograp hic seizure s, use of vasopressors or paralytic agents, presence of chest tubes, wound vacuums, or 
drains, and in utero opiate exposure .  
Informed consent: Dr. Alexa Craig is the neonatal neurologist involved in the clinical care of all infants at 
Maine Medical Center  treated with therapeutic hypothermia. Within this patient population, Dr. Craig will 
identify potential patients to recruit for the study. Dr. Craig will describe the research study to mothers of 
infants who meet the inclusion criteria.  Ther apeutic hypothermia treatment takes 72 hours to complete (three 
days). Drs. Craig, Fox or Utley will wait 24 hours into therapeutic hypothermia to determine if the infant meets 
all inclusion criteria and does not meet any exclusion criteria.  At this time,  Drs. Craig ,  Fox, Deerwester, or 
Utley  will obtain a single signed informed consent from the mother on behalf of herself and on behalf of the 
infant. After randomization, a calendar of events will be created with mothers, NICU nurses and research 
personnel  for the holding plan  on day two and day three of hypothermia .  
Assisting mothers to hold their infants is within the scope of practice and routine clinical duties for NICU 
nurses , including  babies born prematurely (up to 23 weeks ) and intubated babies . A discussion will take place 
between the NICU nurse and research personnel prior to enrolling a patient into this study. Any concerns or 
discomfort can be addressed, and no nurse will be obliged to participate in the study. Should a nurse decline to 
assist w ith holding a patient in this study, another nurse volunteer may step in. The patient’s nurse will be 
expected to continue to care for the patient in all non -study related aspects. Nurses will go through an informed 
consent process before completing the qu estionnaire. There is no penalty for declining to complete the 
questionnaire.  
Randomization: Infants and mothers will be randomly assigned to the holding condition occurring on the 
second versus the third day of hypothermia . A random number generator will  be used with those numbers being 
translated into a list of sequentially numbered opaque envelopes that will be opened by the principal 
investigator (PI) in order at the time of randomization following the informed consent process (Figure 1).  
Data Collecti on and Management :  
After obtaining consent  and randomization , a plan will be made with the mother and a discussion will take place 
regarding the timing of events.  Mothers will be assisted with holding their infants for a single 30 -minute period  
using the holding protocol developed for the feasibility study  (Appendix A) . Holding  will occur  between 9:00 
am and 11:00am , to account for the diurnal variation of cortisol, on day two or day three  of hypothermia 
treatment.  Transitioning of the infant to  the mother’s arm will require the  assistance of the  NICU nurse  caring 
for the baby and one other nurse . For condition A, four samples of saliva will be obtained ; two from the mother  
(pre and post holding)  and two from the  infant  (pre and post holding) . The first sample will be collected prior to 
holding, and the second sample immediately at the end of holding before the infant is placed back in the bed 
(condition A).  For condition B, four additional samples of saliva will be obtained; two from the mother (pre and 
post “not holding”) and two from the infant (pre and post “not holding”).  
Version 5  – 1/17/1 9 
 
Page 5 of 10 
  
All of the infants  at Maine Medical Center treated with therapeutic hypothermia are recorded in the Maine 
Medical Center Neonatal Encephalopathy REDCap d atabase (IRB NET976245 -1). We will access  the data base 
for demographic and descriptive characteristics for the participants of this this study.  Medical history will also 
be obtained from this database, including mothers ’ obstetric history  and infants ’ medical history. This will be 
entered into a different REDCap database specific for this study.  
A ten-question survey will be given to Mothers after holding. A n informed consent form with be obtained and a 
de-identified 1 5-question survey will be given to nurses immediately after assisting with holding. Infant data 
and maternal surveys will be stored in a binder in a locked office in the neonatal intensive care unit  or at 55 
Spring Street, Scarborough, ME . The data will periodically be manually entered in to the HIPPA compliant 
REDCap by co -investigators.  
Safety:  Infant vital signs will be continuously monitored during holding and “not holding” and recorded at the 
following intervals; 30 minutes prior to, every two minutes during, and 45 minutes after holding to monitor 
infant safety. Early termination of holding will occur if there is a n adverse event  as defined in the feasibility 
study.  This includes a change in infant temperature greater than 0.5°C above or belo w 33.5°C. This cutoff is  
used based on historical data at our institution in which the infant core temperature during therapeutic 
hypothermia normally varies by up to 0.5°C above or below 33.5°C. Accidental dislodgement of central lines or 
disruption of EE G leads during holding  will also be considered adverse events . Early termination of holding 
will occur if there is clinical instability of infant heart rate, blood pressure or oxygen saturation present for 
greater than 2 recorded measurements; infant brady cardia defined as heart rate less than 80 beats per minute11, 
infant hypotension with mean arterial pressure (MAP) less than 40 mmHg11, oxygen saturation of less than 
93%24, or evidence of clinical instability as determined by the NICU nurse and/or attending neonatologist.  
Laboratory Studies : Saliva will be collected from mothers by passive drool method , the gold standard when 
collecting oral fluid for biological testing . Infant  saliva will be obtained  using a  1 mL syringe and suctioning 
saliva from the infants mouth until 0.1mL of volume is obtained . Research indicates that oxytocin increases in 
anticipation of breast -feeding  and begins to normalize after 30 minutes25. Therefore, mothers will be asked to 
pump prior to the first saliva collection, which will allow prior antici patory oxytocin increases to normalize. 
The collection will take place within the 30-minute  window after pumping, prior to the rebound increase in 
oxytocin level. The  mother will be asked not to eat, drink, smoke, or exercise for one hour before the study 

Version 5  – 1/17/1 9 
 
Page 6 of 10 
 session - all factors that confound salivary cortisol levels. Infants receiving therapeutic hypothermia are not fed 
by mouth so this issue will not impact infant subjects. The half -life of oxytocin has been shown to be 10 -15 
minutes18. The half -life for cortisol has been shown to be one hour26. After collection, the saliva will be mixed 
with RNAprotect ® Saliva Reagent  with cOmplete™  protease inhibitor , to stabilize the sample. It will then be 
frozen immediately at -20°C , transferred to Dr. Jill Maron’s lab, and stored at -80°C, a temperature which has 
been shown to stabilize cortisol and oxytocin samples.20,27,28 An enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
will be used to analyze cortis ol and oxytocin concentrations in saliva28 at Dr. Jill Maron ’s lab at Tufts in 
Boston . A premade salivary cortisol ELISA from ENZO Life Sciences (ADI-901-071) and a premade oxytocin 
ELISA from ENZO (ADI-901-153A ) will be used. Samples will be run in triplicate.  The cortisol and oxytocin 
levels will be tested in one batch at the completion of the study.  
The sensitivity of the cortisol assay is 56.72  pg/ml. The intra - and interassay coefficients of variation are 6.6% 
and 7.8% respectively. Crossreactivities for the cortisol ELISA include: Prednisolone (122.35%), 
Corticosterone (27.68%), 11 -deoxycortisol (4.0%), Progesterone (3.64%), Prednisone (0.85%), Testosterone 
(0.12%) and less than <0.10% androstenedione, cor tisone and estradiol. The sensitivity of oxytocin assay is 15 
pg/ml, without correcting for concentration.  The intra - and interassay coefficients of variation are 10.2% and 
16.5% respectively  for our anticipated oxytocin concentration (100 -300 pg/ml11). The oxytocin ELISA is 
reported to cross react  with the following substances: mesotocin (7%), Arg -vasotocin (7.5%), Ser ,Ile -Oxytocin 
(<0.2%), TRH (<0.2%), Somatostatin (<0.2%), Met -Enkephalin (<0.2%), VIP (<0.2%), Lys -Vasopressin 
(<0.2%), Arg -Vasopress in (<0.2%), α−ANP (<0.2%), Growth Hormone (<0.2%), Tocinoic acid (<0.2%), and 
Melanostatin (<0.2%).  
Data Analysis:  Descriptive characteristics of infants and their mothers will be presented by percentages f or 
categorical variables and by means and standard  deviation (or non -parametric equivalent) for continuous 
variables . Salivary cortisol and oxytocin concentrations will be determined by comparing the optical density of 
the ELISA result to a control curve.  A paired t -test will be used to assess for signif icant differences in hormone 
levels  pre and post -holding.  Responses to surveys will be described using proportions  of “agree” , “strongly 
agree”, “disagree ” and “strongly disagree .” 
Potential Problems:  Our p revious research demonstrated  feasibility of holding clinically stable infants for 30 
minutes during therapeutic hypothermia. Based on extensive experience of allowing mothers to hold critically 
ill premature infants, our NICU n urses developed and implemented a safe technique to trans ition hypothermic  
infants from the bed to their mother’s arms without adverse eve nts. The thermal barrier successfully prevent ed 
rewarming of the infant.  
For this subsequent study on salivary biomarkers, we are confident in the ability to transition infan ts safely to 
holding, but acknowledge that problems could occur with saliva  collection  or storage , since these are the new 
components of the protocol . There is also the potential for difficulty in coordinating the timing of maternal 
pumping of breast milk and the collection of the first maternal “pre -holding” saliva  specimen . We intend to 
address this with education and written instructions, as well as assistance from nursing staff. There may also be 
potential issues that arise around the availability and proper storage of dry ice. We will work with the Maine 
Medical Center patient laboratory to develop a specimen handling and storage protocol. The specimens , once  
collected,  will be hand delivered t o the lab for storage . 
 
Appendix A: Updated Safety Protocol  
 
Version 5  – 1/17/1 9 
 
Page 7 of 10 
 REASON FOR RESEARCH:  
Holding in normothermic infants has been shown to reduce stress hormones, decrease crying and irritability, 
regulate heart rate and breathing patterns, enhance mother -infant bonding, and provides more restful sleep 
patterns. This research project is aimed at understanding whether or not this holds true for hypothermic babies 
and their mothers.  
 
OUTCOME MEASURE:  
Maternal and Infant saliva will be collected before and after hold ing. Saliva will be tested for cortisol and 
oxytocin levels. We hypothesize that there will be a decrease in cortisol (marker of stress) and increase in 
oxytocin (marker of bonding) after the 30 -minute holding period , when compared to samples obtained 30 
minutes apart without holding taking place .  
 
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:  
 Infant with gestational age ≥35 weeks treated with therapeutic hypothermia  
 Infant without seizures in the first 24 hours on EEG  
 Infants who are clinically stable either intubated, on bubble  CPAP, nasal cannula or who have no respiratory 
support.  This criterion MUST be confirmed by the attending neonatologist.  
 Infants with all types of vascular access are eligible.  
o Use appropriate caution and attention to peripheral arterial lines and centra l lines (PICC, UAC, 
UVC, tunneled central catheters)  
 Informed consent for research study signed by mother who is at MMC.  
 
EXCLUSION CRITERIA:  
 High frequency oscillator ventilation  
 Use of inhaled nitric oxide  
 Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn  
 Presence of seizures on EEG  
 Use of vasopressors or paralytic agents  
 Presence of chest tubes, wound vacuum or drains  
 Neonatal abstinence syndrome  
 
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS:  
 Holding will occur exclusively as part of the research study.  
 May ONLY be performed by an RN in conjunction with the research team  
 Instruct the mothers  to plan to stay in the NICU for a least one  to two  hours 
 Only the mother can hold the infant during the research project.  
 Instruct mother to take care of her own personal needs (i.e. bathroom ) before holding.  The mother will be 
asked not to eat, drink, smoke, or exercise for one hour before the study session. The mother will be asked 
to pump breastmilk within 30 minutes prior to holding.  
 Encourage mothers to discuss their concerns regarding holding with their infant’s nurse.   
 
EQUIPMENT:  
1. Comfortable chair/recliner  
2. Research personnel will be present to assist the RN with transition of infant from Giraffe stand to mother’s 
arms, monitor vital signs, and handle saliva specimens.   
3. Pillows for s upport  
Version 5  – 1/17/1 9 
 
Page 8 of 10 
 4. Insulating barrier  
5. Four  saliva specimen collection kits for infant   
6. Four  saliva specimen collection kits for Mother  
 
PROCEDURE  FOR HOLDING INTERVENTION :   
1. Assemble equipment  
2. Obtain saliva for Mother and Infant per kit collection protocol .  
3. Obtain initial set of vital signs (heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, blood pressure and 
temperature). Record complete set of vitals 15 minutes into the 30 -minute holding session.  Record another 
complete set of vitals after holding session i s over.  Research team to record temperature and oxygen 
saturation every 2 minutes during holding.  Temperature will be recorded from the esophageal probe.   
4. Position reclining chair next to Giraffe stand.  
5. Have mother sit in recliner and place thermal lay er over her chest and abdomen  
6. Transfer infant to mothers  by placing hands under the cooling blanket in order to lift blanket and infant 
together  
7. Support infant’s head and lines immediately after transfer  
8. Assess need for increased oxygen by monitoring the oxygen saturation  
9. Offer pillows as necessary for additional support.  
10. If the infant shows signs/symptoms of not tolerating holding (i.e. drop in oxygen saturation below 90% or if 
temperature increases greater than 1°C) STOP HOLDING and return infant to Gir affe stand. Continue to 
monitor cardiorespiratory status of the infant for 30 minutes following holding.  
11. At the end of holding, prior to transferring infant back to Giraffe stand, obtain second saliva samples from 
mother and infant.  
 
PROCEDURE FOR NO-HOLDING INTERVENTION:  
1. Assemble equipment  
2. Obtain saliva for Mother and Infant per kit collection protocol.  
3. Obtain initial set of vital signs (heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, blood pressure and 
temperature)  
4. After 30 minutes, obtain secon d saliva samples from mother and infant.  
 
 
DOCUMENTATION:  
1. RN will document in EPIC the three sets of vital signs taken before, during and after holding session (HR, 
RR, BP, T, O2)  
2. RN will document in EPIC note the length of holding time upon completion of  session and any 
complications from holding  
 
 
References  
1. Craig A, James C, Bainter J, Lucas FL, Evans S, Glazer J. Survey of Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
Nurse Attitudes Toward Therapeutic Hypothermia Treatment. Adv Neonatal Care. 2017 ;17(2):123 -130. 
2. Heringhaus A, Blom MD, Wigert H. Becoming a parent to a child with birth asphyxia -From a traumatic 
delivery to living with the experience at home. Int J Qual Stud Health Well -being. 2013;8:1 -13. 
3. Lemmon ME, Donohue PK, Parkinson C, Nor thington FJ, Boss RD. Communication Challenges in 
Neonatal Encephalopathy. Pediatrics. 2016;138(3).  
Version 5  – 1/17/1 9 
 
Page 9 of 10 
 4. Nassef SK, Blennow M, Jirwe M. Experiences of parents whose newborns undergo hypothermia 
treatment following perinatal asphyxia. Journal of obstetric, gy necologic, and neonatal nursing : JOGNN 
/ NAACOG. 2013;42(1):38 -47. 
5. Thyagarajan B, Baral V, Gunda R, Hart D, Leppard L, Vollmer B. Parental perceptions of hypothermia 
treatment for neonatal hypoxic -ischaemic encephalopathy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2017:1 -7. 
6. Craig AK, Gerwin R, Bainter J, Evans S, James C. Exploring Parent Experience of Communication 
About Therapeutic Hypothermia in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. Adv Neonatal Care. 
2018;18(2):136 -143. 
7. Craig AK, Gerwin R, Bainter J, Evans S, James C. Exploring parent expectations of neonatal 
therapeutic hypothermia. J Perinatol. 2018.  
8. Azzopardi D, Brocklehurst P, Edwards D, et al. The TOBY Study. Whole body hypothermia for the 
treatment of perinatal asphyxial encephalopathy: a randomised co ntrolled trial. BMC Pediatr. 
2008;8:17.  
9. Azzopardi D, Robertson NJ, Cowan FM, Rutherford MA, Rampling M, Edwards AD. Pilot study of 
treatment with whole body hypothermia for neonatal encephalopathy. Pediatrics. 2000;106(4):684 -694. 
10. Gluckman PD, Wyatt  JS, Azzopardi D, et al. Selective head cooling with mild systemic hypothermia 
after neonatal encephalopathy: multicentre randomised trial. Lancet. 2005;365(9460):663 -670. 
11. Jacobs SE, Berg M, Hunt R, Tarnow -Mordi WO, Inder TE, Davis PG. Cooling for newb orns with 
hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;1:CD003311.  
12. Shankaran S, Laptook AR, Ehrenkranz RA, et al. Whole -body hypothermia for neonates with hypoxic -
ischemic encephalopathy. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(15):1574 -1584.  
13. Shankaran S, Pappas A, Laptook AR, et al. Outcomes of safety and effectiveness in a multicenter 
randomized, controlled trial of whole -body hypothermia for neonatal hypoxic -ischemic encephalopathy. 
Pediatrics. 2008;122(4):e791 -798. 
14. Lemmon ME, Donohue PK , Parkinson C, Northington FJ, Boss RD. Parent Experience of Neonatal 
Encephalopathy. J Child Neurol. 2017;32(3):286 -292. 
15. Tessier R, Cristo M, Velez S, et al. Kangaroo mother care and the bonding hypothesis. Pediatrics. 
1998;102(2):e17.  
16. Gray L, Watt L, Blass EM. Skin -to-skin contact is analgesic in healthy newborns. Pediatrics. 
2000;105(1):e14.  
17. Gitau R GX, Bond, C, et al. Acute effects of maternal skin -to-skin contact and massage on saliva 
cortisol in preterm babies. Journal of Reprod uctive and Infant Psychology. 2002;20(6):83 -88. 
18. Cong X, Ludington -Hoe SM, Hussain N, et al. Parental oxytocin responses during skin -to-skin contact 
in pre -term infants. Early Hum Dev. 2015;91(7):401 -406. 
19. Feldman R, Gordon I, Zagoory -Sharon O. Maternal and paternal plasma, salivary, and urinary oxytocin 
and parent -infant synchrony: considering stress and affiliation components of human bonding. Dev Sci. 
2011;14(4):752 -761. 
20. Vittner D, McGrath J, Robinson  J, et al. Increase in Oxytocin From Skin -to-Skin Contact Enhances 
Development of Parent -Infant Relationship. Biol Res Nurs. 2018;20(1):54 -62. 
21. Chourasia N, Surianarayanan P, Adhisivam B, Vishnu Bhat B. NICU admissions and maternal stress 
levels. Indian  J Pediatr. 2013;80(5):380 -384. 
22. Segre LS, McCabe JE, Chuffo -Siewert R, O'Hara MW. Depression and anxiety symptoms in mothers of 
newborns hospitalized on the neonatal intensive care unit. Nurs Res. 2014;63(5):320 -332. 
23. Woodward LJ, Bora S, Clark CA, et al. Very preterm birth: maternal experiences of the neonatal 
intensive care environment. J Perinatol. 2014;34(7):555 -561. 
24. Poets CF. When do infants need additional inspired oxygen? A review of the current literature. Pediatr 
Pulmonol. 1998;26(6):424 -428. 
25. White -Traut R, Watanabe K, Pournajafi -Nazarloo H, Schwertz D, Bell A, Carter CS. Detection of 
salivary oxytocin levels in lactating women. Dev Psychobiol. 2009;51(4):367 -373. 
26. Mitchell A CJ, Yates C, et al. Challenges , Guidelines and Systemat ic Review of Salivary Cortisol 
Research in Preterm Infants. e-journal of Neonatology Research. 2012;2(1):44 -51. 
Version 5  – 1/17/1 9 
 
Page 10 of 10 
 27. Neu M, Goldstein M, Gao D, Laudenslager ML. Salivary cortisol in preterm infants: Validation of a 
simple method for collecting saliva for co rtisol determination. Early Hum Dev. 2007;83(1):47 -54. 
28. Grewen KM, Davenport RE, Light KC. An investigation of plasma and salivary oxytocin responses in 
breast - and formula -feeding mothers of infants. Psychophysiology. 2010;47(4):625 -632. 