Mayo Clinic IRB ID 20 -007207 
 
       Page 1 of 10 
 
General Study Information  
 
Principal Investigator:   Ivana Croghan, PhD  
 
A Study Title:  A Feasibility study evaluating Mindfulness -Based Intervention Assessing A  Wearable 
Wellness Brain Sensing Device (Muse- S™) in Practicing  Health Care Providers . 
 
Protocol date:    23 Sept 2024 
 
Research Question and Aims  
 
Hypothesis:  Healthcare providers (HCP) often deal with patients who are experiencing a variety of 
ailments, symptoms, and infections at the time of the face- to-face visit.  There is an inherent stress that 
exists when one realizes the life of another being rests in their hands and capabilities.  In addition, whereas the risk of contracting diseases in the course of caring for others has always existed, it has never been more evident than during this time of the Covid19 pandemic.  The stress of caring for others while worrying about the potential  ramifications of their care management decisions and the possibility of 
contracting Covid19 and inadvertently passing said disease to others (friend and family included) has significant physical and mental health ramifications for HCP .  Whereas it has been touted that 
mindfulness can be a benefit to physicians  in the front line
1,  little guidance exists as to how this can be 
learned and practiced by HCP  during such a busy time with little respite.  We postulate that using a novel 
biofeedback- assisted meditation device (Muse -S™) often during the workday can provide mindfulness 
training to increase calm state brain activity in physicians during a busy practice  in the midst of a 
pandemi c2.  We hypothesize that the greater amount of time the HCP  uses this tool, the greater amount of 
resilience s/he builds, providing needed mental support.  Aims, purpose, or objectives:  
1. To study the feasibility of HCP  using a wearable brain sensing wellness device (Muse -S ) 
during a time of increased workload, patient volume and stressors.  
2. To assess the association between duration of active state and calm state as measured by the 
wearable brain sensing wellness device (Muse- S), and quality of life (QOL), subjective stress, 
sleep and resilience.  
 
The primary  outcome will be the adherence to the Muse -S™ by summarizing the frequency of use and 
duration of use each time it was accessed.  
The secondary  outcomes will include: 
o change in stress  score over time 
o measures of QOL, resilience and coping  score in HCP  at specific time points post baseline .  
Background:  
Prior to the COVID 19 pandemic, physicians were experiencing high degree of burnout, which has consequence to physician health
3-5.  A multitude of causes result in physician burnout, such as 
adopting/learning new electronic medical records5, administrative responsibilities  taking time away from 
clinical practice6, lack of autonomy, changes in reimbursement model7 and other factors.  
Mayo Clinic IRB ID 20 -007207 
 
       Page 2 of 10 
 
 
COVID 19 has added another dimension to the stress experienced by physicians.    A recent study in JAMA
5, showed that front line healthcare workers in China were experiencing a high degree of stress.  It 
was reported that “A considerable proportion of participants reported symptoms of depression (634 [50.4%]), anxiety (560 [44.6%]), insomnia (427 [34.0%]), a nd distress (899 [71.5%])
5”.  Additional 
stressors include the rapidly changing way medicine is being practiced8. The use of barrier -protection, 
adoption of telemedicine, and decrease of income has  affected the way physicians practice medicine.  
This along with fear of infection and passing along to family members add additional pressure on physicians
9. 
 Integrative Medicine has introduced many mind- body therapies for addressing mental stress.  The top 
stress relievers recommended by Mayo Clinic include: getting active, eating a healthy diet, avoiding unhealthy habits, meditation,  laughing more, connecting with others, asserting yourself,  practicing yoga, getting enough sleep, keeping a journal,  exploring music and being creative, seeking counselin g
10.  
Among all of these potential options, meditation is the easiest to incorporate in a current lifestyle yet most difficult to undertake without proper training and guidance at the beginning.  Muse -S™ is a clinical grade, 
headband- style wireless EEG system designed to interact with a mobile device (a smartphone or tablet) 
(https://choosemuse.com). In combination with the Muse -S™ APP running on iOS or Android 
smartphones, Muse -S™ converts EEG signals measured over the frontal and temporal cerebral cortices 
into measures of brain state. At the same time Muse -S™ can also guide the user through the meditation 
steps.  Calibrated to an individual user, Muse -S™ distinguishes between active and calm brain states to 
provide real -time performance feedback, and helps users realize the benefits of mindfulness practice in an 
engaging and accessible manner. Muse -S™ also has a PPG sensor that tracks heartrate during meditation 
sessions as well. This has been tested in a prior study by some of the current study team (SP and ITC), with patients undergoing breast cancer surger y
11. 
 
Study Design and Methods  
 Methods:   
 All study participants will receive the Muse S
™ Headband system at study entry and will be asked to 
utilize it at least 4 times per week for a minimum of 10 minutes each time over a period of 3 months (12 weeks).  They will be followed for a period of 6 months (3 months of treatment and 3 months post 
treatment) according to the schedule below.  
 
We will assess the following:  
● Type of meditation the patient has selected from the 3 available options:  
Mind Meditation, Guided Meditation and Go- to-sleep meditation.  
● Frequency and duration of use from baseline to month 3 (end of treatment).  
The participants will be informed at baseline that for best results , it will be 
recommended that they use it a minimum of 10 minutes, at least 4 times 
per week for over 3 months.  If they are short on time, they can break up the 10 minutes and do shorter meditations. 

Mayo Clinic IRB ID 20 -007207 
 
       Page 3 of 10 
 
● Changes in QOL, stress, resilience, and sleep score from baseline through week 2, month 1, month 3 
and month 6.    
 Consent  
/screen  
/baseline  Treatment Phase  Follow up 
Phase  
 
Visit No.  1 2 3 4 5 
Visit Type  face to 
face Phone/ 
email  Phone/ 
email  face to 
face/phone/ 
email  face to 
face/phone/ 
email  
Visit Days  0 14 30 90 180 
Informed Consent  X     
Inclusion/Exclusion  X     
Demographic and History Form  X     
Depression  X X X X X 
Burnout  X   X X 
Resilience  X X X X X 
Sleep  X X X X X 
Quality of Life  X X X X X 
Stress Scale  X X X X X 
Satisfaction Survey      X 
Adverse Events 1  X X X X 
CBS Cognitive Tests  X   X X 
Concomitant Medication 2 X X X X X 
Instructions for Muse -S™  X     
End of Treatment/End of Study Forms     X X 
1 = For visit 5, only serious adverse events will be newly collected; 2 = For visit 5, only newly added concomitant medications 
will be collected  
 
Study Visit Windows:  
Each visit will have a window from midpoint of prior visit to midpoint of latter visit.    Data Collection:  
Subjects will have the options of completing study surveys/questionnaires online via email link to REDCap prior to study visit.  If not completed by the time the study visit takes place, the coordinator can 
provide the iPad digital version of the survey/questionnaire to the subject for the in- person visits or can 
interview the patient via phone for the telephone visits.  Data Collection in this study will utilize REDCa p
12.  All other data collection will be entered directly into this password protected system.   
 Assessments:  
Safety:  
● PRIME -MD Questionnair e
13,14: A validated and frequently used self -report measure of depressive 
symptoms comprising of 2 questions, which w ere derived from the PH Q15,16.  
Mayo Clinic IRB ID 20 -007207 
 
       Page 4 of 10 
 
 
Outcomes:  
● Demographics Form :  This form collected demographic and other lifestyle history of the research 
subject.  
● Burnout:  We will measure burnout using 2 single -item measures adapted from the full Maslach 
Burnout Inventory (MBI )17. These 2 items have been demonstrated to correlate strongly with the 
emotional exhaustion and depersonalization domains of burnout measured by the full MBI in a sample 
of over 10,000 individuals with an area under the ROC curve of 0.94 and 0.93 for emotional exhaustion and depersonalization, respectively, for these single items relative to the full MBI
18,19. 
● Quality of Life:  Will be measured using the  Line ar Analogue Self -Assessment (LASA)20-22. This 
measure is a six -item measure of quality of life (QOL), in which QOL is conceptualized as a 
multidimensional construct with five domains (physical, functional, emotional, spiritual, and social).  This data will be collected at screen (prior to any treatment), day 14, day 30, day 60, end of treatment day 90, and at end of study day 180 ( 3months post last treatment).   
● Stress :  Will be evaluated through the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS)
23,24.  The PSS is a 10 -item Likert 
scale that measures global life stress by assessing the degree to which experiences are appraised as 
uncontrollable or unpredictable. Scores can range from 0 to 40, with higher scores indicating greater 
perceived stress. Reliabi lity is reported as 0.85, with Cronbach alphas ranging from 0.75- 0.86.  
● Resilience:  Will be evaluated through the Connor -Davison Resilience Scale 10 (CD -RS10)25.  This is 
a 10-item, likert scale, validated, scoring system.   The CD -RS10 is a reliable means of assessing 
resilience and most often used in  medical and/or disaster studies26.   
● Sleep Quality : The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI )27-29 is an effective instrument used to 
measure the quality and patterns of sleep in adults. This is a 9- item, likert scale, validated, scoring 
system.  It differentiates “poor” from “good” sleep quality by measuring seven areas (components): subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep duration, habitual sleep efficiency, sleep disturbances, use of sleepin g medications, and daytime dysfunction over the last month. 
● Cognitive Testing:  The Cambridge  Brain  Science (CBS) web-based tests were developed in the 
laboratory of Dr. Adrian Owen, Canada Excellence Research Chair in Cognitive Neuroscience and 
Imaging (owenlab.org), over the course of his 25-year career. The tests are self -administered, do not 
require supervision, and effectively assess aspects of cognition including reasoning, memory, attention and 
verbal ability. Over 300 scientific studies have been run to date using the CBS tests, yielding numerous 
publications in leading academic journals30-33. The tests have been validated in studies of patients, brain 
imaging studies of healthy volunteers and in several large -scale public studies involving tens of thousands 
of volunteers. They have proven to be efficient and sensitive measures of cognitive pe rformance and can 
be used to consistently monitor participants and patients due to the unlimited versions of problem sets within each task.   The 12 tasks (*see CBS Task Overview.pdf) can be customized to use specific tasks if a 
shortened assessment is req uired for research. A custom 3-task assessment would take approximately 10 
minutes and for the purposes of this study, we would recommend the use of the following tasks:  
1) Double Trouble – 90 seconds (measure of Response Inhibition ) - Version of the Stroop task. It is a 
“double” version in which there can be up to two incongruities (the top word and the bottom words), so is a little more difficult than other versions and has been sensitive to a range of interventions known 
to improve attention, response inhibition, or cognition in general. Response times and accuracy can be 
separately calculated for each difficulty level (congruent /incongruent / double incongruent), in 
addit ion to an overall score.  
Mayo Clinic IRB ID 20 -007207 
 
       Page 5 of 10 
 
2) Feature Match – 90 seconds (measure of Attention ) - Version of a “spot the difference” game. It uses 
areas of the brain involved in tuning attention and requires both fast response time and accuracy to get 
a good score.  
3) Grammatical Reasoning – 90 seconds (measure of Verbal Reasoning) - Based on Alan Baddeley’s 
grammatical reasoning test (Baddeley, 1968). Short sentences describing the relationship of two 
shapes along with an image of the shapes are displayed on the screen. Participants must indicate 
whether the sentence correctly des cribes the pair of objects displayed on the screen.  
• Satisfaction with the program: This questionnaire is adapted from Was it Worth it Questionnaire 
(WIWI)34 to  measur e study and Muse -S  satisfaction.  It will be administered to the participants 
after completing the intervention at the end of the study, probing their satisfaction with the research 
study. These data could be used to assess the feasibility of the intervention by asking the patient if the entire research experience was worth it for them . 
 Adherence to Intervention:  
● Adherence to the Muse -S will be assessed by de -identified data available within the cloud, provided 
by InteraXon.  InteraXon only has information per subject through subject ID only (as was provided by Mayo Clinic site), so when the cloud data is provided to Mayo, it will be linked to each subject through their study ID.   
 Intervention:  
● The Muse -S Headband system:    The Muse -S Headband system is a brain sensing headband that 
measures brain activity by detecting electrical impulses created by the brain.  The Muse- S 
Headband system uses a series of focus attention training methods to train the brain.  Each focus attention session can vary in length, with the ideal being a minimum of 10 minutes, and has been 
shown to reduce stress, anxiety, and improve focus and productivity.  The Muse -S Headband 
system has seven sensors with four channels of EEG data for an accurate, high- quality experience.  
The battery life is approximately five hours and uses an industry- standard micro- USB charger. 
Twen ty Muse -S Headband systems will be provided by the manufacturer at no cost in support of 
this study.  
 
Use of Muse -S Headband systems will be demonstrated to each participant prior to their first 
mindfulness practice session, which will be completed during the baseline visit with the study 
coordinator.  The study coordinator will present the participant with detailed instructions on how to begin each session.  The frequency of the sessions thereafter will be at the participant’s discretion according to the study’s requirements (daily practic e). Mindfulness training will 
follow the protocol in the Muse -S APP, which follows a standard 
breathing exercise with EEG brain state feedback through the mobile device, as designed by a panel of experienced mindfulness 
practitioners. In short , the Muse -S is a FitBit like device for the 
brain.    
 
The study participants can access 3 different types of meditation while using the Muse -S Headband 
system.  They are as follows:  

Mayo Clinic IRB ID 20 -007207 
 
       Page 6 of 10 
 
o Mind Meditation  uses the Muse -S headband to track the 
user's brain activity during meditation and translates 
the brain's activity into guiding sounds. Users get real time 
feedback to know when their mind is focused and when it's distracted, and are cued to return to a state of focused attention (meditation state). Users also see data from their 
brain after the meditation. Real time feedback during Mind 
Meditation is the Muse -S signature meditation and 
teaches the fundamentals of a meditation practice-  
remaining in a calm focused attention state and being able 
to move your mind away from distracting thoughts. 
o Guided Meditations from Healthcare Burnout Collection.  Guided meditations are 
narrated  meditations on a range of subjects like stress, 
focus, breath and body practices. We will put together a 
collection of meditations specifically for HCP . Guided 
meditations can be done with or without the Muse -S 
headband. When they are done with the headband, there is no real -time feedback, but you see data from your brain, 
heart and movement after the session. You are welcome to do guided sessions without the headband.  
o Go-to-sleep Meditations  use the headband and are guided 
meditations that can be combined with an audio sound scape generated from your biosignals (heart rate, brain and movement). Sleep Journeys are designed to help you fall asleep faster. They are intended to be used in bed while you fall asleep to help calm your body and mind and entrain you into sleep. If you fall asleep with the headband on you can wear it through the night if you wish. Some people find Go- to-sleep j ourneys deeply 
relaxing and use them during the day as a relaxation tool as well.  
 
All study participants will have access to The Muse -S Headband system’s customer service team 
based in Toronto, Canada, by telephone and email for assistance should they experience technical 
problems with the device.  
o Server Data:  As the subject completes any Muse -S sessions, the information from these 
sessions will be uploaded to the Muse -S  IC loud servers hosted by Google.  Each subject will 
be able to see their own data at the end of each session, and data from the previous session stored 
in the “me” tab in the app. Subject to the study organizers ensuring that the subjects have signed the app ropriate consents, study organizers will have access to each subject’s data to monitor 
compliance, performance and outcomes, but will not get access to Journal entry information (if subject chooses to write a Journal entry). These data that the study organizers will have access to can include the study- specific identification number, gender, and age of the subject, the session 
type, the time and duration of each session,  EEG data, heart rate (PPG) data, and the performance per session. Interaxon’s privacy policy, which can be found at www.choosemuse.com/privacy will apply to Interaxon’s use of the subjects’ data. In order to 
maximize protection of the individual’s privacy, the study organizers will ensure that the subjects 

Mayo Clinic IRB ID 20 -007207 
 
       Page 7 of 10 
 
are assigned anonymized email address and names for use in the Muse - S application and when 
contacting the Muse -S  customer support. To ensure that no health data is shared with 
Interaxon, the study organizers have agreed to ensure that no health data will be shared with 
Interaxon.  At the end of the study, the data collected in Google ICloud Server associated with study email addresses will be deleted.  
o The Muse -S steps include : 1) Open the Muse -S  App on your phone. 2) select meditat ion 
type 3)  if meditating with the headband, turn on the Muse -S  headband.  It will pair via 
bluetooth to the app 4) put on headband (if doing a meditation with headband) 5) meditate 6) add any journal or mood entry if desired 7)  review results  
o Cleaning the Muse -S:  Each patient will be given a brand new, out -of-the-box Muse -S 
Headband system.  If cleaning must occur, the entire Muse -S including the head set can be 
wiped down with a standard disinfectant wipe. The band can also be hand -washed gently with 
soap and water. The module on the band is not waterproof but can be wiped with disinfectant.   
 
Subject Retention:  Participants will not be remunerated for participating in this study, but they will be allowed to keep the Muse -S™ Headbands.  
 Resources:  
● The data entry screens used will be developed via REDCap for the online forms.   
● Clinician investigators will provide medical oversight.  
● The Muse -S Headband systems are provided at no cost through the manufacturer (InteraXon) 
for use during study participation.   
 Check all that apply. If none apply, leave blank:  
☒  The research involves contact or interaction with subjects, for example, surveys, questionnaires, 
observation, blood draw.  
 Study Design:  
We will use standardized procedures to ensure uniform instructions and support for all subjects for the recruitment, screening, and study entry.    Recruitment:  
HCP  participants will be recruited from the Mayo Clinic Practice.  The study staff will inform participants 
of the study during practice meetings, and if the participants indicate interest they w ill connect with 
research staff  and arrange a time to meet to begin the consent process.   
 Participants will not be reimbursed for their time spent in the study, but all participants will be given the option of keeping the Muse -S™ Headband system for continued use post study participation. 
 Consent and Screen:  
Study coordinator will meet with the potential participant who has expressed an interest in participating in the study.  The study coordinator will begin by introducing the study details, and after determining that the subject has continued interest in study participation, will move on to the study consent.  If the subject 
Mayo Clinic IRB ID 20 -007207 
 
       Page 8 of 10 
 
chooses to consent, the study coordinator will screen the participant for study entry inclusion/exclusion 
criteria.  If the study entry criteria are met, the subject will begin their study participation. They will be asked to complete the study surveys/que stionnaires.  
 Please note:  Participants must have access to an iOS or Android capable device to take part in this study 
in order to interact with the Muse -S™ Headband system.   
 Treatment phase:  
During the first three months of study, participants will be asked to complete the online study intervention using the Muse -S™ headband. Participants will be contacted via telephone and online (REDCap) for 
study visits at day 14 and 30.  At day 90, they will be asked to return to the clinic for an in- person visit 
(telephone and online will be alternatives).  
 Study Follow -Up Visits:  
The study will consist of a 6- month visit post baseline (3- month post end of intervention).  Participants 
will be asked to complete an in -person visit , if possible (telephone and online will be the alternative).      
 
Subject Information  
 Target accrual:  We plan to recruit  40 Mayo Clinic Practicing  HCP . 
 Subject population:   A total of  40 practicing HCP at Mayo Clinic who meet the following study criteria: 
 Inclusion Criteria:  
1. 18 years of age or older at time of consent  
2. Practicing HCP  at Mayo Clinic  
3. Not pregnant by subject self -report at time of consent  
4. Have the ability to provide informed consent  
5. Have the ability to complete all aspects of this trial  
6. Have access to an iPhone, iPad, or Android device  
7. Have no contraindicating comorbid health condition which would interfere with the proper use of the 
Muse -S  system, as determined by the clinical investigators  
 
Exclusion Criteria:    
1. Used an investigational drug within the past 30 days  
2. Anyone that is not on a stable dose of medication for anxiety, depression or sleep  
3. Currently (within the past 3 weeks) been practicing mindfulness training on a weekly/regular basis  
4. Currently (within 3 weeks) has been enrolled in another clinical or research program  which intervenes 
on the patients’ QOL, or stress  
5. An unstable medical or mental health condition as determined by the physician investigator  
 
 
Review of medical records, images, specimens   
 
Mayo Clinic IRB ID 20 -007207 
 
       Page 9 of 10 
 
☒The study involves data that exist at the time of IRB submission and  data that will be generated after 
IRB submission. Include this activity in the Methods  section.  
 
References  
 
1. Galbraith N, Boyda D, McFeeters D, Hassan T. The mental health of doctors during the Covid- 19 
pandemic. BJPsych Bull. 2020:1- 7. 
2. Ninifaggi F. Physician engagement: mindfulness as part of the pandemic solution. Elsevier Connect. https://www.elsevier.com/connect/physician -engagement -mindfulness -as-part-of-the-
pandemic -solution. Updated 11 May 2020. Accessed 11 June 2020, 2020.  
3. West CP, Dyrbye LN, Shanafelt TD. Physician burnout: contributors, consequences and solutions. J Intern Med. 2018;283(6):516- 529. 
4. Tawfik DS, Profit J, Morgenthaler TI, et al. Physician Burnout, Well -being, and Work Unit Safety 
Grades in Relationship to Reported Medical Errors. Mayo Clin Proc. 2018;93(11):1571- 1580.  
5. Lai J, Ma S, Wang Y, et al. Factors Associated With Mental Health Outcomes Among Health Care Workers Exposed to Coronavirus Disease 2019. JAMA Network Open. 2020;3(3):e203976-e203976. 
6. Rao SK, Kimball AB, Lehrhoff SR, et al. The Impact of Administrative Burden on Academic Physicians: Results of a Hospital -Wide Physician Survey. Acad Med. 2017;92(2):237- 243. 
7. Lacy BE, Chan JL. Physician Burnout: The Hidden Health Care Crisis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;16(3):311- 317. 
8. Center for Disease Control. Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19) in Healthcare 
Settings. Coronavirus Diesease 2019 (COVID -19) Web site.  Published 2020. Updated 12 April 
2020. Accessed 01 June 2020. 
9. Adams JG, Walls RM. Supporting the Health Care Workforce During the COVID -19 Global 
Epidemic. JAMA. 2020;323(15):1439- 1440.  
10. Mayo Clinic Staff. Stress Management. Healthy Lifestyle Web site. https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy -lifestyle/stress -management/in -depth/stress -relievers/art -
20047257. Updated 12 March 2019. Accessed 01 June 2020. 
11. Millstine DM, Bhagra A, Jenkins SM, et al. Use of a Wearable EEG Headband as a Meditation Device for Women With Newly Diagnosed Breast Cancer: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Integr Cancer Ther. 2019;18:1534735419878770. 
12. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture (REDCap) --a metadata- driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational 
research informatics support. Journal of biomedical informatics. 2009;42(2):377- 381. 
13. Whooley MA, Avins AL, Miranda J, Browner WS. Case -finding instruments for depression. Two 
questions are as good as many. J Gen Intern Med. 1997;12(7):439- 445. 
14. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB. Validation and utility of a self -report version of PRIME -
MD: the PHQ primary care study. Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders. Patient Health Questionnaire. JAMA. 1999;282(18):1737- 1744.  
15. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The Patient Health Questionnaire -2: validity of a two -item 
depression screener. Med Care. 2003;41(11):1284- 1292. 
Mayo Clinic IRB ID 20 -007207 
 
       Page 10 of 10 
 
16. First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, J.B.W. W. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV Axis I 
Disorders (SCID -I). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, Inc.; 1997. 
17. Maslach C, Jackson S, Leiter M. Burnout Inventory Manual. 3rd ed. 3rd ed. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press; 1996. 
18. West CP, Dyrbye LN, Shanafelt TD. Burnout in medical school deans. Acad Med. 2009;84(1):6; author reply 6.  
19. West CP, Dyrbye LN, Sloan JA, Shanafelt TD. Single item measures of emotional exhaustion and depersonalization are useful for assessing burnout in medical professionals. J Gen Intern Med. 
2009;24(12):1318- 1321.  
20. Hyland M, Sodergren S. Development of a new type of global quality of life scale, and comparison of performance and preference for 12 global scales. Qual Life Res. 1996;5(5):469- 480. 
21. Dyrbye LN, Thomas MR, Huschka MM, et al. A multicenter study of burnout, depression, and quality of life in minority and nonminority US medical students. Mayo Clinic proceedings Mayo Clinic. 2006;81(11):1435- 1442. 
22. Locke DE, Decker PA, Sloan JA, et al. Validation of single -item linear analog scale assessment of 
quality of life in neuro- oncology patients. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2007;34(6):628- 638. 
23. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc Behav. 1983;24:385- 396. 
24. Cohen S, Williamson GM. Perceived stress in a probability sample of the United States. In: Spacapan S, Oskamp, eds. The Social Psychology of Health. Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1988:31-67. 
25. Campbell -Sills L, Stein MB. Psychometric analysis and refinement of the Connor -davidson 
Resilience Scale (CD -RISC): Validation of a 10- item measure of resilience. J Trauma Stress. 
2007;20(6):1019- 1028.  
26. Salisu I, Hashim N. A Critical Review of Scales Used in Resilience Research. IOSR -JBM. 
2017;19(4):23- 33. 
27. Buysse DJ, Hall ML, Strollo PJ, et al. Relationships between the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS), and clinical/polysomnographic measures in a community sample. J Clin Sleep Med. 2008;4(6):563- 571. 
28. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Monk TH, Hoch CC, Yeager AL, Kupfer DJ. Quantification of subjective sleep quality in healthy elderly men and women using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI). Sleep. 1991;14(4):331- 338. 
29. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res. 1989;28(2):193-213. 
30. Hampshire A, Highfield RR, Parkin BL, Owen AM. Fractionating human intelligence. Neuron. 
2012;76(6):1225- 1237.  
31. Owen AM, Hampshire A, Grahn JA, et al. Putting brain training to the test. Nature. 
2010;465(7299):775- 778. 
32. Wild CJ, Nichols ES, Battista ME, Stojanoski B, Owen AM. Dissociable effects of self -reported 
daily sleep duration on high- level cognitive abilities. Sleep. 2018;41(12).  
33. Sternin A, Burns A, Owen AM. Thirty- Five Years of Computerized Cognitive Assessment of 
Aging- Where Are We Now? Diagnostics (Basel). 2019;9(3). 
34. Chauhan C, Atherton PJ. Patient satisfaction with participation in phase II/III NCCTG clinical trials: Was it worth it? (N0392). . J Clin Oncology. 2012a;30(15_Supplement):6133. 