Informal c aregiv ing is demanding and stressful . This stress may exceed the caregiver’s ability to adapt , and 
many eventually become care recipients themselves as years of stress and deferred self-care put them at 
increased risk for illness . Self-care refers to th e behaviors undertaken  to maintain health  and manage illness . 
Engaging in self -care may improve health status , defined as physical functioning and mental well -being . 
Caregivers of adults with heart failure (HF) a re an understudied group. HF is extremely common . Most HF 
patients remain in the community through the end of their lives , depending  on informal caregi vers to assist 
them.  The trajectory of illness  in HF  is highly variable, which limits the use of palliative care and r espite 
services . As a consequence, HF caregivers  report significant stress and poor self-care. Health coaching , a 
support intervention,  can improve self -care in patients , but s tudies evaluating HF caregivers are limited, as are 
studies of the cost -effectiveness of support interventions for caregivers . Even less is known about the effect of 
caregiver support interventions on HF patient outcomes . Caregiving duties often confine caregivers to the 
home and many are unable to attend in- person sessions,  so we have developed and pilot  tested a virtual 
support  intervention (ViCCY [“Vicky”] – Virtual Caregiver Coach for You) , that we propose to evaluate among 
HF caregivers . Using a randomized controlled trial (RCT) design, w e will  enroll  informal HF caregivers  with 
poor self -care ( Health Self -Care Neglect  scale  score ≥2 ), randomizing them  1:1 to an  intervention or control 
group. Both groups will receive standard care augmented with H ealth Information (HI) delivered through the 
Internet, but t he ViCCY caregiver group will also receive 10 front -loaded coaching support sessions tailored to 
individual issues. The control group will have access to the same HI resources over the same interval, using 
the same Internet program, but without coaching  support. At baseline and 3, 6, 9 , and 12 months, we will 
collect self -reported data on self -care, stress, coping, and health status. At 6 months , we will  compare ViCCY 
to HI alone to ass ess intervention efficacy using intent -to-treat analysis. Our pilot data suggest that addition of 
support provided by the health coach will make ViCCY more efficacious than HI alone. A sample of 250 
caregivers (125/arm) will provide >90% power to detect significant differences between the groups on the 
primary outcome of self -care (Aim 1). We will collect quality adjusted life years (QALYs) and health care 
resource use in caregivers over 12 month s to assess cost -effectiveness of ViCCY  (Aim 2) . To explore the effect 
of caregiver outcomes on HF patients’ outcomes (hospitalization rates, hospital days, mortality rates, QALYs) 
over a 12- month period  (Aim 3) and knowing that not  all HF patients will participate, w e will consent  a 
subgroup of the HF patients cared  for by these  caregivers  (at least 40 dyads ). If shown to be efficacious and 
cost-effective, our virtual health coaching intervention can easily scaled to support millions of caregivers 
worldwide . This application addresses the NINR  strategic plan and is directly responsive to PA -18-150.  
 
 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Project Summary/Abstract                                                                                      
 Page 6
SPECIFIC AIMS 
 Informal caregiv ers have been called the “hidden victim” of illness.1 Caregiv ing is demanding and 
stressful for th ose who provide extraordinary, uncompensated care for loved ones,  often daily for months and 
years.2 This stress may exceed the caregiver’s ability to adapt ,3 and many eventually become care recipients 
themselves as years of stress  and deferred  self-care put them at increased risk for illness .4-8 Self-care refers to 
those behaviors a person undertakes to maintain health and manage illness .9 Engaging in self -care may 
improve an individual’s health status ,10 defined as physical functioning and mental well -being.  
 Caregivers of adults with heart failure (HF) are an understudied group. HF is extremely common (12% of 
US adults after age 65) .11 Most HF patients remain in the community through the end of their lives , depending  
on informal caregivers to assist them.12 The trajectory of illness  in HF  is hig hly variable, which limits the use of 
palliative care and r espite services .13-15 As a consequence, c aregiv ers of patients with HF ( HF caregivers ) 
report significant stress  and poor self-care, 16-20 and t here is a critical need to identify ways to improve self-care 
in HF caregivers . Without doing  so, we risk losing these burdened caregivers to their own health issues.  
 Support interventions can encourage self -care by helping  caregiver s to focus on values, solve problems, 
and transform their goals into action.21,22 We and others have shown that health coaching can improve self -
care and outcomes  in patients ,23-25 but s tudies of caregivers are limited, as are studies of the cost -
effectiven ess of support interventions for caregivers.15,26,27 Even less is known about the effect of caregiver 
support on patient outcomes, although caregiver burden and stress have  been shown to be associated with 
higher rates of hospitalization for patients with HF.28,29 Although c aregiving duties often confine caregivers to 
the home and many are unable to attend in- person sessions,30 support interventions can be d eliver ed by 
telephone31 and the Internet .24,32,33 Leveraging the  growing availability  and declining costs  of – along with 
increasing receptivity of older adults to  – technolog y,34 we have developed and pilot  tested a virtual support  
intervention (ViCCY [“Vicky”]  – Virtual Caregiver Coach for You) , that we propose to evaluate in  HF caregivers.   
 Using a randomized controlled trial (RCT) design, w e will  enroll  informal HF caregivers  with poor self -care 
(Health Self -Care Neglect35 scale  score ≥2 ), randomizing them  1:1 to an  intervention or control group. Both 
groups will receive standard care augmented with H ealth Information (HI) delivered through the Internet, but 
the ViCCY caregiver group will also receive 10 front -loaded coaching support sessions tailored to individual 
issues. The  control group will have access to the same HI resources over  the same interval, using the same 
Internet program, but without coaching  support. At baseline and 3, 6, 9 , and 12 months, we will collect self -
reported data on self -care, stress, coping, and health status. At 6  months , we will  compare the efficacy of 
ViCCY (HI plus coaching) to HI alone to assess i ntervention efficacy using intent -to-treat analysis. Our pilot 
data suggest that addition of support provided by the health coach will make  ViCCY more efficacious  than HI 
alone. A sample of 250 caregivers (125/arm) will provide >90% power to detect significant differences between 
the groups on the primary outcome of self -care (Aim 1) . We will collect quality adjusted life years (QALYs) and 
health care resource use in caregivers over 12 month s to assess cost -effectiveness of ViCCY  (Aim 2) . To 
explore the effect o f caregiver outcomes on HF patients’ outcomes ov er a 12- month period (Aim 3) and 
knowing that not  all HF patients will participate, w e will consent  a subgroup of the HF patients care d for by 
these  caregivers  (at least 40 dyads ). We have the following Specific Aims:  
Aim 1 : To compare  the efficacy  of ViCCY  vs. HI alone in improving self -care. We hypothesize that, a t 6 
months  after enrollment , caregivers randomiz ed to ViCCY vs. HI alone will have  H1a: Improved self-care 
measured with the Health Self -Care Neglect  scale35 (primary outcome ); H1b: Less self-reported stress 
measured with the Perceived Stress Scale36 (secondary outcome);  H1c: Better  coping  measured with the 
Ways of Coping Questionnaire,  short form37,38(secondary outcome) ; and H1d: Better perceived mental 
and physical health status  measured with the SF- 3639(secondary outcome).  
Aim 2 : To estimate the cost and cost -effectiveness of ViCCY . We hypothesize that, at 12 months  after 
enrollment , caregivers r andomized to ViCCY vs. HI alone will have H2 a: Higher QALYs measured with 
the SF- 6D (short form six -dimension) derived from the SF- 3640 (secondary outcome) ; and H2b:  Lower 
health care resource use (secondary outcome) . 
Aim 3 ( Exploratory ): To explore t he effect of caregiver outcomes  on HF patient  outcomes . We hypothesize 
that, a t 12 months  after enrollment , HF patients whose caregivers improve vs. not improve in self -care – 
regardless of group – will have H3a: Lower hospitalization rates ; H3b:  Fewer hospital days ; H3c: Lower 
mortality rates ; and H3d:  Higher QALYs  measured with the SF- 6D.40 
If shown to be efficacious and cost -effective, our virtual health coaching intervention can easily scaled to 
support millions of caregivers worldwide. This application addresses the NINR strategic plan and is directly 
responsive to PA -18-150.  
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Specific Aims                                                                                                 
 Page 72
RESEARCH STRATEGY  
A. SIGNIFICANCE  
A.1. Informal c aregivers are s tressed  and their self-care is poor . Informal caregi vers carry the bulk of the 
responsibility for the care of ill, disabled, and elderly individuals.41 More than 42 million unpaid informal 
caregivers provide care  to someone needing  help because of a limitation in physical, mental, or cognitive 
functioning.42 As a group, informal caregivers have more stress ,43,44 worse self -care,10,45-48 poorer health 
status,8,27,49,50 and higher mortality than non- caregivers.48,51-55 Caregivers often feel left alone to cope with 
problems, which exacerbates  their stress.56 When stressed, caregivers are less vigilant and less motivated to 
engage in behaviors that will benefit them selves  and their charges .57,58 In a study of 121 mainly  female 
caregivers (mean age 61±13.4  years) of older  family members, healthy self -care behaviors were lowest in 
those with high stress scores.59 In another  study, after four years of follow -up, stressed caregivers were at 63% 
higher risk for mortality than non- caregiving controls.7 Together these studies illustrate the risk that informal 
care providers face when they defer sel f-care in response to the stress of caregiving.   
A.2. Informal c aregivers of patients with heart failure (H F caregivers)  are an understudied population.  
Although  informal  HF caregivers  face many of the same issues as other caregivers , they also face unique 
challenges . HF caregivers are older than other caregivers  (mean 55.7 vs 49.4 years ; p < 0.001) .60 Both the 
patients and their caregivers often have multiple comorbid i llnesses , making  caregiving  complicated. The 
trajectory of HF  is highly variable with a gradual decline in function , so the need for caregiving  lasts longer than 
for other populations.61 Because of  this unpredictability , neither palliative care to HF patients  nor respite 
services to their caregivers are routinely offered.13,20,60,62,63 HF is associa ted with  poor physical capacity, 
depression, behavior problems , and cognitive impair ment .20,64-67 Caregi vers report difficulty coping with these  
patient -symptoms ,68 with t he most stressful daily duties being  providing emotional support, structuring and 
planning act ivities, and managing patient behavior and mood.69-71 Caregivers  must supervise and monitor 
complex care regimens and coordinate frequent hospitalizations,72,73 the latter being  so stressful that well -
being is lower in caregivers than in patients when HF patients are hos pitalized.74  HF c aregiving is expensive, 
incurring lost-wages and out -of-pocket expenses; in a study of end -stage HF patients, 23% of families had lost 
all or most of their savings by the time the patient died.75 These issues have a profound effect on caregivers’ 
lives.76,77 While c aregivers of other populations often report satisfaction from caregiving, we see no  evidence of 
caregiving satisfaction in HF caregivers.  They  are burdened, stressed, and poor in self -care.30,69,71,78 
A.3. Effective i nterventions are needed for HF caregivers. Few randomized controlled trials ( RCTs ) of 
interventions for HF caregiver s have been published, 79 and o f those, m ost have focused on improving HF 
caregiver burden, stress , or health status  – not caregiver self -care.76,80,81 The most common interventions 
involved psychoeducation facilitated by a registered nurse (RN), supplemented with face -to-face follow -up 
sessions, home visits, telephone calls and/ or virtual monitoring.82 Two studies focused on helping caregivers 
support patient  self-care,81,83 but none focused on improving caregiver  self-care. Few interventions reported 
a significant effect on one or more primary outcomes , and many were resource- intensive . For example, in a 
successful  study in the Veterans Affairs system ,84 team-managed, home -based primary care with a dedicated 
care manager, 24 -hour contact for patients, prior approval of hospital readmissions , and team participation in 
discharge planning effectively reduced caregiver stress and improved health status , but patient care costs  
increased by 12 % at 12 months  due to increased  staffing .84 In an unsuccessful  approach, a trial of a 12- week 
chair  exercise program for HF patients hypothesized to decrease stress in caregivers85 demonstrated 
increased caregiver stress after six months , perhaps due to increased caregiving demands. We believe that 
few interventions  have been effective because of failure to include elements  argued to be essential in 
caregiving interventions:86 1) a psychosocial rather than purely  educational approach; 2) flexibility ; 3) 
multidimensional ity; and 4) sufficient intervention dose.   We developed ViCCY to address these elements . 
A.4. Internet -based v irtual approaches can be used to support homebound caregivers. Successful 
implementation of potentially effective interventions is impeded when caregivers are homebound with 
caregiving duties.30,87 Yet, s uch isolated individuals may be among the most stressed caregivers  in need of 
support .88,89 The home environment may be the best place to deliver an intervention,  where distractions are 
predictable and privacy  can be optim ized.90 Home interventions are perceived as conv enient, requiring less 
time commitment, travel costs, and waiting times ; duration and timing of sessions can be  flexible and 
accommodate caregiver preferences. Support is important to the success of psychosocial interventions ,91 and 
virtual visual contact overcomes the challenges  of lack of visual cues found in telephone- based interventions.92 
A 2015 review of virtual interventions to support family caregivers concluded that caregivers w ere satisfied and 
comfortable with virtual support.93 Another review of eight  open- label trials and 16 RCTs concluded that 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 73
Intern et-based interventions were effective in r educing caregiver stress and improving their well -being.94 
According to the 2015  US Census,  77% of the US population has broadband Internet access at home.95 Thus, 
live video- streaming is now possible for most people in the US at very low cost , making virtual support a 
potentially efficacious way to intervene with homebound caregivers.96  
A.5. Little is known about the cost -effectiveness of interventions for caregivers.  Few cost-effectiveness 
analyses of support interventions h ave been performed in any chronically  ill population. One review suggested 
that psychological therapies and psychosocial interventions were potentially cost -effective in people with 
dementia and their family caregivers .97 In a pragmatic RCT provid ing an  8-session coping intervention to family 
caregive rs of people with dementia, the cost -effectiveness acceptability curve98 indicated >99% chance of being 
cost-effecti ve in the short and longer term.99,100 There is also evidence that psychological therapies provided by 
Internet are cost -effective.101 No economic analyses of support interventions have been conducted in the HF 
population, but the annual cost associated with informal caregiving of patients with HF in the US was estimated 
at $3 billion in 2010.102 A Cochrane review examined the cost -effectiveness of home palliative care for adults 
with advanced illness , including HF, and their family caregivers ,15 but found inconclusive evidence and 
recommended more study.15  
A.6. Dyadic processes influence  outcomes. By definition, t he caregiving relationship i nvolves  two people.103 
Several studies , including our own,  have demonstrated that dyadic processes  influence outcomes in both  HF 
patients and their caregivers .78,80,104-108 The vast majority of these studies are descriptive, and no one has 
tested the influence of an intervention for caregivers on HF patient outcomes . The mechanism by which dyadic 
processes influence outcomes appears to be related to the quality of the relationship.105-108 Relationship  quality 
influenc es burden,109 emotional distress,110 self-care behaviors,14,105 decision -making,111 and quality of life in 
both HF patients and caregivers .112 It is plausible that the  relationship influences  HF patient hospitalization s and 
mortality , but there is  little evidence on this topic .28,29,113 Hospital readm issions within 30-days are especially high 
(20-25%)  in HF patients ,114 with almost two thirds of readmissions occurring within 15 days of discharge.115 Four 
of every five HF patients require hospitalization annually , and at least one -third are hospitalized repeatedly.116 
By 12 months, close to two- thirds of all HF patients have been readmitted .117 Hospital izations are costly,118 and 
the a nnual total costs attributable to HF are so high119 that HF is the primary contributor to the US Medicare 
budget.120 More than half of those who de velop HF die  within five years  of diagnosi s.11  
A.7. Theoretical Framework. The proposed  study  is based on the Transactional Model of Stress and Coping 
(Figure 1).121 Stressful experiences such as caregiving demand – circumstances that give rise to real or 
percei ved stress  – are construed as person -environment transactions.121 Primary appraisal of demand involves 
assessment of its significance, which results in perceived burden. Secondary appraisal involves assessment of 
the resources available to cope with it. These appraisals lead to  the coping effort.121 Without successful coping, 
self-care is poor, which 
decreases health status  in 
caregivers . Our virtual support 
intervention [ViCCY (“Vicky” ) – 
Virtual Caregiver Coach for You]  
addresses both appraisal and 
coping. Because s tress does 
not affect all people equally , the 
intervention is tailored to 
individual appraisals and th e 
factors  most likely to influence 
demand and perceived 
burden.122 A key strength of the 
Transactional Model of Stress 
and Coping is its recognition 
that both individual and 
environmental variables 
respond to coping. See Section C.5 and Table 3 for details on how the theory is used in ViCCY . 
 Scientific premise . This study builds on a body of evidence that is strong in describing stress in HF 
caregivers but weak in linking that stress to poor caregiver self-care. We have demonstrated  in HF patients 
that self -care im proves health status,123,124 but the  relationship between self -care and health status has rarely  
been tested in HF caregivers.125 Health coaching has been shown to decrease perceived stress and improve 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 74
self-care and health status  in other caregiver populations .126 Some of these studies have provided virtual 
support  to homebound caregivers , and a few included older caregivers  such as those we anticipate enrolling. 
However, ver y few studies have addressed the cost -effectiveness of interventions targeting informal 
caregivers. Furthermore, i n addition to our primary aims, we will explore the impact of caregiver outcomes on 
HF patient outcomes. Although a growing body of research i llustrates the i nfluence of caregivers on patients 
and vice versa, (i.e., dyadic processes), very few intervention studies have explored the influence of the 
caregiver experience on patient outcomes.    
B.  INNOVATION  
Our proposed research is innovative for  several  reasons : 
1. We focus on a patient  population (those with HF)  with unique issues –  e.g., symptom burden, impaired 
cognition, frequen t hospitalizations, multi morbidity , and complex regimens  – that increase caregiver 
demand,  burden , and stress . While de mentia caregivers face many  of these issues,127 HF is different 
because palliative care is not offered routinely and respite services are rarely available.8,63,128 Without 
support  services, these caregivers are extraordinarily stressed.20,129 High stress levels are associated with 
poor self -care.130 
2. Few studies of caregivers have focus ed on their self-care, and those studied other populations.  Most 
studies of HF emphasize the caregiver’s role in promoting HF patient  self-care. T he proposed study will 
provide a robust description of HF  caregivers’  self-care and the manner in which it changes  with 
intervention.  
3. We have developed a unique approach to health coaching that targets stress and self -care concurrently . 
ViCCY is potentially more powerful than interventions addressing either issue alone because self -care is 
lower in stressed populations and self -care can potentiate stress reduction approaches.131  
4. Using video technology to intervene with caregivers is not new but it is new in HF caregivers , who are a 
predominately older population.  In spite of mounting evidence that older adults use technology regularly,132-
135 ageism persists and elders often are assumed to be unable to participate in research using 
technolog y.136,137 Our proposed study will be one of the first adequately powered trials of a virtual  
intervention fo r predominately older caregivers.  If efficacious, this approach to the delivery of ViCCY  can 
easily be deployed in any location and with other populations .  
5. Very few caregiver intervention studies have addressed cost -effectiveness. We include a formal cost  
effectiveness analysis  in which caregivers are followed for 12 month s.  
6. We explore the influence of caregiver outcomes on HF patient outcomes. A growing body of research 
illustrates the powerful influence of individuals in a dyad or couple on each other.106,108 But our study is 
unique and innovative in exploring the effect of a stress intervention for caregivers on outcomes in HF 
patients.  Measuring QALYs in both caregivers and HF patients, we will be able to assess benefit in both.  
C.  APPROACH  
C.1. Research Team  (see Biographical Sketches and Letters of Support for details) . Our multidisciplinary 
team based at th e University of Pennsylvania ( Penn)  is well positioned to complete the proposed study . Team 
member s, most of whom  have worked together for the past decade,138-145 bring unique but complementary 
perspectives that have  informed all dimensions of the propos al: Barbara Riegel , PhD  [Principal Investigator 
(PI)] HF, health coaching, motivational interviewing, caregivers, self -care]; Kathryn Bowles , PhD  (Co-I) virtual 
technolog ies; Karen Hirschman, PhD  (Co-I) interventions with older caregiver s; Joyce Wald , DO (Co-I), heart 
failure;  Norma B. Coe, PhD  (Co-I) cost-effectiveness analysis ; and Alexandra Hanlon, PhD  (Co-I) biostatistic s. 
Led by the PI, members will share responsibility for the conduct and integrity of the study. See Budget Narrative for specific responsibilities and contributions . 
C.2. Preliminary Studies. We developed our intervention in patients and have modified it for caregivers. In the 
first study , we refined our tailored health coaching intervention in 15 HF patients (mean age 60 ± 13.3 
years, 53% White, 60% female) .
146 The intervention, provided by an RN during an average of 3 ± 1.5 home 
visits over 3  months, focused on improving self -care. Motivational interviewing was used to elicit beliefs about 
the illness, personal goals, and self -efficacy. Reflective listening and empathy were used to provide support, 
decrease barriers and build skill  in self-care.  There was evidence of improvement in self -care in 80%  of HF 
patients after receiving the intervention.146 In a second study, we tested health coaching vs. standard 
education in 100 HF patients  (mean age 62  ± 12.8 years, 54% Black, 30% female)  in an RCT.147 The 
intervention was provided by an RN in 1  in-person session and 2- 3 telephone sessions  over the first month 
after hospital discharge . At 3  months, more improvement in self -care was seen on the Self -Care of HF Index148 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 75
in the intervention group than the control group (19.7 ±  16.0 vs. 12.1 ± 18.3 improvement in standardized 
scores ), a clinically and statistically significant difference after adjust ing for confounding variables.149 The effect 
size was moderate (Cohen’s d = 0.44). Based on qualitative data collected in bot h studies, w e learned that 
face- to-face sessions were more effective than  telephone sessions , so we moved to using virtual technology.   
 In preparation for this proposal, we conducted three  pilot studies  to adapt the intervention for 
caregivers . We first enrolled seven homebound female spouse caregivers of HF patients and interviewed 
them to identify stress ors associated with caregiv ing. When we described the planned program, all were 
receptive to the electronic intervention and five of the seven women wanted to participate (“I need help 
desperately ”).71 In the second pilot study , we tested four methods of distance communication – telephone, 
tablet ( iPad) with video, laptop computer with video and a detachable webcam, and touchscreen videophone. 
The iPad facilitated privacy by allowing the car egiver to move to a private place while conversing and was 
preferred over other devices (“the iPad is just less threatening”). In the  third study , we assessed feasibility of 
our planned methods and pilot -tested the Vi CCY intervention.150 We enrolled four HF caregivers  (white female 
spouses, mean age 66 ± 8.5 years ) and gave each an iPad. Health coaches engaged each caregiver in 8  
support sessions  over a 3- month period. Each session lasted approximately 1  hour.  Data were collected at 
enrollment and three months later using most of  the methods proposed below.  Table 1 shows  change in  the 
main target variables . Technology  problems  were more common in coaches  than caregivers  and were quickly 
resolved with ass istance. Together these pilot studies illustrate that caregivers are interested in participating, 
they are comfortable with the tablet  technology, and our proposed methods are feasible. We learned to hire 
coaches  adept with technology and to ensure that pa rticipants have a strong Internet connection.  
Table 1. Results from Pilot Study of Four Caregivers  Baseline  
Score (SD)  3-Month Follow -up 
Score (SD)  
Perceived Stress Scale (lower is better)  20.7 (4.3)  18.2 (0.96)  
Health Self-Care Neglect Scale  (1-10 poss ible range, lower is better)  3.2 (2.5)  1.2 (1.2)  
SF-12 Health Status, Mental Component Score  (higher is better)   52.1 (9.1) 55.6 (4.3) 
 We have used virtual technology to deliver numerous interventions, including some of the early work 
using virtual appr oaches  with older adults .138,140 In a field experiment funded by the Department of Commerce,  
we enrolled 174 elderly diabetic home health patients  and provided a virtual intervention.151 Of th ose who 
refused, only 12% said the technology  was too complicated, in spite of the fact that we  used first -generation 
technology that was far more complicated than that proposed in this study  – a virtual technology  approach with 
tablets. Satisfac tion with this delivery method was high. Our research staff has extensive experience in setting 
it up and  instructing those having no knowledge of tablets  to become proficient in its use.138,139,151-153  
C.3. Study Overview  (Figure 2) . We will use a RCT design to achieve robust and unbiased results , as 
detailed below . We will enroll 250 informal HF caregivers and, when possible, the HF patients for whom they 
care. After collecting baseline data,  we will block randomize the caregivers  1:1 to the intervention or control 
group, stratify ing randomization by caregiver sex and relationship to the patient (e.g., spouse, adult child)  – 
factors known to influence caregivi ng burden, 
perceived stress, and receptivity to the 
intervention.8,154 We will provide tablet devices 
with wireless network access and connect 
caregivers  in both conditions  to the Internet so 
they can access the Internet  site providing 
Health Information (HI)  content, which will be 
the only  content provided to caregivers in the 
control group. In addition  to HI , the intervention 
group will receive 10 front-loaded sessions of 
ViCCY  over 6 months . Assessments of self -care, perceived stress, coping, and health status will be co nduc ted 
at baseline (after enrollment but prior to randomization) and by phone at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months . Using 
contrasts within a mixed- effect modeling framework, we will assess intervention efficacy  at 6 months  using 
intention- to-treat analysis . We chose to provide 10 health coaching sessions based on our pilot data and 
literature demonstrating that a shorter duration of health coaching  is not routinely effective.21 We chose to 
assess the primary aim at 6  months based on prior psychosocial intervention studies ,83,125,155 but w e will 
assess outcomes at 3 -month intervals  based on this  rationale: baseline (enrollment) , to generate consistent 
profiles of all enrollees at a consistent point in time and prior to implementation of the new intervention; at 3 -
months , very early effects, at 6 -months,  short -term effects; and at 12-months , the longer -term effects of ViCCY 
vs. HI. These 3- month intervals also will allow us to compare our results with others.156,157 We chose a 12-  
 
   
 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 76
month follow -up interval for  the cost -effectiveness analysis to allow for a full year of  event accrual. We will pull 
resource use data from the electronic medical record (EMR) in 30 day increments and validated these data 
during routine follow -up calls with caregivers. We expect the proposed study to require 5 years for completion.  
C.4. Sample.   
C.4.a  Recruitment . We will enroll a consecutive sample of  informal HF caregivers  identified from the Penn 
Heart and Vascular Center  (PHVC) , the largest out-patient HF clinic  in the Philadelphia region and a site at 
which the PI has establis hed relationships and success in past recruit ment of  participants . In 2017, there were 
5344 HF patient visits (mean 445 visits per month ). Of these, approximately 832 we re new HF patients (mean 
69 new patients per month). In a prior study at this site , we enrolled 139 HF patients over 18 months ; 84% of 
the screened and eligible patients enrolled.142 These 139 HF patients (45% female, 34% non- White, mostly 
Black) all lived at home with a family caregiver .   
 If recruitment  is slow er than expected, we will identify caregivers visiting HF patients hospitalized at one 
of three University of Pennsylvania Health System (UPHS) sites, all of which use a single, integrated EMR with 
the level of f inancial data needed to address our cost -effectiveness aim. The Hospital of the University of 
Pennsylvania (HUP) has 789 licensed acute care beds. Between July 2016 and July 2017, HUP admitted 1,859 HF patients. Presbyterian Medical Center (PMC) has 331 patient beds and admitted 1 ,621 HF patients in 
that year. Pennsylvania Hospital (PAH) has 496 licensed patient beds and admitted 716 HF patients that year. 
From these various sources, it is reasonable to project identifying 100 unique HF patients each month,  most  
of whom will have caregivers.  Based on our prior research ,
158-161 we anticipate that 90 will have caregivers and 
70% of these (63 caregivers) will be eligi ble, and 15% will enroll . Thus, we estimate enrolling 10 caregivers  per 
month . We will requir e a minimum of 25 months for enrollment, and have conservatively allowed 30 months for 
enrollment and five years to complete the study.   
 We will explore the relationship between HF caregiver and HF patient outcomes  in a subgroup of  at least  
40 caregiver -patient  dyads ; 40 dyads is sufficient to provide reliable parameter estimates. HF patient  
participant s will be asked to provide informed consent to allow us to acc ess their EMR to collect clinical 
information and track events  and, in the case that patients receive care outside the Penn health system, for the 
caregiver to report on patient health care resource use.  HF patients will not receive an intervention. If a 
caregiver  agree s to participate but the HF patient does not , we will still enroll the caregiver . It is not possible (or 
desirable) to exclude caregivers of patients with comorbid illnesses that may increase caregiv ing demand 
given the high prevalence of comorbid conditions in HF patients .162-164 Thus, whenever possible we will also 
gather EMR data on patients’ comorbid illnesses  using the Charlson Index categories of mild, moderate, or 
severe165 for use as a covariate in analyses.   
 Based on our prior studies, w e anticipate enrolling a diverse sample, with many in vulnerable racial, 
socio -economic, and geographically disadvantaged gr oups.160,166,167 Most caregivers will be spouses but some 
will be adult children. Although t he sex distribution of HF  patients is about  equal ,11 female  HF patients are 
typically older.  See Table 2 for caregiver inclusion and exclusion criteria. All willing HF patients cared for by an 
eligible and enrolled caregiver  and capable of giving written informed consent  will be eligible for inclusion .  
C.4.b. Screening,  Enrollment , and Baseline Assessment . We will have a study Research Assistant (RA) on 
site during PHVC clinic hours and anticipate that m any i nformal caregivers will be screened and enrolled 
during a HF patient clinic visit  because meet ing in person is anticipated to maximize enrollment .169 To obtain a 
consecutive sample we w ill seek a HIPAA waiver to screen the daily appointment schedule to identify every 
patient with a potentially eligible caregiver (e.g., living within 50 miles of the research office). Clinic staff will 
identify potential caregiver participants (e.g., speak  English) and determine  their interest in speaking with 
research staff about the study. If caregivers agree to speak with research staff, the RA will explain the study 
and screen the caregiver for inclusion and exclusion criteria with standardized testing (e.g., self-care) and 
interview (e.g., hearing).  Fully eligible caregivers who provide informed consent (see Human Subjects)  will 
complete the baseline assessment  (Section C. 9) before being randomized to study arm.  Table 2 . HF Caregiver Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Informal caregiver  providing care at least 8 hours/week   
2. Reporting poor self -care on screening ( Health Sel f-Care Neglect 
scale35 score ≥2 based on our pilot data)  
3. Able to complete the protocol, e.g. , adequate  vision and hearing, 
English speaking   
4. Living within 50 miles of the research office in case home visits 
are required  for enrollment or Internet set -up Exclusion Criteria  
1. Cogni tive impairment (Telephone Interview for Cognitive 
Status [TICS]168 < 25)  
2. Participation in another support RCT  
3. Untreated major psychiatric  illness (Use of anti -anxiety/ anti-
depressant medic ines is acceptable and will be adjusted in 
analysis  if grou p imbalance is identified .)  
4. Plans to move out of the area imminent ly 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 77
If we need to enroll from the hospital, an RA will be available in the hospital daily to give interested caregivers 
study information and conduct screening. We will obtain a  HIPAA waiver to  allow us to screen the daily 
admission log to identify every HF patient with a potentially eligible caregi ver (e.g., living within 50 miles of the 
research office). Caregivers willing to speak with research staff will be screened as described above.  
If the caregiver is not able to complete the baseline assessment at the time of the clinic visit  or during the 
patient’s hospitalization, a home visit will be scheduled to complete baseline data collection. After all baseline 
data are collection, the caregiver will be randomized to study arm. At that time, participants will be trained in 
tablet use  and how to acces s the Health Information website. A research diary will be provided to aid tracking 
of health care resource use and cost.   
C.4.c  Consideration of Sex as a Biological Variable . In accordance with NIH guidance, we will include sex 
as a biological variable i n study design (block randomization of men and women to each group), analyses , and 
reporting. We will report all primary and secondary outcomes separately by sex to enhance the rigor and 
transparency of our findings. We expect to enroll more female than male caregivers because most HF 
caregivers are female55 and support interventions are more appealing to women.170 Enrolling at least 50 men is 
a goal so that sex -related differences in intervention efficacy and outcomes can be identified.  We will monitor 
enrollment weekly. If fewer than 15 male caregivers are enrolled in the first 3 months, we will conduct a focus 
group with male caregivers to identify specific elements  that could be emphasized to make the intervention 
more attractive to them.171-175 
C.4.d. Randomization and Blinding. B lock randomization will be used to achieve equal distribution of key 
variables in each condition. We will block randomize on caregi ver sex (male/female) and relationship to patient 
(e.g., spouse)  – factors shown to influence perceived caregiving burden176 and receptivity to intervention.177 
The randomization sequence will  be generated a priori  by a statistician independent of the study investigators 
using a randomly permuted blocks algorithm to ensure equal distribution of these variables in each study arm . 
The P roject Manager  will notify the study staff and participants of their group assignment  (ViCCY or HI  only) by 
telephone, email or message, as preferred  by the individual. Although balance in sample size can be achieved 
with block randomization, the groups may not be fully comparable on other factors . Initial comparison of the 
groups  will allow us to  control  for important  covariates in the analys es.178 Investigators and all s taff involved in 
collecting assessment data will be blinded to group assignment  until after the data are locked. The RN 
providing the intervention and the caregiver participants  will not be blinded.   All baseline data will be collected 
prior to randomiz ing. Timing of follow -up assessments  will be based on day of randomization.  
C.5. Augmented Standard Care –  Health Information (HI) . Caregivers in both the intervention and control 
arms will receive augmented standard  care content (HI) through the Internet. Standard care typically involves 
unstructured, intermittent outreach by nurses staffing physicians’  offices , but there is evidence that caregivers ’ 
needs  are not  met with this approach .16,179 Augmented standard care (HI) in this study  will be based on 
informational resources from the UK National Health Service ( http://www.nhs.uk/pages/home.aspx ). This rich 
Internet site (see Section C. 7 for Internet availability)  has educational pages on hundreds of conditions. The 
site offers self -help books and free self -help computer exercises designed for stress reduction  and healthy self -
care.  For instance,  one module,  Mood zone,  teaches  stress management  skills  with an interactive game, 
anxiety assessment, a downloadable relaxation audio, workbook, and feedback assessment. Using flashed diagrams and online exercises, Mood zone illustrate s the relationship between thoughts and emotions and 
works through the process of dealing with stress. Relaxation and meditation techniques are described. Live 
Well provides excellent, updated content on diet, exercise, substance abuse, immunizations, etc.  If a 
participant wishes  to use the self -help books —equivalent in content —instead of or in addition to the online 
materials or in addition, we will p rovide those materials . Participating caregivers in both study arms  will be 
encouraged to spend at least 30  minutes weekly  using the Internet modules or books for six months  and will 
receive monthly reminder cards by mail. We will track participant use of the website using Google Analytics , 
and those  who are not using the website will be telephoned and reminded  to do so. Those who choose to use 
books rather than the website will be asked to keep track of t he number of book chapters reviewed each 
month. Use of the website or book chapters will be used as a  measure of fidelity  in both arms  (see Section 
C.8). After  six months , we will pick up all tablet devices (both groups) to minimize  bleeding of the intervention 
into the follow -up period, and w e will continue to track use of the website to identify if bleeding occurs.   
C.6. Intervention - ViCCY . In addition to au gmented standard care  HI, caregivers  randomized to V iCCY  will 
receive 10 front-loaded sessions of virtual  health coaching by trained RNs (Section C. 6.a) over 6 months with 
content based on the theoretical framework and our prior research ( Table 3 , next page ). As shown in Figure 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 78
3, sessions are weekly initially and decrease in frequency over time. ViCCY incorporates the factors essential 
in caregiver interventions ;86 it is a psychosocial  approach that is personalized and tailored to be flexible ; is 
multidimensional , providing support for coping with perceived stress  while fostering self -care; and is sufficient  
in dose, based on our pilot work . We r efined our approach based on caregiver input to focus on relieving  stress 
rather than intensifying demand and burden ,71 thereby  promot ing caregivers’  ability to respond to stressors 
with adaptive coping.  We aim to build  
motivation to gain the knowledge and skills 
needed to achieve self -identified health 
goals.180 We focus on identifying personal 
values, solving problems, and transforming 
goals into action using a combination of psychological and behavioral interventions.
181  
 We use motivational interviewing  in all 
ViCCY  sessions .182 Observations are 
presented to the caregiver in a way that 
builds confidence, motivates action,  and enhances self -care by breaking the cycle of  negative self -perception 
and emotions with the knowledge, skills, and beliefs needed to engage in healthy behaviors.183-186  We discuss 
goal-setting and action- planning in early sessions. Consistent with motivational interviewing , information (e.g., 
reasons for specific  patient behavior) is  given  only if and when the caregiver is receptive to it.  
 A series of sessions is provided with the goal of achieving a lasting effect .187 In preliminary studies, we 
found a direct relationship between the number of sessions provided and the effect obtained,166,188 with 10  
sessions of health coaching typically being a sufficient dose .21 Because m aintaining c ontact  is important to the 
success of stress reduction interventions,91 the assigned RN will check in with caregivers between intervention 
sessions. W e will offer booster sessions to any caregiver in the  ViCCY arm who wishes to receive additional 
support  during  the 6 -month intervention interval .21 We will track the number of sessions  and test for differential 
effectiveness based on the dose received. If a brief check -in call becomes an intervention session, it will be 
tracked for use in analysis. We will mail monthly newsletters  to maximize ret ention (see Recruitment and 
Retention Plan) . Because w e found that early and intense contact with the coach builds the relationship, 
engag es the participant in the treatment program ,189 and maximizes outcomes,190 we will front -load the 
intervention sessions ( Figure 3). Consistency  is important for trust building, behavioral change, and growth,191 
so one RN health coach will be assigned to work with each caregiver  for the full 6- month period.  Intervention 
content is carefully standardized, guided  by a manual  with session agendas and checklist of  specific content  to 
be covered in each call, but also tailored to allow the coach to focus on caregiver needs,  address ing unique 
and varying individual characteristics, preferences, and goals.192,193   
C.6.a. Health coaches.  We will hire two  baccalaureate -level RNs who have at least three  years of clinical Table 3. Intervention Content Derived from the Transactional Model of Stress and Coping  
Theoretical Dimension  Intervention Actions  by the  RN Health Coach  
Caregiving  demand  Assess caregiving demand (e.g., patient behaviors, communicating with providers, feeling 
isolated).12,18,194 Provide “mutual education” and cross -learning—caregivers educate the RN about 
the nature of their problems and the RN educates the caregiver about the purpose of health coaching 
and how self -care can help the caregiver.  
Primary appraisal 
(significance of the stressor)  Assess beliefs about HF and personal goals to determine how caregiving demand impacts caregiving 
burden and personal goals.  
Secondary appraisal 
(assess coping resources 
and options)  Assess perceptions of controllability and self -efficacy in dealing with specific situation s. Use goal 
setting to set up discussions of the discrepancy between goals and self -care behavior, ambivalenc e 
about self -care, and action planning.  
Coping: Problem 
management  Assess structural and contextual factors influencing coping (e.g., social determinants of health ). 
Identify resources needed. Teach practical skills to activate self -care and encourage a s ense of 
health ownership (e.g., self -monitoring of thoughts and behavior). Introduce problem solving.195,196 
Emphasize s elf-care as a pleasurable and healthy method of coping. Discus s action planning, 
emphasizing skills that can help deal with problems (e.g., brainstorming about potential solutions 
when problems seem insurmountable). Teach how to itemize and prioritize questions before 
meetings with providers. Focus on building confid ence.  
Coping: Emotional 
regulation  Teach that avoidant coping styles (e.g., denial) are not helpful.197 Encourage perceptions of 
controllability and self -effic acy as they are associated with engaged  coping (e.g. problem -solving) . 
Teach relaxation exercises (e.g., guided imagery, controlled diaphragmatic breathing, and 
meditation) early and reinforce throughout t o promote  emotional regulation.  
Coping: Meaning -based 
coping  Encourage gratitude to decrease stress and improve wellbeing.198-200 Encourage spiritual be liefs and 
engagement in positive events.  Focus on ways to find satisfaction with caregiving.  
Support resources  Identify interpersonal and community resources available to provide respite and support.  
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 79
experience in cardiac nursing, excellent interpersonal communication skills, and comfort with technology .201 
RNs will receive two days of initial training  in health coaching from Dr. Ri egel and then complet e a 7-hour 
online training program in motivational interviewing provided by the University of Colorado, College of Nursing. 
Thereafter, weekly training and supervision will be conducted  by Dr s. Riegel and Hirschman as the RNs begin 
coaching caregiver  participant s. As part of this supervision, audio- recordings  of coaching  sessions will be 
reviewed by independent raters using the Behavior Change Technique taxonomy .202 Two trained raters will 
judge three  randomly selected session recordings  for each coach . Raters  will assess completeness and 
thoroughness  of the therapeutic techniques used , calculating i ntraclass correlation coefficients as a measure of 
interrater reliability. RNs who receive less than moderate ratings will receive individual session supervision. I f 
an RN receives a low rating on any session, s/he will be required to undergo additional training and will be 
suspended from coaching study participants until the deficiencies are remedied. We have had success in this 
approach for  recruiting, training, and retaining  health coaches engaged in prior trials.23,149,153 
C.7. Internet Access. We will offer a variety of Internet options to participating caregivers. We will offer tablet 
devices , which are versatile for allowing privacy,  to all  participants . The tablet uses an embedded computer 
camera capable of full 2 -way duplex video and audio transmissions for real -time communication. Existing 
broadband Internet connection is not required because we supply devices with mobile connectivity. 
Technology experts (Caryl Technologies, with whom we have worked in the past ) will train research staff to set 
up Internet service and devices during an in -person visit and ensure  that the system is functioning well  before 
research procedures begin. Caregivers will be left with a step -by-step manual and the research office phone 
number in case technology issues occur. If they wish to use their own computer, we will locate the site on their 
computers and ensure that it functions properly.  We will provide a camera for anyone in the ViCCY arm  who 
wishes to use her/his  own computer. If their personal technology proves to be inadequate, we will offer a tablet 
to ensure access to the website and the intervention.   
 ViCCY  sessions will be provided entirely by video- conferencing technology . A secure cloud account will 
be set up for the ViCCY  session s, which will begin within one week of set -up. As described previously, w e 
have conducted several funded clinical trials using virtual technology that illustrate our experience with 
installing, teaching, trouble shooting, using,  and evaluating such  applications in participants’ homes.139,203-208  
Almost all of these studies involved older adults . This experience taught us that the devices are easy to install 
and use. In one typical study with older adults,  average use  (number of days the eq uipment was used divided 
by number of days available)  was 81% ( range 6% -100%).138  
C.8. Process evaluation.  Treatment fidelity will b e monitored as detailed in Table 4.209-211 To examine whether 
caregivers’ expectations are influencing outcomes, caregivers  in both groups will complete the Outcome 
Expectancy and Treatment Credibility Scale212 at baseline and 6 month s to facilitate  data interpretation. This  
scale has good internal consistency (α=0.85) and has been used in numerous prior studies, including trials in 
which an intervention is  delivered by I nternet.213,214  
Table 4. Methods of Process Evaluation to Ensure Treatment Fidelity  
Goal  Strategies  
Study Design  
Ensure that the treatment dose (number, 
frequency, length of contact) is 
adequately described and the same for 
each participant  • Provide a ll participants wi th consistent access to HI  
• Provide all intervention group participant s with  10 doses of ViCCY over six months  
• Use a detailed treatment manual with session agendas and checklist of points to 
cover  to enhance treatment quality and consistency  
• Use a software program to monitor use of the HI website  
Plan for Implementation Setbacks   
(e.g. coach  drops out)  • Hire 2 RNs, maintain a pool of qualified RNs so that new ones can be trained as 
needed 
• Track attrition (Research Assistants (RAs), RNs, participants) and reasons for dropout  
Coach  Training  
Standardize training to ensure that it is 
conducted similarly for all RNs. Train 
RNs to well -defined performance criteria  • Train RNs together using standardized training manuals and the same instructor  
• Design training to accommodate individual styles while assuring standardization  
• Specify performance criteria a priori   
• Provide remedial training immediately when problems are detected  
Treatment Delivery  
Monitor and control for treatment 
differences  • Monitor a ll encounters, with deviations from protocol addressed quickly  
• Assure that a single RN is assigned to provide ViCCY for each caregiver for continuity  
• Randomly choose 3 early  ViCCY sessions per RN to audio-record and rate for fidelity  
• Provide routine supervisory oversight using fidelity ratings to minimize decay or drift  
• Assure that RNs s elf-monitor, completing an intervention log after each contact  
Treatment Enactment  
Monitor and control for participant perceptions of RN differences (e.g., 
warmth, credibility)
 • Assess participant perceptions of RNs’ characteristics through intermittent ph one calls  
• Give feedback to RNs and mentor them to rectify complaints  
• Analyze t reatment enactment data after 50%, 75%, and 100% of participants are 
recruited and compare by group (ViCCY and HI)215 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 80
C.9. Caregiver Characteristics and Outcomes. On enrollment , the RA will colle ct self-report data from 
caregivers using encrypted laptop computers . Data will be entered directly  into the REDCap database as 
collected, with data entry screens designed to incorporate range checks and concurrent checks to minimize 
errors.  Caregiver burden216 will be  measured using t he Dutch Objective Burden Inventory (alpha coefficient 
0.81- 0.84, construct validity) , which  measures the full range of activities r equired to care for HF patients 
(demand) as well as the burden associated with these demands.217,218 Qualit y of the relationship with the 
patient ; social determinants of health;  and demographic, caregiving, and clinical characteristics will be 
gathered from caregivers at enrollment  only. At 3, 6, 9 and 12 -months  post randomization we will telephone 
caregivers and collect self -report data on self-care, stress, coping, and health status  (Table 5 ). At 12 months 
we will measure QALYs.  These data will be obtained by interview and entered directly into REDCap using 
encrypted laptop computers . Self-report instruments with demonstrated cultural -sensitivity and prior validity 
testin g in caregiving samples were chosen, and m easures are as brief as possible to minimize burden.  
C.10. HF Patient Characteristics . With patient consent , HF patient demographic and clinical chara cteristics 
will be abstracted from the medical record at enrollment. Duration of HF will be measured in months. All 
comorbid conditions will be noted and classified using the Charlson Index.165 Physician ratings of New York 
Heart Association functional class as noted in the EMR  at enrollment will be used to describe HF patient s. The 
SF-6D will be administered to HF patients at baseline and 12 months to obtain QALYs.40 
Table 5. Caregiver  Outcome Variab les and Measurement  
Definition and Measure  Items  Item responses  Reliability  Validity  Comments  
Self-care (behaviors 
undertaken to maintain 
health) . Health Self -Care 
Neglect  (HSCN) scale35 and 
the short Health- promoting 
lifestyle profile (HPLP) II .219  10 
 
30 
 HSCN dichotomous.   
HPLP 4 -point Likert scale; 
higher score = more healthy 
behavior.  0.76 
 
0.90 Content  
 
Criterion 
Convergent 
Divergent 
Construct  The HSCN has not been widely tested 
so we augment this measure with the 
widely- used Health- promoting lifestyle 
profile II. To minimize burden, we will 
use the short form.  
Stress  (demands exceed 
ability to cope) . Perceived 
Stress Scale (PSS) .36  10 5-point scale (0=never to 4=very 
often).  0.84-0.86 Concurrent 
Predictive 
Construct  Gold standard for assessing stress.220 
Norms  are available for comparison.  
Coping  (ability to respond to 
stressors with appropriate 
adaptive coping resources) .121 
Ways of Coping 
Questionnaire,  short form .38 30 4-point Likert -scale response 
format  (0 = not used to 3 = used 
a great deal ); higher scores 
indicate greater coping.  0.95 Construct  The original scale has been used widely 
since developed by Lazarus in 1985. 
This short version has been used 
numerous times in studies with older 
adult caregivers.221-225 
Health status  (physical  and 
mental health) .  Medical 
Outcomes S tudy Short form 
(SF)-36.136,137  36 Varied (3 -, 5- and 6 -pt scale and 
dichotomous [yes/no]); each 
component score is 
standardized 0-100 point scale.   >0.80  Convergent  
Divergent   Standardized scores and national norms 
for comparison. SF- 36 valid in many 
populations,39,226 and caregivers.227,228 
One of the common data elements .  
Quality of the relationship  
scale229 measures giving and 
receiving support .  10 4-point Likert scale (never to 
always).  0.85 Predictive  Adapted to be used with couple or 
parent –child relationships.109  
Demograp hic 
characteristics and social 
determinants of health  
influence self -care.230-234   
  
 Collected with the Protocol for 
Response to and Assessing Patient Assets, R isks, and 
Experiences (PRAPARE) .235 Standardized 
measure of 
individual level 
data  Age, race, sex, education etc. ( common 
data elements ), money, resources (food, 
housing) , social and emotional health, 
support (transportation, safety)  
Caregiv ing characteristics 
assessed  in HF  studies.236-240    To be collected at baseline in 
sociodemographi c survey    Relationship  to the patient , time spent 
caregiving (historical, daily)   
Chronic conditions and 
medications. Interview format of the Charlson 
Comorbidity Index .241   11 Chronic conditions (most scored 
1 point. Scores range from 0 to 34).
241 Self-report of medicines.  
 -- Predictive  
  
 Caregiver Health Characteristi cs: 
• All medications  including over -the-
counter and herbals , by interview . 
• All chronic conditions  
Work performance  [lost 
productivity due to time away from work (absenteeism) and 
reduced efficiency at work 
(presenteeism).
242 7-day work 
performance questionnaire .243 13 Interview fo rmat. Varied (10 -pt 
scale and dichotomous [yes/no]  
and number hours spent per -
forming paid and unpaid work  0.73 Predictive  
Concurrent  
Construct  Caregivers will be interviewed at 
baseline, 3- , 6-, 9-, and 12- months to 
assess lost productivity.  
C.11 . Health care utilization  outcomes: Caregivers and patients.  Health care utilization of  both caregivers 
and consenting HF patients  will be obtained from the EMR  for 12 months before and 12 months after  
randomization using a process of active surveillance (Table 6 ). The Penn Data Store will monitor inpatient  and 
outpatient activity and generate automated reports  for tracking of m ortality. As EMR  data may be incomplete if 
a person is hospitalized outside the Penn health system , caregivers will be asked about their health care use 
when they are telephoned at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months . If the patient in their care has provided consent, we will 
also ask the caregiver about HF patient hospitalizations outside the Penn health system. We will ask about all  
major categories of use including provider visits, hospitalizations,  emergency department  (ED) visits, 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 81
diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, ambulance services, and home care services received. RAs blinded to 
study group will perform these assessments .  
C.12 . Database Set -up and Management. REDCap (Research  Electronic Data Capture) will be used as a 
central resource for data processing and management.  REDCap is a web application and back -end database 
model designed to support data capture for research.252 REDCap was devel oped around HIPAA -security 
guidelines with features such as data encryption. It provides an intuitive interface for data entry with data 
validation, audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export procedures, automated export procedures for seamless data downloads to common statistical packages, and procedures for importing data from external 
sources. We will use standard operating procedures to guide all data management activities, such as the 
naming of variables, data cleaning and handling of missing data. Missing fields will not be allowed except in certain pre- specified cases (e.g., income).  
C.13. Power. We will enroll 250 caregivers (125 caregivers per  study arm) t o achieve over 90% power to 
detect significant overall differences in longitudinal profiles between the groups on the primary outcome of Health Self -Care Neglect Scale.
35 Assuming estimates similar to those in our pilot data, and extrapolating 
through 6 months, along with control group scores that also decline over time (due to interaction that comes 
with participation in a clinical trial) but at a slow er rate than the intervention, it is assumed that ViCCY  
caregivers will demonstrate mean Health Self -Care Neglect scores of 3.2, 1.25, 1.1 while HI caregivers will 
demonstrate mean scores of 3.2, 3.0, 2.7 at baseline, 3,  and 6  months, respectively. Combini ng the two data 
sets, th is translates  to mean scores of 1.85 and 2.97 (D=1.12) overall for intervention and control group 
caregivers, respectively —in line with a clinically meaningful difference equal to 0.4*SD (SD 2.8)=1.12 units.253 
We conservatively assumed that standard deviations (pilot estimates 2.5 and 1.3 at baseline and 3 months) 
are c onstant over time, equal to 2.8, and that the variance- covariance matrix pattern is generated using a 
mixed effects model design (congruent with the primary analytic plan) with a first -order auto -correlation 
parameter equal to 0.3. A design with three asse ssment points and 100 participants per group (200 total) 
achieves 99% power to test the overall between- group effect (intervention vs. control without regard to 
changes over time), 99% power to test the overall time effect, and 90% power to test the group x time interaction effect. All tests are based on simulations with 100 iterations, a 5% significance level, mean vectors 
and variance- covariance as described above. We anticipate 20% attrition based on our prior experience with 
the intervention, which was found to be helpful, supportive, and stress relieving  rather than burdensome. 
Further, we will remunerate caregivers for their time and effort (see Human Subjects).  
C.14. Data Analysis Plan.  All analyses will use an intent -to-treat approach. Descriptive st atistics will be used 
to characterize the sample, with measures of central tendency and variation for continuous measures, and frequencies and percentages for categorical variables . Distributional properties will be examined to determine if 
variance stabil izing or normalizing tra nsformations should be applied. Non -inferential interim analyses will be 
performed to ensure data collection and archiving procedures are operating correctly. Outliers will be assessed 
by visual inspection and checked for accuracy. Once the database is locked, c omparisons by group will assess 
for balance and identify multi -collinearity and areas requiring statistical adjustment. For comparisons involving 
continuous variables, homoscedasticity will be evaluated using Levine’s tests. N ormality will be assessed using 
Shapiro- Wilk tests. Should violations emerge, transformations will be applied or non -parametric tests used.  
 While every effort will be made to obtain complete data on every participant , some missing data are  
inevitable.254 The underlying mechanism —missing completely at random (MCAR), nonignorable or not missing 
at random (NMAR) —will be evaluated prior to adjusting to minimize bias from missing data.255-257 We expect 
most  missing data to  be MCAR (e.g., finding data collection burdensome). However, systematic bias may exist 
for those who withdraw  so baseline characteristics will be compared among those with and without complete Table 6. Cost Effecti veness Data to be Collected on Caregivers and HF Patients   
Variable  Definition and Comment  Measures  
QALYs  QALYs are derived from the SF -36 because the  SF-6D based on the SF -36 is more discriminative than 
that derived from the  SF-12.244 SF-36 
Hospital 
readmission 
rates  Risk-standardized all -cause readmission rates (RSRR) endorsed by the National Quality Forum245 as a 
measure of hospital performance and aligns with published standards for statistical models used for 
calculation and publ ic reporting of health outcomes and efficiency measures.246  
EMR  
Days in the 
hospital  Captures the natural history of the multimorbid HF patient experience.247 Used to describe the burden of 
disease from the individual and healthcare system perspectives248 and in previous trials.249-251  Maximal 
exposure of 365 days.  EMR  
Resources 
used  Provider visits, hospitalizations, ED visits, diag nostic and therapeutic procedures, ambulance services, 
and home care services  EMR  
Death  If we suspect that the patient is dead, we will use family, then local, then national resources to confirm.  EMR  
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 82
follow -up data. To assess potential biases, we will compar e withdrawal rates and time to withdrawal.258,259 If the 
number lost to follow -up is small (<  5%) and the missing observations can be considered MCAR, then the 
primary hypotheses will be tested using the complete observed data. If missing observations cannot be 
assumed to be MCAR, more complex approaches will be considered such as shared parameter models260 or 
random pattern -mixture models.261-263 Sensitivity analyses for these models will be performed.264 These 
approaches assume that participants  dropped out for either informative (e.g., illness exacerbation) or non -
informative reasons (e.g., withdrawing consent). If dropouts are informative, we will adjust for this potential bias 
by introducing a covariate(s) into the analysis to help to explain why participants  dropped out early.  
 To assess changes in each of the primary and secondary outcomes  over time, separate mixed effects 
regression models will be generated with SAS Proc Mixed .265 We are not powered for secondary  outcomes  
(e.g., stress, coping, health status), but we will examine  effect sizes and confidence intervals  (CIs)  to 
determine if lack of power is driving nonsignificant  result s. Mixed models can account for correlation between 
repeated measures and handle non- excessive MAR or MCAR data better than traditional models and allow for 
use of time- independent and time -dependent covariates.266 Both random slopes and random intercepts will be 
modeled to represent deviation s from the average, or fixed- effect, slope over time and intercept, respectively. 
REML will be used for parameter estimation and the most appropriate covariance structure will be examined. 
Scores will be analyzed as repeated observations, with mean- centered baseline outcome scores serving as a 
covariate. Other predictor variables will include group, assessment time, and the interaction of group time  
(primary effect of interest) . Baseline measures  and group will be analyzed as time- independent covariates . The 
evaluation of differences in outcome profiles over time according to group  will rely on the group x time 
interaction terms, while differences by the balancing variables will rely on the mixed- effects modeling of higher 
order interaction terms.267-270 Statistical significance for individual intervention contrasts will be evaluated for 
each outcome, applying the Benjamini &  Hochberg271 method to control for  the type I error rate at 5%. The 
Akaike information criterion (AIC)272 will be used to evaluate overall model fit and to select the best -fitting 
longitudinal change pattern. We expect the groups to be balanced on baseline characteristics due to 
randomization; however, imbalances that occur by chance will be adjusted for in all analyses. T ime-dependent 
covariates of perceived stress and potential moderating effects of natural support or an intervening 
hospitalization will be examined in exploratory models . Using met hods described above, time -specific contrasts 
will be estimated to evaluate differences in outcome within groups at 9 and 12 months.  
C.14 .2. Aim 2:  To estimate the cost and cost -effectiveness of ViCCY over 12 months.  We hypothesize 
that caregivers randomi zed to ViCCY vs. HI only will have H2a : Higher QALYs measured with the SF- 6D 
derived from the SF- 36;40 and H2b:  Lower health care resource use.  The primary outcomes of this analysis 
include the difference in c osts (intervention cost minus cost offsets), the difference in QALYs  measured with 
the SF- 6D,40 and the incremental cost effectiveness ratio (the difference in costs divided by the difference in 
QALYs). Costs will include both the costs of intervention implementation (number and l ength of intervention 
contacts , RN time to assess need for and delivery of the intervention, technology expenses, supervision time, 
and initial training) . Cost offsets include the  costs of health care (detailed below) and the difference in 
workplace productivity collected for both study groups . QALYs will be used to assess effectiveness. We 
hypothesize that compared to HI, ViCCY will require more resources for intervention implementatio n, but will 
reduce use of other health care resources. It is unclear if the changes in health care resource  use or labor 
productivity  will fully offset the intervention implementation costs (leading  to a finding of dominance: lower cost 
and greater effect)  or if net costs will be positive ( leading  to a finding of cost -effectiveness). We will follow a 
micro -costing approach in which all clinically relevant resources used in the study groups  will be tracked and 
converted to costs using appropriate price weights.   
 We will obtain and summarize all health care use and convert it to payer costs (i.e., a payer’s 
perspective) by use of Medicare fees. Many, if not most, of the anticipated participants will be over 65 years 
old, which makes Medicare fees appropriate for the analysis. Fees will be derived from the last study year, so 
there will be no need to adjust for inflation. Because follow -up will be for a year, at most, there will be no need 
to discount costs. Medication costs will be based on average wholesale prices adjusted to average sales prices 
as reported by the U.S. Office of the Inspector General.273 We will evaluate the effect of a reasonable range of 
private sector cost es timates in sensitivity analyses.  Costing methods will adhere to standards proposed by the 
US Public Health Service -sponsored Panel on Cost -Effectiveness in Health and Medicine.98 Resources and 
costs associated with researc h and data collecti on will be excluded from analyses. Sensitivity analyses will be 
performed using self -reported information on key variables (e.g., explor ing alternative outcomes across a 
range of outcome CIs ). We have used these procedures successfully i n prior studies.8,274,275  
  Resource utilization and cost comparisons will be examined overall and by resource category over four 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 83
time periods (0- 3 months, 3 -6 months, 6- 9 months; and 9- 12 months) , with t he main outcome at one year. 
Statistical comparisons will be performed using generalized estimating equations (GEE) with links selected 
using  the Pearson correlation test, the Pregibon link test, and the modified Hosmer and Lemeshow test , and 
families selected using  the modified Park test.276 Estimates of average total treatment costs and QALYs will be 
generated separately for each group . Non -parametric 95% CIs  will be determined for group differences in 
mean total costs using empirical sampling distrib utions (1,000 iterations) generated with bootstrapping 
methodology with replacement.277,278 We will compute a  non-parametric two -sided p- value based on the 
empirical sampling distribution. Differences in cost and QALYs w ill be used to calculate the incremental cost -
effectiveness ratio. Reported measures of sampling uncertainty for this ratio will include 1) the plot of the joint 
distribution of the difference in cost and effect on the cost -effectiveness plane, 2) the confidence interval for the 
cost-effectiveness ratio calculated by use of the Fieller’s theorem method, and 3) the acceptability curve.98 
Sensitivity analysis  is a critical component of an economic evaluation since all assumpt ions and parameter 
estimates have uncertain precision.98 As more than one approach is often available to monetize outcomes, we 
will calculate a lower and upper bound estimate, as  relevant, for the benefit (QALYs) and cost calculations. We 
will combine this series of sensitivity analyses to form a lower and upper bound estimate for preliminary ICER.  
C.14.3. Aim 3 ( Exploratory ): To explore the effect of caregiver  outcomes  (self-care, stress, coping, 
health status)  on HF pati ent outcomes.  We hypothesize that at 12 months, HF patients whose caregivers 
improve vs. not improve in self -care (regardless of group) will have H3a: Lower hospitalization rates; H3b:  
Fewer hospital days; H3c: Lower mortality rates; and H3d:  Higher QALYs  measured with the SF- 6D.40 We will 
analyze number of hospitalizations and days in the hospital using  GEE regression models  with the Poisson 
distribution as the working outcome distribution. GEE allows for modeling of the marginal distribution of each 
outcome variable as a function of the caregiver predictor of interest over time, and accounts for the likely 
correlations of the repeated outcome measures for each participant.  An approach similar to that described for 
Aim 1 will be used within the GEE framework (different correlation structures will be examined, baseline 
outcomes will be included as a covariate) .  
 We will measure t ime to death from date of the caregiver’s enrollment in the study to the date of patient 
death.  Patients remaining free from an event will be censored at their last follow -up. Kaplan- Meier estimates 
will be plotted to provide a visual demonstration of time to death by group (categorized caregiver outcomes) , 
and the log- rank test will be used for comparisons . GEE and frailty type multivariable modeling  will be applied 
to time -to-event data within the context of equally spaced time i ntervals .279-281 This approach allows for the 
addition of a random effect to a general Cox proportional hazards  model to account for the likely correlation of 
repeated measures for each study participant while also accounting for censoring.  
 QALYs will be analyzed using  mixed effects regression modeling. As described above, scores will be 
analyzed as repeated observations, with mean- centered baseline outcome scores serving as a covariate. Other 
predictor variables will include time -dependent caregiver variables , assessme nt time , and the corresponding  
two-way interaction term (primary effect of interest) . Statistically significant findings will be concluded on the 
basis of a two- sided 0.05 level of significance, recognizing these analyses are exploratory in nature and 
findings will be used to generate hypotheses . Finally, we will examine t he effect of caregiver outcome on HF 
patient outcomes in patient -caregiver dyads using the Actor -Partner Interdependence Model.282 
C.15. Methodological challenges. We hav e considered the following methodological challenges:  
1. There is the possibility of  differential compliance with the protocol –  for instance, if the HF patient has an 
exacerbation that distracts the caregiver and interferes with the intervention or assessments. We will allow 
some flexibility in the timing of ViCCY sessions to accommodate such events and increase the 
generalizability of study results. Caregivers in the ViCCY arm will be able to schedule calls with the RN 
coach during day, evening, and weekend hours to limit stress from study participation. For both arms, we 
will allow data collection calls to be completed up to two weeks before or after the planned contact date to 
accommodate schedules. We will collect data on cancelled and delayed events for l ater analysis and adjust 
for delays and the dose of intervention received in analyses.  
2. A threat to validity  includes the potential for the control  group to receive a level of natural support sufficient 
to interfere with our ability to detect treatment eff ects from ViCCY.283  We will interview participants about 
naturally occurring support so that we can adjust  for this in the analysis if needed.  
3. We may have difficulty enrolling the most stressed and bur dened caregivers who may see the trial as one 
more demand; however , in pilot testing we found that caregivers were grateful for the support.  
4. It is possible that the patient could die during the year in the study; half of all HF patients die within 5 
years .11 Should this occur, the caregiver will be dropped from the study.  
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Research Strategy                                                                                             
 Page 84
LITERATURE CITED   
1. Lindqvist G, Hakansson A, Petersson K. Informal home caregiving in a gender perspective: A selected 
literature review. VÅRD I NORDEN. 2004;24(4):26- 30. 
2. Family Caregiver Alliance. Definitions. 2014.  
3. Wallhagen MI. Caregiving demands: their difficulty and effects on the well -being of elderly caregivers. 
Scholarly inquiry for nursing practice. 1992;6(2):111- 127; discussion 129 -133. 
4. Haley WE, Roth DL, Howard G, Safford MM. Caregiving strain and estimated risk for stroke and 
coronary heart disease among spouse caregivers: differential effects by race and sex. Stroke. 
2010;41(2):331 -336. 
5. Lee S, Colditz GA, Berkman LF, Kawachi I. Caregiving and risk of coronary heart disease in U.S. 
women: a prospective study. Am J Prev Med. 2003;24(2):113 -119. 
6. Mausbach BT, von Kanel R, Aschbacher K, et al. Spousal caregivers of patients with Alzheimer's 
disease show longitudinal increases in pl asma level of tissue- type plasminogen activator antigen. 
Psychosom Med. 2007;69(8):816- 822. 
7. Schulz R, Beach SR. Caregiving as a risk factor for mortality: the Caregiver Health Effects Study. 
JAMA. 1999;282(23):2215- 2219.  
8. Coe NB, Van Houtven CH. Carin g for mom and neglecting yourself? The health effects of caring for an 
elderly parent. Health economics. 2009;18(9):991 -1010.  
9. Riegel B, Jaarsma T, Stromberg A. A middle- range theory of self -care of chronic illness. ANS Adv Nurs 
Sci. 2012;35(3):194- 204. 
10. Acton GJ. Health -promoting self -care in family caregivers. West J Nurs Res. 2002;24(1):73 -86. 
11. Benjamin EJ, Blaha MJ, Chiuve SE, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics -2017 Update: A Report 
From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017; 135(10):e146 -e603.  
12. Pressler SJ, Gradus -Pizlo I, Chubinski SD, et al. Family caregiver outcomes in heart failure. Am J Crit 
Care. 2009;18(2):149- 159. 
13. Stromberg A, Luttik ML. Burden of caring: risks and consequences imposed on caregivers of those 
living and dying with advanced heart failure. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care. 2015;9(1):26 -30. 
14. Buck HG, Mogle J, Riegel B, McMillan S, Bakitas M. Exploring the Relationship of Patient and Informal 
Caregiver Characteristics with Heart Failure Self -Care Using the Actor -Partner Interdependence Model: 
Implications for Outpatient Palliative Care. J Palliat Med. 2015;18(12):1026- 1032.  
15. Gomes B, Calanzani N, Curiale V, McCrone P, Higginson IJ. Effectiveness and cost -effectiveness of 
home palliative care servic es for adults with advanced illness and their caregivers. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2013(6):Cd007760.  
16. Saunders MM. Family caregivers need support with heart failure patients. Holist Nurs Pract. 
2003;17(3):136 -142. 
17. Luttik ML, Jaarsma T, Veeger N, Tijssen J, Sanderman R, van Veldhuisen DJ. Caregiver burden in 
partners of Heart Failure patients; limited influence of disease severity. Eur J Heart Fail. 2007;9(6 -
7):695 -701. 
18. Molloy GJ, Johnston DW, Witham MD. Family caregiving and congestive heart f ailure. Review and 
analysis. Eur J Heart Fail. 2005;7(4):592 -603. 
19. Usher BM, Cammarata K. Heart failure and family caregiver burden: an update. Progress in 
Cardiovascular Nursing. 2009;24(3):113 -114. 
20. McIlfatrick S, Doherty LC, Murphy M, et al. 'The importance of planning for the future': Burden and 
unmet needs of caregivers' in advanced heart failure: A mixed methods study. Palliat Med. 
2017:269216317743958.  
21. Olsen JM, Nesbitt BJ. Health coaching to improve healthy lifestyle behaviors: an integrat ive review. Am 
J Health Promot. 2010;25(1):e1- e12. 
22. Chen HM, Huang MF, Yeh YC, Huang WH, Chen CS. Effectiveness of coping strategies intervention on 
caregiver burden among caregivers of elderly patients with dementia. Psychogeriatrics. 2015;15(1):20-
25. 
23. Dickson VV, Melkus GD, Katz S, et al. Building skill in heart failure self -care among community dwelling 
older adults: results of a pilot study. Patient Educ Couns. 2014;96(2):188 -196. 
24. Wayne N, Perez DF, Kaplan DM, Ritvo P. Health Coaching Reduces  HbA1c in Type 2 Diabetic Patients 
From a Lower -Socioeconomic Status Community: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Med Internet Res. 
2015;17(10):e224.  
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 115
25. Sathe A, Flowers E, Mathur A, et al. A culturally specific health coaching program targeting 
cardiovasc ular disease risk in South Asians: rationale, design, and baseline data. Ethn Dis. 
2013;23(3):304 -309. 
26. Hale R, Giese J. Cost -Effectiveness of Health Coaching: An Integrative Review. Professional case 
management. 2017;22(5):228 -238. 
27. Van Houtven CH, Smith VA, Stechuchak KM, et al. Comprehensive Support for Family Caregivers: 
Impact on Veteran Health Care Utilization and Costs. Med Care Res Rev. 2017:1077558717697015.  
28. Schwarz KA, Elman CS. Identification of factors predictive of hospital readmissions for patients with 
heart failure. Heart Lung. 2003;32(2):88- 99. 
29. Bidwell JT, Vellone E, Lyons KS, et al. Caregiver determinants of patient clinical event risk in heart 
failure. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2017;16(8):707 -714. 
30. Saunders MM. Perspectives f rom family caregivers receiving home nursing support: findings from a 
qualitative study of home care patients with heart failure. Home Healthc Nurse. 2012;30(2):82- 90. 
31. O'Neil A, Hawkes AL, Atherton JJ, et al. Telephone- delivered health coaching improves anxiety 
outcomes after myocardial infarction: the 'ProActive Heart' trial. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2014;21(1):30 -38. 
32. Leveille SG, Huang A, Tsai SB, Allen M, Weingart SN, Iezzoni LI. Health coaching via an internet portal 
for primary care patients with chronic conditions: a randomized controlled trial. Medical care. 
2009;47(1):41 -47. 
33. Glasgow RE, Nutting PA, Toobert DJ, et al. Effects of a brief computer -assisted diabetes self -
management intervention on dietary, biological and quality -of-life outcomes. Chronic illness. 
2006;2(1):27 -38. 
34. Hilty DM, Ferrer DC, Parish MB, Johnston B, Callahan EJ, Yellowlees PM. The effectiveness of 
telemental health: a 2013 review. Telemedicine Journal & E -Health. 2013;19(6):444- 454. 
35. Boise L. Health Self -Care Neglect Scale. Empowering family caregivers: The powerful tools for 
caregiving program. Educational Gerontology, 31, 573- 586.2005.  
36. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc Behav. 
1983;24(4):385 -396. 
37. Folkman S, Lazarus R. Manual for the Ways of Coping questionnaire Research Edition . Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists; 1988.  
38. Sherer RF, Weibe FA, Luther DC, Adams JS. Dimensionality of coping: Factor stability using the Ways 
of Coping Questionnaire. . Psycho logical Reports. 1988;62:763- 700. 
39. McHorney CA, Ware JE, Jr., Raczek AE. The MOS 36- Item Short -Form Health Survey (SF- 36): II. 
Psychometric and clinical tests of validity in measuring physical and mental health constructs. Medical 
care. 1993;31(3):247- 263. 
40. Sayah FA, Qiu W, Xie F, Johnson JA. Comparative performance of the EQ -5D-5L and SF- 6D index 
scores in adults with type 2 diabetes. Quality of life research : an international journal of quality of life 
aspects of treatment, care and rehabilitation.  2017;26(8):2057 -2066.  
41. Hoefman RJ, Meulenkamp TM, De Jong JD. Who is responsible for providing care? Investigating the 
role of care tasks and past experiences in a cross -sectional survey in the Netherlands. BMC health 
services research. 2017;17(1):477.  
42. Reinhard SC, Feinberg LS, Choula R, Houser A, Institute APP. Valuing the invaluable: 2015 update: 
Undeniable progress, but big gaps remain. 2015.  
43. Davis LL, Gilliss CL, Deshefy -Longhi T, Chestnutt DH, Molloy M. The nature and scope of stressful 
spousal caregiving relationships. Journal of family nursing. 2011;17(2):224- 240. 
44. Ostwald SK, Bernal MP, Cron SG, Godwin KM. Stress experienced by stroke survivors and spousal 
caregivers during the first year after discharge from inpatient rehabilitation. Top Stroke Rehabil. 
2009;16(2):93 -104. 
45. Furlong KE, Wuest J. Self -care behaviors of spouses caring for significant others with Alzheimer's 
disease: the emergence of self -care worthiness as a salient condition. Qual Health Res. 
2008;18(12):1662 -1672.  
46. Lu YF, Wykle M. Relationships between caregiver stress and self -care behaviors in response to 
symptoms. Clin Nurs Res. 2007;16(1):29 -43. 
47. Ortiz N, Lamdan R, Johnson S, Korbage A. Caregiver status: a potential risk factor for extreme self -
neglect. Psych osomatics. 50(2):166 -168. 
48. Gallant MP, Connell CM. Predictors of decreased self -care among spouse caregivers of older adults 
with dementing illnesses. J Aging Health. 1997;9(3):373 -395. 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 116
49. Kim Y, Wellisch DK, Spillers RL, Crammer C. Psychological distre ss of female cancer caregivers: 
effects of type of cancer and caregivers' spirituality. Support Care Cancer. 2007;15(12):1367 -1374.  
50. Eriksson M, Svedlund M. 'The intruder': spouses' narratives about life with a chronically ill partner. J 
Clin Nurs. 2006 ;15(3):324- 333. 
51. Baumgarten M. The health of persons giving care to the demented elderly: a critical review of the 
literature. J Clin Epidemiol. 1989;42(12):1137- 1148.  
52. Bergman- Evans B. A health profile of spousal Alzheimer's caregivers. Depression and physical health 
characteristics. J Psychosoc Nurs Ment Health Serv. 1994;32(9):25- 30. 
53. Wykle ML. The physical and mental health of women caregivers of older adults. J Gerontol Nurs. 
1994;20(3):48 -49. 
54. Jutras S, Lavoie JP. Living with an impaired elderly person: the informal caregiver's physical and 
mental health. J Aging Health. 1995;7(1):46 -73. 
55. National Academies of Sciences E, and Medicine,. Families Caring for an Aging America.  Washington, 
DC: The National Academies Press; 2016.  
56. Wiener L , Viola A, Kearney J, et al. Impact of Caregiving for a Child With Cancer on Parental Health 
Behaviors, Relationship Quality, and Spiritual Faith: Do Lone Parents Fare Worse? J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs. 2015.  
57. von Kanel R, von Kanel R. Psychological distress and cardiovascular risk: what are the links? J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2008;52(25):2163- 2165.  
58. Wang X, Robinson KM, Hardin HK. The Impact of Caregiving on Caregivers' Medication Adherence 
and Appointment Keeping. West J Nurs Res. 2015;37(12):1548 -1562.  
59. Sisk RJ. Caregiver burden and health promotion. Int J Nurs Stud. 2000;37(1):37 -43. 
60. Davidson PM, Abernethy AP, Newton PJ, Clark K, Currow DC. The caregiving perspective in heart 
failure: a population based study. BMC health services research. 2013;13:342.  
61. Alosco ML, Spitznagel MB, Cohen R, et al. Reduced cognitive function predicts functional decline in 
patients with heart failure over 12 months. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2014;13(4):304- 310. 
62. Dionne- Odom JN, Kono A, Frost J, et al. Translating and testi ng the ENABLE: CHF -PC concurrent 
palliative care model for older adults with heart failure and their family caregivers. J Palliat Med. 
2014;17(9):995 -1004.  
63. Collins LG, Swartz K. Caregiver care. Am Fam Physician. 2011;83(11):1309- 1317.  
64. Opasich C, Gualco A, De Feo S, et al. Physical and emotional symptom burden of patients with end-
stage heart failure: what to measure, how and why. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2008;9(11):1104-
1108.  
65. Zambroski CH, Moser DK, Bhat G, Ziegler C. Impact of symptom prevalence and symptom burden on 
quality of life in patients with heart failure. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2005;4(3):198- 206. 
66. Pressler SJ, Subramanian U, Kareken D, et al. Cognitive deficits in chronic heart failure. Nurs Res. 
2010;59(2):127 -139. 
67. Chung M L, Lennie TA, Mudd- Martin G, Dunbar SB, Pressler SJ, Moser DK. Depressive symptoms in 
patients with heart failure negatively affect family caregiver outcomes and quality of life. Eur J 
Cardiovasc Nurs. 2016;15(1):30- 38. 
68. Wingham J, Frost J, Britten N, e t al. Needs of caregivers in heart failure management: A qualitative 
study. Chronic illness. 2015;11(4):304 -319. 
69. Sagerian M, Riegel B, Burt S, Yamada A. Caregiver Burden in Hispanic and Non- Hispanic Whites with 
Heart Failure. Paper presented at: Heart Failure Society of America; September, 2002, 2002; Boca 
Raton, FL.  
70. Hupcey JE, Fenstermacher K, Kitko L, Penrod J. Achieving medical stability: Wives' experiences with 
heart failure. Clinical Nursing Research. 2010;19(3):211 -229. 
71. Sigafus M, Riegel B . Riding the Roller -Coaster: Experiences of Caregivers of Adults with Heart Failure. 
Penn- ICOWHI 18th International Congress on Women's Health; "Cities and Women's Health: Global 
Perspectives"; April 7-  10, 2010, 2010; University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.  
72. Freydberg N, Strain L, Tsuyuki RT, McAlister FA, Clark AM. "If he gives in, he will be gone...": the 
influence of work and place on experiences, reactions and self -care of heart failure in rural Canada. 
Social Science & Medicine. 2010;70( 7):1077 -1083.  
73. Buck HG, Harkness K, Wion R, et al. Caregivers' contributions to heart failure self -care: a systematic 
review. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2015;14(1):79 -89. 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 117
74. Luttik ML, Jaarsma T, Veeger NJGM, van Veldhuisen DJ. For better and for worse: Quality of life 
impaired in HF patients as well as in their partners. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2005;4(1):11 -14. 
75. Levenson JW, McCarthy EP, Lynn J, Davis RB, Phillips RS. The last six months of life for patients with 
congestive heart failure. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2000;48(5 Suppl):S101- 109. 
76. Evangelista LS, Stromberg A, Dionne- Odom JN. An integrated review of interventions to improve 
psychological outcomes in caregivers of patients with heart failure. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care. 
2015. 
77. Malik FA, Gysels M, Higginson IJ. Living with breathlessness: a survey of caregivers of breathless 
patients with lung cancer or heart failure. Palliat Med. 2013;27(7):647 -656. 
78. Vellone E, Chung ML, Cocchieri A, Rocco G, Alvaro R, Riegel B. Effe cts of Self -Care on Quality of Life 
in Adults with Heart Failure and Their Spousal Caregivers: Testing Dyadic Dynamics using the Actor -
Partner Interdependence Model. Journal of family nursing. 2014;20(1):120- 141. 
79. Pressler SJ, Jung M, Friedman J. Heart failure and debilitating cardiovascular problems In: Burgio LD, 
Gaugler JE, Hilgeman MM, eds. The spectrum of family caregiving for adults and elders with chronic 
illness . New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2016.  
80. Liljeroos M, Agren S, Jaarsma T, Ar estedt K, Stromberg A. Long -term effects of a dyadic psycho-
educational intervention on caregiver burden and morbidity in partners of patients with heart failure: a 
randomized controlled trial. Quality of life research : an international journal of quality  of life aspects of 
treatment, care and rehabilitation. 2017;26(2):367 -379. 
81. Srisuk N, Cameron J, Ski CF, Thompson DR. Randomized controlled trial of family -based education for 
patients with heart failure and their carers. Journal of advanced nursing. 2 017;73(4):857 -870. 
82. Evangelista LS, Stromberg A, Dionne- Odom JN. An integrated review of interventions to improve 
psychological outcomes in caregivers of patients with heart failure. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care. 
2016;10(1):24 -31. 
83. Piette JD, Strip lin D, Marinec N, Chen J, Aikens JE. A randomized trial of mobile health support for 
heart failure patients and their informal caregivers: impacts on caregiver -reported outcomes. Medical 
care. 2015;53(8):692- 699. 
84. Hughes SL, Weaver FM, Giobbie- Hurder A,  et al. Effectiveness of team -managed home -based primary 
care: a randomized multicenter trial. Journal of the American Medical Association. 2000;284(22):2877-
2885.  
85. Molloy GJ, Johnston DW, Gao C, et al. Effects of an exercise intervention for older hear t failure patients 
on caregiver burden and emotional distress. European Journal of Cardiovascular Prevention & 
Rehabilitation. 2006;13(3):381 -387. 
86. Zarit S, Femia E. Behavioral and psychosocial interventions for family caregivers. Am J Nurs. 
2008;108(9 Suppl):47 -53; quiz 53.  
87. Grant I, McKibbin CL, Taylor MJ, et al. In- home respite intervention reduces plasma epinephrine in 
stressed Alzheimer caregivers. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2003;11(1):62 -72. 
88. Hardy VL, Riffle KL. Support for caregivers of dependent elderly. A support group can help a dependent 
elderly person by helping a caregiver overcome feelings of social isolation. Geriatr Nurs. 
1993;14(3):161 -164. 
89. Hayes L, Hawthorne G, Farhall J, O'Hanlon B, Harvey C. Quality of Life and Social Isolation Among 
Caregivers of Adults with Schizophrenia: Policy and Outcomes. Community mental health journal. 
2015;51(5):591 -597. 
90. Dunbar SB, Jacobson LH, Deaton C. Heart failure: strategies to enhance patient self -management. 
AACN clinical issues. 1998;9(2):244 -256. 
91. Dennis CL, Dowswell T. Psychosocial and psychological interventions for preventing postpartum 
depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;2(2):CD001134.  
92. Thrasher S, Power M, Morant N, Marks I, Dalgleish T. Social support moderates outcome in a 
randomized controlled trial of exposure therapy and (or) cognitive restructuring for chronic 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Canadian journal of psychiatry Revue canadienne de psychiatrie. 
2010;55(3):187 -190. 
93. Chi NC, Demiris G. A systematic review of telehealth tools and interventions to support family 
caregivers. Journal of telemedicine and telecare. 2015;21(1):37 -44. 
94. Hu C, Kung S, Rummans TA, Clark MM, Lapid MI. Reducing caregiver stress with internet -based 
interventions: a systematic review of open -label and randomized controlled trials. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc. 2015;22(e1):e194- 209. 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 118
95. Ryan C, Lewis JM. Computer and Internet Use in the United States: 2015 American Community Survey 
Reports.  U.S. Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics A dministration; September 2017.  
96. Finkelstein SM, Ratner E. Managing chronic disease through home telehealth. Minn Med. 
2006;89(11):42 -45. 
97. Olazaran J, Reisberg B, Clare L, et al. Nonpharmacological therapies in Alzheimer's disease: a 
systematic review  of efficacy. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2010;30(2):161 -178. 
98. Gold M, Siegel J, Russell L, Weinstein M, eds. Cost -effectiveness in health and medicine.  New York, 
NY: Oxford University Press; 1996.  
99. Livingston G, Barber J, Rapaport P, et al. START (S TrAtegies for RelaTives) study: a pragmatic 
randomised controlled trial to determine the clinical effectiveness and cost -effectiveness of a manual -
based coping strategy programme in promoting the mental health of carers of people with dementia. 
Health technology assessment. 2014;18(61):1- 242. 
100. Knapp M, King D, Romeo R, et al. Cost effectiveness of a manual based coping strategy programme in 
promoting the mental health of family carers of people with dementia (the START (STrAtegies for 
RelaTives) study):  a pragmatic randomised controlled trial. Bmj. 2013;347:f6342.  
101. Warmerdam L, Smit F, van Straten A, Riper H, Cuijpers P. Cost -utility and cost -effectiveness of 
internet -based treatment for adults with depressive symptoms: randomized trial. J Med Internet Res. 
2010;12(5):e53.  
102. Joo H, Fang J, Losby JL, Wang G. Cost of informal caregiving for patients with heart failure. Am Heart 
J. 2015;169(1):142 -148.e142.  
103. Lyons KS, Zarit SH, Sayer AG, Whitlatch CJ. Caregiving as a dyadic process: perspectives f rom 
caregiver and receiver. The journals of gerontology Series B, Psychological sciences and social 
sciences. 2002;57(3):P195- 204. 
104. Al-Rawashdeh SY, Lennie TA, Chung ML. Sleep Disturbance Association With Quality of Life in Heart 
Failure Patients -Careg ivers Dyads. West J Nurs Res. 2016.  
105. Bidwell JT, Vellone E, Lyons KS, et al. Determinants of Heart Failure Self -Care Maintenance and 
Management in Patients and Caregivers: A Dyadic Analysis. Res Nurs Health. 2015;38(5):392 -402. 
106. Lee CS, Vellone E, Lyons KS, et al. Patterns and predictors of patient and caregiver engagement in 
heart failure care: a multi -level dyadic study. Int J Nurs Stud. 2015;52(2):588- 597. 
107. Retrum JH, Nowels CT, Bekelman DB. Patient and caregiver congruence: the importance of  dyads in 
heart failure care. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2013;28(2):129- 136. 
108. Agren S, Evangelista LS, Hjelm C, Stromberg A. Dyads affected by chronic heart failure: a randomized 
study evaluating effects of education and psychosocial support to patients with heart failure and their 
partners. Journal of cardiac failure. 2012;18(5):359- 366. 
109. Winter L, Moriarty HJ. Quality of relationship between veterans with traumatic brain injury and their 
family members. Brain Inj. 2017;31(4):493- 501. 
110. Kitko LA, Hupcey  JE, Pinto C, Palese M. Patient and Caregiver Incongruence in Advanced Heart 
Failure. Clin Nurs Res. 2015;24(4):388 -400. 
111. Hopp FP, Marsack C, Camp JK, Thomas S. Go to the hospital or stay at home? A qualitative study of 
expected hospital decision makin g among older African Americans with advanced heart failure. Journal 
of gerontological social work. 2014;57(1):4- 23. 
112. Vellone E, Chung ML, Cocchieri A, Rocco G, Alvaro R, Riegel B. Effects of self -care on quality of life in 
adults with heart failure and their spousal caregivers: testing dyadic dynamics using the actor -partner 
interdependence model. Journal of family nursing. 2014;20(1):120- 141. 
113. Hooker SA, Grigsby ME, Riegel B, Bekelman DB. The Impact of Relationship Quality on Health- Related 
Outcom es in Heart Failure Patients and Informal Family Caregivers: An Integrative Review. J 
Cardiovasc Nurs. 2015;30(4 Suppl 1):S52- 63. 
114. Kociol RD, Liang L, Hernandez AF, et al. Are we targeting the right metric for heart failure? Comparison 
of hospital 30- day readmission rates and total episode of care inpatient days. Am Heart J. 
2013;165(6):987 -994 e981.  
115. Dharmarajan K, Hsieh AF, Lin Z, et al. Diagnoses and timing of 30 -day readmissions after 
hospitalization for heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, or pneumonia. JAMA. 2013;309(4):355-
363. 
116. Dunlay SM, Redfield MM, Weston SA, et al. Hospitalizations after heart failure diagnosis a community 
perspective. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54(18):1695 -1702.  
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 119
117. Ross JS, Chen J, Lin Z, et al. Recent national  trends in readmission rates after heart failure 
hospitalization. Circ Heart Fail. 2010;3(1):97- 103. 
118. Kazi DS, Mark DB. The economics of heart failure. Heart Fail Clin. 2013;9(1):93- 106. 
119. Heidenreich PA, Albert NM, Allen LA, et al. Forecasting the Impact of Heart Failure in the United 
States: A Policy Statement From the American Heart Association. Circ Heart Fail. 2013.  
120. Jencks SF, Williams MV, Coleman EA. Rehospitalizations among patients in the Medicare fee -for-
service program. NEnglJMed. 2009;360(14):1418 -1428.  
121. Lazarus R, Folkman S. Stress, appraisal and coping.  New York: Springer; 1984.  
122. Glanz K, Schwartz MD. Stress, coping, and health behavior. In: Glanz K, Rimer BK, Viswanath K, eds. 
Health Behavior and Health Education: Theory, Research, and Practice . 4th ed. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey -Bass; 2008.  
123. Clark AP, McDougall G, Riegel B, et al. Health Status and Self -care Outcomes After an Education -
Support Intervention for People With Chronic Heart Failure. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2015;30( 4 Suppl 1):S3-
13. 
124. Lee CS, Suwanno J, Riegel B. The relationship between self -care and health status domains in Thai 
patients with heart failure. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2009;8(4):259 -266. 
125. Piette JD, Striplin D, Marinec N, et al. A Mobile Health In tervention Supporting Heart Failure Patients 
and Their Informal Caregivers: A Randomized Comparative Effectiveness Trial. J Med Internet Res. 
2015;17(6):e142.  
126. Williams VP, Bishop -Fitzpatrick L, Lane JD, et al. Video- based coping skills to reduce healt h risk and 
improve psychological and physical well -being in Alzheimer's disease family caregivers. Psychosom 
Med. 2010;72(9):897- 904. 
127. Schulz R, Sherwood PR. Physical and mental health effects of family caregiving. Am J Nurs. 
2008;108(9 Suppl):23 -27; q uiz 27.  
128. Saunders MM. Factors associated with caregiver burden in heart failure family caregivers. West J Nurs 
Res. 2008;30(8):943 -959. 
129. Schwarz KA, Dunphy G. An examination of perceived stress in family caregivers of older adults with 
heart failur e. Experimental aging research. 2003;29(2):221- 235. 
130. Ogbera A, Adeyemi -Doro A. Emotional distress is associated with poor self care in type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. J Diabetes. 2011;3(4):348 -352. 
131. Epel ES. Psychological and metabolic stress: a recipe f or accelerated cellular aging? Hormones 
(Athens). 2009;8(1):7- 22. 
132. Olson KE, O'Brien MA, Rogers WA, Charness N. Diffusion of Technology: Frequency of Use for 
Younger and Older Adults. Ageing international. 2011;36(1):123 -145. 
133. Mitzner TL, Boron JB,  Fausset CB, et al. Older Adults Talk Technology: Technology Usage and 
Attitudes. Computers in human behavior. 2010;26(6):1710- 1721.  
134. Hall AK, Stellefson M, Bernhardt JM. Healthy Aging 2.0: the potential of new media and technology. 
Prev Chronic Dis. 2 012;9:E67.  
135. Schulz R, Wahl HW, Matthews JT, De Vito Dabbs A, Beach SR, Czaja SJ. Advancing the Aging and 
Technology Agenda in Gerontology. Gerontologist. 2015;55(5):724- 734. 
136. Joyce K, Loe M. A sociological approach to ageing, technology and health.  Sociology of health & 
illness. 2010;32(2):171 -180. 
137. Harris J, Regmi S. Ageism and equality. J Med Ethics. 2012;38(5):263 -266. 
138. Bowles K, Hanlon A, Glick HA, et al. Clinical Effectiveness, Access to and Satisfaction with Care using 
a Telehomecare S ubstitution Intervention: A Randomized Controlled Trial. International Journal of 
Telemedicine and Applications. 2011:1 -13. 
139. Bowles KH, Riegel B, Weiner MG, Glick H, Naylor MD. The effect of telehomecare on heart failure self 
care. AMIA Annu Symp Proc.  2010;2010:71- 75. 
140. Bowles KH, Riegel B, Weiner MG, Glick H, Naylor MD. The Effect of Telehealth on Heart Failure Self 
Care. American Medical Informatics Association Annual Symposium Proceedings 2010:71- 75. 
141. Dickson VV, Knafl GJ, Wald J, Riegel B. Racial Differences in Clinical Treatment and Self -Care 
Behaviors of Adults With Chronic Heart Failure. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4(4).  
142. Riegel BB, Dickson VV, Knafl GJ, Wald J. Racial differences in clinical treatment and self -care 
behaviors of adults with chronic heart failure. European Journal of Heart Failure. 2015;17:168 -168. 
143. Riegel B, Hanlon AL, Zhang X, et al. What is the Best Measure of Daytime Sleepiness in Adults with 
Heart Failure? J Amer Acad Nurs Pract. 2013;25(5):272 -279. 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 120
144. Tkacs NC, Pien G, Hanlon AL, et al. Assessing the interaction between sleep, stress, and 
catecholamines - a home- based feasibility study. 2011.  
145. Brewster G, Hirschman K, Riegel B, et al. Association of Health- Related Quality of Life Domains with 
Daytime Sleepiness  among Older Adult Recipients of Long -Term Services and Supports. under review.  
146. Riegel B, Dickson VV, Hoke L, McMahon JP, Reis BF, Sayers S. A motivational counseling approach to 
improving heart failure self -care: mechanisms of effectiveness. J Cardio vasc Nurs. 2006;21(3):232- 241. 
147. Masterson Creber R, Patey M, Dickson VV, DeCesaris M, Riegel B. Motivational Interviewing Tailored 
Interventions for Heart Failure (MITI -HF): study design and methods. Contemp Clin Trials. 2015;41:62-
68. 
148. Riegel B, L ee CS, Dickson VV, Carlson B. An update on the self -care of heart failure index. J 
Cardiovasc Nurs. 2009;24(6):485- 497. 
149. Masterson Creber R, Patey M, Lee CS, Kuan A, Riegel B. Motivational Interviewing Tailored 
Interventions for Heart Failure (MITI -HF): Randomized Controlled Trial. Patient Educ Couns. 2015.  
150. Riegel B, Christiansen K, Fontana S, et al. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy by iPad for Caregivers: A Pilot 
Study. 2013; Heart Failure Society of America.  
151. Bowles KH, Dansky KH. Teaching self -management of diabetes via telehomecare. Home Healthc 
Nurse. 2002;20(1):36- 42. 
152. Bowles KH, Baugh AC. Applying research evidence to optimize telehomecare. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 
2007;22(1):5 -15. 
153. Bowles KH, Hanlon AL, Glick HA, et al. Clinical effectiven ess, access to, and satisfaction with care 
using a telehomecare substitution intervention: a randomized controlled trial. Int J Telemed Appl. 
2011;2011:540138.  
154. Schrank B, Ebert -Vogel A, Amering M, et al. Gender differences in caregiver burden and its 
determinants in family members of terminally ill cancer patients. Psychooncology. 2016;25(7):808 -814. 
155. Eyre V, Lang CC, Smith K, et al. Rehabilitation Enablement in Chronic Heart Failure- a facilitated self -
care rehabilitation intervention in patients w ith heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (REACH -
HFpEF) and their caregivers: rationale and protocol for a single- centre pilot randomised controlled trial. 
BMJ Open. 2016;6(10):e012853.  
156. Baldwin BA, Kleeman KM, Stevens GL, Rasin J. Family caregiver stress: clinical assessment and 
management. International psychogeriatrics / IPA. 1989;1(2):185- 194. 
157. Schulz CH, Godwin KM, Hersch GI, Hyde LK, Irabor JJ, Ostwald SK. Return to work predictors of 
stroke survivors and their spousal caregivers. Work. 2017;57(1):111- 124. 
158. Riegel B, Glaser D, Richards K, et al. Modifiable factors associated with sleep dysfunction in adults with 
heart failure. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2012;11(4):402- 409. 
159. Riegel B, Lee CS, Ratcliffe SJ, et al. Predictors of objec tively measured medication nonadherence in 
adults with heart failure. Circ Heart Fail. 2012;5(4):430 -436. 
160. Riegel B, Moelter ST, Ratcliffe SJ, et al. Excessive daytime sleepiness is associated with poor 
medication adherence in adults with heart failure. Journal of cardiac failure. 2011;17(4):340 -348. 
161. Riegel B, Ratcliffe SJ, Weintraub WS, et al. Double jeopardy: the influence of excessive daytime 
sleepiness and impaired cognition on health -related quality of life in adults with heart failure. European 
Journal of Heart Failure. 2012;14(7):730 -736. 
162. Braunstein JB, Anderson GF, Gerstenblith G, al. e. Noncardiac comorbidity increases preventable 
hospitalizations and mortality among Medicare beneficiaries with chronic heart failure. J Am College 
Cardi ology. 2003;42(7):1226- 1233.  
163. Ceia F, Fonseca C, Mota T, et al. Aetiology, comorbidity and drug therapy of chronic heart failure in the 
real world: the EPICA substudy. European Journal of Heart Failure. 2004;6(6):801- 806. 
164. Page RL, 2nd, Lindenfeld J. The comorbidity conundrum: a focus on the role of noncardiovascular 
chronic conditions in the heart failure patient. Current cardiology reports. 2012;14(3):276 -284. 
165. Charlson M, Pompei P, Ales K, MacKenzie C. A new method of classifying prognostic c omorbidity in 
longitudinal studies: Development and validation. J Chronic Dis. 1987;40:373- 383. 
166. Riegel B, Dickson VV, Garcia LE, Masterson Creber R, Streur M. Mechanisms of change in self -care in 
adults with heart failure receiving a tailored, motivat ional interviewing intervention. Patient Educ Couns. 
2016.  
167. Riegel B, Masterson Creber R, Hill J, Chittams J, Hoke L. Effectiveness of Motivational Interviewing in 
Decreasing Hospital Readmission in Adults With Heart Failure and Multimorbidity. Clin Nu rs Res. 
2016;25(4):362 -377. 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 121
168. Brandt J, Folstein MF. Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status. Psychological Assessment Resources, 
Inc.; 2003.  
169. Cossette S, Frasure- Smith N, Dupuis J, Juneau M, Guertin MC. Randomized controlled trial of tailored 
nursing interventions to improve cardiac rehabilitation enrollment. Nurs Res. 2012;61(2):111 -120. 
170. Pinquart M, Sorensen S. Helping caregivers of persons with dementia: which interventions work and 
how large are their effects? International Psychogeriatrics . 2006;18(4):577 -595. 
171. Buchanan RJ, Radin D, Huang C. Burden among male caregivers assisting people with multiple 
sclerosis. Gend Med. 2010;7(6):637 -646. 
172. Coe M, Neufeld A. Male caregivers' use of formal support. West J Nurs Res. 1999;21(4):568 -588. 
173. Hubbell L, Hubbell K. The burnout risk for male caregivers in providing care to spouses afflicted with 
Alzheimer's disease. J Health Hum Serv Adm. 2002;25(1):115 -132. 
174. Pierce LL, Steiner V. What are male caregivers talking about? Top Stroke Rehabil. 2004;11(2):77 -83. 
175. Sanders S. Experiences of rural male caregivers of older adults with their informal support networks. 
Journal of gerontological social work. 2007;49(4):97- 115. 
176. Duggleby W, Williams A, Ghosh S, et al. Factors influencing changes in health related quality of life of 
caregivers of persons with multiple chronic conditions. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2016;14:81.  
177. Zivin K, Kales HC. Adherence to depression treatment in older adults: a narrative review. Drugs Aging. 
2008;25(7): 559-571. 
178. Pocock SJ, Simon R. Sequential treatment assignment with balancing for prognostic factors in the 
controlled clinical trial. Biometrics. 1975;31(1):103 -115. 
179. Rausch SM, Baker K, Boonmee J. Sleep disturbances in caregivers of patients with end- stage 
congestive heart failure: Part I --The problem. Prog Cardiovasc Nurs. 2007;22(1):38 -40. 
180. Bennett HD, Coleman EA, Parry C, Bodenheimer T, Chen EH. Health coaching for patients with chronic 
illness. Fam Pract Manag. 2010;17(5):24 -29. 
181. Olsen JM. Health coaching: a concept analysis. Nurs Forum. 2014;49(1):18- 29. 
182. Huffman M. Using motivational interviewing: through evidence- based health coaching. Home Healthc 
Nurse. 2014;32(9):543- 548. 
183. Hibbard JH, Mahoney E. Toward a theory of patient and consumer activation. Patient Educ Couns. 
2010;78(3):377 -381. 
184. Lauver DR, Ward SE, Heidrich SM, et al. Patient -centered interventions. Res Nurs Health. 
2002;25(4):246 -255. 
185. Resnicow K, McMaster F, Rollnick S. Action reflections: a client -centered technique to bridge the WHY -
HOW transition in Motivational Interviewing. Behav Cogn Psychother. 2012;40(4):474 -480. 
186. Hibbard JH, Mahoney ER, Stock R, Tusler M. Do increases in patient activation result in improved self -
management behaviors? Health Ser v Res. 2007;42(4):1443- 1463.  
187. Demonceau J, Ruppar T, Kristanto P, et al. Identification and assessment of adherence- enhancing 
interventions in studies assessing medication adherence through electronically compiled drug dosing 
histories: a systematic li terature review and meta -analysis. Drugs. 2013;73(6):545- 562. 
188. Masterson Creber R, Patey M, Lee CS, Kuan A, Jurgens C, Riegel B. Motivational interviewing to 
improve self -care for patients with chronic heart failure: MITI -HF randomized controlled trial . Patient 
Educ Couns. 2016;99(2):256- 264. 
189. Sefcik JS, Petrovsky D, Streur M, et al. "In our corner": A qualitative descriptive study of patient 
engagement in a community -based care coordination program. Clinical Nursing Research. 2016:1 -20. 
190. Murtaugh CM, Deb P, Zhu C, et al. Reducing Readmissions among Heart Failure Patients Discharged 
to Home Health Care: Effectiveness of Early and Intensive Nursing Services and Early Physician 
Follow -Up. Health Serv Res. 2016.  
191. Sidhu MS, Daley A, Jordan R, et al. Patient self -management in primary care patients with mild COPD -  
protocol of a randomised controlled trial of telephone health coaching. BMC Pulm Med. 2015;15:16.  
192. Ryan P, Lauver DR. The efficacy of tailored interventions. J Nurs Scholarsh. 2002;34(4):331 -337. 
193. Brodaty H, Green A, Koschera A. Meta- analysis of psychosocial interventions for caregivers of people 
with dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003;51(5):657 -664. 
194. Doherty LC, Fitzsimons D, McIlfatrick SJ. Carers' needs in advanced heart fail ure: A systematic 
narrative review. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2015.  
195. Mauldon M, Melkus G, Cagganello M. Tomando Control: a culturally appropriate diabetes education 
program for spanish- speaking indviduals with type 2 diabetes mellitus - evaluation of a pil ot project. The 
Diabetes Educator. 2006;32(5):751 -760. 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 122
196. Steinhardt M, Mamerow M, Brown S, Jolly C. A reslience intervention in African American adults with 
type 2 diabetes: A pilot study of efficacy. The Diabetes Educator. 2009;35(2):274- 284. 
197. Taylor BJ, Irish LA, Martire LM, et al. Avoidant Coping and Poor Sleep Efficiency in Dementia 
Caregivers. Psychosom Med. 2015;77(9):1050- 1057.  
198. Ghandeharioun A, Azaria A, Taylor S, Picard RW. "Kind and Grateful": A Context -Sensitive 
Smartphone App Utilizin g Inspirational Content to Promote Gratitude. Psychology of well -being. 
2016;6:9.  
199. O'Leary K, Dockray S. The effects of two novel gratitude and mindfulness interventions on well -being. 
Journal of alternative and complementary medicine (New York, NY). 2 015;21(4):243 -245. 
200. Kini P, Wong J, McInnis S, Gabana N, Brown JW. The effects of gratitude expression on neural activity. 
NeuroImage. 2016;128:1 -10. 
201. Newman CF, Beck JS. Selecting, Training, and Supervising Therapists. In: Nezu AM, Nezu CM, eds. 
Evidence- based outcome research: A practical guide to conducting randomized controlled trials for 
psychosocial interventions . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 2008:245- 262. 
202. Michie S, Ashford S, Sniehotta FF, Dombrowski SU, Bishop A, French DP. A re fined taxonomy of 
behaviour change techniques to help people change their physical activity and healthy eating 
behaviours: the CALO -RE taxonomy. Psychol Health. 2011;26(11):1479 -1498.  
203. Dansky KH, Palmer L, Shea D, Bowles KH. Cost analysis of telehomeca re. Telemedicine journal and e-
health : the official journal of the American Telemedicine Association. 2001;7(3):225- 232. 
204. Dansky KH, Bowles KH. Lessons learned from a telehomecare project. Caring. 2002;21(4):18 -22. 
205. Dansky KH, Bowles KH, Palmer L.  Clinical outcomes of telehomecare for diabetic patients receiving 
home care. The journal on information technology in healthcare. 2003;1(1):61- 74. 
206. Dansky KH, Vasey J, Bowles K. Impact of telehealth on clinical outcomes in patients with heart failure.  
Clin Nurs Res. 2008;17(3):182 -199. 
207. Dansky KH, Vasey J, Bowles K. Use of telehealth by older adults to manage heart failure. Res Gerontol 
Nurs. 2008;1(1):25- 32. 
208. Dansky KH, Bowles KH. Impact of telehealth on heart failure outcomes. Circulation. 2007;113(21):794.  
209. Bellg AJ, Borrelli B, Resnick B, et al. Enhancing treatment fidelity in health behavior change studies: 
best practices and recommendations from the NIH Behavior Change Consortium. Health Psychol. 
2004;23(5):443 -451. 
210. Resnick B, Bel lg AJ, Borrelli B, et al. Examples of Implementation and Evaluation of Treatment Fidelity 
in the BCC Studies: Where We Are and Where We Need to Go. Ann Behav Med. 2005;29(2 Suppl):46-
54. 
211. Spillane V, Byrne MC, Byrne M, Leathem CS, O'Malley M, Cupples M E. Monitoring treatment fidelity in 
a randomized controlled trial of a complex intervention. Journal of advanced nursing. 2007;60(3):343-
352. 
212. Devilly GJ, Borkovec TD. Psychometric properties of the credibility/expectancy questionnaire. Journal 
of behavior therapy and experimental psychiatry. 2000;31(2):73 -86. 
213. Vos-Vromans DC, Smeets RJ, Rijnders LJ, et al. Cognitive behavioural therapy versus multidisciplinary 
rehabilitation treatment for patients with chronic fatigue syndrome: study protocol for a randomised 
controlled trial (FatiGo). Trials. 2012;13:71.  
214. Ljotsson B, Hedman E, Andersson E, et al. Internet -delivered exposure- based treatment vs. stress 
management for irritable bowel syndrome: a randomized trial. The American journal of 
gastroenterology. 2011;106(8):1481- 1491.  
215. Bova C, Jaffarian C, Crawford S, Quintos JB, Lee M, Sullivan- Bolyai S. Intervention Fidelity: Monitoring 
Drift, Providing Feedback, and Assessing the Control Condition. Nurs Res. 2017;66(1):54 -59. 
216. Luttik ML, Jaarsma T, Tijssen JG, et al. The objective burden in partners of heart failure patients; 
development and initial validation of the Dutch Objective Burden Inventory. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 
2008;7(1):3 -9. 
217. Makdessi A, Harkness K, Luttik ML, McKelvie RS. The Dutch Objective Burden Inventory: validity and 
reliability in a Canadian population of caregivers for people with heart failure. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 
2011;10(4):234 -240. 
218. Hwang B, Fleischmann KE, Howie- Esquivel J, Stotts NA, Dracup K. Caregiving for patients with heart 
failure: impact on patients' families. American journal of critical care : an official publication, American 
Association of Critical -Care Nurses. 2011;20(6):431- 442. 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 123
219. Walker SN, Sechrist KR, Pender NJ. The Health -Promoting Lifestyle P rofile: development and 
psychometric characteristics. Nurs Res. 1987;36(2):76 -81. 
220. Sheldon Cohen: award for distinguished scientific contributions. The American psychologist. 
2004;59(8):673 -675. 
221. Anderson MI, Simpson GK, Daher M, Matheson L. Chapte r 7 the relationship between coping and 
psychological adjustment in family caregivers of individuals with traumatic brain injury: a systematic 
review. Annual review of nursing research. 2015;33:219- 247. 
222. Aschbacher K, Patterson TL, von Kanel R, et al. Coping processes and hemostatic reactivity to acute 
stress in dementia caregivers. Psychosom Med. 2005;67(6):964 -971. 
223. Papastavrou E, Tsangari H, Karayiannis G, Papacostas S, Efstathiou G, Sourtzi P. Caring and coping: 
the dementia caregivers. Aging & mental health. 2011;15(6):702 -711. 
224. Sander AM, Davis LC, Struchen MA, et al. Relationship of race/ethnicity to caregivers' coping, 
appraisals, and distress after traumatic brain injury. NeuroRehabilitation. 2007;22(1):9 -17. 
225. Washington KT, Rakes CR . Coping Responses Among Hospice Family Caregivers: A Confirmatory 
Factor Analysis. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2015;50(6):867- 873. 
226. Gandek B, Sinclair SJ, Kosinski M, Ware JE, Jr. Psychometric evaluation of the SF- 36 health survey in 
Medicare managed care.  Health Care Financ Rev. 2004;25(4):5 -25. 
227. Griva K, Goh CS, Kang WC, et al. Quality of life and emotional distress in patients and burden in 
caregivers: a comparison between assisted peritoneal dialysis and self -care peritoneal dialysis. Quality 
of life research : an international journal of quality of life aspects of treatment, care and rehabilitation. 
2015.  
228. Martin J, Padierna A, Aguirre U, Gonzalez N, Munoz P, Quintana JM. Predictors of quality of life and 
caregiver burden among maternal and paternal caregivers of patients with eating disorders. Psychiatry 
Res. 2013;210(3):1107 -1115.  
229. Lawrence RH, Tennstedt SL, Assmann SF. Quality of the caregiver --care recipient relationship: does it 
offset negative consequences of caregiving for family careg ivers? Psychol Aging. 1998;13(1):150 -158. 
230. Gold R, Cottrell E, Bunce A, et al. Developing Electronic Health Record (EHR) Strategies Related to 
Health Center Patients' Social Determinants of Health. J Am Board Fam Med. 2017;30(4):428- 447. 
231. Walker RJ , Gebregziabher M, Martin- Harris B, Egede LE. Understanding the influence of psychological 
and socioeconomic factors on diabetes self -care using structured equation modeling. Patient Educ 
Couns. 2015;98(1):34 -40. 
232. Walker RJ, Smalls BL, Egede LE. Social  determinants of health in adults with type 2 diabetes --
Contribution of mutable and immutable factors. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015;110(2):193 -201. 
233. Patel MR, Piette JD, Resnicow K, Kowalski -Dobson T, Heisler M. Social Determinants of Health, Cost -
related Nonadherence, and Cost -reducing Behaviors Among Adults With Diabetes: Findings From the 
National Health Interview Survey. Medical care. 2016;54(8):796 -803. 
234. Hill KE, Gleadle JM, Pulvirenti M, McNaughton DA. The social determinants of health for people with 
type 1 diabetes that progress to end -stage renal disease. Health Expect. 2015;18(6):2513 -2521.  
235. Centers NAoCH. PRAPARE Implementation and Action Toolkit. 2017. Accessed Jan 11, 2018.  
236. Brazil K, Kaasalainen S, Williams A, Rodriguez C. Comparing the experiences of rural and urban family 
caregivers of the terminally ill. Rural and remote health. 2013;13(1):2250.  
237. Wong SY, Wong CK, Chan FW, et al. Chronic psychosocial stress: does it modulate immunity to the 
influenza vaccine in Hong Kong Chinese elderly caregivers? Age. 2012.  
238. Rokach A, Findler L, Chin J, Lev S, Kollender Y. Cancer patients, their caregivers and coping with 
loneliness. Psychology, health & medicine. 2012.  
239. Davis LC, Sander AM, Struchen MA, Sherer M, Nakase -Richards on R, Malec JF. Medical and 
psychosocial predictors of caregiver distress and perceived burden following traumatic brain injury. The 
Journal of head trauma rehabilitation. 2009;24(3):145- 154. 
240. Sander AM, Sherer M, Malec JF, et al. Preinjury emotional and family functioning in caregivers of 
persons with traumatic brain injury. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation. 2003;84(2):197-
203. 
241. Katz JN, Chang LC, Sangha O, Fossel AH, Bates DW. Can comorbidity be measured by questionnaire 
rather than medical record review? Medical care. 1996;34(1):73 -84. 
242. Organization. WH. World Health Organization Health and Performance Questionnaire (HPQ): Clinical 
Trials Baseline Version. 2002.  
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 124
243. Kessler RC, Ames M, Hymel PA, et al. Using the World Health O rganization Health and Work 
Performance Questionnaire (HPQ) to evaluate the indirect workplace costs of illness. J Occup Environ 
Med. 2004;46(6 Suppl):S23- 37. 
244. Luo N, Wang P, Fu AZ, Johnson JA, Coons SJ. Preference- based SF- 6D scores derived from the S F-
36 and SF- 12 have different discriminative power in a population health survey. Medical care. 
2012;50(7):627 -632. 
245. (NQF) NQF. Preferred Practices and Performance Measures for Measuring and Reporting Care 
Coordination: A Consensus Report. Washington, DC2010.  
246. Krumholz HM, Keenan PS, Brush JE, Jr., et al. Standards for measures used for public reporting of 
efficiency in health care: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association Interdisciplinary 
Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes R esearch and the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation. Circulation. 2008;118(18):1885 -1893.  
247. Goodlin SJ. Palliative care in congestive heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54(5):386 -396. 
248. Wasywich CA, Gamble GD, Whalley GA, Doughty RN. Unders tanding changing patterns of survival 
and hospitalization for heart failure over two decades in New Zealand: utility of 'days alive and out of 
hospital' from epidemiological data. Eur J Heart Fail. 2010;12(5):462 -468. 
249. Binanay C, Califf RM, Hasselblad V, et al. Evaluation study of congestive heart failure and pulmonary 
artery catheterization effectiveness: the ESCAPE trial. JAMA. 2005;294(13):1625 -1633.  
250. Ariti CA, Cleland JG, Pocock SJ, et al. Days alive and out of hospital and the patient journey i n patients 
with heart failure: Insights from the candesartan in heart failure: assessment of reduction in mortality 
and morbidity (CHARM) program. Am Heart J. 2011;162(5):900 -906. 
251. Stewart S, Ball J, Horowitz JD, et al. Standard versus atrial fibrillat ion-specific management strategy 
(SAFETY) to reduce recurrent admission and prolong survival: pragmatic, multicentre, randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2014;385:775 -784. 
252. Harris PA, Taylor, R. , Thielke, R., Payne, J., Gonzalez, N., & Conde, J.G. Research electronic data 
capture (REDCap) -A metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational 
research informatics support. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 2009;42(2):377 -381. 
253. Falissard B, Lukasiewicz M, Corruble E. The MDP 75: a new approach in the determination of the 
minimal clinically meaningful difference in a scale or a questionnaire. J Clin Epidemiol. 2003;56(7):618-
621. 
254. Gleason TC, Staelin R. Proposal for Handling Missing Data. Psychometrika. 1975;40(2):229 -252. 
255. Little RJA, Rubin DB. Statistical analysis with missing data.  2nd ed. New Jersey: Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 
2002.  
256. Roth PL. Missing data: A conceptual review for applied psychologists. Personnel Psychology. 
1994;47:537 -560. 
257. Schafer JL, Graham JW. M issing data: Our view of the state of the art. Psychological Methods. 
2002;7(2):147 -177. 
258. Lavori PW, Dawson R, Shera D. A multiple imputation strategy for clinical trials with truncation of 
patient data. Statistics in Medicine. 1995;14:1913 -1925.  
259. Crawford SL, Tennstedt SL, McKinlay JB. A comparison of analytic methods for non -random 
missingness of outcome data. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 1995;48(2):209 -219. 
260. Little RJA. Modeling the drop- out rate mechanism in repeated measures studies. Journal of American 
Statistical Association. 1995;90:1112 -1121.  
261. Laird NM. Missing data in longitudinal studies. Statistics in Medicine. 1988;7:305 -315. 
262. Little RJA. A class of pattern- mixture models for normal incomplete data. Biometrika. 1994(81): 471-
483. 
263. Molenberghs G, Thijs H JI, Beunckens C, Kenward MG, Mallinckrodt C, Carroll RJ. Analyzing 
incomplete longitudinal clinical trial data. Biostatistics. 2004;5:445- 464. 
264. Verbeke G, Molenberghs G, Thijs H, Lesaffre E, Kenward MG. Sensitivity analysis for nonrandom 
dropout: a local influence approach. Biometrics. 2001;57(1):7 -14. 
265. Littell RC, Milliken GA, Stroup WW, Wolfinger RD. SAS System for Mixed Models.  Cary, NC: SAS 
Institute; 1996.  
266. Gueorguieva R, Krystal JH. Move over ANOVA: pro gress in analyzing repeated- measures data and its 
reflection in papers published in the Archives of General Psychiatry. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2004;61(3):310 -317. 
267. Aiken L, West S. Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting interactions.  Newbury Park:  Sage; 1991.  
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 125
268. Bryk AS, & Raudenbush, S.W. . Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data analysis methods.  
Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1992.  
269. Laird NM, Ware JH. Random -effects models for longitudinal data. Biometrics. 1982;38(4):963 -974. 
270. Dunt on GF, Tscherne J, Rodriguez D. Factorial validity and gender invariance of the physical activity 
enjoyment scale (PACES) in older adolescents. Res Q Exerc Sport. 2009;80(1):117 -121. 
271. Benjamini Y, Drai D, Elmer G, Kafkafi N, Golani I. Controlling the f alse discovery rate in behavior 
genetics research. Behavioural brain research. 2001;125(1 -2):279- 284. 
272. Akaike H. A new look at statistical model identification. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control. 
1974;19:716 -723. 
273. Office of the Inspector Gener al. Medicaid Drug Price Comparison: Average Sales Price To Average 
Wholesale Price, . Department of Health & Human Services (DHHS); 2005.  
274. Khandelwal N, Benkeser DC, Coe NB, Curtis JR. Potential Influence of Advance Care Planning and 
Palliative Care Co nsultation on ICU Costs for Patients With Chronic and Serious Illness. Crit Care Med. 
2016;44(8):1474 -1481.  
275. Khandelwal N, Engelberg RA, Benkeser DC, Coe NB, Curtis JR. End -of-life expenditure in the ICU and 
perceived quality of dying. Chest. 2014;146( 6):1594- 1603.  
276. Glick HA, Doshi JA, Sonnad SS, Polsky D. Economic Evaluation in Clinical Trials.  2nd ed. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press; 2015.  
277. Efron B, Tibshirani RJ. An Introduction to the Bootstrap.  Vol 57. New York, NY: Chapman Hall; 1993.  
278. Mooney CZ, Duval RD. Bootstrapping: A Nonparametric Approach to Statistical Inference.  Vol 95. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1993.  
279. Vaida F, Xu R. Proportional hazards model with random effects. Stat Med. 2000;19(24):3309- 3324.  
280. Yau KK, McGilchrist CA. ML and REML estimation in survival analysis with time dependent correlated 
frailty. Stat Med. 1998;17(11):1201- 1213.  
281. Zeger SL, Liang K. Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models. Biometrics. 
1986;73(1):13 -22. 
282. Rayens MK, Svava rsdottir EK. A new methodological approach in nursing research: an actor, partner, 
and interaction effect model for family outcomes. Res Nurs Health. 2003;26(5):409- 419. 
283. Freedland KE, Mohr DC, Davidson KW, Schwartz JE. Usual and unusual care: existing  practice control 
groups in randomized controlled trials of behavioral interventions. Psychosomatic Medicine. 
2011;73(4):323 -335. 
 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
References Cited                                                                                              
 Page 126
Recruitment and Retention Plan  
 
We plan to enroll a consecutive sample of 250 informal caregivers (125/arm)  of heart failure 
(HF) patients  (HF caregivers). The main enrolment site is  the Penn Heart and Vascular Center 
(PHVC), the largest outpatient HF clinic in the Philadelphia region and a site at which the 
Principal Investigator ( PI) has established relationships and success in past recruitment of 
participants.  If recruitment is slow er than expected, we will identify caregivers visiting HF 
patients hospitalized at one of three University of Pennsylvania Health System (UPHS) sites .  
 
We anticipate identi fying 100 unique HF patients each month, most of whom will have 
caregivers. Based on our prior research, we anticipate that 90 will have caregivers and 70% of 
these (63 caregivers) will be eligible, and 15% will enroll. Thus, we estimate enrolling 10 
careg ivers per month. Using this number, w e anticipating needing at least 25 months for 
enrollment, but we  have conservatively allowed 30 months for enrollment and five years to 
complete the study.  
 
In addition to caregivers, we want to enroll at least 40 caregiver -patient dyads . We understand 
the chal lenges of enrolling dyads, but 40 dyads is sufficient to provide reliable parameter 
estimates  for this exploratory aim . The effort of HF patient participants is minimal. They  will not 
receive an intervention. They will be asked to provide informed consent to allow us to acc ess 
their electronic medical record ( EMR ) to collect clinical information and track events and, in the 
case that patients receive care outside the Penn health system, for the caregiver to report on 
patient health care resource use . At the end of the study period (12 months), the HF patients will 
be asked to provide data on quality adjusted life years (QALYs).  
 
We will have a study Research Assistant (RA) on site during PHVC clinic hours so that the RA 
can meet the informal caregiver  in person because we anticipate that a face- to-face meeting will 
maximize enrollment . We plan to seek a HIPAA waiver to screen the daily appointment 
schedule to identify every patient with a potentially eligible caregiver (e.g., living within 50 miles 
of the research office). Dr. Wald, a co -investigator on the study, will ask clinic staff to identify 
potential caregiver participants (e.g., speak English) and determine their willingness to  speak  
with research staff about the study.  
 
To facilitate the engagement of clinic staff, we will meet with them before the study begins to tell 
them about the study. We will bring lunch to compensate their time in talking with us . We will 
use that forum to build enthusiasm about the study. We wil l hold similar events throughout the 
enrollment period to assure that engagement of staff in enrollment does not wane. During these subsequent events, we will update the clinic staff on our progress.   
 
We will prepare informational materials for the clinic  staff to use to engage the interest of 
informal caregivers. These materials will use clear and simple language with graphics  that 
portray caregivers of diff erent ages and races . We will place these materials in the waiting 
rooms, at the front desk, and in all the examination rooms. Research staff will make  sure that 
these materials are consistently available.  
 If we need to enroll from the hospital  because enrollment is not sufficiently brisk in the clinic , an 
RA will be available in the hospital daily to give interested caregivers study information and conduct screening. We will obtain a HIPAA waiver to allow us t o screen the daily admission log 
to identify every HF patient with a potentially eligible caregiver (e.g., living within 50 miles of the 
research office). We will engage hospital staff in a manner to that described above for clinic 
staff. 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Recruitment and Retention Plan                                                                                
 Page 91
 
We recognize that  some caregivers will learn about the study in the clinic or hospital but not 
decide to participate until after they are home. For these situations, we will have a dedicated telephone number and email  address for potential participants to learn more about the study . 
Anyone who contacts us in this manner will receive a response within 48 hours.  
 If we find that we are unable to recruit a diverse racial/ethnic sample , we will identify additional 
community agencies  and other clinics that serve different racial and ethnic populations. We will 
work with staff at those clinics t o facilitate successfully on-site recruitment . Recruitment flyers 
will reflect images and language that speak  to a diverse population.  
 Our training of staff will emphasize good clinical practice in working with study participants. Staff 
training will include developing cultural competency (cultural awareness, knowledge, and skills) in working with diverse populations, participant rec ruitment, and follow -up activities. Our goal is 
to minimize language and communication problems to support retention and engagement. For example, we will make sure that the reading materials are written at a basic reading level. Print 
will be sufficiently large to accommodate age-related vision changes. Regular staff meetings will 
provide further opportunity for continued cultural competency training and discussion.  
 
From experience, we recognize that identifying the ideal way to recruit participants is 
challenging. Issues that impede enrolment include lack of staff engagement, resistance from 
unexpected sources, and RA staff turnover. We will meet with research staff at least weekly to 
monitor these issues and any others that arise. We will monitor our processes intensely until we 
have identified a successful method of enrolling caregivers. Thereafter, we will continue to 
monitor our processes regularly.  
 
Retention 
Once enrolled, it is important that we keep participants in the study for the full 12 months. We 
will monitor retention regularly and discuss retention trends at monthly meetings of the full study 
team. Our plans to accomplish this goal address contact frequency, tokens of appreciation, 
newsletters, and remuneration.  
 
We will contact all participants at 3 month  intervals by telephone for data collection. We will use 
these calls as a method to keep participants engaged. On enrollment, we will c learly expl ain the 
requirements of the study to all participants.  We will specify that we need to speak with them 
every 3 months, asking “ What is the best way for me to contact you?”  We will o btain several 
phone numbers (home, work, and cell) and an email address whenever possible so that we  can 
follow up with them easily.  We will b e flexible when scheduling appointments. We will carefully 
train the RAs to be polite, thoughtful, and sensitive to the stresses these informal caregivers are 
experiencing.  
 
We will mail a regular newsletter that report s the progress of the study  to keep the participants 
engaged. We will write this newsletter it in such a way that it can be distributed to participants in 
both the intervention and the control groups.  
 
We will s end participants small tokens of appreciation that will remind them of the study: 
birthday cards, refrigerator magnets  and pens  with the study logo,  etc. For remuneration, we 
chose a market model of payment where the amount serves as an incentive rather than a 
reward. The advantage is more rapid recruitment and avoidance of subject financial sacrifice. 
Further, a completion bonus encourage s subject retention. Using this model, caregivers will 
receive $25 at enrollment, $50 after the 6-month data are provided, $25 after the 9- month data 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Recruitment and Retention Plan                                                                                
 Page 92
are provided, and $100 when they complete the study  for a total remuneration of $200 for a 12-
month commitment .  
  
We have procedures planned and itemized in the research strategy for monitoring intervention 
fidelity. We anticipate that many of these procedures (e.g. health coach consistency for each 
participant in the intervention) will facilitate retention of participants.   
 
At the end of the study, we will distribute research results to all participants in formats  that are 
useful to the different  communities involved (e.g., participants, families of  participants, and 
referring practitioners ). For participants,  we will explain how the findings may ultimately improve 
their health.  For health care practitioners, we will summarizes the findings  succinctly to 
accommodate their busy schedules . 
 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Recruitment and Retention Plan                                                                                
 Page 93
 
 
 
Estimated Timeline for Major Study Activities  YEAR 1  YEAR 2  YEAR 3  YEAR 4  YEAR 5  
Activity  Quarters  
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Hire and train the Project Manager                       
Develop databases, refine study materials                      
Obtain IRB approval                      
Hire, orient, train research and clinical (health coaches) staff                     
Prepare for sample enrollment with clinic staff meetings                      
Sample enrollment  and data collection                       
Data entry and data cleaning                      
Provide intervention, actively monitoring treatment fidelity                      
Data collection finishe s, final clean ing of  all data                      
Complete data a nalysis                      
Disseminate results                      
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Study Timeline                                                                                                
 Page 94
HUMAN SUBJECTS  
This Human Subjects Research meets the definition of ‘Clinical Research’.  
Protection of Human Subjects 
Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics, and Design . In the proposed RCT we will enroll adults who are 
informal caregivers of adults  with heart failure (HF) and the HF patients they care for. The study focuses on the 
caregivers, but we will also enroll all willing HF patients to address our exploratory aim. We will seek HF patient 
consent to review their medical records for factors ant icipated to add to the demand of caregiving (e.g.,  number 
of comorbid conditions)  and health care resource use. QALYs will be collected from consenting HF patients.  
The informal caregivers and the HF patients are anticipated to be primarily older adults because HF is a 
condition affecting primarily elders. I n our most recent study of this population, the mean age of HF patient 
participants  was 62 ± 12.5 years  and most of their caregivers were spouses of a similar age. Considering the 
age group, most caregivers will have one or more chronic conditions.  
The sampling plan involves enrolling a consecutive s ample of adult caregivers and patients with chronic HF, 
whenever possible. We will focus enrolment on caregivers, appr oaching them  after staff obtain permission 
during a clinic visit  or during a hospitalization of the HF patient . Caregivers must be informal caregivers  of 
patients with a confirmed diagnosis of HF. They will be screened with the 10 -item Health Self -Care Neg lect 
scale ;1 we will enroll only those who are poor in self -care using a cut -point of ≥2 based on our pilot study . 
Caregivers must be able to provide informed consent (spea k English, see, hear, cognitively intact) and 
complete the protocol. We recognize that we may need to make a home visit to complete enrollment and/or set up tablets, so caregivers must live within 50 miles of the research office. We will exclude caregivers with 
cognitive impairment because we anticipate that they would have difficulty completing the intervention. We will 
exclude anyone with untreated major  psychiatric illness such as psychosis. Anyone who is planning to move 
out of the area will not  be enrolled. Anyone in a competing trial testing a support intervention also will be 
excluded. In this way, we anticipate enrolling only caregivers who are able to provide true informed consent 
and those who will potentially benefit from the intervention.  Any HF patient cared for by an enrolled caregiver 
will be consented,  if willing. We anticipate, however, that some patients will refuse. In this case, we will enroll 
only the caregiver.  
The PI , Dr. Riegel will oversee the recruitment and enrollment of ca regivers . We anticipate enrolling a diverse 
sample of participants, with many in vulnerable racial, socio- economic, and geographically disadvantaged 
groups.  We acknowledge that there will be too few Asians and Hispanics to analyze in a meaningful way but 
we will include these caregivers and analyze their data in an exploratory fashion. We expect to enroll women 
more easily than men because most caregivers are women and this type of intervention is more appealing to 
women.
2 Recruitment efforts will focus on enrolling a sufficient number of men so that we can analyze sex -
based differ ences in response to the intervention. We will balance sex and the nature of the relationship 
through block randomization to groups as we enroll. We will not include caregivers of children with HF; HF in a child is unusual. No caregivers who are < 18 years  of age will be included because their stresses may be 
unique. No vulnerable populations will be enrolled.   
The randomization sequence will be generated a priori  by a statistician unassociated with the study . Study 
nurses and caregiver participants will be notified of their group assignment by the Project Manager . Both 
groups will receive Health Information (HI) delivered by the Internet ( http://www.nhs.uk/pages/home.aspx ) in 
addition to standard care. The intervention group will receive virtual health coaching (ViCCY) by video 
conferencing, with 10 front-loaded health coaching contacts over six months. This dose is based on published 
data demonstrating that six months of health coaching is needed to be effective.  
No other collaborating sites are involved.  
Sources of materials.  The research material obtained from caregivers will be primarily self -report surveys (e.g., 
self-care, stress, health status ) and clinical information such as names of medications. The self-report  
measures will be collected five times over the course of 12 -months  (baseline and 3, 6, 9,  and 12  months ). On 
enrollment, i llness -related information and c aregiver burden will be  measured.  3,4 Quality of the relationship 
with the patient; social determinants of health; and demographic, caregiving, and clinical characteristics will be gathered from caregivers at enrollment only. Three randomly selected ViCCY sessions de livered by each 
health coach will be audiotaped, reviewed and rated for fidelity.   
We will enroll HF patients  whenever possible so that we can review their  medical records to obtain information 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Protection of Human Subjects                                                                                  
 Page 98
to describe their HF illness severity , HF duration and comorbi d conditions . If comorbidity of the patients differ s 
between the groups we will use comorbidity  as a covariate in analyses. We will also track hospitalizations , 
emergency department visits,  and mortality in HF patients over the 12 months of the study to test our 
exploratory aim.  
Because study participants  are to  be followed for 12-months, a central data file with subject name, phone 
number, email address if available, and address (needed to arrange data collection if no clinic visit is 
scheduled) will be kept by the PI and Project Manager. The research staff directly involved in data collection 
will have access to these data, but in the electronic file all identifying information will be removed and 
participants  will be identified only by numbers. Only the PI and the Project Manager will be able to link the 
participant  with his or her identification number.  
Potential Risks . Participants  will be monitored continually for the occurrence of adver se events defined as any 
untoward or unfavorable occurrence. Potential risks for caregivers  include fatigue from data collection, stress  in 
response to data collection or some element of the intervention, and loss of confidentiality . The most likely risk  
is fatigue, discussed further below. Patients  are at risk for loss of confidentiality because we will be reviewing 
their medical records. Although the risk of a l oss of confidentiality is possible for both caregivers and patients, it 
is judged to be unlikel y as we are experienced in systems of protecting private information. All data are stored 
behind multiple firewalls . It is monitored regularly, and is accessible only to key personnel who receive private 
network/firewall, server/password, and data director y access rights . Thus , the risk of unlawful penetration is not 
a significant data safeguard concern.  
Fatigue is anticipated in this study ; some caregivers  will be fatigued by data collection on top of their usual 
caregiving responsibilities . Survey d ata collection will take place five times and is anticipated to require less 
than one hour. We  have streamlined data collection significantly by choosing short measures  and those that 
can be administered by telephone. W e will accommodate  any request to break up the data collection into two 
separate sessions  that can be scheduled up to two weeks apart.  
Stress from data collection and/or the intervention is possible as the  topics covered (e.g. demand of 
caregiving) may cause emotional distress.  Empathy will be emphasized in the training of health coaches as a 
way to minimize distress. All RAs will be trained on how to approach the topics in a non -suggestive yet 
supportive and empathetic way to minimize distress.  
Adequacy of Protection Against R isks 
Recruitment and Informed Consent . After approval by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Penn, the 
research staff  will work with staff from the HF clinic  to identify eligible caregivers  for referral to us. If enrollment 
from the clinic is slow w e will also look for hospitalized HF patients. Once identified, those caregivers will be 
contacted by the providers to ask about their willingness to  speak with the study team. Those agreeing to 
speak with us will have the study carefully explained to them  by the research staff . Potential participants  will be 
fully informed regarding the interventions and the schedule of the data collection. Those willing to be screened 
will undergo preliminary screening to assess inclusion  and exclusion criteria.  
Written informed consent will be obtained from caregivers  and HF patients . Those who agree to participate will 
be asked to read and sign the consent form with integrated HIPAA  authorization information (i.e., specifics 
about data elements to be collected and use o f the private information). The consent for m will specify that 
some intervention sessions will be audiotaped to ensure the quality of the intervention and judge treatment 
fidelity. We will explain that t hese audiotapes will be transcribed for analysis and then destroyed. The RAs will 
answer questions and make sure that the procedures that are to be used are fully understood.  
As stress from study participation is the most concerning risk to caregivers, we will systematically monitor to 
assure that we identify it. We anticipate that stress may result in early withdrawal so we will monitor withdrawal 
rates methodically in each group. I f a participant  withdraw s, reasons will be carefully noted.  
As data collection is anticipated to require significant comm itment and effort on the part of subjects, 
remuneration will be provided. We carefully considered the amount to pay participants using the guidelines 
from Dickert and Grady.5 Because of the potential burden of data collection, we chose a market model of 
payment where the amount serves as an incentive rather than a reward. The advantage is more rapid recruitment and avoidance of subject financial sacrifice. Further, a completion bonus encourages  subject 
retention. Using this model, caregivers will receive $25 at enrollment, $50  after the 6-month data are provided, 
$25 after the 9- month data are provided, and $100 when they complete the study  for a total remuneration of 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Protection of Human Subjects                                                                                  
 Page 99
$200 for a 12- month commitment . This amount is not anticipated to be undue inducement, considering the 
effort and commitment required of participants.  
Protection Against Risk . Fatigue. To minimize the most likely risk of fatigue during data collection,  we selected 
surveys  that are as short as possible. Completion of the  self-report survey packet requires less than one hour. 
Testing will be scheduled at a time that is convenient for subjects . If participants  are too fatigued to complete 
all measures, sociodemographic and clinical data will be administered at enrollment and the baseline surveys 
will be gathered in a subsequent telephone call  (but before randomization) . All delayed data collect ion will 
occur within a two- week interval. The RAs will be trained to be sensitive to signals from participants  that a 
break is needed during testing. All p articipants  will be informed that they can stop their participation in the 
study  at any time.  For subjects who find data collection too fatiguing, we will offer the option of providing only 
the most essential data reflecting the key outcome variables (e.g., health self-care neglect ).  
Stress . To minimize the risk of stress during data collection the RAs will be trained to be supportive and helpful 
to participants  with questions about data collection. If a participant becomes stressed during data collection 
because of the questions asked, the burden of data collection, or for other personal reasons, data collection 
will be terminated , delayed, or abbreviated to only the most essential items  (e.g. primary outcome variable) . 
Significant stress will be reported to the P roject Manager  who will cont act the caregiver to discuss the issue if 
indicated (the PI is blinded) . The RAs will be trained to detect any signals that the participant  is becoming 
upset before stress escalates. In a  prior study we hired nursing and psychology students as RAs, which 
facilitated the assessment and management of participant  stress during data collection.  
RAs will be required to have sufficient maturity and background to interact appropriately with ill, aging, stressed 
individuals. The protocol for training of RAs, detai led in our operations manual, addresses enrollment methods 
and the collection of data in a uniform manner.6 Training for RAs in data collection will occur during a two- day 
period prior to beginning subject enrollment. Training will begin with classroom instruction, including the 
purpose and background on each measure, importance of strict adherence to the standardized protocol, step-
by-step instruction for survey administration, criteria for aborting testing and the procedure for audiotaping 
sessions and transmitting data. RAs will be trained to ensure  that they do not prompt subjects with verbal or 
nonverbal cues. Training will include practic e administering all tests. Consistency in data collection procedures 
will be assessed and reinforced during routine staff meetings. Retraining and retesting will be done 
immediately if a new RA is hired and annually thereaf ter. The PI and the Project Manager will meet weekly or 
bi-weekly with staff (in -person or by video) to discuss issues of enrollment and data collection. All decisions will 
be logged and filed for future reference. All issues will be reported immediately t o the IRB and the Data Safety 
Monitoring Board, as discussed in that plan.  
We will be enrolling a sample  of stressed individuals  and it is possible that we will identify someone  with severe 
distress. We have a previously tested detailed safety plan (Riegel R01HL084394), which has been refined for 
use in this study. This safety plan addresses the concerns associated with severe stress  that need to be 
handled in order to ensure that the research participants’ needs are addressed. This plan includes the 
requirement that research staff undergo training in this safety protocol and participate in ongoing regular 
supervision by Dr. Riegel on these procedures. In addition, for participants randomized to the ViCCY  group, 
specific rules to ensure privacy and s afety will be discussed in the first session, such as being in a private 
place during sessions and not engaging in discussions  while driving.  
Confidentiality . To protect against any risk to subject confidentiality, all printed data forms will be coded wit h 
unique identifiers. The unique identification number will be kept separate from the files with protected health 
information (PHI) to protect subject confidentiality. Every effort will be made to prevent anyone who is not on 
the research team from knowing  what information was collected from a particular subject. As part of the 
consent process, subjects will be made aware of the fact that there are some circumstances where the 
research team may have to provide subject information to other people (regulatory  or legal circumstances).  In 
addition, as we are unable to ensur e total I nternet security , this limitation of privacy will be noted in the 
informed consent . In this manner caregivers will be informed that although it is highly unlikely that anyone 
would ac cess an audiotaped session, the prevention of such intrusions cannot be guaranteed.  The content of 
the intervention sessions is not anticipated to be confidential in nature.  
Data Storage. Since this data storage system is behind multiple firewalls, is monitored regularly, and is 
accessible only to key personnel who rec eive private network/firewall, server/password, and data directory 
access rights, the risk of unlawful penetration is not a significant data safeguard concern. Individually identifiable or deducible data will not be transmitted by unsecured telecommunicati ons, which include the 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Protection of Human Subjects                                                                                  
 Page 100
Internet, email, and electronic File Transfer Protocol (FTP). Further, the data will not be physically moved or 
transmitted in any way from the server without written approval from the project manager. All output containing 
individual identifiable information is treated as confidential data. This information is never transferred 
electronically via email or other protocols.  
All data will be backed up daily and system backups will be done weekly. Batch validity checks will be run on 
the database at periodic intervals to identify data that violate predefined rules. Data will be de- identified and 
stored on the database server with strong access controls, software firewall, secure file transfe r protocols, 
network -wide virus protection software, and daily back -ups. The computers will be password- protected and  
maintained in a secure, locked location at the School of Nursing. Interim checks will be conducted regularly to 
ensure that data collectio n and archiving procedures are operating correctly and security and confidentiality are 
not compromised. A ll information obtained on paper  (e.g., consent forms) will be numerically coded and locked 
in a secure location, as described further below.  
Signed c onsent forms and other subject -specific information containing name s will be kept separate from the 
subject identification numbers. The master list and subject information will be stored in different locked file 
cabinets in the PI’s research offices at the  University of Pennsylvania, School of Nursing. Access to these 
master files will be limited to those directly involved in the study.  
Data will be compiled from all  of the subjects in the study and aggregated for analysis and publication. All 
identifying data will be eliminated from files before data are electronically transferred to the biostatistician. As a 
result of aggregation, no individual subjects will be identifiable from the written materials. Audiotaped 
interviews will be assigned a unique identif ier; any identifiable info rmation  in the interviews will be deleted 
during the transcription process.  
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Human Subjects and Others  
We cannot guarantee that any participant  will benefit by participating in this study, although all of the 
caregivers will receive health information. We acknowledge that subject burden may be an issue for these 
already -burdened caregivers . However, we believe that the benefits of the knowledge g ained will outweigh the 
burden and the risks to participants. A Data and Safety Monitoring Board will be used to ensure the validity and 
integrity of the data. We anticipate that the results of this study will benefit society most, by helping to improve 
the support provided to caregivers of HF patients.  It is our judgment that benefits outweigh the risk to study 
participants.  
Importance of the knowledge to be gained  
Heart failure is extremely common in the aging population worldwide. The vast majority of these patients are 
limited functionally and living at home with care provided to them by their loved ones. Little attention has been 
given to these caregivers . This study has the potential to address this underserved and distressed segment of 
the population  by improving their abilities to cope with the stress of providing daily care to a loved one with a 
severe, debilitating, and chronic illness  and refocus their attentions onto themselves (self -care) . If perceived 
stress decreases in caregivers and they ar e able to care for themselves more effectively, this study will provide 
a new and innovative way to increase the support available for these caregivers .  
ClinicalTrials.gov Requirement  
We will register the trial with Clinical Trials.gov Protocol Registration System no later than 21 days after the first subject is enrolled.  
 CITATIONS  
1. Boise L. Health Self -Care Neglect Scale. Empowering family caregivers: The powerful tools for 
caregiving program. Educational Gerontology, 31, 573 -586.2005.  
2. National Academies of Sciences E, and Medicine,. Families Caring for an Aging America.  Washington, 
DC: The National Academies Press; 2016.  
3. Luttik ML, Jaarsma T, Tijssen JG, et al. The objective burden in partners of heart failure patients ; 
development and initial validation of the Dutch Objective Burden Inventory. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2008;7(1):3 -9. 
4. Makdessi A, Harkness K, Luttik ML, McKelvie RS. The Dutch Objective Burden Inventory: validity and 
reliability in a Canadian population o f caregivers for people with heart failure. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 
2011;10(4):234 -240. 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Protection of Human Subjects                                                                                  
 Page 101
5. Dickert N, Grady C. What's the price of a research subject? Approaches to payment for research 
participation. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(3):198 -203. 
6. Bowman A, Wyman JF, Peters J. The operations manual: a mechanism for improving the research process. Nurs Res. 2002;51(2):134 -138. 
 
Contact PD/PI: RIEGEL, BARBARA J
Protection of Human Subjects                                                                                  
 Page 102