Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18   
INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
SUMMARY  
 
 
IRBN et 885148  / [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: 0 5/10/2018  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Amee Bigelow MD   
 
CO-INVESTIGATORS: Nancy Ghanayem, MD, George Hoffman, MD, Jake Scott, MD, Laura 
Cassidy, MS, PhD , Nathan Thompson, MD  
 
STUDY TITLE:  Use of Arginine Vasopressin in Early Postoperative Management after Fontan 
Palliation  
 
 
A. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
 
The treatments  for preventing and managing low cardiac output syndrome after congenital heart 
surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass include  manipulations of vascular volume  and infusion s of 
phosphodiesterase inhibitors  (milrinone) and catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine)  for 
inotropic and vasoactive effects , all of which have associated risks which can contribute to morbidity  
and mortality .  Vasopressin, a vasoactive drug with efficacy in septic shock , has also been utilized to 
improve postoperative hemodynamics after cardiac surgery in chi ldren.   It is a common institutional 
practice to use vasopressin in this patient population , but usually after escalation through two or three 
other vasoactive drugs . There have  been  several studies  in pediatrics and adults which suggest that  
vasopressin is not inferior to  other  vasoconstrictor therapies , and advantageous  when looking at 
specific end points . 1-5  We propose to randomize the use of vasopressin to use at an earlier point in 
our typical post-operative medication strategy.  The proposed study is a double blinded, randomized , 
placebo control study of vasopressin infusion immediately after the completion Fontan operation. The 
goal is to identify a vasoactive treatment strategy  that improves hemodynamics with lower  
catecholamine infusion burden, reduces volume of fluid resuscitation, and reduces in -hospital 
resource utilization  
 
B. HYPOTHESIS / SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
Specific Aim 1 :  
To assess the hemodynamic profile of patients undergoing Fontan palliation as characterized by 
vasoactive inotropic score  (VIS) , fluid balance, organ perfusion pressure, transpulmonary pressure 
gradient  (CVP  minus LAP) , arterio -cerebral  and arterio -somatic saturation differen ce between the two 
groups ( Vasopressin [ VP] and non-vasopressin [ non-VP] groups ) during the first 48 -hours following 
cardiopulmonary bypass.  
 
Hypothesis  
The group receiving vasopressin  will have a  more favorable hemodynamic profile  as measured by 
lower vasoactive inotropic score and better surrogate determinants of oxygen economy . 

Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18   
 
Rationale:   
The vasoactive inotropic score has been shown to be a strong predictor of morbidity and mortality by 
characterizing the degree of support following cardiopulmonary bypass. 6,7  A significant difference in 
VIS, fluid balance and other markers of hemodynamic state  between the two groups will have a 
significant impact on post -operative management after Fontan completion.   
 
Catecholamine infusions such as epinephrine and norepinephrine are standard therapy for post -
operative cardiac patients, but they come with the r isk of arrhythmias and increased myocardial 
oxygen demand.  In the post -operative Fontan patient, inotropic agents can improve systolic function 
but may worsen diastolic function by impairing ventricular relaxation.  Vasodilators are indicated  when 
ventric ular dysfunction is present, but organ perfusion pressure is threatened in the Fontan patient by 
higher venous pressures, and thus  vasodilator treatment  must be used with caution.  Vasopressin 
acts by increasing systemic vascular resistance and in turn inc reasing mean arterial pressure.  This 
differs from catecholamine infusions in that it does not have a direct effect on cardiac contractility, 
therefore it does not have as much effect on  myocardial oxygen demand or arrhythmia  potential .  
Vasopressin infusi ons have been used in a number of clinical settings, including septic shock and 
cardiogenic shock, in both adults and children. 4,8-11 The systemic vasoconstriction  and pulmonary 
vasodilation effects of vasopressin are unique among vasoactive agents and this vasoactive profile 
has major theoretic advantage in the Fontan patient.  A recent retrospective study reported that post -
opera tive Fontan patients receiving vasopressin infusion had improved outcomes including less chest 
tube output, less positive fluid balance in the early postoperative period and a shorter hospital length 
of stay when compared to historical controls. 12  
 
Specific Aim -2:  
To assess the difference in incidence  of oliguria, hyponatremia,  and organ dysfunction between the 
two groups (VP and non -VP).   
 
Hypothesi s 
Low dose VP will not negatively effect sodium levels, urine output, renal function or transaminases.   
 
Rational e 
Vasopressin is a neurohypopphyseal hormone naturally occurring in the body (endogenous).  It is 
synthesized in the hypothalamus and released in posterior pituitary  in response to reductions in 
plasma volume with the primary aim of vasoconstriction/increased systemic vascular resistance for 
improved regulation of blood pressure or increases in plasma osmolarity to retain water in the body. 
When higher -dose exogenous vasopressin is administered for vasoconstriction, it can also cause  
hyponatremia, oliguria, and  transaminitis  from decreased renal and mesenteric blood flow 13,14. This 
is of particular interest in  patients after completion Fontan due to predictable increases in intra -
abdominal venous pressures that further potentiate risk to the kidneys and liver.  
 
Specific Aim 3  
To compare the secondary outcomes including post -operative fluid resuscitation, chest tube drainage 
and duration, and hospital length of stay (LOS) between the two groups (VP and non -VP).  
 
 
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18   
  
Hypothesis  
The VP group will have lower resource utilization that are directly related to volume of fluid 
resuscitation during the first 24 hours after Fontan completion, resulting in decreased chest tube 
drainage and duration, which results in shorter hospital LOS.  
 
Rationale  
The Fontan procedure  is performed in patients with single ventricle anatomy undergoing stepwise 
surgical palliation, t ypically as a planned third step between the ages 2 -6 years.  Although operative 
mortality is less than 5 %, 15-17 these patients have significant physiologic vulnerability, with  longer 
hospital stay and higher risk of morbidities, resulting in  significant resource utilization for institutions 
and patients/families.  After the Fontan procedure, cardiac output is more vulnerable to changes in 
venous preload and pulmonary vascular r esistance because there is no high -compliance cardiac 
pump (functional right atrium and ventricle) in the pulmonary circulation Because the single 
(functionally left) ventricle does all work of both systemic and pulmonary circulations, systemic blood 
flow is more vulnerable to changes in systemic venous pressure pulmonary vascular resistance.   The 
most readily reversible cause of low cardiac output syndrome after the Fontan operation is 
hypovolemia.  Aggressive fluid resuscitation in the post -operative peri od can have adverse 
consequences, in particular in the setting of ongoing capillary leak, and third spacing of fluid.  This 
characteristic is the typical inflammatory effects of post -CPB period and in particular the postoperative 
Fontan patients who have a n increase in their venous pressure.  The adverse effects of fluid 
resuscitation to maintain cardiac output can include worsening lung function, edema and positive fluid 
balance.  These effects can result in prolonged ventilator support, development of ple ural effusions, 
requirement for aggressive diuresis and longer hospitalization.  These potential deleterious effects are 
more pronounced in patients with Fontan anatomy, because higher venous pressure can worsen 
pulmonary vascular resistance and initiate a spiral of CVP elevation and worsening pulmonary 
function. Thus strategies that maintain cardiac output with less fluid administration would be helpful.  
 
The mechanisms related to the development of pleural effusions in the post -Fontan patients have 
been we ll described and include an inflammatory response to CPB, generalized capillary leak 
resulting from changes in hydrostatic pressures from the increase in venous pressure that results 
from the increase in pulmonary blood flow attendant to  the inferior vena cava connection to the 
pulmonary arteries , and the activation of the renin -angiotensin pathway resulting in reabsorption of 
water and other electrolytes.  Pleural effusions are typically the most frequent postoperative problem 
requiring prolonged hospitali zations following the Fontan procedure with replacement of electrolytes, 
intravascular volume, protein, clotting factors and anticipating resolution with diuretic therapy or 
requiring more definitive treatment with chest tube placement, or even sometimes a dditional 
procedures including pleurodesis or thoracic duct ligation.  
 
Vasopressin is a neurohypopysial hormone that most notably increases systemic vascular resistance 
without directly affecting cardiac contractility.  In addition to vasopressin’s ability to increase mean 
arterial pressures by directly increasing systemic vascular resistance, vasopressin has also been 
described to decrease capillary leakage by tightening endothelial intercellular junctions and reducing 
capillary hydros tatic pressure.  Vasopressin has also been described as a cor onary and pulmonary 
vasodilator  by promotion of endothelial nitric oxide release in animal models. 18,19 The specific effects 
on systemic and pulmonary vascular resistance make vasopressin a physiologically -rational agent to 
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18  manage the specific circulatory vulnerabilities of the Fontan patient. The clinical consequences  of this 
physiologic improvement would be beneficial effects in the early pos toperative fluid balance, chest 
tube output and overall resource utilization.  
 
Specific Aim -4 
To measure vasopressin levels pre -cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and immediately post -CPB (prior 
to initiating study drug ) 
 
Hypothesis  
Patients receiving the place bo will have lower vasopressin levels, which will be associated with higher 
post-operative catecholamine support and higher volume of fluid resuscitation during the first post -
operative day.  
 
Rationale   
Vasopressin is an alternative vasoactive therapy that improves postoperative hemodynamics and 
decreases dependence on traditional therapies such as fluid resuscitation and catecholamine 
infusions in neonatal and pediatric CHD patients. Landry and colleagues first reported a beneficial 
use of AVP in critically ill adult patients with septic shock in whom maximal inotropic and vasopressor 
therapy failed to maintain blood pressure.  These patients also demonstrated a deficiency of 
vasopressin that was probably secondary to a defect in baroreflex -medi ated release of the hormone. 
10  This prompted a randomized adult trial of vasopressin in patients undergoing a left ventricular 
assist device (LVAD) placement where they noted significant reduction in need for catech olamine 
infusion after initiation of exogenous vasopressin in patients with vasodilatory shock. 8 Since then, 
vasopressin levels and the use of vasopressin infusion has been described in a number of studies in 
vario us disease states.  Increase plasma levels of AVP have been observed post -CPB in adult 
patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting. 20 And Morrison et. al. also reported an increase 
in AVP levels in all childre n after CPB. 21  However, a large pediatric prospective observational study 
reported some children undergoing CPB had relatively low AVP levels at baseline, which remained 
low after CPB and determined that these pat ients are likely optimal candidates for exogenous 
vasopressin infusions for hemodynamic instability. 22 In our study proposal, we look to prospectively 
identify the effect of exogenous vasopressin on AVP levels and hemodynamics in the postoperative 
Fontan population.  
 
C. BACKGROUND, SIGNIFICANCE, AND RATIONALE  
 
Neonatal and pediatric interventions associated with congenital heart disease (CHD) continue to 
produce improved outcomes.  There are no established guidelines for managing patients after 
congenital heart surgery due to lesion -specific unique challenges in the post -operative period.  
Volume resuscitation and catecholamine infusions are the traditional treatment methods to maintain 
adequate perfusion.  However, these two treatment modalities are associated with increased risk of 
worsening lung function and prolonged ventilator support with aggressive fluid resuscitation, 
increased myocardial oxygen demand, and precipitation of arrhythmias.  G iven the multifactorial 
etiology of postoperative low cardiac output syndrome, it is often unclear which catecholamine 
infusion is optimal to improve circulatory function. Vasopressin, an alternative vasoactive therapy 
commonly utilized in shock, has been utilized to improve postoperative hemodynamics in neonatal 
and pediatric patient populations and has recently gained more attention.  
 
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18  The use of arginine vasopressin infusion in infants and children after cardiac surgery was first 
reported in 1999 in a cas e series of 11 patients with vasodilatory shock in the postoperative period. 4 
This case series reported initiation of vasopressin for hypotension refractory to traditional treatment 
methods and reported a signifi cant rise in hemodynamics with improved blood pressure in all patients 
as well as weaning inotropic support in 10/11 patients.   Since this study there have been conflicting 
reports regarding vasopressin levels and the use of vasopressin to improve hemodyn amics.  Results 
from a study published in 2008 evaluated vasopressin levels in 39 patients with CHD in the pre and 
post-operative periods and concluded that children do not have deficient levels of vasopressin 
following surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB).  In addition, lower levels were not associated 
with hypotension. 21 A larger study in 2010 of 121 patients who had congenital heart surgery with CPB 
described results suggestive of clinically important hypote nsion associated with low vasopressin 
levels. 22 Several other publications have reported improved blood pressure and decreased 
catecholamine usage in patients with CHD. 14,23,24 Two of these reports have focused on vasopressin 
use in infants with single ventricle physiology. 23,24 In all of these reported case series t he vasopressin 
infusion has been initiated in the post -operative period as a rescue therapy.  None of the studies have 
advocated for initiation of vasopressin immediately post -operatively and prior to a time period of 
hemodynamic instability, except for on e retrospective chart review by Alten et al. 25 This study from 
2012 initiated vasopressin in the operating room after CPB in 19 neonates undergoing either an 
arterial switch for d -transposition of the great arteries o r the Norwood palliation procedure for 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome. 25 In this study, all neonates in whom vasopressin was initiated in the 
operating room received significantly lower amounts of volume replacement and catecholamine 
support in the immediate post -operative period.  They also described lower heart rate, lower 
incidence of arrhythmias, shorter duration of mechanical ventilation and shorter intensive care unit 
stay when compared to lesion -matched control  group. More recently in 2016, a single center 
retrospectively reviewed their experience with vasopressin and patients undergoing Fontan 
operations over a 10 year period and it’s effects on chest tube output.  They determined that patients 
receiving vasopr essin perioperatively had less chest tube output and shorter duration of chest tube 
drainage in addition to shorter hospital length of stay and improved fluid balance as compared to 
historical controls. 12   
 
There is a gap in the literature describing improved outcomes with a specific targeted vasoactive and 
inotropic therapy regimen to use in the post -operative Fontan procedure patients. Our proposed novel 
study will further provide evidence for outcome based post -operative medical interventions.  The 
proposed  study is a double blinded, randomized control study of vasopressin infusion versus placebo 
in the first 24 -hours after Fontan completion.  The aim of this study is to evaluate the impact of 
vasopressin on the ear ly postoperative course in a relatively homogenous population, with specific 
attention to catecholamine use, hemodynamics, pleural drainage, extracardiac organ function (kidney 
and liver) and length of stay. Furthermore, we plan to evaluate vasopressin lev els between the two 
groups.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18  D. DESIGN AND METHODS  
This is a double -blinded, randomized, placebo -controlled, study of vasopressin use in patients 
following Fontan palliation.  All patients undergoing Fontan palliation at CHW will be screened for 
eligibility into this study using the following inclusion and  exclusion  criteria:  
Inclusion  
1. Planned completion of Fontan palliation  
2. English or Spanish speaking.  
3. Completed Informed consent  
 
Exclusion   
1. Previous attempt at completion Fontan with subsequent takedown  
2. Planned concomitant atrioventricular valvuloplasty o r neoaortic valve or arch 
reconstruction at time of completion Fontan.  
3. History of renal failure requiring renal replacement therapy  
4. Absence of informed consent  
5. Concurrent  enrollment  in other interventional studies  
 
Patients who meet all inclusion and no exclusion criteria will be approached for consent prior to 
surgery, most often during their pre -operative visit to the cardiology clinic.  Consent procedures will be 
explained in more detail in Section N.  
 
Randomization  
Patients whose famil ies give permission for them to participate will be identified by the study team 
immediately prior to  admission  for surgery. At this time,  an order will be placed by the PI for the study 
drug/placebo , which  will trigger initiation of the  randomization procedure by the investigational 
pharmacist . After randomization, study drug or placebo will be prepared by the pharmacist as per the 
subject’s study group assignment .   
 
Blinding  
Blinding of the study drug/placebo will be done in the pharma cy. The prepared placebo will look no 
different than prepared study drug.  The infusion pump will note the drug as “Fontan Vasopressin 
Study” as reference. The study team will remain blinded throughout enrollment, data collection, and 
data analysis for all  study subjects.  Data will be unblinded for the purpose of safety reviews and 
available only to the members of the DSMB.  
 
E. TOTAL NUMBER OF HUMAN RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS PROPOSED FOR THIS STUDY 
AT THIS SITE AND GLOBALLY.  WHAT ARE THESE  
 NUMBERS BASED ON?  
 
Based on 2015 census, we anticipate about 2 5 patients per year will meet our inclusion/exclusion 
criteria. From previous studies at CHW 80 -90% of families for patients with congenital heart disease 
will agree to participate in studies involving blood draws  and drug trials. We anticipate being able to 
enroll 20 patients, with approximately 10 in each randomization arm. Enrollment numbers a re based 
on available subjects. A s this is a pilot study to we wish to determine feasibility of a larger, better 
powered study to show true efficacy of using VP as a first -line treatment for hemodynamic instability 
after Fontan palliation.  
 
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18   
F. DRUGS OR PROCEDURES  
 
Study Drug Administration  
On the day of surgery, the subject’s operative plan and anesthetic management will proceed per 
current institutional practices. The investigational pharmacist will deliver study drug/placebo to the OR  
during the course of the subject’s surgery. Following the modified ultrafiltra tion period (MUF) the 
anesthesiologist will start the study drug/placebo infusion. The subject will receive low dose 
vasopressin or  placebo  started at 0.3mU/kg/min and will not be titrated.  Total infused volume will be 
calculated using the subject’s pre -surgical dosing weight.  
 
After study drug initiation the attending provider  will treat the patient per standard of care . If the 
subject require s vasoconstrictor therapy, open label vasopressin or any other appropriate 
medications will be added  at the discr etion of the attending physician.  
 
The study drug/placebo infusion will be maintained at this rate for 20 hours when it will be weaned off 
at 0.1 mU/kg/min every hour over 3 hours . The subject’s care team will monitor and titrate the study 
drug/placebo wea n so it is tolerated clinically by the subject.  
 
Throughout the active study period, p ostoperative care will be provide d per usual practice with goal -
directed interventions with vasoactive medications and fluid based on standard monitoring including 
invas ive pressure (venous and arterial) monitoring and use of two -site near infrared spectroscopy.  
 
Vasopressin is used in our standard practice;  we are proposing that we randomize the vasoactive 
medication to an earlier point in our standard protocol.  The study does not constrain use of other 
intraoperative or postoperative pharmacology such as milri none, epinephrine and norepinephrine 
from being  used.   
 
Study Sample Collection  
During the course of the study, non -SOC arginine vasopressin (AVP) levels will be drawn on all 
subjects consented for this study at 5 different time points. As well, non -SOC cystatin levels will be 
drawn at 2 time points a s a marker of renal function pre and post operatively. A maximum of 3 ml and 
minimum of  2 ml of blood will be drawn at each time point .  A maximum of 7 ml of blood will be drawn 
in one 24 hour period. All samples drawn for the study will be  sent to the CHW  lab for analysis and 
processed per their standard procedures for AVP and cystatin levels. Results of the AVP lab will not 
be entered into the subject’s medical record in order to maintain the blind.  Cystatin levels will be 
included in the subject’s EMR . 
 
All samples will be preferentially collected from an indwelling venous or arterial line. This will be done 
as close as possible to the target time. In a minority of cases, if no catheter is available the sample 
will be collected at the same time as an alr eady scheduled clinical blood draw. This should be done 
as close as possible to the target time.  Of note, the sample collection times in the CICU correspond 
with the timing of standard of care labs being collected in post -operative Fontan patients.  We 
anticipate being able to draw the majority of study labs simultaneously with standard of care to reduce 
the number of times a subject’s line is accessed. The following time points will be used for AVP 
sample collection:  
 
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18   Pre-CPB Post-CPB/ Pre 
Study Infusion  4 hrs. post 
CICU  20 hrs. post 
CICU /pre-weaning  48 hrs. 
post CICU  
AVP ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Cystatin  ✓   ✓  
Total Volume  3 ml 2 ml 2 ml 3 ml 2 ml 
 
 
Data Collection  
For all subjects enrolled in the study, data will be extracted from the EMR.  Specific data points can 
be found on the data collection form attached to this IRB submission.  
 
G. RISK CATEGORY:  
 
Patients enrolled in Study Drug Cohort: (2) 45 CFR 46.405  - Research involving greater than minimal 
risk but presenting the prospect of direct benefit to the individual child subjects involved in the 
research.  
 
Patients enrolled in the placebo group:  (3) 45 CFR 46.406  - Research involving greater than minimal 
risk and no prospect of direct benefit to the individual child subjects i nvolved in the research, but likely 
to yield generalizable knowledge about the subject's disorder or condition.  
 
H. RISKS AND THE PRECAUTIONS, WHICH  WILL BE TAKEN TO MINIMIZE RISK 
EXPOSURE  
 
Study Drug Administration  
The standard risks and side effects of exogenous vasopressin infusion are minimal and rarely occur 
at the lower -dose infusion at which we will be running.  However known side effects, which can be 
seen include : hyponatremia , decreased urine output , nausea,  tremors, vertigo, diaphoresis, and 
thrombocytopenia.  Other side effects that are rare, but more serious include anaphylaxis, clinical 
evidence of regional ischemia . The standard treatment for the less serious s ide effects would be 
symptomatic. The standa rd treatments for addressing the more serious side effects would be to titrate 
down or discontinuing infusion.  
Sample Collection  
Procedures for venipuncture and obtaining blood samples from indwelling catheters are routine in 
pediatric intensive care unit s and all care will be taken to ensure protecting the child from the potential 
risks. Ideally, samples will be collected through an indwelling catheter, or concurrently with a clinically 
ordered blood draw to minimize the number of needle sticks per patien t. As with all blood draws, 
there is a chance the patient may experience slight  pain, bleeding or bruising at the venipuncture 
sight.  There is also a slight chance of fainting or infection as a result of the venipuncture, but no 
greater risk than with a r outine blood draw.  
 
Data Collection  
Data will be extracted from the subject’s medical record  by the investigators and research 
coordinators working on this project. Files will be  maintained on paper and electronically for the study.  
Any paper records maintained will be stored in a locked file cabinet in the critical care research office. 
A list linking the patient’s identity , along with other collected PHI,  to an assigned study subject 
number will be maintained separately from the clinical data that is extracted from the medical records. 
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18  Records maintained electronically will be stored in a MCW -maintained REDCap database ; access to 
this database will be limited only to study staff who will enter and analyze data.  PHI will be maintained 
in the same database, but will be electronically marked so that data export can easily be done in an 
anonymized m anner.  
 
I. PROVISION FOR THE PROTECTION OF PRIVACY OF SUBJECTS AND TO MAINTAIN 
THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF DATA  
 
Please indicate which encryption tools you are using to secure your research data.  
 
___ Credent Mobile Guardian (RS, PD)  
___ GuardianEdge Hard Disk and GuardianEdge Removable Storage Encryption (HD, RS, PD)  
___ IronKey encrypted flash drives (RS)  
___ McAfee Endpoint Encryption (HD, RS)  
___ Microsoft Bitlocker (HD, RS when used with Windows 7 and FIPS compliant algorithms are 
enabled)  
___ PGP Whol e Disk Encryption and PGP Portable (HD, RS)  
___ SafeNet Protect Disk and SafeNet Protect File (HD, RS)  
___ Seagate Secure Self -Encrypting Drives (HD when encryption option is enabled)  
  ✓  Symantec Endpoint Encryption (HD, RS, PD)  
___ WinMagic SecureDoc encryption (HD) (for MCW owned computers)  
___ Other ( add description ) 
 
Does not apply because:  
___ Data is de -identified – no PHI collected  (please provide detailed information on data elements in 
your protocol application)  
___ Data is stored on paper only  
___ Data is stored on CHW secured shared drives.  
  ✓  Data is stored on MCW secured shared drives.  
 
Only research personnel will have access to any information gathered. Identifying information will be 
kept in the research office at M CW in a locked area only accessible by study staff. The key 
connecting the subject’s identity to the sample will be kept separate from other collected information.  
 
As of June 30th, 2018  Dr. Bigelow will be leaving CHW and completing a fellowship at Cincinnati 
Children’s Hospital and Medical Center in Ohio. She will remain as a collaborator on this study  after 
her departure,  but she will only have access to data that has been entered into  the study REDCap 
database. Her access will be updated to include only deidentified data.  
 
J. PROVISIONS FOR MONITORING DATA TO ENSURE THE SAFETY OF SUBJECTS; AND 
ADDITIONAL SAFEGUARDS TO PROTECT THE RIGHTS AND WELFARE OF SUBJECTS 
WHO ARE LIKELY TO BE VULNER ABLE  
 
During the active phase of this stud y, research team members will  monitor subjects in real time for 
potential serious adverse events (SAEs) related and unrelated to study drug/placebo administration. 
We will monitor subjects for known risks during ac tive study drug administration (risks listed in section 
H). The study team will work closely with the care team for this subject to ensure accurate collection 
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18  of this information. The majority of the active study period will take place in the CICU where 24  hour 
cardiac intensivist coverage is standard of care for all post -operative Fontan patients.  
 
Any SAEs that do occur will be reported to the IRB per their reporting guidelines.  
 
If at any time the attending physician feels that the study drug/placebo in fusion needs to be halted for 
the safety of the patient this can be done at their discretion. Study team contact information will at the 
bedside of all subjects to promote open communication between the study and care teams. All 
cardiac intensivists that a re  
 
All data collected will be provided to the Data Monitoring Committe e (DMC) that has been created  for 
this study.  Details on the review done by the DMC are in Section M.  
 
K. ANTICIPATED BENEFITS ASSOCIATED WITH THE PROTOCOL  TO HUMAN RESEARCH 
PARTICIPANTS AND SOCIETY  
 
The benefits of this study are unknown. The research team believes that initiating low dose 
vasopressin in the immediate post -operative period will reduce  the need for  inotropic support which 
could minimize fluid resuscitation and  arrhythmias in the post -operative period.  There is a chance 
this may d ecrease chest tube output meaning decreased duration of CT placement and likely 
decreased hospital length of stay in addition to less hospital resource utilization , however, all of thi s is 
only speculative.  This study will hopefully lead to a better understanding of the postoperative period 
for these patients and improved treatment protocols in the future.  
 
L. STOPPING POINTS THAT WOULD NOT ALLOW THE STUDY TO CONTINUE AS 
PROPOSED  
 
Known side effects (listed below) of vasopressin, if present, will act as potential s topping points for 
the study infusion.  However, if these side effects are noted in the subject it is at the discretion of the 
CICU attending to determine if the study inf usion will be stopped or other catecholamine infusions will 
be stopped in an effort to reverse the noted side effects. If the CICU attending determines it is 
necessary to stop the study drug/placebo infusion earlier than the protocol dictates, data and blo od 
sampling collection will continue per protocol.  
 
▪ Hypertension  that is not otherwise corrected or explained by weaning of inotropic agents or 
other vasoactive medications  
▪ Low Urine Output  which will be categorized by urine output <0.3 mL/kg/hr  for 4 hour s not 
otherwise correctable by standard treatments  
▪ Clinical evidence of regional ischemia  
Additional stopping points are outlined in Section M.  
 
M. IS THERE A DATA SAFETY MONITORING BOARD (DSMB) IN PLACE?  WHO ARE IT'S 
MEMBERS?  HOW OFTEN DO THEY MEET?   
 
A DMC is in place for this study, made up of the following individuals:  
- Rebecca Russell , MD , pediatric critical care physician  
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18  - Viktor Hraska, MD , pediatric cardiothoracic surgeon  
- Eckehard Stuth, MD , pediatric anesthesiologist  
Prior to the first subject being enrolled, DMC members will be provided with the study protocol, and all 
data collection tools to familiarize them with the study.  
 
A full review of  DMC review will be completed after the first subject randomized to the vasopressin 
arm has been completed. If any subjects were randomized to the placebo arm during this time the 
data from these individuals will be reviewed as well.  A final interim  review of  enrolled subjects will 
take place after the tenth  subject  has been r andomized and all study data collection has been 
completed.  
 
In the event that the DMC  find a serious adverse event  deemed related to study -drug administration , 
enrollment will be temporarily halted until further review of this event is completed. In this  study 
serious adverse events are considered anaphylaxis, hyponatremia < 120mEq/dL, evidence of 
regional ischemia  or any other unanticipated event listed in the CTCAE (version 4) of grade 4 or 
higher that the PI has determined to likely be related to study  drug administration.  After the D MC has 
reviewed the data, it will determine if the study will  
1. Stop due to patient safety concerns (either temporarily  or permanently ) 
2. Continue enrollment as is  
3. Continue enrollment with protocol modifications  
4. Discontinue enrollment due to futility.  
 
N. DESCRIBE HOW THE CONSENT AND ASSENT PR OCESS WILL TAKE PLACE.  INCLUDE 
A LIST OF APPROPRIATELY TRAINED PERSONNEL WHO WILL BE INVOLVED  
Once patients are identified, guardians will be approached by research personnel for the enrollment 
and consent process. Information about the study and any associated risks and benefits will be 
presented to the parent(s)/guardian by a study investigator during the preoperative evaluation about 
one week prior to surgery. Families will be able to consent at this time, or take documentation home 
for further review.  If the family does not consent during the pre -operative visit the study team will 
meet with the family prior to the start of the subject’ s procedure to determine their willingness to 
participate.  
 
The Principal investigator, all of the listed sub -investigators, and the research coordinators listed as 
part of the study team will be able to obtain consent for the study. To ensure a robust co nsent 
conversation one coordinator and one of the PI/Sub -I members will be present for each consent 
conversation.  In the case that the subject is admitted to the CICU at the time of consent, study team 
members who are part of the subject’s CICU care team will not participate in the consent 
conversation.  We do not anticipate obtaining assent for this study as the Fontan procedure is not 
typically done on patients over 5 years old.  
 
O. PROCEDURES TO BE EMPLOYED IN ANALYZING DATA  AND THE ANTICIPATED 
SIGNIFICAN CE OF THE PROPOSED STUDY  
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18  We propose that p ostoperative low dose vasopressin (VP) infusion initiated after separation from 
cardiopulmonary bypass will be associated with improved hemodynamic profile  and overall lower 
resource utilization.  
 
Data will be compared using a t -test for continuous normally distributed data. For skewed data, such 
as LOS, data will be compared using a Mann Whitney U.  Categorical data will be analyzed using a 
Chi-square test. If the expected value of any cell is less than five th en a Fishers Exact test will be 
used.  Dichotomous outcome variables will be analyzed using logistic regression and potential 
confounders will be controlled for.  All tests will be conducted as two -tailed tests with a significance 
level of 0.05.  
  
P. FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIPS  
There is no cost to the patient, their guardians, or their insurance company for participation in this 
study. Investigators have no financial relationships to disclose . Some funding from this study has 
been obtained from CHW to be used to offset the cost of lab testing.  
 
Q. ADVERTISEMENTS / FLIERS  
No advertisements or fliers will be used for recruitment in this study.  
 
R. BIBLIOGRAPHY (list pertinent literature references)  
 1. Delmas A, Leone M, Rousseau S, Albanese J, Martin C. Clinical review: Vasopressin and 
terlipressin in septic shock patients. Crit Care . 2005;9(2):212 -222. 
2. Leibovitch L, Efrati O, Vardi A, Matok I, Barzilay Z, Paret G. Intractable hypotension in sept ic 
shock: Successful treatment with vasopressin in an infant. Isr Med Assoc J . 2003;5(8):596 -598. 
3. Tsuneyoshi I, Yamada H, Kakihana Y, Nakamura M, Nakano Y, Boyle WA,3rd. Hemodynamic and 
metabolic effects of low -dose vasopressin infusions in vasodilatory  septic shock. Crit Care Med . 
2001;29(3):487 -493. 
4. Rosenzweig EB, Starc TJ, Chen JM, et al. Intravenous arginine -vasopressin in children with 
vasodilatory shock after cardiac surgery. Circulation . 1999;100(19 Suppl):II182 -6. 
5. Hall LG, Oyen LJ, Taner CB , et al. Fixed -dose vasopressin compared with titrated dopamine and 
norepinephrine as initial vasopressor therapy for septic shock. Pharmacotherapy . 2004;24(8):1002 -
1012.  
6. Gaies MG, Gurney JG, Yen AH, et al. Vasoactive -inotropic score as a predictor of m orbidity and 
mortality in infants after cardiopulmonary bypass. Pediatr Crit Care Med . 2010;11(2):234 -238. 
7. Gaies MG, Jeffries HE, Niebler RA, et al. Vasoactive -inotropic score is associated with outcome 
after infant cardiac surgery: An analysis from the  pediatric cardiac critical care consortium and virtual 
PICU system registries. Pediatr Crit Care Med . 2014;15(6):529 -537. 
8. Argenziano M, Choudhri AF, Oz MC, Rose EA, Smith CR, Landry DW. A prospective randomized 
trial of arginine vasopressin in the trea tment of vasodilatory shock after left ventricular assist device 
placement. Circulation . 1997;96(9 Suppl):II -286-90. 
9. Landry DW, Levin HR, Gallant EM, et al. Vasopressin deficiency contributes to the vasodilation of 
septic shock. Circulation . 1997;95(5): 1122 -1125.  
10. Landry DW, Levin HR, Gallant EM, et al. Vasopressin pressor hypersensitivity in vasodilatory 
septic shock. Crit Care Med . 1997;25(8):1279 -1282.  
Vasopressin Study  Protocol  
Last Update 5.10.18  11. Kampmeier TG, Rehberg S, Westphal M, Lange M. Vasopressin in sepsis and septic shock. 
Minerva  Anestesiol . 2010;76(10):844 -850. 
12. Kumar TK, Kashyap P, Figueroa M, et al. Vasopressin after the fontan operation. World J Pediatr 
Congenit Heart Surg . 2016;7(1):43 -48. 
13. Dunser MW, Mayr AJ, Ulmer H, et al. The effects of vasopressin on systemic hemod ynamics in 
catecholamine -resistant septic and postcardiotomy shock: A retrospective analysis. Anesth Analg . 
2001;93(1):7 -13. 
14. Jerath N, Frndova H, McCrindle BW, Gurofsky R, Humpl T. Clinical impact of vasopressin infusion 
on hemodynamics, liver and rena l function in pediatric patients. Intensive Care Med . 
2008;34(7):1274 -1280.  
15. Tweddell JS, Nersesian M, Mussatto KA, et al. Fontan palliation in the modern era: Factors 
impacting mortality and morbidity. Ann Thorac Surg . 2009;88(4):1291 -1299.  
16. Hirsch JC, Goldberg C, Bove EL, et al. Fontan operation in the current era: A 15 -year single 
institution experience. Ann Surg . 2008;248(3):402 -410. 
17. Meyer DB, Zamora G, Wernovsky G, et al. Outcomes of the fontan procedure using 
cardiopulmonary bypass with aort ic cross -clamping. Ann Thorac Surg . 2006;82(5):1611 -8; discussion 
1618 -20. 
18. Evora PR, Pearson PJ, Schaff HV. Arginine vasopressin induces endothelium -dependent 
vasodilatation of the pulmonary artery. V1 -receptor -mediated production of nitric oxide. Ches t. 
1993;103(4):1241 -1245.  
19. Sai Y, Okamura T, Amakata Y, Toda N. Comparison of responses of canine pulmonary artery and 
vein to angiotensin II, bradykinin and vasopressin. Eur J Pharmacol . 1995;282(1 -3):235 -241. 
20. Novella S, Martinez AC, Pagan RM, et al. Plasma levels and vascular effects of vasopressin in 
patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg . 2007;32(1):69 -76. 
21. Morrison WE, Simone S, Conway D, Tumulty J, Johnson C, Car darelli M. Levels of vasopressin in 
children undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass. Cardiol Young . 2008;18(2):135 -140. 
22. Mastropietro CW, Rossi NF, Clark JA, et al. Relative deficiency of arginine vasopressin in children 
after cardiopulmonary bypass. Crit Ca re Med . 2010;38(10):2052 -2058.  
23. Lechner E, Hofer A, Mair R, Moosbauer W, Sames -Dolzer E, Tulzer G. Arginine -vasopressin in 
neonates with vasodilatory shock after cardiopulmonary bypass. Eur J Pediatr . 2007;166(12):1221 -
1227.  
24. Mastropietro CW, Clark J A, Delius RE, Walters HL,3rd, Sarnaik AP. Arginine vasopressin to 
manage hypoxemic infants after stage I palliation of single ventricle lesions. Pediatr Crit Care Med . 
2008;9(5):506 -510. 
25. Alten JA, Borasino S, Toms R, Law MA, Moellinger A, Dabal RJ. Ear ly initiation of arginine 
vasopressin infusion in neonates after complex cardiac surgery. Pediatr Crit Care Med . 
2012;13(3):300 -304. 
 
 
 
 