 
 
UCSD Human Research Protections Program  
New Biomedical Application  
RESEARCH PLAN  
Version Date: 03/20/2017  
1. PROJECT TITLE  
Evaluation of the effect of subcutaneous hyaluronidase administration on psoriatic plaques  
2. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  
Tissa Hata, M.D., Clinical Professor and Di rector of Clinical Trials, UCSD  
3. FACILITIES  
UCSD Dermatology Outpatient  Clinic (University Center Lane, La Jolla)  
4. ESTIMATED DURATION OF THE STUDY  
3 years  
5. LAY LANGUAGE SUMMARY OR SYNOPSIS (no more than one paragraph)  
Dendritic cells are a key component of the inflammatory response seen in psoriasis.  Several current psoriasis 
therapies have been shown to reduce the number of dendritic cells in patients with psoriasis , leading researchers 
to believe that therapies specifically targeting dendritic cells may lead to improvement in psoriaisis . Research 
recently conducted in Dr. Gallo’s lab has shown that transgenic mice overexpressing the enzyme hyaluronidase 
have a significant decrease in the number of dendritic cells in the dermal component of their skin compared to 
wild type mice.  If hyaluronidase overexpression in hum ans also decreases the number of dendritic cells in the 
dermis, then hyaluronidase therapy may improve the clinical presentation of psoriasis.  In order to test this 
hypothesis, we plan to inject recombinant human hyaluronidase (Hylenex ®) subcutaneously be low a psoriatic 
plaque in human psoriasis patients every week for a total of 4 weeks.  Each week we will measure the clinical 
appearance of the plaque.  At visit  5we will also take skin biopsies of the treated plaque to visualize the 
histology of t he plaqu e and look for changes in expression of different inflammatory markers.  
6. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 To determine whether administration of subcutaneous hyaluronidase (Hylenex ®) into a psoriasis plaque is 
able to improve its clinical appearance  
 To determine whether administration of subcutaneous hyaluronidase (Hylenex ®) into a psoriasis plaque is 
able to change its histologic appearance  
 
If there appears to be either a clinical or histologic change in the psoriatic plaque after subcutaneous 
hyaluronidase (Hylenex ®) administration, we will also attempt the following aim:  
 
 To determine whether administration of subcutaneous hyaluronidase (Hylenex ®) into a psoriasis plaque 
down -regulates the expression of inflammatory markers interferon α ( INFα), tumor necrosis factor α 
(TNFα), Toll-like receptor (TLR)  7, TLR 8, or TLR 9  
7. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin condition affecting approximately 2% of the population1.  Affected 
patients experience  raised, well -demarcated, erythematous plaq ues with an overlying silvery scale  on various 
parts of their skin .  These lesions are  associated with significant morbidity. Patients are embarrassed by the 
appearance of their skin; the lesions can be extremely itchy, causing distraction and difficulty s leeping; and 
most medications have significant side effects. In addition, patients with psoriasis, like those with other major 
medical disorders, have reduced levels of employment and income as well as a decreased quality of life2,3.  
 
The pathogenesis of psoriasis is thought to be initiated by triggers such as physical trauma or bacterial products 
that start a cascade of events, including the formation of self -DNA/LL -37 complexes.  These complexes are 
recognized by Toll -like receptors on dendritic cells, a ctivating the dendritic cells and causing them to secrete 
IFN-α. Activated dendritic cells then migrate into draining lymph nodes and induce the differentiation of naive 
T cells into effector cells such as type 17 helper T cells (Th17) or type 17 cytotoxic T cells (Tc17) and type 1 
helper T cells (Th1) or type 1 cyto toxic T cells (Tc1). Effector cells continue to recirculate , and immune cells 
expressing the chemokine receptors CCR6, CCR4, and CXCR3 emigrate into skin tissue along chemokine 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application  
Page 2 gradients.  
 
Current therapeutic options for psoriasis target different points i n the psoriatic cascade  described above , 
including cytokines secretion and T cell activation and differentiation.   Another therapeutic option, psoralen 
and ultraviolet A (PUVA), has been shown to reduce the number of dendritic cells in patients with psoria sis, 
providing key support for the role of these cells in the psoriatic cascade.  Furthermore, A functional and 
potentially therapeutic role of dendritic cells as potential drug targets has also be en shown in models of 
psoriasis50.  In this study we hope to confirm the role of dendritic cells as a therapeutic target in psoriasis by 
injecting psoriatic plaques with an enzyme shown to decrease dendritic cell abundance in the animal model 
described below.  
 
Hyaluronan is a major component of the dermal and epidermal extracellular matrix.  An extraordinarily wide 
variety of biological functions have been attributed to HA including roles as a space -filling molecule 
maintaining hydration,  lubrication of joints and actions in angiogenesis (19), and immune regulation (21, 22) .  
Although the nascent size of hyaluronan is typically very large, large molecular w eight hyaluronan undergoes 
breakdown after wounding into small fragments. These hyaluronan fragments can then interact with endothelial 
cells, macrophages and dendritic cells.  Dr. Gallo’s lab recently set out to investigate the role of hyaluronan 
breakdow n in vivo  using a transgenic mouse model overexpressing hyaluronidase, the enzyme responsible for 
breaking larger molecular weight hyaluronan into fragments.  Results from these studies showed that 
hyaluronidase over -expressing mice had a significantly low er number of dendritic cells in the dermal 
compartment of the skin compared to wild type mice.  The mice were otherwise morphologically normal 
compared to wild type mice and had no signi ficant laboratory abnormalities during a hematologic survey that 
inclu ded a complete blood count, blood chemistry, coagulation and bleeding time except for a slight but 
significant increase in LDL.   Since dendritic cells also play a role in mounting an inflammatory response to 
contact allergens, the ability of the hyaluronid ase over -expressing mice were also tested to determine whether 
or not they were able to mount an allergic response.  The transgenic mice were sensitized with the hapten 
eFluor670, which is known to cause a contact hypersensitivity reaction in wild type mic e.  Cutaneous 
inflammation was neither observed visually nor detected biochemically in the transgenic mice after application 
of this agent, suggesting that these mice were unable to mount an immune response to the agent because they 
lacked a sufficient num ber of dermal dendritic cells to mount an allergic response to this agent.  Taken together, 
these results in these mice suggest that hyaluronidase overexpression, which causes breakdown of high 
molecular weight hyaluronan into small fragments, lack dendrit ic cells in their dermis that can prevent antigen 
presentation and reduce the resulting inflammatory cascade usually caused by exogenous stimuli.  
 
In this study, we propose a plan that would allow us to test our hypothesize that hyaluronidase may have a ro le 
in treating psoriasis by reducing the number of dendritic cells in the dermis.  Since dendritic cells play a key 
role in the inflammatory cascade of psoriasis, reducing their expression in the dermis could prevent the 
propagation of this inflammatory ca scade.   
 
Hylenex ® is a recombinant form of human hyaluronidase that is FDA - approved for subcutaneous 
administration as an adjuvant for subcutaneous fluid administration for achieving hydration, to increase the 
dispersion and absorption of other injected drugs, and in subcutaneous urography for improving resorption of 
radiopaque agents.  In this study we will inject Hylenex ® subcutaneously beneath a psoriatic plaque every 
week for 4 weeks.  Over the course of those 4 weeks we will observe the plaque for cl inical changes.  After the 
last administration of the drug, we will also do a skin biopsy of the treated plaque to determine whether any 
histologic changes have occurred.  If there do appear to be histologic signs of psoriasis improvement, we will 
run RT -PCR of a second biopsy taken at the same time as the first biopsy to determine the expression levels of 
inflammatory cytokines such as IFN -α and receptors of inflammatory signals such as Toll -like receptors (TLR) 
7-9 are different in these psoriatic plaques . 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application  
Page 3  
8. PROGRESS REPORT  
None.  
9. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
Participation in this study will consist of a total of 5 visits  (plus 2 optional visits for a total of 7 visits)  to the 
UCSD Dermatology Clinic over approximately a three -month period.  At the first visit, two psoriatic plaques 
between 2 -cm and 5 -cm in diameter to be studied in this trial will be agreed upon by the patient as well as the 
blinded and unblinded investigator s.  Preference will be given to plaques on the elbows since the elbow is a 
common place of psoriatic plaques, and since scarring on the elbows is usually more acceptable than scarring 
on other parts of the skin since the skin on the elbows is naturally hyperpigmented in most people.  For the 
remainder of the study, all grading an d measurements of the psoriatic plaques will be completed by a blinded 
investigator who is unaware of which plaque is receiving which treatment.  An unblinded investigator will 
complete all other portions of the study visit, including digital photography, injecting the plaques, and 
completing the biopsies.  The patient will also be blinded as to which plaque is being injected with which 
treatment.  
 
During the first 4 visits, we will be injecting the plaques with 1 -mL of Hylenex® or 1 -mL of sterile 
(pharmace utical grade) normal saline ( NS).  1-mL of Hyelenx® contains 150 Units of recombinant 
hyaluronidase.  This is the standard dose of the drug that has been approved by the FDA , and therefore this 
dose is considered to be safe for use in adults .  If injected subcutaneously into the center of a psoriatic plaque 
that is between 2 and 5 centimeters in diameter, this 1 -mL dose should be able to diffuse throughout the entire 
area beneath the plaque.  The exact pharmacokinetics of Hylenex® are difficult to study due  to its rapid 
inactivation after intravenous injection.  According to the Hylenex® package insert, though, disruptions to the 
dermal barrier that occur in response to subcutaneous Hyelenx® injection persist 24 hours after injection, but 
this barrier is com pletely restored after 48 hours.  We expect cutaneous dendritic cells residing in the epidermis 
to migrate away from the epidermis through either lymphatic or vascular channels after Hylenex® is injected.  
This process should  take only a few  hours.  Since cutaneous dendritic cells are thought to turnover only every 
1-2 weeks, we would not expect new dendritic cells to populate the epidermis before patients receive the next 
injection of Hylenex®.  Since dendritic cell activation initiates the inflammatory ca scade thought to result in 
psoriasis, preventing dendritic cells from being harbored in the epidermis should essentially prevent the 
inflammatory cascade that results in psoriasis.  Therefore, we hope that during the month -long period while 
patients are re ceiving Hylenex ® injections, the inflammatory cascade triggering their psoriasis will be turned 
off, allowing their affected plaques to heal  without further propagation of psoriasis .  We therefore hope to see 
differences in the Hylenex® -treated versus the NS-treated plaques both morphologically and histologically 
when we complete our final set of biopsies on the Visit 5.  
 
 
The specific procedures planned for each visit are described below : 
 
Screening/Baseline Visit (Visit 1/Day -28 to 1): After signing info rmed consent, participants  will first be 
screened to ensure that they are eligible for the study.  This includes undergoing any necessary wash -out period 
in the case that the subject has treated their psoriasis with any topical agents (topical steroids, vi tamin D, or 
calcineurin inhibitors) within 7 days of the screening/baseline visit, or any oral or injectable treatments 
(cyclosporine, methotrexate, immuran, oral retinoids,  chemotherapeutic agents, anti -inflammatory biologics 
such as alefacept, etanercept , or oral calcineurin inhibitors ) within 28 days of the screening/baseline visit.  If 
patients have taken one of these medications within the specified time and are still interested in participating in 
the study, they must hold that medication for a total of 7 days for topical agents and 28 days for oral/injectable 
agents and return for a baseline visit.  For subjects who  are eligible for the study, we will then take a brief 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application  
Page 4 medical history and do a physical exam.  Next we will choose two of their psoriasis  plaques to monitor 
throughout the study.  Both plaques must be between  2-cm and 5 -cm in diameter, and must be in different 
locations on the body (either on different extremities or one on an extremity and the other on the trunk).  One of 
these plaques wil l be treated with Hylenex ® over the course of the trial, while the other will be treated with NS 
to use as a control plaque.  First we will take pictures of the two plaques using a digital camera in order to 
visually compare the plaques and to use as a ref erence for determining the location of the plaque in future visits 
should the plaque(s) resolve over the course of the trial.  The photographs will not contain any identifying 
information.  They will be uploaded onto a password -protected computer and saved  under the patient’s unique 
study identification number, which will not be traceable to any identifying information about the patient on the 
computer.  A blinded investigator  will grade the severity of the plaques using known psoriatic grading scales 
such as the Physician’s Global Assessment (PGA) and the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI)  and will 
also take measurements of the plaque sizes.  The unblinded investigator  will then do one (1) 4-millimeter punch 
biopsies of the two plaque s.  These biops ies will be fixed in formalin for histologic examination (to be read by 
Dr. Hind s), and will be frozen for later use for RT -PCR to determine expression levels of inflammatory 
cytokines and receptors including TNFα, IFNα, and TLR 7, 8 and 9.  There will not b e any genetic testing done 
on this tissue, nor will it be stored for later use in other research projects.  We will then inject a single dose (1 
mL, or 150 units) of Hylenex ® subcutaneously under the skin of the plaque designated the treatment plaque .  
We will next inject the control plaque with 1 mL NS subcutaneously. We will monitor the patient for thirty (30) 
minutes after the injection to ensure the patient does not have a reaction to the injection s prior to them leaving 
the clinic.   The total length of  this visit will be approximately one hour  and 15 minutes . 
 
 Visit 2  (Day 8 +/ - 1): Participants  will return to the clinic, where we will first record any adverse events since 
the last visit .  We will take digital photographs of the two psoriasis plaques o f interest in this study to document 
changes in the plaque since the last visit.  The photographs will not contain any identifying information.  Next 
the blinded investigator  will grade the severity of the psoriasis plaques  of interest using the PGA and PA SI 
scores, as well as by taking measurements of the plaque sizes .  The unblinded investigator  will then administer 
a 1 mL (equivalent to 150 units) dose of Hylenex ® under the skin of the same plaque injected at Visit 1.   We 
will next administer a subcutane ous injection of 1 mL NS to the control plaque.  We will monitor the patient for 
thirty (30) minutes after the injection s to ensure the patient does not have a reaction to the injection prior to 
them leaving the clinic.   The total length of this visit will  be approximately 45 minutes.  
 
Visit 3  (Day 15 +/ - 1): The activities of Visit 3 will be identical to those of Visit 2  
 
Visit 4  (Day 22 +/ - 1): The activities of Visit 4 will be identical to those of Visit 2  
 
Visit 5  (Day 29 +/ - 1):  We will first record a ny adverse events .  We will take digital photographs of the two 
psoriasis plaques of interest in this study to document changes in the plaque s since the last visit.  The 
photographs will not contain any identifying information.  The blinded investigator  will then grade the severity 
of the psoriasis plaques  of interest, including size measurements .  Finally, the unblinded investigator  will 
perform to one (1) 4-millimeter punch biopsies of the plaque we injected with Hylenex ® during previous visit s, 
and one (1) 4-millimeter punch biopsies of the plaque we previously injected with NS.  The  biopsy from both 
the treatment and control psoriatic plaques will be fixed in formalin for histologic examination  (to be ready by 
Dr. Robert Lee  or Dr. Casey Carlos ), and wi ll be stored at -80° Celsius  for later use for RT -PCR to determine 
expression levels inflammatory cytokines and receptors such as  TNFα, IFNα, and TLR 7, 8 and 9.   The total 
length of this visit will be approximately 30 minutes.  
 
Phone 1 (Day 59 +/ - 7):  
Subjects will be called approximately one month after Visit 5.  Patients can opt for an optional in -clinic visit 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application  
Page 5 instead of a phone call if so desired. During this phone call, subjects will be asked about any adverse events 
(including serious adverse events)  since their last follow -up visit, as well as how their psoriasis is currently 
doing. If patients opt for an in -clinic visit, digital photographs of the two psoriasis plaques of interest will be 
taken to document changes in the plaques since the last visit . The photographs will not contain any identifying 
information.  
 
Phone 2 (Day 109 +/ - 7):  
Subjects will be called approximately 2 months after Visit 5. Patients can opt for an optional in -clinic visit 
instead of a phone call if so desired. During this ph one call, subjects will be asked about any adverse events 
(including serious adverse events) since their last follow -up visit, as well as how their psoriasis is currently 
doing. If patients opt for an in -clinic visit, digital photographs of the two psorias is plaques of interest will be 
taken to document changes in the plaques since the last visit. The photographs will not contain any identifying 
information. Although this phone contact or in -clinic visit will be the last scheduled contact for subjects with 
respect to this study, any subject with an ongoing adverse event (including serious adverse event) at the time of 
this phone contact/clinic visit will continue to be followed by study personnel until resolution of the event.  
 
 
Statistics  
Sample size calcul ation:  Since this study is a proof -of-concept pilot study, there is no sample size calculation 
for this study.   
Comparison of psoriatic plaques:   
The treated plaque for each individual will be compared at each visit to the previous visit  in terms of PGA, 
PASI and area using a paired t -test.   
Each participant’s  baseline biopsy for histology will be compared to the histology of the treated plaque by our 
dermatopathologist to determine whether there appears to be any histologic changes in the plaque treated with 
Hylenex ® compared to the untreated plaque.  These histologic changes will include the number of dendritic 
cells in particular slices of the biopsy, as well as histologic markers of psoriasis severity.  
Each participant’s baseline biopsy for expression l evels of  inflammatory cytokines and receptors including  
TNFα, IFNα, and TLR 7, 8 and 9 will be compared to the expression levels of these cytokines and receptors  in 
the treated psoriatic plaque using a paired t -test. 
 
10. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Ten patients with a clinical diagnosis of psoriasis  on physical exam wil l be recruited for this study.  All subjects 
will be between the ages of 18 and 65 .  Enrollment will not take race or gender into consideration.  Women of 
child -bearing potential (pre -menopausal females who have not been surgically sterilized) , children (u nder age 18), 
and unhealthy subjects with significant co -morbid conditions as determined by the PI will be excluded.  
 
This study is planned as a single center at the University of California , San Diego.  
 
SUBJECT ELIGIBILITY  
 
Inclusion Criteria :  
Those who m eet all of the following criteria are eligible for enrollment into the study:      
1.         Diagnosis of plaque psoriasis for at least 6 months , with at least 2 psoriatic plaques on different parts of  
            the body that are both between  2-cm and 5-cm in diameter at the time of screening  
2.         Age 18 -65 years  
3. Male subjects who agree to use barrier methods for contraception throughout the course of the trial  if their  
            female partners are of child -bearing potential , or female subjects not of child -bearing potential  
4. Subject agrees to comply with study requirements  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application  
Page 6 5.         Subject is fluent in English and is able to provide  written  informed consent  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Subjects with severe medical condition(s) that in the vi ew of the investigator prohibits participation in the study  
2. Subject has Netherton’s syndrome or other genodermatoses that result in a defective epidermal barrier  
3.  Subjects who have applied topical medications (prescription or over -the-counter) for th e treatment of psoriasis   
     to their body  within 7 days of the baseline visit  
4.  Subjects who have taken cyclosporine, methotrexate, immuran, oral retinoids, chemotherapeutic agents, anti - 
     inflammatory biologics (e.g., alefacept, etanercept, etc.) , or oral calcineurin inhibitors within 28 days of the  
     baseline visit  
5.  Subjects who are unable to hold their current psoriasis  medications for the period of time indicated ( at least 7  
     days for topical medications, at least 28 days for oral o r injectable medications) without significant worsening  
     of their psoriasis  
6. Immunocompromised subjects (e.g., lymphoma, HIV/AIDS, Wiskott -Aldrich Syndrome), or subjects with a  
     history of malignant disease (excluding non -melanoma skin cancer) as determined by the participant’s medical  
     history.  
7.  Subjects r eceiving phototherapy (e.g., ultraviolet light B [UVB], psoralen plus ult raviolet light A [PUVA])  
     within  28 days of  the baseline visit  
8. Subjects with a history of psychiatric d isease or history of alcohol or drug abuse that would interfere with the  
     ability to comply with the study protocol  
9. Subjects with significant concurrent medical condition(s) at screening that in the view of the investigator  
     prohibits particip ation in the study (e.g., severe concurrent allergic disease, condition associated with  
     malignancy, and condition associated with immunosuppression)  
10.  Subjects who have used any systemic antibiotics within 28 days of the baseline visit  
11.  Subjec ts with an active bacterial, viral or fungal skin infection (excluding nail fungus)  
12.  Subjects  currently receiving lithium or have received lithium within the last 4 weeks.  
13.  Ongoing participation in an investigational drug trial  
14.  Subjects with d iabetes requiring medication  
15.  Presence of psoriasis with exfoliative erythroderma or presence of guttate psoriasis, primary palmoplantar  
        psoriasis, or pustular psoriasis  
16.  Hypersensitivity to hyaluronidase or any other ingredient in the for mulation of hyaluronidase, as well as  
       subjects with an allergy or hypersensitivity to lidocaine  
17.  Subjec ts taking furosemide, benzodiaze pines, phenytoin , salicylates, cortisone, antihistamines or estrogens  
 
REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT OF SUBJECTS  
Subjects have the right to withdraw fully or partially from the study at any time and for any reason without 
prejudice to his or her future medical care by the physician or at UCSD.  All data generated up to the time of 
discontinuation from the study will be  analyzed and the reason for dis continuation will be recorded.  
11. RECRUITMENT  
Patients will be recruited from the practice of the investigators  (once the study starts, investigators will ask 
psoriasis patients who they see in their clinic if they are i nterested in participating in a clinical trial) , online 
advertisements placed on Craigslist, and fliers .  Recruitment will be performed by investigators and study 
coordinators.  All recruitment materials will receive approval from the IRB before utilizatio n. Involvement will be 
completely voluntary (no coercion) and all risks will be clearly outlined and explained prior to enrollment. 
Involvement will not lead to promotion or any salary compensation.  
12. INFORMED CONSENT  
Informed consent is an ongoing pro cess that includes the signing of an informed consent form. Subjects will be 
required to sign an informed consent form prior to being screened and before undergoing any study procedures or 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application  
Page 7 assessments, in accordance with ICH E6; 4.8, “Informed Consent of T rial Subjects.  The informed consent 
process will occur at the UCSD outpatient dermatology clinic in La Jolla. After first being told about the study 
and its risks and benefits, participants will be given a minimum of 3 days to fully consider their willing ness to 
participate in the study before coming in to sign the consent form during their screening visit.  Before any other 
procedures at the screening visit, s ubjects will be provided with a copy of the informed consent form and printed 
materials that expl ain the purpose of the study, procedures, and assessments. Subjects will also be provided with 
the telephone numbers of the investigator and qualified personnel who can assist with their questions and 
concerns.  Members of the research team listed below wi ll be involved in this consenting procedure.  Once the 
consent form has been signed and dated, the participant can proceed with the screening procedures.  
 
Please see attached consent form.  
 
Withdrawal of full consent for a study means that the subject does  not wish to receive further investigational 
treatment and does not wish to or is unable to continue further study participation.  Any subject may withdraw full 
consent to participate in the study at any time during the study.  The investigator will discus s with the subject the 
most appropriate way to withdraw to  ensure the subject’s health.  Patients may withdraw their consent at any 
point in the study without risk of compromising future care at UCSD.  
13. ALTERNATIVES TO STUDY PARTICIPATION  
The alternati ve to participating would be not to participate in the trial.  Patients not wanting to enroll in the 
study but still wanting to treat their psoriasis will need to see a dermatologist to discuss other therapeutic 
options, which include topical steroids, met hotrexate and biologics.  
14. POTENTIAL RISKS  
Risks of Hylenex ® 
Hylenex ® has been FDA -approved as an adjuvant in subcutaneous fluid administration for achieving 
hydration, to increase the dispersion and absorption of other injected drugs, and in subcutane ous urography for 
improving resorption of radiopaque agents in the same dosages being used in this study.  Nonetheless, the use 
of Hylenex ® still has risks.   These risks will be listed below:  
1. The most frequently reported adverse reactions to Hylenex ® have been local injection site reactions 
such as erythema and pain in response to Hylenex ® injections.  These reactions are self -limited and 
tend to resolve spontaneously over a period of a few days.   
2. Hypersensitivit ies or allergies  to hyaluronidase or any oth er ingredient in the formulation have been 
reported in less than 0.1% of patients receiving Hylenex ®.  Rare anaphylactic -like reactions after 
Hylenex ® administration have occurred, but only after retrobulbar blocks or intravenous injections . 
Although neith er of these routes of administration will be used in  this study , an anaphylactic reaction is 
possible . 
3. Hylenex ® recombinant contains albumin, which is a derivative of human blood that may carry a remote 
risk of transmitting infectious agents, e.g., viruses  and theoretically, the Creutzfeldt -Jakob disease 
(CJD) agent. No cases of transmission of viral diseases, CJD, or variant CJD (vCJD) have ever been 
identified for licensed albumin or albumin contained in other licensed products.  
4. Hyaluronidase is antigenic ; repeated injections of relatively  large amounts of hyaluronidase preparations 
may result in the formation of neutralizing  antibodies.  Since we are only administering 4 injections  of 
Hylenex ®, each containing the dose recommended by the manufacturer, we do not anticipate antibody 
production to be an issue.  
5. Hylenex ® can enhance the spread of local infections when administered in an infected site.  Psoriatic 
plaques do not typically get infected, however we will avoid injecting the medication into a plaque that 
appears to be infected or is surrounded by skin with clinical signs of infection or excoriations 
representing recent trauma to the skin.   
6. Hylenex ® is categorized as Pregnancy Class C by the FDA ( Animal reproduction studies have shown 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application  
Page 8 an adverse effec t on the fetus and there are no adequate and well -controlled studies in humans ) 
 
For additional information  on the risks of Hylenex ®, please see the product insert included with this 
submission.  
 
Risks of  Normal Saline  
Normal saline  is a solution commonly used in biological research. It is a salt solution with an  osmolarity that 
match es that of the human body (isotonic), therefore we do not expect there to be risks associated with 
subcutaneous administration of this medication.  
 
Risks associated with Hylene x®/NS injections  
Risks associated with injecting Hylenex ®/NS include the following:  
1. Pain 
2. Tenderness at the injection site for a few days  
3. Worsening of psoriasis at the injection site  
4. Infection  
5. Redness and /or swelling at the site of the injection  
 
Risks of m edication withdrawal  
Discontinuation of a person’s psoriasis medication prior to participating in this study  may result in worsening 
of the patient’s  psoriasis.  After the study, patients will be allowed to resume their standard psoriasis treatment 
regimen s, however during the study they will not be permitted to use their regular medications or any other 
medications for psoriasis .  Subjects’  usual treatment regimens are still expected to be efficacious after 
participating in the study, however if the patien t’s psoriasis is much worse than before the study, they may need 
to temporarily increase the strength or dose of their regular psoriasis medications.  Patients will be advised to 
see the dermatologist who prescribes their me dications to help them in making  any such medication 
adjustments.  Similarly, if Hylenex ® use improve s a patient’s psoriasis, discontinuation of this medication at 
the end of the study may cause worsening of their psoriasis.  We would recommend patients resume their  
regular psoriasis med ications at the end of the study to prevent this rebound effect from happening.  We would 
expect the patient’s  psoriasis to respond to their usual medication regimen just as it did before participating in 
the study.  
 
Risks of a skin biopsy  
The following ar e potential risks of a skin biopsy:  
 
1. Bleeding, infection, pain, and/or discomfort at the site of the biopsies.  
2. The biopsied areas will be tender for a few days following the procedures.  
3. The biopsy procedures will result in a small scar.  
4. The sk in may become temporarily inflamed  (swollen) as a result of these procedures.  
5. The subject may experience an allergic reaction (itchy rash on the body or fainting) to the  
            numbing medication.  
6. The biopsy site may develop  an increase or dec rease in the pigmentation (color) of the skin.  
 
Risk of Loss of Confidentiality  
Samples will be labeled with the subject identification number prior to storage and only study investigators and 
study coordinators will have access to the patients’ identifyi ng information. The patients name and sample/test 
results will be stored separately and securely, but the principal investigator and site study staff will know which 
samples belongs to which patients until one year following the end of this study. At that time, the link between 
the subject and their sample will be destroyed and it will not be possible to determine which samples belong to 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application  
Page 9 a particular patient. A patient may withdraw their sample from the study any time before the link between the 
patient and  the sample is broken.  Study participants will not be identified by name on any study documents.  
The study -related records will be maintained by the investigator. All study -related records (patient charts and 
other study records) must be retained at leas t 3 years after data analysis is complete.  Patients will be reassured 
that PHI will not be re -used or disclosed for other purposes.  
15. RISK MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES AND ADEQUACY OF RESOURCES  
Risk management procedures related to Hylenex ® were discussed ab ove in Section 14.  These procedures 
include:  
 Avoidance of Hylenex ® injection s in patients with an active skin infection  
 Administering Hylenex ® only in the dosages recommended by the manufacturer  
 Not administering Hylenex ® intravenously  
 Female subjects of child -bearing potential will not be enrolled in the study unless surgically sterilized, 
and male subjects whose partners are of child -bearing potential must agree to use barrier contraceptive 
methods during the course of the study . 
 
Further risk management  strategies related to Hylenex ® injections include the following:  
All adverse events will be seriously considered to determine whether or not they are related to the study 
procedures, including the administration of Hylenex ®.  Any participants having an ad verse event related to the 
study procedures will be considered for withdrawal from the study.  The PI will be responsible for determining 
whether it is in the subject’s best medical interest to be removed from the study.  
 
Risk management strategies related  to drug injections:  
In order to minimize the potential for an infection after drug injections, we will use a sterile need for all 
injections.  Needles will not be re -used on the same or different people.  We will also clean each plaque we are 
going to inj ect with an alcohol swab prior to doing the injection.  
 
Risk management strategies related to skin biopsies:  
To minimize potential risks, skin sites for biopsy will be cleaned. Patients will be excluded from study with 
known tape or anesthetic allergy. The  procedure will be done under aseptic conditions, and bleeding controlled 
by standard dermatologic techniques of pressure of electrocautery wound care instructions will be provided to 
all patients. It is extremely unlikely that an adverse reaction will occ ur as these procedures are routinely 
performed at our institution with rare (less than 1/10,000) reports of adverse effects. In the event of adverse 
outcome, all patients are provided with wound care instructions that contain emergency contact information for 
the dermatology service. If the subject is injured as a result of participation in this research, treatment will be 
available.  
 
Risk management strategies to avoid loss of confidentiality:  
To protect patient confidentiality, all samples will be encoded  and anonymous.   The link between subjects and 
their study identifier will be stored under lock and key, only accessible to the study coordinator and the PI.  
Strict adherence to current HIPPA guidelines will also minimize the risk of loss of  confidentiali ty. 
 
 
Site resources:  
The outpatient dermatology clinic at UCSD is fully staffed with between 5 to 7 physicians and up to 6 ancillary 
medical personnel (registered nurses and medical assistants) at any given time during regular business hours.  
In case of an emergency including a type 1 hypersensitivity reaction such as anaphylaxis, the clinic has 
automated machines for taking vitals; an automatic external defibrillator; and an emergency box containing 
needles and syringes, an epinephrine pen, a non -rebreat her mask with tubing that can be connected to one of 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application  
Page 10 several oxygen outlets in the clinic, and a first -aid kit.  All of these emergency supplies are checked daily to 
ensure that they are well -stocked and functional.  Furthermore, our clinic is located with in 3 miles of the 
UCSD -affiliated Thornton Hospital.  Emergency personnel will be contacted to transport subjects to this 
location should subjects require an escalated level of care.  
 
The subject may call the Human Research Protections Program at (858) 246-HRPP (4777)  to inquire about 
their rights as a research subject or to report research related problems.  
16. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY CONSIDERATIONS INCLUDING DATA ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT  
Personal information will be kept confidential and will be mainta ined at the UCSD Dermatology Outpatient 
Clinic in La Jolla . All research records will be labeled with a code number  so that they are de -identified . The 
list that matches the patient ’s name with the ir code number will be kept in a locked file at the UCSD 
Dermatology Clinic on the 3rd floor of University Pacific Center in La Jolla. The research records will be kept 
only as paper records in a secure location, or as files behind the secure computer firewall. Digital photographs 
will be identified by participant s’ code number, and will not contain any identifying information about the 
participant.  Photographs will not be used in any publications  or for any future uses .  Any presentations or 
publications from this information will not identify any personal inform ation.  Identifying information will only 
be available to the study PI  and study coordinator conducting patient visits .  De -identified information will be 
available to all other persons involved with the research study.   
17. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Animal st udies conducted in our lab on  mice suggest that subcutaneous hyaluronidase may improve psoriasis 
plaques.  If this is true, patients may experience improvement or even clearing in the psoriasis plaque that is 
treated.  This information may be beneficial to  the population of psoriasis patients in general, and may also 
promote further research leading to more knowledge regarding the effects of hyaluronic acid on psoriasis.  
18. RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
Skin biopsies are relatively safe and well -tolerated.  Hylenex ® is a relatively safe drug that is generally well -
tolerated with few side effects.   Animal studies have suggested that administration of this drug may improve 
psoriasis.  If so, not only will enrolled subjects benefit from improvement of their psoriasis, but also the 
population of patients with psoriasis could one day benefit from the findings in this study.  It is also possible 
that a patient’s psoriasis may not change with our dosing and frequency of Hylenex ® administration.  
Alternatively, patients’ pso riasis may even worsen with Hylenex ®, however they may withdra w from the study 
if they feel that their psoriasis is worsening and they do not wish to continue in the study .  Given the relatively 
low risk of the medication and the potential for patients to have an improvement in their psoriasis, it seems that 
the benefits of the study would outweigh the risks.  
19. EXPENSE TO PARTICIPANT  
None.   Hylenex will be provided free of charge to participants.  
20. COMPENSATION FOR PARTICIPATION  
Participants will be  compensated $5 0 per visit for completing Visit 1 , $20 each for completing Visits 2, 3 and 4, 
and $5 0 for completing Visit 5.   Payments will be issued in the form of a payment authorization through 
UCSD.   A single payment authorization for $160 will be iss ued to each participant upon the participant’s 
completion of the study.   If a person withdraws from the study (voluntarily or otherwise) before completing all 
of the study procedures, they will be issued a payment authorization for the total sum of money o wed to them 
based which visits they completed.  
 
21. PRIVILEGES/CERTIFICATIONS/LICENSES AND RESEARCH TEAM RESPONSIBILITIES  
Dr. Tissa Hata will be primarily responsible for overseeing the clinical portion of this study.  Dr. Hata holds a 
Californ ia Medical  License and she is a  Clinical Professor in the Department of Dermatology and Director of 
Clinical Trials in the Department  of Dermatology.   
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application  
Page 11 Yun Tong , MD, is a Clinical Research Fellow who will be involved in study coordination, enrollment 
interviews and  informed consent discussions. He will serve as the unblinded coordinator and therefore will also 
be responsible for administration of the study drug.  He will also serve as the study pharmacist and therefore 
will also be responsible for the storage and proper handling of study drug.  Dr. Tong  is licensed to practice 
medicine in the State of California.  He currently serves as the pharmacist for several industry -sponsored 
clinical trials in the Department of Dermatology.  
 
Dr. Brian Hinds  is an Assistant Clinical Professor in the Department of Dermatology.  He is a board -certified 
Dermatologist and fellowship -trained/board -certified in Dermatopathology.  Dr. Lee holds a California Medical 
License . He will be responsible for analyzing the skin biopsies take n in this study.  
 
22. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
1. Christophers E. Psoriasis -- epidemiology and clinical spectrum. Clin Exp Dermatol  2001;26:314 -320 
2. Horn EJ, Fox KM, Patel V, Chiou CF, Dann F, Lebwohl M. Association of patient -reported psoriasis 
severity with income a nd employment. J Am Acad Dermatol  2007;57:963 -971 
3. Gelfand JM, Feldman SR, Stern RS, Thomas J, Rolstad T, Margolis DJ. Determinants of quality of life 
in patients with psoriasis: a study from the US population. J Am Acad Dermatol  2004;51:704 -708 
4. Nestle FO, Conrad C, Tun -Kyi A, et al. Plasmacytoid predendritic cells initiate psoriasis through 
interferon -alpha production. J Exp Med  2005;202:135 -143 
23. FUNDING SUPPORT FOR THIS STUDY  
Funding will be internal through the UCSD Department  of Dermatology and thro ugh a Fellowship Grant from 
the National Psoriasis Foundation.   
24. BIOLOGICAL MATERIALS TRANSFER AGREEMENT  
N/A  
25. INVESTIGATIONAL DRUG FACT SHEET AND IND/IDE HOLDER  
IND# 119899  
26. IMPACT ON STAFF  
None.  
27. CONFLICT OF INTEREST  
None.  
28. SUPPLE MENTAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR CANCER -RELATED STUDIES  
N/A  
29. OTHER APPROVALS/REGULATED MATERIALS  
None.  
30. PROCEDURES FOR SURROGATE CONSENT AND/OR DECISIONAL CAPACITY ASSESSMENT  
N/A (persons without decisional capacity or those needing a surrogate consenter  will not be enrolled ) 
 
 