Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  1 
Calcium chloride for the prevention of uterine atony during 
cesarean in women at increased risk of hemorrhage  
A pilot randomized controlled trial and pharmacokinetic study  
 
Jessica R. Ansari, MD 
Neil Kalariya, MD 
Brendan Carvalho, MBBCh, FRCA 
Pamela Flood, MD, MA 
Nan Guo, PhD 
Edward Riley, MD 
 
Stanford Institutional Review Board # 43076  
Clinical trial registry [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
KEYWORDS:  calcium chloride, calcium pharmacokinetics, maternal hemorrhage, 
obstetric hemorrhage , uterine atony  
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  2 
Summary  
 
Uterine atony is the leading cause of obstetric hemorrhage. Low calcium levels diminis h 
uterine muscle contractility and  response to oxytocin. Our aim is to assess  the 
effectiveness  and pharmacokinetic s of intravenous calcium chloride to prevent uterine 
atony. This will be a  single -center, double blind, randomized controlled  pilot trial . 
Women with at least 2 risk factors for uterine atony  at the time of c aesarean delivery w ill 
be randomized in 1:1 ratio to receive 1 -gram dilute calcium chloride  or saline placebo  in 
addition to  oxytocin after umbilical cord clamping. The primary outcome w ill be 
incidence of uterine atony , defined as  second -line uterotonic  requirement , uterine  
balloon, or estimated blood loss  (EBL)  >1000 mL .  
  
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  3 
 
Introduction : 
Postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) is the leading cause of maternal mortality 
worldwide .1 Uterine atony , defined as failure of the uterus to adequately contract after 
placental delivery, causes at least 70-80% of PPH .2 Current management of uterine 
atony  involves prophylaxis with oxytocin and treatment with second -line uterotonics  
including  methylergonovine, carboprost, and misoprostol. However , these medications 
all carry significant limitations of poor efficacy, adverse side effect profiles, expense, or 
contraindications to use.3 For example, methylergonovine is contraindicated in women 
with preeclampsia or hypertensive diseases, and carboprost , which may cost up to 
$1000 per dose,  is contraindicated in women with asthma.  As such, additional 
prevention or treatment modalities for uterine atony are needed.  
Calcium has an important physiological  role in uterine contractility. Uterine 
myometrial contractility is dependent upon an influx of calcium from intracellular stores 
in the sarcoplasmic reticulum as well as extracellular calcium.4 A number of in vitro 
studies have established that myometrial  contraction amplitude diminishes in the setting 
of low extracellular calcium.4-7 Oxytocin’s efficacy in inducing myometrial contraction 
diminishes by 60-75% in the setting of low or absent extracellular calcium levels  in in 
vitro studies with human uterine strips .7 Although the safety and lack of hemodynamic 
consequences of intravenous calcium infusion in parturients has been assessed in one 
study ,8 no clinical studies have been designed to assess the potential role for 
intravenou s calcium in preventing or treating  uterine atony or PPH  as a primary 
outcome . 
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  4 
. This pilot study was designed to assess whether intravenous calcium chloride 
warrants future study as an agent for prevention of uterine atony  and maternal 
hemorrhage . Our pri mary aim is to assess whether calcium , administered in addition to 
standard oxytocin to women with risk factors for developing uterine atony  during 
caesarean delivery,  warrants a large study for  efficac y in the prevention of uterine 
atony. We hypothesize t hat providing calcium  will augment uterine contraction and 
decrease the incidence of atony . Secondary aims include assessment of atony and 
hemorrhage -associated outcomes including estimated blood loss, fluid requirement, 
obstetrician assessment of tone. Other secondary aims assessed  include  potential side 
effects of calcium infusion including hemodynamic changes, discomfort  at the site of the 
intravenous catheter , nausea, and vomiting. Finally, population pharmacokinetics will be  
assessed as a secon dary aim to guide dosing in future studies.  
  
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  5 
Methods:  
Inclusion  criteria : Cesarean  delivery  with at least two of the following established 
risk factors for uterine atony : intrapartum delivery, oxytocin infusion for 4 hours  or 
longer , magnesium infusion, chorioamnionitis, multiple gestation, polyhydramnios, 
premature preterm rupture of membranes (PPROM), preterm at <34 weeks gestation, 
and prior history of postpartum hemorrhage.  
Exclusion criteria : renal dysfunction with serum creati nine >1.0  mg dL-1, maternal 
treatment with digoxin, maternal treatment with a calcium channel blocker, and maternal 
history of cardiac condition including arrhythmia, congenital cardiac disease , or 
coronary disease.  
Patients  admitted to the labor and delivery ward w ill be  provided a brief 
informational sheet regarding the study. Women who m eet inclusion criteria for the 
study w ill be subsequently approached by the clinical staff for written informed consent 
as long as the obs tetrician agree s that this discussion w ill not interfere with case 
urgency.  Not all women who me et study inclusion criteria w ill be approached; the 
patients included in this pilot study w ill be a convenience sample approached when the 
clinical service allo ws.  
As part of consent, women w ill be asked if they w ill permit the team to draw 3 
blood specimens for ionized calcium assessment and nested pharmacokinetic analysis;  
however, women who declined phlebotomy are still allowed study participation.   
Patients will be informed about possible side effects including intravenous line 
discomfort during the consent process and asked to inform the anesthesiologist if they 
experience this at any point during the delivery course. The anesthesiologist is 
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  6 
instructed to as sume all patients are receiving a 1 gram  bolus of calcium chloride, and 
to immediately discontinue the infusion if any concerns for medication extravasation, 
arrhythmia, hemodynamic disturbance, or for severe nausea or vomiting.  
Patients will be sequentially assigned to one of two  computer -gener ated random 
group s (Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA ) using in  a sealed, 
opaque envelope  system. Patients will either receive 1 gram of intravenous calcium 
chloride or saline placebo diluted to a total volume of 60mL with normal sal ine in 
addition to our ins titution’s standard oxytocin regimen ( 2 U bolus and 7.5 U  hr-1 infusion  
for 4 hours) . All participants including the obstetrician, supervising and resident 
anesthesiologists, patient , and study investigator collecting data w ill be blinded to the 
study solution received. An anesthesiologist with no further involvement in patient care 
will prepare the study solution in a different operating theater.  
Upon entering the operating room,  standard noninvasive monitors w ill be applied: 
pulse oximetry, electrocardiography (ECG), heart rate  (HR), and baseline non -invasive 
blood  pressure (NIBP).  Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP)  will be measured with an 
automated, non -invasive sphygmomanometer (Dinamap, Critikon Inc., Tampa, FL, 
USA) at 1 minute intervals until fetal delivery and hysterotomy closure and then at 2.5  
minute intervals at the discretion of the clinical anesthesiologist.  
All patients will have  an 18 -gauge peripheral intravenous cannula in place at the 
time of cesarean  delivery  per standard protocol . Lactated Ringers  solution w ill be 
administered at the discretion of the clinical anesthesiologist with general guidelines not 
to exceed 3  L during the c aesarean delivery . Total administered fluid volume will be 
recorded. Co lloid infusion with 6% hydroxyethyl starch in 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% 
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  7 
albumin is also recorded. Patients receive prophylactic phenylephrine infusion (starting 
at 0.5 mcg  kg-1 min-1) and phenylephrine (50-100 mcg) or ephedrine (5-10 mg) bolus 
doses as needed at the discretion of the clinical anesthesiologist to maintain MAP within 
20% of baseline. The total phenylephrine infusion dose received as well as total bolus 
doses of vasopressors w ill likewise  be left to the discretion of the clin ical 
anesthesiologist and recorded.  
Following fetal delivery and umbilical cord clamping, patients will receive 2 U 
oxytocin bolus, and oxytocin infusion will be initiated at a rate of 7.5 U hr-1. At this same 
time point, the 60  mL s tudy drug infusion will be administered over 10 minutes  using an 
Alaris syringe infusion pump (BD Alaris syringe module, Beckton, Dickinson and 
Company , Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) through microbore infusion tubing connected to the 
intravenous injection port most proximal to the pa tient. Adequacy of uterine tone (yes or 
no) will be formally assessed at 3, 6, and 10 minutes after delivery  by the operating 
obstetrician . If tone is deemed inadequate at 3 minutes or 6 minutes, a 2 U bolus of 
oxytoci n will be administered , and the oxytocin infusion rate  doubled. If at 10 minutes, 
tone is still deemed inadequate, a second -line uterotonic agent of intramuscular 
methylergonovine  200 mcg, intramuscular  250 mcg, or buccal misoprostol 600 mcg will 
be chosen at the discretion of t he obstetrician and clinical anesthesiologist and 
recorded. After leaving the operating theater, all patients receive our institution’s 
standard protocol of oxytocin 7.5 U hr-1 for 4 hours.  
 
 
 
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  8 
Primary outcome:  
The primary outcome will be  incidence of uterine atony , a binary composite 
outcome defined as any of the following: second -line uterotonic  requirement , EBL 
>1000 mL , placement of a Bakri balloon, B -lynch suture, or O’Leary sutures by the 
obstetrician, uterine artery embolization or hysterectomy. For this pilot study, any P 
value less than 0.2 is defined a priori as indicating potential for efficacy , and thus 
warranting a future , larger study.   
 
Secondary outcomes:  
Several secondary outcomes related to uterine atony and hemorrhage  will be 
assessed. At completion of study drug infusion (10 minutes after umbilical cord clamp), 
the operating obstetric attending w ill be  asked to assess and grade the uterine tone 
based upon palpation of the fundus using a verbal numerical scale score from 0 -100 
(0=completely atonic, 100=fully contracted). Blood loss w ill be estimated by visual 
examination of  the graduated suction jars, surgical sponges, drapes,  table and floor. 
The difference in preoperative and postoperative day 1 hematocrit  gathered as standard 
of care at our institution will be calculated. The total  volume of intravenous fluid given 
from start to conclusion of the surgical procedure  will be  recorded .  
For patients who consent to phlebotomy, blood specimens will be collected into a 
non-heparinized syringe at three different time intervals: once in the operating room 
prior to fetal delivery for a baseline value, once within 1 -30 minutes of comple ting study 
drug infusion, and once 30 minutes to 3 hours after completing study drug infusion . To 
allow for painless sample collection for patients with a surgical lumbar neuraxial block, a 
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  9 
tourniquet will be placed at the patient’s lower calf, and a 21 -gauge winged blood 
collection needle was utilized to collect a 3 mL venous specimen from the foot or 
saphenous vein. The ionized calcium level  and pH will be immediately determined with 
an i-STAT 1 system (i -STAT Corp.,  Princeton, NJ, USA) . 
 Calcium pharmaco kinetics w ill be analyzed with NONMEM (Nonlinear  Mixed -
Effects Modeling; Globomax, Ellicott City, MD) using PLT Tools (PLT  Soft, San 
Francisco, CA).  We will evaluate calcium kinetics using a 1 -compartment model with  
administration into  the central compartm ent. We  will use an exponential  model for 
interindividual variability on the volume of distribution and  clearance and an additive 
model of interindividual  variability  on the baseline calcium concentration. The model 
parameters will be  estimated by NONMEM  using the first order conditional estimation 
approach.  Confidence  intervals for each parameter w ill be assessed using log likelihood 
profiling and bootstrap analysis.  
 Hemodynamic variables a nalyzed will include heart rate and mean arterial 
pressure at baseline, at fetal delivery, and at 5  minute intervals for the next 30 minutes. 
This will be used to calculate a maximal increase and decrease from baseline 
calculation for each patient. The cli nical anesthesiologist will fill  out a checklist prior to 
exiting the operating theater at case conclusion answering whether the patient 
experienced nausea, vomiting, intravenous  line discomfort, changes in heart rate or 
blood pressure, any arrhythmia, or other possible side effect (with a free -text field) 
during or following the study drug infusion.  
 
  
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  10 
Statistical analysis:  
A sample size of 40 parturients was selected for this pilot study as most likely 
feasible to perform in approximately one year or less at our institution. Internal quality 
improvement data at our institution revealed that in patients with more than one  atony 
risk factor, incidence of EBL >1000 mL  or second line uterotonic use was >60%. If 
calcium were to halve the rate of uterine atony, we estimated t hat a s ample size of 20 
subjects in the calcium and 20 subjects in the placebo group should allow sufficient data 
to show a difference between groups with 75% power and a two -sided type I error 
probability of 0. 2. 
For analysis of the primary outcome, t he relative  risk (RR), and its 95% 
confidence interval will be calculated according to Altman .13 The number needed to treat 
(NNT) w ill be defined and calculated using the terminology suggested by Altman .14 The 
95% confidence interval for NNT w ill be calculated accord ing to Daly ,15 and P-value  
calculated according to Sheskin .16 Bootstrap analysis for sample size calculation for 
future studies w ill be performed using R programming and 10,000 replicates of the pilot 
dataset.  
Demographic and baseline characteristics will be  reported as mean ± standard 
deviation (SD) or median and interquartile range [IQR] as appropriate for continuous 
variables . Categori cal variables  will be  presented as percent . The mean differences and 
their 95% confidence intervals (CI) will be  presented for outcomes of interest. Univariate 
comparisons between groups  will be  performed using Chi -square analysis or the 
Kruskal –Wallis tes t, as appropriate for categorical or continuous variables, respectively. 
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  11 
Statistical analyses w ill be performed using  STATA version 14.0 (StataCorp, 
CollegeStation, TX, USA).   
 
  
Protocol Version 2.1 September 10, 2018  12 
References:  
 
1. Say L, Chou D, Gemmill A, Tunçalp  Ö, Moller A -B, Daniels J, Gülmezoglu AM, 
Temmerman M, Alkema L. Global causes of maternal death: a WHO systematic analysis. 
Lancet Glob Health. 2014 Jun;2(6): p. e323 -33 
2. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG Practice Bulletin: Clinical  
Management Guidelines for Obstetrician -Gynecologists Number 183, October 2017: 
Postpartum Hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol, 130 (2017), p. e168 -e186  
3. Bateman BT, Berman MF, Riley LE, Leffert LR. The epidemiology of postpartum 
hemorrhage in a large, nationwide sa mple of deliveries. Anesth Analg 2010;110:1368 -73 
4. Luckas MJ, Taggart MJ, Wray S. Intracellular calcium stores and agonist -induced 
contractions in isolated human myometrium. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1999 Aug;181(2): p. 
468-76 
5. Papandreou, Chasiotis, Seferiadis, Thanasoulias, Dousias, Tsanadis, Stefos. Calcium 
levels during the initiation of labor. European Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology and 
Reproductive Biology. 2004 July;115(1):17 -22 
6. Talati C, Ramachandran N, Carvalho JCA, Kingdom J, Balki M. The Effect of  Extracellular 
Calcium on Oxytocin -Induced Contractility in Naive and Oxytocin -Pretreated Human 
Myometrium In Vitro. Anesth Analg. 2016 May;122(5): p. 1498 -507. 
7. Papandreou L, Chasiotis G, Seferiadis K, Thanasoulias NC, Dousias V, Tsanadis G, 
Stefos T. Calc ium levels during the initiation of labor. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 
2004 Jul 15;115(1):17 -22. 
8. Farber MK, Schultz R, Lugo L, Liu X, Huang C, Tsen LC. The effect of co -administration 
of intravenous calcium chloride and oxytocin on maternal hemodynam ics and uterine 
tone following cesarean delivery: a double -blinded, randomized, placebo -controlled trial. 
Int J Obstet Anesth. 2015 Aug;24(3):217 -24 
 