 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
Study Protocol  and Statistical Analysis Plan 
How Long Should a Behavioral Activation Single- session Intervention be? A Four -armed 
Trial Comparing Effectiveness by Intervention Duration  
ClinicalTrials.gov ID  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
April 17, 2024  
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
Protocol  
Researchers  will use the crowdwork platform CloudResearch Connect to recruit and 
compensate participants. Researchers  will pay participants $0.25 USD for completing 
the screener and (if eligible) the study information sheet. If participants are eligible, 
researchers will send them invites through the crowdwork platform to participate in the 
next parts of the study. Researchers will pay them $ 4.00 for completing session 1 of the 
study and $1.00 for the 8- week follow -up. Participants are only allowed to complete the 
study once and cannot participate in the study if they have participated in another study  
from the research team relating to depression on Cloud Research Connect  in the last 
two months.  
 
Researchers will recruit a sample of 1,100 adults who struggle with depression. To 
recruit these adults, potential participants will complete a screener and, if eligible, read 
the study content information and decide whether  to participate (2 minutes). Within  five 
days , participants who consent will be invited to complete the first part of the study. In 
this part, they will first complete a questionnaire of demographics and well -being at 
baseline (roughly 4 minutes), be randomly allocated to one of four conditions with equal 
odds of assignment to each condition, complete the SSI to which they were randomized 
(2-15 minutes) and then complete the post -test measures (roughly 4 minutes) just after 
the SSI and eight weeks later. Combined across all three  study sessions, the study 
should take roughly 29 minutes.  At the end of the study, researchers will offer 
participants access to  a list of free online mental health support resources (shown in 
supporting documents) . At the end of the study, researchers will also offer participants 
permanent access to all  four SSIs . 
 
The research team created the SSIs of different lengths aiming to make the active 
elements in each SSI as consistent as possible. Thus, even though the 2- minute 
version contains less content than the 15- minute version, researchers tried to ensure it 
expresses the same general message and activates similar mechanisms of change.  
Participants will complete questionnaires asking about their well- being and experiences  
with the interventions  at baseline, post -test, and 8- week follow- up. 
 
All interventions and survey materials are available at https://osf.io/g846j . 
 
Statistical Analysi s Plan  
Main analysis: The main DV is change in depressive symptoms (PHQ -8) from baseline 
to 8-week follow -up. The main analysis compares change in PHQ -8 score from baseline 
to 8-week follow -up across experimental conditions. Researchers will use a mixed -
effects model predicting depressive symptoms with condition, measurement time point 
(1 = baseline, 2= 8- week follow -up), and the 2- way interaction between condition and 
measurement time point as IVs and a participant identifier as a random  intercept. Using 
the “lme4” package in R, these analyses will take the following form:  
 
lmer(phq8 ~ time*condition + (1|pid))  
 
Secondary analysis: Researchers will re -run the same analysis as above separately for 
each secondary outcome collected. Researchers will also duplicate the main analysis 
but with the following covariates included in the mixed- effects model: gender (multiple 
choice), age (continuous), ethnicity (categorical), education level (categorical), 
employment (categorical), and if one completed the study on a phone (binary).  
 
Inference criteria  
For all analyses, researchers will use the standard p < 0.05 criterion for determining 
statistical significance. Researchers will use two -tailed tests for each of researchers ’ 
analyses.  
 
Data exclusion  
Main analyses will be limited to only those participants who 1) were randomized to a 
condition ( i.e., those who consented to participate and completed the baseline 
measures), 2) did not indicate that they did not participate seriously at the end of the study, and 3) completed the study only once.  
 
Missing data  
Based on researchers ’ previous work on Cloudresearch Connect, researchers do not 
foresee a great deal of missing data or differential dropout . Although researchers will 
take efforts to avoid missing data (e.g., a financial incentive for completing the study 
and reminder emails), it is not necessary to impute missing data before performing a 
longitudinal mixed- model analysis (Twisk et al., 2013). Participants with mis sing data at 
some assessments will be included in the analysis and results will be modeled on the basis of the available data.  
 
 