Intranasal Vasopressin Treatment in Children 
with Autism  
Study Protocol  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  27MAR2020  
Antonio Y. Hardan, M.D., Principal Investigator  
Karen J. Parker, Ph.D., Principal Investigator  
Stanford University  
Stanford, California 94305  
  
27MAR2020   Page 2 of 48 1. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
a. Brief Summary  
We will test the safety and efficacy of intranasal arginine vasopressin (hereafter referred 
to as vasopressin) treatment for social deficits  in children with autism spectrum disorder 
(ASD). This research also aims to identify those individuals who stand to benefit most 
from this drug intervention. Vasopressin treatment has enormous potential for enhancing 
quality of life in people with ASD through improved social cognition and more 
meaningful social relationships . If efficacious, vasopressin will considerably reduce the 
emotional and financial burden of ASD on patients , family members, and society.  
b. Objectives  
Vasopressin is one of the most promising candidate drugs to treat the presently 
intractable social deficits of ASD. This will be the first large -scale clinical trial to test the 
efficacy of intranasal vasopressin treatment to enhance social abilities in individuals with 
ASD. Inclusion of female participants is a strength of this study, because their  exclusion, 
which frequently occurs in ASD treatment studies, may jeopardize optimal testing of 
effective pharmacotherapies. Evidence from both preclinical and c linical studies has 
shown that differences in neuropeptide biology and/or pre -treatment social functioning 
are associated with treatment response outcomes. Our proposed project therefore will also 
test whether neuropeptide measurements and pre-treatment social functioning contribute 
to individual differences in vasopressin treatment efficacy.  
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
The purpose of the study is to test the tolerability and efficacy  of intranasal vasopressin 
administration in children with ASD.  
 
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Overview and Design  
Using a quadruple -blind (participant, care provider, investigator, and outcomes assessor), 
randomized, placebo -controlled design, we will test the eff icacy  of 8-week intranasal 
vasopressin on social functioning in children with ASD (aged 6-17 years). Following a 
gold-standard Sequential Parallel Comparison Design  (SPCD ), participants will be 
randomized into one of three treatment allocations . The treatment allocations are: 1) 
drug-drug, in which participants will be on active vasopressin for the entire 8 -week 
dosing period, 2) placebo -drug, in which participa nts will be on placebo for four weeks 
and then switch to active vasopressin for the remaining four weeks, and 3) placebo -
placebo, in which participants will be on placebo for the entire 8 -week dosing period. At 
the completion of the study, participants in the placebo -placebo group will be given the 
option of switching to active vasopressin for a four -week open -label dosing period. The 
ratio of participants in the three groups is 1:2:2 (drug -drug: placebo -drug: placebo -
placebo) . Consent by parents (and assen t by participants aged 7 -17 years) will be 
obtained before initiating any study procedures.  
 
27MAR2020   Page 3 of 48 After obtaining informed consent, participants will be screened at Visit 1. If the 
participant so desires, Visit 1 can be split into two shorter clinic visits.  
 
During Visit 1, participants will undergo:  
• Medical and psychiatric history assessments  
• A physical exam  
• ASD diagnostic screening using the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, 
2nd edition (ADOS -2) or the Childhood Autism Rating Scale , 2nd Edition  (CARS -
2), and the Autism Diagnostic Interview -Revised (ADI -R) 
• Intellectual ability assessment using the Stanford Binet, 5th Edition or the 
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children , 5th Edition  (WISC -V) 
• Demographics questionnaire  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Severity (CGI -S) ratings  
• Overt Aggression Scale (OAS) ratings  
• The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)  
• The Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -2) 
• Side effect s ratings using the Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency 
Symptom Scale (DOTES)  
• Concomitant medications information  
• Electrocardiogram (EKG) recordings  
• Blood samples (up to 30 mL) for clinical evaluation and safety monitoring (urea 
nitrogen, sodium, potassium, chloride, CO2, anion gap, glucose, creatinine, 
calcium, and osmolality)  
• Urine samples (up to 5mL ) for clinical evaluation and safety monitoring  
(osmolality ; females of childbearing age [12.5 years and older] or females with a 
history of menstruating will undergo urine pregnancy testing at screening and as 
needed in later visits)  
• Vital signs (including heart rate, blood pressure, and temperature)  
• Height and weight measurements  
 
Biological samples for research purposes will also be collected. These samples will be 
obtained at the same time as the clinical samples  mentioned above. These samples will 
include blood, saliva, buccal cell s, and urine.  
 
Whole blood samples for research purposes will be processed and banked. Plasma -borne , 
DNA, and RNA biomarkers of treatment response  will be evaluated . Because limitations 
to how much blood can be drawn depend on the participant's weight, peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) will only be obtained at Visit 1  from participants who meet 
the weight requirements.  
 
Saliva and buccal cell samples  for research purposes will also be collected, to evaluate 
biomarkers of treatment response. For every sample collection, participants are asked to 
fast for one hour prior to saliva and buccal cell sample collection. Participants will also 
be instructed to rinse their mouths prior to saliva and buccal cell collection.  This 
procedure applies for all future visits at which saliva and buccal cell samples are 
collected. As much as 4 mL of saliva will be collected. For participants who enroll in the 
27MAR2020   Page 4 of 48 trial after the implementation of COVID -19 protocol changes, saliva and buccal cell 
samples will not be collected.  
 
Urine samples will also be collected for research purposes, to evaluate biomarkers of 
treatment response. Urine samples for research purposes will not be collected for 
participants enrolled after the implementation of the COVID -19 protocol  changes .  
 
Participants’ tissues, cells, or other materials derived from these biospecimens  may be 
kept for many years and may be used by researchers at Stanford or by researchers at 
entities outside Stanford in future studies, which are not foreseeable now. They may 
include research that involves genetic manipulation as well as those that invol ve induced 
pluripotent stems cells (iPSCs) and iPSC -derived neurons and organoids.  
 
Prior to Visit 2, inclusion and exclusion criteria (as outlined in section 8h) will be 
assessed. One to six weeks later, participants will return to the clinic or schedule a Zoom 
visit for Visit 2 (Baseline and Randomization).  
 
The following information will be obtained  at this time point : 
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Severity (CGI -S) ratings  
• Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale (DOTES) ratings  
• Concomitant medications information  
• Vital signs  
• Height and weight measurements   
  
 Parent ratings  on the following will also be obtained  at this time point : 
• Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -2) 
• Wing Subgroup Questionnaire (WSQ)  
• Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales 3: Social Skills and Relationships Domain 
(VABS -3) 
• Repetitive Behaviors Scale – Revised (RBS -R) 
• Stanford Social Motivation Scale, also known as the Stanford Social Dimensions 
Scale (SSDS)  
• Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale (SCAS)  
• Parent Rated Anxiety Scale -ASD (PRAS -ASD)  
• Pediatric Quality of Life (PedsQL)  Inventory  
• Child's Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ)  
 
We will also perform an optional high -density electroencephalogram (EEG) to detect the 
participant's brain activity. Resting -state EEG will be recorded from participants 
comfortably seated with their eyes open during each visit. Participants will be 
familiarized with all experimental materials prior to recording and provided with an 
explicit visual schedule to diminish any undue stress associated with novel environments, 
equipment (e.g. , electrode caps), or support staff. A practice cap will also be made 
available for participants should further familiarization be requested. Data will be 
collected using a 64 -channel Ag/AgCl electrode cap (ANT North America, Madison, WI) 
and continuously digitized at 500Hz with an as alab Turnkey System (Madison, WI). 
27MAR2020   Page 5 of 48 Placement of electrodes will conform to the International 10 –20 System. MNE -Python  
will be used to pre -process data and monitor impedances to be less than 10kOhms. 
Approximately 5 minutes of continuous EEG  will be recorded as participants sit with 
eyes open. Offline processing will also be performed using the MNE neuroimaging suite 
and includes (but is not limited to) re -referencing to linked -ear mastoids, correction of 
DC drift, and the removal of eye -blink artifacts.  
 
The EEG, vital signs, and height and weight measurements at this time point will not be 
collected from participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes.  
 
Participants will undergo experimental assessments measuring social behavior and 
cognition to facilitate  the analysis of post -treatment changes in functioning by accounting 
for any pre -existing individual differences. These assessments will include: the Reading 
the Mind in the Eyes Test , NEPSY -II Theory of Mind Test , Diagnostic Analysis of 
Nonverbal Accuracy, 2nd edition: Child Voices (DANVA -2), and Facial Emotion 
Recognition Test. We will also record participants' eye gaze using eye -tracking 
technology whi le the participants view emotional faces (Eye Gaze Assessment).  
 
Participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes will complete 
the social behavior and cognition assessments via Zoom. The Eye Gaze Assessment will  
no longer be performed.  
 
Participants will then be randomized in a blinded fashion to a treatment condition 
(vasopressin or placebo). Stratification will be based on gender and age. Participants will 
receive 32 IU (16 IU BID) of vasopressin or placebo. Parents will be given a dosing 
schedule that they will be required to follow and sign each day. Participants will continue 
vasopressin or placebo administration for 4  weeks at home and their parents will be 
responsible for reporting any adverse events to research staff. P articipant s will be 
screened for excessive water intake and will be informed to maintain an average water 
intake to decrease the potential occurrence of hyponatremia and water intoxication during 
the treatment period.  
 
One week after starting the nasal spray, research staff will contact families to check in 
and i nquire about side effects.  
 
Two weeks after starting the nasal spray, participants will return to the clinic for Visit 3. 
For participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes, Visit 3 will 
be conducted remotely, with the physician visit completed via Zoom.  
 
The following will be obtained at this time  point : 
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Severity (CGI -S) ratings  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale —Improvement (CGI -I) ratings  
• Overt Aggression Scale (OAS) ratings  
• Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale (DOTES) ratings  
• Concomitant medications information  
• Vital sig ns 
• Height and weight measurements  
27MAR2020   Page 6 of 48 • Optional PBMC collection  
• Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -2) ratings  
 
For participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes, vital signs 
and height and weight measurements will not be obtained at Visit 3 unless instructed by 
the study physician.  
 
Three weeks after starting the nasal spray, research staff will contact families to check in 
and inquire about side effects.  
 
Four weeks after starting the nasal spray, participants will return to the clinic for Visit 4 
or complete a portion of the visit locally through the primary physician’s office (an 
option instituted after the COVID -19 pandemic) .  
 
During Visit 4, the following information will be obtained:  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Severity (CGI -S) ratings  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Improvement (CGI -I) ratings  
• Overt Aggression Scale (OAS) ratings  
• The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)  
• Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale (DOTES) ratings  
• Concomitant medications information  
• EKG recordings  
• Optional EEG recordings  
• Vital signs  
• Height and weight measurements  
• Clinical blood and urine samples  
• Research biological samples (e.g., blood, urine, saliva, buccal cells)  
 
Parent  ratings on the following will also be obtained:  
• Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -2) 
• Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales 3: Social Skills and Relationships Domain 
(VABS -3) 
• Repetitive Behaviors Scale – Revised (RBS -R) 
• Stanford Social Motivation Scale, also known as the Stanford Social Dimensions 
Scale (SSDS)  
• Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale (SCAS)  
• Parent Rated Anxiety Scale -ASD (PRAS -ASD)  
• Pediatric Quality of Life (PedsQL)  Inventory  
• Child's Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ)  
 
For participants who enroll in the trial after the implementation of the COVID -19 
protocol changes, the research saliva, buccal cell, and urine samples will not be collected.  
 
If participant s choose to complete the blood draw locally through the primary physician ’s 
office , research blood samples will not be obtained. Participants who opt to complete the  
27MAR2020   Page 7 of 48 visit through the primary physician ’s office  must obtain and send to the study team the 
EKG recording, vital signs, and height and weight measurement s. 
 
Participants will undergo experimental a ssessments including:  
▪ Eye Gaze Assessment  
▪ Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test  
▪ NEPSY -II Theory of Mind Test  
▪ Diagnostic Analysis of Nonverbal Accuracy, 2nd edition  (Child Voices)  
▪ Facial Emotion Recognition Test  
 
For participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes, the Eye 
Gaze Assessment will not be performed.  
 
At this time point, participants who were in the placebo group will either continue on 
blinded placebo or be switched in a blinded manner to the active vasopressin for the 
remaining 4 weeks. Participants who were taking the active vasopressin will continue 
taking the drug in a blinded fashion for the remainder of the study.  
 
Five weeks after starting the nasal spray, research staff will contact families to check in 
and inquire about side effects.  
 
Six weeks after starting the nasal spray, participants will return to the clinic for Visit 5. 
For participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes, Visit 5 will 
be conducted remotely, with the physician visit completed via Zoom.  
 
The following information will be obtained at this time  point:  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Severity (CGI -S) ratings  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Improvement (CGI -I) ratings  
• Overt Aggression Scale (OAS) ratings  
• Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale (DOTES) ratings  
• Concomitant medications information  
• Vital signs  
• Height and weight measurements  
• Optional PBMC collection  
• Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition (SRS -2) ratings  
 
For participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes, vital signs 
and height and weight measurements will not be obtained at Visit 5 unless instructed by 
the study physician. If the required blood volume for optional PBMC collection was not 
obtained at Visit 3 due to the participant's weight, additional blood samples may be 
obtained at Visit 5. As much as  30 mL of blood will be collected.  
 
Seven weeks after starting the nasal spray, research staff will contact families to check in 
and inquire about side effects.  
 
27MAR2020   Page 8 of 48 Eight weeks after starting the nasal spray, participants will return to the clinic for Visit 6 
or complete a portion of the visit locally  through the primary physician’s office (an 
option instituted after the COVID -19 pandemic).   
 
The following information will be obtained at this time  point : 
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Severity (CGI -S) ratings  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Improvement (CGI -I) ratings  
• Overt Aggression Scale (OAS) ratings  
• The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)  
• Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale (DOTES) ratings  
• Concomitant medications information  
• EKG recordings  
• Optional EEG  recordings  
• Vital signs  
• Height and weight measurements  
• Clinical blood and urine samples  
• Research blood, urine, saliva, and buccal cell samples  
 
Parent ratings on the following will also be obtained:  
• Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -2) 
• Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales 3: Social Skills and Relationships Domain 
(VABS -3) 
• Repetitive Behaviors Scale – Revised (RBS -R) 
• Stanford Social Motivation Scale, also known as the Stanford Social Dimensions 
Scale (SSDS)  
• Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale (SCAS)  
• Parent Rated Anxiety Scale -ASD (PRAS -ASD)  
• Pediatric Quality of Life (PedsQL)  Inventory  
• Child's Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ)   
 
For participants who enroll in the trial after the implementation of the COVID -19 
protocol changes, saliva, urine,  and buccal cell samples will not be collected.  
 
If the participant chooses to complete the blood draw locally through the primary 
physician’s office, research blood samples will not be obtained. Participants who opt to 
complete the visit locally must also  obtain and send to the study team the EKG recording, 
vital signs, and height and weight measurement s obtained through the primary 
physician's office.  
 
Participants will undergo experimental  assessments including:  
• Eye Gaze Assessment  
• Reading the  Mind in the Eyes Test  
• NEPSY -II Theory of Mind Test  
• Diagnostic Analysis of Nonverbal Accuracy, 2nd edition (Child Voices)  
• Facial Emotion Recognition Test  
 
27MAR2020   Page 9 of 48 For participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes, the Eye 
Gaze Assessment will not be performed.  
 
After completion of the blinded  8-week treatment period, participants will be informed of 
their treatment group . Participants in the placebo -placebo group will have the option of 
participating in a 4 -week open -label vasopressin treatment extension period.  
 
One week after starting open -label vasopressin treatment, research staff will contact 
families in this open -label extension period to check in and inquire about side effects.  
 
Two weeks after starting open -label vasopressin treatment, participants in this open -label 
extension period will return to the clinic for Visit 7. Participants who enroll in the trial 
after the COVID -19 protocol changes will complete Visit 7 remotely, with the physician 
visit completed via Zoom.  
 
The following information will be obtained at this time  point:  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Severity (CGI -S) ratings  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Improvement (CGI -I) ratings  
• Overt Aggression Scale (OAS) ratings  
• Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale (DOTES) ratings  
• Concomitant medication information  
• Vital signs  
• Height and weight measurements  
• Optional PBMC collection  
• Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -2) ratings  
 
For participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes, vital signs 
and height and weight measurements will not be obtained at Visit 7 unless instructed by 
the study physician.  
 
Three weeks after starting open -label vasopressin treatment, research staff will contact 
families in the open -label period to check in and inquire about side effects.  
 
Four weeks after starting open -label vasopressin treatment, participants in the open -label 
phase will return to the clinic for Visit 8 or complete this visit locall y through the primary 
physician’s office (an option instituted after the COVID -19 pandemic).   
 
The following information will be obtained at this time  point:  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Severity (CGI -S) ratings  
• Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Improvement (CGI -I) ratings  
• Overt Aggression Scale (OAS) ratings  
• The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)  
• Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale (DOTES) ratings  
• Concomitant medication information  
• EKG recordings  
• Optional EEG recordings  
27MAR2020   Page 10 of 48 • Vital signs  
• Height  and weight measurements   
• Clinical blood and urine samples  
• Research blood, urine, saliva, and buccal cell samples  
 
Parent ratings will be obtained on the following at this time  point:  
• Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -2) 
• Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales 3: Social Skills and Relationships Domain 
(VABS -3) 
• Repetitive Behaviors Scale – Revised (RBS -R) 
• Stanford Social Motivation Scale, also known as the Stanford Social Dimensions 
Scale (SSDS)  
• Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale (SCAS)  
• Parent Rated Anxiety Scale -ASD (PRAS -ASD)  
• Pediatric Quality of Life (PedsQL)  Inventory  
• Child's Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ)   
 
For participants who enroll in the trial after the implementation of the COVID -19 
protocol changes, saliva, buccal cell, and urine samples will not be collected. If the 
participant chooses to complete the blood draw locally through the primary physician’s 
office, research blo od samples will not be obtained. Participants who opt to complete the 
visit locally must  send to the study team the EKG recording, vital signs, and height and 
weight measurements obtained through the primary physician's office.  
 
Participants will undergo experimental assessments including:  
• Eye Gaze Assessment  
• Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test  
• NEPSY -II Theory of  Mind Test  
• Diagnostic Analysis of Nonverbal Accuracy, 2nd edition (Child Voices)  
• Facial Emotion Recognition Test  
 
For participants  who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes, the Eye 
Gaze Assessment will not be performed.  
 
For participants in all 3 treatment allocation groups, research staff will contact families 4 
weeks after completion of the last vasopressin dose to ask them to complete the Social 
Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition .  
 
b. Procedure Risks  
Given that this research is some of the first to determine the effects of intranasal 
vasopressin for the treatment of social deficits in children with ASD, we have chosen 
doses and a treatment duration that we believe will prove both safe and effective. 
Participants will receive 32 IU vasopressin (16 IU bid). If severe side effects occur, the 
study physician may lower the dose or instruct the participant to discontinue the nasal 
spray.  
27MAR2020   Page 11 of 48 Safety monitoring:  A medical and psychiatric history will be obtained, and a physical 
examination conducted during the screening phase, prior to randomization. All 
participants will be in good general medical health. Additional evaluations will be 
conducted at later visits.  Seizure history will be reviewed carefully during the screening 
visit and,  as stated in the protocol’s exclusion criteria, children with seizure disorder, or a 
history of seizure -like activity, will be excluded. Drug side effects will be  evaluated with 
the Dosage Record and Treatment Emergent Symptom Scale at each visit. The Dosage 
Record and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale is a general rating scale published by 
the Early Clinical Drug Evaluation Unit of the National Institute of Mental  Health. The 
scale has been widely used clinically for children and adults to assess many central 
nervous system side effects as well as some behavioral side effects. We have modified 
the original version of the Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency Sympto m Scale to 
include specific questions related to potential side effects that might be related to 
vasopressin , such as hyponatremia/water intoxication. Vital signs (heart rate/blood 
pressure and temperature) will be assessed at each visit. Height and weight will also be 
assessed at each visit.  In order to increase safety monitoring, blood and urine safety 
measure ment will be conducted during the screening phase and at Visits 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
Clinical blood work will consist of a basic metabolic panel  of blood urea nitrogen, 
sodium, potassium, chloride, CO2, anion gap, glucose, creatinine, calcium). Osmolality 
(urine, blood) will also be assessed. In order to determine the impact of vasopressin on 
heart function, EKG recordings will be obtained at screening and Visits 3, 4, 5, and 6.  
 
After treating more than 40 pediatric participants with vasopressin using a conservative 
monitoring plan, we have concluded that the drug has been well tolerated with minimal 
side effects. Therefore, we have decreased the number of safety monitoring points during 
this trial , which will allow us to collect fewer venous blood samples, urine  samples, and 
EKGs. We received Stanford Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval on 01FEB2019 
for these changes to the frequency of safety monitoring points. We also rece ived approval 
for this change from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development. We will keep the safety blood draws and 
EKGs performed at Visit 1 (screening), Visit 2 (baseline), Visit 4 (4 weeks after 
baseline), Visit 6 (8 weeks after baseline), and Visit 8 (12 weeks after baseline for 
participants in the open -label extension phase).  We have removed the safety blood draws 
and EKGs performed at Visit 3 (2 weeks after baseline), Visit 5 (6 weeks aft er baseline), 
and Visit 7 (10 weeks after baseline for participants in the open -label extension phase).   
 
For participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes, vital signs 
and height and weight measurements, EKG readings, and blood and urine safety 
measurement will be obtained at screening and Visits 4 and 6.  
 
In light of the recent evidence linking psychotropic medications to suicidal behaviors, 
closely monitor ing the mental well -being of  individuals taking these psychotropic 
medications  is important . Therefore, assessment of suicidal ideation/behaviors will be 
completed during Visit 1 and will be monitored during the trial at Visits 4, 6, and 8 (if 
applicable ). 
 
27MAR2020   Page 12 of 48 Finally, based on preclinical animal studies , some evidence to suggest s that vasopressin 
may be involved in the expression of aggressive behavior. Although the relationship 
between vasopressin and aggression in humans is currently unknown, we will take every 
precaution to assess such behavioral changes throughout the study. T he Overt Aggression 
Scale will be administered at screening and Visits 3, 4, 5, and 6. The Overt Aggression 
Scale is designed to assess observable aggressive or violent behavior and has  been used 
in children with different neuropsychiatric disorders. Identical safety measures as 
outlined above will be performed during the optional 4 -week open -label extension study.  
 
Procedures for handling adverse events:  Outpatient dosing phase: For any adverse events, 
families will be instructed to contact the research coordinator directly during business 
hours, and through the Stanford page operator after hours and during weekends/holidays. 
(A project coordinator will be available 24  hours per day /7 days per week to respond to 
safety concerns.) If the adverse event is life threatening, participants will be asked to call 
911 or to visit the nearest emergency room. If the adverse event is not life threatening, the 
study co ordinator will contact the study physician who will contact the family directly 
and inquire about the adverse event. If the study physician judges the side effects as 
minor or benign, a decision will be made as to whether the participant will continue in the 
study. If side effects are judged to be severe and potentially related to vasopressin , the 
participants will be asked to stop the medication immediately and invited to come to the 
clinic within 24 hours for a direct evaluation and potential termination of their 
participation in the study. If the study physician ascertains that the adverse event requires 
immediate medical attention, parents will be instructed to contact 911 or go to the nearest 
emergency room. The study physician will also have the ability to break the blind if 
doing so is in the best interest of the partici pant’s health.  
 
Any serious adverse events will be reported to the Data and Safety Monitoring Board and 
Stanford IRB within 24 hours and to the FDA within 7 calendar days.  
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
No deception will be used.  
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  
Audio and video recordings will be used during the A utism Diagnostic Observation 
Schedule, 2nd Edition , Childhood Autism Rating Scale, 2nd Edition, and the Autism 
Diagnostic Interview – Revised assessments. A senior clinical psychologist (Dr. Jennifer 
Phillips or Dr. Cristiana Vattuone) will supervise diagnostic testing. Video recording will 
be used in order to quantify the participant’s social mimicry while they view videos of 
people yawning and  laughing. Two independent raters will study the videos to ass ess for 
mimicry behavior.  
 
The analyses of these recordings can be shared for scientific purposes, shown in 
classrooms to students for educational purposes, shown in public presentations to non -
scientific groups, and submitted for public distribution  (sold on a DVD ). However, audio 
and video recordings will not be used for any other purpose or shown outside of the 
research group unless explicit written permission is obtained in the consent form.  
27MAR2020   Page 13 of 48 e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
An alternative is not participating  in this study. No standard treatment will be withheld. 
Participants would remain on their regular medications.  
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
Yes. 
g. Study Endpoint (s) 
Primary Outcome Measure:   
 
1. Change from baseline in parent  rated Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -
2) Total scores during treatment. [Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
 
Secondary  Outcome Measures:  
 
2. Change from baseline in Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scores during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
3. Change from baseline on Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test (RMET) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
4. Change from baseline on the Facial Emotion Recognition Test during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
5. Change from baseline in parent rated Repetitive Behavior Scale Revised (RBS -R) 
scores during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
6. Change from baseline in parent rated Spence Children's Anxiety Scale (SCAS) during 
treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
7. Change from baseline on electrocardiogram (EKG) P Duration during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
8. Change from baseline on electrocardiogram (EKG) PR Interval during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
9. Change from baseline on electrocardiogram (EKG) QRS Interval during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
10. Change from baseline on electrocardiogram (EKG) QT Interval during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
11. Change from baseline on blood clinical labs (Sodium) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
12. Change from baseline on blood clinical labs (Potassium) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
13. Change from baseline on blood clinical labs (Chloride) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
14. Change from baseline on blood clinical labs (CO2) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
15. Change from baseline on blood clinical labs (Anion Gap) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
27MAR2020   Page 14 of 48 16. Change from baseline on blood clinical labs (Glucose) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
17. Change from baseline on blood clinical labs (Creatinine) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
18. Change from baseline on blood clinical labs (Urea Nitrogen) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
19. Change from baseline on blood clinical labs (Calcium) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
20. Change from baseline on blood clinical labs (Osmolality) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
21. Change from baseline on urine clinical labs (Osmolality) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
22. Change from baseline on vital signs (systolic blood pressure) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
23. Change from baseline on vital signs (diastolic blood pressure) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
24. Change from baseline on vital signs (pulse) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
25. Change from baseline on height during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
26. Change from baseline on weight during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
27. Change from baseline on the Dosage Record Treatment Emergent Symptom Scale 
(DOTES) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 2 -week, 4 -week; 6 -week, 8 -week]  
28. Change from baseline in Overt Aggression Scale (OAS) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 2 -week, 4 -week; 6 -week, 8 -week]  
29. Baseline vasopressin concentration predicting primary and secondary behavioral 
outcome measures.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
 
Other Pre -specified Outcome Measures:  
 
30. Change from baseline in Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, 3rd edition  (VABS -3) - 
Social Skills and Relationships Domain during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
31. Change from baseline in parent rated Pediatric Quality of Life (PedsQL) inventory 
scores during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
32. Change from baseline on Eye Gaze Assessment (eye tracking) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
33. Change from baseline on the Developmental Neuropsychological Assessment, 2nd 
edition  (NEPSY -II) Theory of Mind Test during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
34. Change from baseline the Diagnostic Analysis of Nonverbal Accuracy, 2nd edition  
(DANVA -2) Child Voices Prosody Test during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
27MAR2020   Page 15 of 48 35. Change from baseline in parent rated Stanford Social Motivation Scale (also known 
as the Stanford Social Dimensional Scale) Total scores during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
36. Change from baseline in Parent Rated Anxiety Scale - Autism Spectrum Disorder 
(PRAS -ASD) score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]   
37. Change from baseline in parent rated Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -
2) Social Avoidance Factor Score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
38. Change from baseline in parent rated Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -
2) Emotion Recognition Factor Score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
39. Change from baseline in parent rated Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -
2) Interpersonal Relatedness Factor Score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8-week]  
40. Change from baseline in parent rated Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -
2) Insistence On Sameness Factor Score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
41. Change from baseline in parent rated Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -
2) Repetitive Mannerisms Factor Score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
42. Change from baseline in parent rated Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -
2) Attachment and Affiliation Factor Score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
43. Change from baseline in parent rated Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -
2) Non -facial Communication Production Factor Score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
44. Change from baseline in parent rated Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -
2) Facial Communication Production Factor Score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
45. Change from baseline in parent rated Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -
2) Mental States Understanding Factor Score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
46. Change from baseline in parent rated Child's Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ) 
Score during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
47. Change from baseline on spectral power  in the alpha, theta, and gamma frequencies 
as measured by electroencephalogram (EEG) during treatment.  
[Time Frame: 4 -week; 8 -week]  
 
3. BACKGROUND  
Impact and relevance . ASD is a pervasive developmental disorder characterized by core deficits  
in social behavior and communication, and the presence of repetitive or stereotyped behaviors.  
ASD affects an estimated 1 in 68 children in the US [1]. Individuals with ASD demonstrate  
diminished eye gaze, abnormal facial and emotion processing, and impaired social judgment.  
27MAR2020   Page 16 of 48 These deficits jeopardize the development of appropriate social skills and maintenance of social 
relationships [2 -4]. Although several medications are approved for the treatment of ASD (i.e., the 
atypical antipsychotics risperidone and aripiprazole), none are effective in ameliorating the 
characteristic social deficits. Moreover, these medications have unfavorable side effects (e.g., 
lethargy, weight gain). Identifying the underlying pathophysiology of the core social deficits 
associated with ASD and develo ping new medications that target these impairments is clearly an 
important challenge [5]. The proposed project leverages promising preclinical findings to test 
whether intranasal administration of the neuropeptide vasopressin enhances social functioning in  
children, particularly males, with ASD. Vasopressin represents enormous potential for enhancing 
an individual’s quality of life through improved social cognition and more meaningful social 
relationships. The discovery of effective novel therapeutics provi des an outstanding opportunity 
to reduce the emotional and financial burden of ASD on patients, family members, and society.  
 
Preclinical findings:  Vasopressin and oxytocin regulate social behavior and show translational 
promise as pharmacotherapies to treat social impairments.  The neurobiological systems critical 
for normative social functioning are arguably the most promising candidates by which to identify 
“druggable ” targets to treat ASD [5,6]. Two such candidates are vasopressin and oxytocin [8]. 
Vasopressin and oxytocin are  primarily synthesized in the hypothalamus and released into the 
brain via distributed neural pathways and systemic circulation via the posterior pituitary [7]. 
Vasopressin and oxytocin are  nearly structurally identical nonapeptides and likely  evolved due to 
duplication of a common ancestral gene [6]. Extensive animal research during  four decades has 
demonstrated the importance of both vasopressin and oxytocin in social functioning. Specifically, 
brain vasopressin and oxytocin systems promote social behavior (e.g., partner preference 
formation, parenting behavior) and social cognition (e.g., learning and memory for social 
information) in a variety of mammalian species [8]. In contrast, vasopressin and oxytocin peptide 
and receptor impairments in duced by pharmacological or genetic manipulations produce 
numerou s social deficits in animals [9 -12].  
 
Clinical findings: The behavioral effects of intranasal vasopressin  and oxytocin administration in 
neurotypical and patient populations and gaps in our knowledge.  On the basis of these promising 
preclinical findings, multiple investigators have begun to test the potential of these neuropeptides 
as therapeutic agents to enhance social functioning in people. These studies have mostly focused 
on the prosocial effects of intranasal oxytocin on social functioning in both neurotypical 
individuals and individuals with various psychiatric disorders (e.g., anxiety, schizophrenia, ASD) 
[13-25]. Several  independent groups have recently demonstrated that single  doses  of oxytocin 
administered to teenage and adult males with ASD improve the processing and retention of social 
information [20], improve emotion recognition when viewing the eye region of faces [15], and 
increase trust and preference for social partners duri ng a computer simulated ball -toss game [14]. 
Several groups, including our own, are now testing the effec ts of longer -term oxytocin 
administration to younger individuals , inclusive of boys and girls, with ASD.  
 
In contrast to oxytocin, only a handful of studies have investigated the effects of intranasal 
vasopressin on social functioning in humans. These  studies have shown that vasopressin enhances 
memory for happy and angry faces [26], increases recognition of positively and negatively 
valenced social words [27], and enhances neural activity  in known vasopressin brain circuitry 
during a cooperation task [28]. Single intranasal doses of vasopressin or analog s have also been 
shown to enhance speech and word formati on in patients with post -stroke aphasia and improve 
27MAR2020   Page 17 of 48 short and long -term memory in patients with central diabetes insipidus suggesting potential 
cognitive enhancing properties of this hormone [29,30]. In humans, intranasally administered 
vasopressin results in elevated cerebrospinal fluid levels of measured vasopressin, strongly 
suggesting that it achieves access to the brain [31].  
 
Intranasally  administered vasopressin and its analogs (e.g., desmopressin) are well tolerated in 
humans with no significant side effects reported in any of the studies outlined above . Vasopressin  
and its analogs have been used for more than 30 years in both children and adults to treat central 
diabetes insipidus, nocturnal enuresis, and varying states of shock . It has caused  very few side 
effects given  that precautions are adhered to (e.g., water restriction to prevent hyponatremia/water 
intoxication) [32 -36]. Despite  a growing body of evidence documenting the prosocial effects of 
vasopressin, and the relevance of this system to ASD [37,38], no studies have tested whether 
vasopressin administration enhances social functioning in this disorder. Given the research effort  
now directed toward testing oxytocin as a treatment  for the social deficits in ASD, there is an 
obvious need to investigate the treatment potential of this closely related neuropeptide in order to 
ameliorate the social deficits in individuals with ASD.  
 
Why is a vasopressin treatment trial critically needed in people  with ASD?  In addition to its 
structural and functional similarity to oxytocin, vasopressin merits investigation as a candidate 
drug for use in ASD for several other reasons. First, preclinical findings from genetically 
modified and wild type animals suggest that im portant aspects of social cognition are mediated 
through vasopressin V1a receptors. In oxytocin receptor (OXTR) null (Oxtr -/-) mice , central 
administration of either oxytocin or vaso pressin directly in to the brain improves sociability 
deficits, enhances exploration of social novelty, and reverses cognitive flexibility deficits [39]. 
Pre-treatment with a selective V1a receptor antagonist prior to central oxytocin administration 
almost completely attenuates the prosocial and cognitive enhancing effects of oxytocin, indicating 
that V1a receptors mediate this effect. Experiments using wild -type mice, rats, and voles likewise 
show that administration of selective V1a antagonists in the pre sence of normal brain oxytocin 
signaling impairs social functioning [40,41]. These findings are particularly evident in males, in 
which vasopressin has been shown to selectively regulate social functioning. An intriguing and 
important aspect of vasopressin and oxytocin physiology is that they exert largely sexually 
dimorphic behavioral effects as determined by a series of influential pharmacological and 
autoradiographical studies [42 -44]. These studies have shown that , whereas oxytocin 
preferentially regula tes pair bond formation, reproductive physiology (e.g., parturition and 
lactation), and parental care in females, vasopressin preferentially re gulates mating behavior, pair 
bond formation, and parental care in males [45].  
 
Second, recent genetic association studies indicate that several single nucleotide polymorphisms 
and their haplotypes in the OXTR gene increase risk for ASD [46,47]. Genome -wide scans 
likewise indicate that the 3p25 region, which contains the OXTR gene, may be a linkage site for 
ASD [48]. These findings sug gest the intriguing supplementary hypothesis that in people  with 
OXTR impairments, vasopressin treatment may be even more efficacious than oxytocin 
administration . Although both vasopressin and oxytocin  ligands show high affinity for all four 
receptors (i.e., vasopressin: V1a, V1b, V2; and oxytocin: OXTR, respectively), they bind with 
greatest affinity to their own receptor( s) [49]. This hypothesis is further supported by evidence 
that Oxtr -/- mice have higher vasopressin V1a receptor expression in the brain than do wild -type 
mice , which suggests  that these animals may be more sensitive to vasopressin administration than 
27MAR2020   Page 18 of 48 oxytocin [39,50]. These findings clearly highlight the need for careful studies that clarify the 
underlying neurobiological actions of these neuropeptides as pharmacot herapeutic agents in 
individuals with ASD [50]. To address this larger research question, we must first test whether 
intranasal vasopressin administration improves social functioning in individuals with ASD, and 
whether this medication is more efficacious in males than females.  
 
Factors  that contribute to treatment response efficacy.  In addition to gender differences in  
treatment response, most vasopressin and oxytocin pharmacology studies have found treatment 
responders and non -responders. For example, previous preclinical research conducted by our 
group, led by Dr. Karen Parker, has shown that baseline social phenotype significantly influences 
the efficacy of vasopressin treatment to induce or enhance prosocial behaviors in male rodents 
[51]. Similarly, a single -dose oxytocin tre atment study in male adults with ASD provides 
preliminary evidence for enhanced social functioning post -treatment in a subgroup of individuals 
who show higher social motivation at baseline  [14]. Another recent study using transcutaneous 
electrical acupoint stimulation therapy demonstrated  enhanced social functioning post -treatment, 
which was associated with higher plasma vasopressin  levels in children with ASD. Treatment  
benefits and higher vasopressin levels were most pronounced in children with “passive” and 
”aloof,” , but not  “active but odd” behavioral phenotypes as assessed by the Wing Subgroup 
Questionnaire at baseline [52]. These  findings suggest that individual differences in pre -treatment 
social impairments may contribute to treatment response efficacy and that these changes are 
associated with increased plasma neuropeptide levels. This intriguing hypothesis will be explored 
in the present study.  
 
Innovation.  Vasopressin is one of the most promising candidate drugs to treat the presently 
intractable social deficits of ASD. This large -scale clinical trial will to test the efficacy of 
vasopressin treatment to enhance social abilities in individuals with ASD. Inclusion of female 
participants is a strength of this study . Female  exclusion, which frequently occurs in ASD 
treatment studies, may jeopardize optimal testing of effective pharmacotherapies, and preclude 
identification of disease mechanisms. Our inclusion of females is particularly important because 
preclinical evidence suggests that males may respond more robustly to vasopressin treatment than 
females [5 3]. Findings from both preclinical and clinical studies have shown that differences in 
pre-treatment social functioning and/or neuropeptide biology are associated with vasopressin and 
oxytocin treatment response outcomes. Ours will be the first study to test concomitantly whether 
pre-treatment social measurements and baseline neuropeptide levels co ntribute to individual 
differences in vasopressin treatment response efficacy.  
 
The use of both eye -tracking methodology to assess change in social abilities and an automated 
prosody assessment in this trial represent crucial steps toward objective assessment of core 
symptoms of ASD and generalization of treatment. No clear biologically -based marker, such as 
eye tracking, has yet been used extensively in published controlled trials of children with ASD  in 
order  to test treatment effects and moderators of response.  
 
References  
1 CDC. Prevalence and Characteristics of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 
years.  Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 Sites, United States, 2012. 
MMWR Surveill ance Summ aries  65, 1 -23 (2016).  
27MAR2020   Page 19 of 48 2 Corden, B.  et al. Fear recognition ability predicts differences in social cognitive and 
neural functioning in men. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  18, 889 -897 (2006).  
3 Adolphs, R., Sears, L. & Piven, J. Abnormal processing of social information from faces 
in autism. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 13, 232 -240 (2001).  
4 Dalton, K. M. et al. Gaze fixation and the neural  
circuitry of face processing in autism. Nature Neuroscience 8, 519 -526 (2005).  
5 Webb, S. Drugmakers dance with autism. Nature Biotechnology 28, 772 -774 (2010).  
6 Donaldson, Z. R. & Young, L. J. Oxytocin, vasopressin, and the neurogenetics of  
sociality. Science 322, 900 -904 (2008).  
7 Landgraf, R. & Neumann, I. D. Vasopressin and oxytocin release within the brain: A 
dynamic concept of multiple and variable modes of neuropeptide communication. Frontiers in 
Neuroendocrinology 25, 150 -176 (2004).  
8 Hammock, E. A. & Young, L. J. Oxytocin, vasopressin and pair bonding: Implications 
for autism. Philos ophical  Trans actions of the  Royal Society Lond on B: Biological  Sciences  361, 
2187 -2198 (2006).  
9 Bielsky, I. F. & Young, L. J. Oxytocin, vasopressin, and social recognition in mammals. 
Peptides 25, 1565 -1574, (2004).  
10 Young, L. J. & Wang, Z. The neurobiology of pair bonding. Nat ure Neurosci ence 7, 
1048 -1054 (2004).  
11 Ferguson, J. N. et al. Social amnesia in mice lacking the oxytocin gene. Nat ure Genet ics 
25, 284 -288 (2000).  
12 Takayanagi, Y. et al. Pervasive social deficits, but normal parturition, in oxytocin  
receptor -deficient mice. Proc eedings of the  National Acad emy of  Sciences  of the United  States of 
America  102, 16096 -16101 (2005).  
13 Pedersen, C. A. et al. Intranasal oxytocin reduces psychotic symptoms and improves 
Theory of Mind and social perception in schizophrenia. Schizophr enia Research  132, 50 -53 
(2011).  
14 Andari, E. et al. Promoting social behavior with oxytocin in high -functioning autism 
spectrum disorders. Proceedings of the  National Acad emy of  Scienes of the  United  States of  
America  107, 4389 -4394 (2010).  
15 Guastella, A. J. et al. Intranasal oxytocin improves emotion recognition for youth with 
autism spectrum disorders. Biol ogical  Psychiatry 67, 692 -694 (2010).  
16 Guastella, A. J.  et al. A randomized controlled trial of intranasal oxytocin as an adjunct to 
exposure therapy for social anxiety disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology 34, 917 -923 (2009).  
17 Ditzen, B. et al. Intranasal oxytocin increases positive communication and reduces 
cortisol levels during couple conflict. Biol ogical  Psychiatry 65, 728 -731 (2009).  
18 Domes, G.  et al.  Oxytocin improves "mind -reading" in humans. Biol ogical  Psychiatry 
61, 731 -733 (2007).  
19 Guastella, A. J., Mitchell, P. B. & Dadds, M. R. Oxytocin increases gaze to the eye 
region of human faces. Biol ogical  Psychiatry 63, 3 -5 (2008).  
20 Hollander, E. et al. Oxytocin increases retention of social cognition in autism. Biol ogical  
Psychiatry 61, 498 -503 (2007).  
21 Kirsch, P. et al. Oxytocin modulates neural circuitry for social cognition and fear in 
humans. J ournal of  Neurosci ence 25, 11489 -11493 (2005).  
22 Kosfeld, M.  et al. Oxytocin increases trust in humans. Nature 435, 673 -676 (2005).  
23 Rimmele, U.  et al. Oxytocin makes a face in memory familiar. J ournal of  Neurosci ence 
29, 38 -42 (2009).  
27MAR2020   Page 20 of 48 24 Theodoridou, A.  et al. Oxytocin and social perception: oxytocin increases perceived 
facial trustworthiness and attractiveness. Horm ones and  Behav ior 56, 128 -132 (2009).  
25 Zak, P. J., Stanton, A. A. & Ahmadi, S. Oxytocin increases generosity in humans. PLoS 
One 2, e1128 (2007).  
26 Guastella, A. J.  et al. Intranasal arginine vasopressin enhances the encoding of happy and 
angry faces in humans. Biol ogical  Psychiatry 67, 1220 -1222 (2010).  
27 Guastella, A. J.  et al. Arginine Vasopressin selectively enhances recognition of sexual 
cues in male humans. Psychoneuroendocrinology 36, 294 -297 (2011).  
28 Rilling, J. K. et al. Effects of intranasal oxytocin and vasopressin on cooperative behavior 
and associated brain activity in men. Psychoneuroendocrinology 37, 447 -461 (2012).  
29 Laczi, F. et al. Effects of lysine -vasopressin and 1 -deamino -8-D-arginine -vasopressin on 
memory in healthy individuals and diabetes insipidus patients. Psychoneuroendocrinology 7, 185 -
193 (1982).  
30 Tsikunov, S. G. & Belokoskova, S. G. Psychophysiological analysis of the influence of 
vasopressin on speech in patients with post -stroke aphasias. The Span ish Journal of  Psychol ogy 
10, 178 -188 (2007).  
31 Born, J. et al. Sniffing neuropeptides: A transnasal approach to the human brain. Nat ure 
Neurosci ence 5, 514 -516 (2002).  
32 Vande Walle, J.  et al. Desmopressin 30 years in clinical use: A safety review. Curr ent 
Drug Saf ety 2, 232 -238 (2007).  
33  Harris, A. S. Clinical experience with desmopressin: Efficacy and safety in central 
diabetes insipidus and other conditions. J ournal of  Pediatr ics 114, 711 -718 (1989).  
34 Vande Walle, J., Van Herzeele, C. & Raes, A. Is there still a role for desmopressin in 
children with primary monosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis?: A focus on safety issues. Drug 
Safety 33, 261 -271 (2010).  
35 Meyer, S.  et al. Arginine -vasopressin in catecholamine -refractory septic versus non -
septic shock in extremely low birth weight infants with acute renal injury. Crit ical Care 10, Epub 
(2006).  
36 Kim, R. J.  et al. Vasopressin and desmopressin in central diabetes insipidus: Adverse 
effects and clinical considerations. Pediatric endocrinology Reviews : PER 2 Suppl 1, 115 -123 
(2004).  
37 Tansey, K. E. et al. Functionality of promoter microsatellites of arginine vasopressin 
receptor 1A (AVPR1A): Implications for autism. Mol ecular  Autism (1):3 (2011).  
38 Insel, T. R. The challenge of translation in social neuroscience: A review of oxytocin, 
vasopressin, and affiliative behavior. Neuron 65, 769 -779 (2010).  
39 Sala, M. et al. Pharmacologic rescue of impaired cognitive flexibility, social deficits, 
increased aggression, and seizure susceptibility in oxytocin receptor null mice: A neurobehavioral 
model of autism. Biological Psychiatry 69, 875 - 882 (2011).  
40 Donaldson, Z. R., Spiegel, L. & Young, L. J. Central vasopressin V1a receptor activation 
is independently necessary for both partner preference formation and expression in socially 
monogamous male prairie voles. Behav ioral Neurosci ence 124, 159 -163 (2010).  
41 Nephew, B. C. & Bridges, R. S. Arginine vasopressin V1a receptor antagonist impairs 
maternal memory in rats. Physiol ogy and  Behav ior 95, 182 -186 (2008).  
42 Cho, M. M.  et al. The effects of oxytocin and vasopressin on partner preferences in male 
and female prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster). Behav ioral Neurosci ence 113, 1071 -1079 
(1999).  
27MAR2020   Page 21 of 48 43 Carter, C. S.  et al. Consequences of early experiences and exposure to oxytocin and 
vasopressin are sexually dimorphic. Developmental Neuroscience 31(4):332 -341 (2009).  
44 Carter, C. S. Sex differences in oxytocin and vasopressin: Implications for autism 
spectrum disorders? Behav ioural  Brain Res earch  176, 170 -186 (2007).  
45 Young, L. J. Being human : Love: Neuroscience reveals all. Nature 457 (7226): 148 
(2009).  
46 Wermter, A. K. et al. Evidence for the involvement of genetic variation in the oxytocin 
receptor gene (OXTR) in the etiology of autistic disorders on high -functioning level. Am erican  
Journal of  Medical Genet ics Part  B: Neuropsychiatr ic Genet ics 153B, 629 -639 (2010).  
47 Wu, S. et al. Positive association of the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) with autism in 
the Chinese Han population. Biol ogical  Psychiatry 58,  74-77 (2005).  
48 Liu, X. et al. Association of the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) gene polymorphisms with 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in the Japanese population. J ournal of  Hum an Genet ics 55, 137 -
141 (2010).  
49 Manning, M. et al. Peptide and non -peptide agonists and antagonists for the vasopressin 
and oxytocin V1a, V1b, V2 and OT receptors: Research tools and potential therapeutic agents. 
Prog ress in  Brain Res earch  170, 473 -512 (2008).  
50 Ring, R. H. A complicated picture of oxytocin action in the central nervous system 
revealed. Biological Psychiatry 69, 818 -819 (2011).  
51 Parker, K. J., Kinney, L. F., Phillips, K. M. & Lee, T. M. Paternal behavior is associated 
with central neurohormone receptor binding patterns in meadow voles (Microtus 
pennsylvanicus). Behav ioral Neurosci ence 115, 1341 -1348 (2001).  
52 Zhang, R. Transcutaneous electric acupoint stimulation in children with autism and its 
impact on plasma levels of arginine -vasopressin and oxytocin: a prospective single -blinded 
controlled study. Research in Developmental Disabilities 33(4), 1136 -1146 (20 12).  
53 Keverne, E. B. & Curley, J. P. Vasopressin, oxytocin and social behaviour. Current 
opinion in neurobiology 14, 777 -783 (2004).  
4. RADIOISOTOPES OR RADIATION MACHINES  
a. Standard of Care (SOC) Procedures  
Identify Week/Month of Study  Name of Exam  Identify if SOC or Research  
NA NA NA 
b. Radioisotopes  
i. Radionuclide(s) and chemical form(s)  
NA 
ii. Total number of times the radioisotope and activity will be administered (mCi) and 
the route of administration for a typical study participant  
NA 
iii. If not FDA approved: dosimetry information and source documents (package insert, 
Medical Internal Radiation Dose [MIRD] calculation, and peer reviewed literature)  
NA 
27MAR2020   Page 22 of 48 c. Radiation Machines – Diagnostic Procedures  
i. Examination description (well -established procedures)  
NA 
ii. Total number of times each procedure will be performed (typical study participant)  
NA 
iii. Setup and techniques to support dose modeling  
NA 
iv. FDA status of the machine and information on dose modeling (if procedure is not 
well-established)  
NA 
d. Radiation Machines – Therapeutic Procedures  
i. Area treated, dose per fraction/number of fractions, performed as part of normal 
clinical management or due to research participation (well -established procedures)  
NA 
ii. FDA status of the machine, basis for dosimetry, area treated, dose per fraction and 
number of fractions (if procedure is not well -established)  
NA 
 
5. DEVICES USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Devices (Including Commercial Devices Used Off -Label)  
Investigational  Device 1  
Name:  NA 
 
b. IDE-Exempt Devices  
IND-Exempt Device 1  
Name:  NA 
 
6. DRUGS , BIOLOGICS , REAGENTS , OR CHEMICALS USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Drugs, Biologics, Reagents, or Chemicals  
Investigational  Product 1  
Name:  Vasopressin Injection, USP  
 
Dosage:  16 IU BID 
Administration Route:  Intranasal  
b. Commercial Drugs, Biologics, Reagents, or Chemicals  

27MAR2020   Page 23 of 48 Commercial Product 1  
Name:  NA 
  
  
7. DISINFECTION PROCEDURES FOR MEDICAL EQUIPMENT USED ON BOTH HUMANS AND 
ANIMALS  
NA 
 
8. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
All participants will be enrolled at Stanford. We plan to enroll and screen as many as  200 
children to meet our target of a minimum of 100 randomized participants.  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background  
The participants will be between the ages of 6 and 17 years (maximum 17 years and 11 
months). Males and females from all racial and ethnic backgrounds will be eligible to 
participate in this study.  
 
c. Vulnerable Populations  
We are recruiting a minimum of 100 potentially decisionally  impaired children (ages 6 to 
17 years) with ASD. This study is specifically directed at children with ASD in order to 
test the tolerability and efficacy  of vasopressin in this population.  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
NA 
e. Stanford Populations  
NA 
f. Healthy Volunteers  
NA 
g. Recruitment Details  
Potential participants will be identified from the Autism and Developmental Disorders 
Clinic at Stanford and from the Autism and Developmental Disorders Research Registry 
participants (eProtocol #9345; PI: Antonio Hardan). An email letter and flyers will b e 
distributed to the Autism and Developmental Disorders Research Registry participants.  
 
Participants may also be recruited via the Simons Foundation Power ing Autism Research 
for Knowledge (SPARK). SPARK will inform families about our study via email .  
 
27MAR2020   Page 24 of 48 Flyers will be posted  throughout the community in public places and also on craigslist, 
Facebook, Berkeley Parent Network, and various websites such as the Stanford Autism 
Research website (PI: Antonio Hardan), the Stanford Autism Center website, the 
Stanford Social Neuroscience Research Program (PI: Karen Parker), the Stanford 
Department of Psychiatry Recruitment website, the Bay Area Autism Consortium 
website, ClinicalTrials.gov, resourcesmatch.org, the Stanford Clinical Trials website, and 
centerwatch.c om. 
 
Additionally, participants may be recruited via the Interactive Autism Network (IAN). 
The Interactive Autism Network Project will inform families about our study in two 
distinct ways: via email  (for Interactive Autism Network Research families meeting our 
study criteria) and via the Interactive Autism Network Community Research 
Opportunities Bulletin Board (for the public at large). If participants are  interested in 
participating, they can fill out an online survey with basic contact information, or call th e 
research staff who will explain the study using the advertisement phone script. If 
participants remain  interested in participating , the research staff will obtain their 
informed consent as outlined above. The same process outlined above will be used for 
participants recruited from the flyers and email letters.  
 
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
All participants will meet the following:  
a) Medically healthy outpatients between 6 and 17 years of age;  
b) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 5th edition (DSM -5) criteria for Autism 
Spectrum Disorder on the basis of clinical evaluation, confirmed with the Autism 
Diagnostic Interview Revised and Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, 2nd 
edition or the Childhood Autism Rating Scale, 2nd Edition ; 
c) Males and females;  
d) IQ of 40 and above;  
e) Rating of 4 or higher on the Social Communication domain of the Clinical Global 
Impressions Severity;  
f) Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  Total score of 70 and above;  
g) Care provider who can reliably bring participant to clinic visits, provide 
trustworthy ratings, and interact with participant on a regular basis;  
h) Stable concomitant psychotropic medications or medications potentially affecting 
vasopressin for at least 4 weeks (with the exception of fluoxetine, 6 weeks);  
i) No planned changes in psychosocial and biomedical interventions during the trial;  
j) Willingness to provide blood samples and ability to participate in key study 
procedures (i.e., diagnostic assessments and laboratory safety measurements).  
ii. Exclusion  Criteria  
Participants will be excluded if one or more of the following are met:  
a) DSM -5 diagnosis of schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or psychotic disorder;  
b) Regular nasal obstruction or nosebleeds;  
27MAR2020   Page 25 of 48 c) Unstable medical conditions such as migraine, asthma attacks, or seizures, and 
significant physical illness ( e.g., serious liver disease, renal dysfunction, or cardiac 
pathology);  
d) Clinically significant abnormal EKG reading;  
e) History of hypersensitivity to vasopressin, its analogs, or compounding 
preservatives (e.g., chlorobutanol);  
f) Evidence of a genetic mutation known to cause ASD or intellectual disability (e.g., 
Fragile X Syndrome); or metabolic or infectious etiology for ASD on the basis of 
medical history, neurologic history, and available tests for inborn errors of 
metabolism  and chromosomal analysis;  
g) Significant hearing or vision impairments;  
h) Habitually drinks large volumes of water;  
i) Pregnant or sexually active females not using a reliable method of contraception;  
j) Current use of any medications known to interact with vasopressin including: 1) 
carbamazepine (i.e., Tegretol); chlorpropamide; clofibrate; urea; fludrocortisone; 
tricyclic antidepressants (all of which may potentiate the antidiuretic effect of 
vasopres sin when used concurrently); 2) demeclocycline; norepinephrine; lithium; 
heparin; alcohol (all of which may decrease the antidiuretic effect of vasopressin 
when used concurrently); 3) ganglionic blocking agents including benzohexonium, 
chlorisondamine, pen tamine (all of which may produce a marked increase in 
sensitivity to the pressor effects of vasopressin);  
k) Previous participation in a vasopressin clinical trial or current use of vasopressin;  
l) Current use of desmopressin (DDAVP) or oxytocin.  
iii. Screening Procedures : 
Consent will be obtained before any screening procedures can begin. A review of the 
medical and psychiatric history of participants will occur  during the screening 
procedures in order to determine study eligibility. Clinically significant abnormal 
vital signs, EKG readings, and clinical chemistry labs will be determined according 
to Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital standards and expert opinion from trained 
physicians.  
i. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
Participants will not be allowed to be enrolled in any other medication or behavioral trials 
during their participation in the current research study.  
j. Payments to Participants  
Participants  will be paid $60 for the first visit and $30 for each additional completed visit.  
k. Costs to Participants  
There will be no costs charged to the participants.  
l. Planned Duration of the Study  
The entire study will last as long as  six years to complete and will be followed by a 
period of 6 months of data analysis. A participant  could be in the study for approximately 
14 weeks including the initial screening period, the 8 -week blind ed treatment trial. The 
27MAR2020   Page 26 of 48 optional open -label extension study (only for those participants randomized to the 
placebo -placebo group) will take an additional 4 weeks to complete.  
 
9. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Investigational devices  
NA 
ii. Investigational  drugs  
Vasopressin side effects:  There is presently no readily available list of side effects 
based on a common -rare continuum for vasopressin. There are several routes of 
administration for vasopressin: intramuscular (IM), subcutaneous (SC), intravenous 
(IV), and intranasal (IN). In the  present study, the intranasal administration route will 
be used. There are limited side effects associated with the intranasal route of 
administration for vasopressin. However, as discussed below, there are a number of 
potential s ide effects observed when vasopressin is administered by injection (i.e., 
intramuscular, subcutaneous, intravenous). It is crucial to differentiate between the 
side effects specifically associated with different routes of administration.  
 
Intranasal administration:  Information regarding the safety profile of intranasal 
vasopressin administration comes mostly from several clinical trials examining the 
efficacy of vasopressin for enhancing neurocognitive functioning. Additionally, 
although the typical administration r oute for treatment of central diabetes insipidus 
(CDI) is some form of vasopressin injection, some  patients (including children) have 
primarily used a nasal route of administration to treat their disease, or use a 
vasopressin nasa l spray as an adjunct to vasopressin injections [1 -4]. Importantly, a 
large number of studies have provided convincing evidence for intranasal vasopressin 
being very well tolerated [1 -13]. As mentioned, the majority of these studies have 
aimed to investiga te the impact of intranasal vasopressin on neurocognitive 
processes.  
 
Given the relatively large size of vasopressin (>1 kD), injections of this polypeptide 
are not considered to reach the brain in significant quantities due to the restrictions of 
the blood -brain barrier (BBB) [14]. Nasal routes of administration are purported to 
overcome the restrictions of the blood -brain barrier for large molecule peptides, 
including vasopressin, making it a preferred administration route for targeted central 
nervous system treatment. Born et al. [15] provided convincing evidence of this by 
show ing that intranasal vasopressin (40 and 80 IU) administered to healthy adult 
males and females significantly increased cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of the 
peptide compared to placebo administration; vasopressin levels had not returned to 
baseline at the end of the 80 -minute sampling period. Blood concentrations of 
vasopressin also increased but were only slightly (non -significantly) correlated with 
cerebrospinal fluid levels. The nasal route of administration is generally considered 
much safer than in jections of vasopressin for multiple reasons . Not  only is the risk of 
27MAR2020   Page 27 of 48 local infection or transfer of contagious blood borne disease substantially reduced, far 
fewer peripheral effects are noted with intranasal administration of vasopressin [5 -
13]. For example, several recent studies have outlined the ability of intranasal 
vasopressin (20 and 40 IU) to enhance complex psychosocial functioning and 
associated brain activity when given in singl e-doses to healthy adults [5,6,11 -13]. 
Only minor and transient side effects (relaxation/tiredness, headache, dizziness, bitter 
taste, nas al irritation, increased diastolic blood pressure) were reported by a small 
number of participants and were experienced following both administration of 
vasopressin and placebo.  
 
Chronic dosing with intranasal vasopressin, as proposed in the current study, has also 
been shown in several studies to be very well tolerated [8 -10]. In a study of 26 
elderly individuals utilizing a blinded, randomized, placebo -controlled, 10 -week trial 
of intranasal vasopressin administration (20 IU, bid) for treatment of sleep 
disturbances, no major side effects were reported across multiple safety measures 
[10]. A self -rating scale of complaints did not reveal any side effects of the intranasal 
vasopres sin treatment. Cardiovascular  monitoring revealed a systolic blood pressure 
that was slightly elevated 60 minutes after vasopressin administration, but not 8 -12 
hours later. Measurements of diastolic blood pressure and heart rate did not indicate 
any treatment effects. Examination of blood pressure and heart rate on a weekly basis 
during the 10 -week study period revealed values in the normal range and no 
treatment related differences. At the end of the trial, measurement of sodium, 
osmolality, and hematocri t did not reveal any treatment effects, and values were 
entirely within the normal range.  
 
In our pilot intranasal vasopressin trial, minimal side effects were reported, including  
fever, cough, body aches, excitement/agitation, increased motor activity, insomnia, 
headache, decreased motor activity, akathisia, depressive affect, drowsiness, head 
banging, nasal congestion, blurred vision, dry mouth, decreased appetite/anorexia, 
nausea /vomiting, constipation, increased urination, bed wetting, skin rash, bug bite, 
lethargy/tiredness, feeling emotional, bloody nose, stinging sensation in the nose, and  
burning sensation in the throat.  
 
Taken together, the studies outlined above suggest that intranasal vasopressin 
administration at the doses proposed here is very well tolerated. Below is a list of 
side effects reported from a small number of participants following intranasal 
vasopressin ( and placebo) treatment.  
 
In our prior pilot vasopressin trial at Stanford, sneezing, gagging, and sore throat, 
have also been reported.  
 
Reported side effects following intranasal vasopressin (and placebo) administration 
(NB: These side effects were all minor and transient):  
• Relaxation or tiredness  
• Headache  
• Dizziness  
• Increased systolic blood pressure  
27MAR2020   Page 28 of 48 • Increased diastolic blood pressure  
• Bitter taste  
• Nasal irritation  
 
Vasopressin administered by injection:  Ten IU of vasopressin (0.5 mL) given 
intramuscular ly will usually elicit full physiologic response in adult patients. The 
manufacturer recommends that in the average postoperative adult , an initial 5 IU 
dose, increased to 10 IU, if necessary, should be given intramuscular ly every 3 to 4  
hours for treating abdominal distention. In preparation for roentgenography, the 
average patient will require two intramuscular injections of 10 IU given two hours 
and one half -hour, re spectively, before films are exposed. For treating central 
diabetes insipidus, vasopressin may be administered subcutaneous ly or intranasal ly. 
The dose of injection is 5 to 10 IU repeated two or three times daily as needed. When 
vasopressin is administered intranasal ly for treating central diabetes insipidus , the 
dosage and interval should be adjusted for each patient [16].  
 
Many of the side effects listed by the manufacturer are associated with injections of 
vasopressin and result from its vasoconstrictive properties mediated by vasopressin 
V1a receptors. These side effects include cardiac arrest and/or shock, circumoral 
pallor, arrhythmias, decreased cardiac output, angina, myocardial ischemia, and 
peripheral vasoconstriction. Gastrointestinal side effects may include abdominal 
cramps, diarrhea, intestinal hyperactivity, nau sea and vomiting. Bronchial 
constriction, tremor, ve rtigo and “pounding” in the head have also been reported. 
Skin changes may also occur following vasopressin injection and include sweating, 
urticarial (rash), and cutaneous gangrene. Additionally, some individuals may 
experience a severe hypersensitivity to vasopressin or its excipients (e.g., 
chlorobutanol as preservative) (see Kim et al. [17] for a review of vasopressin side 
effects). In recent years, an increase has been noted in the use of intravenous 
vasopressin treatment for hemodynamically unstable i nfants and children following 
cardiothoracic surgery [18].  
 
This treatment has been associated with reports of water intoxication/hyponatremia 
associated with prolonged intravenous vasopressin. Careful monitoring of 
cardiovascular parameters and serum sodium values is important when vasopressin is 
given to intensiv e care patients or to those with underlying cardiovascular pathology 
or a known sensitivity to the drug or its excipients. For outpatients, drinking a glass 
of water when taking vasopressin is reported to reduce some of the skin and 
gastrointestinal effect s. However, close monitoring of fluid intake and output should 
also be considered during vasopressin treatment . Less  free water should be given in 
cases where hyponatremia may be a concern. Several  studies have shown that 
regulation of fluids and close monitoring of electrolyte balance substantially reduce 
the risk of hyponatremia in children treated with intravenous vasopressin [19,20].  
 
Reported side effects following injections (intramuscular, subcutaneous, intravenous) 
of vasopressin:  
• Abdominal cramps  
• Diarrhea  
27MAR2020   Page 29 of 48 • Intestinal hyperactivity  
• Nausea  
• Vomiting  
• Passage of gas  
• Blanching of skin  
• Sweating  
• Tremor  
• Vertigo  
• “Pounding” in head  
• Bronchial constriction  
• Urticarial  
• Circumoral pallor  
• Cutaneous gangrene  
• Anaphylaxis (cardiac arrest and/or shock)  
• Arrhythmias  
• Decreased cardiac output  
• Angina  
• Myocardial ischemia  
• Peripheral vasoconstriction  
• Gangrene  
• Hyponatremia/water intoxication (possibly resulting in seizure or coma)  
 
FDA indications for vasopressin administration:  The formulation of vasopressin to be 
used in the proposed research is VasostrictTM (Vasopressin Injection, USP; 
manufactured by PAR Pharmaceutical, an Endo International Company, Chestnut 
Ridge, NY). Th e drug has FDA marketing approval for increasing blood pressure in 
adults with vasodilatory shock. This study is a Phase II clinical trial that aims to 
investigate both the efficacy and tolerability of intranasal vasopressin treatment for 
social, cognitive,  and behavioral problems in children with ASD. Several other US 
research groups have received FDA approval to investigate the effects of intranasal 
vasopressin administration for enhancing neurocognitive functioning in both healthy 
adults and people with ASD (e .g., see [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  
 
Contraindications and precautions for vasopressin administration:  The safety 
concerns listed in the section above for vasopressin injections are considered rare if 
precautions are adhered to. The package insert for Vasopressin Injection, USP lists 
several precautions and contraindications associated with this drug. Cont raindications 
for the use of vasopressin include anaphylaxis or hypersensitivity to the drug or its 
components (e.g., chlorobutanol as a preservative). This drug is not  recommended for 
use in patients with vascular disease, especially disease of the coronary arteries, 
except with extreme caution. In such patients, even small doses may precipitate 
angina pain ; with larger doses, the possibility of myocardial infarction should be 
considered. Vasopressin may also produce hyponatremia/water intoxication and is 
contraindicated in patients who habitually drink large volumes of water (e.g., habitual 
or psychogenic po lydipsia). For this reason, the early signs of drowsiness, 
listlessness, and headaches  should be recognized to prevent terminal coma and 
27MAR2020   Page 30 of 48 convulsions. Vasopressin should also be used with caution in the presence of 
epilepsy, migraine, asthma, heart failure, or any state in which a rapid addition to 
extracellular water may produce hazard s for an already overburdened system. These 
contraindications are reflected in the extensive exclusion criteria and safety 
monitoring used in this study. Research utilizing vasopressin treatment in children 
provide s convincing evidence for vasopressin being well tolerated if fluid intake is 
monitored closely du ring the treatment period [ e.g., 20].  
 
An additional concern with using vasopressin is the potential for increased 
aggression. This concern is  based on specific preclinical animal studies; however, to 
the investigators’ knowledge no evidence has demonstrated that vasopressin 
increases aggressive behavior when administered to humans. Research on 
vasopressin and aggression in rodents has generally shown that vasopressin increases 
aggression in: 1) non -monogamous adult male residents when an adult male intruder 
is introduced into his “territory” (i.e., home cage), and 2) monogamou s adult male 
residents when an adult male intruder is introduced into his territory, which 
sometimes includes the mate and pups [21,22]. One can argue  that increased 
aggression in these behavioral assays is adaptive . In the context of the second 
example, increased aggression in the presence of mate/pups in the home territory is a 
protective response that is prosocial in nature, at least regarding  the resident male’s 
family. Nevertheless, we acknowledged that monitoring aggression in children in our 
pilot tr eatment trial was an important precaution. We found no evidence that blinded 
vasopressin treatment increased aggression in our pilot vasopressin trial. We will 
continue to regularly inquire about aggressive behavior throughout this larger phase 
II study.  
 
No reliable data are available on the developmental risks of vasopressin 
administration in children. The main purpose of our study is to determine the safety 
and efficacy of intranasal vasopressin administration in children with ASD. We will 
report any serious adverse events to the IRB and FDA according to law and will 
detail this information in published articles and presentations.  
 
References  
1 Chirman, S. B. & Kinsell, L. W. Diabetes insipidus. Treatment with 8 -lysine 
vasopressin in a nasal spray. California Medicine 101, 1 -3 (1964).  
2 Dashe, A. M.  et al. Synthetic vasopressin nasal spray in treatment of diabetes 
insipidus. Journal of the American Medical Association 190, 1069 -1071  (1964).  
3 Moses, A. M. Synthetic lysine vasopressin nasal spray in treatment of diabetes 
insipidus. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics 5, 422 -427 (1964).  
4 Hung, W. Treatment of diabetes insipidus in children with synthetic lysine -8-
vasopressin nasal spray . Medical Annals of the District of Columbia 36, 400 -401 
(1967).  
5 Guastella, A. J.  et al. Intranasal arginine vasopressin enhances the encoding of 
happy and angry faces in humans. Biological Psychiatry 67, 1220 -1222 (2010).  
6 Guastella, A. J.  et al. Arginine Vasopressin selectively enhances recognition of 
sexual cues in male humans. Psychoneuroendocrinology 36, 294 -297 (2011).  
27MAR2020   Page 31 of 48 7 Laczi, F. et al. Effects of lysine -vasopressin and 1 -deamino -8-D-arginine -
vasopressin on memory in healthy individuals and diabetes insipidus patients. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 7, 185 -193 (1982).  
8 Perras, B.  et al. Verbal memory after three months of intranasal vasopressin in 
healthy old humans. Psychoneuroendocrinology 22, 387 -396 (1997).  
9 Perras, B. et al. Beneficial treatment of age -related sleep disturbances with 
prolonged intranasal vasopressin. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 19, 28 -36 
(1999).  
10 Perras, B.  et al. Improvement of sleep and pituitary -adrenal inhibition after 
subchronic intranasal vasopressin treatment in elderly humans. Journal of Clinical 
Psychopharmacology 23, 35 -44 (2003).  
11 Rilling, J. K. et al. Effects of intranasal oxytocin and vasopressin on cooperative 
behavior and associated brain activity in men. Psychoneuroendocrinology 37, 447 -
461 (2012).  
12 Zink, C. F. et al. Vasopressin modulates social recognition -related activity in the 
left temporoparietal junction in humans. Translational Psychiatry 1 (4):e3  (2011).  
13 Zink, C. F.  et al. Vasopressin modulates medial prefrontal cortex -amygdala 
circuitry during emotion processing in humans . Journal of Neuroscience 30, 7017 -
7022  (2010).  
14 Ermisch, A. et al. On the blood -brain barrier to peptides: accumulation of 
labelled vasopressin, DesGlyNH2 -vasopressin and oxytocin by brain regions. 
Endocrinologia Experimentalis 19, 29 -37 (1985).  
15 Born, J. et al. Sniffing neuropeptides: a transnasal approach to the human brain. 
Nature Neuroscience 5, 514 -516 (2002).  
16 American Regent  (N.Y.). Vasopressin Injection, USP Package Insert. (2011).  
17 Kim, R. J.  et al. Vasopressin and desmopressin in central diabetes insipidus: 
Adverse effects and clinical considerations. Pediatric Endocrinology Reviews : PER 2 
Suppl 1, 115 -123 (2004).  
18 Davalos, M. C. et al. Hyponatremia during arginine vasopressin therapy in 
children following cardiac surgery . Pediatr ic Critical Care Med icine  14(3) 290 -297 
(2013).   
19 Mishra, G. & Chandrashekhar, S. R. Management of diabetes insipidus in 
children. Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism 15 Suppl 3, S180 -187 
(2011).  
20 Wise -Faberowski, L. et al. Perioperative management of diabetes insipidus in 
children. Journal of Neurosurgical Anesthesiology 16, 220 -225 (2004).  
21 Albers, H. E. The regulation of social recognition, social communication and 
aggression: Vasopressin in the social behavior neural network. Hormones and 
Behavior 61, 283 -292 (2012).  
22 Young, L. J., Wang, Z. X. & Insel, T. R. Neuroendocrine bases of monogamy. 
Trends in Neurosciences 21, 71 -75 (1998).  
 
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
NA 
iv. Procedures  
27MAR2020   Page 32 of 48 Screening measures  
Medical and psychiatric screening will be conducted under the supervision of Dr. 
Antonio Hardan, a board -certified child and adolescent psychiatrist, to determine 
participants’ eligibility to take part in the trial. A physical examination will be 
completed on all participants . Parents  and children will be interviewed to determine 
relevant information pertaining to the child’s lifetime medical and psychiatric health.  
 
The Clinical Global Impression Scale (CGI) [1] consists of 3 subscales: severity of 
illness (CGI -S), global improvement (CGI -I), and therapeutic index. The severity of 
the illness is scored from 1= normal to 7= extremely ill. The patient's improvement is 
scored on a 7-point scale which ranges from markedly improved (1), to no change 
(4), and to very much worse (7). The Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Severity 
has been widely used in psychopharmacological studies and has been shown as 
highly sensitive to  medication effects  [2]. Consistent with the Research Unit on 
Pediatric Psychopharmacology (RUPP) Autism Network, a score of 3 (mildly ill) on 
the severity of illness scale will  be assigned to participants based upon the core 
features of ASD. Higher scores will be assigned based on the presence of other, 
secondary behaviors. The Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Improvement is a 
subscale scored from 1 (very much improved) to 7 (very much worse). A score of 4 
reflects no change. Positive response is define d by a score of 2 (much improved) or 1 
(very much improved) at week 4. The scores on the severity of illness and 
improvement scale will be based on parent interview, parent -completed behavior 
problem checklists, as well as direct observation of the child. The CGI -S will be used 
as a screening tool and as an outcome measure. CGI -I will be used as an outcome 
measure to assess improvement observed during the trial that is due to vasopressin 
treatment .  
 
The Autism Diagnostic Interview -Revised (ADI-R) [3] is a reliable and well 
validated research diagnostic instrument administered to participants’ parents and 
consists of 88 items that are informed by the ICD -10 and DSM -5 diagnostic criteria 
for ASD. To meet these criteria, the participant must have a s core higher than a pre -
specified cut -point in the three symptom areas of the ICD -10 diagnostic system, and 
must also have an age of onset prior to 3 years.  
 
The Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, 2nd edition (ADOS -2) [4,5] is a 
reliable and well validated semi -structured clinical and research diagnostic 
instrument that allows assessment through behavioral observations during specific 
play, social, and language tasks. The ADOS -2 provides empirically -based thresholds 
for diagnoses of autism and autism spectrum. The ADI -R and  ADOS -2 will be used 
in conjunction with expert clinical opinion guided by DSM -5 criteria to assess for the 
presence of a diagnosis of ASD.  
 
The Childhood Autism Rating Scale, 2nd Edition ( CARS -2) is a clinician -rated 
questionnaire that allows for ASD diagnosis assessment through behavioral 
observations and additional information  such as parent and/or teacher reports [ 6]. 
CARS -2 consists of 15 items that cover social, emotional , adaptive, communicative, 
and cognitive functions. CARS -2 (standard form) is “for use with individuals 
27MAR2020   Page 33 of 48 younger than 6 years of age and those with communication difficulties or below -
average estimated IQs” and CARS -2-HF (high functioning) is used for “assessing 
verbally fluent individuals, 6 years of age and older, with IQ scores above 80”. The 
Childhood Aut ism Rating Scale, 2nd edition will be used as an alternative to the 
ADOS -2 for participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol 
changes ; CARS -2 can be administered via Zoom.   
 
The Stanford Binet, 5th edition (SB-5) [7] will be administered to determine 
intellectual functioning. Participants must have an IQ of 40 or higher to meet 
inclusion criteria. The SB-5 provides an overall (Full Scale) IQ score, as well as 
Verbal and Nonverbal IQ scores. Tasks are broken into five domains of cognitive 
functioning: Fluid Reasoning, Knowledge, Quantitative Reasoning, Visual -Spatial 
Processing, and Working Memory. Age -referenced standard scores, as well as raw 
scores for cognitive domains, are available. If participants have already undergone 
previous IQ testing with a different instrument , such as one of the Weschler scales , 
the research team will review the assessment report to determine its suitability in 
place of the SB -5.  
 
The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children , 5th Edition (WISC -V) is an 
individually administered, comprehensive clinical instrument that will be 
administered to assess intelligence [ 8]. The primary index scores represent 
intellectual  functioning in five cognitive  areas: Verbal Comprehension Index, Visual 
Spatial Index, Fluid Reasoning Index, Working Memory Index, and the Processing 
Speed Index. The assessment also includes a Full-Scale  IQ composite score 
representing general intellectual ability. The WISC -V will be used as an alternative to 
the SB5 for participants who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes ; 
the WISC -V can be administered in a modified manner via Zoom , following 
publisher guidelines.  
 
Phenotyping measures:  
The Wing Subgroups Questionnaire (WSQ) [ 9] will be administered to classify  
participants into distinct social subtypes to test whether social phenotype affects 
treatment efficacy. The three subtypes are: active -but-odd (actively seeks social 
interaction with others but does so in an awkward manner) ; passive (does not engage 
in social approach but responds when approached and will remain socially engaged) ; 
or aloof (fails to approach others and withdraws if approached). The Wing Subgroup 
Questionnaire  has criterion -referenced validity and internal consistency  [10].  
 
Safety measures  
Clinical chemistry labs, including  blood urea nitrogen sodium, potassium, chloride, 
CO2, anion gap, glucose, creatinine, calcium, and blood and urine osmolality, will be 
conducted at screening prior to participants being allocated to treatment groups to 
determine eligibility status and Visits 4 and 6 to assess for drug safety. Blood 
samples will be collected at the Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital phlebotomy lab 
or locally through the participant’s primary care physician’s office. As much as  
30mL of bloo d will be collected (including the blood collected for research 
biomarker measures).  
27MAR2020   Page 34 of 48  
An EKG will be performed at screening prior to participants being allocated to 
treatment groups to determine eligibility status and at Visits 4 and 6 to assess for drug 
safety. A trained investigator will place the leads for measurement of basal cardiac 
function.  
 
Vital signs including heart rate, blood pressure, and body temperature will be 
assessed at each visit. Participants enrolled in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol 
changes will have the above assessed at Visits 1, 4, 6, and 8  (if applicable) .  
 
Height and weight will be measured at each visit. Participants enrolled in the trial 
after the COVID -19 protocol changes will have height and weight measured at 
screening, Visit 4, Visit 6, and Visit 8 (if applicable). Fluctuations in weight can 
provide im portant information on the diuretic effects of vasopressin and will be used 
to determine alterations in weight gain or loss potentially related to changes in 
appetite/metabolism resulting from the treatment.  
 
The Dosage Record and Treatment Emergent Symptom Scale (DOTES) will be used 
to assess general physical and psychiatric side effects. The Dosage Record and 
Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale is a general rating scale published by the 
Early Clinical Drug Eval uation Unit of the National Institute of Mental Health [ 11]. 
The scale has been widely used clinically for children and adults to assess many 
central nervous system side effects as well as some behavioral side effects [ 12]. We 
have modified the Dosage Reco rd and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale to 
include relevant questions regarding hydration status.  
 
The Overt Aggression Scale (OAS) will be administered to determine changes in 
aggressive behavior throughout the study. The Overt Aggression Scale is designed to 
assess observable aggressive or violent behavior and has been used in children with 
different neuropsychiatric disorders [ 13,14 ].  
 
All safety assessments outlined above will be repeated during the optional open -label 
vasopressin treatment extension period. We will also perform pharmacokinetics 
analysis during the open -label treatment period  as outlined previously.  
 
Urine pregnancy tests will be administered to all female participants of childbearing 
age. Females, who are at least 12.5 years old or have a history of menstruating, must 
have a negative pregnancy test before participating in this study.  
 
 
 
 
Primary outcome measure  
 
The Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -2) [15-17] is a norm -referenced 
questionnaire developed to measure social behavior in both clinical and non -clinical 
populations. The Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  provides age - and gender -
27MAR2020   Page 35 of 48 referenced  scores , as well as raw scores for the following domains: Total score, 
Receptive, Cognitive, Expressive, and Motivational aspects of social behavior, and 
Autistic preoccupations. The psychometric properties were tested in younger and 
older participants [ 15,18 ]. The Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  Total score 
was continuously distributed within each group and minimally correlated with IQ. 
Post-treatment parent Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition   ratings will be used 
as the primary ou tcome measure in each treatment arm, and pre -treatment parent 
Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  ratings will be used to assess whether social 
deficit severity affects treatment response efficacy.  
 
Secondary outcome measures  
 
The Clinical Global Impressions Scale – Severity ( CGI-S) and Clinical Global 
Impressions Scale – Improvement ( CGI-I) are included as secondary outcome 
measures. Please see above for more details about this instrument .  
 
The Repetitive Behavior Scale – Revised (RBS -R) [19] is a rating tool used to 
capture the breadth of repetitive behavior in ASD. The Repetitive Behaviors Scale – 
Revised contains 43 items that are drawn from other instruments and grouped 
theoretically based on the authors’ clinical experience. The Repetiti ve Behaviors 
Scale – Revised consists of five subscales: 1) Rituals/Sameness; 2) Self -injurious 
behavior; 3) Stereotypical behavior; 4) Compulsive behavior; and 5) Restricted 
interests. Items are rated on a four -point Likert scale ranging from (0) ‘‘behavior 
does not occur’’ to (3) ‘‘behavior occurs and is a severe problem .” Raters  are asked 
to refer to the previous month when completing the scale. The Repetitive Behaviors 
Scale – Revised has been validated for use in young children with ASD.  
 
The Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale (SCAS) [ 20] assesses the frequency with which 
children experience symptoms relating to obsessive -compulsive disorder, separation 
anxiety, social phobia, panic/agoraphobia, generalized anxiety/overanxious disorder , 
and fears of physical injury. The Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale has high internal 
consistency for the total score and factor scores, acceptable for 6-month test -retest 
reliability. Results of both confirmatory and exploratory factor analyses were 
supportive of  the DSM -IV constructs of anxiety disorders.  
 
The Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test (RMET) [ 21] will be used to test participants’ 
ability to determine the emotions of others. The Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test is 
a widely used test of theory of mind that assesses individuals’ ability to infer 
complex emotions from the eye region of faces. We wi ll use the child version of the 
test, which  consists of 28 images and has modified answer options for ease of use in 
pediatric populations.  
 
The Facial Emotion Recognition Test will be used to assess participants’ ability to 
identify facial emotions of others. The Facial Emotion Recognition Test was derived 
from the NimStim Set of Facial Expressions that required participants to identify the 
correct facial emotion displayed by each face stimulus [ 22]. Participants are required 
to select an emotion from a list of seven possible emotions (angry, calm, disgusted, 
27MAR2020   Page 36 of 48 happy, sad, scared, and surprised) and are administered a total of 42 face stimuli per 
test session.  
 
Optional high -density EEG: Outcome measures will include spectral power  in the 
alpha, theta, and gamma frequencies. The exploratory outcome measure includes 
EEG coherence. Resting -state EEG will be recorded from participants comfortably 
seated with their eyes open during each visit at which EEG is collected. Participants 
will be familiarized with all experimental materials prior to recording and provided 
with an explicit visual schedule to diminish any undue stress associated with novel 
environments, equipm ent (e.g. , electrode caps), or support staff. A practice cap will 
also be made available for participants should further familiarization be requested. 
Data will be collected using a 64 -channel Ag/AgCl electrode cap (ANT North 
America, Madison, WI) and continuously d igitized at 500Hz with an asalab Turnkey 
System (Madison, WI). Placement of electrodes will conform to the International 10 –
20 System. MNE will be used to pre -process data and monitor impedances to be less 
than 10kOhms. Approximately 5 minutes of  continuous EEG will be recorded as 
participants sit with eyes open. Offline processing will be performed using the MNE 
neuroimaging suite and includes (but is not limited to) re -referencing to linked -ear 
mastoids, correction of DC drift, and the removal o f eye -blink artifacts. For 
participants  who enroll in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol changes, the EEG 
will not be available.  
 
Other outcome measures  
 
The Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, 3rd edition : Social Skills and Relationships 
Domain (VABS -3) will be administered to measure behavioral functioning  [23]. The 
participants’ level of expressive and receptive speech will be used as a covariable 
when examining performance on tasks that require adequate language and 
communication skills. The Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales 3: Social Skills and 
Relationships Domain is a norm -referenced, standardized, parent report/interview 
that measures developmental an d behavioral abilities in the areas of socialization, 
communication, daily living skills, and motor skills. This instrument was developed 
for use in people with developmental disabilities , has been used frequently in 
individuals with ASD , and maintains strong psychometric properties [ 24,25 ]. 
 
The Pediatric Quality of Life (PedsQL) [ 26] inventory is a 23 -item brief parent 
proxy -report designed not only to measure core dimensions of health as delineated by 
the World Health Organization, but also  to capture information about an individual’s  
functioning in educational settings. The inventory has 4 subscales including physical, 
emotional, social, and school functioning. The Pediatric Quality of Life distinguishes 
between healthy children and children with acute and chronic health conditions and 
also distinguishes disease severity within a chronic health condition.  
The NEPSY -II [27] is a widely used and highly validated norm -referenced measure 
of child (3 -16 years old) neurocognitive processes. The Theory of Mind subtest will 
be used to assess social perception abilities. This test consists of participants being 
read various scenari os and then asked questions that require knowledge of another 
person’s point of view to answer correctly.  
27MAR2020   Page 37 of 48  
Eye Gaze  to social cues will be measured while participants view the emotional faces 
presented in the Facial Emotion Recognition assessment using a corneal reflection 
eye tracker. Eye  tracking is routinely used with infants and children; it is no different 
from being videotaped with a camera that produces no sensation. For coding of eye 
gaze, four standard a priori regions of interest (the whole face, the eyes, the nose and 
mouth, and the forehead and cheeks) will be created on each face [ 28]. Data will be 
extracted for these regions of interest and analyzed for levels of gaze duration (total 
amount of time fixating on a region of interest) and fixation counts (number of gaze 
fixations toward a region of interest). The NimStim Set of Facial E xpressions has 
been standardized for use with eye tracking and has been used in previous eye gaze 
studies in pediatric participants [ 29]. For participants who enroll in the trial after the 
COVID -19 proto col changes, the Eye Gaze Assessment will not be performed.  
 
The Child’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ) is the most frequently employed 
measure assessing the quality and type of sleep experienced by children as reported 
by parents/caregiver [ 30,31 ]. Thirty -three items are grouped into 8 subscales: 
bedtime resistance, sleep onset delay, sleep duration, sleep anxiety, night 
awakenings, parasomnias, sleep disordered breathing, and daytime sleepiness. To 
calculate subscale scores, each item is rated on a scale from 1 to 3 ; a higher score 
reflects more sleep disturbanc e.  Owen et al., (2000) [ 30] demonstrated internal 
consistency and validity of the Child’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire comparing a 
community sample and a clinical sample.  
 
The Diagnostic Analysis of Nonverbal Accuracy -2 (DANVA -2) is a standardized 
measure that includes child vocal emotion recognition subtests.  Diagnostic Analysis 
of Nonverbal Accuracy -2 scores are associated with subclinical characteristics of 
ASD in non -autistic individuals [ 32], and are widely utilized to evaluate emotional 
recognition in individuals with ASD [ 33-35]. The scores reflect the number of errors 
made in identifying the displayed emotion, with a lower score indicating stronger 
performance.  
 
The Stanford Social Motivation Scale,  also known as the Stanford Social 
Dimensional Scale (SSDS) [36] was developed by researchers from the Stanford 
Autism Center to enable detailed assessment of key social processes and skills that, if 
impaired, can impede one’s ability to navigate the comple xities of the social world. 
The Stanford Social Motivation Scale is a 71 -item questionnaire measure. The first 
58 items are appropriate for any child of any language level and have been factor 
analyzed. An additional 1 3 are language -based items suitable for verbal individuals. 
The  Stanford Social Motivation Scale is a dimensional, quantitative measure 
designed to capture individual differences in social motivation, affiliation, social 
communication, and recognition , as well as unusual social approach in both 
normative and clinical populations.  
 
The Parent Rated Anxiety Scale -ASD (PRAS -ASD) [37] is a 25 -item, parent -
reported measure of anxiety symptoms in youth with ASD (age 5 -17 years). Parents 
rate the frequency and impairment of anxiety symptoms on a 4 -point scale (0 = not 
27MAR2020   Page 38 of 48 present; 1 = present sometimes, not a real problem; 2 = often present and a problem; 
3 = very frequent and a major problem) during  the past two weeks.  
 
The Social Responsiveness Scale, 2nd edition  (SRS -2) subscales : Five subscales have 
been proposed by the S RS manual and include Social Awareness, Social Cognition , 
Social Communication , Social Motivation , and Restricted Repetitive behaviors. 
Subsequent f actor analysis indicated the presence of additional domains including 
Social Avoidance, Emotion Recognition , Interpersonal Relatedness , Insistence On 
Sameness , and Repetitive Mannerisms [38]. A factor analytic analysis that was based 
on the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) revealed the following social domains: 
Attachment and Affiliation , Non-facial Communication Production , Facial 
Communication Production , and Understanding Mental States  [39]. 
 
Biological measurements  
Plasma vasopressin concentrations, as well as related biological measures, will be 
quantified using techniques validated for use in humans. Blood samples for 
measuring plasma -based biomarkers will be collected once pre -treatment and at 
Visits 4 and 6 (for participants in ope n-label period, Visit 8 as well) . Blood collection 
will take place  at the Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital phlebotomy lab. The blood 
samples will be immediately placed on wet ice  and centrifuged at 1600g for 15 mins 
at 4°C . The  plasma layer will be aliqu oted, and stored at -80°C in Dr. Parker’s lab. 
As much as 30 mL of blood will be collected (including the blood collected for 
clinical chemistry measurements).  
 
References  
1 Guy, W. ECDEU Assessment manual for psychopharmacology -revised (DHEW 
Publ No ADM 76 -338). Rockville, MD, U.S. Department of Health, Education,  and 
Welfare, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health  
Administration, NIMH Psychopharmacology Research Branch, Division of 
Extramural Research Programs, 1976, pp 218 –222. (2000).  
2 Campbell, M. & Palij, M. Measurement of side effects including tardive 
dyskinesia. Psychopharmacol ogy Bulletin 21, 1063 -1080 (1985).  
3 Lord, C., Rutter, M. & Le Couteur, A. Autism diagnostic interview -revised : A 
revised version of a diagnostic interview for caregivers of individuals with possible  
pervasive developmental disorders. J ournal of  Autism  and Development  Disord ers 
24, 659 -685 (1994).  
4 Lord, C. et al. The autism diagnostic observation schedule -generic: A standard 
measure of social and communication deficits associated with the spectrum of 
autism. J ournal of  Autism and Development  Disord ers 30, 205 -223 (2000).  
5 Lord, C.  et al. Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule -WPS. (Western 
Psychological Services, 1999).  
6  Moon, S. J.  et al.  Accuracy of the childhood autism rating scale: A systematic 
review and meta‐analysis. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology 61(9), 
1030 -1038 (2019).  
7 Roid, G. H. Stanford Binet's Intelligence Scales, 5th ed ., Technical Manual 
(Riverside Publishing, 2003 ).  
27MAR2020   Page 39 of 48 8  Pearson Assessments. WISC -V Interpretive Considerations for Sample Report 
(10/20/2020). NCS Pearson, Inc.  
9 Castelloe, P. & Dawson, G. Subclassification of children with autism and  
pervasive developmental disorder: A questionnaire based on Wing ’s subgrouping 
scheme.  Journal of  Autism and Development  Disord ers 23, 229 -241 (1993).  
10 O'Brien, S. K. The validity and reliability of the Wing Subgroups Questionnaire.  
Journal of  Autism  and Development  Disord ers 26, 321 -335 (1996).  
11 Guy, W. ECDEU assessment manual for psychopharmacology. Rev. Rockville,  
MD: U.S.  National Institute of Health, Psychopharmacology Research Branch. 
(1976).  
12 Garvey, C. A., Gross, D. & Freeman, L. Assessing psychotropic medication side  
effects  among children. A reliability study. J ournal of  Child  and Adolesc ent 
Psychiatr ic Ment al Health Nurs ing 4, 127 -131 (1991).  
13 Dittmann, S. et al. Cognitive functioning in euthymic bipolar I and bipolar II  
patients. Bipolar Disorders 10, 877 -887 (2008).  
14 Martin Fernandez -Mayoralas, D. et al. Treatment with paliperidone in children 
with behavior disorders previously treated with risperidone : An open -label trial . 
Clinical Neuropharmacology 35, 227 -230 (2012).  
15 Constantino, J. N. et al. Validation of a brief quantitative measure of autistic  
traits: Comparison of the social responsiveness scale with the autism diagnostic 
interview - revised. J ournal of  Autism and Development  Disord ers 33, 427 -433 
(2003).  
16 Constantino, J. N.  et al. Reciprocal social  behavior in children with and without 
pervasive developmental disorders.  Journal of  Development and  Behav ioral 
Pediatr ics 21, 2 -11 (2000).  
17 Constantino, J. N. & Todd, R. D. Autistic traits in the general population: A twin 
study. Arch ives of  General Psychiatry 60, 524 -530 (2003).  
18 Pine, E. et al. Quantitative assessment o f autistic  symptomatology in 
preschoolers. Autism 10, 344 -352 (2006).  
19 Bishop, S. L. et al. Subcategories of restricted and repetitive behaviors in 
children with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders  43(6), 1287 -1297 (2013).  
20 Spence, S. H., Barrett, P. M. & Turner, C. M. Psychometric properties of the 
Spence Children's  Anxiety Scale with young adolescents. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders 17, 605 -625 (2003).  
21 Baron -Cohen, S. et al. The "Reading the Mind in the Eyes" test revised version: 
A study with normal adults, and adults with Asperger syndrome or high -functioning 
autism. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 42, 241 -251 (2001).  
22 Tottenham, N. et al. The NimStim set of facial expressions: Judgments from 
untrained research participants. Psychiatry Research 168, 242 -249 (2009).  
23 Sparrow, S., Balla, D. A. & Cichetti, D. Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales,  2nd 
ed., (Pearson Education, Inc., 2005).  
24 Park, C. J.  et al. Brief report : The relationship between language skills , adaptive 
behavior , and emotional and behavior problems in pre-schoolers with autism . Journal  
of Autism  and Developmental  Disord ers 42(12), 2761 -2766  (2012).  
25 Kjellmer, L.  et al. Language and communication skills in preschool children with 
autism spectrum disorders: Contribution of cognition, severity of autism symptoms, 
27MAR2020   Page 40 of 48 and adaptive functioning to the  variability.  Research in  Developmental  Disabil ities. 
33, 172 -180 (2012).  
26 Varni, J. W., Seid, M. & Rode, C. A. The PedsQL: Measurement model for the 
pediatric  quality of life inventory. Med ical Care 37, 126 -139 (1999).  
27 Korkman, M., Kirk, U. & Kemp, S. L. NEPSY II. Administrative manual. San 
Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation (2007).  
28 Guastella, A. J., Mitchell, P. B. & Dadds, M. R. Oxytocin increases gaze to the 
eye region of human faces. Biological Psychiatry 63, 3 -5 (2008).  
29 Amso, D. et al. Visual exploration strategies and the development of infants' 
facial emotion discrimination. Frontiers in Psychology 1 :180 (2010).  
30  Owens JA, Spirito A, McGuinn M. The children’s sleep habits questionnaire 
(CSHQ): Psychometric properties of a survey instrument for school -aged children. 
Sleep , 23(8):1043 -51 (2000 ). 
31 Markovich AN , Gendron MA and Corkum PV . Validating the Children’s Sleep 
Habits Questionnaire against polysomnography and actigraphy in school -aged 
children. Front. Psychiatry 5:188  (2015) .  
32 Ingersoll, B. Broader autism phenotype and nonverbal sensitivity: Evidence for an 
association in the general  population. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders 40, 590 –598 (2010) .  
33 Berard, N. et al . Executive function, social emotional learning, and social 
competence in school -aged boys with autism spectrum disorder. Canadian Journal of 
School Psychology, 32(3 -4), 265 -281 (2017) .  
34 Hudepohl, M. B. et al. The role of emotion perception in adaptive functioning of 
people with autism spectrum disorders. Autism, 19(1), 107 -112 (2015).  
35 Rosen, T.E., Lerner, M.D. Externalizing and internalizing symptoms moderate 
longitudinal patterns of facial emotion recognition in autism spectrum disorder. 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 46, 2621 –2634 (2016).  
36 Phillips, J. M.  et al. Development of the Stanford Social Dimensions Scale 
(SSDS): Initial validation in autism spectrum disorder and in neurotypicals. 
Molecular  Autism, 10:48  (2019) . 
37 Scahill L, et al. Development of the parent -rated anxiety scale for youth with 
autism spectrum disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 58, 887 –896 (2019).  
38 Frazier, T.W.  et al. Confirmatory factor analytic structure and measurement 
invariance of quantitative autistic traits measured by the social responsiveness scale -
2. Autism, 18(1), 31 -44 (2014).  
39 Uljarevic, M.  et al. Mapping the research domain criteria social processes 
constructs to the Social Responsiveness Scale. J ournal of  the American  Acad emy of  
Child Adol escent Psychiatry, 59(11):1252 -1263  (2020).  
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines  
NA 
vi. Physical well -being  
Vasopressin and its analogs have been used for more than 30 years , in both pediatric 
and adult patient groups , to treat central diabetes insipidus, nocturnal enuresis, and 
varying states of shock with very few serious adverse effects , given that simple 
27MAR2020   Page 41 of 48 precautions are adhered to (e.g., water restriction to prevent hyponatremia and water 
intoxication). See above for a comprehensive discussion of potential risks associated 
with vasopressin administration. Obtaining blood can cause bruising and hurt briefly , 
which applying a topical anesthetic can minimize.  
vii. Psychological  well-being  
There are minimal risks to individuals from interviewing, testing measures, and blood 
draws other than loss of time at school and parental work. The risks associated with 
the testing measures are minimal and are limited to performance anxiety or fatigue. 
There will be an attempt to schedule appointments for assessments at times that 
minimize loss of time from the child's school schedule and caregiver's work. Parents 
may experience some discomfort in responding to questions asked during the initial 
interview  or to items on the various measures. Blood collection can also cause stress 
and anxiety for some individuals. Trained pediatric phlebotomists, who have 
extensive experience working with children with ASD, will collect blood at the  
Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Phlebotomy Clinic . 
 
As detailed above in 9a, there is preclinical data showing that vasopressin  can induce 
aggression in several rodent  species, under specific circumstances.  Although we did 
not observe an increase in aggression in children enrolled in our pilot vasopressin 
trial, we nevertheless will m onito r aggression in children in the present trial as a 
precaution. We will regularly inquire about aggressive behavior throughout the study.  
viii. Economic well -being  
Low to almost no risk  
ix. Social well -being  
Low to almost no risk  
x. Overall evaluation of risk  
Medium – therapy with chemotherapy, antibodies, or a non -FDA approved 
potentially toxic drug, invasive procedures such some organ biopsies or catheter 
procedures, and some studies using biological agents  
b. International Research Risk Procedures  
NA 
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
Every precaution will be taken to use the safest and most gentle procedures .  
 
Cognitive and behavioral assessments and paper -and-pencil tests:  The risk of the 
cognitive and behavioral tests are minimal and are limited to performance anxiety or 
fatigue. To minimize these problems, testing will not begin until the participant is 
comfortable with the testing environment and the tester. Staff experi enced in working 
with children with disabilities will administer the tests, provide breaks as needed, and 
adjust the length of the test sessions to each individual. Participants will be provided with 
27MAR2020   Page 42 of 48 frequent positive feedback and will receive certificates in recognition of their 
participation. Each examiner will be attentive to participant fatigue and provide breaks 
accordingly. Parents/legal guardians may experience discomfort in revealing personal 
information regarding psychiatric and medical status; therefore , we will provide support 
and assure that personal information is kept in a locked cabinet with no personal 
identifiers on the forms except for a participant ID number.  
 
Scheduling during school/caregiver work:  Attempts will be made  to schedule 
appointments for research assessments at times that minimize absence of the child from 
school and the caregiver from work.  
 
Blood draws:  Obtaining blood may hurt briefly and cause bruising , but will be minimized 
by both applying a topical anesthetic and having experienced staff draw blood samples. 
All Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital laboratory staff have considerable experience 
working with children. The phlebotomists are trained to work with youth of a wide age 
range and different neuropsychiatric disorders, including ASD.  
 
Vasopressin  side effects:  As discussed above, the use of intranasal vasopressin in several 
research studies has been associated with limited side effects. However, in light of the 
young age of participants, the lack of experience with intranasal vasopressin in 
individuals with ASD , and the theoretical pharmacological effects, a series of protective 
measures will be applied to minimize risk and increase monitoring. Briefly (see above for 
full list):  
1. Vital signs ( heart rate/blood pressure , temperature) monitoring will be conducted 
at each visit. Participants enrolled in the trial after the COVID -19 protocol 
changes will have vital signs measured at screening, Visit 4, Visit 6, and Visit 8 
(if applicable).  
2. Height and weight will be measured at each visit. Participants enrolled in the trial 
 after the COVID -19 protocol changes will have height and weight measured at 
 screening, Visit 4, Visit 6, and Visit 8 (if applicable).  
3. Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale side effects report 
will be collected at each visit.  
4.  Overt Aggression Scale will be collected at screening and Visits 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 
8 (if applicable) . 
5. EKG monitoring will be conducted at screening and Visits 4,  6, and 8 (if 
applicable) . 
6. Clinical chemistry labs will be conducted at screening and Visits 4, 6, and 8 (if 
applicable) . 
7. A study investigator will be available 24 hours a day to respond to adverse 
events.  
8. Participants and their families will be briefed on procedures for responding to 
potential adverse events (see Procedures for Handling Adverse Events section 
below).  
 
All safety procedures will be repeated during the optional open -label extension period.  
 
Procedures for Handling Adverse Events:  
27MAR2020   Page 43 of 48  
Outpatient dosing phase:  For any adverse events, families will be instructed to contact the 
research coordinator directly during business hours, and through the Stanford page 
operator after hours and during weekends/holidays. (A project coordinator will be 
available 24/7 to respond to safety concerns.) If the adverse event is life threatening, 
participants will be asked to ca ll 911 or referred to the nearest emergency room. If the 
adverse event is not life threatening, the study coordinator will contact the study 
physician who will contact the family directly and inquire about the adverse event. If the 
study physician judges t he side effects as minor or benign, a decision will be made 
whether the participant will continue in the study. If side effects are judged as severe and 
might be related to vasopressin, the participants will be told to stop the study drug 
immediately . They will be  invited to the clinic within 24 hours for a direct evaluation and 
termination of their participation in the study. If the study physician believes that the 
adverse event requires immediate medical attention, parents will be instructed to contact 
911 or go to the nearest emergency room. The study physician will also have the ability 
to break the blind if it is felt that doing so is in the best interest of the participants’ health.  
 
Any serious adverse events will be reported to the Data Safety and Monitoring Board  and 
Stanford IRB within 24 hours and to the FDA within seven calendar days.  
 
Data Safety and Monitoring Board:  A Data and Safety Monitoring Board will be 
established to monitor the proposed clinical trial that will be registered with, and receive 
approval from, the FDA as an Investigation al New Drug. (This study will also be listed 
on clinicaltrials.gov and on Stanford University’s Clinical Trials Directory.) The Data 
and Safety Monitoring Board will include several physicians who are not involved in the 
research and will be chaired by Glen Elliott, M.D., PhD. The Data and Safety Mo nitoring 
Board will meet every three months to assess data quality and timeliness, participant 
recruitment, accrual and retention, participant risk -versus -benefit (including review of all 
adverse reactions and SAEs), and any breaches of confidentiality. Re ports will be 
submitted to the Stanford University IRB every 3 months, as part of the annual IRB 
review process, as well as for the annual report. We will also submit annual reports to the 
FDA.  
 
Confidentiality:  All information from the evaluation and assessment of all participants 
are subject to standard confidentiality procedures followed at Stanford as mandated by 
the IRB. Information will not be released to any party, except with the written consent of 
participant s and parents/legal guardians. Participants’ identity will be concealed in data 
records and files by assigned ID codes. Research data will be maintained in locked 
storage cabinets in a locked file room. Only project staff will be allowed in this room. 
The s creening, diagnostic, and neuropsychological tests are maintained in folders for 
each participant, stored in locked cabinets, in locked rooms, within a locked suite. When 
data are transf erred to data summary sheets, only the participant number will appear on 
the sheet and entered alone into the database.  
 
We will continuously monitor both our procedures and our data to ensure  compliance 
with confidentiality guidelines. Research staff members are carefully trained concerning 
both the critical nature of participants’ confidentiality and also the procedures for 
27MAR2020   Page 44 of 48 respecting and maintaining it. They are instructed to file data immediately after 
collection , never to leave unlocked or opened data files unattended, never to discuss 
participants’ behavior outside of the research study, and never to mention the name(s) of 
participants except to other research staff on this project. They are also instructed on t he 
procedures for assigning ID numbers and for filing data separately from participant -
identification information. All staff members complete training modules on hu man 
subjects’ protection and take an examination to obtain certification.  
 
Data and safety monitoring by PIs:  Drs. Parker and Hardan will oversee all data and 
safety monitoring. They will hold weekly meetings with staff to discuss progress of the 
research study (data quality, timeliness, and participant recruitment) ; outcome and 
adverse event data and changes to the benefit -to-risk ratio that would change the design 
of the experiment ; and issues related to confidentiality , ensuring that procedures for 
obtaining information in a private manner were performed and that documentation was 
stored in the appropriate locked file cabinets. The PIs will also hold separate monthly 
educational meetings to discuss any new information relevant to this study. They will be 
responsible for reporting any serious and unexpected adverse reactions to t he IRB and 
Data and Safety Monitoring Board within 24 hours and also to the FDA within seven 
calendar days. Any identifying information collected from participants in this study will 
be kept strictly confidential. As mentioned above, the participants will be assigned an ID 
code for all data, and all information in research files will be coded using that number 
rather than participant s’ name s. A name log will be kept in a locked desk in a locked 
office at all times. All data will be entered onto a secured database. Scientifically trained 
and properly authorized employees of the FDA and/or Stanford University may inspect 
the relevant records. W e are committed to complying with FDA and IRB policies for 
reporting serious and unexpected adverse events.  
 
For maximal benefit to the field, de -identified data will be made available to other 
investigators through the National Database for Autism Research (NDAR) and related 
information will be included in our consent form.  
 
Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale:  Because recent evidence has linked 
psychotropic medications to suicidal behaviors, closely monitor ing the mental well -being 
of patients taking these psychotropic medications  is important . During Visit 1, suicidal 
ideation/behaviors will be assessed using the Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale , 
and will continue to be administered throughout the trial. The Columbia -Suicide Severity 
Rating Scale is an interview that prospectively assesses suicidal ideation and behavior 
using a semi -structured interview to probe participant responses. Determining  the 
presence of suicidal ideation and/or behavior depends on the judgment of the individual 
administering the scale. A trained investigator will administer the Columbia -Suicide 
Severity Rating Scale. Parents/caregivers will complete the interview for participant s. 
The study physician will proactively assess participants for suicidality and mood 
disturbances through discussions with the participant and/or parent. Any positive 
responses will be further investigated, and appropriate medical treatment will be initiat ed. 
The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale will be completed at baseline, at the end of 
the blinded phase, and at the end of the open -label phase. For baseline, the scale will 
evaluate the last 12 months  and for  subsequent time points, it will assess any changes 
27MAR2020   Page 45 of 48 from the previous visit. If the study physician determines that the participant should  be 
monitored more closely, the scale may be added as needed throughout the study. If, at 
any assessment, the Suicidal Ideation (questions #1 -5) score is a 4 or higher , or the 
patient (or parents) answers “yes” to any Suicidal Behavior item (actual attempt, 
interrupted attempt, aborted attempt, preparatory acts or behavior, or suicidal behavior), a 
mental health care professional will further assess and/or treat. Once t he participant has 
started study medication, the decision about whether the participant should be withdrawn 
from study treatment will be determined by the protocol director and study physician. To 
note, any study investigator or research staff can refer a par ticipant to the designated 
mental health professional for any concerns about suicidality, even if the participant does 
not meet the criteria detailed above. The participant should not be allowed to leave the 
study center until the results of the Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale are reviewed 
and the participant is not considered to be at risk. If there is doubt about whether a 
participant is at risk, the investigator should obtain appropriate psychiatric consultation 
prior to releasing the participant.  
 
d. Study Conclusion  
Outpatient  dosing phase:  For any adverse events, families will be instructed to contact the 
research coordinator directly during business hours, and through the Stanford page 
operator after hours and during weekends/holidays. (A project coordinator will be 
available 24 hours a day/7 days a week to respond to safety concerns.) If the adverse 
event is life threatening, participants will be told to call 911 or referred to the nearest 
emergency room. If the adverse event is not life threatening, the study coord inator will 
contact the study physician who will contact the family directly and inquire about the 
adverse event. If the study physician judges the side effects as minor or benign, a 
decision will be made whether the participant will continue in the study.  If side effects 
are judged as severe and might be related to vasopressin , the participants will be told to 
stop the study drug immediately . They  will be asked to come to the clinic within 24 hours 
for a direct evaluation and termination of their participa tion in the study. If the study 
physician ascertains that the adverse event requires immediate medical attention, parents 
will be instructed to contact 911 or go to the nearest emergency room. The study 
physician will also have the ability to break the bli nd if it is felt that doing so is in the 
best interest of the participants’ health.  
 
Any serious adverse events will be reported to the Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
and Stanford IRB within 24 hours , and to the FDA within seven calendar days.  
 
 
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
i. Data and/or events subject to review  
1. Vital signs (H eart Rate/Blood Pressure , temperature) monitoring will be 
conducted at each visit.  
2. Height and weight will be measured at each visit.  
27MAR2020   Page 46 of 48 3. Dosage Record and Treatment Emergency Symptom Scale side effects report 
will be conducted at each visit.  
4.  Overt Aggression Scale will be measured at screening and Visits 3, 4, 5, and 6.  
5. EKG monitoring will be conducted at screening and Visits 4 and  6 
6. Clinical chemistry labs will be conducted at screening and Visits 4 and 6.  
 
All safety assessments outlined above will be repeated during the optional open -label 
extension period.  
ii. Person(s) responsible for Data and Safety Monitoring  
A Data and Safety Monitoring Board will be established to monitor the proposed 
clinical trial that will be registered with, and will receive approval from, the FDA as 
an Investigation al New Drug. (This study will also be listed on clinicaltrials.gov and 
on Stanford University’s Clinical Trials Directory.) The Data and Safety Monitoring 
Board will include several physicians who are not involved in the research 
investigations and will be c haired by Glen Elliott, M.D., PhD. The Data and Safety 
Monitoring Board  will meet every three months to assess data quality and timeliness, 
participant recruitment, accrual and retention, participant risk -versus -benefit 
(including review of all adverse reactions and Serious Adverse Events [Serious 
Adverse Events]), and any br eaches of confidentiality. Reports will be submitted to 
the Stanford University IRB every six months, as part of the annual IRB review 
process, as well as for the annual report. We will also submit annual reports to the 
FDA.  
iii. Frequency of Data and Safety Monitoring Board meetings  
The Data and Safety Monitoring Board will meet every three months to assess data 
quality and timeliness, participant recruitment, accrual and retention, participant risk 
versus benefit (including review of all adverse reactions and Serious Adverse 
Events), and any breaches of confidentiality.  Reports will be submitted to the 
Stanford University IRB every six months, as part of the annual IRB review process, 
as well as for the annual report. We will also submit an annual report to the FDA.  
iv. Specific triggers or stopping rules  
The study will end if a serious adverse event is related to the study medication 
resulting  in hospitalization or emergency room  visit or death. A serious adverse 
reaction is an untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: results in death ; is life -
threatening ; requires inpatient hospitalization ; results in persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity ; or is an otherwise important medical event . An important 
medical event  may not be immediately life -threatening or result in death or 
hospitalization but, based upon appropriate medical and scientific judgment, may 
jeopardize the patient/ participant  or may require intervention (e.g., medical, surgical) 
to prevent one of the other serious outcomes. Cancer/Overdose: All cases of cancer 
and overdose will be reported immediately.  
v. DSMB Reporting  
27MAR2020   Page 47 of 48 Any serious adverse events will be reported to the Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
and Stanford IRB within 24 hours and to the FDA within seven calendar days.  
vi. Will the Protocol Director be the only monitoring entity? (Y/N)  
N 
vii. Will a board, committee, or safety monitor be responsible for study monitoring? 
(Y/N)  
Y 
f. Risks to Special Populations  
Research involving greater than minimal risk but presenting the prospect of direct benefit to the 
individual subjects. The research presents more than minimal risk to children, but holds out the 
prospect of direct benefit for the individual subject or is l ikely to contribute to the subject's well -
being. Please provide rationale that: (a) the risk is justified by the anticipated benefit to the 
subjects; (b) the relation of the anticipated benefit to the risk is at least as favorable to the subjects 
as that p resented by available alternative approaches; and (c) adequate provisions are made for 
soliciting the assent of the children and permission of their parents or guardians.  
 
Rationale for category selected above:  
a) ASD is a pervasive developmental disorder characterized by core deficits in social behavior 
and communication, and the presence of repetitive/stereotyped behaviors. Recent prevalence rates 
estimate that 1 in 68 children in the US meet criteria for ASD. Good  evidence now exists for the 
potential of vasopressin treatment to improve social functioning and relieve other symptoms in 
patients with ASD. Importantly, in the present study vasopressin treatment occurs during 
childhood when the brain is most plasti c, and when pharmacotherapies may be maximally 
beneficial.  
 
b) Although several medications are approved for ASD (i.e. , the antipsychotics risperidone and 
aripiprazole), none are effective in ameliorating the characteristic social deficits and often result 
in unfavorable side  effects (e.g. , lethargy and weight gain). No effective pharmacological or 
behavioral treatments are currently available for the core social deficits exhibited in p eople with 
ASD. Vasopressin is overall a very well tolerated agent with minimal risks if simple precautions 
are adhered to (e.g., water restriction to prevent hyponatremia and water intoxication).  
 
c) Parents of participants will be consented in a private room by a trained investigator. All 
participants who are older than 7 years of age , and also capable of understanding the consenting 
process , will be assented by a trained investigator, in a private room, in the presence of the parent. 
Both parents of participants and the participants themselves will have ample opportunity to ask 
questions and to discuss the risks and potential benefits with Dr. Hardan and the other 
investigators.  
10. BENEFITS  
As of now, no effective intervention strategy is aimed at targeting the core symptoms of ASD and 
curbing the long course and guarded prognosis of ASD. Outcome studies indicate that about 2/3 
of autistic adults remain severely handicapped and live in complete dependence or semi -
27MAR2020   Page 48 of 48 dependence. Available agents do aim at controlling associated behavioral features such as 
aggression, agitation and compulsive behaviors. Agents that treat underlying chronic 
neurobiological abnormalities are lacking. The suggested innovative agent (vasopressin), if 
shown to be effective , will lead to the development of new strategies to treat individuals with 
ASD.  
11. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information  and specimens are  handle d in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Ca re, and Stanford Children’s Health.  