COMIRB Protocol  
Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board; Campus Box F -490; 303- 724-1055  
Protocol #:                          15-0474   
Project Title:                       Dysregulation of FSH in Obesity: Functional and Statistical Analy sis  
Principal Investigator:         Alex Polotsky   
Version Date:                       v06-October -2020 
  
    
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims :   
  
Hypothesis. Insufficient FSH pulsatility, as seen in obesity, results in inadequate folliculogenesis and reduced ovarian steroid and 
protein production.  
 
AIM: To test the hypothesis that insufficient FSH pulsatility, as seen in obesity, results in inadequate folliculogenesis and reduced 
ovarian steroid and protein production. We will determine if exogenous FSH administered in a pulsatile fashion results in a 
significant increase of ovarian hormones in obese women. Serial inhibin B and E2 levels will be measured in obese and normal weight women undergoing frequent blood sampling studies before and after GnRH antagonist blockade.  In addition, we will con duct 
a pilot study to correlate the fecal microbiome and bacteria l metabolism with reproductive hormone levels in normal weight and 
obese women.
 
 
II. Background and Significance :  
 
Maternal obesity is an independent risk factor for decreased reproductive fitness and detrimental impact on offspring.  In the US, 
32% of wom en 20 to 39 years old are obese.1 U.S. women born in the 1980s exhibit a 21 % higher propensity to have a large body 
mass compared to those born in the 1960s.2 Thus, a further escalation of the current trends is expected when the 1980s generation 
reaches i ts peak of obesity prevalence.  Maternal obesity is associated with decreased reproductive fitness: ovulatory and menstrual 
dysfunction ,3 increased congenital anomalies,4 iatrogenic5 and spontaneous6 preterm birth, recurrent miscarriage .7 Even in regularly 
ovulating women, obesity is linked with increased spontaneous pregnancy loss,8 longer time to pregnancy,9 and decreased lifetime 
fertility.10 
 
Although weight loss and lifestyle modifications should be the first line therapy for any sequelae of obesity, the evidence for the effectiveness of this approach for impaired reproduction is lacking. A recent Cochrane meta -analysis indicated that there are no 
randomized trials supporting a benefit of weight loss for pregnancy outcomes.
11 Thus, it is critically important that we improve our 
understanding of the pathophysiology leading to decreased reproductive fitness in obesity in order to design alternative appr oaches 
for intervening. Abnormalities of reproductive hormones and ovarian function have been implicated.12-15 Our long -term goal is to 
identify molecular interactions between affected aspects of hypothalamic -pituitary- ovarian (HPO) hormonal changes and 
pathophysiology of obesity. However, to target molecular interactions we must clarify the mechanisms for altered HPO dynamics in 
this population. Thus, our short- term goal is to improve our understanding of the mechanisms underlying disrupted reproductive 
hormone secretion in obese women.  
 
Pituitary follicle -stimulating hormone (FSH) secretion is regulated mostly by hypothalamic Gonadotropinreleasing hormone (GnRH) 
secretion but also by endocrine input from the ovary. Inhibins, secreted by granulosa cells of ovarian follicles, exert a pot ent 
negative feedback effect on FSH. The reproductive aging associated fall in circulating inhibin B (and not a drop in estradiol) is 
believed to be responsible for the classic, monotropic rise in FSH that accompanies the menopausal transition. FSH pulsatilit y is 
challenging to characterize given its long half -life and low signal -to-noise ratio. Our work shows that existing pulsatility methods 
miss a third or more of FSH pulses. Female obesity is associated with reduced levels of both inhibin B and FSH, providing a u nique 
opportunity to tease apart the secretory dynamics of FSH in the absence of one of its controlling mechanisms. Female adiposity is 
strongly related to decreased reproductive fitness, subfertility, and harmful metabolic programming of the offspring. Reproductive dysfunction in obesity may be related to abnormal hypothalamic -pituitary dynamics (a central deficit in GnRH, FSH or luteinizing 
hormone (LH) production), an abnormal ovarian environment (reduced sex steroid or ovarian protein production), or both. Most 
analyses of FSH have focused on mean levels, leaving us u nable to probe if features of pulsatile FSH secretion are related to the 
reproductive deficits observed in obese women. Thus, a knowledge gap exists because we have not adequately assessed the 
interplay between pituitary FSH and its feedback in obesity . 
Protocol Template Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  
There is abundant evidence that the fecal microbiome is altered in obesity and may be a contributing factor to its etiology. 
To date no studies have correlated measurements of ovarian steroids with microbiome composition and/or bacterial gut 
metabolism. Evi dence in mice  suggests that bacterial de- conjugation of estrogen glucuronides may modulate circulating 
estrogen levels18,19. We propose to analyze the fecal microbiome of normal and obese women and correlate bacterial 
composition and metabolism with host reproductive hormone levels  before and after t reatment . This will pr ovide 
preliminary data to test the impact of microbial diversity on obesity related sub -fertility.  
 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
 
Our new preliminary data from Dr. Kumar’s lab (co -I) demonstrate that pulsatile FSH secretion dramatically enhances ovarian 
function in mice (PNAS 2014;111:5735). In this transgenic model, FSH was diverted into the LH secretory pathway that resulted in 
reduced follicular atresia, prolonged reproductive lifespan and enhanced fertility. The oocytes produced in these FSH transgenic mice were of high quality, developed into viable blastocysts, and resulted in viable pups upon embryo transfer. We aim to tra nslate 
and expand these novel findings of biologi cal relevance of FSH pulsat ility in the current proposal.  
 The PI has recently conducted a study recruiting  women from the local community for an investigation  of pituitary sensitivity to 
estrogen in obesity (National  Clinical Trial (NCT) identifier: 01381 016). Significantly lower s erum inhibin B  level was observed in 
obese women.  
Reduced Early Follicular Inhibin B in Obese Women despite “Un-elevated” Serum FSH  
Normal weight n=10   Obese, n=11    P 
Age, years    29.4(1.9)    32.5 (1.8)   0.25 
BMI, kg/m 2    21.2 (1.5)    36.7 (1.3)   <0.01  
AMH, ng/ml    3.2 (2.3)    1.2(1.1)    0.01 
Inhibin A, pg/ml    19.3(6.6)    20.2 (6.1)   0.87 
Inhibin B, pg/ml    96.6 (36.3)    67.7(38.2)   0.04 
Mean FSH, IU/L    6.4 (0.7)    5.8(0.8)    0.57 
Mean LH, IU/L    5.2 (0.8)    2.5 (0.2)   <0.01  
 Notably, antral follicle count is typically NOT reduced  in obese women as seen by others and our  group. Thus, the reduced inhibin B 
is unexplained.  In this Aim, we will determine whether
 the pulsatile pattern of FSH secretion is responsible for the reduced 
circulating levels of inhibin B and E2 in  obese women. We and others have  shown that the deficit in LH in obesity  is greater that the 
FSH deficit.  
 
However, FSH deficit in obese women  appears to be modifiable. We have  observed a sign ificantly improved FSH  but not LH response 
to IV GnRH in obese women after one month of  transdermal estrogen .  
Protocol Template Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 
 
 
Exogenous Estradiol Improves FSH Sensitivity in Obese Women. Composite response of mean endogenous LH and FSH (± SEM) for 11 obese and 10 
norm al weight menstruating women to GnRH bolus of 75 ng/kg given at time =360. Y axis is gonadotropin in IU/ml. X axis is time on minutes.  
 
This suggests that the pituitary is a  functionally important locus for  mediating the impact of obesity on female reprodu ction. We 
posit that abnormal FSH secretion is responsible for ovulatory defects in obesity and is the focus of the current proposal.  
 
IV. Research  Methods 
 A.  Outcome  Measure (s):   
 
We will examine LH and FSH secretion during  frequent blood sampling at 1 0 min intervals.  
 
Primary: the difference  between peak E2 and inhibin B from Day 1 to  
day 2. This is defined as the maximum  hormone value during the Day2 study minutes  after the maximum hormone value 
during the  Day1 study before GnRH antagonist is  administ ered.  
 Secondary: peak inhibin B and  E2 per subject, area under the curve (AUC)  
for inhibin B and E2 during stimulation; we will  compute LH and FSH pulsatility (pulse  frequency, and average pulse 
amplitude) on day 1 and day 2, along with the means of LH  and FSH to assess adequacy of GnRH  antagonism and FSH 
stimulation. LH  pulsatility will be assessed to confirm phenotypic concordance of this study  population with existing 
literature.  
 
B. Description of Population to be Enrolled:   
 
Inclusion criteria:  
• Age bet ween 21 to 39 years old wit h regular menstrual cycles every 25 -40 days,  
• Body mass of 18.5 kg/m2- 24.9kg/m2 (normal weight controls) or greater than 30.0 kg/m2 (obese group),  
• Prolactin and TSH within normal laboratory ranges at screening, baseline hemoglobin  >11 gm/dl.  
 
Exclusion crit eria:  
• Diagnosis of PCOS, defined by the 2003 Rotterdam criteria as suggested by 2012 NIH Workshop,  
• History of chronic disease affecting hormone production, metabolism or clearance or use of thiazolidinediones or 
metformin (known to interact with reproducti ve hormones),  
Protocol Template Page 4 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 • Use of hormones affecting HPO axis (such as hormonal contraceptives) within 3 months of entry,  
• Strenuous exercise (>4 hours of intense physical activity per week),  
• Pregnancy, breast -feeding or current attempts to conceive,  significant recent weight loss or gain , 
• Irregularities in uterus or ovaries,   
• Serum anti -Mullerian hormone (AMH) equal to or greater than 20 pmol/l. This is based on the data that the specificity 
and sensitivity of AMH for identifying women with pol ycystic  ovary syndrome were  described to be over 97% and 
95%, respectively, at this cut- off (Eilertsen et al., Hum Reprod 2012; 27: 2494 -2502).   Additionally, it has been 
demonstrated that AMH and antral follicle count (AFC) have an equal level of accurac y in the prediction of an 
excessive response to ovarian stimulation (Broer et al., Hum Reprod Update 2011;17:46 -54) but AFC is subject to 
inter- observer variability (J. van Disseldorp et al., Hum. Reprod 2010; 25: 221 -227) , 
• Impaired renal, hepatic, or card iac function,  
• Allergy, hype rsensitivity, or intolerance to study drug or its excipients  
• Presence or sequelae of gastrointestinal, liver, kidney, or other conditions known to interfere with absorption, 
distribution, metabolism, or excretion of drugs, 
• Recent  blood or blood product donation.  
 
 
C. Study Design and Research Methods   
 
Up to 68 s ubjects will undergo two  10-hour frequent blood sampling studies on consecutive days.  However, the PI will first 
need to identify the dose level that results in a signific ant pharmacodynamic  (PD) effect, namely an increase in serum inhibin 
B, with a target PD response rate of 80% across patients.  Therefore, up to 9 subjects will also be needed for a pilot portion of 
the study (up to 3 subjects at each level will be  needed  to identify the level  at which the target response rate is reached).   
 The total maximum number of subjects consented will be 120.  At the date of this protocol ( 10/11/2016), 6 subjects had already been treated in the pilot portion of this protocol.  
• 3 subjects were treated a t 10 IU; none of them showed an increase in inhibin B; adverse events of delayed menses and 
hot flushes thought be related to GnRH antagonist use were reported.  
• 3 subjects were treated at 20 IU; none of them showed an increase  in inhi bin B; adverse eve nts of delayed menses and 
hot flushes thought be related to GnRH antagonist use were reported.  
 With this version of the protocol  (10/11/2016) , we propose to treat 9 subjects with 30 IU, administered every 60 minutes 
over 10 hour s, for  a total of 300 IU.  
 Preliminary analysis of the com pleted study visits thus far (09/3/2019) have indicated the obese cohort has lower serum FSH 
levels than the no rmal weight cohort  in response to the addition of rFSH on Day 2.  We want to investigate if the difference 
we see is because FSH is being excreted in  urine.  We propose to collect urine a t 4 non specific time points during day 1 to 
obtain a baseline value of FSH in urine for each participant and at the following specific time points T=0, 30, 60, 12 0, 240, 
480, 600  minutes during day 2 .  We understand that asking the participants to provide 3 urine samples in the first hour of day  
2 might not be possible for e very participant.  T herefore , we will ask each participant to give at least 2 sam ples (0 and 60 min 
on day 2) and request the 30-minute sample  be tried but not required.  
 (09/18/2019) Due to the pilot phases needing more participants tha n originally estimated , the fact that we have seen co -
morbities in the high BMI cohort  which causes more scr een fails than the normal BMI co hort and the difficulty s ched uling the 
study visit in the  I npatient CTRC  we need to increase the total enrolled number to 90 from 77.  
 
Protocol Template Page 5 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 (02/19/2020) We have still been experiencing difficulty in scheduling the study visits at the inpatient CTRC. Specifically , we 
only can schedule a minimum of 3 months in advance.  This has caused  some participants  to drop due to the long time 
between the screening visit and the study visit.  A n accurate p rediction of the start of a participant ’s period is difficult 3 
months in advance .  We have also seen an increase in loss to follow-up. 
 
Prior to the initiation of the frequent blood sampling, the subject will undergo a screening visit where they will sign the consent, and have a history and phys ical exam, incl uding a pelvic exam,  and a blood draw.  Sc reening labs  will in clude liver 
functio n tests and renal function tests.  The PI will determine eligibility based on the laboratory values, exam, and medical 
history. Due to COVID -19 we are adding the option to move part of the screening visit to a Telehealth vi rtual visit through 
EPIC  or via a Zoom meeting, if necessary .  The par ts conducted virtually would be the reading of the consent, answ ering of 
the particip ant’s questions and the participant ’s history (after verbal agreeme nt by the participant of consent into the study) .  
We will ask the parti cipant to print and sign the consent and email a scanned copy or a photo taken with their cell phone  to 
us and we wil l send bac k a copy with both signatures before the next steps of the screening visit  are scheduled.  The height 
and weight, the hip/wais t circumference  and the screening blood dr aw will be performed in the outpatient CT RC and will 
occur aft er the consent is sign ed.  The participant will com e into the outpatient CTRC  clinic to complete the aforementioned 
procedures .  The study team will keep their interaction with the subject to a minimum at this visit.   
 If eligible, the two-day visit will be scheduled to  correspond with the subject’s early fo llicular p hase (cy cle days 3 -6).  To help 
predict the date of their study visit we will provide the participants with urine ovulation tests strips  to voluntary use. We will 
ask the participant to  start using 8 -10 days after the ending date of their last pe riod.  We will ask  them to use these urine 
ovulation tests in the morning.  Once they observe a positive with the ovulation test strip  we will ask them to notify the 
research coordinator.  The study visit will th en be  scheduled. Prior to the study visit the particip ant will  be asked to provide 
an optional  fecal sample using the Alpco EasySampler® Stool Collection Kit  and will be asked to bring it to the study  visit in a 
pre-provided thermal transpor t bag. Particip ants will be instructed to freeze the fecal sample after it is  collec ted.  
 
Women will report to the CTRC at 1 :30pm on day 1 of the study for placement of an indwelling IV catheter.  Prior to initiation  
of the study drug a serum pregnancy te st will be done to rule out the  possibility pregnancy. Small volume s (3-4 mL) blood 
samples will be drawn every 10 minutes f or 10 hours (2pm – 12am) to assess pituitary gonadotropin dynamics.  During the 
first 10 hour s of t he study we will collect the partici pants uri ne 4 time s (non -spec ific) to asses endogenous FS H elimination in  
their urine.  After the first 10 hours of blood samples have been collected, the GnRH antagonist Cetrorelix will b e given 
subcutaneously ( 3 mg).  The subje ct will then be allowed t o sleep until 6am.  
 On day 2, a t 6am a second, smaller dose  of Cetrorelix (0.25mg) will be given  at subcutaneously.  In addition, beginning at 6 
am, small volume blood samples will again be drawn every 10 minutes for 10 hours.  Rep eated b oluses of exogenou s 
recombinant FSH (rF SH) will b e given by IV during this 10 -hour visit.  Ur ine will also be collected during day 2 at  the following  
specific time  points : T=0, 30, 60, 120, 240, 480, 600. If the participant cannot give 3 urine samples in the first hour of Day 2 
we wil l request  at least two sample s during the first hour instead of 3. Where the 30 minute will be requested, but optional. 
Final blood samples will be collected after the last dose o f FSH. At about 4pm, the visit will conclude,  and the subject will be 
disch arged from t he cl inic.  Subjects will be advised t o use double barrier contraception until the following menses to prevent 
conception immediately following the study.  
 
S
ubjects will also be p rovided a second Alpco EasySampler® Stool Collection Kit  and be asked to return a n optional stool 
sample wit hin 7 days of the study visit.   
 All subjects who received 30 IU of th e rFSH will h ave safety follow up phone call s the next day, 3- 5 days and 7- 10 calendar 
days after discharge from the clinic.  Any adver se event s identified during that call  will be reported an d followed until 
resolution.   
 
Protocol Template Page 6 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 If no adverse event is identified, the 7 -10 day post discha rge phone call concludes the subject’s  involvement.  
 
 
  
 
 
D.   Description, Risks, and Justification of Procedures: 
 
Potential Risks  and plan fo r minimizi ng:  
 
Phle botomy . Blood drawing for serum hormone or analyte testing can be associated with bruising or bleeding and 
phlebotomy involves a transient pricking pain. This is a minimal risk and good laboratory prac tices will be applied. 
 
Frequent bl ood sampling studies . This is associated with the risks of bruising and bleeding at the site of the IV line. Anemia 
can result if amounts of blood withdr awn are excessive. Participants will be screened with hemoglobin. An y part icipant 
whos e hemoglobin is l ess than 11 gm/dl will not be enrolled. As with all of the PI’s frequent blood sampling studies, a total of 
120 blood draws will be done with approximate ly 0.5 ml – 1 ml of waste.  Overall, there will be a total of 60 – 1 20 ml of waste 
over a 48 hour perio d. 
 
GnRH a ntagonists . One-time  administration of long -acting GnRH antagonist, cetrorelix  (Cetrotide® ; Merck Ser ono) will be 
used to suppress endogenous gonadotropin secretion . Reported side effects include: Ovarian Hype rstimulation Syndrome in 
3.5% of pati ents, naus ea in 1.3%  and headache in 1.1% of subjects. Local site reactions to the subcutaneous injection 
(redn ess, erythema, bruising, itching and pruritis) have been reported.  These reactions were mild, short -lived an d transi ent. 
Additio nal possible risk s include delayed menses for up to 1 -2 months ( occurring in approximately 8 -10% of patients) and/or 
hot fla shes. Allergic reactions are possible, but rare and unlikely.  Participants will be inpatients at the CTRC bed a nd will be 
closely m onitored during a nd after a dministrat ion of Cetrorelix  to assure their safety in the unlikely event of an atopic 
reaction. GnRH antagonists are Pregnancy Category X drugs  and participants who are taking these  agents will all be screened  
with a serum pregnancy test to assur e that they are not pregnant while taking the  medication.  
 
Recombinant FSH.  rFSH will be administered during the frequent blood sampling study to enable follicular production of 
inhibin B and estradiol. The total  daily dose wil l be 300 IU. Risks of rFSH in clude ovarian hypers timulat ion which is very 
unlikely with this dosing,  but any potential signs or symptoms will  be followed with subsequent follow-up . There is  no 
reported antigenicity of exogenous human recombinant FSH . Side e ffects may i nclude headache, na usea, fatigue, an d pelvic  
pain.  There is a possibility of the subject experiencing an allergic reaction.  
Protocol Template Page 7 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  
Patient confidentiality.  Patient confidenti ality will be respected and guarded by adhering to HIPAA guideline s for pe rsonal 
healt h information. We  will describe this  approac h to study subjects both verbally and in the informed consent document. 
They will be  told that their information will be made available to appropriate representatives of the National Institute s of 
Health who may be reviewing the re cords in  accordan ce with accepted policies and procedures. This approach has been 
successfully utilized by us  previously for numerous clinical research  studies at our  institution, including the studies directed 
or co -directed  by the PI. No breaches of pa tient confidentiali ty or inappropriate disclosure of their medical information have 
transpired.  All participant s will be given a study number that will identify their file. Files will be kept in the Clinical and 
Translati onal R esearch Cent er, under lock and key, or in the PI  or rese arch coordinator’s office. Identifying information other 
than the study number will be redacted from participant’s study records such that the file  cannot be linked to the participant 
by name.  The cod e linking st udy numbers to na me will be  kept by the rese arch coordinator in a separate folder in a separate 
locked cabinet in a locked office. No identifying information will be released in the course of publication or presentation of 
study finding s. 
 Samp les will be sent to the Unive rsity of V irginia t o run the inhibin B assay as UVA has one of the most sensitive  and precise 
assays for inhibin B.  No identifiers will accompany the samples when sent to UVA.  
 
E.   Data Analysis Plan:   
 
1) To test whether the difference in maximal inhib in B and E2 response between day 1 and day 2 depends on group (obese 
vs. normal weight) we will use a two -sample t -test.  
 
2) In a second phase of analysis, we will adjust for potential confounders such as age and AMH l evel. We  will repeat  this 
analysis on  the other  secondar y outcom e measures.  
 
3) To understand how inhibin B and E2 respond to FSH stimulation after  GnRH antagonist we will compare groups in relation 
to the maximal change in inhibin B.  
 4) To understand how chang es in inhibin B relate to cha nges in es tradiol, linear r egression will be used to assess whether the 
maximal change in inhibin B between day  1 and day 2 is statistically associated with the change in maximal E2 response 
between day 1 and day 2 (i.e . ΔMax E2 = β
0+β1 ΔInhibin B) . 
 
5) To characterize the changes in the microbiome we will analyze bacterial diversity by 16s ribosomal RNA sequencing.  We 
have extensive experience in the analysis of the human microbiome in the environment, nares, vaginal, an d intestinal tract 
and will analyze our data as previously described.20-22 Microbiome data will be used for exploratory analyses in relation to 
clinical and other parameters measured among t he study participants.  
 
 
Pilot:  
We are planning to assess the cha nge in inhibin B lev els following repeated bolus dosing of recombinant FSH (rFHS) following 
GnRH antagonist blockade.  For the purposes of this study, we are interested in identifying the do se level that results in a 
significant pharmacodynamic (PD) effect , namely  an increase  in serum inhibin  B, with a target PD response rate of 80% across 
patients.  Statistical significance for the PD response at the patient level will be identified as an increase of 2.3 times the baseline standard deviation for inhibin B me asurem ent in norma l women.  Using t he data provided in the above table, 
showing a standard deviation in serum inhibin B concentration in normal women of 36.3 pg/mL, an increase in serum inhibin B of 83.5 pg/mL following FSH dosing would be considered a s ignifica nt PD effect.  This value pro vides a one -sided statistical 
significance at the 0.05 significance level, appropriate as there is an a priori  anticipation that the response will occur in only 
one direction
.16 To determine statistical significance of the dose  level of 10 IU IV every 60 m inutes, three study subjects will 
Protocol Template Page 8 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 be needed and the dose level will be declared effective if 2 of the 3 subjects demonstrate the significant PD response 
described above.  This will provide 90% power, at the dose level, to detec t a true 80% response rate ac ross patients .16,17  If 
fewer than 2 subjects demonstrate a significant PD response, dose escalation will be used with three subjects at the second 
level  (20 IU) and nine subjects at the third level (30 IU) to identify the level at which the target respons e rate is reached.   
Subjects in the pilot portion of the study will receive the same study procedures as other subjects, except the dose escalati on 
porti on of the study.   
 The base dosage for rFSH was 1 0 IU q 60 mins.   Based o n the calculation of achieving a statistically significant 
pharmacodynamic effect at 2.3 times the baseline standard deviation for serum inhibin B levels in normal women, the initial dose given to three patients (10 IU every 60 minutes x 10 for a total daily dose of 1 00 IU) provided i ncreases of only 9%, 13% 
and a decrease in serum inhibin B; this was considered to be ineffective with regard to the desired pharmacodynamic effect 
and the next cohort received a dose that was doubled from the previous group (2 0 IU every 60 minutes x 10 fo r a total daily 
dose of 200 IU). The results from this group revealed that two patients had increased inhibin B levels of 38.5% and 13.2% 
with the third experiencing a decrease in serum inhibin B levels.  With the pharm acodynam ic target of  80% increase at the 
patient level in 2 out of three subjects, this second dose should again be considered ineffective.  For this reason, and due to the safety profile of the study drug, it would be prudent to double the dose in an atte mpt to reach the desired PD effect in at 
least one patient, at which time increases in dose can be modified to follow the originally proposed modified Fibonacii sequence.  Therefore, the dose for the next patient cohort is proposed to be 40 IU every 60 minutes x 1 0 for a tota l daily 
dose of 4 00 IU.   Based on recommendations form FDA’s clinical review team, the next patient cohort will consist of 9 
subjects treated with 3 0 IU of rFSH every 60  minutes x 10 for a total daily dose of 3 00 IU.  As requested by the FDA, safety 
data (adverse events) will be submitted to FDA for review after 9 subjects have received 30 IU Gonal -f IV every 60 minutes 
x10, with a total daily dose of 300 IU in the pilot study, prior to proceeding with additional study participants.
 
 
F.  Summar ize Knowledg e to be Gained:   
 
The knowledge to be gained from this study will help elucidate the underlying mechanism for reproductive hormonal alterations in female obesity. While recent years have brought an increased understanding of the link between obesity and reproductive impairment, including risk for the offspring, there is still a tremendous gap in our understanding of how and 
why specific reproductive hormones are changed the way they are in obese individuals and not in other women. In addition, it will lay the ground work for future studies that could potentially identify targets for therapeutic regimens. The findings of this study will also contribute to the general body of knowledge about the endocrine regulation of pituitary and hypothal amic s ecretion by the ovary. Thus, the potential knowledge gained is significant.  
 
 
G. References:  
 
1. Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Ogden CL 2012 Prevalence of obesity and trends in the distribution of body mass index 
among US adults, 1999- 2010. JAMA 307:491-497 
2. Robinson WR, Keyes KM, Utz RL, Martin CL, Yang Y 2012 Birth cohort effects among US -born adults born in the 1980s: 
foreshadowing future trends in US obesity prevalence. Int J Obes (Lond)  
3. Lake JK, Power C, Cole TJ 1997 Women's reproductive health: the role of body mass  index in early and adult life. 
International Journal of Obesity & Related Metabolic Disorders: Journal of the International Association for the Study of 
Obesity 21:432-4 38 
4. Stothard KJ, Tennant PWG, Bell R, Rankin J 2009 Maternal Overweig ht and Obesity and the Risk of Congenital 
Anomalies. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association 301:636-650 
5. Smith GC, Shah I, Pell JP, Crossley JA, Dobbie R 2007 Maternal obesity in early pregnancy and risk of spontaneous and 
elective preterm deliveries: a retrospective cohort study. Am J Public Health 97:157- 162 
6. Cnattingius S, Villamor E, Johansson S, Edstedt Bonamy AK, Persson M, Wikstrom AK, Granath F 2013 Maternal 
obesity and risk of preterm delivery. JAMA 309:2362-2370 
7. Metwally M, Saravelos SH, Ledger WL, Li TC 2010 Body mass  index and risk of miscarriage in women with recurrent 
miscarriage. Fertility and Sterility 94:290-295 
Protocol Template Page 9 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 8. Metwally M, Ong KJ, Ledger WL, Li TC 2008 Does high body mass index increase the risk of miscarriage after spontaneous 
and assisted conception? A meta-an alysis of the evidence. Fertil Steril 90:714-726 
9. Gesink Law DC, Maclehose RF, Longnecker MP 2007 Obesity and time to pregnancy. Human Reproduction 22:414-420  
10. Polotsky AJ, Hailpern SM, Skurnick JH, Lo JC, Sternfeld B, Santoro N 2010 Associa tion of adolescent obesity and 
lifetime nulliparity —The Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN). Fertility and sterility 93:2004-2011 
11. Anderson K, Norman RJ, Middleton P 2010 Preconception lifestyle advice for people with subfer tility. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev:CD 008189 
12. Jungheim ES, Moley KH 2010 Current knowledge of obesity's effects in the pre- and periconceptional  periods and avenues 
for future research. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 203:525-530 
13. Robker RL 2008 Evidenc e that obesity alters the quality of oocytes and embryos. Pathophysiology 15:115-121 
14. Igosheva N, Abramov AY, Poston L, Eckert JJ, Fleming TP, Duchen MR, McConnell J 2010 Maternal diet-induced 
obesity alters mitochondrial activity and redox status i n mouse oocytes and zygotes. PLoS One 5:e10074 
15. Jain A, Polotsky AJ, Rochester D, Berga SL, Loucks T, Zeitlian G, Gibbs K, Polotsky HN, Feng S, Isaac B, Santoro N 
2007 Pulsatile Luteinizing Hormone Amplitude and Progesterone Metabolite Excretion Are Reduced i n Obese Women. 
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 92:2468- 2473 
16. Rubinstein L.V., Steinberg S.M., Kummar S, Kinders R, Parchment R.E., Murgo A.J., Tomaszewski J.E., Doroshow 
J.H.  The statistics of phase 0 trials. Statistics in Medicine (2010)  29: 1072-1076 
17. Murgo J.M., Kummar S, Rubinstein L, Gutierrez M, Collins J, Kinders R, Parchment R.E., Ji J, Steinberg S.M., Yang 
S.X., Hollingshead M, Chen A, Helman L, Wiltrout R, Tomaszewski J.E., Doroshow J.H. Designing Phase 0 Cancer Clinical Trials. C linical Cancer Research (2008) 14(12) :3675-3682. 
18. Baker J.M., Al-Nakkash l., Herbest -Kralovetz M.M. Estrogen-gut microbiome axis : Physiological and clinical implications. 
Maturitas (2017) 103: 45-43. 
19. Kwa M., Plottel C.S., Blaser M.J., Adams S. The Intestinal Microb iome and Estrogen Receptor -Postivie Female Breast 
Cancer . JNCI Journal National Cancer Institute (2016) 108(8): djw029. 
20. 
Markle JG, Frank DN, Mortin- Toth S, et al. Sex Differences in the Gut Microbiome Drive Hormone- Dependent Regulation of Autoimmunit y. 
Science. 2013;339(6132):1084 -1088. 
21. Soderborg TK, Clark SE, Mulligan CE, et al. The gut microbiota in infants of obese mothers increases inflammation and suscept ibility to 
NAFLD. Nature communications. 2018;9(1):4462.  
22. Friedman JE, Dobrinskikh E, Alfons o-Garcia  A, et al. Pyrroloquinoline quinone prevents developmental programming of microbial 
dysbiosis and macrophage polarization to attenuate liver fibrosis in offspring of obese mice. Hepatol Commun. 2018;2(3):313- 328. 
 
Protocol Template Page 10 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Appendix: Study Visits and Procedur es Flo w Chart  
 
Visit #  
1 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
          
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
SAFETY Follow Up phone calls ( 24 hours , 3-5 days and 7- 10 post- discharge)  
 
  ** All blood draws conducted by CTRC Inpatient  or Outpatient staff  
 
 Serum Labs run at Clinical  or Core Lab  
• Hematocrit  
• TSH 
• Prolactin  
10-hour Sampling Day 1 (Inpatient  CTRC)  
(2pm -12am)  
• Frequent Blood Draw (q10 min s) 
o 60 red tops (10 ml filled with 3 ml each)  
• Urine Collection during day 1  
• GnRH antagonist, Cetrorelix ( 3 mg 
subcutaneously at 12am)  
• Return of Fecal Sample  
10-hour Sampling D ay 2 (Inpatient CTRC) 
(6am -4pm)  
• GnRH antagonist, Cetrorelix (0.25 mg 
subcutaneously at 6am)  
• Frequent Blood Draw (q10 mins)  
o 60 red tops (10 ml filled with 3 ml each)  
• IV bolus of rFSH q 60 -90 min (dose 
and frequency tba prior to  visit)  
• Urine Collection during day 2  
• Fecal sample to be returned post 
visit  Serum aliquots stor ed in  PI’s Lab for 
FSH,  LH, inhibin B and E2 Screening Visit:  
• Consent signed  
• H&P 
• Blood Draw  
• Pelvic Exam  
 
Serum aliquot s stored in PI’s Lab for 
FSH, LH, inhibin B and E2  