Cover Page  
Title: Use of the Modified Beef Tongue Model for Teaching Repair of Obstetrical Fourth -Degree 
Laceration to Residents 
Approved by the Human Subjects IRB at UAB 
Date of Document: 09/29/2017 
 
This document contains the participant consent form  
Version 09/29/17  Pag e 1 of 4 
 CONSENT FORM 
 
TITLE OF RESEARCH: Use of the Modified Beef Tongue Model for Teaching Repair 
of Obstetrical Fourth-Degree Laceration to Residents  
 
IRB PROTOCOL NO.: IRB - 300000074  
 
INVESTIGATOR: Joseph M. Malek, MD 
 
SPONSOR: UAB Department of Ob/Gyn 
SUPPORTED BY:  UAB School of Medicine Dean’s Research Award  
 
 
Purpose of the Research 
 We are asking you to take part in a research study. This study will examine two groups for 
teaching repair of fourth-degree obstetrical lacerations.  One group will participate in a 
workshop using a modified beef tongue model which will illustrate anatomy and repair of a 
fourth-degree laceration, and the other group will watch a video using the modified beef 
tongue model to illustrate anatomy and repair of a fourth-degree laceration.  We are trying to 
evaluate differences in skill achievement in the two groups .  This study will enroll up to 32 
participants who are residents in UAB Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology.    
 
Explanation of Procedures 
All participants will complete demographic and baseline data including PGY level, number of 
fourth-degree lacerations performed, whether they have read a textbook regarding fourth-
degree laceration repair, whether they have read a journal article regarding fourth-degree 
laceration repair, whether they have attended a didactic session in pelvic anatomy, and 
whether they have attended a didactic session on fourth-degree laceration repair.   
Prior to randomization, you will take a short written pre-intervention knowledge assessment 
and be asked to rate your confidence level in completing a fourth-degree repair using a Likert 
scale.  You will also complete a baseline objective structured assessment of technical skills 
(OSATS) for repair of fourth-degree obstetric laceration on a commercial anatomical replica, the 
Sultan Anal Sphincter Trainer (Limbs & Things Inc, Savannah, Georgia).  The repair will be 
videotaped and then distributed to evaluators.  The time taken for the repair will be recorded.   
You will then be randomized into one of two groups.  The randomization will be performed 
usin
g a computer-generated block design so that each group has a balanced number of 
residents in each postgraduate year training level.  One group will be randomized to the 
modified beef tongue video and one will be randomized to the modified beef tongue 
instructional workshop.  The modified beef tongue video group will be given an instructional 
video we have created using the modified beef tongue model to show anatomy and proper 
repair of the laceration which you will be able to watch on a supplied computer.  The group 
randomized to the modified beef tongue instructional workshop will undergo an interactive 
Version 09/29/17  Pag e 2 of 4 
 workshop using the modified beef tongue model to show anatomy and proper repair of the 
laceration.   
 
Following the assigned intervention, participants from each group will be given the written 
knowledge assessment test again and the objective structured assessment of technical skills 
(OSATS) for repair of fourth-degree laceration on the commercial anatomical replica again.    
Participants will also be asked to evaluate model realism, ease of use, and satisfaction using a 
Likert scale.  The participants will be asked to assess their confidence again using a Likert scale.   
 
The participants will then be crossed over and those who were initially randomized to the video 
group will then undergo the instructional workshop and the ones initially in the workshop 
group will be given the instructional video.  Participants will then be asked to rate their overall 
preference between models on a scale of 1 to 10 with 1 being the video and 10 being the 
instructional workshop.  We expect your participation to take about 2 hours over the course of 
1 day.  
 
Risks and Discomforts 
There are minimal if any risks associated with this study.  You will be performing a repair of a 
fourth-degree perineal laceration on a model and there may be a risk of a needle stick from 
handling suture.  We expect any risk of needle stick to be rare.   
 
Benefits 
You may benefit directly from taking part in this study by increasing your knowledge, 
confidence, and ability to perform a fourth-degree laceration repair.  We hope to gain further 
knowledge on the best and most efficient way to teach residents. 
 
Alternatives 
The alternative is to not participate. 
 
Confidentiality 
Information obtained about you for this study will be kept confidential to the extent allowed by 
law. However, research information that identifies you may be shared with the UAB 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) and others who are responsible for ensuring compliance with 
laws and regulations related to research.  The information from the research may be published 
for scientific purposes; however, your identity will not be given out.   Reponses will be recorded 
only by participate ID number.  Participates will not be identified in the video recordings and 
the video recordings will be saved on a secured server.  The videos will be deleted following 
final analysis.   
  
Version 09/29/17  Pag e 3 of 4 
  
Voluntary Participation and Withdrawal 
Whether or not you take part in this study is your choice. There will be no penalty if you decide 
not to be in the study. If you decide not to be in the study, you will not lose any benefits you 
are otherwise owed. You are free to withdraw from this research study at any time. Your choice 
to leave the study will not affect your relationship with this institution.  
 
If you are a UAB student or employee, taking part in this research is not a part of your UAB class 
work or duties.  You can refuse to enroll, or withdraw after enrolling at any time before the 
study is over, with no effect on your class standing, grades, or job at UAB. You will not be 
offered or receive any special consideration if you take part in this research. 
 
Cost of Participation 
There will be no cost to you for taking part in this study.  
 
Payment for Participation in Research 
You will not be paid for participation in this study. 
 
Payment for Research-Related Injuries 
UAB has not provided for any payment if you are harmed as a result of taking part in this study. 
If such harm occurs, treatment will be provided. However, this treatment will not be provided 
free of charge. 
 
Questions 
If you have any questions, concerns, or complaints about the research or a research-related 
injury including available treatments, you may contact Dr. Joseph Malek. He will be glad to 
answe r any of your questions. Dr. Malek’s number is 205 -996-5466. Dr. Malek may also be 
reached after hours by paging him at 205-934-3411 (beeper 2193 ). 
 
If you have questions about your rights as a research participant, or concerns or complaints 
about the research, you may contact the UAB Office of the IRB (OIRB) at (205) 934-3789 or toll 
free at 1-855- 860-3789. Regular hours for the OIRB are 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. CT, Monday 
through Friday. You may also call this number in the event the research staff cannot be reached 
or you wish to talk to someone else. 
 
Legal Rights 
You are not waiving any of your legal rights by signing this informed consent document. 
 
  
Version 09/29/17  Pag e 4 of 4 
  
Signatures 
Your signature below indicates that you have read (or been read) the information provided 
above and agree to participate in this study. You will receive a copy of this signed consent form. 
 
 
              
Signature of Participant        Date 
 
 
              
Signature of Person Obtaining Informed Consent     Date 
 