 
 
TRADIPITANT  
VP-VLY -686-2102 
 
 
A MULTICENTER, RANDOMIZED,  DOUBLE -BLIND , 
PLACEBO -CONTROLLED  STUDY TO ASSESS THE 
SAFETY AND EFFICACY OF TRADIPITANT  IN 
TREATMENT -RESISTANT PRU RITUS ASSOCIATED WITH 
ATOPIC DERMATITIS  
 
Document Type:       Clinical Study Protocol  
Sponsor:         Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc.  
          2200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW  
          Suite 300 E 
          Washington, DC 20037  
USA  
Study Product:       tradipitant ( VLY-686) 
Protocol Number:      VP-VLY-686-2102 
Study Phase:        II 
IND Number:        122741 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
 
Date:   03 March 2017  
Status:  Final  
VP-VLY-686-2102   Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc.  
Protocol                                     03 March  2017  
Confidential  
2  SYNOPSIS  
Name of Sponsor/Company:  
Vanda Pharmaceuticals  Inc. 
Name of Investigational Product:  
Tradipitant ( VLY-686) 
Name of Active Ingredient:  
{2-[1-(3,5-Bistrifluoromethylbenzyl) -5-pyridin -4-yl-1H-[1,2,3]triazol -4-yl]-pyridin -3-yl}-(2-
chlorophenyl) -methanone  
Title of Study: A Multicenter, Randomized , Double -Blind , Placebo -Controlled  Study to Assess 
the Safety and Efficacy of Tradipitant in Treatment -Resistant Pruritus Associated with Atopic  
Dermatitis   
Study center(s): Up to 30 centers in the United States  
Indication :  
Chronic pruritus in subjects  with atopic dermatitis  Phase of development:  
II 
Number of subject s (planned):  
Approximately 164 subjects  randomized (82 per arm , 1:1 randomization scheme )  
Inclusion Criteria : 
1. Male and non-pregnant, non -lactating female subjects  aged 18 – 65 years  (inclusive ); 
2. Diagnosed with atopic dermatitis  
a. with a SCORAD index ≤  80 at the screening and baseline visits ; 
b. with atopic lesion (s) present  at the screening and baseline visits ; 
3. Suffering from c hronic pruritus with pruritus being actively present for at l east 6 weeks 
prior to screening  despite the use of  antihistamines or corticosteroids ; 
4. Average p ruritus intensity  (VAS) ≥ 70 mm (during one of the three  days preceding the 
screening and baseline  visits  ); 
5. Patient assessment of pruritus ( VRS (1-5) item “ pruritus ”) ≥3 at screening and baseline  
visits ; 
6. Subjects with Body Mass Index (BMI) of ≥18 and ≤35 kg/m2 (BMI = weight (kg)/ [height 
(m)]2);  
7. Subjects must agree to the following study restrictions:   
a. Males  of procreative capacity (not surgically sterile via vas ectomy) will use an 
acceptable method of contraception from randomization through 1 month 
following the last dose of study medication. Examples of acceptable 
contraception for males include abstinence, use of a barrier method, or surgically -
sterilized or post -menopausal partner .  
b. Females of child -bearing potential (not surgically sterile or post -menopausal, 
defined as 12 months without menses) will use an acceptable method of 
contraception from the earlier of screening or 1 month prior to randomization 
VP-VLY-686-2102   Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc.  
Protocol                                     03 March  2017  
Confidential  
3 through 1 month after the last dose of study medication. Examples of acceptable 
methods of contraception for females include abstinence, the use of 2 independent 
barrier  methods , or hormonal contraception plus 1 barrier  method , or surgically 
sterilized partner.  
8. Ability to provide written informed consent;  
9. Willing and able to comply with all study requirements and restrictions ; 
10. Willing to not participate  in any other interventional trial  for the duration of th eir 
participation ; 
11. Subjects must be in good health as determined by past medical history, physical 
examination, electrocardiogram, clinical laboratory tests and vital signs.  
 
Exclusion Criteria : 
1. Chronic pruritus due  to condition other than atopic dermatitis (AD)  
2. Superinfection of AD;  
3. Unwilling or unable to follow medication restrictions described in Section 7.2, or 
unwilling or unable to sufficiently washout from use of restricted medication .  
4. Under medical treatment for a skin disease with a therapy listed in the prohibited 
medications section that may influence the results of the study;  or treatment with 
Cyclosporin A within the past 6 months.   
5. Recent h istory (within six months  of screening) of Alcohol Use Disorder or Substance 
Use Disorder as defined in DSM -5 or a positive drug screen at the Screening  visit; 
6. Subject has ever made a suicide attempt and /or had suicidal ideation of ty pe 4 or 5 on the 
Columbia Suicide  Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS) or subject is at risk of suicide at 
Screening or Baseline, in the opinion of the investigator;  
7. Any medical procedure requir ing general anesthetic within three months of the Baseline 
Visit or any procedure requiring sed ation within one month of the baseline visit ; 
8. Current clinically significant cardiovascular, respiratory, neurologic, hepatic, 
hematopoietic, renal, gastrointestinal or metabolic dysfunction unless currently controlled 
and stable , including (but not limited to) the following:  
a. Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus defined as HbA1c >7%;  
b. Positive hepatitis C antibody test (anti -HCF) ; 
c. Positive hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) ; 
9. History (including family history) or current evidence of conge nital long QT syndrome 
or known acquired QT interval  prolongation;  
10. Exposure to any investigational medication , including placebo, within 60 days of the 
Baseline  Visit;  
11. History of intolerance and/or hypersensitivity to medications  similar to  tradipitant  and its 
accompanying excipients ; 
VP-VLY-686-2102   Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc.  
Protocol                                     03 March  2017  
Confidential  
4 12. Participation in a previous tradipitant  (LY686017 or V LY-686) trial; 
13. Indication of impaired liver function ( including values for AST, ALT, or bilirubin >  1.5 
times the Upper Limit of Normal , unless isolated bilirubin > 1.5 x ULN due solely to 
Gilbert’s syndrome ); 
14. Has a creatinine level > 1.25x ULN ; 
15. Anyone affiliated with the site or sponsor and/or anyone who may consent under duress ; 
16. Any other reason as determined by the Investigator  which may lead to an unfavorable 
risk-benefit  of study participation, may interfere with study compliance , or may confound 
study results.   
Investigational product, dosage and mode of administration:  
A single oral capsule of tradip itant 85 mg or matching placebo will be orally administered twice 
daily for a total daily dose of 170 mg.  Study medication should be administ ered with food . 
Duratio n of treatment:  8 weeks  
Objectives:  
Primary:  
• To evaluate the efficacy of tradipitant relative to placebo in reducing 
symptom s of chronic pruritus in subjects with atopic dermatitis  
Secondary:  
 
• To evaluate the efficacy of tradipitant  relative to placebo in reducing chronic 
pruritus  
• To evaluate  the efficacy of tradipitant  relative to placebo in reducing atopic 
dermatitis disease progression  
• To evaluate the efficacy of tradipitant relative to placebo in reducing the severity 
of sleep disruption  
• To assess the efficacy of tradipitant on global measures of improvement  
• To assess the efficacy of tradipitant on  quality of life  
• To evaluate the relationship betwee n tradipitant’s pharmacokinetics and efficacy 
measurements  
• To explore the safety and tolerability of multiple oral doses of tradipitant . 
 
Optional Pharmacogenetic  Sub-Study : 
• To identify genetic markers that correlate with response to tradipitant  treatment.  
• To identify genetic markers that correlate with adverse events that may occur 
upon treatment with  tradipitant . 
• To identify genetic markers that are associated with atopic dermatitis  and/or 
pruritus  and dis orders /diseases associated with NK -1 receptors . 
• To identify genetic markers that are associated in the metabolism, distribution, 
and/or excretion  of tradipitant  and its metabolites.      
Overall Design:  
VP-VLY-686-2102   Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc.  
Protocol                                     03 March  2017  
Confidential  
5 This is a multicenter, randomized, double -blind , placebo -controlled study to be conducted in the 
United States. Approximately 164 subjects  with treatment -resistant pruritus diagnosed with atopic 
dermatitis, who satisfy the selection criteria for the study, will be randomized to receive either 
tradipitant 85 mg or matching placebo BID.   
The study is divided into two phases: the pre-treatment phase and the evaluation phase. The pre-
treatment phase includes  a screening and a baseline visit whe re subjects’ eligibility for the study 
will be assessed . Washout of medications per  Section 7.2 will occur during the screening phase.  
The evaluation phase includ es 8 weeks of randomized double -blind  treatment. In clinic 
evaluations will occur at Screening, Baseline, and Weeks 2, 4, 6, and 8.  
Criteria for evaluation:  
Efficacy:  
Efficacy assessments will in clude:  
• Daily Diary Itch Scale (DDIS)  
• Pruritus Visual Analogue S cale (VAS)   
• Verbal Rating Scale (VRS) item “pruritus”  
• SCOR ing Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD)  index  
• Eczema Area Scoring Index ( EASI )  
• Daily Diary Sleep Scale  (DDSS ) 
• Clinical Global Impression  of Change (CGI -C) 
• Patient Global Impression of Change (PGI -C) 
• Skindex -16 
• Patient Benefi t Index (PBI)  
Safety:  
• Safety and tolerability  assessments will include the recording of adverse events 
(AEs), physical examinations, clinical laboratory evaluations, vital signs, and 
electrocardiograms.  
• The Columbia -Suicide Severity Scale (C-SSRS) will be used to assess suicidal 
behavior and ideation . 
Statistical methods:   
Primary Endpoint:  
 
• Mean change from baseline in pruritus symptoms in the tradipitant group versus the 
placebo  group   
Secondary Endpoints:   
• Mean change from baseline in pruritus intensity in the tradipitant group versus the 
placebo group  
VP-VLY-686-2102   Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc.  
Protocol                                     03 March  2017  
Confidential  
6 • Mean change from baseline of disease severity  in the tradipitant group versus the 
placebo group as measured by SCOR ing Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD)  index  
• Mean change from baseline of disease severity  in the tradipitant group versus the 
placebo group as measured by  Eczema Area Scoring Index (EASI)  
• Mean change from baseline in the daily diary sleep scale (DDSS)  in the tradipitant 
group versus the placebo  group.  
• Mean global improvement measured by the Clinical Global Impression -Change 
(CGI -C), Patient Global Impression of Change (PGI -C), Skindex -16, and the Patient 
Benefit Index (PBI)   
• Mean change from baseline in pruritus intensity in relation to serum concentrations 
of tradipitant and its metabolites.   
 
Statistical analyses will be performed using two -sided tests.  The details of analysis models will 
be specified in the SAP.  
 
  
VP-VLY-686-2102   Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc.  
Protocol                                     03 March  2017  
Confidential  
7 Table  1: Schedule of Evaluations  
Phase  Pre-Treatment  Evaluation  
Visit  V1 
Screening  V2 
Baseline  V3 
 V4 
 V5 
 V6  
EOS or 
ET 
Study Day Up to Day 
-45 Day 0  Day 141 Day 281 Day 421 Day 561 
or ET  
Informed Consent For m (ICF)2 X      
Eligibility a ssessment  X X     
Subject demography  X      
Medical history  X      
Prior/ concomitant medications  X X X X X X 
Adverse Event (AE) assessment  X3 X X X X X 
Serum β-HCG ( for WOCBP)  X     X 
Urine pregnancy test (for WOCBP)   X X X X  
HbA1c  X      
Hepatitis B/C screen  X      
Drug and alcohol screen  X X  X  X 
Hematology,  chemistry, and urinalysis  X X  X  X 
IgE  X     
Pharmacogenetic  (PG) sample4  X     
Pharmacokinetic (PK) sample(s)   X X5 X6 X5 X5 
12-lead resting ECG  X X X X X X 
Vital signs and body measurements7 X X X X X X 
Physical Examination  (PE) X X8 X8 X8 X8 X 
C-SSRS9 X X X X X X 
Medical History of Pruritus Questionnaire   X     
Pruritus Assessmen t (incl. V AS, VRS)10 X X X11 X12 X X 
SCORing Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD)  X X X X X X 
Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI)  X X X X X X 
Patient Benefit Inde x (PBI)13  X X X X X 
Skindex -16   X X X X X 
Patient Global Impression of Change (PGI -C)   X X X X 
Clinic al Global Impres sion of Change (CGI -C)   X X X X 
Randomization   X     
Study medication  dispensation14  X X X X  
VP-VLY-686-2102   Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc.  
Protocol                                     03 March  2017  
Confidential  
8 Phase  Pre-Treatment  Evaluation  
Visit  V1 
Screening  V2 
Baseline  V3 
 V4 
 V5 
 V6  
EOS or 
ET 
Study Day Up to Day 
-45 Day 0  Day 141 Day 281 Day 421 Day 561 
or ET  
Study medication collection & compliance    X X X X 
Subject daily diary distribution and instruction  X15      
Subject daily diary review   X X X X X 
Subject  daily  diary collection       X 
 
EOS = End of Study; ET = Early Termination; WOCBP = Women of Child -bearing Potential; 
ECG = electrocardiogram; C -SSRS = Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale; V AS = Visual 
Analog Scale; VRS = Verbal Rating  Scale  
1 within +/ - 3 days  
2 Informed Consent will be obtained prior to performance of any study procedure(s)  
3 Adverse Event collection will begin at the time the ICF is signed.  
4 The PG blood sample will only be collected for subjects consenting to the PG study.  
5 The PK sample collection should occur within 15 minutes following the pruritus assessment  
6 Multiple PK samples will be collected at V4.  In -clinic dosing of study medication (morning dose) will occur at V4 
following a pre -dose PK blood draw.   
7 Vital signs will be collected at all visits.  Height will be collected at V1(Screening).  Body weight will be  collected 
at V1  (Screening) , V2 (Baseline), and V6.  
8 An abbreviated physical  exam ination  may be performed at V2 (Baseline), V3, V4, and V5  if clinically indicated.  
9 The Screening/Baseline C -SSRS will occur at V1 (Screening). The Since Last Visit C -SSRS will occur at all other 
visits.  
10 The baseline pruritus assessment will be completed at V1 and V2.  The post -baseline pruritus assessment will be 
completed at V3, V4, V5, and V6.  
11 At V3, V5, and V6, the Pruritus  Assessment will be conducted between 2 and 4 hours post study drug administration  
12 At V4, the Pruritus assessment will occur at 0 3:00 (+/ - 00:30) post in-clinic study drug administration  
13 At V2 (Baseline) , The Patient Needs Questionnaire (PBI -PNQ) will be administered.  The Patient Benefits 
Questionnaire (PBI -PBQ) will be administered at subsequent visits.  
14 Subjects will be instructed to take their first dose of study medication on the evening of Day 0.   
15 The subject diary will be completed for at  least 7 days prior to randomization and the duration of the evaluation 
phase.  