GORE® CARDIOFORM ASD Occluder  
MD144427 ASD 15 -04 Study Summary  Revision#: 5 Doc Type: SP  
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION  
MD133247 Study Summary Template  1 of 4 
Revision#: 2 
Doc Type: GC  
STUDY SUMMARY  
Study Title  GORE® CARDIOFORM ASD Occluder Clinical Study: A Study to evaluate 
safety and efficacy in the treatment of transcatheter closure of ostium 
secundum atrial septal defects (ASDs) – The Gore ASSURED Clinical Study  
Protocol Number  ASD 15-0 4 - Revision 6 (06 Jan 2021)
 
IDE Number  G160218  
Study Device  GORE® CARDIOFORM ASD Occluder  
Sponsor  W. L. Gore & Associates, Inc.
Medical Products Division
4250 West Kiltie Lane
Flagstaff, AZ 86005
Telephone: 800 -437-8181
Facsimil e: 928 -864-4957
Study Design  Prospective, multicenter, single -arm comparison to performance goals 
derived from clinical study outcomes for devices indicated  for ASD closure  
Study Objective  Evaluate the safety and efficacy of the GORE® CARDIOFORM ASD 
Occluder in the percutaneous closure of ostium secundum  atrial septal 
defects (ASDs)  
Study Endpoints  Primary Endpoints  
Co-Primary Endpoint 1: 6 -Month Closure Success is defined as a clinical 
residual defect status of occluded or clinically insignificant as determined by 
the Echo Core Lab at the 6 -month evaluation among subjects with technical 
success.  
Co-Primary Endpoint 2: Composite Clinical Success is evaluated at 6 months 
after index procedure among subjects with attempted study device closure 
and is defined as satisfying all of the following criteria:  
1.Technical Succe ss: Successful deployment and retention (at
conclusion of index procedure) of a GORE® CARDIOFORM® ASD
Occluder
2.Safety Success:
•Freedom from any Serious Adverse Event (SAE) related to
the device or procedure (as adjudicated by the Independent
Data Review Board (IDRB)) through 30 days post -procedure
•Freedom from device events (post -procedure embolization,
device removal, or other device reintervention) from
completion of the implant procedure through 6 months (180
days) post -procedure
3.Closure Success : A clinical residual defect status of occluded or
clinically insignificant as determined by the Echocardiography Core
Lab at the 6 -month evaluation
Secondary Endpoints  
•Technical Success
•Procedure Success
 GORE® CARDIOFORM ASD Occluder   
MD144427 ASD 15 -04 Study Summary  Revision#: 5 Doc Type: SP  
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION  
MD133247 Study Summary Template    2 of 4 
Revision#: 2 
Doc Type: GC  
• Long -term Composite Clinical Success  
• Long -term Clo sure Success  
• Safety Outcomes  
• Clinically Significant New Arrhythmia  
Subject Population  • No age limitations  
• Patients with ostium secundum  ASD measuring 8 -35 mm by stop -balloon 
sizing  
• Inter-atrial shunting with evidence of right heart volume overload, 
demonstrating the need for septal defect closure  
• Absence of concurrent cardiac conditions that could elevate 
morbidity/mortality beyond what i s common for ASD  
Number of Subjects  • Training Cases: First 2 subjects per site  
• Pivotal Phase: 125 subjects (non -training)  
• Continued Access Phase: up to 535 subjects (non -training)  
• Total Study Enrollment: up to 704 subjects  
Number of Sites  Up to 22 sites in the U.S.   
Coordination P rincipal 
Investigator  Matthew Gillespie, MD  
Division of Cardiology  
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia  
Room 6NE42, Main Bldg  
34th & Civic Center BLVD  
Philadelphia, PA 19104  
National Principal Investigator, Pediatric  
 
Robert Sommer, MD  
Center for Interventional Vascular Therapy  
Columbia University Medical Center  
627 West 165th Street, 5th floor Room 512  
New York, NY 10032  
National Principal I nvestigator, Adult  
Significant Inclusion 
Criteria  • Patient has an ostium secundum  ASD with evidence of left -to-right shunt 
and right ventricular volume overload.  
• Patient has a defect size 8 -35 mm as measured directly by stop -flow 
balloon sizing.  
• Patient vasculature can accommodate the delivery system and 
procedural accessories.  
• Patient can accommodate TEE or intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) 
probe for implant procedure.  
• Patient is judged by the implanting physician to have adequate septal 
rims to retain the study device.  
• Patient (or legal guardian, if patient is a minor) will voluntarily sign a 
Patient ICF specific to the study. The Patient ICF must be reviewed and 
 GORE® CARDIOFORM ASD Occluder   
MD144427 ASD 15 -04 Study Summary  Revision#: 5 Doc Type: SP  
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION  
MD133247 Study Summary Template    3 of 4 
Revision#: 2 
Doc Type: GC  
approved in a manner that complies with requirements of the hospital’s 
IRB. 
• Patient (and legal guardian, if patient is a minor) is physically and 
mentally willi ng to comply with all study follow -up requirements through 
36 months, including routinely scheduled diagnostic testing and physical 
examinations.  
Significant Exclusion 
Criteria  
 • Patient has significant known pre -existing electrophysiologic or structural  
cardiovascular defect, or other comorbidities that could elevate morbidity 
or mortality beyond what is common for ASD or would require surgical 
treatment within three (3) years of device placement. Examples include, 
but are not limited to, large ventricular septal defect, hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome, coarctation, univentricular heart or tricuspid atresia, 
pulmonary hypertension, coronary artery disease, valvular or myocardial 
dysfunction, and other congenital heart disease requiring surgical repair.  
• Patient has systemic or inherited conditions that would significantly   
increase risk of major morbidity and mortality during the term of the  
study. Examples include endocarditis, cancer, degenerative 
neuromuscular disorder, cardiomyopathy, and any condition expected to 
result in significant deterioration of healt h within three (3) years of the 
index procedure.  
• Patient has anatomy where the size or position of the occluder would   
interfere with other intracardiac or intravascular structures, such as  
cardiac valves or pulmonary veins.  
• Patient has active endocarditis, other infections producing  
bacteremia, or has known sepsis within one month of planned  
implantation, or any other infection that cannot be treated  
successfully prior to device placemen t. 
• Patient has known intracardiac thrombi.  
• Patient has an uncontrolled arrhythmia with evidence of arrhythmia  
• Control failure within the past 90 days (e.g., supraventricular  
tachycardia while under rate control or atrial fibri llation while under  
rhythm control) or requires electrophysiology study or concomitant  
intervention with device placement.  
• Patient is awaiting a procedure that requires trans -septal left atrial  
access within 6 months of implant procedure.   
• Patient has a history of stroke resulting in a significant morbidity or  
disability.  
• Patient is pregnant or lactating at time of screening.  
• Patient has contraindication to antiplatelet and anticoagulant  
medication s.  
• Patient has elevated pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) which in  
the opinion of the implanting physician precludes safe defect closure.  
• Patient has multiple defects based on screening imaging and stop - 
flow balloon sizing that would require placement of more than one  
device.  
Expected Time to  
Complete Enrollment  Pivotal Phase:  Enrollment Completion: 12 months  
Continued Access:  Enrollment Completion: 18 -24 months  
 GORE® CARDIOFORM ASD Occluder   
MD144427 ASD 15 -04 Study Summary  Revision#: 5 Doc Type: SP  
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION  
MD133247 Study Summary Template    4 of 4 
Revision#: 2 
Doc Type: GC  
Expected Time of each  
Study Subject to  
Complete the Study  36 months  
Study Duration  Total Study Duration: 5.5 years  
Schedule of Events  Screening Assessments (within 6 months of procedure)  
• Physical exam  
• Electrocardiogram (ECG)  
• Echocardiogram (TTE or TEE)  
Pre-Study Procedure (within 90 days of procedure)  
• Echocardiogram (TTE)  
Procedure  
• Physical exam  
• Stop-flow balloon sizing of defect  
• Echocardiogram (TEE, TTE or ICE)  
• Fluoroscopy  
Pre-Discharge  
• Electrocardiogram (ECG)  
• Echocardiogram (TTE)   
30 days and 6 months:  
• Physical exam  
• Electrocardiogram (ECG)  
• Echocardiogram (TTE)  
• Fluoroscopy (6 months for all Subjects)  
Long -term follow -up at 12 months and 36 months include d: 
• Physical exam  
• Electrocardiogram (ECG)  
• Echocardiogram (TTE)  
• Fluoroscopy (36 months for all Subjects)  
A telephone follow -up occurred at 24 months  
Additional Information  Echocardiography Core Lab, Independent Data Review Board (IDRB)  
 