 
 
Pharmac okinetics of doxorubicin in conventional transarterial 
chemoembolization (cTACE) of primary and secondary liver cancer  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: April 20, 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pharmacokinetics of doxorubicin in conventional transarterial chemoembolization 
(cTACE) of primary and secondary liver cancer  
 
HIC Protocol #: 1506016008 
 
Principal Investigator: Todd Schlachter , MD  
Yale University School of Medicine  
Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging  
330 Cedar Street, PO Box 208042  
New Haven, CT 06520 -8042  
Phone: (203) 785- 5885  
Fax: (203) 7 37-1077  
E-mail: todd.schlachter@yale.edu  
 
Co-Investigators and Study  Team  
Co-Investigators:  
Hyun Kim, MD  
Jeff Pollak, MD  
Rajasekhara Ayyagari, MD  
Juan Carlos Perez Lozada, MD  
Julius Chapiro, MD  
 
Research Nurse:  
Teresa White  
 
Study Coordinator:  
Eliot Funai  
 
 
 
   
Study Sponsor:  
Investigator -Initiated: Todd Schlachter, MD  
 
Financial Support:  
Guerbet  
 
Protocol Revision Record  
Original Version: July 10, 2015  
Protocol Amendment #1: June 22 , 2016  
Protocol Amendment #2: October 10, 2016  
Protocol Amendment #2.1: January 19, 2017  
Protocol Amendment #2.2: April 20, 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
Table of Contents  
Section  Page #  
Investigator Agreement Page  5 
Log of protocol revisions  6 
Schema/Synopsis  7 
List of Abbreviations  10 
1. Introduction  11 
 1.1 Background/Rationale  11 
 1.2 Hepatocellular Carcinoma 11 
 1.3 Hepatic Metastases from Solid Tumors  12 
 1.4 Transarterial Chemoembolization for Hepatocellular Carcinoma and  
      Metastatic Disease  13 
 1.5 Lobar and Superselective TACE  14 
 1.6 Transarterial Chemoembolization Safety Profile  15 
2. Study Objectives and Endpoints  16 
 2.1 Primary Objectives/Endpoints  16 
 2.2 Secondary Objectives/Endpoints  17 
3. Subject Selection  17 
 3.1 Subject Selection  17 
 3.2 Inclusion Criteria  18 
 3.3 Exclusion Criteria  19 
 3.4 Inclusion of Women and Minorities  19 
4. Subject Registration Procedures  19 
 4.1 General Guidelines  19 
 4.2 Registration Process  19 
 4.3 Screening Assessments 20 
5. Study Design/Investigational Plan  20 
 5.1 Overall Design  20 
  5.1.1 Routine Care Procedures  21 
  5.1.2 Research Procedures  22 
 5.2 Visit Schedule and Study Evaluation  23 
 5.3 Duration for Therapy  24 
 5.4 Duration of Follow -up 24 
 5.5 Criteria for Removal from Study  24 
6. Adverse Event Collection and Reporting Requirements  24 
 6.1 Definitions  24 
 6.2 Adverse Event Coding  25 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 3 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
 6.3 Adverse Event Capture and Reporting  25 
7. Statistical Methods  26 
 7.1 Primary Outcome Variable  26 
 7.2 Secondary Outcome Variables  26 
 7.3 Statistical Plan  27 
 7.4 Early Stopping Rules  28 
8. Regulatory Considerations  28 
 8.1 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  28 
 8.2 Case Report Forms  29 
 8.3 Record Retention  29 
9. Ethics  29 
 9.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB)   29 
 9.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study  30 
 9.3 Subject Information and Consent  30 
10. References  31 
11. Appendices  35 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 4 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
 
Investigator Agreement Page 
Study Title: Pharmacokinetics of doxorubicin in conventional transarterial chemoembolization 
(cTACE) of primary and secondary liver cancer  
 
I confirm agreement to conduct the study in compliance with the protocol and all applicable 
regulatio ns. 
 
Investigator Name: __________________________________________________  
 Affiliation: _________________________________________________________  
  
Investigator Signature: __________________________________       Date:_____________  
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 5 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
Log of protocol revisions  –  
Version 4/20/2017  
• Change of principal investigator from Jeff Geschwind, MD to Todd Schlachter, MD  
• Addition of Juan Carlos Perez Lozada, MD as co -investigator  
Version 1/19/2017  
• Modification of inclusion criteria #7 to only exclude prev ious chemoembolization to 
target area within 1 year.  
• Addition of Rajasekhara Ayyagari, MD as co -investigator  
Version 10/10/2016  
• Addition of Jeff Pollak, MD as co -investigator  
• Minor edits and revisions, the most significant being correction of inclusion criteria 
ECOG 0 -2 to ECOG 0- 1. 
Version 6/22/2016  
• Clarification of inclusion criteria #7 on page 8, 18  
• Minor edits and  revisions . 
• Addition of co -investigators Hyun Kim, MD, and Todd Schlachter, MD  
• Addition of research nurse  Teresa White  
• Addition of shipping information for PK samples  
  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 6 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
 
Schema/Synopsis  
Name of Sponsor:  
Principal Investigator: Todd Schlachter, MD  (Investigator initiated)  
Title of Study:  
Pharmacokinetics of doxorubicin in conventional transarterial chemoembolization (cTACE) of 
primary and secondary liver cancer  
Co-Investigators:  
Hyun (Kevin) Kim MD, Jeff Pollak MD, Rajasekhara Ayyagari, MD , Juan Carlos Perez Lozada, MD, 
Julius Chapiro, MD  
Study Center:  
Yale University School of Medicine  
Anticipated Study Period (years):  
July 2015 – August 2017 (2 years)  Phase of Development:  
Phase I  
Abstract:  
Problem:  
Conventional transarterial chemoembolization (cTACE) was the first type of TACE developed.  
cTACE  consists of the injection of a mixture of chemotherapeutic drugs with Lipiodol, a contrast 
agent, followed by the injection of small beads to occlude the tumor feeding arteries.  Despite 
the local injection of the chemotherapeutic drugs, pharmacokinetic ( PK) studies of cTACE dating 
back to the 1990s demonstrated a high serum concentration peak of the chemotherapeutic 
drugs right after administration.  
Research hypothesis:  
This is not a hypothesis driven study.  The purpose of this study is to perform a dedi cated PK 
analysis of doxorubicin and its metabolite doxorubicinol after cTACE.  
Importance of the research:  
Newer forms of TACE that include drug eluting microsphere technology have been developed, 
with more favorable PK profiles than those found in the stu dies of cTACE which were performed 
several decades ago.  The cTACE procedure has since matured, and in fact is now often 
administered selectively so that the chemotherapy can be delivered in close proximity to the 
tumor, rather than administered in a lobar  or whole liver fashion.  It is important to determine 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 7 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
the PK profile of the modern cTACE procedure in order to make comparisons with the newer 
forms of TACE.  Finally, it is also important to know whether superselective cTACE results in less 
serum exposur e of doxorubicin and doxorubicinol than when it is administered in a lobar non -
selective manner.  The findings may truly lead to a change in practice and a new set of technical 
guidelines.  
Study Design:  
Single site, prospective study, designed to measure PK of doxorubicin and its metabolite 
doxorubicinol at various timed intervals after cTACE in patients with primary or secondary liver 
cancer.  
# of Patients (planned):   
30 patients to be enrolled, approx imately 15 patients with primary liver cancer and 15 patients 
with secondary liver cancer.  Up to 40 patients may be consented if necessary in order to 
account for potential patients who screen- out or who are unable to complete sample collection 
for the PK  (80% of planned draws).   15 patients will be assigned to the lobar treatment arm and 
15 patients will be assigned to the superselective treatment arm.  
Diagnosis and Main Criteria for Inclusion:  
Patients with primary or secondary liver cancer that are rec ommended for cTACE and meet the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Age ≥ 18 years.  
2. Histologically, cytologically, or radiologically confirmed liver dominant or liver only 
malignancy.  
3. Preserved liver function (Child -Pugh A -B class) without si gnificant liver decompensation.  
4. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 -1 at study entry.  
5. Measurable or evaluable disease that will be directly treated with intrahepatic therapy (as defined by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid  Tumors [RECIST] 1.1).  
6. Suitable for TACE based on blood parameters such as platelet count, bilirubin, and 
international normalized ratio.  
7. May be enrolled with a history of prior liver directed chemoembolization  if 
chemoembolization to the target lesion occ urred > 1 year prior to enrollment date.   TACE 
to different targets within 1 year prior to enrollment date, radioembolization to target 
location, or other form of intra- arterial therapy will not exclude subjects.  
Exclusion criteria:  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 8 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
1. Serum total bilirubin >  3.0 mg/dL  
2. Creatinine > 2.0 mg/dL  
3. Platelets < 50000/ µL 
4. Complete portal vein thrombosis with reversal of flow  
5. Ascites (trace ascites on imaging is acceptable)  
Duration of treatment:  
Patients are on study for 4 weeks, starting from the initial blood draw at baseline prior to the 
cTACE procedure until the last blood draw taken 3 -4 weeks post- cTACE.  
Statistical methods:  
Primary outcome variable:  
Pharmacokinetic profile of doxorubicin and doxorubicinol after cTACE  
 Pharmacokinetic parameters to be measured fo r each patient:  
• Peak of the plasma concentration, time of maximum concentration, and area under the concentration -time curve (AUC).  
• Pharmacokinetic profiles for each patient will be correlated with toxicity and tumor burden (size of target lesion), BSA, gender.  
• PK profiles of lobar cTACE as compared to that of super -selective cTACE.  
Secondary outcome variables:  
1. Feasibility  
• Technical success of the cTACE procedure (technical failure is defined as the inability to administer the cTACE material, in which cas e the patient would be 
excluded from the study).  
• Dose of doxorubicin delivered.  
2. Safety  
• All toxicities assessed as being at least possibly related, up to the 3 -4 week follow -
up visit (post cTACE) will be analyzed by descriptive statistics to show type, grade 
(NCI Common Toxicity Criteria v4.0), frequency, and time from cTACE.  
 
 
 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 9 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
 
 
List of Abbreviations  
 
Abbreviation  Definition  
AE Adverse event  
AUC  Area under concentration -time curve  
CRF Case report form  
cTACE  Conventional transarterial chemoembolization  
CTCAE  NIH Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
DEB-TACE  Drug eluting bead transarterial chemoembolization  
DSMC  Data  and Safety Monitoring Committee  
ECOG  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status  
GCP Good Clinical Practice  
HCC Hepatocellular carcinoma  
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
NET Neuroendocrine tumor  
PET Pancreatic endocrine tumor  
PK Pharmacokinetics  
PRC Protocol Review Committee  
RECIST  Response evaluation criteria in solid tumors  
SAE Serious adverse event  
UPIRSOs  Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects and Others  
   
 
  
 
 
 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 10 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
1. Introduction  
1.1 Background /Rationale  
Transarterial chemoembolization ( TACE ) is the combination of locally injected chemotherapy 
and embolization of the tumor feeding arteries.  Due to good tumor response rates and a low 
incidence of side effects, this technique has evolved into the standard palliative treatment for a 
number of pr imary and secondary liver cancers, including hepatocellular, intrahepatic 
cholangiocellular, colorectal, and neuroendocrine cancer.  Conventional TACE ( cTACE ), the first 
type of TACE developed, consists of the injection of a mixture of chemotherapeutic drugs with Lipiodol, an oil -based contrast agent, followed by the injection of small beads to occlude the 
tumor feeding arteries.  Despite the local injection of the chemotherapeutic drugs, this technique was shown to result in a high serum concentration peak  of the chemotherapeutic 
drugs right after injection.  Drug -eluting beads were developed to release the 
chemotherapeutic agent over a longer period of time, resulting in a lower initial serum 
concentration and a higher concentration of the chemotherapeutic  drug in the tumor treated 
area over time.  
Since the development of drug -eluting beads, many research teams have focused on the 
advantages of Drug Eluting Bead TACE (DEB -TACE) over cTACE, including better tumor response 
and lower incidence of side -effects (1,2).  Several PK studies comparing various bead types have 
been performed in different animal models (3 -5).  According to these studies, the serum 
concentration of chemotherapeutic drugs is lower using DEB -TACE compared to cTACE.  
However, the cTACE stud ies used for comparison date  back to the 1990, at which time a variety 
of cTACE protocols were being used as the cTACE technique was still in its infancy.  Over the 
years, several studies were performed to develop the optimal drug combination and delivery 
schema with regard to efficacy and toxicity (6, 7).  To our knowledge, there is only a single, 
rather recent PK study comparing DEB -TACE to cTACE (8), however this study had only 5 
patients in the c -TACE arm.  
Thus, the purpose of this study is to perform a  dedicated PK analysis of doxorubicin and its 
metabolite doxorubicinol after cTACE, and compare the PK profile of the two most widely used 
methods for cTACE, lobar and superselective.  
1.2 Hepatocellular Carcinoma 
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth  most common cancer in the world and represents 
more than 5% of all cancers.  Approximately 500,000 cases of HCC are diagnosed each year and it is the third cau se of cancer -related deaths (9 , 10).  There are wide geographical variations in 
the incidence of the disease with the highest rates in the developing countries of Asia and 
Africa.  However, the incidence of HCC is increasing in North America and Europe (1 1). 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 11 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
Untreated HCC carries a poor prognosis and is directly related to degree of underlying cirrho sis 
and tumor stage.  Early detection offers the only possibility for cure.  Patient survival is 
generally not more than 6 months in patients with large tumor mass and advanced cirrhosis.  
Patients with small HCCs (<5cm diameter) and stable liver function have a better prognosis wit h 
2-year survival rates of 56% (1 2). 
HCC is now responsible for 14,000 deaths annually in the United States.  It is generally accepted 
that surgical resection, liver transplantation, and percutaneous ablation are the only curativ e 
treatments for patients with early stage HCC.  The shortage of donor livers further diminishes 
liver transplantation as a viable option for many patients.  The majority of HCC patients 
(approximately 85 -90%) are not candidates for curative treatments eit her due to poor liver 
function or the presence of advanced disease.  These patients are treated with palliative treatments.  
Chemotherapeutic agents (e.g. doxorubicin) can be infused directly into the systemic circulation 
but patients who receive this treatment suffer serious side effects that may be life threatening 
(e.g. cardiac toxicity), pain, nausea, vomiting, myelosuppre ssion, and alopecia.   For those 
patients able to receive systemic chemotherapy, response rates ranged from 15% to 20% and 
have had vir tually no impact on survival.  
These factors, combined with local pattern of disease dissemination, have made local 
interventional therapy the cornerstone of hepatocellular carcinoma treatment for unresectable 
disease and patients who are not eligible for treatment.  
 
1.3 Hepatic Metastases from Solid Tumors  
There are many solid -organ malignant tumors (colorectal carcinoma, neuroendocrine tumors, 
pancreatic endocrine tumors, and other non -colorectal non -neuroendocrine tumors) for which 
cure is not possible with current systemic agents.  Many of these tumors are found to have 
already metastasized to the liver at the time of diagnosis or eventually metastasize to the liver 
despite best therapeutic efforts with available systemic agents.  The liver is the most common site of metastases from colorectal carcinoma and is a frequent metastatic site for pancreatic 
endocrine tumors (PET), neuroendocrine tumors (NET), and other tumor types.  Overall, the 
largest risk factor for the development of hepatic metastases is the stage of the primary tumor 
(colorectal carcinoma) or the size of the primary tumor (NET, PET).  In hepatic metastatic 
disease, the most important prognostic factor is the percent of liver replaced by tumor.  If 
allowed to grow and disseminate within th e liver, metastatic deposits become the dominant, 
and often, the most life -threatening feature of the metastatic disease, either through 
progressive hepatic failure or production of excess endocrine products that produce potentially lethal systemic consequ ences (NET, PET).  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 12 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
Due to the relative sensitivity of the liver to radiation, external beam radiation has had limited 
utility in treating hepatic metastatic disease.  Modest improvements have been achieved in the 
treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer us ing new combination regimens of systemic agents; 
however, most patients ultimately fail first -line therapy either based on lack of efficacy or 
inability to tolerate further courses of treatment (13).  A number of new, non- radiation based 
liver- directed the rapies have been developed for reducing or controlling tumor mass in the liver 
that have demonstrated varying efficacy and patient tolerance.  These treatments also may produce serious morbidity that adversely impacts patient quality of life, and can resul t in life -
threatening complications and adverse events.  
In summary, the status of clinical managements of patients with metastatic disease involving 
the liver has experienced modest improvements over the past 40 years.  Standardization of 
treatment approac h has been hampered by the need to adapt therapy to tumor type and 
presentation, initial response to first line therapy and patient tolerance for therapeutic 
interventions.  Diverse drugs, biologics, medical devices and surgical procedures are available 
for treatment of hepatic metastases.  There is a clinical need to develop new, liver- directed 
therapies with less morbidity and improved patient tolerance compared with existing therapies.  
In addition, new therapies are needed that can be applied at any tim e in the ongoing course of 
treatment for a patient with metastatic liver disease.  
 
1.4 Transarterial Chemoembolization for Hepatocellular Carcinoma and 
Metastatic Disease  
Liver directed forms of therapy have become the mainstay of therapy for  patients with 
unresectable HCC.  These therapies include chemical (alcohol, acetic acid) and thermal 
(radiofrequency ablation, microwave, laser, etc) ablative techniques, as well as intra- arterial 
chemotherapy treatments.  Intra -arterial therapies have been developed to take advantage of 
the fact that  the hepatic artery supplies most of the blood flow and nutrients to hepatic tumors.  
Of those, TACE  is the most widely performed procedure for patients with unresectable HCC.  
Transarterial chemoembolization involves the pe riodic injection of a chemotherapeutic agent, 
mixed with an embolic material, into selected branches of the hepatic arteries feeding a liver 
tumor, thus combining chemotherapy administration with intra -tumor ischemia.  The rational e 
for TACE is that the in fusion of drugs such as doxorubicin, mitomycin- C, and cisplatin suspended 
in an oily medium followed by embolization of the blood vessel with embolic agents will reduce 
arterial blood supply to the tumor allowing greater delivery of the chemotherapy to the  tumor 
and thus causing necrosis of the tumor.  Lipiodol is the most common vehicle used for the intra -
arterial administration of the chemotherapeutic agents.  The advantage of TACE is that higher concentrations of the drug can be delivered to the tumor wi th decreased systemic exposure 
compared with systemic chemotherapy.  TACE has been shown to deliver up to 400 times the 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 13 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
intra -hepatic concentration of chemotherapy in comparison to intravenous administration 
depending on the chemotherapeutic agent (14) .  As such, tissue levels of chemotherapy within 
the tumor were found to be 40 times of that found in surrounding normal hepatic tissue.  
Embolization of a branch of the hepatic artery after the administration of chemotherapy results 
in the detection of the chemotherapeutic agent within the tumor of upwards of several months 
post administration (15-17). 
TACE achieves partial response in 15 -55% of patients (18-24) and significantly delays tumor 
progression and vascular invasion (20, 24) .  Two studies have also reported survival benefits for 
chemoemb olization in selected patients (24, 25) .  The best candidates for chemoembolization 
are those with preserved liver function and asymptomatic multinodular tumors without vascular invasion or extrahepatic spread.  
The imp act of TACE on survival has been assessed through numerous prospective and 
retrospective studies.  Two recently published randomized prospective clinical trials have 
shown a statistically significant survival advantage for TACE compared to symptomatic 
treatment.  The first trial, which utilized cisplatin, Lipiodol, and gelatin sponge particles in 80 
Asian patients, showed one -, two - and three -year survival rates of 57%, 31%, and 26% in 
treated patients compared to 32%, 11%, and 3% (respectively) in control patients treated with 
best available supportive care, giving a relative risk of death of 0.49 (C I, 0.29 -0.81)  (26).  A 
second trial performed in Europe also showed a survival benefit in highly selected patients using Lipiodol, doxorubicin, and gel foam (23 ).  A recent meta -analysis published by Llovet and 
Lo confirmed the findings of the two randomized trials and showed that chemoembolization 
provides significant survival benefit in a selected group of patients, namely those with good 
performance status (22).   Based on those and other studies, chemoembolization is currently the 
standard of care for patients with intermediate stage HCC and has been included since 2006 as 
part of the official guidelines for the treatment of patients with HCC (by the America n 
Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD), as well as the National Cancer Care Network (NCCN) and European Association of the Study of the Liver (EASL).  TACE has also been 
used with success in secondary unresectable hepatic malignancies.  
 
1.5 Lobar and Superselective TACE  
The lobar conventional TACE approach consists of the administration of chemotherapy and Lipiodol to via the left or right hepatic lobar branch followed by embolization.  As a 
consequence of this approach, a large region of the  liver is treated which would make it 
suitable for cases where there are multiple lesions within a lobe.  However, this technique was also correlated to a high serum concentration of the chemotherapeutic drug after 
administration, which compared unfavorably to an alternate form of treatment, the drug -
eluting bead TACE (DEBTACE).  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 14 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
While the lobar technique is still very much in use today, TACE protocols have been refined and 
new specialized protocols developed.  The superselective approach would advance the 
microcatheter further into the hepatic arterial branch afferent to the segment in which the 
tumor is located, or if possible the tip of the catheter will be further advanced into the subsegmental branches feeding the tumor, where chemotherapy will be admini stered followed 
by embolization.  In this manner, the chemotherapy is delivered in a more selective fashion, 
sparing more of the healthy liver parenchyma.  
Logistically, the superselective approach introduces new complexities including a lengthier operation  and being more technically demanding, but some studies have observed that the 
superselective approach may result a higher rate of complete tumor necrosis with small HCCs  in 
comparison to the lobar approach  (27-29).  In Golfieri’s study, tumor necrosis was  greater in the 
superselective arm vs the lobar arm (75.1% vs 52.8%), and complete tumor necrosis was observed in approximately two times more patients on the selective arm when compared to 
the lobar nonselective arm, which also resulted in a reduced need for further treatments (27).  
The damage to liver parenchyma and function was also reduced with the superselective 
approach, with less adverse events when compared to the nonselective TACE (28).  A 
superselective or subsegmental approach could also be performed in patients who may be 
contraindicated for conventional nonselective TACE due to severe cirrhosis and risk of serious 
ischemic complications (30,  31).  Given the reduced adverse event profile of the subsegmental 
approach and the selective nature of t reatment,  it is conjectured that the serum doxorubicin 
concen tration would also be decreased.  
 
1.6 Transarterial Chemoembolization Safety Profile 
Generally, TACE is a well- tolerated procedure, although side effects are common.   Embolization 
of the liver ha s been performed for decades for a variety of indications and is well- tolerated.  
Embolization of solid organs causes a self -limited post -embolization syndrome in the majority 
of patients, consisting of varying degrees of pain, nausea, vomiting, and fever.   This is 
independent of chemotherapeutic drug use, reason for embolization (e.g. bleeding, tumor), and 
the organ treated (e.g. liver, kidney, spleen, uterus).  With current medical care (e.g. hydration, anti-emetic therapy, and pain control), post -emboliz ation syndrome is well- tolerated and 50% 
of patients can be discharged from the hospital the day after chemoembolization.  The average 
length of stay is 1.5 days.  Liver function is transiently affected with an increase in liver 
aminotransferase levels.  T hese values usually peak 3 -5 days after therapy and return to 
baseline levels by 10 -14 days after embolization.  There is no sustained degradation of liver 
function in properly selected patients who do not meet the well -established exclusion criteria 
for h epatic artery occlusion, even in the presence of cirrhosis ( 32).  Because most of the 
injected drug is retained in the liver, systemic toxicity is minimized, with little bone marrow 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 15 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
suppression.  The cumulative toxicity is far more limited than is experien ced with systemic 
chemotherapy, which requires protracted drug exposure for an indefinite period of time.  
Treatment related complications occur in approximately 10% of performed procedures, with 
mortality rate around 2% ( 33). 
Serious adverse events occur after approximately 5% of chemoembolization procedures.  The 
most common serious adverse events are liver abscess or liver infarction, which occur in 
approximately 2% of cases each.  The 30 -day mortality rate is 1% ( 34-36) (37). 
Constitutional symptoms: The post embolization syndrome consisting of transient abdominal pain, ileus, fever and malaise affects 60% to 80% of patients receiving TACE.  Prophylactic  
antibiotics are not routinely administered as the fever is a predictor of treatment response.  
This fever is a result of tumor necrosis initiated by the therapy.  
Gastrointestinal side effects and complications: Transaminases commonly rise 10 fold.  Patients may develop ischemic cholecystitis, hepatic abscess, or biliary strictur es.  Additionally, a 
minority of patients will develop nausea/vomiting and ascites.  
Endocrine complications: Some patients may develop symptomatic hypothyroidism as a result 
of retained iodine load.  
Hematologic complications: Some patients may develop a le ukemoid reaction.  Bone marrow 
toxicity is uncommon occurring in less than 4% of patients and includes neutropenia and 
thrombocytopenia.  A small cohort of patients has developed gastrointestinal hemorrhage as a result of TACE therapy.  
2. Study Objectives and  Endpoints  
2.1 Primary Objectives/Endpoints  
Doxorubicin pharmacokinetics will be performed on all 30 patients.  Peripheral blood will be 
sampled for doxorubicin concentrations just before the cTACE procedure at baseline, and then 
after cTACE at the following time points: 5 minutes, 10 minutes, 20 minutes, 40 minutes, 1 
hour, 2 hours, 4 hours, 24 hours, and 3 or 4 weeks post cTACE.  This will be used to construct a 
pharmacokinetic profile of doxorubicin/doxorubicinol to include:  
• Parameters of PK analy sis including peak of the plasma concentration  (Cmax), time of 
maximum concentration, and area under the concentration time -curve (AUC).  
• PK profiles for each patient will be correlated with toxicity and tumor burden (size of 
target lesion), BSA and gender.  
• Comparison of PK profile between lobar administration and superselective  
administration.  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 16 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
 
2.2 Secondary Objectives/Endpoints  
Feasibility : 
• Technical success of the cTACE procedure (technical failure is defined as the inability to 
administer the cTACE material, in which case the patient would be excluded from the 
study)  
• Dose of doxorubicin delivered  
Safety:  
• All toxicities assessed as being at least possibly related, up to the 3 -4 week follow -up 
visit (post cTACE) will be collected.  Toxicities will be analyz ed by descriptive statistics to 
show type, grade (NCI Common Toxicity Criteria v4.0), frequency and time from cTACE.  
 
3. Subject Selection  
3.1 Subject Selection  
Patients must have histologically, cytologically , or radiologically  confirmed liver dominant or 
liver only malignancy.  Patients must have an ECOG performance status of 0 -1 at study entry 
and maintain a Child -Pugh class of A -B without significant liver decompensation (see Tables 
below).  There must be measurable or evaluable disease that will be directly treated with intrahepatic therapy (as defined by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors [RECIST] 1.1).  
GRADE  ECOG PERFORMANCE STATUS  
0 Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction 
1 Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out 
work of a light or sedentary nature, e.g., light house work, office work  
2 Ambulatory and capable of all self -care  but unable to carry out any work activities; 
up and about more than 50% of waking hours  
3 Capable of o nly limited self-care ; confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking 
hours  
4 Completely disabled; cannot carry on any self -care ; totally confined to  bed or chair  
5 Death 
ECOG Performance Status : describes a patient’s functional level in terms of self -care  and 
physical activity . 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 17 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
 
 
Parameter  Points Assigned  
1 2 3 
Ascites  Absent Slight  Moderate  
Bilirubin, mg/dL  ≤ 2 2-3 > 3 
Albumin, G/dL  > 3.5  2.8-3.5 < 2.8  
Prothrombin Time     
Seconds over control  1-3 4-6 > 6 
INR < 1.7  1.8-2.3 > 2.3  
Encephalopathy  None  Grade 1 -2 Grade 3 -4 
 
Child -Pugh Classification of Liver Disease Severity:  Modified Child- Pugh classification of liver 
disease severity according to the degree of ascites, the plasma concentrations of bilirubin and 
albumin, the prothrombin time, and the degree of encephalopathy.  A total score of 5 -6 is 
considered grade A (well -compensated disease); 7 -9 is grade B (significant functional 
compromise); and 10 -15 is grade C (decompensated disease).  These grades correlate with one -
year and two -year percent survival; grade A –  100 and 85 percent; grade B –  80 and 60 percent; 
and grad e C –  45 and 35 percent, respectively.  
 
3.2 Inclusion Criteria 
Inclusion criteria as follows:  
1. Patient’s age is  ≥ 18 years . 
2. Histologically, cytologically, or radiologically confirmed liver dominant or liver only 
malignancy.  
3. Preserved liver function (Child -Pugh A -B class) without significant liver 
decompensation.  
4. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 -1 at study 
entry.  
5. Measurable or evaluable disease that will be directly treated with intrahepatic 
therapy (as defined by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors [RECIST] 1.1).  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 18 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
6. Suitable for TACE, based on blood parameters such as platelet count, bilirubin, and 
international normalized ratio.  
7. May be enrolled with a history of prior liver directed chem oembolization  if 
chemoembolization  to the target lesion occurred > 1 year prior to enrollment date.   
TACE  to different targets within 1 year  prior to enrollment date , radioembolization  
to target location , or other form of intra -arterial therapy will not ex clude subjects . 
 
3.3 Exclusion Criteria 
Exclusion criteria as follows:  
1. Serum total bilirubin > 3.0 mg/dL.  
2. Creatinine > 2.0 mg/dL  
3. Platelets < 50000/ µL 
4. Complete portal vein thrombosis with reversal of flow . 
5. Ascites (trace ascites on imaging is acceptable) . 
 
3.4 Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
All patients, regardless of sex or ethnicity, presenting for cTACE for primary or secondary liver 
cancer will be reviewed for study eligibility.   For participants who are not fluent in spoken or 
written English, interpreter services will be available both during the informed consent process 
and during the subject’s participation as needed.   A translated short form consent will be 
provided.  
4. Subject  Registration Procedures  
4.1 General Guidelines  
All patients would be seen for an initial visit  at the Interventional Radiology clinics , where a 
clinician would present all treatment options.  If the patient expresses an interest in the study, 
a member of the study team designated to consent patients would discuss the protocol in 
greater detail explaining the risks and benefits of the study, and obtain informed consent from 
the patient or a legally acceptable representative.  Imaging, laboratory results, an d medical 
history will be used as part of the screening process to determine the patient’s eligibility for the study.  
4.2 Registration Process  
Patients consented for the study will be registered with OnCore, Yale’s Clinical Trials 
Management System, and be  assigned a study identifier and counted for the final data analysis.  
Patients’ progress while on the study will be managed via OnCore.  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 19 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
4.3 Screening Assessments  
Assessment completed in the initial clinic visits (pre -consent), as part of standard of care 
assessments, may be used as part of the study screening assessment.  
• Detailed medical history including previous cancer history and cancer treatment.  Any 
additional relevant medication taken one year prior to study start will also be recorded.  
• History and physical exam (including vital signs, ECOG -PS assessment, height, weight) 
within 30 days of cTACE.  
• Chemistry panel: Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) , alanine aminotransferase ( ALT), 
bilirubin (total and direct), alkaline phosphatase  (AP), total protein, al bumin, calcium, 
phosphate, glucose, creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN).  
• Electrolyte panel: sodium, potassium, chloride.  
• Complete blood count: hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelet count, white blood cell count 
(WBC).  WBC should include differential neutrophil, lymphocyte, monocyte, basophil, 
and eosinophil counts.  
• Prothrombin time and INR.  
• Appropriate tumor marker: alpha feto -protein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 
CA 19 -9, etc.  
• Serum or urine pregnancy test for women of childbearing potential  (must be negative)  
• Contrast enhanced MRI of the liver within 30 days of treatment.  A CT may be used if a 
MRI would be improbable to obtain.  
 
5. Study Design/Investigational Plan  
5.1 Overall Design  
The study is a single site, prospective study, designed to measure the PK of doxorubicin and its 
metabolite doxorubicinol at various timed intervals after cTACE in patients with primary or 
metastatic liver cancer.   
Up to 30 patients will be enrolled that meet study entry criteria; approximately 15 with primary liver cancer and 15 with secondary liver cancer.  Up to 40 patients may be consented if 
necessary in order to enroll these 30 patients , to account for potential patients who screen- out 
or who are una ble to complete sample collection for t he PK (80% of planned draws).  15 
patients will be enrolled into the lobar cTACE arm and 15 patients will be enrolled into the superselective cTACE arm.   The assignment of the treatment arm will be determined by the P I 
or a designated radiologist after review of the patient’s imaging and history.  
The study is planned to complete enrollment in two years, with another month to conclude 
patient follow -up. 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 20 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
5.1.1 Routine Care Procedures  
Patients will undergo cTACE according  to the standa rd of care hospital protocol. Depending on 
the assigned treatment arm, a lobar or superselective cTAC E procedure will be performed.  
To perform the superselective TACE technique, the tumor -feeding arteries will be catheterized 
with a coaxial microcatheter passed through a 5 -Fr catheter previously placed either the right 
or left hepatic artery.  The tip of the microcatheter will be placed into the hepatic arterial 
branch afferent to the segment in which the tumor is located, or if possible the tip of the 
catheter will be further advanced into the subsegmental branches feeding the tumor.  After the microcatheter placement, the chemotherapy mixture will be injected under fluoroscopy, 
followed by injection of 1% lidocaine and 100 -300 micron embosphe res. 
Nonselective lobar TACE will consist of injection of the same chemotherapy materials used in 
the superselective procedures into the right or left lobar branches.  
The amount of chemoembolization material administered is titrated to the area being treat ed, 
i.e., a smaller area (lesion) may be adequately treated with a portion of the prepared 
chemoembolization material.  The chemoembolization material consists of 10cc of 
chemotherapy, with 50 mg doxorubicin and 10 mg of mitomycin -C mixed 1:1 with Lipiodol 
(approximately 10cc) giving a total of approximately 20cc.  After the chemotherapy is administered, approximately 10cc of 1% lidocaine and 1 -2 vials  of embospheres measuring 100 -
300 microns are injected.  The amount of 1% lidocaine and embospheres is titr ated to each 
clinical situation.  
Intra -arterial chemotherapy materials:  
• 10 cc of chemotherapy, with 50 mg doxorubicin and 10 mg of mitomycin- C mixed 1:1 
with Lipiodol (approximately 10cc) giving a total of approximately 20 cc.  
• 10 cc of 1% lidocaine  
• 1-2 vials of embospheres measuring 100 -300 microns  to achieve angiographic end -point 
of 2-5 heart beats to clear the contrast column.  
Following the chemoembolization procedure, the patient is admitted for observation, pain 
control, and hydration, and is discharge d home once they are stable.  The day after the TACE 
procedure, a non -contrast CT scan is performed to document the deposition of the Lipiodol.  
Follow -up imaging, labs, and clinical assessment are done 3 -4 weeks following the cTACE 
procedure.  
 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 21 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
5.1.2 Research Procedures  
Based on previous methodology utilized in our research trial J1306 at Johns Hopkins and other 
TACE trials, venous blood will be sampled for doxorubicin concentrations just before the cTACE 
(pre-) and then repeatedly after cTACE at the following time points: 5 minutes, 10 minutes, 20 
minutes, 40 minutes, 1 hour, 2 hours, 4 hours, 24 hours, and 3 -4 weeks post cTACE.   Data will 
be collected and recorded on the Doxorubicin PK Worksheet.  
Instructions for processing PK samples : 
Blood samples will be collected in a heparinized tube (6 mL) from subjects at the time 
points on the study collection calendars (baseline, 5, 10, 20, 40 min, 1, 2, 4, 24 hours, 3 -
4 weeks).  Blood samples will be centrifuged at 1000x g (or 3000 rpm) for 10 minutes at 4
oC and stored frozen at -20oC or below until analyzed.  The samples will be analyzed for 
total plasma doxorubicin and doxorubicinol at the Analytical Pharmacology Laboratory 
at the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins.  
Shipment of PK samples:  
Samples will be kept at the study site and periodically during the study shipped to the APC Laboratory.  Unless otherwise stated, samples will be shipped to the Johns Hopkins SKCCC Analytical Pharmacology Core (APC) Laboratory under the direction of  Michelle A. Rudek, 
Pharm.D., Ph.D.  Specimens should be stored through the duration of the PK study and shipped as a batch.  A participant’s samples should be shipped to the APC lab within 3 months of the last 
sample’s collection date.  (i.e., if C1D1 sample is collected on 1/1/2016, all of the participant’s 
samples should be at the APC lab by 4/1/2016).  If another set of participant samples can be batched by waiting up to 2 weeks (i.e., 3.5. months), this deviation is allowed.  
Samples will be shipped wit h a copy of the Doxorubicin PK Worksheet to the APC laboratory.  
Overnight shipments should occur on Monday through Wednesday  (Tuesday  is the preferred 
day) except when the following day is a holiday.  A fax or call should be placed to the Analytical Pharmacology Core Laboratory prior to shipment providing the shipment tracking information.  
Samples should be shipped on dry ice to:  
Analytical Pharmacology Core Laboratory  
Attn: Geschwind /Schlachter cTACE doxorubicin Study Samples  
1650 Orleans St. CRB1 Rm 184  
Baltimore, MD 21231 -1000  
Phone: 410 -502-7192 or 410- 955-1129  
Fax: 410 -502-0895  
 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 22 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
5.2 Visit Schedule and Study Evaluation  
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
Total 30 patients (up to 40 consented) , approximately 15 with HCC and 15 
with secondary liver cancer (range: 8 -20): Obtain informed consent, 
screen potentials subjects by inclusion and exclusion criteria, register 
eligible participants , obtain MRI imaging and labwork if not already 
completed.  
Assignment into lobar or 
superselective arm based on 
imaging and history  
Lobar arm:  
15 subjects (8 -20) 
Superselective arm: 
15 subjects (8 -20) 
PK baseline blood draw performed prior to cTACE.  
cTACE procedure, lobar vs superselective approach as assigned.  
PK blood draws at: 5, 10, 20, 40 min, 1, 2, 4 hours after cTACE.  
PK blood draw 24 hours after cTACE.  
Standard of care non -contrast abdomen CT to ensure Lipiodol administration.  
Standard of care clinical followup, H&P, labwork, MRI or CT imaging.  
PK blood draw at 3 -4 weeks.  
Screening  
Day 0  
Day 1  
Day 21 -28 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 23 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
Please see appendices for additional study calendar.  
5.3 Duration of Therapy  
There will be one cTACE procedure performed at baseline, done as standard of care.  PK blood 
sampling will continue until the 3 -4 week time point.  
5.4 Duration of Follow -up 
Patients will return 3 -4 weeks after the cTACE for clinic visit, H&P, laboratory tests, and new 
imaging as part of standard of care.  The final PK blood sample will be drawn at this time.  
5.5 Criteria for Removal from Study  
A study pa rticipant may be removed from the study for any of the following reasons:  
• At the request of the patient or a representative, i.e., withdrawal of consent.  
• Patient falls out of eligibility criteria  
• Technical failure of the cTACE procedure  
• Use of illicit drug s or other substances that may, in the opinion of the investigator, 
contribute to toxicity  
• The patient is lost to follow -up 
• Death 
 
6. Adverse Event Collection and Reporting Requirements  
6.1 Definitions  
An Adverse Event (AE) is defined as any new untoward medical occurrence or worsening of a 
pre-existing medical condition in a patient and that does not necessarily have a causal 
relationship with this treatment.  An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign 
(including abnormal laboratory findin g, for example), symptom, or disease temporally 
associated with the treatment.  
A Serious AE (SAE) is an untoward medical occurrence that at any dose produces any of the following outcomes:  
• Results in death;  
• Is life threatening (defined as an event in which  the subject was at risk of death at the 
time of the event; it does not refer to an event which hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe):  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 24 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
• Requires inpatient hospitalization or causes prolongation of existing hospitalization (see 
NOTE below for exceptions);  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity;  
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect ; 
• Is an important medical event (defined as a medical event(s) that may not be 
immediately life -threatening or result in death or hospita lization but, based upon 
appropriate medical and scientific judgment, may jeopardize the subject or may require 
intervention [e.g., medical, surgical] to prevent one of the other serious outcomes listed in the definition above).  Examples of such events include, but are not limited to: 
intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm; blood 
dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in hospitalization.  
NOTE:  
The following hospitalizations are not considered SAEs:  
• Admissions as  per protocol for a planned medical/surgical procedure;  
• Routine health assessment requiring admission for baseline/trending of health status 
(e.g., routine colonoscopy);  
• Medical/surgical admission for purpose other than remedying ill health state and was planned prior to entry into the study.  Appropriate documentation is required in these 
cases;  
• Admission encountered for another life circumstance that carries no bearing on health status and requires no medical/surgical intervention (e.g., lack of housing, economic 
inadequacy, care -giver respite, family circumstances, administrative).  
 
6.2 Adverse Event Coding  
CTCAE term (AE description) and grade: the descriptions and grading scales found in the revised 
NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CT CAE) version 4.0 will be utilized for all 
AE reporting.  
6.3 Adverse Event Capture and Reporting  
Risks  associated with the research procedures are expected to be minimal, and are involved 
with the drawing of blood and the placement of the IV catheter (second sheath).  They include pain, bruising, swelling and bleeding when the catheter is placed.  There is also a risk of 
infection at the IV site, and very rarely, nerve damage.  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 25 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
Adverse Events are collecte d through 3 -4 weeks post cTACE and documented for each  patient 
on the AE case report form (CRF).  The AEs are transcribed onto a study -specific electronic AE 
log which is reviewed regularly by the PI and is available for the IRB and monitoring committees 
for review.  
Study deviations (protocol deviations: PDs)  are collected and reported in the same way as the 
AEs are managed.  PDs are collected through 3 -4 weeks post cTACE , and documented on CRFs  
and into PD electronic logs, which are reviewed regularly by the PI and available for IRB and monitoring committees for review.  
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects and Others  (UPIRSOs) that may require a 
temporary or permanent interruption of study activities will be reported immediately (if possible), followed by a written report within 5 calendar days o f the Principal Investigator 
becoming aware of the event to the IRB (using the appropriate forms from the website) and 
any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies.  The investigator will apprise fellow 
investigators and study personnel of all UPIRSOs a nd adverse events that occur during the 
conduct of this research project via email as they are reviewed by the PI.  The Cancer Center 
Protocol Review Committee (PRC), Yale Cancer Center Data and Safety Monitoring Committee 
(DSMC), study sponsor, funding and regulatory agencies will be informed of serious adverse 
events within 5 days of the event becoming known to the P rincipal Investigator.  
7. Statistical Methods  
7.1 Primary Outcome Variable 
Pharmacokinetic profile of doxorubicin and doxorubicinol  after cTACE for each patient:  
• Parameters of PK analysis including peak of the plasma concentration (C max), time of 
maximum concentration, and area under the concentration time -curve (AUC).  
• PK profiles for each patient will be correlated with toxicity and tumor burden (size of 
target lesion), BSA and gender.  
• Comparison of PK profile between lobar administration and superselective 
administration.  
7.2 Secondary Outcome Variables  
Feasibility : 
• Technical success of the cTACE procedure (technical failure is defin ed as the inability to 
administer the cTACE material, in which case the patient would be excluded from the study)  
• Dose of doxorubicin delivered  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 26 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
Safety:  
• All toxicities assessed as being at least possibly related, up to the 3 -4 week follow -up 
visit (post cTA CE) will be collected.  Toxicities will be analyzed by descriptive statistics to 
show type, grade (NCI Common Toxicity Criteria v4.0), frequency and time from cTACE.  
7.3 Statistical Plan  
Up to 40 patients may be consented in order to enroll 30 patients, and to account for patients 
who are unable to complete sample collection for the PK (80% of planned draws).  15 patients 
will be enrolled into the lobar cTACE arm and 15 patients will be enrolled into the 
superselective cTACE arm.  
We have assumed a clinically significant change in doxorubicin exposure would be 50%.  In order to have 80% power to detect a 50% change with a 5% α , the sample size varies depending 
on the variability noted with TACE therapy.  In the Varella trial utilizing cTACE with a Lipiodol doxorubicin formulation, the variability was reported as 30% Coefficient of Variation (CV).  In 
our recent trial (J1306) utilizing TACE with a Drug Eluting Bead (DEB) doxorubicin formulation, 
the variability was reported as 90% CV.  We anticipate the Lipiodo l formulation to behave more 
like the Varella trial with 15 patients allowing for slightly higher variability.  
*%CV  30%  43%  90%  
Expected Sample Size  8 15 58 
*Methodology/calculator accessed from the websites below on 11/6/2014:  
https://www.statstodo.com/SSizBioequiv_Tab.php  
https://www.statstodo.com/SSizBioequiv_Pgm.php#  
 
Continuous variables will be reporte d as means and standard deviations, medians and ranges, 
or both.  Categorical variables will be reported as numbers and percentages.  Pharmacokinetic 
parameters will be calculated by standard noncompartmental methods using Phoenix 
WinNonlin 6.1 (Pharsight,  Mountain View, CA) for each patient.  Pharmacokinetic parameters 
will be summarized using descriptive statistics.  
Comparisons of the pharmacokinetic profiles between the lobar cTACE group and the superselective cTACE group will be performed using the Mann- Whitney U test.  Correlations 
between pharmacokinetic profiles and clinical toxicities will be performed using the Kruskal-Wallis one -way ANOVA test.  Correlations between the pharmacokinetic profiles and tumor 
burden will be performed with the Spearman’s  correlation coefficient.  A P value < 0.05 will be 
considered statistically significant in all cases.  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 27 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
Interim analysis :  
After the 16th patient has completed the study, including approximately 8 in each cTACE arm, 
the PK parameters will be measured for each patient in order to formally review the 
accumulated data and to inform the investigators whether any protocol modifications need to 
be made.  
7.4 Early Stopping Rules  
Not applicable for this study.  
8. Regulatory Considerations  
8.1 Data and Safety Monitoring  Plan  
This study is expected to be of minimal risk, and as such, will follow the guidelines for a minimal 
risk DSMP.  The principal investigator is responsible for monitoring the data, assuring protocol 
compliance, an d conducting the safety reviews .  Durin g the review process the principal 
investigator will evaluate whether the study should continue unchanged, require 
modification/amendment, or close to enrollment.   An internal monitoring plan will be 
established with the YCC to facilitate this process, and  the study will be reviewed annually at 
minimum.  
The principal investigator, the Institutional Review Board (IRB), Yale Cancer Center Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) have the authority to stop or suspend the study or 
require modifications.  
This protocol presents minimal risks to the subjects and Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks 
to Subjects and Others (UPIRSOs), including adverse events , are not anticipated.  In the unlikely 
event that such events occur, Reportable Events (which are events that are serious or life -
threatening and unanticipated (or anticipated but occurring with a greater frequency than expected) and possibly, probably, or definitely related) or U nanticipated Problems Involving 
Risks to S ubjects or Others that may require a temporary or permanent interruption of study 
activities will be reported immediately (if possible), followed by a written report within 5 
calendar days of the Principal Investigator becoming aware of the event to the IRB ( using the 
appropriate forms from t he website) and any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies.  The 
investigator will apprise fellow investigators and study personnel of all UPIRSOs and adverse events  that occur during the conduct of this research project via email as they are reviewed  by 
the PI.  The  Cancer Center Protocol Review Committee (PRC), Yale Cancer Center Data and 
Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC), study sponsor , funding and regulatory agencies will be 
informed of serious adverse events within 5 days of the event becoming known to the principal 
investigator.  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 28 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
 8.2 Case Report Forms  
As used in this protocol, the term case report form (CRF) refers to a paper form.  A CRF is 
required and should be completed for each included subject.  
The investigator has ultimate responsibility f or the accuracy, authenticity, and timely collection 
and reporting of all clinical, safety, laboratory data entered on the CRFs and any other data 
collection forms.  
All CRFs must be signed by the investigator to verify that the data contained on the CRFs i s 
accurate.  Any corrections to entries made in the CRFs and source documents must be dated, 
initialed, and explained (if necessary) and should not obscure the original entry.  
Usually, source documents are the hospital’s or the physician’s subject medical chart.  In these instances the data collected on the CRFs must match the data in the corresponding charts.  A 
CRF, or part of the CRF, may also serve as a source document.  
Electronic master logs of all adverse events and protocol deviations will also be re corded and 
kept in an encrypted database with access only available to study team members.  An individual 
physical paper CRF will also be kept with the patient’s research binder.  
 
8.3 Record Retention  
To enable inspections and/or audits from regulatory aut horities, the investigator agrees to keep 
records, including the identity of all participating subjects (i.e. information to link records, e.g., CRFs and hospital records), all original signed informed consent forms, copies of all CRFs, 
serious adverse eve nt forms, source documents, and detailed records of treatment disposition, 
and adequate documentation of relevant correspondence (e.g., letters, meeting minutes, 
telephone calls reports).  The records should be retained by the investigator according to the  
IRB’s policies or the FDA’s regulations, whichever is longer but for a minimum of 5 years.  
If the investigator is unable for any reason to continue to retain study records for the required 
period (e.g., retirement, relocation), the study records must be t ransferred to a designee 
acceptable to the investigator such as another investigator or another institution.  
9. Ethics  
9.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB)  
It is the responsibility of the investigator/sponsor to have prospective approval of the study protocol , protocol amendments, informed consent forms, and other relevant documents, e.g., 
recruitment advertisements, if applicable, from the IRB.  All IRB correspondence should be retained in the Investigator File.  
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 29 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
9.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study  
The study will  be conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki on Ethical Principles 
for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects, adopted by the General Assembly of the World 
Medical Association (1996).  In addition, the study will be conducted in accordance with the 
protocol, the International Conference on Harmonization guideline on Good Clinical Practice, 
and applicable local regulatory requirements and laws.  
9.3 Subject Information and Consent  
All parties will ensure protection of subject personal data and will not include subject names on 
any reports, publications, or in any other disclosures, except where required by laws.  
The informed consent form must be in compliance with ICH GCP, local regulatory requirements, 
and legal requirements.  
The informed c onsent form must be used in this study, and any changes made during the 
course of the study must be prospectively approved by the IRB before implementation.  
The investigator must ensure that each subject, or his/her legally acceptable representative, is fully informed about the nature and objectives of the study and possible risks associated with 
participation.  The investigator, or a person designated by the investigator, will obtain written informed consent from each subject or the subject’s legally accep table representative before 
any study -specific activity is performed.  The investigator will retain the original of each 
subject’s signed consent form.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 30 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
10. References  
 
1. Lammer J, Malagari K, Vogl T, et al.  Prospective randomized study of doxorubicin-
eluting -bead embolization in the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma: results of the 
PRECISION V study.  Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol .  2010 Feb; 33(1): 41- 52. 
2. Vogl TJ, Lammer J, Lencioni R, et al.  Liver, gastrointestinal, and cardiac toxicity in 
intermediate hepatocellular carcinoma treated with PRECISION TACE with drug -eluting 
beads: results from the PRECISION V randomized trial.  AJR Am J Roentgenol .  2011 Oct; 
197(4): W562 -70. 
3. Lee KH, Liapi E, Ve ntura VP, et al.  Evaluation of different calibrated spherical polyvinyl 
alcohol microspheres in transcatheter arterial chemoembolization: VX2 tumor model in rabbit liver.  J Vasc Interv Radiol .  2008 Jul; 19(7): 1065 -9. 
4. Lee KH, Liapi EA, Cornell C, et al.   Doxorubicin -loaded QuadraSphere microspheres: 
plasma pharmacokinetics and intratumoral drug concentration in an animal model of liver cancer.  Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol .  2010 Jun; 33(3): 576 -82.  
5. Namur J, Wassef M, Millot JM, Lewis AL, Manfait M, Laurent A.  Drug -eluting beads for 
liver embolization: concentration of doxorubicin in tissue and in beads in a pig model.  J Vasc Interv Radiol .  2010 Feb; 21(2): 259 -67. 
6. Geschwind JF, Ramsey DE, Cleffken B, et al.  Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization of liver tumors: effects of embolization protocol on injectable volume of chemotherapy 
and subsequent arterial patency.  Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol .  2003 Mar -Apr; 26(2): 
111- 7. 
7. Georgiades CS, Hong K, D’Angelo M, Geschwind JF.  Safety and efficacy of transarterial 
chemoembolization in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma and portal vein thrombosis.  J Vasc Interv Radiol .  2005 Dec; 16(12): 1653 -9. 
8. Varela M, Real MI, Burrel M, et al.  Chemoembolization of hepatocellular carcinoma 
with drug eluting beads: efficacy and doxorubicin pharmacokinetics.  J Hepatol .  2007 
Mar; 46(3): 474 -81. 
9. El-Serag HB.  Hepatocellular carcinoma.  N Engl J Med.  2011 Sep 22; 365(12): 1118 -27. 
10. Bruix J, Sherman M, Llovet JM, et al.  Clinical management of hepatocellular carcinoma.  
Conclusions of the Barcelona -2000 EASL conference.  European Association for the 
Study of the Liver.  J Hepatol .  2001 Sep; 35(3): 421- 30. 
11. El-Serag HB, Mason AC.  Rising incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in the United 
States.  N Engl J Med.   1999 Mar 11; 340(10): 745- 50. 
12. Barbara L, Benzi G, Gaiani S, et al.  Natural history of small untreated hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: a multivariate analysis of prognostic factors of tumor growth rate 
and patient survival.  Hepatology .  1992 Jul;  16(1): 132- 7. 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 31 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
13. Modulation of fluorouracil by leucovorin in patients with advanced colorectal cancer: 
evidence in terms of response rate.  Advanced Colorectal Cancer Meta- Analysis Project.  
J Clin Oncol .  1992 Jun; 10(6): 896- 903.  
14. Watanabe S, Nishioka M, Oh ta Y, Ogawa N, Ito S, Yamamoto Y.  Prospective and 
randomized controlled study of chemoembolization therapy in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma.  Cooperative Study Group for Liver Cancer Treatment in Shikoku area.  Cancer Chemother Pharmacol .  1994; 33 Suppl: S93- 6. 
15. Sasaki Y, Imaoka S, Kasugai H, et al.  A new approach to chemoembolization therapy for hepatoma using ethiodized oil, cisplatin, and gelatin sponge.  Cancer .  1987 Sep 15; 
60(6): 1194 -203.  
16. Kanematsu T, Furuta T, Takenaka K, et al.  A 5 -year experience of lipiodolization: 
selective regional chemotherapy for 200 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.  
Hepatology .  1989 Jul; 10(1): 98- 102.  
17. Ensminger WD, Gyves JW.  Clinical pharmacology of hepatic arterial chemotherapy.  
Sem in Oncol .  1983 Jun; 10(2): 176- 82. 
18. Lin DY, Liaw YF, Lee TY, Lai CM.  Hepatic arterial embolization in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma— a randomized controlled trial.  
Gastroenterology .  1988 Feb; 94(2): 453 -6. 
19. Pelletier G, Roche A, Ink O, et al.  A randomized trial of hepatic arterial 
chemoembolization in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma.  J Hepatol .  
1990 Sep; 11(2): 181- 4. 
20. A comparison of lipiodol chemoembolization and conservative treatment for 
unresectable hepatoce llular carcinoma.  Groupe d’Etude et de Traitement du Carcinome 
Hépatocellulaire.  N Engl J Med.  1995 May 11; 332(19): 1256 -61. 
21. Bruix J, Llovet JM, Castells A, et al.  Transarterial embolization versus symptomatic 
treatment in patients with advanced hepat ocellular carcinoma: results of a randomized, 
controlled trial in a single institution.  Hepatology .  1998 Jun; 27(6): 1578 -83. 
22. Pelletier G, Ducreux M, Gay F, et al.  Treatment of unresectable hepatocellular 
carcinoma with lipiodol chemoembolization: a multicenter randomized trial.  Groupe 
CHC.  J Hepatol .  1998 Jul; 29(1): 129 -34. 
23. Lo CM, Ngan H, Tso WK, et al.  Randomized controlled trial of transarterial lipiodol 
chemoembolization for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma.  Hepatology .  2002 May; 
35(5): 1 164-71. 
24. Llovet JM, Real MI, Montana X, et al.  Arterial embolisation or chemoembolisation 
versus symptomatic treatment in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: a randomised controlled trial.  Lancet .  2002 May 18; 359(9319): 1734- 9. 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 32 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
25. Llovet J M, Bruix J.  Systematic review of randomized trials for unresectable 
hepatocellular carcinoma.  Chemoembolization improves survival.  Hepatology .  2003 
Feb; 37(2): 429 -42. 
26. Vetter D, Wenger JJ, Bergier JM, Doffoel M, Bockel R.  Transcatheter oily 
chemoembol ization in the management of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma in 
cirrhosis: results of a Western comparative study in 60 patients.  Hepatology .  1991 Mar; 
13(3): 427- 33. 
27. Golfieri R, Cappelli A, Cucchetti A, et al.  Efficacy of selective transarterial 
chem oembolization in inducing tumor necrosis in small (<5 cm) hepatocellular 
carcinomas.  Hepatology .  2011 May; 53(5): 1580 -9. 
28. Matsui O, Kadoya M, Yoshikawa J, et al.  Small hepatocellular carcinoma: treatment with subsegmental transcatheter arterial emboliza tion.  Radiology .  1993 Jul; 188(1): 79 -83. 
29. Dharancy S, Boitard J, Decaens T, et al.  Comparison of two techniques of transarterial chemoembolization before liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: a case -
control study.  Liver Transpl .  2007 May ; 13(5): 665- 71. 
30. Uchida H, Matsuo N, Sakaguchi H, Nagano N, Nishimine K, Ohishi H.  Segmental 
embolotherapy for hepatic cancer: keys to success.  Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol .  1993 
Mar- Apr; 16(2): 67- 71. 
31. Uchida H, Ohishi H, Matsuo N, et al.  Transcatheter hepatic segmental arterial 
embolization using lipiodol mixed with an anticancer drug and Gelfoam particles for 
hepatocellular carcinoma.  Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol .  1990 Jun -Jul; 13(3): 140- 5. 
32. Caturelli E, Siena DA, Fusilli S, et al.  Transcatheter arte rial chemoembolization for 
hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with cirrhosis: evaluation of damage to nontumorous liver tissue -long -term prospective study.  Radiology .  2000 Apr; 215(1): 
123- 8. 
33. Brown DB, Cardella JF, Sacks D, et al.  Quality improvement guidelines for transhepatic 
arterial chemoembolization, embolization, and chemotherapeutic infusion for hepatic 
malignancy.  J Vasc Interv Radiol .  2006 Feb; 17(2 Pt 1): 225- 32. 
34. Kim W, Clark TW, Baum RA, Soulen MC.  Risk factors for liver abscess formation  after 
hepatic chemoembolization.  J Vasc Interv Radiol .  2001 Aug; 12(8): 965 -8. 
35. Sakamoto I, Aso N, Nagaoki K, et al.  Complications associated with transcatheter 
arterial embolization for hepatic tumors.  Radiographics .  1998 May -Jun; 18(3): 605- 19. 
36. Solomon B, Soulen MC, Baum RA, Haskal ZJ, Shlansky -Goldberg RD, Cope C.  
Chemoembolization of hepatocellular carcinoma with cisplatin, doxorubicin, mitomycin -
C, ethiodol, and polyvinyl alcohol: prospective evaluation of response and survival in a 
U.S. popu lation.  J Vasc Interv Radiol .  1999 Jun; 10(6): 793- 8. 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 33 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
37. Brown DB, Fundakowski CE, Lisker- Melman M, et al.  Comparison of MELD and Child -
Pugh scores to predict survival after chemoembolization for hepatocellular carcinoma.  J 
Vasc Interv Radiol .  2004 Nov; 15(11): 1209- 18. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 34 of 36 
HIC #: 1506016008 
Todd Schlachter, MD  
11. Appendices  
Study Visit Calendar  
 Day -30 to 0 Day 0 (baseline)  Day 1  Day 21- 28 
Informed consent  X    
I/E criteria  X    
Medical history, H&P  X   X 
Serum/urine pregnancy test 
(if applicable)  X    
Blood chemistry, hematology/coagulation  X   X 
Tumor marker: AFP, CEA, CA 19-9, etc.  X   X 
MRI scan, contrast enhanced of the liver  X   X 
cTACE procedure   X   
Doxorubicin PK*   X X X 
Non -contrast CT abdomen  
(standard of care)    X  
*PK blood samples will be drawn at: baseline (pre -cTACE), 5, 10, 20, 40 min, 1, 2, 4, 24 hours, and at 3 -4 
week time points after cTACE.  
 
Version 4/20/ 2017   Page 35 of 36 