 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  1 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
STUDY INFORMATION  
 
Title of Project:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental Illness  
 
Principal Investigator:    
Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Division & Department: Psychiatry  
Contact Information:  732-235-4341, marc.steinberg@rutgers.edu   
 
 
PROTOCOL VERSION AND DATE:  V22 3/28/2022  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  2 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 1.0 Research Introduction   
 1.1 Purpose/Specific Aims   
 1.2 Research Significance   
 1.3 Research Design and Methods   
 1.4 Preliminary Data   
 1.5 Sample Size Justification   
 1.6 Study Variables   
 1.7 Drugs/Devices/Biologics   
 1.8 Primary Specimen Collection   
 1.9 Interviews, Focus Groups, or Surveys   
 1.10  Timetable/Schedule of Events   
 2.0 Project Management   
 2.1 Research Staff and Qualifications   
 2.2 Resources Available   
 2.3 Research Sites   
 3.0 Multi -Site Research Communication & Coordination   
 3.1 Outside Research   
 4.0 Research Data Source/s   
 4.1 Primary Data – Subjects and Specimens   
 4.2 Subject Selection and Enrollment Considerations   
 4.3 Subject Randomization   
 4.4 Secondary Subjects   
 4.5 Number of Subjects   
 4.6 Consent Procedures   
 4.7 Special Consent Populations   
 4.8 Economic Burden and/or Compensation  For Subjects   
 4.9 Risks to Subjects   
 4.10  Secondary Data – Record/Chart Reviews, Databases, Tissue Banks, Etc.   
 4.11  Chart/Record Review Selection   
 4.12  Secondary Specimen Collection   
 5.0 Special Considerations   
 5.1 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)   
 5.2 Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)   
 5.3 NJ Access to Medical Research Act   
 5.4 Code of Federal Regulations Title 45 Part 46 (Vulnerable Populations)   
 6.0 Research Data Protection and Reporting   
 6.1 Data Management and Confidentiality   
 6.2 Data Security   
 6.3 Data Safety And Monitoring   
 6.4 Reporting Results   
 6.5 Data Sharing   
 7.0 Data and/or Specimen B anking   
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  3 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
 8.0 Other Approvals/Authorizations   
 9.0 Bibliography   
 
1.0 Research Introduction  
 
1.1 Purpose/Specific Aims  
This study will test the feasibility and acceptability of a telehealth -delivered treatment designed to help smokers 
with s erious mental illness  to quit using a therapy  approach focused on increasing task persistence.  
A. Objectives  
We will test the feasibility, acceptability, and initial efficacy of our PTSC -S intervention  when delivered via 
telehealth.  
B. Hypotheses / Research Question(s)   
1. We hypothesize that  the PTSC -S intervention will be acceptable to participants, and the study 
will be feasible to conduct . 
 
2. As compared to baseline, participants will report greater task persistence as evidenced by 
reduced scores on the Thoughts About Smoking Questionnaire (TASQ).   
 
3. As compared to baseline, participants will report smoking fewer cigarettes per day at 1 - and 3 -
month follow -up. 
 
 
 
1.2 Research Significance  (Briefly describe the following in 500 words or less ): 
We created a treatment manual designed to help smokers with serious mental illness  to quit smoking, in part, by 
targeting deficits in the tendency to persist in difficult or frustrating ta sks (i.e., “task persistence”). While several 
measures of task persistence were not found to be significantly changed in the study, we detected a significant 
change (in the hypothesized direction) on a measure of thoughts likely to dampen task persistence as it relates to. 
Specifically, as hypothesized, scores on the Thoughts About Smoking Questionnaire (TASQ) showed significant 
decreases from baseline to the target quit date, t(16) = 7.753, p < 0.001, and maintained those significant decreases 
from baselin e to end -of-treatment, t(19) = 4.537, p < 0.001.  
 
In addition, we found that the intervention was feasible and understandable. Once we began providing 
transportation to our research participants, attendance exceeded our goal of 65% of participants attendin g at least 
6 of 8 treatment sessions. We also found that in response to the statement, “Overall, this treatment was easy to 
understand,” 68.8% of participants endorsed “7: Totally Agree” with an additional 18.8% endorsing “6: Agree very 
much” for a total o f 87.6% endorsing at least a 6 out of 7. In response to the statement, “Overall, this treatment was 
helpful,” 56.3% of participants endorsed “Totally Agree” with an additional 25% endorsing “Agree very much” for a 
total of 81.3% endorsing at least a 6 of 7 . 
 
1.3 Research Design and Methods  
Overview : We will evaluate the  feasibility and acceptability of our intervention (Persistence Targeted Smoking 
Cessation for Serious Mental Illness; PTSC -S) when delivered via telehealth in a single group, within -subjects design. . 
The purpose of this trial is to test the feasibility, acceptability, and initial efficacy of our PTSC -S intervention.  
A. Participant Recruiting and Screening:  The project will take place remotely via telehealth to reduce patient 
burden and travel difficulties. O ur Rutgers offices in New Brunswick, NJ,  are located in the building next to 
a large University Behavioral Health Care outpatient clinic that serves clients with serious and persistent 
mental illness . We will recrui t New Jersey resident smokers from Rutgers University Behavioral Health 
Care, from the community via our website , social media,  and local flyers, via Rutgers listservs , local 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  4 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
agencies or organizations who serve mental health consumers (i.e. CHOICES ; Serv B ehavioral Health 
Systems, Inc. ; George J. Otlowski, Sr. Center for Mental Health Care , Hunterdon Behavioral Health Care ), 
and ElevateU’s  Study Recruitment Platform  (more detailed information listed below under “ElevateU 
Recruitment”) . We will use IRB appr oved language from recruitment advertisements for electronic 
communication (i.e. listservs, newsletters, ect.) with approved study sites. Potential participants will call 
our offices for a telephone pre -screen  or fill out an interest form on Qualtrics that would be followed by a 
telephone pre -screen . If potentially eligible, they will be offered a more in -depth telehealth phone or video 
assisted  screening after providing informed consent. If all inclusion crite ria are met, they will be invited to 
participate. This is an urban area with a large low -income population and therefore a greater proportion 
of smokers than the average of 14.8% in the state of New Jersey.  Previous studies have given us the 
necessary exp erience with Rutgers listservs, websites, Craigslist, and use of flyers and brochures to 
maximize recruitment.  
 
ElevateU . ElevateU  is a pilot recruitment platform funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse. 
The purpose of the online platform is to match individuals with substance use disorders who wish 
to participate in research with researchers doing relevant substance use resea rch. The recruitment 
platform is currently in a pilot phase and there is therefore no fee or contractual agreement related 
to using this National Institute on Drug Abuse funded platform.  
 
Access to ElevateU’s recruitment platform https://moshemu.com/  is provided to researchers at no 
cost. Researchers may register and create an entry describing their research study on the Moshemu 
website for potentially interested individuals to view. ElevateU advertises online, at no cost to the 
research teams for res earch studies. Potential research participants who see the advertisement 
may choose to click on the advertisement link which will take them to a description of the study. If 
interested in that study, the potential research participant can “sign up” to be c ontacted by the 
research team via email and/or phone numbers.  
 
ElevateU, as part of this registration process, potential research participants may choose to 
voluntarily provide information related to health behaviors so they can be contacted in the future 
if they match with other relevant research studies. Providing this information is voluntary. The 
ElevateU platform is seen as providing minimal risk to participants who wish to enroll in studies 
because the website and registration/data storage process is similar to methods currently being 
used in people’s day to day lives. For example, people typically register on Facebook, Reddit, and 
online patient communities such as “Patients Like Me,” where they provide information about their 
health either through fr ee text conversations and/or responses to questions. This website will be 
using similar methods and therefore seen as minimal risk to participants.  
 
Furthermore, the primary method of identification will not be through name but through email 
address. Part icipants have the ability to create a new email address by creating a free email 
through tools such as gmail.com. Overall, we believe these methods involve minimal risk and have 
been used in a variety of IRB -approved studies by our team (e.g., UCLA and UC Irvine researchers) 
in the past.  
 
All information collected via ElevateU’s platform will be stored in an encrypted database. Two 
copies of the encryptions will be created with a passkey for each user (participant on the online 
recruitment platform) and for  each study that the user enrolls in. If the user opts into the study, a 
copy of their data becomes encrypted with a passkey of the study. It is therefore will only ever be 
accessible to the user themselves and to the manager of any study they enroll in.  
 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  5 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
 
Recruitment using ElevateU. ElevateU will advertise, at no cost to us, for the IRB approved study, 
Persist to Quit: Telehealth Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental Illness. Information about 
our IRB approved study will only be described in language consistent with already IRB approved 
study flyers. As noted above, potential participants who see the advertisement will have the option 
to click the link on the ad, read about the study, and opt -in to being contacted by IRB approved 
research staff if they  are interested in participating or learning more about our study.  
 
When a potential participant actively opts -in to being contacted, Dr. Steinberg’s Moshemu account 
will be notified. The research team will then have access to the contact information the p otential 
participant chose to provide. Dr. Steinberg’s team will be able to download a CSV file with the 
contact information and Dr. Steinberg will store this file on the secure HIPAA compliant Rutgers 
OneDrive folder.  
 
Study Procedures:  A trained research assistant (who will receive weekly and as -needed supervision 
from the principal investigator) will pre -screen potential participants on the phone, followed by a pre -
baseline tutorial regarding the required technology and assist with any troubleshooting needs.  A 
research assistant will meet with participants via telephone or telehealth video platform, obtain 
informed consent  via a HIPAA compatible survey platform (i.e., Red Cap  or Qualtrics ), and administer 
the baseline assessment battery  (see Assessment Measures table below). We will divide the baseline 
assessment battery into two sessions to minimize participant fatigue if necessary. Each baseline 
assessment session will last approximately 90 minutes.  
 
The research coordinator (who will receive weekly and as -needed supervision from the principal 
investigator) will screen participants at baseline using the SCID -RV for suicide risk exclusion criteria. If 
any participant indicates high levels of depression or suicidality, we will provide phone numbers and a 
recommendation to contact Rutgers University Behavioral Health Care or the Rutgers RWJMS 
Department of Psychiatry outpatient practice . In case of imminent suicide risk , a research staff member 
will call A cute Psychiatric Services (APS) at 855 -515-5700 with the research participant and the principal 
investigator will be contacted immediately.  
 
Questionnaires that are commonly used in tobacco dependence treatment studies will be used in the 
current study. Women of childbearing age will confirm in writing that they are not pregnant or nursing, 
not planning on becoming pregnant in the next three months, and that they are using effective birth 
control  if they are sexually active . Carbon monoxide (CO) levels (also commonly collected in tobacco 
dependence treatment studies) will be assessed with a personal carbon monoxide monitor that 
connects to one’s mobile device and CO reading in parts per million (ppm) will be recorded.  
 
Study  Intervention: We will  provide free, weekly individual telehealth video counseling sessions for 8 
weeks and 10 -weeks’ worth of the nicotine transdermal patch (an FDA -approved smoking cessation 
product available over the counter). All sessions will be video  recorded for treatment integrity and 
supervision.  
 
HIPAA compatible video platform : We will use Microsoft Teams for all assessment and telehealth  
counseling  appointments . If there are any problems connecting to Microsoft Teams, we will use 
Doxy.me or Zoom as a backup. Both Microsoft Teams , Doxy.me , and zoom  are HIPAA compatible 
platforms for telehealth services. A trained research assistant will meet with each participant  via 
Microsoft Teams (or via telephone ) if participant is unable to use the technology without any assistance  
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  6 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
to review technology, telehealth application, and assist with any technology issues prior to the 
beginning of assessment or  counseling.  
 
In the event we are unable to meet with a patient using telehealth  video services (e.g. because of 
internet connectivity issues ), we will provide counseling using the telephone . There is a strong 
literature supporting tobacco "QuitLines", proactive telephone coun seling and we would therefore still 
be providing treatment via an empirically supported format. We expect this will in the best interest of 
the patient as abruptly stopping treatment would be unethical.  
 
Emails : We may  create a Google account  email with a complex password for each research participant 
using their assigned ID number and short title of our study “ptscs”  (i.e. ID#ptscs@gmail.com ) if a 
participant does not have an email address to use . We will store this information using the HIPAA 
compliant Microsoft OneDrive cloud storage system  and may assist participants with their email as 
needed . No PH I will be transmitted via this email account. This email will be used to set up  the 
Smokerlyzer application for the iCO Smokerlyzer device, as the application requires an email to be sent 
to our research team with  the results of their breath test. We will ask our participants to not use this 
email account for communication outside of the research study to protect their confidentiality.  See 
section 1.7.2 for more on the iCO Smokerlyzer device.  
 
B. Data Points:  We will collect data at baseline, at the end of treatment, and at follow up at 3 -months post 
quit date.  
 
C. Duration:  Participants will be active in the stud y for approximately 4 months. We anticipate completing 
data collection activities within 32 months.  
 
D. Primary study endpoints  include baseline, at the end of treatment, and at follow up at 3 -months post quit 
date. We will assess AEs on a rolling basis and report them at DSMB meetings. We will conduct an interim 
analysis after 50% of the target enrollment has completed followup assessment.  
 
1.4 Preliminary Data  
Our pilot study (N=26) examining the PTSC -S intervention demonstrated that we could successfully follow -up this 
population (20 of 26 participants were reached at end -of-treatment). In addition, we demonstrated tha t our 
intervention engaged our target mechanism (i.e., task persistence). While there was no change in persistence on 
multiple measures, we did find that as hypothesized, scores on the Thoughts About Smoking Questionnaire (TASQ) 
showed significant decrease s from baseline to the target quit date, t(16) = 7.753, p < 0.001, and maintained those 
significant decreases from baseline to end -of-treatment, t(19) = 4.537, p < 0.001. These data indicate that our PTSC -
S intervention positively influenced cognitive aspe cts of our target mechanism, thus meeting milestone 1. More 
specifically, our intervention was able to positively influence cognitions likely to dampen task persistence.  
 
We also found that 57.7% of participants met our target of attending at least 6 of 8 sessions. Importantly, early in 
the study, we noticed that patients were having difficulty with transportation and therefore were missing many 
sessions. We therefore instituted a protocol in which we were able to provide transportation to the participants and 
this has increased participant attendance in treatment. When excluding the first 5 patients from the equation (those 
who did not have the benefit of transportation provided to them), we find that 66.7% of participants attended at 
least 6 of 8 of their PTSC -S treatment sessions.  
 
Finally, participants found the intervention to be easy to understand and helpful. In response to the statement, 
“Overall, this treatment was easy to understand,” 68.8% of participants endorsed “7: Totally Agree” with an 
additio nal 18.8% endorsing “6: Agree very much” for a total of 87.6% endorsing at least a 6 out of 7In response to 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  7 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
the statement, “Overall, this treatment was helpful,” 56.3% of participants endorsed “Totally Agree” with an 
additional  25% endorsing “Agree very m uch” for a total of  81.3% endorsing at least a 6 of 8.  
 
1.5 Sample Size Justification  
Based on data from the R21 phase of the study, we can expect a large effect (Cohen’s dz  = 1.28) of the intervention 
on task persistence as measured by the Thoughts About Smoking Questionnaire (TASQ). We detected a change in 
mean(SD) scores, in the predicted direction, from 4.371(1.0) at baseline to 3.218(1.1) at follow -up. An effect of dz = 
1.28 setting power at 80% and alpha at 0.05 suggests we need N = 6 participants in the within -subjects analysis to 
detect an effect (see Figure 1 below).  
Because effect sizes may be unstable at smaller sample sizes, we will be much more conservative and as sume an 
effect size of Cohen’s dz = 0.5 (consistent with a medium, rather than a very large effect size). Given a medium effect 
size, while setting power at 80% and alpha at 0.05, we will require N = 27 participants for this within -subjects design 
(see Fig ure 2 below). While we will impute baseline data where follow -up data are missing (i.e., assuming no 
improvement), we will also recruit additional participants to account for the possibility of up to 20% loss to follow -
up (i.e., 80% retention rate). We wil l therefore aim to recruit 34 additional participants to have N = 27 with complete 
data at follow -up after making the protocol changes described within this document . 
 
1.6 Study Variables  
A. Independent Variables, Interventions, or Predictor Variables  
We will provide 8 -weeks of free telehealth counseling to participants and 10 weeks of nicotine transdermal 
patch (an FDA -approved, over -the-counter medication).  
 
“Persistence -Targeted Smoking Cessation  in those with Serious Mental Illness  (PTSC -S)” is an 8-session, 
individual, smoking cessation counseling strategy that focuses heavily on using cognitive behavioral therapy 
targeted at disputing automatic thoughts that may reduce task persistence for smokers with serious mental 
illness . While disputing autom atic thoughts will be the focus of each session, skill building and support will 
also be included. Participants will be asked to complete homework assignments between sessions – 
including keeping a daily thought record to monitor automatic thoughts that ma y put them at risk for 
smoking. A daily thought record is a commonly used cognitive behavioral therapy homework assignment in 
which participants practice identifying and evaluating their thoughts. Participants will also track their daily 
cigarette use and nicotine patch use for homework.  
 
 
We will give participants a 10 -week supply of the nicotine transdermal patch (an FDA -approved, over -the-
counter medication) to be used starting two weeks prior to their Quit Date.  Although the nicotine patch 
is commercial ly available without a doctor’s prescription, Co -I Dr. Jill Williams (an addiction 
psychiatrist) will provide medical monitoring during this study. Consistent with the product insert, 
participants will be instructed to use one nicotine patch daily, and to apply it upon awakening at 
about the same time each day. Subjects will be instructed to vary the site of application of the 
patch daily to minimize any skin irritation. They will use the 21mg patch for the first 8 -weeks, then 
2-weeks of the 14mg patch.  
 
B. Dependent Variables or Outcome Measures   
Primary Outcome measures  
• We will measure prolonged abstinence with a 2 -week grace period following the target quit date 
until end -of-treatment and 3 -months post quit -date  
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  8 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
• We will measure feasibility using a  scale regarding how “useful” the intervention was, how 
acceptable the length of each session was, and how acceptable the number of counseling sessions 
offered was (with higher scores reflecting ratings of more useful and more acceptable).   
• Follow -up rate s of at least 80% at the 3 -month follow -up 
• Rates of missing/unusable data will be < 10% of all data collected  
Secondary Outcome measures:  
• 7-day point prevalence abstinence at end -of-treatment and 3 -months post quit -date  
• Percent abstinence days between the target quit -date and end -of-treatment and 3 -months post 
quit-date.  
• Task Persistence  
• Treatment attendance  
 
 
1.7 Drugs/Devices/Biologics  
1) Nicotine replacement therapy . The n icotine transdermal patch is an accepted , FDA approved  treatment for 
nicotine dependence . Nicotine patches are available over -the-counter (OTC)  without a prescription . Study 
participants will be provided with information by a research therapist  describing the proper use of the nicotine 
patch, including a desc ription of common side effects.  
 
A. Drug Accountability and Storage Methods  
▪ Storage and accountability.  We will store  any existing nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) in 
original packaging (box containing 2 -week supply) in locked cabinets in a room with locked doors 
at 317 George Street; Suite 105; New Brunswick, NJ. We will  document temperature of the room 
weekly using a min/max thermometer.  All future NRT orders will be directly shipped to 
participants.  
o Back Up Storage Site : In the event the storage room reaches a temperature near the 
maximum or minimum allowed temperature range, we will temporarily store  the 
medication at the Rutgers RWJMS Research Pharmacy located in the East Tower, 8th 
Floor, 125 Paterson Street in New Br unswick, NJ. We will continue to store the 
medication at the Research Pharmacy until our storage room temperature returns to 
the allowed range.  
 
Any time there is a transfer of  medication  between the research pharmacy and 
Addiction Psychiatry office , a trained research assistant will contact the pharmacy and 
arrange to drop off /pick up  the medication . We will document the transfer i n the in the 
medication  log. The research assistant will document their name, the date of the 
transfer, and the number of boxes  transferred.   
 
If the medication is stored at the pharmacy and the research therapist needs to 
dispense the medication  to a research participant , the research therapist will arrange 
with a research assistant to pick up the medication within the same day of the 
appointment  and document this in the medication log as described above.  
▪ Inventory.  A trained research assistant  will use an NRT inventory log to document the Lot # and 
Expiration date of each box of NRT.  After receiving the nicotine patch shipm ent, a research 
assistant will meet with the participant using telehealth video platform, asking the patient to 
show each  nicotine box’s  expiration date and lot number . This information will be documented 
in the inventory log.  
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  9 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
▪ Dispensing NRT.  We will purchase the 10 -week supply and ship the nicotine patches directly to 
each participant. We anticipate directly sending our participants the nicotine patches will reduce 
patient burden and travel difficulties. We will monitor the package tracking nu mber for delivery 
and confirm with participants via phone or telehealth service they have received the package. To 
protect the confidentiality of our participants, there will be no indication on the package that the 
participant is enrolled in a research st udy. After receiving the nicotine patch shipment, a research 
assistant will meet with the participant using telehealth video platform, asking the patient to 
show each  nicotine box’s  expiration date and lot number . This information will be documented 
in the  dispensing log. The research therapist with meet with the participants who  will be 
instructed to store unused nicotine patches at room temperature consistent with the packaging 
instructions. Consistent  with the product insert, participants will be instruc ted to use one 
nicotine patch daily, and to apply it upon awakening at about the same time each day. 
Participants will be instructed to vary the site of application of the patch daily to minimize any 
skin irritation. They will use the 21mg patch for the fi rst 8 -weeks, then 2 -weeks of the 14mg 
patch. We will not collect unused portions of the NRT because it is not common practice to 
specify a time limit by which participants are required to use the NRT.  Patients will receive  large 
stickers with the label “21 mg” or “14mg”. A  research assistant will watch patients put the correct 
sticker over the seal of the appropriate nicotine patch box to minimize chances that patients will 
open the wrong box.  
 
2) Carbon Monoxide Monitor.  We will use the  iCO™ Smokerlyzer  to measure carbon monoxide (CO) . The iCO 
Smokerlyzer  has an FDA regulatory classification of a General Wellness Device (GWD)  and therefore does not 
have a 510(k) number . The iCO™ Smokerlyzer® allows you to measure your breath CO levels to encou rage the 
user to make an informed decision about cutting down or stopping smoking to promote better general health, 
which is in line with the definition and intended use of a General Wellness Device ( GWD ). 
 
The iCO Smokerlyzer  works with iOS or android smartphone or tablet and in conjunction with their 
Smokerlyzer®App (available on Apple App Store & Google Play Store). Each participant will receive an iCO 
Smokerlyzer  and a computer tablet with the app loaded to the device. The iCO Smokerlyzer provides 
biofeedback in the form of a personal CO level immediately from a simple breath test.   
 
The patient is asked to hold their breath for a 15 second countdown. This is disp layed on the screen of the 
device. At the end of the breath hold, the patient blows gently into the ICO Smokerlyzer  expiring as much of the 
breath in their lungs as possible. The reading on the device shall rise until the peak reading is held on the displa y. 
After completing the breath test, participants will send  our research team the results, which are date and time 
stamped, from an email account we set up for them. The data itself are stored on the participants’ own mobile 
device and the data transmitted  via email will not contain any PHI. For more information about participant’s 
email accounts please reference 1.3.A.  
  
A. Device Accountability and Storage Methods  
▪ Storage and accountability.  We will store  the iCO Smokerlyzer devices  with  the study coordinator  
or Principal Investigator . We will document when each iCO Smokerlyzer devices are provided to 
participants.  
▪ A research assistant will provide instructions on how to use the iCO Smokerlyzer. The study PI is 
accountable for the device s. 
 
1.8 Primary Specimen Collection  
N/A 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  10 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
 
1.9 Interviews, Focus Groups, or Surveys   
We will conduct a semi -structured interview ( SCID -RV for DSM 5 - Modules  A, B, C , and D ; Suicidal Ideation and 
Suicide Attempt ) as part of the baseline assessment. This semi -structured interview is widely recognized as the gold 
standard for determining psychiatric diagnoses.  
 
If any participant indicates high levels of depression  or suicidality , we will provide phone numbers and a 
recommendation to contact Rutgers University Behavioral Health Care or the Rutgers RWJMS Department of 
Psychiatry outpatient practice.  In case of emergent suicidality a research staff member will call Acute Psychiatric 
Services (APS) at 855 -515-5700  with the research participant.  
 
A. Administration  
Participants will meet with a research assistant for a “pre -baseline” appointment technology tutorial for 
assistance with any troubleshooting needs.  Participants will then meet with a research assistant to provide 
electronic informed consent through HIPAA compatible survey platform, RedCap  or Qualtrics . Following 
consent, participants will complete a questionnaire battery that does not include PHI online via Qualtrics .  
▪ Timing and Frequency  
We will divide the baseline assessment battery into two sessions to minimize participant fatigue if 
necessary.  Each baseline assessment session will last approximately 90 minutes. We will then 
provide free, weekly individual counseling sessions for 8 weeks . Participants will complete an end 
of treatment assessment and a 3 -month post quit date assessment, each will last approximately 
60 min utes.  
▪ Location  
Participants will complete questionnaires and counseling sessions using a HIPAA compatible  
telehealth platform  (e.g. Microsoft Teams , Doxy.me , or zoom ) 
▪ Procedures for Audio and Visual Recording  
Participants will be asked permission to allow study staff to video record their intervention as part 
of the research study, by signing an addendum to the informed consent form. The recording(s) will 
be used for clinical supervision, to validate the integr ity of the counseling intervention, and 
potentially to later examine the relationship between what is said during the sessions and various 
clinical outcomes.  The recording(s) will include the participant ID number and date of the research 
appointment  and will automatically be stored within the Microsoft  Teams environment ( i.e., 
Microsoft  Streams) . If we were forced to use Doxy.me  or zoom  as a backup, recordings would be 
stored on password protected local computers, and the files would  then be encrypte d and moved 
to a HIPAA compatible network storage .  The files themselves will be password protected and 
encrypted using the Advanced Encryption Standard 256 method (AES -256). Files will be linked with 
each participant’s  ID number. Files will be destroyed 6  years after the protocol is closed.        
 
B. Study Instruments  
Concept  Measure  B/L  
Week 
4 Week 
8 3-mo. 
Post 
QD Weekly  
DEMOGRAPHICS  Demographics Questionnaire (includes National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey (NHANES) items)  X  
   
       
TOBACCO /SUBSTA
NCE  USE Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence (Heatherton et al., 1991)  X     
Timeline Followback (TLFB; Sobell & Sobell, 2000)    X X X 
Current Tobacco Use  X  X X X 
Expired Breath Carbon Monoxide (CO)  X  X X X 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  11 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
a Participants answering “yes” to any item listed under cardiovascular disorder on the “Medical History Form” will be 
reviewed by  an Addiction Psychiatrist for follow -up and approval for the study. The Addiction Psychiatrist will review 
this assessment and will be documented in the patient chart . The addiction psychiatrist will review any other items listed 
as "yes" on the "Medical History Form" , determine if follow up is needed,  and will be documented in the patient chart.  
 
Online Measures (Qualtrics)  Smoking History (Allen et al., 2019; NHANES)  X  X X  
Medicinal Cannabis  X  X X  
AUDIT -C X     
DAST -10 X     
Brief WISDM  (Smith et al., 2010 ) X     
       
CRAVING AND 
WITHDRAWAL  Wisconsin Smoking Withdrawal Scale (Welsch et al., 1999)  X  
X X  
       
MOTIVATION TO 
QUIT SMOKING  ICT – Change Measure (includes self -efficacy) (Miller & Johnson, 2008)  X  X   
Quitting Fatigue     X X  
Commitment to Quitting Smoking Scale (CQSS)  (Kahler et al., 2007 ) X  X   
       
TASK 
PERSISTENCE        
Breath -holding  X  X X  
Temperament and Character Inventory —Persistence Scale (TCI -P)  
(Cloninger, Przybeck, Svrakic, & Wetzel, 1994)  X  X X  
2-item Task Persistence Measure  (Steinberg et al., 2007)  X  X X  
Distress Tolerance Scale (DTS)  (Simons & Gaher, 2005 ) X  X X  
Discomfort Intolerance Scale (Schmidt, 2006)  x  x x  
Thoughts About Smoking Questionnaire  X  X X  
      
       
MENTAL HEALTH 
SYMPTOMS  Brief Experiential Avoidance Questionnaire  X  x x  
Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI)  (Derogatis & Melisaratos, 1983 ) X  X X  
Mental Health and Smoking  X  X   
SCID -RV for DSM 5 - Modules  A, B,  C , D, and Suicidal Ideation and 
Behavior  (First  et al., 2015)  X     
       
MEDICAL HISTORY  Medical History Forma X     
Pregnancy Form  X     
Baseline Medical Problems  X     
       
ADVERSE EVENTS  Adverse Event Tracking    x x x 
Adverse Event Specifics Log    x x x 
       COVID -19 COVID -19 Questionnaire  X     
SLEEP The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI ; Buysse , 1989).   X  X X  
TECHNOLOGY  Technical Glitches Questionnaire  
     X 
TELEHEALTH  Post -counseling questionnaire    x   
       
FEASIBILITY AND 
ACCEPTABILITY  Working Alliance Inventory – Short Revised (WAI -SR; Munder et al., 2010)   X    
Patient Satisfaction Survey      X 
Final Exit Interview    X   
Weekly Exit Interview      X 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  12 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
Demographics Questionnaire . This questionnaire includes primarily items from the National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES; (United States Department of Health and Human 
Services & Disease Control and Prevention, 2010) including items about a ge, race, and income.  
 
Smoking History . This questionnaire includes primarily items from the National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES; (United States Department of Health and Human Services 
& Disease Control and Prevention, 2010) . This self-report asks whether a participant relights 
cigarettes (Yes/No); i f subjects responded “Yes,” a follow -up question was asked to 
determine the number of cigarettes that were  relit (Allen et al., 2019) . 
 
Fagerström Test for Cigarette Dependence (FTCD; He atherton, Kozlowski, Frecker, & Fagerström, 
1991) . The FTCD is a commonly used, 6 -item questionnaire designed to measure dependence upon 
cigarettes.  
 
Brief Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives (WISDM; Smith et al., 2010).  The Brief 
WISDM is a 37-item, theoretically derived measure of tobacco dependence measuring a variety of 
smoking motives. Respondents rate each item on a scale ranging from ranging from 1 = Not true 
of me at all to 7 = Extremely true of me.  
 
Wisconsin Smoking Withdrawal Scale (WSWS; (Welsch et al., 1999).  The WSWS is a 28 -item scale 
developed to contain reliable subscales tapping the major symptom elements of the nicotine 
withdrawal syndrome. There are 7 subscales: anger, anxiety, sadness, concentration, sleep, 
hunger, and crav ing. Respondents rate each statement on a scale ranging from 0 (strong disagree) 
to 4 (strongly agree).  
 
ICT – Change Measure (Miller & Johnson, 2008).  This measure asks participants to rate their 
perception of importance of quitting and confidence in quit ting on a 10 -point Likert -type scale 
from 0=Definitely Not to 10 = Definitely.  
 
Quitting Fatigue.  Quitting fatigue will be measured with a single Likert -scale item ranging from 0 
(Not true of me at all) to 10 (Extremely true of me) in response to the state ment, “I am tired of 
trying to quit smoking.”  
 
Commitment to Quitting Smoking Scale (CQSS; Kahler et al., 2007) . The CQSS measures motivation, 
or “commitment” to quitting smoking with eight Likert scale items with response options ranging 
from 1 = strongly  disagree to 5 = strongly agree.  
 
Thoughts About Smoking Questionnaire.  The Thoughts About Smoking Questionnaire is a 1 4-item 
scale that was developed by the PI to examine cognitions related to smoking that were likely to 
decrease persistence towards the goal of quitting. Respondents rate items from 1 -7 (Totally 
Disagree to Totally Agree).  
 
Temperament and Character Inventory —Persistence Scale (TCI -P; Cloninger, Przybeck, Svrakic, & 
Wetzel, 1994). This subscale examines the trait of task persis tence in 8 True/False items.  
 
2-item Task Persistence Measure (Steinberg et al., 2007).  This 2 -item scale measures task 
persistence via a 4 -choice Likert scale (Very True to Very Untrue)  
 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  13 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
Distress Tolerance Scale  (DTS; Simons & Gaher, 2005) . 15-item scale used to assess 
participants’ perception of their ability to tolerate mental distress. Items (e.g. “I can’t 
handle feeling distressed or upset”) answered on 5 -point Likert -type scales ranging from 
(1) strongly agree to (5) strongly disagree evaluate p articipants’ ability to experience and 
endure negative emotional states and includes scales that assess appraisal, tolerance, 
absorption, and regulation. This scale contains good psychometric properties, including 
high internal consistency.  Because six of these items are included in the DII, below, this 
measure will be comprised of nine items.  
 
Distress Intolerance Scale  (DIS; Schmidt, 2006 ). 5-item measure on which participants indicate, on 
a 7-point Likert -type scale (0 = not at all like me to 6 = extremely like me), the degree of agreement 
towards statements related to their tolerance of discomfort  
 
COVID -19 Questionnaire . This questionnaire includes q uestions from the Coronavirus Stressor 
Survey ( McLean & Cloitre, 2020 ) and relationship between th e coronavirus and smoking.  
 
Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI; Derogatis & Melisaratos, 1983).  The BSI is  a self -report instrument 
assessing severity of psychiatric symptoms.  
 
Breath -holding.  We will document time in seconds that participants can hold their br eath as a 
measure of task persistence. Participants will raise their hand when the experience begins to 
become uncomfortable and the total persistence score will be the time (in seconds) bewteen when 
they indicate discomfort and when they release their bre ath. 
 
Medical History Form.  We developed this form to collect brief medical information to assist in 
confirming eligibility for this study.  
 
Inclusion Exclusion Criteria Form. We developed this form to confirm eligibility for this study.  Part 
one includes criteria from the initial phone screen. Part two includes risk assessment information 
from the baseline assessment.  
 
Technical  Glitches Questionnaire . We developed this form to collect brief feedback about any 
technology issues related t o telehealth.  This brief questionnaire is completed by therapists, rather 
than participants to assess intervention feasibility.  
 
The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI; Buysse , 1989 ). Measure the quality and patterns of 
sleep. It differentiates “poor” fr om “good” sleep by measuring seven domains: subjective sleep 
quality, sleep latency, sleep duration, habitual sleep efficiency, sleep disturbances, use of sleep 
medication, and daytime dysfunction over the last month. The client self -reports each of these 
seven areas of sleep on a 0 to 3 scale, whereby 3 reflects the negative extreme on the Likert Scale.  
A global sum of “5”or greater indicates a “poor” sleeper.  
 
Post -counseling questionnaire.  We developed this form to collect feedback from participants 
based on their experience with telehealth counseling.  
 
Working Alliance Inventory – Short Revised (WAI -SR; Munder et al., 2010) .  The Working Alliance 
Inventory‐Short Revised (WAI‐SR) is a 12‐item measure for the assessment of the therapeutic 
alliance  
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  14 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
Patient Satisfaction Survey . We developed this form to collect feedback from participants 
regarding satisfaction with the interventio n and delivery via telehealth.  
 
Final Exit Interview . We developed this form to collect feedback from participants based on their 
overall experience with this treatment and rating of usefulness.   
  
Weekly Exit Interview . We developed this form to collect  feedback from patients from participants 
based on their experience and ratings of usefulness.   
 
Medicinal Cannabis.  We developed this form to assess medicinal cannabis use.  
 
Mental Health and Smoking.  Indicates patient’s belief about the influence of the ir mental health 
and quitting smoking.  
 
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test, AUDIT -C. 3-item alcohol screen that can help identify 
persons who are hazardous drinkers or have active alcohol use disorders . 
 
Drug Abuse Screen Test, DAST -10. Screen that can help identify persons with problematic 
substance use.  
 
Electronic Measures Forms  
Timeline Followback (TLFB; Sobell & Sobell, 1992).  The TLFB method is a strategy for assessing 
substance use requires participants to retrospectively estimat e their daily substance and alcohol 
use.  
 
Expired Breath Carbon Monoxide (CO).  Participants will provide expired breath carbon monoxide 
by blowing into the iCO smokerlyzer . CO levels will be documented on this form in parts per million 
(ppm). The iCO Smok erlyzer works with iOS or android smartphone or tablet and in conjunction 
with their Smokerlyzer®App (available on Apple App Store & Google Play Store). Each participant 
will receive an ICO Smokerlyzer and a computer tablet with cellular service with the app loaded to 
the device. The iCO Smokerlyzer provides biofeedback in the form of a personal CO level 
immediately from a simple breath test.  After completing the breath test, participants will email 
our research team the results, which are date an d time stamped, from an email account we set up 
for them. The data itself are stored locally on the mobile device  and the data transmitted via email 
will not contain any PHI.  
 
Pregnancy Form.  Using this form, women will state in writing that they are not pregnant or nursing, 
not planning on becoming pregnant in the next two months, and that they are using effective birth 
control  if sexually active . Although we will request this attestation fro m all female participants, it 
should be noted that the nicotine patch is available over -the-counter, and although the package 
insert states that “the risks to your child from this medicine are not fully known” observational and 
intervention studies do not find harmful effects on the fetus or on the pregnancy as compared to 
placebo in human studies (Bar‐Zeev et al., 2018).   We therefore expect the risks continue to be 
minimal to our female population and are outweighed by benefits by participation in this st udy.  
 
SCID -RV for DSM 5 - Modules  A, B, C , D, and Suicidal Ideation and Behavior  (First, Williams, Karg, 
& Spitzer, 2015).  This semi -structured interview is  widely accepted as  the gold standard for 
determining psychiatric diagnoses.  
 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  15 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
Baseline Medical Problems. We developed this form to summarize any medical problems existing 
before the study started to help differentiate pre -existing conditions from new adverse events 
occurring once the participant engages in treatment.   
 
Adverse Event Tracking. We developed this form to monitor adverse events at each weekly 
appointment.  
 
Adverse Event Specifics Log. We developed this form to monitor details for adverse events.  
 
Treatment Form. We developed this form  to monitor report weekly carbon monoxide and current 
tobacco use. This form will be used by the research therapists at weekly appointments. This form 
includes a table for research therapists to monitor participant’s dispensed nicotine patch  progress.  
 
 
 
1.10  Timetable /Schedule of Events  
 2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  
Rutgers  / UBHC 
project meeting  x x x x x 
Train study 
therapist and 
research asst.  x x x x x 
Recruit 
participants (N=90; 
30/yr; 3/month)  x x x x  
Complete follow 
up assessments   x x x x 
Data Analysis     x x 
 
 
2.0 Project Management  
 
2.1 Research Staff and Qualifications  
Marc Steinberg, Ph.D.  (PI) is a licensed clinical psychologist, a faculty member in the Rutgers RWJMS Department of 
Psychiatry, and director of the Tobacco Research & Intervention lab. His research focuses on tobacco dependence 
treatment, including tobacco dependence treatment deve lopment and tobacco use in vulnerable populations such 
as those with psychiatric comorbidity and lower socioeconomic status. Dr. Steinberg has  been PI or Co -I for multiple 
randomized clinical trials of tobacco dependence treatments for high -risk smokers in cluding RCTs of motivational 
interviewing, behavioral therapy, and of nicotine nasal spray for smokers with serious mental illness , of persistence -
targeted smoking cessation in low SES smokers, and of varenicline for smokers not yet ready to quit.  
 
Jill Williams, MD (Co -I) is Professor and Director, Division of Addiction Psychiatry, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson 
Medical School. Dr. Williams’ research focuses on smokers with mental illness comorbidity and she has extensive 
experience in randomized clinical t rials for tobacco dependence treatment with R01 grant support from NIDA and 
NIMH. Dr. Williams and Dr. Steinberg are both housed in the Division of Addiction Psychiatry with one office door 
separating them. They meet regularly to discuss clinical research issues.  
 
 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  16 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
Patricia Dooley -Budsock  M.A, LPC, NCTTP  (Research Therapist).  Ms. Dooley has almost 20 years  experience in 
working with serious mental illness and cognitive behavioral therapy.  
Shou -En Lu, Ph.D. (Biostatistician)  is an Associate Professor in the Department of Biostatics in the Rutgers School of 
Public Health who specializes in multivariate survival analysis, clustered data analysis and cohort case -control and 
case -cohort designs.  
 
Graduate Students:  
Benjamin Billingsley  
Rachel Rosen  
 
Doctoral Psychology Intern s and Graduate students have completed coursework and didactics in substance use 
treatment, cognitive behavioral therapy, and motivational interviewing. Students also have prior experience treating 
individuals with psychosocial im pairment in the surrounding area. All graduate students have also interfaced with 
members of the community to facilitate completion of research projects focused on nicotine use. This includes, but 
is not limited to, structured clinical interviewing of rese arch subjects and administration of behavioral tasks.  
 
All graduate students  have also completed online coursework on ethical research practices (e.g., HIPAA compliance).  
 
 
Undergraduate Students:  
Drashya Shah  
Sara Diras  
Sanjana Thaper  
Daniella Burnett  
 
 
Other research staff:  
Anagha Babu  
 
Undergraduate students have completed coursework in psychology have completed online coursework on ethical 
research practices (e.g., HIPAA compliance).  
 
2.2 Resources Available  
Facilities - Participants will be daily smokers from New Jersey. Participants will attend treatment remotely using an 
online telehealth HIPAA compatible platform . Participants will be in the state of New Jersey during any counseling 
sessions though they may be outside of New Jersey (e.g., if they are traveling) for follow -up research assessment 
appointments.  
 
Medical Or Psychological Resources - Dr. Steinberg is a licensed clinical psychologist in that state of New Jersey and 
will assist in training study staff in the management of crisis intervention. In addition, they will be available 24/7 to 
field any  questions/concerns study staff have regarding how to proceed in the event that participants experience 
unanticipated psychiatric distress during the course of the stud y.  
 
Research Staff Training - All graduate students and research assistants will complete intensive training with Dr. 
Steinberg, including proper administration of each intervention condition and proper administration and 
management of nicotine replacement  therapies. All graduate students will also complete weekly supervision with 
Dr. Steinberg.  
 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  17 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
2.3 Research Sites  
Research activities will occur remotely or at the offices of Rutgers RWJMS Division of Addiction Psychiatry . We may 
temporarily store nicotine patches at Rutgers RWJMS Research Pharmacy located at the East Tower, 8th Floor, 125 
Paterson Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901.  
 
 
3.0 Multi -Site Research Communication & Coordination  
N/A 
 
3.1 Outside  Research  
N/A 
 
4.0 Research Data Source/s  
 
4.1 Primary Data -Subjects and Specimens  
Research participants will be 61 daily cigarette smokers with schizophrenia , schizoaffective disorder , or bipolar 
disorder . We will collect questionnaire data and expired breath carbon monoxide. We will provide 8 -weeks of free 
counseling to participants and 10 weeks of nicotine transdermal patch (an FDA -approved, over -the-counter 
medication).  
 
4.2 Subject Selection and Enrollment Considerations   
A. Recruitment Details  
Research assistants will post flyers at UBHC and will work with staff for help in connecting with potential 
participants . Research assistants will post flyers and place leaflets in local areas.  
 
B. Source of Subjects   
We will recruit smokers from Rutgers University Behavioral Health Care, from the community via our 
website an d local flyers, via social media, via Rutgers listservs , local agencies or organizations who serve 
mental health consumers (i.e. CHOICES , SERV Behavioral Health Systems, Inc. ; George J. Otlowski, Sr. Center 
for Mental Health Care , Hunterdon Behavioral Health Care ), and ElevateU’s Study Recruitment Platform  
(explained above in section 1.3 1.3 Research Design and Metho ds).  
 
C. Method to Identify Potential Subjects  
Participants responding to flyers or otherwise referred will complete a telephone screen to determine likely 
eligibility. If potentially eligible, they will be offered a more in -depth telehealth appointment  screening after 
providing informed consent. If al l inclusion criteria are met, they will be invited to participate . 
 
D. Subject Screening  
Interested participants will complete a brief telephone screening where they will be assessed by trained 
study personnel who will determine initial eligibility.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
• Must be between 18 – 70 years old  
• Must indicate willingness to make a quit attempt in the next 30 days  
• Must report being a daily smoker  (including those labeled “little cigars”) for past month  
• Must have a diagnosis of Schiz ophrenia , Schizoaffective Disorder , or Bipolar Disorder  on 
SCID -5-RV 
• Psychiatric illness must be stable, as indicated by no hospitalizations in previous 8 weeks, 
and a stable psychotropic medication regimen for 8 weeks  
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  18 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
• Must have a smartphone, tablet, or computer with ability to download apps  
• Must currently receive mental health treatment  
• Must sign release of information for current mental health treatment providers  
  
Exclusion Criteria  
• Must not currently (in past 10 days ) be taking varenicline (Chantix),  
• Must not currently (in past 10 days) be taking bupropion (Zyban/Wellbutrin) to quit 
smoking.  
• Must not be taking any nicotine preparations (gum, lozenge, patch, spray, inhaler) daily 
over the last 10 days  
• Must not be curre ntly receiving tobacco dependence treatment counseling.  
• Must not report myocardial infarction, unstable angina pectoris, or significant cardiac 
arrhythmia (including atrial fibrillation) in the past 30 days.  
• Women must not be pregnant , nursing,  or planning on becoming pregnant in the next 
three months . Women who can become pregnant may be included if using effective birth 
control . 
• Must not have pending legal matters with potential to result in jail time  
• Must not be planning on moving outside of New  Jersey  in next 3 -months  
• Problematic substance use in the past 3 months (AUDIT -C score ≥5 for men and ≥4 for 
women , DAST -10 score of ≥4 ) 
• Must not have suicidal ideation in the past week with  intent, plan, or access to method ; 
must not have attempted suicide in the past year  (as assessed on the SCID -RV) 
 
 
E. Recruitment Materials   
We will rely upon flyers and consumer letters . We will also give UBHC staff a handout to use for reference 
when making referrals. Please see attachments. We additionally anticipate recruitment of participants via 
word -of-mouth.  
 
F. Lead Site Recruitment Methods  
N/A 
 
4.3 Subject Randomization  
N/A 
 
4.4 Secondary Subjects  
N/A 
 
4.5 Number of Subjects  
A. Total Number of Subjects  
N=120  
 
B. Total Number of Subjects If Multicenter Study  
N/A 
 
C. Require Number of Subjects to Complete Research  
N=61 
 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  19 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
D. Feasibility of Recruiting  
We anticipate enrolling 3  participants monthly  over the course of 3 years . Based on previous research 
conducted by the principal investigators this should be feasible.  This is an urban area with a large low -
income population and therefore a greater proportion of smokers  than the average of 14.8% in the state 
of New Jersey.  Previous studies have given us the necessary experience with Rutgers listservs, websites, 
Craigslist, and use of flyers and brochures to maximize recruitment.   
4.6 Consent Procedures  
A. Consent  
▪ Docume nting Consent  
All participants will provide electronically signed  informed consent using the HIPAA compatible 
survey platform, RedCap or Qualtrics after being given the opportunity to read the consent form 
in full and to ask questions about the research. A research assistant will also electronically sign the 
consent form as a witness.  
▪ Waiver or Alteration  of Consent Process  
N/A 
 
B. Consent Process  
▪ Location of Consent Process  
Verbal consent will be obtained for the initial phone screen. The PI or RA will first explain the 
purpose of the phone screen and limits of confidentiality and provide an overview of the study. If 
potential participants remain interested, they must verbally agree to phone screen completion.  
 
During the initial telehealth  meeting,  study personnel will verbally go over the consent form 
including details regarding the procedure, time commitment, payment, risks/benefits, and  option 
to discontinue at any time without penalty, and ask the participant questions to ensure they 
understand.   
▪ Ongoing Consent  
N/A 
▪ Individual Roles for Researchers Involved in Consent  
A trained research assistant (who will receive weekly and as -needed supervision from the principal 
investigator) will pre -screen potential participants on the phone, followed by obtaining informed 
consent and administering the baseline assessment battery . 
 
1. Consent Discussion Duration  
Staff will go over details regarding the procedure, time commitment, payment, 
risks/benefits, and option to discontinue the study at any time without penalty. We 
anticipate that it will take participants 5 minutes to read the consent and up to an addition 
5 for staff to review relevant information.   
 
2. Coercion or Undue Influence  
Potential participants will explicitly be told in the consent form that the study is 
completely voluntary and that they may withdraw without penalty at any time. We will 
inform participants who wish to withdraw, who do not wish to participate, and who do 
not meet inclusion criteria about alternative cessation treatment options.  
 
3. Subject Understanding  
Participants will read a consent form or will have the consent form read to them before 
signing it. Trained research staff will proactively ask participants to describe the research 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  20 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
study to them in their own words to ensure that participants understand th e consent 
form.  If there is any doubt of competence to consent, the individual will not be enrolled. 
In addition to providing written informed consent, participants must verbally indicate that 
they understand the study procedures and that they have no fur ther questions.  
 
4.7 Special Consent/Populations  
N/A 
 
4.8 Economic Burden and/or Compensation for Subjects  
A. Expenses   
N/A 
 
B. Compensation/Incentives  
Participants will be paid $ 100 through the duration of the study. They will receive $ 35 at the initial 
assessment, $ 30 at the post -counseling assessment (after session 8), and $ 35 at the 3 -months post -quit 
date assessment.  Participants will be paid via t he Rutgers C linCard system . 
  
B.1 We may divide the baseline assessment battery into two sessions to minimize participant 
fatigue if necessary.  
 
C.  Compensation Documentation  
We will maintain a full accounting of funds using the Rutgers ClinC ard system .  
  
4.9 Risks to Subjects  
A. Description of Subject Risk  
There is a risk of discomfort associated with nicotine withdrawal for patients who are quitting smoking. The 
nicotine patch (an FDA -approved medication) is well tolerated; however, there are potential side effects 
that may arise  when using the patch. Potential side effects include dizziness, headache, nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, or redness or swelling at the patch site.  Each patient will discuss these side effects with their 
therapist. If questions arise as a result of the patch, one of the study co -investigators is an Addiction 
Psychiatrist who will be available to provide patients with information regarding their side effects.  
 
The overall risk of AEs in this study is expected to be low because both the counseling sessions  and the use 
of over -the-counter nicotine replacement products are low risk and similar to established treatments to 
help smokers quit. We will monitor patients for AEs at every session, however, and any AEs that are deemed 
to be moderate to severe will be  reviewed by addiction psychiatrist, Dr. Williams and discussed at the 
weekly research meetings. The team will document the recommended actions with input from Dr. Williams. 
AEs will be followed until they resolve or until participant study completion.  Th e AE Tracking Form and AE 
specifics log will also be completed.  
 
There is a risk that participants’ confidentiality could be violated. To reduce the risk of violating 
confidentiality, several steps will be taken. Only IRB approved members of the research t eam will have 
access to the data. All computers used by research staff with be password protected with complex 
passwords. The participants google email account will only include their participant ID number  and we will  
ask that participants do not use this account for communication outside of the research study to protect 
their confidentiality.  Data will only be accessed when coded, entered, or audited. The PI will maintain 
responsibility for safe data storage. All data will be stored in locked cabinets with in locked rooms. We will 
use a telehealth platform that is HIPAA compatible  (e.g. Microsoft Teams , Doxy.me , or zoom ). Based on 
these procedures, we anticipate that the risk to confidentiality is very low.  
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  21 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
 
B. Procedures for Risks to Embryo, Fetus, and/or Pregnant Subjects  
N/A 
 
C. Risks to Non -Subjects  
N/A 
 
 D. Assessment of Social Behavior Considerations  
Study risks are minimal and include a small, temporary increase in distress as a result of the 
assessments; however, the methodologies employed have been utilized in many labs and clinical 
settings with hundreds of participants suffering from a range of psychopathology, and approved by as 
many  IRBs.  
 
▪ Reasonably Foreseeable Risks  
Study risks are minimal and include a small, temporary incre ase in distress as a result of the 
assessments . Participants who quit may experience at least mild nicotine withdrawal 
symptoms even with counseling and nicotine replacement therapy.  
 
▪ Risk Of Imposing An Intervention On Subject With Existing Condition  
N/A 
 
▪ Other Foreseeable Risks  
Our research team employs standard procedures to ensure confidential information about study 
participation is not disclosed. All data are linked to an arbitrary 3 -digit study ID unrelated to 
personal information. The file linking participants to their stud y ID will be stored in a password -
protected file, located within a password -protected database on an encrypted computer. Only 
select trained laboratory personnel will have access to the file. All computer files or printed data 
used for analysis also will b e de -identified. Informed consent collected remotely will be stored in 
HIPAA compatible survey platform, RedCap. Physical c onsent forms and payment forms will be 
stored in a locked file cabinet separate from data in an office that is locked when not occupi ed. 
Participants’ confidentiality also is protected by never associating a participant’s name with results 
in any published or otherwise publicly presented report. Demographic information, including 
information about participants’ age, ethnicity, education , marital status and employment status, 
will be reported using averages and percentages computed over multiple participants and never 
reported at the level of individual participants.  
 
▪ Observation And Sensitive Information  
N/A 
 
E. Minimizing Risks  
Particip ants will be instructed to call 911 if they experience a medical emergency and Acute Psychiatric 
Services (APS) at 855 -515-5700 if they experience a psychiatric emergency. Patient will be counseled and 
provided with appropriate emergency contact informatio n in the event a research assistant or study 
therapist determines that emergency care is warranted.  
 
Our research team employs standard procedures to ensure confidential information about study 
participation is not disclosed. All data are linked to an arbi trary 3 -digit study ID unrelated to personal 
information. The file linking participants to their study ID will be stored in a password -protected file, located 
within a password -protected database on an encrypted computer. Only select trained laboratory per sonnel 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  22 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
will have access to the file. All computer files or printed data used for analysis also will be de -identified. 
Informed consent collected remotely will be stored in HIPAA compatible survey platform, RedCap. Physical 
consent  forms and payment forms will be stored in a locked file cabinet separate from data in an office that 
is locked when not occupied. Participants’ confidentiality also is protected by never associating a 
participant’s name with results in any published or ot herwise publicly presented report. Demographic 
information, including information about participants’ age, ethnicity, education, marital status and 
employment status, will be reported using averages and percentages computed over multiple participants 
and n ever reported at the level of individual participants . 
 
All technology platforms handling PHI will be HIPAA compatible  and our team is well trained in HIPAA 
compliance.  
 
F. Certificate of Confidentiality  
We have obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality fr om the National Institutes of Drug Abuse.  
 
 
G. Potential Benefits to Subjects  
The benefits of taking part in this study include access to high -quality, smoking cessation treatment based 
on empirically supported psychosocial approaches. If participants quit smoking, they will experience health 
benefits; however, they may receive no direct benefit from taking part in this study.  
 
H. Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Our research team employs standard procedures to ensure  confidential information about study 
participation is not disclosed. All data are linked to an arbitrary 3 -digit study ID unrelated to personal 
information. The file linking participants to their study ID will be stored in a password -protected file, locat ed 
within a password -protected database on an encrypted computer. Only select trained laboratory personnel 
will have access to the file. All computer files or printed data used for analysis also will be de -identified. 
Informed consent collected remotely wi ll be stored in HIPAA compatible survey platform, RedCap. Physical 
consent forms and payment forms will be stored in a locked file cabinet separate from data in an office that 
is locked when not occupied. Participants’ confidentiality also is protected by never associating a 
participant’s name with results in any published or otherwise publicly presented report. Demographic 
information, including information about participants’ age, ethnicity, education, marital status and 
employment status, will be reporte d using averages and percentages computed over multiple participants 
and never reported at the level of individual participants.  
I. Research Team Access to Subject Data  
Only IRB approved staff will have access to participant data. All data will be coded by arbitrary study number 
to ensure confidentiality and will be stored in a locked filing cabinet or stored on the lab server where access 
will be password -protected. Data  collected online will be de -identified (e.g., associated with an arbitrary 
study ID number) and only accessible to trained study personnel. Informed consent collected remotely will 
be stored in HIPAA compatible survey platform, RedCap. Physical c onsent forms with identifying 
information (names) will be filed separately from actual study data in a separate locked filing cabinet. This 
cabinet the office in which it is kept will ensure that it is also double -locked.  
 
 
4.10 Secondary Data  – Records/Chart Revie ws/Databases/Tissue Banks/ etc. 
N/A 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  23 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
 
4.11 Chart/Record Review Selection  
N/A 
 
4.12 Secondary Specimen Collection  
N/A 
 
 
5.0 Special Considerations  
 
5.1 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  (HIPAA ) 
We will be obtaining and/or disclosing individually identifiable health information associated with a HIPAA -covered 
component or entity. See attachments for release of information and request of information forms.  
 
Informed consent, release of information ,  and request for information collected remotely will be stored in HIPAA 
compatible survey platform, RedCap. All technology platforms handling PHI will be HIPAA compatible and our team 
is well trained in HIPAA compliance.  
 
5.2 Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)  
N/A 
 
 
5.3 NJ Access to Medical Research Act  
N/A 
 
5.4 Code of Federal Regulations Title 45 Part 46 (Vulnerable Populations)  
N/A 
 
 
6.0 Research Data  Protection and Reporting  
 
6.1 Data Management and Confidentiality  
 
A. Hypothesis 1: The PTSC -S intervention will be acceptable to participants, and the study will be feasible to 
conduct as evidenced by:  
a. At least 80% of participants will provide at least a 5 on a 1 – 7 scale regarding how “useful” the 
intervention was, how acceptable the length of ea ch session was, and how acceptable the number 
of counseling sessions offered was (with higher scores reflecting ratings of more useful and more 
acceptable). Analysis 1a: Descriptive statistics will be reported.  
b. We will achieve follow -up rates of at least 8 0% at the 3 -month follow -up. Analysis 1b: Descriptive 
statistics will be reported.  
c. Rates of missing/unusable data will be < 10% of all data collected. Analysis 1c: Descriptive statistics 
will be reported.  
 
Hypothesis 2: As compared to baseline, participant s will report greater task persistence as evidenced by 
reduced scores on the Thoughts About Smoking Questionnaire (TASQ). Analysis 2: One -tailed, paired 
sample t -tests will be used to examine decreases in scores on the TASQ at each timepoint.  
 
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  24 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
Hypothesis 3 : As compared to baseline, participants will report smoking fewer cigarettes per day at 1 - and 
3-month follow -up. Analysis 3: One -tailed, paired sample t -tests will be used to examine decreases in 
cigarettes smoked per day on the TASQ at each timepoint.  
 
B. We determined the sample size based on data from the R21 phase of the study, we can expect a large effect 
(Cohen’s dz = 1.28) of the intervention on task persistence as measured by the Thoughts About Smoking 
Questionnaire (TASQ). We detected a change in mea n(SD) scores, in the predicted direction, from 
4.371(1.0) at baseline to 3.218(1.1) at follow -up. An effect of dz = 1.28 setting power at 80% and alpha at 
0.05 suggests we need N = 6 participants in the within -subjects analysis to detect an effect (see Fig ure 1 
below).  
 
Because effect sizes may be unstable at smaller sample sizes, we will be much more conservative and 
assume an effect size of Cohen’s dz = 0.5 (consistent with a medium, rather than a very large effect size). 
Given a medium effect size, while setting power at 80% and alpha at 0.05, we will require N = 27 participants 
for this within -subjects design (see Figure 2 below). While we will impute baseline data where follow -up 
data are missing (i.e., assuming no improvement), we will also recruit additional partici pants to account for 
the possibility of up to 20% loss to follow -up (i.e., 80% retention rate). We will therefore aim to recruit 34 
additional participants to have N = 27 with complete data at follow -up after making the protocol changes 
described within th is document .  
 
C. Data Handling: Only IRB approved members of the research team will have access to the data. The research 
staff collecting the data will bring the data to the PI within 24 hours of it being collected. Data will only be 
accessed when coded, entered, or audited. The PI will maintain responsibility for safe data storage. All data 
will be stored in locked cabinets within locked rooms.  
 
Data collection: The data will be collected through telehealth video  interview  using HIPAA compliant 
platform (e.g. Microsoft Teams , Doxy.me , or zoom ). If telehealth video  appointments are unable to be done 
because of internet connectivity , we will conduct telephone interviews.  Data will be stored at the Division 
of Addiction Psych iatry; 317 George Street; Suite 105; New Brunswick, NJ 08901.  Only the IRB -approved 
research team will have access to the research data.  
 
Data entry, editing and management, including handling of data collection forms, different versions of data, 
and data  storage and disposition: Data will only be accessed and handled by IRB approved study personnel 
and kept in password protected databases. Dr. Steinberg is ultimately responsible for the receipt and 
transmission of all data. Informed consent collected remo tely will be stored in HIPAA compatible survey 
platform, RedCap. Paper copies of data (e.g., names on consent forms) will be stored immediately in Rutgers 
offices where they will be locked in a cabinet housed behind a locked door (of Division of Addiction 
Psychiatry, 317 George Street, Suite 105, New Brunswick).  
  
All computer files will be kept on computers requiring login and complex passwords for entry, and all files 
with identifying information will have the extra protection of a password to open that i ndividual file.  The 
individual participant’s personal information, including name and contact numbers, will be kept separate 
from their study data and linked only by a study number assigned by the PI. The master link between the 
study number and patient c ontact information will be destroyed once all data is collected and checked for 
accuracy. The confidential binder containing telephone screen forms will be shredded and properly 
discarded after 12 months of study completion. Participant names will not be u sed in any publications or 
papers derived from this study.  
 
Additionally, we have obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality from the NIH.  
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  25 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
 
D. Qualtrics and Excel databases will be created in such a way as to not allow for out of range data.  
 
E. Data (described in section 1.6 B) will only be accessed and handled by IRB approved study personnel and 
kept in password protected databases. Dr. Steinberg is ultimately responsible for the receipt and 
transmission of all data. Paper copies of data (e.g., names on consent forms) collected at the UBHC will be 
brought immediately to Rutgers offices where they will be locked in a cabinet housed behind a locked door 
(of Division of Addiction Psychiatry, 317 George Street, Suite 105, New Brunswick) . 
 
 
6.2 Data Security  
Our research team employs standard procedures to ensure confidential information about study participation is not 
disclosed. All data are linked to an arbitrary 3 -digit study ID unrelated to personal information. The file linking 
participants to their stud y ID will be stored in a password -protected file, located within a password -protected 
database on an encrypted computer. Only select trained laboratory personnel will have access to the file. All 
computer files or printed data used for analysis also will b e de -identified. Informed consent collected remotely will 
be stored in HIPAA compatible survey platform, RedCap. Physical c onsent forms or other forms with identifiable 
information be stored in a locked file cabinet separate from data in an office that is locked when not occupied.  
 
All technology platforms handling PHI will be HIPAA compatible and our team is well trained in HIPAA compliance.  
 
 
6.3 Data and Safety Monitoring   
A. Periodic Data Evaluation  
A Data Safety Monitoring Board will meet quarterly to evaluate safety data and other study issues.  
 
B. Type of Data Evaluated  
Safety data will be reviewed quarterly. Efficacy data will be evaluated after 50% of participants have 
completed follow -up data collection.  
 
C. Collection of Safety Inform ation  
We will use case report forms to document adverse events at each telehealth  patient contact.  
 
D. Frequency of Data Collection  
We will document adverse events at each telehealth  patient contact.  
 
E. Reviewer of Data  
A Data Safety Monitoring Board will meet quarterly to evaluate safety data and other study issues.  The PI 
(Dr. Steinberg) and medical monitor (Co: Dr. Williams) will review safety data as it is collected.  
 
F. Schedule of Review of Cumulative Data  
Safety data will be reviewed every 6 -months . 
 
G. Tests for Safety Data  
Independent t -tests will be used to examine differences between treatment groups with respect to number 
of adverse events reported.  
 
H. Suspension of Research  
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  26 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
We do not expect any adverse events in this trial that would indicate stopping the trial because 
we are providing established treatments  to smokers trying to quit. We will monitor adverse events, 
however, and stop the trial if our DSMB determines that it i s warranted in response to adverse 
events.  
 
In addition, we will stop the trial if the DSMB concludes that interim analysis at the halfway point 
of the trial provided overwhelming evidence that PTSC -S intervention was more efficacious than 
the control inte rvention.  
 
 
6.4 Reporting Results  
A. Sharing of Results with Subjects   
Participants will not be provided with individual study results.   
 
B. Individual Results  
Participants will not be provided with individual study results.   
 
C. Aggregate Results  
Aggregate results such as average number of sessions attended, proportion of participants obtaining 
abstinence from smoking, and cigarettes smoked per day may be reported in peer reviewed scientific 
conference presentations, peer -reviewed scientific publications, or peer -reviewed NIH grant applications.  
 
D. Professional Reporting  
Study results may be presented to the scientific community via peer reviewed manuscripts and 
presentations at scientific conferences.  They will also be included in peer -reviewed NIH grant applications.  
 
E. ClinicalTrials.Gov Registration and Data Reporting  
The trial will be registered with ClinicalTrials.gov within the first three  months of receiving the grant funds 
and will reflect the procedures and primary/secondary outcomes outlines in this protocol . 
 
6.5 Data Sharing   
N/A 
 
7.0 Data and/or Specimen Banking  
N/A 
 
8.0 Other Approvals/Authorizations  
N/A 
 
9.0 Bibliography  
1. Allen, S. I., Wasserman, E., Veldheer, S., Yingst, J., Hrabovsky, S., Liao, J., … Foulds, J. (2019). Characteristics 
of Adult Cigarette Smokers Who "Relight" and the Effects of Exposure to Tobacco Smoke 
Constituents.  Nicotine & tobacco researc h : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and 
Tobacco , 21(9), 1206 –1212. doi:10.1093/ntr/nty138   
2. Buysse, D.J., Reynolds III, C.F., Monk, T.H., Berman, S.R., & Kupfer, D.J. (1989). The Pittsburgh Sleep 
Quality Index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 
28(2), 193 -213.  
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  27 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). (2010). 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Questionnaire (or Examination Protocol, or Laboratory 
Protocol). Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of He alth and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, retrieved from: 
https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/continuousnhanes/questionnaires.aspx?BeginYear=2009  
4. Cloninger CR, Przybeck TR, Svrakic DM, Wetzel RD. Temperament and Character inventory (TCI): A guide 
to its development and use. Center for Psychobiology of Personality. St. Louis: Washington University; 
1994  
5. Derogatis, L. R., & Melisaratos, N. (1983). The Brief Symptom Inventory: An introductory report. 
Psychological Medicine, 13(3), 595 -605. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291700048017  
6. First MB, Williams JBW, Karg RS, Spitzer RL: Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5—Research 
Version (SCID -5 for DSM -5, Research Version; SCID -5-RV). Arlington, VA, American Psychiatric 
Association, 2015  
7. Gám ez, W., Chmielewski, M., Kotov, R., Ruggero, C., Suzuki, N., & Watson, D. (2014). The 
Brief Experiential Avoidance Questionnaire: Development and initial validation.  Psychological 
Assessment, 26 (1), 35 –45. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0034473  
8. Gard, D. E., Gard, M. G., Kring , A. M., & John, O. P. (2006). Anticipatory and consummatory components of 
the experience of pleasure: a scale development study. Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 1086 -1102. 
doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2005.11.001  
9. Heatherton, T. F., Kozlowski, L. T., Frecker,  R. C., Fagerstrom, K. O. (1991). The Fagerstrom test for nicotine 
dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom tolerance questionnaire. British Journal of Addiction , 86, 119 –
1127.PMID: 1932883  
10. Kahler, C. W., Lachance, H. R., Strong, D. R., Ramsey, S. E., Mont i, P. M., & Brown, R. A. (2007). The 
commitment to quitting smoking scale: initial validation in a smoking cessation trial for heavy social 
drinkers.  Addictive behaviors , 32(10), 2420 –2424. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2007.04.002  
11. Miller, W.R., Johnson, W. R. (200 8).  A natural language screening measure for motivation to change. 
Addictive Behaviors , 33, 1177 -1182. PMID: 18558466  
12. Munder, T., Wilmers, F., Leonhart, R., Linster, H. W., & Barth, J. (2010). Working Alliance 
Inventory ‐Short Revised (WAI ‐SR): psychometric properties in outpatients and inpatients.  Clinical 
Psychology & Psychotherapy: An International Journal of Theory & Practice , 17(3), 231 -239. 
13. Rosner, B. (2010). Fundamentals of Biostatistics. Seventh Edition. Equation 5.15, page 133. Duxbury P ress.  
14. Schmidt NB, Richey JA, Fitzpatrick KK. Discomfort intolerance: Development of a construct and 
measure relevant to panic disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders. 2006 ;20(3):263 -280. DOI: 
10.1016/j.janxdis.2005.02.002.  
15. Simons, J. S., & Gaher, R. M. (20 05). The Distress Tolerance Scale: Development and validation of a self -
report measure. Motivation and Emotion , 29(2), 83 -102.  
16. Smith, S., Piper, M., Bolt, D., Fiore, M., Wetter, D., Cinciripini , P., & Baker, T. (2010). Development of the 
Brief Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives. Nicotine & Tobacco Research , 12(5), 489 –499. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/ntr/ntq032  
17. Sobell, L.C., Sobell, M.B. (2000). Alcohol Timeline Followback (TFLB). In American Psychiatric Association 
(Ed.), Handbook of Psychiatric Measures. American Psychiatric Association; Washington, DC. pp. 477 -479.  
18. Steinberg, M. L., Williams, J. M., Gandhi, K. K., Foulds, J., Epstein, E. E., & Brandon, T. H. (2012). Task 
persistence  predicts smoking cessation in smokers with and without schizophrenia. Psyc hology of addictive 
behaviors: journal of the Society of Psychologists in Addictive Behaviors, 26(4), 850 –858. 
doi:10.1037/a0028375  
19. Velicer, W. F., DiClemente, C. C., Rossi, J. S., & Prochaska, J. O. (1990). Relapse situations and self -efficacy: 
An integrative model.  Addictive Behaviors , 15,  271-283. PMID: 2378287  
 
 
 
Version Number: V22 – 3.28.2022  
Protocol Number: Pro2018001696  
PI Name: Marc L. Steinberg, Ph.D.  
Protocol Title:  Persist to Quit: Telehealth 
Counseling for Smokers with Serious Mental 
Illness  28 
 
 RESERVED FOR IRB STAMP  
DO NOT MODIFY THIS SPACE  
 
 
 
IRB Form Version v01022018  
 
20. Welsch, S., Smith, S., Wetter, D., Jorenby , D., Fiore, M., & Baker, T. (1999). Development and Validation of 
the Wisconsin Smoking Withdrawal Scale. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology , 7(4), 354 –361. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/1064 -1297.7.4.354  
 