Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 1 of 131 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS
A Phase 1 b/2, Open-label, Dose Escalation Study of Entinostat in Combination with 
Pembrolizumab in Patients with Non-small Cell Lung Cancer, with Expansion Cohorts in Patients 
with Non-small Cell Lung Cancer , Melanoma, and Mismatch Repair -Proficient Colorectal Cancer
Syndax Protocol 
SNDX -275-0601  
Confidentiality Notice 
This document contains confidential information of Syndax Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the contents of which 
must not be disclosed to anyone other than the study staff and members of the respective Institutional 
Review Board /Ethics Committee.  
The information in this document cannot be used for any purpose other than the evaluation or conduct of 
the clinical investigation  without the prior written cons ent of Syndax Pharmaceuticals, Inc . Clinical Study Sponsor:  Syndax Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 
35 Gatehouse Drive  
Building D, Floor 3  
Waltham, MA  02451 
Key Sponsor Contacts:   
 
Telephone:   
 
Telephone:   
Contract Research Organization  N/A 
Date, Version:  12 April  2018 , Version 6.0 
Amendment: 5 
IND Number:  125,812 
EudraCT Number:  2016 -000638- 23 NCT #:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]

Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 2 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
Investigator’s Agreement  
 
I have read the attached protocol entitled “ A Phase 1 b/2, Open -label, Dose Escalation Study of Entinostat 
in Combination with Pembrolizumab in Patients with Non-small Cell Lung Cancer, with Expansion 
Cohorts in Patients with Non-small Cell Lung Cancer , Melanoma, and Mismatch Repair -Proficient 
Colorectal Cancer” dated  12 April 2018, and agree to abide by all provisions set forth therein.   
I agree to comply with the International Council for Harmonisation Tripartite Guideline on Good Clinical 
Practice and applicable regulations of the Food and Drug Administration.  
I agree to ensure that Financial Disclosure Statements will be completed by:  
• me 
• my sub -investigators  
at the start of the study, at study completion, and for up to 1 year after the study is completed, if there are 
changes that affect my financial disclosure status.  
I agree to ensure that the confidential information contained in this  document will not be used for any 
purpose other than the evaluation or conduct of the clinical investigation without the prior written consent 
of Syndax. 
   
Signature    
Name of Principal Investigator  
 Date  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 3 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
1. PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS SN DX-275-0601  
Title:   A Phase 1 b/2, Open -label, Dose Escalation Study of Entinostat in Combination with Pembrolizumab in 
Patients with Non -small Cell Lung Cancer, with Expansion Cohorts in Patients with Non -small Cell Lung Cancer , 
Melanoma, and Mismatch Repair -Proficient Colorect al Cancer  
Study Phase :  Phase 1 b/2 
Indication :  Melanoma , Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) , and  Mismatch Repair -Proficient Colorectal 
Cancer ” 
Primary Objective: 
Phase 1 b (Dose Escalation /Confirmation Cohorts ):  To determine the dose- limiting toxicities (DLT) and maximum 
tolerated dose (MTD) or recommended Phase 2 dose (RP2D) of entinostat (SNDX -275) given in combination with 
pembrolizumab. 
Phase 2 (Expansion Cohorts) : To evaluate the preliminary efficacy of entinostat at the RP2D in combination with 
pembrolizumab in patients with melanoma , NSCLC, and mismatch repair -proficient colorectal cancer as determined 
by overall response rate (ORR) , per the Immune -related Respon se Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors ( irRECIST) 
in each cohort evaluated.  
Secondary Objectives:    
Efficacy :  To evaluate the efficacy of entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab in patients with melanoma , 
NSCLC, and mismatch repair -proficient colorectal cancer as determined by secondary measures of efficacy  per the 
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1 (R ECIST 1.1 ) and irRECIST criterion , including:  
• Clinical benefit rate (CBR)  (i.e., complete response [CR]+partial response [PR]+stable disease [SD]) at 6 
months  
• Progression- free su rvival (PFS) status at 6 months  
• PFS 
• Overall survival (OS)  
In patients who experience a response to treatment  (i.e., CR or PR): 
• Duration of response (DOR)  
• Time to response (TTR) 
Safety :  To evaluate safety and the tolerability of entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab, as measured by 
clinical adverse events (AEs) , laboratory parameters, and electrocardiograms (ECGs) . 
Exploratory Objectives:    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 

Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 4 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
  
 
  
 
   
  
  
Hy
pothesis :   
Entinostat has been shown in preclinical models to reduce the number and inhibit the function of host immune 
suppressor cells in order to enhance the anti -tumor activity of immune checkpoint blockade. It is hypothesized that 
entinostat combined with pembrolizumab will result in an improved response rate for the combination compared to 
either agent alon e. Preclinical study data suggest that entinostat specifically targets MDSCs and thus would improve 
the response to PD-1/ PD-L1-blocking antibody (i.e., pembrolizumab) treatment. The Sponsor accordingly proposes 
to evaluate populations of MDSCs and other myeloid cells in peripheral blood and tumor tissues as well as basic T -
cell function in patients, with the expectation that if the MDSC level is decreased, the response to antigens would be improved.  
Study Design:    
Study SNDX -275-0601 is an open -label, Phase 1 b/2 study evaluating the combination of entinostat plus 
pembrolizumab in patients with advanced metastatic or recurrent NSCLC , melanoma  or mismatch repair -proficient 
colorectal cancer . The study has 2 phases, a Dose Escalation /Confirmation  Phase (Phase 1 b) and an Expansion 
Phase (Phase 2), with the Expansion Phase utilizing a Simon 2- stage design (Simon 1989 ) for cohorts 1 and 4. For 
cohorts 2 and 3, the single proportion binomial test statistic is used to test for statistical significance.  An additional 
cohort (Entinostat Monotherapy Immune Correlate  [EMIC] Cohort) evaluating single agent ent inostat followed by 
the combination will also be evaluated in patients with NSCLC  in the Phase 2 expansion phase.  
Regardless o f phase, patients will be screened for study eligibility within 21 days before enrollment into the study . 
Patients who are determined to be eligible, based on screening assessments, will be enrolled into the study within 3 
days of starting study treatment.  With the excep tion of those in the EMIC  cohort, patients will receive entinostat in 
combination with pembrolizumab on Cycle 1, Day 1 (C1D1) , within 3 days from enrolling into the study .  
A total of 15 patients will be enrolled in a n EMIC  Cohort. EMIC  patients will be enrolled in the study within 3 days 
of starting study treatment on Day -14 (initiation of entinostat monotherapy) and will participate in a 2- week 
entinostat monotherapy period. The purpose of this 14-day lead-in phase is to obtain pre -and post- entinostat 
monotherapy correlative data in blood and tissue. After completion of the 2 -week entinostat monotherapy period, 
patients in the EMIC  Cohort will start entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab on C1D1.  Patients in the  
EMIC  Cohort will receive entinostat beginning at 5mg weekly for the monotherapy period, and then will receive 
entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab at the RP2D as identified in the Phase 1b Dose 
Escalation/ Confirmation portion of the study . 
A cycle is 21  days in length. During treatment, patients will attend study center visits and have study evaluations 
performed on C1D1, C1D8, and C1D15; D1 and D1 5 of C2; and on D1 of each cycle thereafter.  
Fresh tumor tissue samples will be collected during the study as follows : 
• During screening  from all patients on a mandatory basis. 
• On C2D15 (+3 days)  on an optional  basis from patients i n the Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase . All 
patients in the Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase will be strongly encouraged to provide an opt ional 
biopsy in order to help understand dose -immune correlate effects.  
o On C2D15 (+3 days) on a mandatory  basis from the first 10 patients  (in total, across cohorts) in 
Stage 1 in the Expansion Phase, the first 10 patients in the EMIC Cohort, and the first 10 patients 
in the CRC Cohort . If, based on an interim review of tumor tissue data from the initial patients in 

Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 5 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
the Expansion Phase, such  data are not considered informative,  then tumor tissue samples will  not 
be collected from subsequent patients on C2D15 (+3 days). Alternatively, if such data are 
considered informative, these tissue samples will be collected on C2D15 (+3 days) from 
subseq uent study patients  in the Expansion Phase .  
Blood for immune correlate s is to be collected from patients in the EMIC  Cohort  pre-dose on D -14, C1D1,  C1D8, 
and C2D1 5. In all other cohorts, blood for immune correlates is to be collected pre -dose on C1D1, C2D1, and 
C2D15 . Blood for protein lysine acetylation and for entinostat and pembrolizumab PK assessments will be collected 
according to the Schedule of Events.  
Patients will have radiological disease assessments performed during screening and every 6 week s (+/-3 days) 
(Week 6, Week  12, etc.) . Disease will be assessed by computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), and bone scans, as appropriate, and response will be assessed by the Investigator primarily using irRECIST . 
Safety will be assessed during the study by documentation of AEs, clinical laboratory tests, physical examination, 
vital sign measurements, electrocardiograms (ECGs), and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status. 
The maximum duration of treatment for this study is planned to be 2 years. If a patient permanently discontinues 1 
of the 2 study drugs (either entinostat or pembrolizumab), the patient may continue to receive monotherapy for  up to 
2 years, unless alternate therapy is started or another discon tinuation criterion is met ( Section 10). 
After discontinuation of both study drugs, patient s will complete an End of Treatment (EOT) visit within 7  days 
after the last study drug dose and  Safety Follow -up (F/U) visits 30 days and 90 days thereafter. After completion of 
the 30-day Safety F/U visit, patient s who have not experienced progressive disease ( PD) are to be followed every 
2 months  until PD and every 3 months thereafter until death or closure of the study by the Sponsor.  
Phase 1 b (Dose Escalation /Confirmation ):  The Dose Escalation/Confirmation  Phase of the study , in which patients 
with NSCLC will be enrolled,  employs a classical 3+3  design, with the determination of DLT and the MTD and/or 
RP2D  based on entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab in C1.  
Although decisions regarding dose escalation will be made primarily based on review of data from C1, safety data 
will also be collected from all patients continuing treatment and these data wil l be reviewed in an ongoing manner 
by the Sponsor Study Physician (s) including Medical Monitor,  in consultation with the Investigators. Any detected 
cumulative toxicity may require later dose reductions and/or other changes to the dosing schedule, as appro priate, 
including further refinement of the RP2D. 
Dose Escalation:  The initial 3 -6 patients will receive entinostat at a starting dose of 3mg on D1, D8, and D15 along 
with pembrolizumab 200 mg via intravenous (IV) infusion on D1 of a 21- day cycle.  Assumin g an acceptable safety 
profile, escalation to an entinostat dose of 5 mg weekly  is planned,  keeping the pembrolizumab dose constant. 
However, based on evaluation of the safety and tolerability data of the previous dose level, it may also be decided 
that accrual will take place at an intermediate dose level or alternate dosing schedule. Toxicities will be assessed by 
the Investigator usi ng the United States (US) National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (CTCAE), Version 4.03. The decision regarding whether to proceed to the next dose level will be 
made by the Sponsor Study Physician(s)  in consultation with the Investigators after the majority of the safety 
assessments for each cohort are completed.  
All patients within a cohort are to complete C1, have safety assessments performed through C2D1, and be assessed for DLT before enrollment of the next cohor t may commence. If <33% patients within a cohort have a DLT (i.e., < 2 
of up to 6), then enrollment of the next cohort may commence with approval from the  Sponsor Study Physician (s) in 
consultation with the  Investigators. If ≥33% (≥2 of up to 6) of  patients within a cohort experience a DLT, then the 
DLT dose level will have been reached. 
Patients who experience a DLT will be allowed to remain on study if they meet the following criteria : (1) the 
investigator believes it is appropriate for patients t o remain on study; (2) the event has resolved and no longer meets 
the definition of DLT ; and  (3) the timeline for resolution falls within the protocol guidelines for dose delays . 
Patients who complete C1 may continue on study as long as , in the Investigato r’s judgment , the patient is tolerating 
study treatment,  is not at an increased safety risk , and continues to meet protocol eligibility criteria.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 6 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
Six patients will need to be treated in a dose level for that dose to be considered for the Dose Confirmation stage . 
The recommended dose for Phase 2 investigation will be the highe r of either 3 or 5 mg weekly  by mouth ( PO) that 
results in less than a 33% incidence of DLT . The final determination of the optimal RP2D  will consider both acute 
and cumulative toxicit ies; the incidence of required dose delays, reductions, and discontinuations; and the overall 
facility of administration in clinical practice.  
Dose Confirmation :  The prospective MTD/ RP2D  identified in the Dose Escalation Phase will be confirmed in  9 
patie nts in the Dose Confirmation Cohort , to obtain additional AE, immune correlate , and anti -tumor activ ity data on 
entinostat in combination  with pembro lizumab .  
The decision regarding the RP2D will be made by the Sponsor Study Physician (s), based on a review of all data 
obtained from both the Dose Escalation  and C onfirmation Phases, with input from the In vestigators. 
After completion of the Dose Escalation /Confirmation Phase of the st udy, with identification of the  MTD/ RP2D , the 
Phase 2 portion of the study will  commence.  
Phase 2 (Expansion): In the Expansion Phase, entinostat in combination with pembr olizumab  will be evaluated 
using the RP2D  identified in the Dose Escalation /Confirmation  Phase. Up to 4 Expansion Cohorts consisting of 
distinct subsets of patients with solid tumor cancers may be explored.  Expansion cohorts 1 and 4 evaluated during 
the Expansion Phase will employ a Simon 2 stage design. Expansion cohorts 2 and 3 will employ single proportion 
binomial test  (See Sample Size  Considerations ). The final decision about which Expansion Cohort s to study will 
be based on data from the Dose Escalation /Confirmation  Phase, emerging clinical data from other studies, and/or 
nonclinical data. Expansion cohorts may include:  
1. Cohort 1:  NSCLC, with squamous cell or adenocarcinoma histology  who have not been treated with a PD-
1 or PD -L1blocking antibody  
2. Cohort 2:  Patients with NSCLC (any histology) who have previously been treated with and unequivocally 
progressed on either a PD -1 or PD-L1-blocking antibody  
3. Cohort 3:  Patients with melanoma who have previously been treated with and  unequivocally  progressed on 
either a PD -1 or PD-L1-blocking antibody  (i.e., pembrolizumab, nivolumab, MEDI4736, or GNE PDL1 
[MPDL3280A]) 
4. Cohort 4: Patients with CRC (mismatch repair -proficient) who have not been previously treated with a PD -
1 or PD -L1 blocking antibody  
EMIC  Cohort: 
After completion of Stage 1 of Cohort 1 in the Expansion Phase, provided the criteria for continuation are met (i.e., 
at least 3 of 13 patients in Stage 1 experience a CR or PR; see Sample Size Considerations ), 15 patients with 
NSCLC (either squamous cell adenocarcinoma or mixed histology ) will be enrolled in an EMIC  Cohort. Patients 
will be randomly assigned to Stage 2 of Cohort 1 or the EMIC  Cohort on a 1:1 basis until the EMIC Cohort  is fully 
enrolled . As stated previously, EMIC  patients will participate in a 2 -week entinostat monotherapy period prior to 
starti ng entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab. The purpose of this 14-day lead-in phase is to obtain pre -and 
post-entinostat monotherapy correlative data in blood and tissue.  
Sample Size Considerations : 
Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase  
Three to 6 patients will be enrolled in each dose cohort based on a standard Phase 1 dose escalation scheme. Each patient will participate in only 1 dose cohort. The total number of patients to be enrolled in the Dose  
Escalation/Confirmation Phase  is depen dent upon the observed safety profile, which will determine the number of 
patients per dose cohort, as well as the number of dose escalations required to achieve the MTD  or RP2D . 
A starting sample size of at least 3 patients per dose  cohort - expanding to 6 patients in the event of a marginal DLT 
rate (33%) or to confirm  a dose for the Confirmation Phase  - is deemed to be a safe and conventional approach in 
the dose escalation of a novel oncologic agent. Assuming a true DLT rate of 5% or less, there would be a 3% chance that dose escalation would be halted in a given cohort (i .e., observing 2 or more patients with DLT). If a true DLT 
rate of 50% is assumed, then there would be an 83% chance that dose escalation would be halted in a given cohort.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 7 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
As stated pr eviously, a total of 9 additional patients will be enrolled at the potential RP2D  in the Dose Confirmation 
Cohort to obtain additional AE, immune correlate, and anti -tumor activity data on entinostat at the MTD or other 
dose recommended for further investigation in Phase 2 (i.e., RP2D ) in combination.  
Expansion Phase  
In the Expansion Phase of the study, the safety and preliminary antitumor activity of entinostat when administered at 
the RP2D with pembrolizumab will be explored in up to 4  cohorts of adult solid tumors as previously defined. Up to 
252 patients are planned to be enrolled among the 4 cohorts. Patients will be enrolled in each cohort according to a 
single -arm study design with ORR, as determined by irRECIST, as the primary endpoint. The Expansion Phase will 
be carried out in 2  stages so that enrollment for 1 or more of the cohorts evaluated can terminate early in the event 
the antitumor activity of  the combination regimen is not sufficient. The decision to terminate or continue enrollment 
for each cohort will be made independently of the other. The number of patients evaluated in each stage and the 
minimum number of responders needed to continue to the next stage, as described for cohort 1, was determined 
based on the optimum version of Simon’s 2 -stage design (Simon 1989) , with 80% power and 1 -sided significance 
level of 10%. For cohort 4, the number of patients evaluated in each stage and the minimum number of responders 
needed to continue to the next stage was determined based on optimum version of Simon’s 2 -stage design, with 90% 
power and 1-sided significance level of 5 %. For cohorts 2 and 3, the number of responders needed to declare the 
study a success was based on single proportion binominal test with 90% power and 1- sided significance level of 5% . 
Note that the protocol may be amended to allow for enrollment of additional or different cohorts, for example, patients with PD-L1-positive NSCLC, based on emerging data during study conduct.  
Syndax will conduct  one administrative analysis  when at least 60% (42 out of 70 patients in cohort 2, 31 out of 52 
patients in cohort 3) of patient information have accrued in cohorts 2 and  3 for decision making for late phase 
development planning. This administrative look will not lead to stopping of the study. Nonetheless, 0.01 alpha is being allocated to spend for the first administrative look and leaving 0.04 alpha for the final analysis . 
 
Cohort 1 (NSCLC patients with squamous cell and adenocarcinoma  histology  not previously treated with a PD -1 
or PD -L1 blocking antibody)  
A maximum of 46 patients will be enrolled in Cohort 1 . A true ORR of 35% is hypothesized for both tumor types. 
An ORR greater than 20% is considered a lower threshold for antitumor activity that would warrant continued development. Based on the design elements specified above, up to 13 patients may be enroll ed for either  tumor type 
during the first stage:  if 2 or fewer patients achieve a n objective  response ( CR or PR), confirmed or unconfirmed, 
then enrollment will terminate; otherwise, 33  additional patients will be enrolled during the second stage. Upon 
completion of the second stage, if 13 or more patients out of the 46 enrolled achieve CR or PR, then the true ORR 
for the combination therapy likely exceeds 20%, the lower threshold of acceptable antitumor activity. Alternatively, if 12 or fewer patients achieve an objective response at the end of the second stage, then the true ORR is likely 20% 
or lower and further evaluation of the combination therapy may not be pursued for that tumor type. If the true ORR 
is 20% or less for a tumor type, then the expected sample size is 29.4, with probability of terminating enrollment at 
the end of the first stage equal to 50%.  
Cohort 2 (Patients with NSCLC (any histology) who have previously been treated and progressed on a PD -1 or 
PD-L1- blocking antibody )  
A maximum of 70 patients will be enrolled  in Cohort 2. A true ORR of 15% is hypothesized. A response rate greater 
than 5% is considered the lower threshold for antitumor activity that would warrant continued development in this setting . Based on the design elements specified above, the single proportion (or one sample) binomial test will be 
used. Ninety -six percent 1 -sided confidence interval of the observed one sample proportion will be calculated. The 
trial will be considered a success if the lower limit of 9 6% con fidence interval is greater than 5%.  
Syndax will conduct  one administrative analysis  when at least 60% (42 out of 70 patients) of patient information 
have accrued in cohort 2 for decision making for late phase development planning. This administrative loo k will not 
lead to stopping of the study. Nonetheless, 0.01 alpha is being allocated to spend for the first administrative look and leaving 0.04 alpha for the final analysis . 
 
 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 8 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
Cohort 3 (Patients with melanoma who have previously been treated and progressed on a PD -1 or PD -L1-
blocking antibody ) 
A maximum of 52 patients will be enrolled  in Cohort 3. A true ORR of 25% is hypothesized. An ORR greater than 
10% is considered the lower threshold for antitumor activity that would warrant continued development in this 
setting. Based on the design elements specified above, , the single proportion (or one sample) binomial test will be 
used. Ninety -six percent 1 -sided confidence interval of the observed one sample proportion will be calculated. The 
trial will be considered a success if the lower limit of 9 6% confidence interval is greater than 10%.  
Syndax will conduct  one administrative analysis  when at least 60% (31 out of 52 patients) of patient information 
have accrued in cohort 3 for decision making for late phase development planning. This administrative look will not 
lead to stopping of the study. Nonetheless, 0.01 alpha is being allocated to spend for the first administrative look and leaving 0.04 alpha for the final analysis .  
Cohort 4 (Patients with CRC who have not previously been treated on a PD -1 or PD -L1-blocking antibody ) 
A maximum of 84 patients will be enrolled  in Cohort 4. A true ORR of 15% is hypothesized. An ORR greater than 
5% is considered the lower threshold for a ntitumor activity that would warrant continued development in this 
setting. Based on the design elements specified above, up to 37 patients may be enrolled during the first stage:  if 
less than or equal to 2patients achieve a CR or PR, confirmed or unconfirmed, then enrollment will terminate; 
otherwise, 47 additional patients will be enrolled during the second stage. Upon completion of the second stage, if 8 
or more patients out of the 84 enrolled achieve CR or PR, then the true ORR for the combination regimen likely 
exceeds 5%, the lower threshold of acceptable antitumor activity. Alternatively, if 7 or fewer patients achieve an 
objective response at the end of the second stage, then the true ORR is likely 5% or lower and further evaluation of 
the combination therapy may not be pursued in this setting. If the true ORR is 5% or less, then the expected sample 
size is 50.2, with probability of terminating enrollment at the end of the first stage equal to 72%.  
Endpoints  
Primary Efficacy Endpoint  
• ORR, as determined by the local investigator using irRECIST  
Secondary Endpoints: (analyzed in the same populations as the primary endpoint)  
• CBR (CR+PR+SD) at 6  months  
• PFS status at 6 months  
• PFS 
• OS 
In patients who experience a response to treatment  (CR or PR) : 
• DOR  
• TTR 
An analysis of efficacy endpoints also will be performed, with response determined using RECIST, version 1.1  and 
irRECIST . 
Safety:  
• Incidence of treatment -emergent AEs, SAEs, AEs resulting in the perma nent discontinuation of study drug, 
and deaths occurring within 90- days of last dose of study drug  
• Changes from baseline in laboratory, vital signs and ECG results  
Exploratory : 
  
 

Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 9 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
S
ummary of Patient Eligibility Criteria:   
INCLUSION CRITERIA 
Patients meeting all of the following criteria are considered eligible to participate in the study:  
Patients with NSCLC  
1. Has histologically - or pathologically -confirmed recurrent or metastatic NSCLC.  
2. If has adenocarcinoma, required to have previously been tested for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) 
rearrangements and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) (Exon 19 Deletion and Exon 21 L8585R 
Substitution) mutations, with results available for c ollection in this study, and, if positive, has been treated with 
prior EGFR or ALK therapy.  
3. Received at least 1 chemotherapeutic regimen in the advanced/metastatic setting  and experienced  documented, 
unequivocal progressive disease by either  RECIST 1.1 or  clinical assessment . In addition:  
• If patient has EGFR mutation -positive or ALK translation -positive disease, must have received an EGFR 
inhibitor or ALK inhibitor, respectively, in addition to the above chemotherapy regimen.  
• Patients who received adjuvant  or neoadjuvant platinum -based doublet chemotherapy (after surgery and/or 
radiation therapy) and developed recurrent or metastatic disease within 6 months of completing therapy are 
eligible; in such cases, the adjuvant or neoadjuvant platinum -based doublet  chemotherapy regimen will 
count as a line of therapy.  
• Patients with recurrent disease >6 months after adjuvant or neoadjuvant platinum- based doublet 
chemotherapy who subsequently experienced PD during or after a platinum -based doublet chemotherapy 
regime n given to treat the recurrences, are eligible; the second platinum -based doublet chemotherapy 
regimen does not count as another line of therapy.  
• Patients who received pemetrexed, bevacizumab, or erlotinib as maintenance therapy (non -progressors with 
platinum -based doublet chemotherapy) and subsequently progressed after maintenance therapy) are 
eligible; such therapy does not count as a line of therapy. However, if the patient received a tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor (TKI) after failure of platinum- based doubl et chemotherapy, the TKI will count as an additional 
line of therapy.  
4. Patients with NSCLC enrolled in Cohort 1 of the Expansion Phase should not have been previously treated with 
a PD -1/PD -L1-blocking antibody (i.e., pembrolizumab, nivolumab, MEDI 4736, or GNE PDL1 [MPDL3280A])  
Patients in Expansion Phase, Cohorts 2 (NSCLC) and 3 (Melanoma)  
5. Previousl y treated  with a PD -1/PD -L1-blocking antibody (i.e., pembrolizumab, nivolumab, MEDI4736, or GNE 
PDL1 [MPDL3280A]) and experienced documented, unequivocal radiog raphic progression of disease by 
irRECIST , or similar criteria  during or within 12 weeks after last dose of such treatment . Patients must have 
received at least 6 weeks  of PD-1/PD -L1 therapy for Cohort 2 and at least 8 weeks  of PD-1/PD -L1 therapy f or 
Cohort 3 . For patients who received such agents in a clinical trial, documentation of progressive disease 

Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 10 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
requires a confirmatory scan . For patients who had been treated with such agents outside of a clinical trial, 
documentation of progressive disease wil l be based on both radiographic and clinical assessment . If the 
requirement for a confirmatory scan is deemed not to be in the patient’s best interests based upon his/her overall 
condition, including performance status and clinical symptoms, this requireme nt may be w aived in consultation 
with the S ponsor’s Medical Monitor; however, patients who have not had a confirmatory scan because of rapid 
progression and clinical deterioration should not be enrolled onto this trial.  In all cases, the scan obtained duri ng 
the screening process may serve as the confirmatory scan.  
(Note:  Patients who are currently receiving pembrolizumab and have clear , unequivocal  evidence of PD may be 
eligible . Such patients are to be discussed with the Sponsor Study Physician  on a case -by-case basis prior to 
enrollment of the patient in the study.)  
Patients with Melanoma  
6. In addition to having been previously treated with a PD -1/PD -L1-blocking antibody (inclusion #5), has a 
histologically - or cytologically -confirmed diagnosis of unresectable or metastatic melanoma and experienced 
unequivocal progressive disease during treatment with a BRAF inhibitor if BRAF V600 muta tion-positive . 
Treatment with BRAF inhibitor may occur AFTER  treatment with the checkpoint inhibitor.  
Patients in Expansion Phase, Cohort 4 (Colorectal Cancer)  
7. Received at least 1 chemotherapeutic regimen in the advanced/metastatic setting and experienced documented, unequivocal progressive disease by either RECIST  1.1 or clinical assessment . Must have documented mismatch 
repair -proficient colon cancer  as determined by either immunohistochemistry for mismatch repair proteins or 
PCR- based functional microsatellite instability . Patients with colorectal cancer enrolled  in Cohort 4 should not 
have been previously treated with a PD -1/PD -L1-blocking antibody (i.e., pe mbrolizumab, nivolumab , 
MEDI36 MEDI 4736, or GNE PDL1 [MPDL3280A])  
All Patients  
8. Aged 18 years or older on the day written informed consent is given.  
9. If has brain metastases, must have stable neurologic status following local therapy (surgery or radiation) for at 
least 4 weeks without the use of steroids or on stable or decreasing dose of ≤10  mg daily prednisone (or 
equivalent), and must be without neurologic dysfunction that would confound the evaluation of neurologic and other AEs. (Patients with a history of carcinomatous meningitis are not eligible.)  
10. Evidence of locally recurrent or metastatic disease based on imaging studies (e.g., CT, MRI) within 28 days before the first study drug dose:  
• At least 1 measurable lesion ≥20 mm by conventional techniques or ≥10 mm by spiral CT scan or MRI, 
with the last imaging performed within 28 days before the first study drug dose. If there is only 
1 measurable lesion and i t is located in previously irradiated field, it must have demonstrated unequivocal 
progression according to RECIST, version 1.1.  
11. If receiving radiation therapy, has had a 2-week washout period following completion of the treatment prior to 
receiving the f irst study drug dose and continues to have at least 1 measurable lesion, per above criterion.  
12. ECOG performance status of 0 or 1.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 11 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
13. Has the following laboratory parameters:  
System  Laboratory Value  
Hematological  
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC)  ≥1.5×109/L 
Platelets  ≥100×109/L 
Hemoglobin  ≥9 g/dL or ≥5.6 mmol/L  
Renal  
Creatinine OR 
Measured or calculated1 creatinine clearance (CrCl) 
(glomerular filtration rate [GFR] can also be used in place 
of creatinine or CrCl)  ≤1.5× the upper limit of normal (ULN) OR 
≥60 mL/min for patient with creatinine levels >1.5× 
institutional ULN  
Hepatic  
Total bilirubin  ≤1.5×ULN OR 
Direct bilirubin ≤ULN for patients with total bilirubin levels 
>1.5×ULN  
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT)  ≤2.5×ULN OR 
≤5×ULN for patients with liver metastases  
Coagulation  
International Normalized Ratio (INR) or Prothrombin 
Time (PT)  
 
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT)  ≤1.5×ULN unless patient is receiving anticoagulant therapy as 
long as PT or PTT is within therapeutic range of intended use of anticoagulants  
≤1.5×ULN unless patient is receiving anticoagulant therapy as 
long as PT or PTT is within therapeutic range of intended use 
of anticoagulants  
1 Creatinine clearance should be calculated per institutional standard.  
 
14. Female patients  of childbearing potential  must  have a negative serum  pregnancy test during screening and a 
negative urine pregnancy test within 72 hours prior to taking first dose of study drug. If a patient is of 
childbearing pot ential, the patient must agree to use effective contraception, as defined in the prot ocol (Section  
8.5.3 ), during the study and for 120 days after the last dose of study drug. Non-childbearing potential is defined 
as (by other than medical reasons):  
• ≥45 years of age and has not had menses for >2 years,  
• Amenorrheic for <2 years without a hysterectomy and oophorectomy and a follicle -stimulating hormone 
value in the postmenopausal range upon pre -study (screening ) evaluation.   
• Post hysterectomy, oophorectomy or tubal ligation . Documented hysterectomy  or oophorectomy must be 
confirmed with medical records of the actual procedure or confirmed by an ultrasound. Tubal ligation must 
be confirmed with medical records of the actual procedure otherwise the patient  must  be willing to use 2  
adequate barrier methods throughout the study , starting with the screening  visit through 120 days after the 
last dose of study drug. Please see Section  8.5.3 , Contraception,  for a list of acceptable birth control 
methods.  
15. If male, agrees to use an adequate method of contraception starting with the first dose of study drug through 120 
days after th e last dose of study drug.  Please see Section  8.5.3 , Contraception,  for a list of acceptable birth 
control methods.  
16. Experienced resolution of toxic effect(s) of the most recent prior chemotherapy to Grade 1 or less (except alopecia). If patient underwent major surgery or radiation therapy of >30 Gy, they must have recovered from 
the toxicity and/or complications from the intervention.  
17. Willing to have fresh tumor s amples collected during screening and at other time points designated as 
mandatory, per the Schedule of Study Assessments. If patients whose only accessible lesion for biopsy is a 
solitary target lesion, it must be amenable to a core biopsy that will not c ompromise assessment of tumor 
measurements.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 12 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
18. Able to understand and give written informed consent and comply with study procedures.  
EXCLUSION CRITERIA 
Patients meeting any of the following criteria are not eligible for study participation:  
1. Diagnosis of immunodeficiency or is receiving  chronic  systemic steroid therapy (in dosing exceeding 10 mg 
daily of prednisone equivalent) or any other form of immunosuppressive therapy within 7 days prior to the first 
dose of study drug.  
2. Active autoimmune disease that has required systemic treatment in past 2 years (i.e., with disease modifying 
agents, corticosteroids, or immunosuppressive drugs). Replacement therapy (e.g., thyroxine, insulin, or 
physiologic corticosteroid replacement therapy for adrenal or pituitary insufficiency) is not considered a form of 
systemic treatment.  
3. History of interstitial lung disease (ILD).  
4. Allergy to benzamide or inactive components of entinostat.  
5. History of allergies to any active or inactive ingredients of pembrolizumab or severe hypersensitivity (>= Grade 3) to pembrolizumab.  
6. History or current evidence of any condition, therapy, or laboratory abnormality that might confound the results of the study, interfere with the patient’s participation for the full duration of the  study, or is not in the best 
interest of the patient to participate, in the opinion of the treating Investigator, including, but not limited to:  
• Myocardial infarction or arterial thromboembolic events within 6 months prior to baseline or severe or 
unstabl e angina, New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III or IV disease, or a QTc interval 
> 470 msec.  
• Uncontrolled heart failure or hypertension , uncontrolled diabetes mellitus , or uncontrolled systemic 
infection.  
• Another known additional malignancy that is progressing or requires active treatment (excluding 
adequately treated basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell of the skin,  cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 
[CIN]/cervical carcinoma in situ  or melanoma in situ  or ductal carcinoma in situ  of the breast). Prior history 
of other cancer is allowed, as long as there is no active disease within the prior 5 years.  
• Has a history of (non- infectious) pneumonitis that required steroids or  has current pneumonitis.   
• Active infection requiring systemic therapy.  
• Known active central nervous system (CNS) metastases and/or carcinomatous meningitis.  
Note: Patients with previously treated brain metastases may participate provided they are stable (without 
evidence of progression by imaging [using the identical imaging modality for each assessment, either MRI 
or CT scan] for at least 4 weeks prior to the first dose of study drug and any neurologic symptoms have returned to baseline), have no evidence of new or enlarging brain metastases, and are not using steroids for a t least 2 weeks prior to the first dose of study drug or are on stable or decreasing dose of ≤10 mg daily 
prednisone (or equivalent). This exception does not include carcinomatous meningitis which is excluded regardless of clinical stability.  
7. Known psychia tric or substance abuse disorders that would interfere with cooperation with the requirements of 
the study. 
8. Currently participating and receiving study therapy or has participated in a study of an investigational agent and 
received study therapy or used an investigational device within 4 weeks of the first dose of treatment.  
9. Received a live virus vaccin ation  within 30 days of the first dose of treatment.  
10. Prior anti -cancer monoclonal antibody (mAb) within 4 weeks prior to baseline or who has not recovered (i .e., 
≤Grade 1 or at baseline) from AEs due to agents administered more than 4 weeks earlier.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 13 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
11. Prior chemotherapy, targeted small molecule therapy, or radiation therapy within 2 weeks prior to study 
baseline or who has not recovered (i.e., ≤Grade 1 or at bas eline) from AEs due to a previously administered 
agent.  
Note:  Patients with ≤Grade 2 neuropathy or ≤Grade 2 alopecia are an exception to this criterion and may 
qualify for the study.  
Note:  If patient underwent major surgery, they must have recovered adequately from the toxicity and/or 
complications from the intervention prior to starting therapy.  
12. Received transfusion of blood products (including platelets or red blood cells) or administration of colony 
stimulating factors (including granulocyte -colony stimulating factor [G -CSF], granulocyte macrophage- colony 
stimulating factor [GM -CSF], or recombinant erythropoietin) within 4  weeks prior to the first dose of treatment.  
13. Currently receiving treatment with any other agent listed on the prohibited medication  list in Section 8.5.1  such 
as valproic acid, or other systemic cancer agents within 14  days of the first dose of treatment.  
14. If female, i s pregnant , breastfeeding, or expecting to conceive, or if male, expect to  father children within the 
projected duration of the study, starting with the screening visit through 120 days after the last dose of study drug.  
15. Known history of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (HIV 1/2 antibodies). 
16. Known active hepatitis B (e.g., hepatitis B surface antigen -reactive) or hepatitis C (e.g., hepatitis C virus 
ribonucleic acid [qualitative]).  
17. For CRC expansion cohort, prior history of malignant bowel obstruction requiring hospitalization in the 6 
months prior to enrollment 
18. For the CRC expansion cohort, history of uncontrolled ascites, defined as symptomatic ascites and/or repeated paracenteses for symptom control in the past 3 months  
Investigational Product:   
Entinostat   
Entino stat is a synthetic small molecule bearing the chemical name 3 -pyridylmethyl-N- {4-[(2-
aminophenyl)carbonyl] benzyl}carbamate and the molecular formula C
21H20N4O3, with a molecular weight of 
376.41. Entinostat is classified as an antineoplastic agent, specifically functioning as an inhibitor of histone deacetylases and therefore promot es hyperacetylation of nucleosomal histones, allowing transcriptional activation of 
a distinct set of genes that leads to the inhibition of cell proliferation, induction of ter minal differentiation, and/or 
apoptosis. Entinostat is supplied in two strengths of film -coated tablets containing 1 mg (pink to light red) or 5 mg 
(yellow)  of active ingredient . 
Pembrolizumab  
Pembrolizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that blocks the interaction between PD- 1 and its ligands, PD -
L1 and programmed death ligand -2 (PD-L2). Pembrolizumab is an immunoglobulin G 4 kappa immunoglobulin with 
an approximate molecular weight of 149 kDa.  
Pembr olizumab will be supplied as 50mg lyophilized powder for injection or 100mg/4  mL solution for injection .  
Statistical Considerations : 
The safety and efficacy analyses will be presented by study phase. For the escalation phase, tabulations will be provided by dose cohort and overall. For the Expansion Phase, tabulations will be provided by tumor type and 
overall. Some analyses may be performed based on the Dose Escalation/Confirmation  and Expansion Phase s 
combined.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018  Page 14 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL   SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
Safety Analyses  
Safety analyses will be conducted using the Safety Analysis Set.  
Treatment- emergent AEs reported during the study will be tabulated and listed by Medical Dictionary for 
Regulatory Activities (MedDRA  version 18.0 ) System Organ Class (SOC) and Preferred Term (PT). Tables wi ll 
display number and percentage of patients experiencing the event for the following categories: all AEs; AEs 
considered related to study drug; AEs by severity; DLTs; AEs occasioning treatment delay or discontinuation; and 
serious adverse events (SAEs). F or the Dose E scalation/Confirmation  Phase, the observed DLT rate in each dose 
cohort will be calculated by the crude proportion of patients who experienced DLT with a 2 -sided 95% exact 
binomial confidence interval (CI).  
Hematology and serum chemistries wi ll be summarized using conventional summary statistics (mean, standard 
deviation, median, and range) for the following: baseline value, minimum and maximum post-baseline  values, 
average post- baseline  value, and last post- baseline  value. Standard shift tables will also be prepared presenting worst 
post-baseline  toxicity grade versus baseline. Vital signs will be summarized in a descriptive manner by calculating 
the mean, standard deviation, median, and range in the same manner described for laboratory values . The Wilcoxon 
signed rank test may be used to assist in the identification of any systematic changes.  
Efficacy Analyses  
Efficacy analyses will be conducted using the Full Analysis Set and, where appropriate, the Per -protocol Set.  
ORR will be estimated for  each cohort evaluated in the Expansion Phase , assessed  using irRECIST . Crude 
proportion of patients with best overall response of CR or PR, along with  a 2-sided 95% CI, will be calculated. The 
width of the CI will be adjusted to account for the multistage  design ( Atkinson 1985 ). Additionally, a 90% one -sided 
CI of the form (π L, 1] will be reported since the sample size for the Expansion Phase  was determined using a one -
sided significance level of 10%. CBR at 6 months  will be analyzed in a similar manner.  
DOR will be calculated for patients who achieve a CR or PR and is defined as the number of months from the start date of the response (and subsequently confirmed) to the first date that recurrent disease or PD is documented. PFS 
is defined as the number of months from the date of the first dose of study drug to the earliest of documented PD or 
death due to any cause without prior progression. OS is defined as the number of months from the first dose of study 
drug to the date of death due to any cause. DOR, PFS, and OS will be summarized descriptively using the Kaplan -
Meier method with 95% CIs calculated using Greenwood’s formula. Median follow- up for each endpoint will be 
estimated according to the Kaplan -Meier estimat e of potential follow -up. PFS rate at 6 months and corresponding 
95% CIs will be estimated using the Kaplan -Meier method. Greenwood’s formula will be used to calculate the 
standard errors of the Kaplan -Meier estimate and upper and lower limits of the 95% CI.  
Procedures:   The Schedule of Study Assessments for patients in the EMIC  Cohort is included in Table 1-2. The 
Schedule of Study Assessments for all other patients is included in Table 1-1.  
 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 15 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Table 1-1 Schedule of Study Assessments  
Procedure  Screening  
(D -21 to -1) Combina tion Therapy 
EOT1 Safety 
F/U2,3 Post-
Study 
F/U C1 C2  ≥C3 
D1 D8 D15 D1 D15 Day 1  
Visit Window  - - ±1D ±1D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±5D 
Provision of written informed consent  X          
Demographics X          
Height X          
Medical history, including underlying disease 
history X          
Complete physical examination  X4 X4      X X  
Symptom-directed physical examination   X X X X X X    
ECG X      X5 X   
Vital signs  and weight  X X   X  X X X  
ECOG performance status  X X   X  X X X  
Radiological Imaging  X6      X7 X8   
Disease Response Assessment  X     X X9   
Thyroid function tests  X10    X10  X10 X   
Pregnancy testing X X11         
Hematology , coagulation studies12, and clinical 
chemistries13 X X14 X X X X X X   
Blood sample for immune correlate s  X   X X15     
Blood sample for protein lysine acetylation   X  X  X     
Tissue sample collection for immune correlate s X16     X16     
Entinostat self -administration   Entinostat is to be self -administered by the patient weekly), starting on 
C1D1    
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 16 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Procedure  Screening  
(D -21 to -1) Combina tion Therapy 
EOT1 Safety 
F/U2,3 Post-
Study 
F/U C1 C2  ≥C3 
D1 D8 D15 D1 D15 Day 1  
Visit Window  - - ±1D ±1D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±5D 
Pembrolizumab administration  X   X \ X    
Blood sample for entinostat pharmacokinetics17  X X X X      
Blood sample for pembrolizumab 
pharmacokinetics and anti -drug antibodies18  X   X  X  X  
Blood sample for tumor markers19  X   X  X X   
Pre-treatment/concomitant medications X X X X X X X X X  
Adverse events  X X X X X X X X X  
Study drug compliance assessment   X X X    X   
Post-study treatment patient contact20         X 
1 The EOT visit is to be conducted within 7 days of study drug discontinuation.  
2 The first Safety F/U visit is 30 days after the EOT visit . After completion of the Safety F/U visit, patients who have not experienced PD are to be followed every 2  months until PD 
and 3 months thereafter until death or closure of the study by the Sponsor.  
3 The second Safety F/U visit is 90 days after the EOT visit.  
4 If the screening physical examination was performed within 7 days before baseline (C1D1) , then a symptom -directed examination may be performed at baseline. 
5 An ECG is to be performed during screening, pre-dose on C3D1 and then every 3 cycles thereafter. An ECG may be repeated anytime , as clinically indicated.  
6 Performed only if last scan was performed >28 days previously.  
7 Patients will have radiological disease assessments performed during screening and every 6 weeks ( +/-3 days)  (Week 6, Week 12 , etc.)  during treatment .  
8 Performed only if radiological progression was not previously observed on study.  
9 Disease assessments are to be performed every 6 weeks ( +/-3 days ) (Week 6, Week 12, etc.)  during treatment . 
10 In addition to screening, thyroid function tests (thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH, thyrotropin], free thyroxine [T4], and triiodothyronine [T3]  or free triiodothyronine [FT3] ) are to 
be performed every 6 weeks during treatment  starting at C2. 
11 For female patients of child -bearing potential, a serum pregnancy test is to be performed during screening and a urine pregnancy test is to be performed within 72 hours prior to 
taking the first study drug dose . Pregnancy testing is to be repeated during the study any time pregnancy is suspected.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 17 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
12 Analytes tested include white blood cell count (WBC) with differential, platelet count, red blood cell  count (RBC), hemoglobin (HGB), hematocrit (HCT), and, at screening only, 
prothrombin time (PT) or international normalized ratio (INR) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT).  Note: it is advisable to monitor PT and INR more frequently for 
patients who receive coumarin derivatives concurrently with entinostat.  
13 Analytes tested i nclude ALT, AST, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), calcium, creatinine, sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, glucose, 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), phosphorus, total protein, and uric acid. Magnesium is to be measured at baseline only, unless clinically indicated.  
14 Performed only if screening laboratory tests performed >7 days prior to C1D1 (baseline ). 
15 Pre-dose on C1D1, C2D1 and C2D15 only. 
16 Fresh tumor tissue samples will be collected during the study as  follows: during screening  from all patients  on a mandatory  basis; on C 2D15 (+3 days) on an optional  basis from 
patients in the Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase ; and on C2 D15 (+3 days) on a mandatory basis from the first 25 patients (in total, across cohorts) in Stage 1 in the Expansion 
Phase . If, based on an interim review of tumor tissue data from the initial patients in the Expansion Phase, such data are considered informative, then tumor tissue samples will be 
collected on a mandatory basis from all subsequent patients in the Expansion Phase on C2D15 (+3 days). Alternatively, if such data are not considered informative, these samples 
will not be collected from subsequent patients.  
17 Blood samples for entinostat PK will be collected pre -dose on C1D1  as well as 2-4 hours post -dose on C1D1; on C1D 8 (anytime post-dose) , on C1D15 (anytime post-dose) , and pre-
dose on C2D1. The date and time of entinostat administration, the start time and stop time of the pembrolizumab infusion, and the date and time of PK sample collection must be 
recorded in the eCRF.  
18 Samples for pembrolizumab PK and anti -pembrolizumab antibodies will be collected pre -dose on C1D1, C2D1, C4D1, C6D1, C8D1 and every 4  cycles thereafter, and at 30 days 
after the last pembrolizumab dose (or until the patient starts new anti -cancer therapy) .  
19 CEA in CRC cohort only 
20Information regarding PD, alternate treatments, and survival status collected until study closure ; every 2 months until PD , and then every 3 months thereafter.  
 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 18 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Table 1-2 Schedule of Study Assessments :  EMIC Cohort  
Procedure  Screening  
(D -35 
to -15) Mono -
therapy 
Period  Combination Therapy Period  
EOT1 Safety 
F/U2,3 Post-
Study 
F/U D -14 C1 C2 ≥C3 
D1 D8 D15 D1 D15 Day 1  
Visit Window  - - - ±1D ±1D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±5D 
Provision of written informed consent  X           
Demographics X           
Height X           
Medical history, including underlying disease 
history X           
Complete physical examination  X4 X4       X X  
Symptom-directed physical examination    X X X X X X    
ECG X       X5 X   
Vital signs and weight  X X X   X  X X X  
ECOG performance status  X X X   X  X X X  
Radiological Imaging  X6       X7 X8   
Disease Response Assessment  X      X X9   
Thyroid function tests  X10     X10  X10 X   
Pregnancy testing X X11          
Hematology, coagulation studies12, and 
clinical chemistries13 X X14 X X X X X X X   
Blood sample for immune correlate s  X X X   X     
Blood sample for protein lysine acetylation   X X  X  X     
Tissue sample collection for immune 
correlates X15      X15     
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 19 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Procedure  Screening  
(D -35 
to -15) Mono -
therapy 
Period  Combination Therapy Period  
EOT1 Safety 
F/U2,3 Post-
Study 
F/U D -14 C1 C2 ≥C3 
D1 D8 D15 D1 D15 Day 1  
Visit Window  - - - ±1D ±1D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±3D ±5D 
Entinostat self -administration   Entinostat is to be self -administered by the patient weekly, starting on D -14    
Pembrolizumab administration    X   X  X    
Pre-treatment/concomitant medications  X X X X X X X X X X  
Adverse events  X X X X X X X X X X  
Study drug compliance assessment   X X X X    X   
Post-study treatment patient contact16          X 
1 The EOT visit is to be conducted within 7 days of study drug discontinuation.  
2 The first Safety F/U visit is 30 days after the EOT visit . After completion of the Safety F/U visit, patients who have not experienced PD are to be followed every 2  months until PD 
and 3 months thereafter until death or closure of the study by the Sponsor.  
3 The second Safety F/U visit is 90 days after the EOT visit.  
4 If the screening physical examination was performed within 7 days before the Day -14 visit, then a symptom -directed examination may be performed on Day -14. 
5 An ECG is to be performed during screening, pre-dose on C3D1 and then every 3 cycles thereafter. An ECG may be repeated  anytime , as clinically indicated.  
6 Performed only if last scan was performed >28 days previously.  
7 Patients will have radiological disease assessments performed during screening and every 6 weeks ( +/-3 days ) (Week 6, Week 1 2, etc.)  during treatment .  
8 Performed only  if radiological progression was not previously observed on study.  
9 Disease assessments are to be performed every 6 weeks ( +/-3 days ) (Week 6, Week 1 2, etc.)  during treatment . 
10 In addition to screening, t hyroid function tests (thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH, thyrotropin], free thyroxine [T4], and triiodothyronine [T3] or free triiodothyronine [FT3])  are to 
be performed every 6 weeks during treatment  starting at C2. 
11 For female patients of child -bearing potential, a serum pregnancy test is to be performed during screening and a urine pregnancy test is to be performed within 72 hours prior to 
taking the first study drug dose. Pregnancy testing is to be repeated during the study any time pregnancy is suspected 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 20 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
12 Analytes tested include white blood cell count (WBC) with differential, platelet count, red blood cell count (RBC), hemoglobin (HGB), hematocrit (HCT), and, at screening only, 
prothrombin time (PT) or international normalized ratio (INR) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT).  Note: it is advisable to monitor PT and INR more frequently for 
patients who receive coumarin derivatives concurrently with entinostat.  
13 Analytes tested include ALT, AST, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), calcium, creatini ne, sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, glucose, 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), phosphorus, total protein, and uric acid. Magnesium is to be measured at baseline only, unless c linically indicated.  
14 Performed only if screening laboratory tests performed >7 days prior to Day -14. 
15 Fresh tumor tissue samples are to be collected on a mandatory basis from the first 10  patients in the EMIC Cohort during screening and on C2D15  (+3 days).  
16 Information regarding PD, alternate treatments, and survival status collected until study closure; every 2 months until PD and then every 3 months thereafter.  
 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 21 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Study Glossary  
Abbreviation/Acronym  Definition  
ADaM  Analysis Dataset Model  
AE Adverse event  
ALK Anaplastic lymphoma kinase  
ALP Alkaline phosphatase  
ALT Alanine aminotransferase  
ANC  Absolute neutrophil count  
aPTT  Activated partial thromboplastin time  
AST  Aspartate aminotransferase  
AZA 5-Azacitadine  
BSA  Body surface area  
BUN  Blood urea nitrogen  
C Cycle  
CBR Clinical benefit rate  
CEA  Cancer Embryonic Antigen  
CI Confidence interval  
CIN Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia  
CNS  Central nervous system 
CR Complete response  
CrCl  Creatinine clearance  
CRC Colorectal cancer 
CSC Cancer stem cell  
CT Computed tomography  
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 22 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Abbreviation/Acronym  Definition  
CTLA-4 Cytotoxic T -lymphocyte -associated antigen -4 
D Day 
DKA  Diabetic ketoacidosis 
DLT Dose- limiting toxicity  
DNA  Deoxyribonucleic acid  
DOR  Duration of response  
EC Ethics Committee  
ECG  Electrocardiogram  
ECI Events of clinical interest 
ECOG  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group 
eCRF  Electronic case report form  
EDC Electronic data capture 
EGFR Epidermal growth factor receptor 
EOT End of Treatment  
F/U Follow -up 
FAS Full Analysis Set  
FDG 18F-deoxyglucose  
FoxP3  Forkhead box P3  
G-CSF Granulocyte -colony stimulating factor  
GFR  Glomerular filtration  rate 
GI Gastrointestinal  
GM-CSF Granulocyte macrophage -colony stimulating factor  
G-MDSCs  Granulocytic myeloid -derived suppressor cells  
HDAC  Histone deacetylase 
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 23 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Abbreviation/Acronym  Definition  
IB Investigator’s Brochure  
ICH International Council for Harmonisation  
ID Identification  
IFN-γ Interferon -gamma  
Ig Immunoglobulin 
ILD Interstitial lung disease  
IND Investigational New Drug Application  
INR International normalized ratio  
irAE  Immune -related adverse events  
IRB Institutional Review Board 
irRECIST  Immune -related Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors  
ITIM  Immunoreceptor tyrosine -based inhibition motif  
ITSM Immunoreceptor tyrosine -based switch motif  
IV Intravenous(ly)  
LDH Lactic dehydrogenase  
mAb  Monoclonal antibody  
MDSC  Myeloid -derived suppressor cells  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MRI  Magnetic resonance imaging  
MTD Maximum tolerated dose 
NCI National Cancer Institute 
NE Non- Evaluable  
NSCLC  Non-small cell lung cancer  
NYHA New York Heart  Association  
ORR Overall response rate  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 24 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Abbreviation/Acronym  Definition  
OS Overall survival  
PD Progressive disease 
PD-1 Programmed death receptor -1 
PD-L1 Programmed death ligand -1 
PD-L2 Programmed death ligand -2 
PET Positron emission tomography 
PFS Progression- free survival  
PK Pharmacokinetic  
PO By mouth 
PP Per-protocol  
PR Partial response  
PT Prothrombin time  
Q2W  Every other week (i.e., every 2 weeks)  
Q3W  Every 3 weeks  
RBC Red blood cell (count)  
RECIST  Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors  
SAE  Serious adverse event  
SC Subcutaneous(ly)  
SDTM Study Data Tabulation Model  
SEER Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results  
SOC  System organ class  
T1DM Type 1 diabetes mellitus  
T3 Triiodothyronine  
T4 Thyroxine  
TEAE Treatment- emergent adverse event  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 25 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Abbreviation/Acronym  Definition  
TGF Transforming growth factor  
TIL Tumor- infiltrating lymphocyte  
TKI Tyrosine kinase inhibitor  
TSH Thyroid stimulating hormone  
TTR Time to response  
ULN Upper limit of normal  
US United States  
V-type Variable -type 
WBC White blood cell (count)  
 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 26 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS SN DX-275-0601  .......................................................................... 3  
STUDY GLOSSARY  .................................................................................................................... 21 
LIST OF TABLES ......................................................................................................................... 30 
LIST OF FIGURES  ....................................................................................................................... 30 
2. OBJECTIVES  ...................................................................................................................... 31 
2.1 Primary .................................................................................................................... 31 
2.2 Secondary  ................................................................................................................ 31 
2.3 Exploratory .............................................................................................................. 32 
3. ENDPOINTS  ....................................................................................................................... 33 
3.1 Efficacy  ................................................................................................................... 33 
3.2 Safety  ...................................................................................................................... 33 
3.3 Exploratory .............................................................................................................. 33 
4. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  ................................................................................ 35 
4.1 Study Treatment ...................................................................................................... 37 
4.1.1  Entinostat (SNDX -275)  ......................................................................... 37 
4.1.2  Pembrolizumab (MK -3475)  .................................................................. 39 
4.2 Study Rationale  ....................................................................................................... 41 
4.3 Rationale for the Dose Selection ............................................................................. 42 
4.3.1  Entinostat............................................................................................... 42 
4.3.2  Pembrolizumab  ..................................................................................... 43 
4.4 Hypothesis ............................................................................................................... 44 
5. EXPERIM ENTAL PLAN  .................................................................................................... 45 
5.1 Study Design  ........................................................................................................... 45 
5.2 Number of Centers  .................................................................................................. 49 
5.3 Number of Patients  .................................................................................................. 49 
5.4 Estimated Study Duration  ....................................................................................... 49 
6. PATIENT ELIGIBILITY  .................................................................................................... 50 
6.1 Inclus i
on Criteria  ..................................................................................................... 50 
6.2 Exclusion Criteria  ................................................................................................... 54 
7. PATIENT ENROLLMENT ................................................................................................. 57 
8. TRE ATMENT PROCEDURES .......................................................................................... 58 
8.1 Study Drug .............................................................................................................. 58 
8.1.1  Entinostat............................................................................................... 58 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 27 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
8.1.2  Pembrolizumab  ..................................................................................... 59 
8.2 Study Drug Dose and Administration  ..................................................................... 59 
8.2.1  Dose-escalation Phase ........................................................................... 59 
8.2.2  Expansion Phase  .................................................................................... 62 
8.3 Treatment Duration  ................................................................................................. 63 
8.4 Dose Adjustments  ................................................................................................... 63 
8.4.1  Entinostat............................................................................................... 64 
8.4.2  Pembrolizumab  ..................................................................................... 66 
8.5 Concomitant Therapy .............................................................................................. 72 
8.5.1  Prohibited Medications and Medications to be Avoided During the 
Study  ..................................................................................................... 72 
8.5.2  Rescue Medications & Supportive Care Guidelines for 
Pembrolizumab  ..................................................................................... 74 
8.5.3  Diet/Activity/Other Considerations  ....................................................... 75 
8.5.4  Study Drug Use in Pregnancy  ............................................................... 76 
8.5.5  Study Drug Use in Nursing Women  ..................................................... 77 
9. STUDY TESTS AND OBSE RVATIONS  ........................................................................... 78 
9.1 Baseline Assessments .............................................................................................. 78 
9.1.1 Demographics  ....................................................................................... 78 
9.1.2  Height  .................................................................................................... 78 
9.1.3  Medical History  ..................................................................................... 79 
9.1.4  Pregnancy Testing  ................................................................................. 79 
9.2 Safety Assessments  ................................................................................................. 79 
9.2.1  Physical Examination  ............................................................................ 79 
9.2.2  Electrocardiograms  ............................................................................... 80 
9.2.3  Vital Signs  ............................................................................................. 80 
9.2.4  Weight  ................................................................................................... 80 
9.2.5  ECOG Performance Status  .................................................................... 80 
9.2.6  Clinical Laboratory Tests  ...................................................................... 81 
9.2.7  Adverse Events ...................................................................................... 83 
9.3 Efficacy Assessments  .............................................................................................. 83 
9.3.1  Tum
or Measurements and Disease Response Assessment  ................... 83 
9.4 Protein Lysine  Acetylation and Immune Correlates  ............................................... 90 
9.4.1  Blood  ..................................................................................................... 90 
9.4.2  Tumor Tissue  ........................................................................................ 92 
9.5 Pharmacokinetics  .................................................................................................... 93 
9.5.1  Entinostat............................................................................................... 93 
9.5.2  Pembrolizumab  ..................................................................................... 93 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 28 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
10. DISCONTINUATION AND REPLACEMENT OF PATIENTS  ....................................... 95 
11. ADVERSE EVENTS, DATA  REPORTING, AND RECOR DING  .................................... 96 
11.1  Study  Drugs  ............................................................................................................. 96 
11.1.1  Entinostat............................................................................................... 96 
11.1.2  Pembrolizumab  ..................................................................................... 96 
11.2  Adverse Event Definitions  ...................................................................................... 96 
11.2.1  Adverse Events ...................................................................................... 96 
11.2.2  Suspected Adverse Reaction ................................................................. 97 
11.2.3  Unexpected Adverse Event  ................................................................... 97 
11.2.4  Serious Adverse Events  ......................................................................... 98 
11.3  Reporting Procedures for All Adverse Events  ........................................................ 98 
11.4  Serious Adverse Event Reporting Procedures  ...................................................... 100 
11.4.1  Pregnancy and Lactation Reporting Procedures  ................................. 101 
11.4.2  Definition of an Overdose for This Protocol and Reporting of 
Overdose to the Sponsor  ..................................................................... 101 
11.4.3  Events of Clinical Interest with Pembrolizumab  ................................. 102 
11.4.4  Follow -Up of Adverse Events  ............................................................. 102 
11.4.5  Safety Reporting to Health Authorities, Ethics 
Committees/Institutional Review Boards and Investigators  ............... 102 
11.4.6  Protocol Deviations Due to an Emergency or Adverse Event  ............ 103 
11.5  Safety Monitoring  ................................................................................................. 103 
12. STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS  ............................................................................... 104 
12.1  Sample Size Estimation ......................................................................................... 104 
12.1.1  Escalation Phase  .................................................................................. 104 
12.1.2  Expansion Phase  .................................................................................. 104 
12.2  Populations for Analysis  ....................................................................................... 107 
12.3  Analysis Schedule ................................................................................................. 107 
12.3.1  Safety Monitoring  ............................................................................... 107 
12.3.2  Efficacy Monitoring  ............................................................................ 108 
12.4  Statistical Methods  ................................................................................................ 108 
12.4.1  Disposition of Patients  ........................................................................ 108 
12.4.2  Demog r
aphics and Baseline Characteristics  ....................................... 109 
12.4.3  Extent of Exposure  .............................................................................. 109 
12.4.4  Concomitant Medications  ................................................................... 109 
12.4.5  Efficacy Analysis  ................................................................................ 109 
12.4.6  Immune Correlate Analyses ................................................................ 110 
12.4.7  Safety Analysis  .................................................................................... 110 
12.4.8  Pharmacokinetic, Exposure -Safety, and Anti -pembrolizumab 
Antibody Analyses .............................................................................. 112 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 29 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
12.5  Procedures for Reporting Deviations to the Original Statistical Analysis Plan  .... 112 
13. INVESTIGATIONAL DRUG PRODUCT ........................................................................ 113 
13.1  Entinostat  .............................................................................................................. 113 
13.1.1  Description  .......................................................................................... 113 
13.1.2  Formulation ......................................................................................... 113 
13.1.3  Storage and Packaging ........................................................................ 113 
13.2  Pembrolizumab  ..................................................................................................... 113 
13.3  Accountability  ....................................................................................................... 114 
14. REGULATORY OBLIGATIONS  ..................................................................................... 115 
14.1  Informed Consent  .................................................................................................. 115 
14.2  Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Ethics Committee (EC)  ................................... 115 
14.3  Pre-study Documentation Requirements  ............................................................... 116 
14.4  Patient Confidentiality  .......................................................................................... 116 
15. ADMINISTRATIVE AND LEGAL OBLIGATIONS  ...................................................... 117 
15.1  Protocol Amendments and Study Termination ..................................................... 117 
15.2  Study Documentation and Archive  ....................................................................... 117 
15.3  Study Monitoring and Data Collection  ................................................................. 118 
16. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 119 
17. APPENDIC ES ................................................................................................................... 124 
 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 30 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
LIST OF TABLES  
Table 1 -1 Schedule of Study Assessments ....................................................................15 
Table 1 -2 Schedule of Study Assessments:  EMIC Cohort  .............................................18 
Table 8 -1 Study Treatment ..........................................................................................59 
Table 8 -2 Non-hematologic Toxicity:  Dose Modification for Entinostat  .........................64 
Table 8 -3 Hematologic Toxicity:  Dose Modification for Entinostat ................................65 
Table 8 -4 Pembrolizumab Dose Modification and Toxicity Management Guidelines for 
Immune -Related Adverse Events ..................................................................66 
Table 8 -5 Pembrolizumab Infusion R eaction Dose Modification and Treatment Guidelines70 
Table 9 -1 Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status Scale, with Equivalent 
Karnofsky Performance Status Scores  ...........................................................81 
Table 9 -2 Imaging and Treatment After 1st Radiologic Evidence of PD  ..........................88 
Table 11 -1 Standard Severity Grading Scale  ................................................................. 100 
Table 17 -1 Examples of substrates that may be affected by entinostat  .............................125 
Table 17 -2 P-gp Inhibitors and Inducers  .......................................................................125 
Table 17 -3 Gastric Acid Reducing Drugsa ....................................................................126 
LIST OF  FIGURES  
Figure 5 -1 Study Schema  .............................................................................................45 
Figure 9 -1: Imaging and Treatment for Clinically Stable Participants Treated with 
Pembrolizumab after First Radiologic Evidence of PD Assessed by the Investigator ................................................................................................. 89 
 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 31 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
2. OBJECTIVES 
2.1 Primary  
The primary study objectives are:  
Phase 1 b (Dose Escalation /Confirmation Cohorts ):  To determine the dose -limiting toxicities (DLT) 
and maximum tolerated dose (MTD) or recommended  Phase 2 dose (RP2D) of entinostat (SNDX-275) 
given in combination with pembrolizumab.  
Phase 2 (Expansion Cohorts) :  To evaluate the preliminary efficacy of entinostat at the RP2D in 
combination with pembrolizumab in patients with melanoma , non-small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ), and 
mismatch repair-proficient colorectal cancer (CRC) , as determined by overall response rate (ORR), per 
the Immune-related Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors ( irRECIST) in each cohort evaluated.  
2.2 Secondary  
Secondary study objectives are:  
Efficacy :  To evaluate the efficacy of entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab in patients with 
melanoma NSCLC, and mismatch repair -proficient colorectal cancer as determined by secondary 
measures of efficacy  per the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1 ( RECIST 1.1 ) and 
Immune -related Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors ( irRECIST) including:  
• Clinical benefit rate (CBR)  (complete response [ CR]+ partial response [ PR]+stable disease [ SD]) 
at 6 months  
• Progression -free survival (PFS) status at 6 month s 
• PFS 
• Overall survival (OS)  
In patients who experience a response to treatment  (i.e., CR or PR): 
• Duration of response (DOR) 
• Time to response (TTR)  
Safety :  To evaluate safety and the tolerability of entinost at in combination with pembrolizumab, as 
measured by clinical adverse events (AEs) and laboratory parameters.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 32 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
2.3 Exploratory  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 

Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 33 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
3. ENDPOINTS  
3.1 Efficacy 
The primary efficacy endpoint is:  
• ORR , as determined by irRECIST 
Secondary Endpoints: (analyzed in the same populations as the primary endpoint) are:  
• CBR (i.e., CR+PR+SD at 6 months)  
• PFS status at 6 months  
• PFS 
• OS 
In patients who experience a response to treatment  (i.e., CR or PR): 
• DOR  
• TTR  
An analysis of efficacy endpoin ts will be performed with response determined using RECIST, version 1.1 
as well as irRECIST. 
3.2 Safety 
Safety endpoints are:  
• Incidence, severity and duration  of treatment-emergent AEs, SAEs, AEs resulting in the 
permanent discontinuation of study drug, and deaths occurring within 90-days of last dose of 
study drug  
• Changes from baseline in laboratory, vital signs, and ECG results  
3.3 Exploratory  
 
 
 
  
 

Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 34 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
   

Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 35 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
4. BACKGROUND AND RATIO NALE  
Despite recent advances in therapy, metastatic NSCLC , melanoma, and CRC represent oncologic 
indications with a significant unmet medical need, with affected patients having a poor prognosis.  
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States (US) ( SEER 2014). The National 
Cancer Institute (NCI) Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program estimate for the 
number of new lung cancer cases in 2014 was approximately 224,210, with 159,260 deaths due to the 
disease that year ( SEER 2014 ). The prognosis for patients with metastatic lung cancer is poor, with a low 
5-year survival rate of 4% ( Howlader 2014). NSCLC constitutes  approximately 80% of all lung cancers, 
and it is estima ted that 40% of patients with NSCLC present with metastatic disease. Cytotoxic 
chemotherapy and tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been shown to improve survival and quality of life in patients with metastatic NSCLC; however, OS remains poor and more effective therapies are urgently 
needed .  
Cutaneous melanoma, arising from malignant transformation of melanocytes in the skin, is the most aggressive form of skin cancer . In contrast to other types of cancer, the incidence of melanoma has 
increased over the past several decades, with the incidence doubling every 10  years. The NCI, SEER 
Program, estimate for the number of new melanoma cases in 2014 was 76,100, representing 4.6% of all new cancer cases, with an estimated 9,710 deaths due to the disease that year ( SEER 2014). Overall, the 
5-year survival rate for melanoma, regardless of disease stage, is high (91%); however, for patients who 
present with metastatic disease and receive systemic treatment, the 5 -year survival rate is considerably 
lower at 16% (SEER 20 14).  
Melanoma is considered to be one of the most immunogenic tumor types, due to the presence of tumor 
infiltrating lymphocytes in resected melanoma, occasional spontaneous regressions, and clinical responses 
to immune stimulation ( Finn 2012). Although historically not considered to be an immunoresponsive 
tumor type, nonclinical and clinical evidence now supports the investigation of immunologic approaches for the treatment of NSCLC (Harvey 2014 ). 
CRC is the second leading cause of cancer death in the United States with greater than 40,000 deaths each 
year. Median survival at the time of diagnosis has been extended with recent advances to approximately 
30 months, but  longterm survival remains dismal with 5 -year overall survival at <10% . Immune 
checkpoint inhibitors have shown dramatic effect in a subset of patients with mismatch repair -deficient 
tumors ( Le 2015), but this represents 3 -5% of adva nced CRC . In the remaining patients, immune 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 36 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
checkpoint inhibitors have been completely unsuccessful. Accordingly, there is great interest in 
combining immune checkpoint inhibitors with other classes of agents to induce immunosensitivity . Kim 
et al. demonst ated entinostat therapy of immunocompetent CRC models resulting in sensitivity to 
immune che ckpoint inhibition and commesurate decrease in MDSCs.  
Several regulatory mechanisms in the immune system that are exploited by cancer have been identified, includin g regulatory T cells, MDSCs, tumor -associated macrophages and neutrophils, immune checkpoint 
pathways, and immunosuppressive cytokines ( Kim 2014). Recent clinical studies with immune 
checkpoint inhibitory PD -1, PD-L1, and anti-cytotoxic T -lymphocyte -associated antigen -4 (CTLA -4) 
antibodies have demonstrated highly promising responses in a number of tumor types, including both NSCLC and melanoma (Harvey 2014) . Expression of the PD -1 ligand PD -L1 has been detected in lung, 
ovary, renal, and colon carcinomas and in malignant melanoma, but not in normal tissues, including the 
lung, uterus, kidney, colon, or skin ( Harvey 2014 ). Abnormal expression of PD -L1 has been reported in 
19% up to 100% of NSCLC tumors, with the variation in results dependent on the antibody, histology, 
and technique reported ( Creelan 2014). 
A number of immune checkpoint inhibitors are under clinical development for the treatment of solid 
tumors ( Harvey 2014 ). Pembrolizumab (Keytruda
®), a human monoclonal antibody against the PD-1 
protein, represents the first anti -PD-1 therapy to receive regulatory approval in the US ( Poole 2014). 
Pembrolizumab  is indicated for the treatment of advanced  (unresectable or metastatic)  melanoma in 
adults. Pembrolizumab is also indicated for the treatment of patients with metastatic NSCLC whose 
tumors express PD-L1 as determined by an FDA-approved test and who have di sease progression on or 
after platinum -containing chemotherapy. Patients with EGFR or ALK genomic tumor  aberrations should 
have disease progression on FDA -approved therapy for these aberrations prior to receiving K eytruda®. 
(Refer to Section 4.1.2 for detailed information regarding pembrolizumab.)  
Nivolumab is another checkpoint inhibitor that targets PD -1. It is approved for the treatm ent of 
unresectable or metastatic melanoma in patients who experience disease progression following 
ipilimumab, and if BRAF V600 mutation positive, a BRAF inhibitor; and the treatment of metastatic 
squamous NSCLC in patients who experience disease progression after platinum -based chemotherapy.  
In addition to pembrolizumab and nivolumab , there are other investigational immune checkpoint 
inhibitors targeting PD -1 or PD -L1, including  MPDL3280A and MEDI -4736, which have also 
demonstrated efficacy in clinical studies in NSCLC . In particular, the anti-PD -1/PD -L1 therapies 
administered as single agent therapy in chemotherapy refractory patients have produced ORRs ranging 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 37 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
from 15 to 25%, the majority of which were rapid and ongoing 1 year after starting therapy ( American 
Association for Cancer Research  2014 ). 
Despite these encouraging findings, there is room for improvement in the ORR, particularly the CR rate, 
with the majority of patients with metastatic melanoma , NCSLC , and CRC, populations  of patients with a 
poor prognosis, remaining unresponsive to treatment with anti-PD-1/PD -L1 therapies.  
Combination approaches with anti-PD-1/PD -L1 therapies and cytotoxic chemotherapy, anti -angiogenic 
agents, alternative immune -checkpoint inhibitors, imm unostimulatory cytokines, and cancer vaccines, are 
currently under investigation, with the goal of improving efficacy over that seen with monotherapy (
Philips 201 5).  
4.1 Study Treatment  
4.1.1 Entinostat (SNDX -275)  
SNDX-275, an orally availabl e synthetic pyridylcarbamate licensed from Bayer Schering AG by Syndax 
Pharmaceuticals and previously named MS -275, inhibits histone deacetylases (HDACs). SNDX-275 
promotes hyperacetylation of nucleosomal histones, allowing transcriptional activation of a distinct set of 
genes. This ultimately leads to the inhibition of cell proliferation, induction of terminal differentiation, 
and/or apoptosis ( Hess-Stumpp 2007). 
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) within the cell nucleus combines with a class of proteins called histones to form chromatin. Histones have amino terminal groups that are positively charged and are hypo- acetylated 
by HDACs. The positive charge tightly binds the histones to the negatively charged DNA phosphodiester 
backbone. Gene transcription and expression are inhibited by such a condensed conformation of the 
DNA. Histone acetyltransferases acetylate the amino terminal ends and neutralize their positive charges, thus leading to a more open chromatin conformation, facilitating DNA transcription.  
Altered activity of HDACs and inactivation of histone acetyltransferases within transformed cells are key 
events that affect chromatin remodeling. There is evidence that HDACs are associated with a wide range 
of tumors including melanomas, neuroblastomas, lymphomas, and lung, breast, prostate, ovarian, bladder, and colon cancers. In a number of in vitro models, HDAC inhibitors triggered growth arrest and induced 
cell differentiation or apoptosis. In acute promyelocytic leukemia, recruitment of HDACs by aberrant fusion proteins repressed constitutive gene transcription and thus prevented promyelocytic differentiation.  
Entinostat inhibited HDAC in various tumor cell lines. In particular, entinostat induced accumulation of acetylated histones adjacent to the promoter of the transforming growth factor (TGF) -β type II receptor 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 38 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
gene, with resulting gene expression. Mutations affecting the TGF -β signaling pathway have been 
associated with development and progression of human malignancies, including carcinomas of the lung, 
breast, prostate, and colon. Entinostat also induced histone hyperacetylation and induced expression of 
various tumor suppressor genes. Various in vitro studies in a range of human cancer cell lines have 
demonstrated the antiproliferative activity of entinostat . In vivo , entinostat inhibited the growth of a range 
of human tumor xenografts, including models of lung, prostate, breast, pancreatic, renal cell, and 
glioblastoma.  
More recently, entinostat has been shown to modify the phenotype of cancer cells from a mesenchymal to 
an epithelial one, with impact on reducing the metastatic potential of the cancer cells ( Shah 2014). In 
addit ion, there is a suggestion that entinostat may have longer term effects on cancer phenotypes, cancer 
stem cells (CSCs) or progenitor cell pool and potential sensitization to subsequent post -study treatments 
(Juergens 2011). 
4.1.1.1  Entinosta t in Patients with Solid Tumors, including Lung Cancer and Melanoma  
To date, entinostat has been investigated alone or in combination in > 1055  patients with cancer in clinical 
studies, including >600 patients with solid tumors, including NSCLC and melanoma .  
Entinostat has been investigated specifically in patients with NSCLC in combination with erlotinib in 
clinical studies sponsored by Syndax and in combination with 5-azacitadine (AZA) in clinical studies 
sponsored by the NCI . Of the studies of entinostat  in combination with AZA, evidence of the anti -tumor 
activity of this combination was demonstrated in an initial study ( Juergens 2011 ), in which adults with 
metastatic NSCLC who experienced disease progression after at least 1 anticancer regimen received 7 mg 
of entinostat by mouth ( PO) on Days 3 and 10 and 30 or 40 mg/m2/day of AZA subcutaneously (SC) on 
Days 1 -6 and 8-10 of a 28- day cycle. Of 31  evaluable patients, 1  experienced a CR, with a duration of 14 
months; a second patient experienced a PR, with a duration of 8 months; and 10 patients experienced stable disease for at least 12 weeks. Furthermore, 4 patients had major objective responses to the 
immediate subsequent therapy . Based on these encouraging findings, the NCI has init iated a follow -up 
study utilizing this combination regimen to investigate the premise that epigenetic therapy can augment 
the clinical utility of cytotoxic therapy in patients with advanced disease.  
Evidence of the efficacy of entinostat also was seen in patients with Stage IV nonresectable melanoma, 
with 25% of patients experiencing disease stabilization ( Hauschild 2008). Based on these encouraging 
findings, further investigation of entinostat in combination was considered warranted in patients with 
melanoma .  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 39 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Overall, among all patients treated, entinostat has been well tolerated at the doses and schedules 
investigated . Regardless of indication and regimen, the most frequently reported AEs with entinostat 
included gastrointestinal (GI) disturbances, primarily nausea with or without vomiting and diarrhea; fatigue; and hematologic abnormalities, primarily anemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, and leukopenia . Most occurrences of these events are Grade 1 or 2 in severity and non-serious. Grade 3 and 4 
hematologic abnormalities are commonly seen in patients with hematologic malignancies, but are much 
less prevalent in patients with solid tumors.  
As would be expected, the AE profile of entinostat when given in combination varies somewhat based on 
the agent with which it is given and the corresponding patient population. Entinostat in combination with 
AZA was generally associated with an increased number and rate of AEs relative to its use in 
combination with an aromatase inhibitor, erlotin ib, or other agents . Consistent with the overall AE profile 
of entinostat, nausea with or without vomiting, fatigue, and anemia were the most prevalent AEs regardless of the patient population or the agent given in combination.  
Additional information on the chemistry, pharmacology, toxicology, preclinical findings, and clinical experience to date may be found in the Investigator’s Brochure  (IB). 
4.1.2 Pembrolizumab (MK -3475)  
4.1.2.1  Background 
Pembrolizumab is a potent humanized immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) monoclonal antibody (mAb) with high specificity of binding to the PD -1 receptor, thus inhibiting its interaction with PD -L1 and programmed 
cell death ligand 2 (PD -L2). Based on preclinical in vitro data, pembrolizumab has high affinity and 
potent receptor blocking ac tivity for PD 1. Pembrolizumab has an acceptable preclinical safety profile and 
is in clinical development as an intravenous (IV) immunotherapy for advanced malignancies. Keytruda
® 
(pembrolizumab) is indicated for the treatment of patients across a number of indications.   
For more details on specific indications refer to the Investigator’s Brochure (IB). 
4.1.2.2  Pharmaceutical and Therapeutic Background 
The importance of intact immune surveillance function in controlling outgrowth of neoplastic 
transformation has been known for decades (Disis 2010 ). Accumulating evidence shows a correlation 
between tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in cancer tissue and prognosis in various malignancies. In 
particular, the presence of CD8+ T cells and the r atio of CD8+ effector T cells/ forkhead box P3 ( FoxP3 )+ 
regulatory T cells seem to correlate with improved prognosis  and long-term survival in solid malignancies 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 40 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
such as ovarian, colorectal, and pancreatic cancer; hepatocellular carcinoma; malignant melanoma; and 
renal cell carcinoma. Tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes can be expanded ex vivo and reinfused, inducing 
durable objective tumor responses in cancers such as melanoma ( Dudley 2005; Hunder et al., 2008). 
The PD -1 receptor -ligand interaction is a major pathway hijacked by tumors to suppress immune control . 
The normal function of PD -1, expressed on the cell surface of activated T cells under healthy conditions, 
is to down-modulate unwanted or excessive im mune responses, including autoimmune reactions . PD-1 
(encoded by the gene Pdcd1) is an immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily member related to cluster of 
differentiation 28 and CTLA -4, that has been shown to negatively regulate antigen receptor signaling 
upon engagement of its ligands (PD -L1 and/or PD -L2) (Greenwald 2005 ; Okazaki 2001 ).  
 The structure of murine PD -1 has been resolved ( Zhang 2004). PD -1 and its family members are type I 
transmembrane glycoproteins containing an Ig-variable– type domain responsible for ligand binding and a 
cytoplasmic tail responsible for the binding of signaling molecules . The cytoplasmic tail of PD -1 contains 
2 tyrosine -based signaling motifs, an immunoreceptor tyrosine -based inhibition motif (ITIM) and an 
immunoreceptor tyrosine -based switch motif (ITSM) . Following T cell stimulation, PD -1 recruits the 
tyrosine phosphatases SHP -1 and SHP -2 to the ITSM motif within its cytoplasmic tail, leading to the 
dephosphorylation of effector molecules, such as CD3 zeta, protein kinase C -theta, and zeta chain-
associated protein ki nase, which are involved in the CD3 T cell signaling cascade (Okazaki  2001; 
Chemnitz 2004; Riley 2009 ; Sheppard 2004). The mechanism by which PD -1 down- modulates T cell 
responses is similar to, but distinct from that of CTLA -4 because both molecules regulate an overlapping 
set of signaling proteins (Parry 2005 ; Francisco 2010 ). As a consequence, the PD-1/PD -L1 pathway is an 
attractive target for therapeutic intervention in NSCLC, melanoma, and colorectal cancer . 
4.1.2.3  Prec linical Studies  
Therapeutic studies in mouse models have shown that administration of antibodies blocking PD -1/PD -L1 
interaction enhances infiltration of tumor -specific CD8+ T cells and ultimately leads to tumor rejection, 
either as a monotherapy or in combination with other treatment modalitie s (Hirano 2005; Blank 2004; 
Weber 2010; Strome 2003; Spranger 2014; Curran 2010 ; Pilon -Thomas 2010). Anti-mouse PD-1 or anti -
mouse PD -L1 antibodies have demonstrated antitumor responses in models of squamous cell carcinoma, 
pancreatic carcinoma, melanoma, acute myeloid leukemia and colorectal carcinoma (Strome 2003; Curran 2010 ; Pilon -Thomas 2010; Nomi 2007; Zhang 2009). In such studies, tumor infiltration by CD8
+ 
T cells and increased  interferon-gamma ( IFN-γ), granzyme B , and perforin expression were observed, 
indicating that the mechanism underlying the antitumor activity of PD -1 checkpoint inhibition involved 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 41 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
local infiltration and activation of effector T cell function in vivo  (Curran 2010).  Exper iments have 
confirmed the in vivo efficacy of anti -mouse PD-1 antibody as a monotherapy, as well as in combination 
with chemotherapy, in syngeneic mouse tumor models ( see the current pembrolizumab IB). 
4.2 Study Rationale  
CT26 and 4T1 are syngeneic murine tumor models commonly used for the assessment of novel 
therapeutic approaches. The CT26 colon cancer model is considered to be modestly immunogenic 
whereas the 4T1 model is poorly immunogenic and highly metastatic . A nonclinical study assessed the 
effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors alone and combined with other agents in BALB/c mice bearing 
CT26 and 4T1 tumors ( Kim 2014). In the CT26 model, treatment with immune checkpoint -blocking 
antibodies, either anti-CTLA -4 or anti -PD-1, result ed in retardation of tumor growth but not tumor 
eradication . Furthermore, treatment with either antibody resulted in tumor eradication in the vast majority 
of mice with moderately -sized tumors (~400 mm3), but not with tumors >600 mm3. In BALB/c mice 
bearin g 4T1 tumors, limited response was seen to treatment with either anti-PD -1 or anti -CTLA -4 
antibodies.  
It was hypothesized that the tumors in animals that did not respond to treatment might have down-regulated the expression of major histocompatibility complex -I-related genes through epigenetic silencing 
in tumor cells . To evaluate this possibility, animals bearing large CT26 tumors were treated with 
entinostat+AZA. Eradication of primary tumors was seen in 10 of 11 mice, with a 100% survival rate at 
60 days  after tumor implantation. Similarly, treatment of mice with moderately -sized 4T1 tumors with 
anti-PD-1/anti-CTLA -4+entinostat+AZA resulted in complete regression of all primary tumors 3 weeks 
after treatment initiation and a 80% survival rate at 100 days after tumor implantation . Temporary, self -
limiting toxicity, as indicated by body weight changes, was observed in animals exposed to entinostat.  
Functional studies revealed that the primary targets of epigenetic modulation were MDSCs, which are often elevated in tumor -bearing hosts and have potent immunosuppressive activities . Specifically, 
treatment of granulocytic MDSCs (G- MDSCs) with entinostat in vitro  resulted in markedly reduced 
viability in a dose -dependent fashion. In contrast, AZA had no effect at comparable concentrations. 
Importantly, entinostat had only modest effects on CD8
+
 T cells, creating a large therapeutic window in 
which G-MDSCs can be depleted while sparing CD8+ T cells. 
When co -cultured with CD8+ T cells, G-MDSCs inhibited IFN -γ secreti on. However, when entinostat was 
included in the culture medium, entinostat reverted this inhibition in a dose -dependent manner . These data 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 42 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
support the premise that G -MDSCs directly inhibit the function of CD8+  T cells and that entinostat 
alleviates this inhibition by directly suppressing G -MDSCs.  
In consideration of these nonclinical findings showing that entinostat reduced the number and inhibited 
the function of host immune suppressor cells, thereby enhancing the anti -tumor activity of immune 
checkpoint blockade, it is hypothesized that entinostat combined with a PD-1/PD -L1-blocking antibody 
(i.e., pembrolizumab ) will result in an improved response rate for the combination compared to either 
agent alone .  
4.3 Rationale for the Dose Selection  
4.3.1 Entinostat 
Entinostat has been evaluated in vitro , in nonclinical in vivo  studies, and in Phase 1  and 2 studies in 
patients with various solid tumors and hematological malignancies at doses between 2 and 12 mg/m P2
P and 
at dosing frequencies ranging from once daily to every 2 weeks. Increased histone acetylation was 
observed at the lowest dose evaluated with the effect persisting at least 48 hours post -dose. 
Pharmacokinetic ( PK) studies of entinostat have indicated a long half -life of entinostat, ranging from 40 
hours to 120 hours . Consistent with this long half -life, entinostat concentrations were detectable 168 
hours post -dose at doses of 2 to 12  mg/m P2
P.  
The MTD for single agent entinostat in non-hematologic indications was established as 4  mg/m P2
P weekly 
x 3 and 1 week rest, or 10 mg/m P2
P every other  week continuously.  
PK analyses have demonstrated ~ 40% variability in the clearance of entinostat. However, when clearance 
was adjusted for body surface area (BSA), the inter -patient variability was similar. A linear r egression 
analysis on factors that may contribute to this variability, such as ideal body weight, lean body mass, body weight, and body mass index, were not significant covariates. As a result of this analysis, fixed dosing is considered to be as accurate as dosing based on BSA ( Alao 2004).  
Entinostat given once weekly continuously at a dose of 5 mg (in combination with the aromatase inhibitor exemestane) in  a clinical study in patients with locally advanced or metastatic breast canc er and  given 
every other week continuously at a dose of 10 mg (in combination with erlotinib) in patients with stage 
IIIB/IV NSCLC was well tolerated. Entinostat’s AE profile at these dose schedules was consistent with 
previous clinical experience, with the most common AEs being fatigue and gastrointestinal disturbances, 
(nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea ). 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 43 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Based on the clinical experience with entinostat, a low, fixed  dose of 3 mg given weekly has been 
selected as the starting dose for this study, with escalation to 5 mg weekly planned.  
4.3.2 Pembrolizumab 
The dose of pembrolizumab planned to be studied in this trial is 200mg Q3W. The dose recently approved 
in the United States and several other countries for treatment o f melanoma and NSCLC patients is 2mg/kg 
Q3W. Information on the  rationale for selecting 200mg Q3W is summarized below.  
 KEYNOTE -001was Phase I study conducted to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics (PK) 
and pharmacodynamics (PD), and anti -tumor activity of pembrolizumab when administered as 
monotherapy.  The dose escalation portion of this trial evaluated three dose levels, 1mg/kg, 3mg/kg and 
10mg/kg, administered every 2 weeks (Q2W) and dose expansion cohorts evaluated 2mg/ kg Q3W and 
10mg/kg Q3W in patients  with advanced solid tumors.  All dose levels were well tolerated and no dose-
limiting toxicities were observed . This first-in -human study of pembrolizumab showed evidence of target 
engagement and objective evidence of tumor size  reduction at all dose levels.  No maximum tolerated dos e 
(MTD) has been identified. In addition, two  randomized cohort evaluations of melanoma patients 
receiving pembrolizumab at a dose of 2mg/kg versus 10mg/kg every 3 weeks ( Q3W ) have been 
completed, and one randomized cohort evaluati ng 10 mg/kg Q3W versus 10 mg/kg every 2  weeks (Q2W ) 
has also been completed . The clinical efficacy and safety data demonstrate a lack of important differences 
in efficacy or safety profile across doses.  
An integrated body of e vidence suggests that 200mg every 3 weeks (Q3W) is expected to provide similar 
responses to 2mg/kg Q3W, 10mg/kg Q3W, and 10mg/kg Q2W.  Previously, a flat p embrolizumab 
exposure -response relationship for efficacy and safety has been found in patients with me lanoma in the 
range of doses between 2mg/kg and 10mg/kg. Exposures for 200mg Q3W are expected to lie within this 
range and will be close to those obtained with 2mg/kg Q3W dose.   
A population pharmacokinetic (PK) model, which characterized the influence of body weight and other 
patient covariates on exposure, has been developed . The PK profile of pembrolizumab is consistent with 
that of other humanized monoclonal antibodies, which typically have a low clearance and a limited 
volume of distribution. The distr ibution of exposures from the 200mg fixed dose are predicted to 
considerably overlap those obtained with the 2mg/kg dose and importantly will maintain individual 
patient exposures within the exposure range established in melanoma as associated with maximal  clinical 
response. Pharmacokinetic properties of pembrolizumab, and specifically the weight -dependency in 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 44 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
clearance and volume of distribution are consistent with no meaningful advantage to weight -based dosing 
relative to fixed dosing.   
In translating to  other tumor indications, similarly flat exposure -response relationships for efficacy and 
safety as observed in subjects with melanoma can be expected, as the anti -tumor effect of pembrolizumab 
is driven through immune system activation rather than through a direct interaction with tumor cells, 
rendering it independent of the specific tumor type . In addition, available PK results in subjects with 
melanoma, NSCLC, and other tumor types support a lack of meaningful difference in pharmacokinetic 
exposures obtained at tested doses among tumor types . Thus the 200mg Q3W fixed-dose regimen is 
considered an appropriate fixed dose for other tumor indications as well .  
A fixed dose regimen will simplify the dosing regimen to be more convenient for physicians and to reduce potential for dosing errors . A fixed dosing scheme will also reduce complexity in the logistical 
chain at treatment facilities and reduce wastage. The existing data suggest 200mg Q3W as the appropriate 
dose for pembrolizumab.  
4.4 Hypothesi s 
Entinostat has  been shown in preclinical models to reduce the number and inhibit the function of host 
immune suppressor cells in order to enhance the anti -tumor activity of immune checkpoint blockade . It is 
hypothesized that entinostat combined with pembrolizumab will r esult in an improved response rate for 
the combination compared to either agent alone . Preclinical study data suggest that entinostat specifically 
targets MDSC and thus would improve the response to PD -1/PD -L1-blocking antibody (i.e., 
pembrolizumab) treatment . The Sponsor accordingly proposes to evaluate populations of MDSC and 
other myeloid cells in peripheral blood and tumor tissues as well as basic T -cell function in patients, with 
the expectation that if the MDSC level is decreased, the response to anti gens would be improved.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 45 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
5. EXPERIMENTAL PLAN 
5.1 Study Design 
Study SNDX-275-0601 is an open-label, Phase 1 b/2 study evaluating the combination of entinostat plus 
pembrolizumab in patients with advanced metastatic or recurrent NSCLC , CRC,  or melanoma. The study 
has 2 phases, a Dose Escalation /Confirmation Phase (Phase 1 b) and an Expansion Phase (Phase 2), with 
the Expansion Phase utilizing a Simon 2 -stage design (Simon 1989) for cohorts 1 and 4 , and utilizing a 
singl e proportion binomial test for cohorts 2 and 3An additional cohort (Entinostat Monotherapy Immune 
Correlate Cohort (EM IC)) evaluating single agent entin ostat followed by the combination in patients with 
NSCLC will also be evaluated in the Phase 2 Expansion P hase. The study schema is presented in  Figure 
5-1. 
Figure 5-1 Study Schema  
 
Regardless of phase, patients will be screened for study eligibility within 21 days before enrollment into 
the study . Patients who are determined to be eligible based on screening assessments, will be enrolled in 
the study within 3 days of starting study treatment on Cycle  1, Day 1 (C1D1) and will receive entinostat 
in combination with pembrolizumab.  

Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 46 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
A total of 15 patients will be enrolled in a n EMIC Cohort . EMIC patients will be enrolled in the study 
within 3 days of starting of starting entinostat on Day -14 and will participate in a 2-week  entinostat 
monotherapy period. The purpose of this 14-day lead-in phase is to obtain pre -and post -entinostat 
monotherapy correlative data in blood and tissue. After completion of the 2-week entinostat monotherapy 
period, patients in the EMIC  Cohort  will start entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab on C1D1.  
Patients in the EMIC Cohort  will receive entinostat beginning at 5mg weekly for the monotherapy period, 
and then will receive entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab at the RP2D as identified in the 
Phase 1b Dose Escalation/Confirmation portion of the study.  
A cycle is 21 days in length. During treatment, patients will attend study center visits and have study evaluations performed on C1D1, C1D8, and C1D15; D1 and D15 of C2; and on D1 of each cycle 
thereafter.  
Fresh tumor tissue samples will be collected during the study as follows:  
• During screening  from all patients on a mandatory basis.  
• On C2D15 (+3 days)  on an optional  basis from patients in  the Dose Escalation/Confirmation 
Phase . All patients in the Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase will be strongly encouraged to 
provide an optional biopsy in order to help understand dose -immune correlate effects.  
• On C2D15 (+3 days)  on a mandatory basis from the first 10  patients (in total, across cohorts) 
in Stage 1 in the Expansion Phase, the first 10 patients in the EMIC Cohort , and the first 10 
patients in the CRC Cohort .  
If, based on an interim review of tumor tissue data from  at least  the initial in the Expansion Phase, such 
data are not considered informative, then tumor tissue samples will not be collected from subsequent patients  on C2D15 (+3 days) . Alternatively, if such data are considered informative, tumor tissue samples 
will be collected on C2D15  (+3 days) from all subsequent study patients in the Expansion Phase.  
Blood for immune correlates is to be collected from patients in the EMIC Cohort pre -dose on D -14, 
C1D1, C1D8, and C2D15 . In all other cohorts, blood for immune correlates is to be collected pre -dose on 
C1D1, C2D1, and C 2D15. Blood for protein lysine acetylation and for entinostat and pembrolizumab PK 
assessments will be collected according to the Schedule of Events.  Blood for immune correlates and 
protein lysine acetylation is to be shipped on the same day of draw to the applicable laboratories with 
proper advanced notification according to the study laboratory manual.  
Patients will have radiological disease assessments performed during screening and every 6 weeks ( +/-3 
days) (Week  6, Week 1 2, etc.) during treatment . Disease will be assessed by computed tomography (CT), 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 47 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and bone scans, as appropriate, and response will be assessed by the 
Investigator using irRECIST.  
Safety will be assessed during the study by documentation of AEs, clinical laboratory tests, physical examination, vital sign measurements, ECGs, and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status. 
The maximum duration of treatment for this study is planned to be 2 years. If a patient permanently 
discontinues 1 of the 2 study drugs (either entinostat or pembrolizumab), the patient may continue to 
receive monotherapy for up to 2 years, unless alternate therapy is started or another discontinuation 
criterion is met ( Section 10). 
After discontinuation of both study drug s, patients will complete an End of Treatment (EOT) visit within 
7 days after the last study drug dose  and Safety Follow -up visit s 30 days and 90 days thereafter. After 
completion of the 30-day Safety Follow -up (F/U) visit, patients who have not experienced progressive 
disease (PD ) are to be followed every 2 months until PD and every 3 months thereafter until death or 
closure of the study by the Sponsor.  
Phase 1b (Dose Escalation /Confirmation):  The Dose Escalation /Confirmation P hase of the study , in 
which patients with NSCLC will be enrolled, employs a classical 3+3  design, with the determination of 
DLT and the MTD and/or RP2D based on entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab in C1.   
Although  decisions regarding dose escalation will be made primarily based on review of data from C1, 
safety data will also be collected from all patients continuing treatment and these data will be reviewed in 
an ongoing manner by the Sponsor  Study Physician (s) in consultation with the Investigators. Any 
detected cumulative toxicity may require later dose reductions and/or other changes to the dosing 
schedule, as appropriate, including further refinement of the RP2D.  
The initial 3-6 patients will receive entinostat  at a starting dose of 3 mg on D1, D8, and D15 along with 
pembrolizumab 200 mg via intravenous ( IV) infusion on D1 of a 21-day cycle.  Assuming an acceptable 
safety profile, escalation to an entinostat dose of 5 mg weekly is planned, keeping the pembrolizum ab 
dose constant . However, based on evaluation of the safety and tolerability data of the previous dose level, 
it may also be decided that accrual will take place at an intermediate dose level or alternate dosing schedule. 
Toxicities will be assessed by the Investigator using the US NCI Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (CTCAE), Version 4.03. The decision regarding whether to proceed to the next dose level 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 48 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
will be made by the Sponsor  Study Physicians, in consultation with the Investigators after the majority of 
safety assessments for each cohort are completed. Refer to Section 8.2.1.1 for details regarding the dose 
escalation procedures.  
The prospective MTD/RP2D identified in the Dose Escalation Phase will be confirmed in 9  patients in 
Dose Confirmation Cohort to obtain a dditional AE, immune correlate, and anti -tumor activity data on 
entinostat in combination.  
Six patients will need to be treated in a dose level for that dose to be considered for the Dose 
Confirmation stage . The recommended dose for Phase 2 investigation will be the highe r of either 3 or 5 
mg weekly PO that results in less than a 33% incidence of DLT . The final determination of the RP2D will 
be based on a review of all data obtained from both the Dose Escalation and Confirmation Phases and will 
consider both acute and cumulative toxicities; the incidence of required dose delays, reductions, and 
discontinuations; and the overall facility of administration in clinical practice.  
Patients who experience a DLT will be allowed to remain on study if they meet the following criteria : (1) 
the Investigator believes it is appropriate for patients to remain on study ; (2) the event has resolved and no 
longer meets the definition of DLT; and  (3) the timeline for resolution falls within the guidelines for dose 
delays ( Section 8.4).  
Patients who complete C1 may continue on study as long as, in the Investigator’s judgment, the patient is 
tolerating study treatment, is  not at an increased safety risk, and continues to meet protocol eligibility 
criteria.  
After completion of the Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase of the study, with identification of the MTD 
or RP2D , the Phase 2 portion of the study will commence.  
Phase 2 (Expansion): In the Expansion Phase, entinostat in combination will be evaluated using the 
RP2D identified in the Dose Escalation /Confirmation Phase. Up to 4 Expansion Cohort s consisting of 
distinct subsets of patients with solid tumor cancers may be explo red. Each cohort evaluated during the 
Expansion Phase  will employ a Simon 2 -stage design. The final decision about which Expansion Cohort s 
to study will be based on data from the Dose Escalation /Confirmation Phase, emerging clinical data from 
other studies, and/or nonclinical data. Expansion cohorts may include:  
1. Cohort 1:  NSCLC, with s quamous cell  or adenocarcinoma histology who have not been treated 
with a PD -1 or PD -L1 blocking antibody1 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 49 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
1 Depending upon emerging data, the Sponsor may elect, instead of histology, to evaluate NSCLC consisting of 
PD-1+ and PD -L1+ NSCLC patients . In this case, the protocol will be amended accordingly.  
2. Cohort 2:  Patients with NSCLC (any histology) who have previously been treated with and 
unequivocally progressed on either a PD -1 or PD-L1-blocking antibody 
3. Cohort 3:  Patients with melanoma who have previously been treated with and unequivocally  
progressed on either a PD-1 or PD-L1-blocking antibody  (i.e., pembrolizumab, nivolumab, 
MEDI4736, or GNE PDL1 [MPDL3280A])  
4. Cohort 4:  Patients with CRC (mismatch repair -proficient) who have not been previously treated 
with a PD -1 or PD -L1 blocking antibody 
5.2 Number of Centers  
Up to approximately 40 study centers are planned to be recruited for participation in this study . Study 
centers that do not enroll at least 1 patient  within 3 months of study center initiation may be subject to 
closure. 
5.3 Number of Patients 
In the dose -escalation phase, 3  to 6 patients will be enrolled in each dose cohort based on a standard 
“3+3” Phase 1 dose escalation scheme. Each patient will participate in only 1 dose cohort . A total of 9 
additional patients will be enrolled in the Dose Confirmation Cohort to obtain additional AE, immune 
correlate, and anti -tumor activity data on entinostat at the MTD or other dose recommended for further 
investigation in Phase 2 (i.e., RP2D ) in combination.  
Thus, the total number of patients to be enrolled in the Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase is dependent 
upon the observed safety profile, which will determine the number of patients per dose cohort, as well as the number of dose escalations required to achieve the MTD.  
In the Expansion Phase , up to 252  patients are planned  to be enrolled among the 4 Expansion Cohort s 
(Section 5.1). 
5.4 Estimated Study Duration 
The estimated duration of the study is approximately 30 months .  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 50 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
6. PATIENT  ELIGIBILITY 
6.1 Inclusion Criteria  
Patients meeting all of the following criteria are considered eligible to participate in the study:  
Patients with NSCLC:  
1. Has histologically - or pathologically -confirmed recurrent or metastatic NSCLC . 
2. If has adenocarcinoma, required to have previously been tested for anaplastic lymphoma kinase 
(ALK) rearrangements and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) (Exon 19 Deletion and Exon 21 L8585R Substitution) mutations, with results available for collection in this study, and, if positive, has been treated with prior EGFR or ALK therapy.  
3. Received at least 1 chemotherapeutic regimen in the advanced/metastatic setting  and experienced  
documented, unequivocal progressive disease by  either RECIST 1.1 or  clinical assessment . In 
addition: 
• If patient has EGFR mutation-positive or ALK translation -positive disease, must have 
received an EGFR inhibitor or ALK inhibitor, respectively, in addition to the above chemotherapy regimen.  
• Patients who received adjuvant or neoadjuvant platinum -based doublet chemotherapy 
(after surgery and/or radiation therapy) and developed recurrent or metastatic disease 
within 6 months of completing therapy are eligible; in such cases, the adjuvant or 
neoadjuvant platinum -based doublet chemotherapy regimen will count as a line of 
therapy.  
• Patients with recurrent disease >6 months after adjuvant or neoadjuvant platinum -based 
doublet chemotherapy who subsequently experienced PD during or after a platinum -
based doublet chemotherapy regimen given to treat the recurrences, are eligible; the second platinum -based doublet chemotherapy regimen does not count as another line of 
therapy.  
• Patients who received pemetrexed, bevacizumab, or erlotinib as maintenance therapy (non-progressors with platinum -based doublet chemot herapy) and subsequently 
progressed after maintenance therapy) are eligible; such therapy does not count as a line of therapy. However, if the patient received a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) after failure 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 51 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
of platinum -based doublet chemotherapy, the TKI will count as an additional line of 
therapy.  
4. Patients with NSCLC enrolled in Cohort 1 of the Expansion Phase should not have been 
previously treated with a PD-1/PD -L1-blocking antibody ( i.e. p embrolizumab, nivolumab, 
MEDI4736, or GNE PDL1 [MPDL320A]  
Patients in Expansion Phase, Cohorts 2 (NSCLC)  and 3 (Melanoma)  
5. Previously t reated with a PD -1/PD -L1-blocking antibody (i.e., pembrolizumab, nivolumab, 
MEDI4736, or GNE PDL1 [MPDL3280A]) and experienced documented, unequivocal 
radiographic progression of disease by irRECIST , or similar criteria  during or within 12 weeks 
after last dose  of such treatment. Patients must have received at least 6 weeks of PD-1/PD -L1 
therapy  for Cohort 2 and at least 8 weeks  of PD-1/PD -L1 therapy  for Cohort 3 . For patients who 
received such agents in a clinical trial, documentation of progressive disease requires a 
confirmatory scan. For patients who had been treated with such agents outside of a clinical trial, 
documentation of progressive disease will be based on both radiographic and clinical assessment . 
If the requirement for a confirmatory scan is deemed not to be in the patient’s best interests based 
upon his/her overall condition, including performance status and clinical symptoms, this 
requirement may be waived in consultation w ith the Sponsor’s Medical Monitor; however, 
patients who have not had a confirmatory scan because of rapid progression and clinical deterioration should not be enrolled onto this trial.  In all cases, the scan obtained during the 
screening process may serve as the confirmatory scan. 
(Note: Patients who are currently receiving pembro lizumab  and have clear, unequivocal  evidence of 
PD may be eligible. Such patients are to be discussed with the Medical M onitor on a case -by-case 
basis prior to enrollment of the patient  in the study .) 
Patients with Melanoma  
6. In addition to previous treatment with a PD -1/PD -L1 blocking antibody (inclusion #5),  has a 
histologically - or cytologically -confirmed diagnosis of unre sectable or metastatic melanoma and 
experienced  unequivoca l progressive disease during treatment with a BRAF inhibitor if BRAF 
V600 mutation-positive. Treatment with BRAF inhibitor may occur AFTER treatment with the 
checkpoint inhibitor .  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 52 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Patients in Expansion Phase, Cohort 4 (Colorectal Cancer)  
7. Received at least  1 chemotherapeutic regimen in the advanced/metastatic setting and experienced 
documented, unequivocal progressive disease by either RECIST 1.1 or clinical assessment.  Must 
have documented mismatch-repair proficient colon cancer as determined by either 
immunohistochemistry for mismatch repair proteins or PCR -based functional microsatellite 
instability. Patients with colorectal cancer enrolled in Cohort 4 should not have been previously 
treated with a PD -1/PD -L1-blocking antibody (i.e., pembrolizumab, nivolumab, MEDI 4736, or 
GNE PDL1 [MPDL3280A])  
All Patients  
8. Aged 18 years or older on the day written informed consent is given.  
9. If has brain metastases, must have stable neurologic status following local therapy (surgery or 
radiation) for at least 4 weeks without the use of steroids or on stable or decreasing dose of 
≤10 mg daily prednisone (or equivalent), and must be without neurologic dysfunction that would 
confound the evaluation of neurologic and other AEs. (Patients with a history of carcinomatous meningitis are not eligible.)  
10. Evidence of locally recurrent or metastatic disease based on imaging studies (e.g., CT, MRI) 
within 28 days before the first study drug dose:  
• At least 1 measurable lesion ≥20 mm by conventional techniques or ≥10 mm by spiral CT s can or MRI, with the last imaging performed within 28 days before the first study 
drug dose. If there is only 1 measurable lesion and it is located in previously irradiated 
field, it must have demonstrated unequivocal progression according to RECIST, versi on 
1.1.  
11. If receiving radiation therapy, h as had a 2-week washout period following completion of the 
treatment prior to receiving the first study drug dose and continues to have at least 1  measureable 
lesion, per above criterion. 
12. ECOG performance status of  0 or 1.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 53 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
13. Has the following laboratory parameters:  
System  Laboratory Value  
Hematological  
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC)  ≥1.5×109/L 
Platelets  ≥100×109/L 
Hemoglobin  ≥9 g/dL or ≥5.6 mmol/L  
Renal  
Creatinine OR 
Measured or calculated1 creatinine clearance  
(CrCl) 
(glomerular filtration rate [GFR] can also be used 
in place of creatinine or CrCl)  ≤1.5× the upper limit of normal ( ULN ) OR 
≥60 mL/min  for patient with creatinine levels >1.5× 
institutional ULN  
Hepatic  
Total bilirubin  ≤1.5×ULN OR 
Direct bilirubin ≤ULN for patient s with total bilirubin 
levels >1.5 ×ULN  
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT)  ≤2.5×ULN OR 
≤5×ULN for patient s with liver metastases  
Coagulation  
International Normalized Ratio (INR) or 
Prothrombin Time (PT) 
 
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT)  ≤1.5×ULN unless patient  is receiving anticoagulant 
therapy as long as PT or PTT is within therapeutic range 
of intended use of anticoagulants  
≤1.5×ULN unless patient is receiving anticoagulant 
therapy as long as PT or PTT is within therapeutic range 
of intended use of anticoagulants  
  
1Creatinine clearance should be calculated per institutional standard.  
 
14.  Female patients  of childbearing potential must  have a negative serum  pregnancy test during 
screening and a negative urine pregnancy test within 72 hours prior to taking  first dose of study  
drug. If a patient is of childbearing  potential, the patient must agree to use effective contraception 
as defined in the protocol ( Section 8.5.3), during the study and for 120 days after the last dose of 
study drug.  Non-childbearing potential is defined as (by other than medical reasons):  
• ≥45 year s of age and has not had menses for >2 years,  
• Amenorrheic for <2 years without a hysterectomy and oophorectomy and a follicle-
stimulating hormone value in the postmenopausal range upon pre -study ( screening ) 
evaluation.  
• Post hysterectomy, oophorectomy,  or tubal ligation . Documented hysterectomy or 
oophorectomy must be confirmed with medical records of the actual procedure or 
confirmed by an ultrasound. Tubal ligation must be confirmed with medical records of 
the actual procedure otherwise the patient must  be willing to use 2 adequate barrier 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 54 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
methods throughout the study , starting with the screening  visit through 120 days after the 
last dose of study drug. Please see Section 8.5.3 , Contraception, for a list of acceptable 
birth control methods .  
15. If male, agrees t o use an adequate method of contraception starting with the first dose of study 
drug through 120 days after the last dose of study drug. Please see Section 8.5.3,  Contraception,  
for a list of acceptable birth control methods.  
16. Experienced resolution of toxic effect(s) of the most recent prior chemotherapy to Grade 1 or less 
(except alopecia). If patient underwent  major surgery or radiation therapy of >30 Gy, they must 
have recovered from the toxicity and/or complications from the  intervention.  
17. Willing to have fresh tumor samples collected during screening and at other time points 
designated as mandatory, per the Schedule of Study Assessments.  If patients whose only 
accessible lesion for biopsy is a solitary target lesion, it must be amenable to a core biopsy that will not compromise assessment of tumor measurements.  
18. Able to understand and give written informed consent and comply with study procedures.  
6.2 Exclusion Criteria  
Patients meeting any of the following criteria are not eligibl e for study participation:  
1. Diagnosis of immunodeficiency or  is receiving chronic systemic steroid therapy (in dosing 
exceeding 10 mg daily of prednisone equivalent) or any other form of immunosuppressive therapy within 7 days prior to the first dose of study drug.  
2. Active autoimmune disease that has required systemic treatment in past 2 years (i.e., with disease 
modifying agents, corticosteroids, or immunosuppressive drugs). Replacement therapy (e.g., 
thyroxine, insulin, or physiologic corticosteroid replacement therapy for adrenal or pituitary 
insufficiency) is not considered a form of systemic treatment.  
3. History of interstitial lung disease (ILD).  
4. Allergy to benzamide or inactive components of  entinostat.  
5. History of allergies to any active or inactive ingredients of pembrolizumab or severe 
hypersensitivity ( ≥Grade 3) to pembrolizumab.  
6. History or current evidence of any condition, therapy, or laboratory abnormality that might 
confound the results of the study, interfere with the patient’s participation f or the full duration of 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 55 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
the study, or is not in the best interest of the patient to participate, in the opinion of the treating 
Investigator , including, but not limited to: 
• Myocardial infarction or arterial thromboembolic events within 6 months prior to ba seline or 
severe or unstable angina, New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III or IV disease, or a QTc interval > 470 msec.  
• Uncontrolled heart failure or hypertension, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, or uncontrolled systemic infection.  
• Another known addi tional malignancy that is progressing or requires active treatment 
(excluding adequately treated basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell of the skin,  cervical 
intraepithelial neoplasia [CIN] /cervical carcinoma in situ or melanoma in situ  or ductal 
carcinoma in situ of the breast). Prior history of other cancer is allowed, as long as there is no 
active disease within the prior 5 years.  
• Has a history of (non -infectious) pneumonitis that required steroids or  has current 
pneumonitis.  
• Active infection requiring syst emic therapy.  
• Known active central nervous system (CNS) metastases and/or carcinomatous meningitis.  
Note: Patients with previously treated brain metastases may participate provided they are stable (without evidence of progression by imaging [using the identical imaging modality for each assessment, either MRI or CT scan] for at least 4 weeks prior to the first dose of study drug and any neurologic symptoms have returned to baseline), have no evidence of new or enlarging brain 
metastases, and are not using steroids for at least 2 weeks prior to the first dose of study drug or 
are on stable or decreasing dose of ≤10 mg daily prednisone (or equivalent). This exception does 
not include carcinomatous meningitis which is excluded regardless of clinical stability.  
7. Known psychiatric or substance abuse disorders that would interfere with cooperation with the 
requirements of the study.  
8. Currently participating and receiving study therapy or has participated in a study of an 
investigational agent and received study therapy or used an investigational device within 4 weeks 
of the first dose of treatment.  
9. Received a live virus vaccin ation within 30 days  of the first dose of treatment . 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 56 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
10. Prior anti-cancer mAb within 4 weeks prior to baseline or who has not recovered (i.e., ≤Grade 1 
or at baseline) from AEs due to agents administered more than 4 weeks earlier.  
11. Prior chemotherapy, targeted small molecule therapy, or radiation therapy within 2 weeks prior to 
study baseline or who has not recovered (i.e., ≤Grade 1 or at baseline) f rom AEs due to a 
previously administered agent.  
Note:  Patients with ≤Grade 2 neuropathy or ≤Grade 2 alopecia are an exception to this criterion 
and may qualify for the study.  
Note:  If patient underwent major surgery, they must have recovered adequately from the toxicity 
and/or complications from the intervention prior to starting therapy .  
12. Received transfusion of blood products (including platelets or red blood cells) or administration 
of colony stimulating factors (including granulocyte -colony stimulating factor [G -CSF], 
granulocyte macrophage -colony stimulating factor [ GM-CSF], or recombinant erythropoietin) 
within 4 weeks of the first dose of study drug.  
13. Currently receiving treatment with any other agent listed on the prohibited medication list in 
Section 8.5.1 such as valproic acid, or other systemic cancer agents within 14  days of the first 
dose of treatment.  
14. If female, is pregnant, breastfeeding, or expecting to conceive, or if male, expects to father children within the projected duration of the  study, starting with the screening visit through 120 
days after the last dose of study drug.  
15. Known history of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (HIV 1/2 antibodies).  
16. Known active hepatitis B (e.g., hepatitis B surface antigen -reactive) or hepatitis C (e.g., hepatitis 
C ribonucleic acid [qualitative]).  
17. For CRC expansion cohort, prior history of malignant bowel obstruction requiring hospitalization in the 6 months prior to enrollment  
18. For the CRC expansion cohort, history of uncontrolled ascites, defined as symptomatic ascites 
and/or repeated paracenteses for symptom control in the past 3 months  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 57 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
7. PATIENT  ENROLLMENT  
Section 14.3 describes documentation required prior to the commencement of study enrollment . 
The screen ing period for a particular patient commences at the point at which the patient signs the 
informed consent form. The consent form must be signed before any study-specific tests may be 
performed.  
After a patient has been screened and successfully fulfills all eligibility criteria, a site representative will 
send eligibility information to the appropriate Syndax representative. Once the information has been 
reviewed, approved, and returned to the site, the site representative will enter the patient  in the electronic 
data capture (EDC) system. This will officially enroll the patient. Additionally, this process will 
automatically assign the patient identification (ID) number that will be used to identify the patient throughout the clinical study. This patient I D must be used on all study documentation related to that 
patient. Refer to the Study Manual for details on this procedure.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 58 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
8. TREATMENT PROCEDURES  
8.1 Study Drug  
Regardless of study phase, all patients will receive entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab, w ith 
both drugs given in an open-label fashion.  
8.1.1 Entinostat 
Patients will receive entinostat in an open -label fashion; the dose for an individual patient is dependent on 
the cohort /study phase in which the patient is enrolled  (Section 8.2.1.1 ). 
The dose of entinostat is dependent on the cohort / study phase in which the patient is enrolled. In the 
Dose E scalation Phase, the plann ed entinostat doses to be investigated are: 
• 3 mg weekly  
• 5 mg  weekly  
In the Dose Confirmation Phase, 9 patients will receive entinostat at the prospective MTD/RP2D 
identified in the Dose Escalation Phase.  
All patients will self -administer entinostat at the assigned dose and regimen  PO. On study days on which 
patients receive both entinostat and pembrolizumab, entinostat is to be taken prior to pembrolizumab.  
Patients in the EMIC Cohort  will first receive entinostat as monotherapy for 2 weeks (D-14 to -1) at 5mg 
weekly . After completion of the 2-week entinostat monotherapy period, EMIC patients will enter the 
combination period and will receive entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab ( Section 8.1.2) at the 
RP2D as determined in the Phase 1b Dose Escalation/Confirmation phase beginning on C1D1. If an 
EMIC Cohort patient requires a dose reduction during the monotherapy period, that patient will start the 
combination period at the reduced dose (e.g. 3mg).  
Entinostat is to be taken on an empty stomach, at least 1 hour before and 2 hours after a meal.  
Entinostat is supplied as pink to light red (1 mg) or yellow (5 mg) coated tablets.  
Entinostat is to be stored at controlled room temperature (15ºC to 25ºC) in a secure, locked storage area to 
which access is limited. Entinostat is to be protected from light. Entinostat is not to be exposed to 
extremes of temperature (greater than 30ºC or less than 5ºC ). 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 59 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Unused tablets or empty bottles will be returned to the clinic for accountability purposes. Details of study 
drug storage and handling may be found in Section 13.1.3 . 
8.1.2 Pembrolizumab 
The pembrolizumab treatment to be used in this study is outlined in Table 8-1. 
Table 8-1 Study  Treatment  
Drug  Dose/Potency  Dose 
Frequency  Route of 
Administration  Regimen  Use 
Pembrolizumab  200 mg Every three 
weeks 
(Q3W ) Intravenous 
(IV) Day 1 of each cycle 
(3 week cycles)  Experimental  
 
Pembrolizumab  treatment will begin on C1D1.  Pembrolizumab will be administered on D1 of each 3-
week treatment cycle after all procedures and assessments have been completed as detailed on the 
Schedule of Study Assessments (Table 1-1 or, for the EMIC  Cohort , Table 1-2).  
Pembrolizumab will be administered as a dose of 200 mg using a 30-minute IV infusion. Sites should 
make every effort to target infusion timing to be as close to 30 minutes as possible. However, given the variability of infusion pumps from site to site, a window between -5 minutes and +10 minutes  is 
permitted (i.e., infusion time is 30 minutes -5 min/+10 min).  
The Pharmacy Manual contains specific instructions for the preparation of the pembrolizumab infusion and administration of infusion solution.  
The Investigator  shall take responsibility for a nd shall take all steps to maintain appropriate records and 
ensure appropriate supply, storage, handling, distribution, and usage of study drug , in accordance with the 
protocol and any applicable laws and regulations.  
8.2 Study Drug Dose and Administration  
8.2.1 Dose-escalation Phase  
The starting dose of entinostat is 3 mg, with escalation to a dose of 5 mg planned. However, based on 
evaluation of the safety and tolerability data of the previous dose level, it may also be decided that accrual will take place at an  intermediate dose level or alternate dosing schedule.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 60 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
8.2.1.1  Dose Escalation /Confirmation Procedure  
Dose Escalation  
Toxicities will be assessed by the Investigator using the NCI CTCAE, Version 4.03. The decision 
regarding whether to proceed to the next dose level will be made by the Sponsor  Study Physician(s)  in 
consultation with the Investigators , after the safety assessments for each cohort are completed.  
All patients within a cohort are to complete C1, have safety assessments performed through C2D1, and b e 
assessed for DLT before enrollment of the next cohort may commence. If <33% patients within a cohort 
have a DLT (i.e., < 2 of up to 6), then enrollment of the next cohort may commence with approval from 
the Sponsor  Study Physician(s)  in consultation with the Investigators . If ≥33% (≥2 of up to 6) of patients 
within a cohort experience a DLT, then the DLT dose level will have been reached and the previous lower dose level will be considered the MTD.  Patients who experience a DLT will be allowed to remain on  
study if they meet the following criteria : (1) the investigator believes it is appropriate for patients to 
remain on study ; (2) the event has resolved and no longer meets the definition of DLT ; and  (3) the 
timeline for resolution falls within the protocol guidelines for dose delays.  
If a DLT necessitates enrollment of additional patients into a cohort, the Sponsor Study Physician(s) in 
consultation with the Investigators , will review all safety data for that cohort after all patients have 
completed C1.  
Although decisions regarding dose escalation will be made primarily based on review of data from C1, 
safety data will also be collected from all patients continuing treatment and these data will be reviewed 
periodically by the Sponsor Study Physician(s) in consultation with the Investigators . Any detected 
cumulative toxicity may require later dose reductions and/or other changes to the dosing schedule, as 
appropriate, including further refinement of the RP2D. 
Patients who discontinue from the study for reasons other than study drug-related toxicity before completing C1 may be replaced.  
Patients who complete C1 may continue on study as long as , in the investigator’s judgment , the patient is  
tolerating the study treatment, is not at an increased safety risk , and continues to meet protocol eligibility 
criteria.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 61 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Dose Confirmation  
The prospective MTD/ RP2D identified in the Dose Escalation Phase will be confirmed in 9 patients in 
Dose Confirmation Cohort to obtain additional AE, immune correlate, and anti -tumor activity data on 
entinostat in combination.  
After completion of the Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase of the study, with identification of the MTD 
or RP2D , the Phase 2 portion of the study will commence.  
8.2.1.2  Dose-limiting Toxicity  
DLT is defined as the occurrence of any of the following events within the first cycle of treatment (i.e., C1) of entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab that are considered by the Investigator to be at least 
possibly related to entinostat . A patient that experiences an adverse ev ent meeting DLT criteria in C 1 or 
who receives the full dose of pembrolizumab and all doses of entinostat during C1 without experiencing a 
DLT is considered a DLT -evaluable patient.  
• Grade 4 hematologic and non-hematologic (non-laboratory) to xicities of any duration 
• Grade 3 non- hematologic (non-laboratory ) toxicity with the exception of Grade 3  nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhea that resolve within 3 days following institution of optimal supportive care  
• Any Grade 3 or Grade 4 non -hematologic labor atory value if: 
• Medical intervention is required to treat the patient, or  
• The abnormality leads to hospitalization, or  
• The abnormality persists for >1 week. 
• Febrile neutropenia Grade 3 or Grade 4:  
• Grade 3 is defined as ANC <1 .0×10
9/L with a single temperature of >38.3 °C (101°F) or a 
sustained temperature of ≥38 °C (100.4° F) for more than 1 hour 
• Grade 4 is defined as ANC <1.0×109/L wit h a single temperature of >38.3 °C (101°F) or a 
sustained temperature of ≥38° C (100.4° F) for more than 1 hour, with life -threatening 
consequences and urgent intervention indicated.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 62 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
• Grade 4 t hrombocytopenia (i.e., platelet count <25× 109/L) 
• Grade 3 thrombocytopenia with clinically significant bleeding  
• Prolonged delay (>2 weeks) in initiating Cycle 2 due to treatment -related toxicity  
• Any AE requiring >2 entinostat doses to be held, an entinostat dose reduction, or entinostat 
discontinuation 
• Concurrent elevation of transaminases and bilirubin consistent with Hy’s Law criteria  
Note:  The original Hy's Law parameters for treated patients relative to comparator patients  have 
been broadened over time ( Kaplowitz and DeLeve 2003 , Zimmerman 1999) to include additional 
parameters, but still require that these 3 criteria be m et: 
i. injury: elevation of >3× ULN ALT or AST activity; and  
ii. function: >2× ULN total bilirubin  (another clinical marker for function, such as >1.5 ×ULN 
INR may be acceptable if the change is clinically significant in the absence of obstruction) 
without >2 ×ULN alkaline phosphatase ( ALP ); and  
iii. clinical verification to ensure effect is health product -induced and not induced by disease or 
another cause of injury.  
• Grade 5 toxicity  
8.2.1.3  Maximum Tolerated Dose  
MTD is defined as the highest dose level at which <33% of  patients experience DLT in C1.  
8.2.1.4  Recommended Phase 2 Dose 
The RP2D will be equal to or less than the preliminary MTD . The RP2D will be determined in discussion 
with the Sponsor, Medical Monitor, and Investigators . Additionally, observations related to immune 
correlates , and any cumulative toxicity observed after multiple cycles may be included in the rationale 
supporting the  RP2D. 
8.2.2 Expansion Phase  
In the Expansion Phase , all patients will receive entinostat PO at the RP2D and schedule on D1, D8, and 
D15 in combination with pembrolizumab 200 mg via IV infusion over 30 minutes on D1 every 21 days.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 63 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
8.3 Treatment Duration  
The maximum duration of treatment for this study is planned to be  35 treatments (approximately 2 years.)  
Patients who complete C1 may continue on stu dy as long as , in the I nvestigator’s judgment , the patient is 
tolerating the study treatment, is not at an increased safety risk , and continues to meet  protocol eligibility 
criteria.  
If a patient permanently discontinues 1 of the 2 study drugs (either entinostat or pembrolizumab), the 
patient may continue to receive monotherapy for  up to 2 years, unless alternate therapy is started or 
another discontinuation criterion is met ( Section 10). 
Patients who discontinue both study drugs will receive standard of care outside the auspices of this study 
at the Investigator’s discretion.  
After discontinuation of both study drug s, patient s will complete an EOT visit within 7 days (+/- 3 days)  
after the last study drug dose  and Safety Follow -up visit s 30 days (+/- 3 days) and 90 days (+/- 3 days) 
thereafter. After completion of the 30-day Safety F/U v isit, patients who have not experienced PD are to 
be followed every 2 months until PD and every 3 months thereafter until death or closure of the study by the Sponsor . The purpose of the post -treatment follow -up is to ascertain the duration of PFS for all 
patients in the study . After  development of PD, surviving patients are to be followed on an every 3-month 
basis for alternate therapy and survival until closure of the study .  
8.4 Dose Adjustments  
Although entinostat and pembrolizumab have distinct toxicity profiles, they do share some AEs such as 
fatigue  and nausea. There is the theoretical possibility that 1 agent may potentiate the other and hence 
drug causality will not always be clear. In the event of uncertainty, dose reductions and/or delays will 
follow the most conservative approa ch (i.e., delays and/or dose reductions for both drugs) until resolution 
of the event. No dose reductions will be performed for pembrolizumab. Guidance for delays and or dose 
reductions for entinostat are presented in Section 8.4.1 . Once the entinostat dose is reduced, it cannot  be 
increased . Expected AEs for each agent are summarized in Section 11.1.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 64 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
8.4.1 Entinostat 
8.4.1.1  Nonhematologic Toxicity  at Least Possibly  Related to Entinostat 
The rules outlined in Table 8-2 are to be followed for the management of non-hematologic toxicities that 
are definitely or p ossibly  due to entinostat alone, with toxicities graded by the Investigator according to 
the NCI, CTCAE, V ersion 4.03.   
Table 8-2 Non-hematologic Toxicity:  Dose Modification for Entinostat  
Toxicity Dose modifications  
Grade 4  Administer symptomatic remedies/ start prophylaxis.  
Hold dose  P until recovery to Grade  1 or baseline under the following 
directions:  
1. If recovered within 4 weeks of onset (i.e.: ≤3 missed doses), 
resume study drug as follows:  
• If receiving 5 mg, restart study drug at 3 mg 
• If receiving 3 mg, restart study drug at 2 mg 
• If receiving 2 mg, permanently discontinue study drug 
2. If not recovered within 4 weeks (i.e. 4 missed doses) , permanently 
discontinue study drug.  
Grade 3  Administer symptomatic remedies/ start prophylaxis. Hold dose  P until 
recovery to Grade 1 or baseline under the following directions:  
1. If recovered within 1 week, resume study drug at prior dose. If not 
recovered  within 1 week , continue to hold dose.  
2. If recovered within 2 -4 weeks , resume study dr ug as follows:   
• If rece iving 5  mg, restart study drug at 3 mg 
• If receiving 3  mg, restart study drug at 2 mg 
• If receiving 2 mg, permanently discontinue study drug  
3. If not recovered within 4 weeks (i.e. 4 missed doses) , permanently 
discontinue study drug.  
Recurrence of the same  Grade 3 
toxicity despite dose reduction  If the same  ≥ Grade 3 event recurs:  
1. Administer symptomatic remedies/ start prophylaxis. Hold1 dose until 
recovery to Grade 1 or baseline.  
2. If recovered within 2 weeks, resume study drug as follows:  
• If receiving 5 mg, restart study drug at 3 mg 
• If receiving 3 mg, restart study drug at 2 mg 
• If receiving 2 mg, permanently discontinue study drug  
If the same  ≥ Grade 3 event recurs  (i.e., third occurrence) despite 
entinostat dose reduction to 2 mg, as described above, perman ently 
discontinue study drug.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 65 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Toxicity Dose modifications  
≤Grade 2  Administer symptomatic remedies / start prophylaxis.  
Dosing of study drug may be interrupted at the Investigator’s discretion, in 
consultation with the Medical Monitor.  
• If dose is held for 4 consecutive weeks, permanently discontinue study 
drug. P1 
• If toxicity resolves, resume entinostat at the original dose.  
1If greater than 50% of doses are missed during any 6-week period, discontinue from study drug treatment.  
8.4.1.2  Hematologic Toxicity at Least Possibly Related t o Entinostat 
The guidelines in Table 8-3 will be followed for determining the timing of cycles based on hematologic 
status at the time of planned dosing.  
Table 8-3 H ematologic Toxicity:   Dose Modification for Entinostat 
Toxicity P Dose modifications  
≥Grade 3 neutropenia,  
≥Grade 3 uncomplicated thrombocytopenia, or  
Grade 2 complicated 
thrombocytopenia  Administer symptomatic remedies/ start prophylaxis.  
Hold dose
 P1 until recovery to Grade 1 or study baseline  under the following 
directions:   
1. If recovered within 1 week, resume study drug at prior dose.  If 
recovered within 1 week, continue to hold dose. 
2. If recovered within 2-4 weeks, resume study drug as follows:  
• If receiving 5 mg, restart study drug at 3 mg 
• If receiving 3  mg, restart study drug at 2 mg 
• If receiving 2 mg, permanently discontinue study drug  
If not recovered within 4 weeks (i.e. 4 missed doses),  permanently 
discontinue study drug.  
Recurrence of the same  hematologic 
toxicity  If the same hematologic toxicity recurs : 
1. Administer symptomatic remedies/ start prophylaxis. Hold1 dose until 
recovery to Grade 1 or baseline.  
2. If recovered within 2 weeks, resume study drug as follows:  
• If receiving 5 mg, restart study drug at 3 mg 
• If receiving 3 mg, restart study drug at 2 mg 
• If receiving 2 mg, permanently discontinue study drug  
3. If the same  ≥ Grade 3 event recurs  (i.e., third occurrence) despite 
entinostat dose reduction to 2 mg, as described above, permanently 
discontinue study drug.  
P1If greater than 50% of doses are missed during any 6-week period, discontinue from study drug treatment .   
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 66 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
8.4.2 Pembrolizumab 
AEs associated with pembrolizumab exposure may represent an immunologic etiology. These immune -
related AEs (irAEs) may occur shortly after the first dose or several months after the last dose of 
pembrolizumab treatment and may affect more than on body system simultaneously. Therefore, early 
recognition and initiation of treatment is critical to reduce complications. Based on existing clinical study data, most irAEs were reversible and could be managed with interruptions of pembrolizumab, administration of corticosteroids and/or other supportive care. For suspected irAEs, ensure adequate evaluation to confirm etio logy or exclude other causes. Additional procedures or tests such as 
bronchoscopy, endoscopy, skin biopsy may be included as part of the evaluation. Based on the severity of irAEs, withhold or permanently discontinue pembrolizumab and administer corticoste roids. Dose 
modification and toxicity management guidelines for irAEs associated with pembrolizumab are provided in Table 8-4. (Refer to Section  8.5.2 and the Study Manual for supportive care guidelines, including use 
of corticosteroids .) 
Table 8-4 Pembrolizumab Dose Modification and Toxicity Management Guidelines for 
Immune -Related Adverse Events  
General instructions:  
1. Corticosteroid taper should be initiated upon AE improving to Grade 1 or less and continue to taper over at least 4 
weeks.  
2. For situations where pembrolizumab has been withheld, pembrolizumab can be resumed after AE has been reduced to Grade 1 or 0 and corticosteroid has been tapered. Pembrolizumab should be permanently discontinued if AE does not 
resolve within 12 weeks of las t dose or corticosteroids cannot be reduced to ≤10 mg prednisone or equivalent per day 
within 12 weeks.  
3. For severe and life -threatening irAEs, IV corticosteroid should be initiated first followed by oral steroid. Other 
immunosuppressive treatment should be initiated if irAEs cannot be controlled by corticosteroids.  
IR AEs  Toxicity Grade or 
Conditions 
(CTCAEv4.0) Action Taken to Pembrolizumab IR AE Management with 
Corticosteroid and/or 
Other Therapies  Monitor and Follow -up  
Pneumonitis  Grade 2  Withhold  Administer corticosteroids 
(initial dose of 1 -2 mg/kg 
prednisone or equivalent) followed by taper Monitor participants for signs and symptoms of pneumonitis  
Evaluate participants with suspected pneumonitis with radiographic imaging 
and initiate corticosteroid treatment  
Add prophylactic antibiotics for opportunistic infections  
Grade 3 or 4, or recurrent 
Grade 2  Permanently 
discontinue   
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 67 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
General instructions:  
1. Corticosteroid taper should be initiated upon AE improving to Grade 1 or less and continue to taper over at least 4 
weeks.  
2. For situations where pembrolizumab has been withheld, pembrolizumab can be resumed after AE has been reduced to Grade 1 or 0 and corticosteroid has been tapered. Pembrolizumab should be permanently discontinued if AE does not 
resolve within 12 weeks of las t dose or corticosteroids cannot be reduced to ≤10 mg prednisone or equivalent per day 
within 12 weeks.  
3. For severe and life -threatening irAEs, IV corticosteroid should be initiated first followed by oral steroid. Other 
immunosuppressive treatment should be initiated if irAEs cannot be controlled by corticosteroids.  
IR AEs  Toxicity Grade or 
Conditions 
(CTCAEv4.0) Action Taken to Pembrolizumab IR AE Management with 
Corticosteroid and/or 
Other Therapies  Monitor and Follow -up  
Diarrhea / 
Colitis  Grade 2 or 3  Withhold Administer corticosteroids (initial dose of 1 -2 mg/kg 
prednisone or equivalent) 
followed by taper 
 Monitor participants for signs and 
symptoms of enterocolitis (ie, diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, blood or mucus in 
stool with or without fever) and of 
bowel perforation (ie,  peritoneal signs 
and ileus).  
Participants with ≥Grade 2 diarrhea suspecting colitis should consider GI 
consultation and performing endoscopy 
to rule out colitis.  
Participants with diarrhea/colitis should be advised to drink liberal quantities of 
clear fluids . If sufficient oral fluid 
intake is not feasible, fluid and electrolytes should be substituted via IV 
infusion. Grade 4  Permanently discontinue 
AST / ALT 
elevation or 
Increased 
bilirubin Grade 2  Withhold Administer corticosteroids (initial dose of 0.5- 1 mg/kg 
prednisone or equivalent) followed by taper  Monitor with liver function tests (consider weekly or more frequently 
until liver enzyme value returned to 
baseline or is stable  
Grade 3 or 4  Permanently discontinue Administer corticosteroids (initial dose of 1 -2 mg/kg 
prednisone or equivalent) followed by taper 
Type 1 
diabetes 
mellitus 
(T1DM) or 
Hyper -
glycemia Newly onset 
T1DM or  
Grade 3 or 4 hyperglycemia 
associated 
with evidence 
of β-cell 
failure Withhold Initiate insulin replacement 
therapy for participants with 
T1DM  
Administer anti -
hyperglycemic in 
participants with 
hyperglycemia  Monitor participants for hyperglycemia 
or other signs and symptoms of 
diabetes. 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 68 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
General instructions:  
1. Corticosteroid taper should be initiated upon AE improving to Grade 1 or less and continue to taper over at least 4 
weeks.  
2. For situations where pembrolizumab has been withheld, pembrolizumab can be resumed after AE has been reduced to Grade 1 or 0 and corticosteroid has been tapered. Pembrolizumab should be permanently discontinued if AE does not 
resolve within 12 weeks of las t dose or corticosteroids cannot be reduced to ≤10 mg prednisone or equivalent per day 
within 12 weeks.  
3. For severe and life -threatening irAEs, IV corticosteroid should be initiated first followed by oral steroid. Other 
immunosuppressive treatment should be initiated if irAEs cannot be controlled by corticosteroids.  
IR AEs  Toxicity Grade or 
Conditions 
(CTCAEv4.0) Action Taken to Pembrolizumab IR AE Management with 
Corticosteroid and/or 
Other Therapies  Monitor and Follow -up  
Hypophysitis Grade 2  Withhold Administer corticosteroids 
and initiate hormonal 
replacements as clinically 
indicated .  
 Monitor for signs and symptoms of hypophysitis (including hypopituitarism 
and adrenal insufficiency)   
Grade 3 or 4  Withhold or permanently 
discontinue
1   
Hyper -
thyroidism  Grade 2  Continue  Treat with non-selective 
beta-blockers (e.g., 
propranolol) or thioamides 
as appropriate  Monitor for signs and symptoms of 
thyroid disorders 
Grade 3 or 4  Withhold or  
permanently discontinue
1 
Hypo -
thyroidism  Grade 2-4 Continue  Initiate thyroid replacement 
hormones (eg, levothyroxine or liothyroinine) per 
standard of care  Monitor for signs and symptoms of 
thyroid disorders 
Nephritis and 
Renal dysfunction Grade 2  Withhold  Administer corticosteroids (prednisone 1-2 mg/kg or equivalent) followed by 
taper  Monitor changes of renal function 
Grade 3 or 4  Permanently 
discontinue 
Myocarditis Grade 1 or 2  Withhold Based on severity of AE administer corticosteroids  Ensure adequate evaluation to confirm etiology and/or exclude other causes  
Grade 3 or 4  Permanently 
discontinue 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 69 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
General instructions:  
1. Corticosteroid taper should be initiated upon AE improving to Grade 1 or less and continue to taper over at least 4 
weeks.  
2. For situations where pembrolizumab has been withheld, pembrolizumab can be resumed after AE has been reduced to Grade 1 or 0 and corticosteroid has been tapered. Pembrolizumab should be permanently discontinued if AE does not 
resolve within 12 weeks of las t dose or corticosteroids cannot be reduced to ≤10 mg prednisone or equivalent per day 
within 12 weeks.  
3. For severe and life -threatening irAEs, IV corticosteroid should be initiated first followed by oral steroid. Other 
immunosuppressive treatment should be initiated if irAEs cannot be controlled by corticosteroids.  
IR AEs  Toxicity Grade or 
Conditions 
(CTCAEv4.0) Action Taken to Pembrolizumab IR AE Management with 
Corticosteroid and/or 
Other Therapies  Monitor and Follow -up  
All other IR 
AEs Intolerable/ 
persistent 
Grade 2  Withhold Based on type and severity 
of AE administer 
corticosteroids  Ensure adequate evaluation to confirm 
etiology and/or exclude other causes  
Grade 3  Withhold or 
discontinue based 
on the type of 
event . Events that 
require discontinuation 
include and not 
limited to:  
Guillain -Barré 
Syndrome, encephalitis  
Grade 4 or 
recurrent 
Grade 3  Permanently 
discontinue 
1Withhold or permanently discontinue pembrolizumab is at the discretion of the investigator or treating physician .  
NOTE:  
For participants with Grade 3 or 4 immune -related endocrinopathy where withhold of pembrolizumab is required, 
pembrolizumab may be resumed when AE resolves to ≤ Grade 2 and is controll ed with hormonal replacement therapy or 
achieved metabolic control (in case of T1DM).  
Pembrolizumab may cause severe or life threatening infusion -reactions including severe hypersensitivity 
or anaphylaxis. Signs and symptoms usually develop during or shortly after drug infusion and generally 
resolve completely within 24 hours of completion of infusion. Dose modification and toxicity 
management guidelines on pembrolizumab associated infusion reaction are provided in Table 8-5. 
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 70 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Table 8-5 Pembrolizumab Infusion Reaction Dose Modification and Treatment Guidelines  
NCI CTCAE Grade  Treatment Premedication at Subsequent Dosing  
Grade 1  
Mild reaction; infusion interruption 
not indicated; intervention not 
indicated  Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the participant is deemed 
medically stable in the opinion of the investigator.  None 
Grade 2  
Requires therapy or infusion 
interruption but responds promptly to 
symptomatic treatment (e.g., 
antihistamines, NSAIDs, narcotics, 
IV fluids); prophylactic medications 
indicated for ≤24 hrs. Stop Infusion.  
Additional appropriate medical therapy may include but is not limited to:  
IV fluids  
Antihistamines  
NSAIDs  
Acetaminophen  
Narcotics  
Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the participant is deemed 
medically stable in the opinion of the investigator.  
If symptoms resolve within 1 hour of stopping drug infusion, the infusion may be restarted 
at 50% of the original infusion rate (e.g. from 100 mL/hr. to 50 mL/hr.). Otherwise dosing 
will be held until symptoms resolve and the participant should be premedicated for the next 
scheduled dose.  
Participants who develop Grade 2 toxicity despite adequate premedication should be 
permanently discontinued from further study drug treatment  Participant may be premedicated 1.5h (± 30 
minutes) prior to infusion of pembrolizumab 
with:  
Diphenhydramine 50 mg po (or equivalent dose 
of antihistamine).  
Acetaminophen 500-1000 mg po (or equivalent 
dose of analgesic).  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 71 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
NCI CTCAE Grade  Treatment Premedication at Subsequent Dosing  
Grades 3 or 4  
 
Grade 3:  
Prolonged (i.e., not rapidly responsive 
to symptomatic medication and/or 
brief interruption of infusion); 
recurrence of symptoms following 
initial improvement; hospitalization 
indicated for other clinical sequelae 
(e.g., renal impairment, pulmonary 
infiltrates)  
Grade 4:  
Life- threatening; pressor or ventilator 
support indicated 
 Stop Infusion.  
Additional appropriate medical therapy may include but is not limited to:  
Epinephrine** 
IV fluids  
Antihistamines  
NSAIDs  
Acetaminophen 
Narcotics  
Oxygen 
Pressors 
Corticosteroids 
Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the participant is deemed 
medically stable in the opinion of the investigator.  
Hospitalization may be indicated.  
**In cases of anaphylaxis, epinephrine should be used immediately.  
Participant is permanently discontinued from further study drug treatment.  No subsequent dosing 
Appropriate resuscitation equipment should be available at the bedside and a physician readily available during the period of drug administration. For further information, please refer 
to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v4.0 (CTCAE) at  http://ctep.cancer.gov   
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 72 of 131 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Pembrolizumab may be interrupted for situations other than treatment -related AEs such as medical / 
surgical events or logistical reasons not related to study therapy. Participants should be placed back on 
study therapy within 3 weeks of the scheduled interruption, unless otherwise discussed with the Sponsor. 
The reason for interruption should be documented in th e patient's study record.  
8.5 Concomitant Therapy  
All concomitant treatments and therapies, or medication , including all prescription, over -the-counter , 
herbal supplements, and IV medications and fluids, administered during the 30 days preceding the screening study visit must be reported in the electronic case report form (eCRF). If changes occur during 
the study period, documentation of drug dosage, frequency, route, and date may also be included on the 
eCRF. The generic name of the drug (or trade name for combination drugs) must be specified along with 
the route of administration, indication, and duration of treatment.  
Throughout the study, the Investigator may prescribe any concomitant medications or treatments deemed 
necessary to provide adequate supportive  care, such as potassium and phosphorus supplements and 
antiemetics, with the exception of those listed in Section 8.5.1. Patients must notify the  Investigator  of all 
concomitant medications taken through completion of the study (final visit).  
Medications or vaccinations specifically prohibited in the exclusion criteria are not allowed during the 
ongoing study (Section 8.5.1 ). If there is a clinical indication for any medication or vaccination 
specifically prohibited during the study, discontinuation from study drug  may be required . The 
Investigator should discuss any questions regarding this with the Medical Monitor . The final decision on 
any supportive therapy or vaccination rests with the Investigator and/or the patient's primary physician . 
However, the decision to continue the patent on study drug requires the mutual agreement of the 
Investigator, the Sponsor, and the patient.  
8.5.1 Prohibited Medications and Medications to be Avoided During the Study  
8.5.1.1. Prohibited Medications  
The following medications are prohibited during study partic ipation: 
• Any other HDAC inhibitor, including  valproic acid  
• DNA methyltransferase inhibitors 
• Antineoplastic systemic chemotherapy or biological therapy  
• Immunotherapy  other than pembrolizumab  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 73 of 131 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
• Investigational agents other than entinostat and pembrolizumab 
• Prophylact ic use of hematopoietic colony stimulating factors are not allowed during the Phase 1b  
Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase, but can be used to treat hematological adverse events and 
for prophylaxis subsequently, per investigator discretion during t he Expansion Phase.  
• Radiation therapy 
Note:  Radiation therapy to a symptomatic solitary lesion or to the brain may be considered on 
an exceptional case-by -case basis after consultation with Sponsor . The patient  must have clear 
measurable disease outside the radiated field . Administration of palliative radiation therapy will 
be considered clinical progression for the purposes of determining PFS.  
• Live vaccines within 30 days prior to the first dose of study drug a nd while participating in the 
study . Examples of live vaccines include, but are not limited to, the following: measles, mumps, 
rubella, chicken pox, yellow fever, rabies, Bacille de Calmette et Guérin , and typhoid (oral) 
vaccine. Seasonal influenza vaccines for injection are generally killed virus vaccines and are allowed. However, intranasal influenza vaccines (e.g. , Flu-Mist
®) are live attenuated vaccines, 
and are not allowed. 
• The use of systemic corticosteroids to treat disease-related complications or c o-morbid medical 
conditions is strongly discouraged.  In consultation with the Sponsor, systemic corticosteroids 
may be administered, at doses no greater than 10 mg prednisone or for no longer than 7 consecutive days if at higher doses, as clinically indicated, to treat acute conditions, (e.g. 
exacerbations of COPD, pleural effusions, etc.) other than immune- mediated toxicity related to 
study drug.  The corticosteroid regimens used to treat the immune-related toxicity related to study 
drug are specified in Section 8.5.2.  
The use of physiologic doses of corticosteroids for prolonged periods may be approved in consultation with the Sponsor. The use of inhaled steroids for the management of asthma or the 
use of prophylactic corticosteroids to avoid allergic reactions (e.g. , to IV contract dye) is 
permitted. Patients who, in the assessment by the Investigator, require the use of any of the 
aforementioned treatments for clinical management should be removed from the study . Patients 
may receive other medications that the Investigator  deems to be medically necessary.  
The exclusion criteria (Section 6.2 ) describe other medications that are prohibited in this study.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Protocol Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 74 of 131 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
8.5.1.2. Medications to be avoided during the Study  
Concomitant use of the drugs below with entinostat should be avoided during the study:  
•  Gastric acid reducing drugs (e.g., histamine receptor antagonists [H2], antacids; see Appendix 2: 
Concomitant Medications to be Avoided  
• Sensitive substrates of CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP3A with a narrow therapeutic window (refer to  
Appendix 2: Concomitant Medications to be Avoided ) 
• Drugs that are known to inhibit or induce P -gp (refer to  Appendix 2: Concomitant Medications 
to be Avoided)    
8.5.2 Rescue Medications & Supportive Care  Guidelines for Pembrolizumab  
8.5.2.1  Supportive Care Guidelines  
Patients should receive appropriate supportive care measures as deemed necessary by the Investigator . 
Suggested supportive care measures for the management of AEs with potential immunologic etiology are 
outlined below. Where appropriate, these guidelines include the use of PO or IV treatment with 
corticosteroids as well as additional anti -inflammatory agents if symptoms do not improve with 
administration of corticosteroids . Note that several courses of steroid tapering may be necessary as 
symptoms may worsen when the steroid dose is decreased. It is also important to note that the use of 
corticosteroids for any reason other than immune -mediated toxicities is strongly dis couraged, especially 
during the phase 1 and first two cycles of phase 2 of this trial. Refer to Section 8.5.1  for specific criteria 
for the allowance of corticosteroids.   
For each disorder, attempts should be made to rule out other causes such as metastatic disease or bacterial or viral infection, which might require additional supportive care. The treatment guid elines are intended 
to be applied when the Investigator  determines the events to be related to pembrolizumab.  
Note:  if after the evaluation the event is determined not to be related, the Investigator is instructed to 
follow the Events of Clinical Interes t (ECI; Section 11.4.3 ) reporting guidance but does not need to 
follow the treatm ent guidance (as outlined in the Study Manual ). Refer to Section 8.4.2  for dose 
modification guidelines . 
It may be necessary to perform conditional pro cedures such as bronchoscopy, endoscopy, or skin 
photography as part of evaluation of the event.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 75 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
8.5.3 Diet/Activity/Other Considerations 
Diet 
Patients should maintain a normal diet unless modifications are required to manage an AE such as 
diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting.  
Contraception  
Patients (both men and women) should be informed that taking either of the study drugs may involve 
unknown risks to the fetus (unborn baby) if a pregnancy were to occur during the study. Specifically, 
Pembrolizumab  may have adverse effects on a fetus in utero, and it is not known whether pembrolizumab 
has transient adverse effects on the composition of sperm. In order to participate in the study, patients 
with reproductive potential must adhere to contraception methods that result in a failure rate of < 1% per 
year (described below) from the first screening visit throughout the study period during the treatment 
period and for at least 120 days after the last dose of study treatment  (as defined in Section 11.4.1). If 
there is any question that a patient will not reliably comply with the requirements for contraception, that patient should not be entered into the study.
 
A woman is considered to be of childbearing potential if she has experienced menarche and is not yet 
post-menopausa l and has not been permanently or surgically sterilize d. A woman who is ≥45 years of age 
and has not had menses for greater than 1 year will be considered post -menopausal. Permanent 
sterilization includes hysterectomy and/or bilateral oophorectomy and/or bilateral salpingecto my but  not 
does include bilateral tubal occlusion.  
For t his trial, male patients will not be considered to have reproductive potential only if they have 
azoospermia (whether due to having had a vasectomy or due to an underlying medical condition).  
Patients with reproductiv e potential must agree to use acceptable contraceptive methods with a < 1% 
annual failure rate or to remain abstinent (refrain from heterosexual intercourse) . The following are 
acceptable methods of contraception:  
Single method (one of the following is acceptable):  
• intrauterine device (IUD)  
• bilateral tubal ligation  
• vasectomy of a female subject’s male partner  
• contraceptive rod implanted into the skin 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 76 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
  Combination method (requires use of two of the following):  
• diaphragm with spermicide (cannot be used in conjunction with cervical cap/spermicide)  
• cervical cap with sp ermicide (nulliparous women only)   
• contraceptive sponge (nulliparous women only)  
• male condom or female condom (cannot be used together)  
• hormonal contraceptive: oral contraceptive pill (estrogen/progestin pill or progestin-only 
pill), contraceptive skin p atch, vaginal contraceptive ring, or subcutaneous contraceptive 
injection)  
Either two barrier methods or a barrier method plus a hormonal method to prevent pregnancy would be 
considered acceptable.  
Abstinence (relative to heterosexual activity) can be used  as the sole method of contraception if it is 
consistently employed as the patient’s preferred and usual lifestyle and if considered acceptable by the local regulatory agencies and EC/IRBs. Periodic abstinence (e.g., calendar, ovulation, symptothermal, or 
postovulation methods) and withdrawal are not acceptable methods of contraception.  
As discussed above, these contraceptive methods must be used for 1 20 days after the last dose of study 
drug. In order to participate in the study , patients  must adhere to the contraception requirement (described 
above) for the duration of  the study and during the  follow -up period defined in Section 11.4.1 . If there i s 
any question that a patient will not reliably comply with the requirements for contraception, that patient should not be entered into the stud y.  
8.5.4 Study Drug Use in Pregnancy  
If a patient inadvertently becomes pregnant while on study drug, the patient wil l immediately be removed 
from the study. The site will contact the patient at least monthly and document the patient’s status until the pregnancy has been completed or terminated. The outcome of the pregnancy will be reported to the Sponsor without delay a nd within 24 hours if the outcome is a serious adverse experience (e.g., death, 
abortion, congenital anomaly, or other disabling or life -threatening complication to the mother or 
newborn). The Investigator will make every effort to obtain permission to follow the outcome of the 
pregnancy and report the condition of the fetus or newborn to the Sponsor. If a male patient impregnates 
his female partner the study personnel at the site must be informed immediately and the pregnancy reported to the Sponsor and followed as described above and in Section 11.4.1. 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 77 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
8.5.5 Study Drug Use in Nursing Women  
It is unknown whether study drug is excreted in human milk. Since many drugs are excreted in human 
milk, and because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in the nursing infant, patients who are 
breast -feeding are not eligible for enrollment.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 78 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
9. STUDY TESTS AND OBSERVATIO NS 
After provision of written informe d consent, patients will be screened for study eligibility within 21 days 
before the first study drug dose. Patients who are determined to be eligible, based on screening 
assessments, will be enrolled in the study within 3 days of  C1D1 and start entinostat  in combination with 
pembrolizumab, with the exception of those in the EMIC Cohort . 
Patients in the EMIC Cohort  will enrolled in the study on Day -14 and will participate in a 2 -week 
entinostat monotherapy period. After completion of the 2-week entinostat monotherapy period,  patients in 
the EMIC Cohort  will start entinostat in combination with pembrolizumab on C1D1.   
A cycle is 21 days in length. Patients will attend study center visits and have study evaluations performed 
on C1D1, C1D8, and C1D15; D1 and D15 of C2; and on D1 of each cycle thereafter. 
Patients will have radiological disease assessments performed during screening and every 6 weeks ( +/-3 
days) (Week  6, Week 1 2, etc.) during treatment.  
After discontinuation of all study drug, patients will complete an EOT visit within 7 days after the last 
study drug dose  and Safety F/U visits 30 days and 90 days thereafter. After completion of the 30-day 
Safety F/U visit, patients who have not experienced PD are to be followed every 2 months until PD and 
every  3 months thereafter until death or closure of the study by the Sponsor.  
Protocol -required tests, observations, and procedures are summarized in Table 1-2 for the EMIC  cohort 
and in Table 1-1 for all other patients .  
9.1 Baseline Assessments  
All patients must provide written informed consent before the performance of any study-related 
procedures.  
9.1.1 Demographics  
Patient demographics, including age, race, and ethnicity, are to be documented during screening.  
9.1.2 Height  
Height is to be documented during screening.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 79 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
9.1.3 Medical History  
A relevant medical history is to be documented during screening and updated prior to administration of 
the first stu dy drug dose at baseline. 
The medical history is to include cancer history, including date of and stage at diagnosis, method of 
diagnosis, and all previous treatments, including radiation therapy, and response to such treatment . For 
patients in Cohorts 2 and 3, who have previously been treated and responded and  then progressed on 
either a PD-1 or PD-L1-blocking antibody, the details regarding the previous PD-1 or PD-L1-blocking 
antibody, date of progression, and criteria used to determine progression, are to be documented on the 
eCRF.  
For patients with NSCLC, if patient has adenocarcinoma, results of prior testing for ALK rearrangements 
and EGFR (Exon 19 Deletion and Exon 21 L8585R Substitution) mutations are to be documented. Fo r 
patients with melanoma, result of prior testing for BRAF V600 mutation is to be documented, if available.  
For patients in Cohort 4, results of prior testing for KRAS status, NRAS status, BRAF status are to be 
documented, if available.  
Patients in Cohort  4 must have documented mismatch repair proficien t status. 
9.1.4 Pregnancy Testing  
For females of child -bearing potential, a  serum pregnancy test is to be performed during screening and a 
urine pregnancy test should be performed within 72 hours prior to taking the first study drug dose . Results 
must be available and confirmed to be negative prior to study drug administration. Pregnancy testing is to 
be repeated during the study any time pregnancy is suspected.  
9.2 Safety Assessments  
9.2.1 Physical Examination 
A complete p hysical examination will be conducted for all patients during screen ing; at C1D1 (if the 
screening physical  was performed more than 7 days before) ; and at the EOT (7 days post -last dose) and 
Safety F/U (30 and 90 days thereafter ) visits. If the screen ing physical examination was performed within 
7 days of C1D1  then a symptom -directed physical examination may be performed at on C1D1.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 80 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Symptom -directed physical examinations will be performed for all patients on C1D1 (if the screening 
physical was performed within 7 days before) , C1D8, C1D15; D1 and D1 5 of C2; and on D1 of each 
subsequent cycle.  
9.2.2 Electrocardiograms 
All patients will have a 12 -lead ECG performed during screen ing; pre-dose (i.e., before entinostat and 
pembrolizumab) on C3D1, and then every 3 cycles thereafter. A 12 -lead ECG also is to be performed at 
the EOT (7 days post -last dose). A 12 -lead ECG is to be repeated as clinically indicated.  
ECGs will be recorded  after the patient has rested in a supine position for at least 10 minutes in each case. 
The Investigator or designated physician will review the paper copies of each of the timed 12 -lead ECGs 
when they are collected.  
9.2.3 Vital Signs  
Vital signs, including systolic and diastolic blood pressure (mmHg), pulse (beats per  minute), respiration 
rate (breaths per minute), and temperature, are to be measured during screen ing; at D -14 (EMIC  Cohort  
only) ; on D1 of each treatment cycle;  and at the EOT (7 days post -last dose) and Safety F/U (30 and 90 
days thereafter ) visits. 
Measurements are to be made after the patient  has been resting in a supine position for a minimum of 5 
minutes.  
Blood pressure and pulse will be measured using a blood pressure recording device with an appropriately 
sized cuff. The units ( °F or C) and mode of temperature recording will be documented (e.g., oral, 
axillary); the same units and mode should be used for a patient  across all measurements.  
9.2.4 Weight  
Weight is to be measured during screening; at D-14 ( EMIC Cohort only); on D1 of each t reatment cycle; 
and at the  EOT (7 days post -last dose) and Safety F/U (30 and 90 days  thereafter ) visits . 
9.2.5 ECOG Performance Status 
ECOG performance status is to be assessed during screen ing; at D -14 (EMIC Cohort only) ; on D1 of each 
treatment cycle; and at the EOT (7 days post -last dose) and Safety F/U (30 and 90  days thereafter) visits . 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 81 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
The ECOG performance status scale, with corresponding Karnofsky performance status score 
equivalents, is presented in Table 9 -1. 
Table 9-1 Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status Scale, with Equivalent 
Karnofsky Performance Status Scores 
ECOG1 Karnofsky2 
Score  Criterion  % Criterion  
0 Normal activity  100 Normal; no complaints; no  evidence of 
disease  
  90 Able to carry on normal activity; minor 
signs or symptoms of disease  
1 Symptoms but ambulatory  80 Normal activity with effort; some signs or 
symptoms of disease  
  70 Cares for self; unable to carry on normal 
activity or do active work  
2 In bed <50% of time  60 Requires occasional assistance but is able 
to care for most of his/her needs  
  50 Requires considerable assistance and 
frequent medical care  
3 In bed >50% of time  40 Disabled, requires special care and 
assistance  
  30 Severely disabled; hospitalization is 
indicated though death is not imminent  
4 100% bedridden  20 Very sick; hospitalization is necessary  
  10 Moribund; fatal processes progressing 
rapidly  
5 Dead  0 Dead  
1 Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, Horton J, Davis TE, McFadden ET, Carbone PP. Toxicity and response criteria of the 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol. 1982;5:649-655. 
2 Mor V, Laliberte L, Morris JN, Wiemann M. The  Karnofsky Performance Status Scale:  an examination of its reliability and 
validity in a research setting. Cancer. 1984;53:2002-2007. 
9.2.6 Clinical Laboratory Tests  
Blood samples for hematology and clinical chemistries are to be collected and run locally during 
screen ing; at D -14 (EMIC Cohort  only) ; on D1, D8,  and D15 of C1; on D1 and D15 of C2; on D1 of each 
subsequent treatment cycle; and at the EOT visit (7 days post last dose) . If screening hematology and 
clinical chemistry tests are performed within 7 days of C1D1 , they need not be repeated at C1D1.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 82 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
The following analytes are to be measured:  
Hematology   
White blood cell count ( WBC) with differential  Hemoglobin 
Red blood cell count ( RBC) Hematocrit  
Platelet count  
Clinical Chemistries   
ALT  AST  
ALP  Albumin  
Total bilirubin Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)  
Calcium  Creatinine  
Sodium  Potassium  
Chloride  Bicarbonate  
Glucose  Lactic dehydrogenase 
Phosphorus  Total Protein  
Uric acid  Magnesium (screen ing only, unless clinically 
indicated)  
Blood samples for  thyroid function tests, including thyroid-stimulating hormone  (TSH), free thyroxine  
(FT4), and total or free triiodothyronine (T3 or FT3) are to be collected and run locally  during screening , 
every  6 weeks thereafter during treatmen t starting at C2 , and a t the EOT visit (7 days post last dose).  
In addition, coagulation studies, including PT or INR and aPTT, are to  be measured during screening  
(locally). However, if a patient is receiving coumarin derivatives concurrently with entinostat, 
Investigators are advised to monitor PT and INR every cycle or as clinically indicated, whichever is more 
frequent.  
In the CRC cohort, blood tumor marker CEA should be drawn on day 1 of each cycle.  
  
 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 83 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Clinical laboratory evaluations are to be repeated as necessary during treatment at a schedule determined 
by the Investigator, based on the patient’s clinical status.  
Laboratory abnormalities that are considered by the Investigator to be clinically significant for a particular 
patient are to be reported as AEs. 
9.2.7 Adverse Events 
AEs, as defined in Section 11.2.1, are to be documented from the time of signing the informed consent  
through 30 days post -last dose, with the exception of Serious Adverse Events, which must be documented 
through 90 days following cessation of treatment, or 30 days after the initiation of a new anticancer therapy, whichever is earli er (Section 11.4.3 ). Events meeting the definition of serious (including Events 
of Clinical Interest) are to be reported as such as described in Section 11.4 and Section  11.4.3 . 
9.3 Efficacy Assessments  
With the exception of OS, all efficacy endpoints in this trial (including  the primary endpoint in Phase 2) 
are linked to the tumor response assessments and therefore the importance of timely and complete disease 
assessments in this study cannot be understated. Failure to perform any of the required disease 
assessments will result in the inability to determine disease status for that time point. Frequent off 
schedule or incomplete disease assessments have the potential to weaken the conclusion of this clinical trial. 
The schedule of tumor burden assessments should be fixed according to the calendar, regardless of 
treatment interruptions. Tumor burden assessments will be performed until progressive disease as per 
irRECIST and RECIST 1.1 regardless of the discontinuation of study treatment or the start of a 
subsequent anticancer therapy . Patients with radiographic progression only, as defined by RECIST 1.1 
should continue on study treatment until unequivocal progressive disease is determined as defined by 
irRECIST, at the  discretion of the investigator. 
The same method of assessment and the same technique used for study  screening  (CT scan or MRI) to 
characterize each lesion must be used at each subsequent post -screening  assessment.  
9.3.1 Tumor Measurements and Disease Response Assessment  
9.3.1.1  Baseline Tumor Measurement and Assessment  
Initial tumor imaging at screening must be performed within 28 days prior to C1D1. (Scans performed as 
part of routine clinical management are acceptable for use as initial tumor imaging if they are of 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 84 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
diagnostic quality , have been  performed within 28 days prior to C1D1,  and can be assessed by the central 
imaging vendor ). Patients will have radiological disease assessments performed every 6  weeks (+/ -3 
days) (Week  6, Week 12, etc.) during study treatment until progressive disease. If a patient comes off 
study for reasons other than progressive disease, radiological assessments will continue on this same 
study schedule until progressive disease is unequivocall y documented. Images should be kept to the 
calen dar schedule and not be delayed for delays in cycles or study drug administration. Disease response 
in target and non-target lesions will be assessed locally by the Investigator using irRECIST and RECIST 
1.1. 
Measurable Disease  
To be eligible for study par ticipation, all patients must have measurable disease per RECIST 1.1 that has 
been radiologically documented within 28 days prior to initiating study drug treatment , defined as 
follows:  
At least 1 measurable lesion : 
• ≥10 mm in longest diameter on an axial i mage by  CT scan or MRI with ≤5 mm reconstruction 
interval 
o If slice thickness is no greater than 5 mm, longest diameter must be at least 2 times the thickness 
• ≤20 mm longest diameter by chest X -ray (if clearly defined and surrounded by aerated lung); CT 
is preferred, even without contrast  
• Lymph nodes ≥ 15 mm in short axis on CT scan (CT slice thickness of ≤5 mm)  
If there is only 1 measurable lesion and it is located in previously irradiated field, it must have 
demonstrated progression according to RECIST 1.1. 
Non-measurable  
Non-measurable lesions are defined per RECIST 1.1 as the following and should be captured and 
followed appropriately in the eCRF according the eCRF guideli nes.  
• Masses < 10 mm  
• Lymph nodes 10 – 14 mm in short axis  
• Leptomeningeal disease  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 85 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
• Ascites, pleural or pericardial effusion  
• Lymphangitic involvement of skin or lung  
• Abdominal mases or organomegaly identified by physical exam which cannot be measured by 
reproducible imaging techniques  
• Blastic bone lesions 
• Both benign and equivocal (“cannot exclude”) findings should not be included   
Target versus non -target  
• Target:  all measurable lesions up to a maximum of 2 lesions per organ and 5 lesions in total, 
representative of all involved organs, are to be identified as target lesions and measur ed and 
recorded at screen ing. Target lesions are to be selected on the basis of their size (i.e., those with 
the longest diameter) and suitability for accurate repeated measurement. The sum of the diameters for all target lesions is to be calculated and recorded on the eCRF  as the baseline  sum diameters.  
• Non-target:  all other lesions not classified as target lesions (or sites of disease) are to be 
identified as non-target lesions and are to be recorded on the eCRF . Measurement of non -target 
lesions is not required.  
9.3.1.2  Scan Procedures  
Contrast-enhanced CT scans of chest, abdomen, and, as clinically indicated, pelvis are preferred for evaluation of disease status for this study; however, a contrast -enhanced MRI can also be performed if a 
patient has or develops  allergy to iodinated contrast agents.  
Positron emission tomography (PET) alone will not be acceptable as part of the imaging to be performed 
for this study. If PET is performed, the Investigator should not remove any patient based on PET alone, as 
there can be false positives. If he/she thinks a patient  has progressed via PET, it must be confirmed with a 
CT/MRI.  
If a combined 18F -deoxyglucose (FDG) PET -CT scan is performed, the CT portion of that examination 
should not be substituted for the dedicated CT  examinations required by this protocol for tumor 
measurements unless  the study center can document that the CT performed as part of the FDG PET -CT is 
of identical diagnostic quality to a diagnostic CT (with IV and oral contrast). 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 86 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
CT Scan Procedures  
Study centers must acquire and submit CT scans according to the parameters below:  
• Use consistent scan parameters (spacing, thickness, field of view, etc.) for all assessments. Any 
alternate imaging or parameter variation from the protocol should be noted.  
• If a patient  develops hypersensitivity to the iodinated contrast medium while on study, it is 
acceptable to perform chest CT scans without contrast. In addition, a contrast -enhanced MRI scan 
according to the parameters described in the MRI section must be perfo rmed for the remainder of 
the required anatomy.  
• The patient should be given oral contrast (as either positive [e.g., barium or Gastrografin] or 
negative [e.g., water or saline] contrast media, according to site standard of care) prior to the examination t o allow for sufficient bowel opacification.  
• Non-ionic iodinated IV contrast with a minimum of 320 mg iodine/mL should be used for this 
study. Contrast agent volume should be according to the package insert. The same contrast agent with the same concentrat ion should be used throughout the study.  
MRI Scan Procedures  
• If IV contrast is medically contraindicated during the study, a dynamic contrast -enhanced MRI is 
an acceptable alternative to CT scans of the abdomen and pelvis.  
• MRI must be performed using either 1.5T or 3.0T scanner. A change in scanner field strength is not allowed for an individual patient  while on study  (e.g., if a patient  has a C2 MRI scan at 3.0T, 
all subsequent scans must be performed at 3.0T).  
• MRI scans should use optimized parameters to decrease motion artifact and maximize signal -to-
noise ratio and resolution. Breath-hold imaging, fast -scanning techniques, and gadolinium should 
be used to maximize lesion identification. Note: A non -contrast CT  scan of the chest or digital 
chest X-ray must be acquired in addition to the MRI of the abdomen and, as applicable, pelvis.  
• The patient must undergo scanning with approved extracellular contrast media only (e.g., 
Magnevist, Dataram, Omniscan).  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 87 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
• The same equipment, field strength, sequences, scanning parameters, positioning, angulation, 
timing, field of view, and slice thickness should be utilized for all examinations acquired both 
pre- and post -contrast for a given patient  over the course of the study.  
9.3.1.3  Disease Response Assessment Criteria  
Patients will have radiological disease assessments performed every 6 weeks ( ±3 days ) (Week 6, 
Week  12, etc.) until unequivocal progressive disease or closure of the study by the Sponsor .  
All scans will submitted electronically to a central core radiologic laboratory. Scans from patients who were determined by the Investigator to have a response to treatment (CR or PR) will be reviewed by the core radiologic laboratory to confirm response. Scans from non-responders  may also be reviewed by the 
core radiologic laboratory at the direction of the Sponsor.  
Disease response in target and non -target lesions will be assessed locally by the Investigator using 
immune response RECIST ( irRECIST) and RECIST 1.1 .  
Partial or comp lete response should be confirmed by a repeat tumor imaging assessment no  less than 
4 weeks from the date the response was first documented. The tumor imaging for confirmation of 
response may be performed at the earliest , 4 weeks after the first indication of response, or at the next 
scheduled scan (i.e. 6 weeks later), whichever is clinically indicated.
 
When clinically stable, participants should not be discontinued until progression is confirmed by the Investigator, working with local radiology, according  to the rules outlined in Appendix 3. This allowance 
to continue treatment despite initial radiologic PD takes into account the observation that some participants can have a transient tumor flare in the first few months after th e start of immunotherapy, and 
then experience subsequent disease response. This data will be captured in the clinical database.  
Clinical stability is defined as the following:  
- Absence of symptoms  and signs  indicating  clinically  significant  progression  of disease  
- No decline in ECOG performance status  
- No requirements for intensified management, including increased analgesia, radiation, or other palliative care 
If repeat imaging does not confirm PD per iRECIST, as assessed by the Investigator, and the participant 
continues to be clinically stable, study treatment may continue and follow the regular imaging schedule . If 
PD is confirmed, participants will be discontinued from study treatment.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 88 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
If a participant has confirmed radiographic progression (iCPD) as def ined in  Appendix 3, study treatment 
should be
 discontinued; however, if the participant is achieving a clinically meaningful benefit, an 
exception to continue study treatment may be considered following consultation with the Sponsor . In this 
case, if study treatment is continued, tumor imaging should continue to be performed following the 
intervals as outlined in Sect
ion 13 and submitted to the central imaging vendor.  
A description of the adaptations and iRECIST process is provided in  Appendix 3, with additional details 
in the iRECIST publication (Seymour 2017). A summary of imaging and treatment requirements after first radiologic evidence of progression is provided in Table 9-2 and illustrated as a flowchart in  Figure 
9-1. 
Table 9-2 Imaging and Treatment After 1st Radiologic Evidence of PD  
 Clinically Stable  Clinically Unstable  
Imaging Treatment Imaging Treatment 
First radiologic 
evidence of PD by 
RECIST 1.1  Repeat imaging at 
4 to 8 weeks to 
confirm PD.  May continue study treatment at the 
Investigator’s discretion 
while awaiting 
confirmatory tumor 
imaging by site by 
iRECIST. Repeat imaging at 
4 to 8 weeks to 
confirm PD per Investigator’s 
discretion only.  Discontinue treatment  
Repeat tumor imaging confirms PD 
(iCPD) by iRECIST 
per Investigator 
assessment  No additional 
imaging required.  Discontinue treatment (exception is possible 
upon consultation with 
Sponsor). No additional 
imaging required.  Not applicable  
Repeat tumor imaging shows iUPD 
by iRECIST per 
Investigator 
assessment  Repeat imaging at 4 
to 8 weeks to 
confirm PD . May 
occur at next 
regularly scheduled 
imaging visit.  Continue study treatment at the Investigator’s 
discretion. Repeat imaging at 4 
to 8 weeks to 
confirm PD per Investigator’s 
discretion only.  Discontinue treatment  
Repeat tumor 
imaging shows iSD, 
iPR, or iCR by 
iRECIST per 
Investigator 
assessment.  Continue regularly scheduled imaging 
assessments.  Continue study treatment 
at the Investigator’s 
discretion. Continue regularly 
scheduled imaging 
assessments.  May restart study treatment 
if condition has improved 
and/or clinically stable per 
Investigator’s discretion . 
Next tumor imaging should occur according to the 
regular imaging schedule.  
BICR = Blinded Independent Central Review; iCPD = iRECIST confirmed progressive disease; iCR = iRECIST complete response; iRECIST = modified Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 1.1 for immune -based therapeutics; iSD = 
iRECIST stable disease; iUPD = iRECIST unconfirmed progressive disease; PD = progressive disease; RECIST 1.1 = Response 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 89 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
 Clinically Stable  Clinically Unstable  
Imaging Treatment Imaging Treatment 
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 1.1.  
Figure 9-1: Imaging and Treatment for Clinically Stable Participants Treate d with 
Pembrolizumab after First Radiologic Evidence of PD Assessed by the Investigator 
 

Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 90 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
NOTE:  If a patient has confirmed radiographic progression (i.e. , 2 scans at least 4 weeks apart 
demonstrating progressive disease), but the patient is achieving a clinically meaningful benefit, and there 
is no further increase in the tumor burden at the confirmatory tumor imaging, an exception to continue treatment may  be considered following consultation with the Sponsor. In this case, if treatment is 
continued, tumor imaging should continue to be performed following the study intervals and be submitted 
to the central imaging vendor.  
When feasible, patients should not be discontinued until PD is confirmed. However, patients that are 
deemed clinically unstable are not required to have repeat imaging for confirmation of PD and should 
come off study treatment.  
9.4 Protein Lysine Acetylation and Immune Correlate s 
Based on preclinical studies it is suggested that entinostat may specifically target a population of MDSC s 
and thus improve the response to PD -1 or PD -L1 antibody treatment. The Sponsor plans to evaluate 
populations of MDSC and other myeloid cells in peripheral  blood and tumor tissues of the patients (if 
available) and also to evaluate the basic T -cell function in patients, with the expectation that if MDSC 
level is decreased the response to antigens would be improved.  
Blood for immune correlates and protein lysine acetylation is to be shipped on the same day of draw to 
the applicable laboratories wit h proper advanced notification according to the laboratory manual.  
9.4.1 Blood  
For patients in the EMIC Cohort, blood for immune correlates is to be collected pre -dose on D -14, C1D1, 
C1D8, and C2D15 . For patients in all other cohorts, blood for immune correlates is to be collected pre -
dose on C1D1, C2D1, and C 2D15. At these time points, 40 mL of heparinized peripheral  blood is to be 
collected and shipped overnight to a central laboratory facility  for analysis.  
For patients in the EMIC Cohort, blood for protein lysine acetylation is to be collected pre -dose on D -14, 
C1D1, C1D15, and C2D15. For patients in all other cohorts, blood for protein lysine acetylation is to be collected pre-dose on C1D1, C1D15 and C2D15. At these time points, approximately 16mL of blood is to 
be collected and shipped overnight to a central laboratory facility for analysis.  
The following immune c orrelate analyse s will be performed on the collected samples:  
Cell Phenotype:  
• MDSC: Lin (CD3, CD14, CD19, CD56) negative, HLA
-DR-, CD33+; 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 91 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
• MDSC: CD11b+CD14 -CD33+; 
• PMN -MDSC: CD11b+CD14-CD33+CD15+; 
• M-MDSC: CD11b+CD14-CD33+CD15-; 
• M-MDSC: CD14+HLA-DR-/lo; 
• Monocytes: CD14+CD16+CD66b-HLA-DR+ including subsets of classical CD14hiCD16, 
intermediate CD14hiCD16+ and non-classical CD14+CD16hi;  
• Dendritic cells: Lin-HLA-DR+CD303+ (BDCA2) plasmacytoid; Lin-HLA-DR+CD1c+ (BDCA1) 
myeloid; Lin-HLA-DR+CD141+ (BDCA3); 
• Neut rophils: CD11b+CD14-CD15+/CD66b+ cells in high density fraction;  
• T cells: CD3+CD4+; CD3+CD8+; Regulatory T cells: CD4+CD25+FoxP3+; 
• B cells: CD19.  
Cell Function:  
• Mononuclear cells stimulated with CD3/CD28, ConA, and tetanus toxoid. Cell proliferation by 
3H-thymidine uptake will be measured. Supernatant will be collected and interleukin -2, IFN-γ , 
and GM -CSF will be measure by enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay . 
Refer to the Study Laboratory Manual for instructions on sample collection and shipment.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 92 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
9.4.2 Tumor Tissue 
Fresh tumor tissue samples will be collected during the study as follows: 
• During screening  from all patients on a mandatory basis.  
• On C2D15 (+3 days)  on an optional  basis from patients in  the Dose Escalation/Confirmation 
Phase . All patients in the D ose Escalation/Confirmation Phase will be strongly encouraged to 
provide an optional biopsy in order to help understand dose -immune correlate effects.  
• On C2D15 (+3 days)  on a mandatory basis from the first 10  patients (in total, across cohorts) 
in Stage 1 in the Expansion Phase, the first 10 patients in the EMIC Cohort , and the first 10 
patients in the CRC Cohort .  
• If, based on an interim review of tumor tissue data from the initial patients in the Expansion 
Phase, such data are considered informative, then  tumor tissue samples will be collected on a 
mandatory basis from all subsequent patients in the Expansion Phase on C 2D15 (+3  days). 
Alternatively, if such data are not considered informative, these samples will not be collected 
from subsequent patients.  
If patients whose only accessible lesion for biopsy is a solitary target lesion, it must be amenable to a core biopsy that will not compromise assessment of tumor measurements. If patients have only one measurable 
lesion per RECIST v1.1:  
1. the biopsy specimen should be obtained from a non-target lesion  
2. this lesion should not have been in a field of prior -irradiation unless confirmed progression of 
the lesion  
Should a patient opt out of a mandatory biopsy procedure, it will be considered a protocol deviation; 
however, the patient will be allowed to continue tre atment  on study.  
Tissue samples will be analyzed for changes in expression of checkpoint inhibitors (PD -1/PD -L1) 
Cohorts 1, 2, and 3 only)  in tumor biopsies pre - and post -therapy as well as the following immune 
correlates:  
• MDSC: CD33
+S100A9+; 
• Macrophages CD163+ or CD68+ cells; 
• Neutrophils – Neutrophil elastase+ cells;  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 93 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
• Dendritic cells – DC-SIGN (CD209);  
• CD4, CD8, Granzyme B, and FoxP3 positive cells will be done as appropriate if the MDSC 
level in the tissues is decreased.  
Additional details regarding the processing , stor age, and shipment of tissue samples for immune correlate 
assessments are provided in the Study Manual.  
9.5 Pharmacokinetics  
9.5.1 Entinostat 
Blood samples will be collected to assess the PK of entinostat and will be quantified by a sensitive and 
specific validated bioanalytical method . One (1) b lood samples will be collected at the following time 
points:  
• Pre-dose C1D1  
• 2-4 hours post dose C1D1  
• C1D8 (anytime  post dose ) 
• C1D15 (anytime  post dose ) 
• Pre-dose C2D1  
On each PK sample collection day, t he time and date of entinostat administration, the start and stop time 
of pembrolizumab administration, and the time and date of PK sample  collection  should be recorded in 
the eCRF. 
Instructions for sample collection and shipment will be provided in the PK laboratory manual.  
9.5.2 Pembrolizumab 
Samples for determination of trough pembrolizumab levels and anti -pembrolizumab antibodies will be 
collected  at the following time points (all taken pre -dose):  
• C1D1  
• C2D1  
• C4D1  
• C6D1  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 94 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
• C8D1  
• Every 4 cycles thereafter until last dose of pembrolizumab  
• 30 days after the last pembrolizumab dose (or until the patient starts new anti -cancer therapy).  
All pre -dose trough samples should be collected within 24 hours before the pembrolizumab infusion.  
On each sample collection day, the time and date of entinostat administration, the start and stop time of 
pembrolizumab administration, and the time and date of sample collection should be recorded in the eCRF. 
Instructions for sample collection and shipment will be provided in the laboratory manual.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 95 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
10. DISCONTINUATION AND REPLACEMENT OF PATIENTS 
Patients have the right to withdraw fully or partially from the study at any time and for  any reason without 
prejudice to their  future medical care by the physician or at the institution .  
Withdrawal of full consent for a study means that the patient  does not wish to receive further 
investigational treatment and does not wish to or is unable to continue further study participation . 
Withdrawal of partial consent means that the patient  does not wish to take investigational product any 
longer but is still willing to collaborate in providing further data by continuing on study (e .g., participate 
in all subsequent study visits or procedures) . Any patient may withdraw full or partial consent to 
participate in the study at any time during the study .  
Reasons for permanently discontinuing study therapy and/or  observation might include:  
• ineligibility  
• withdrawal of consent 
• administrative decision by the  Investigator or Syndax  
• pregnancy 
• significant protocol deviation or patient noncompliance  
• Unacceptable toxicity  
• Confirmed disease progression  
• The investigator believes it is n o longer in the patient’s be st interest to continue study therapy  
In the event of discontinuation of all treatment or full withdrawal from the study, the Investigator will 
complete the End of Study form and indicate the date and the appropriate reason. To the greatest extent 
possibl e, the I nvestigator will attempt to complete protocol-required follow -up tests.  
Patients who discontinue the study for reasons other than study drug -related toxicity  before completing 
C1 may be replaced . 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 96 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
11. ADVERSE EVENTS, DATA REPORTI NG, AND RECORDING  
11.1 Study  Drugs 
11.1.1  Entinostat 
Commonly encountered AEs across clinical studies of entinostat monotherapy in patients with solid 
tumors included hypoalbuminemia, fatigue, nausea, hypophosphatemia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia . 
Incidence and severity were dose- and schedule -dependent . In a Phase 2, randomized, placebo-controlled 
study in patients with lung cancer, in which patients received erlotinib+entinostat or erlotinib+placebo, 
treatment-emergent adverse events ( TEAEs ) occurring at a ≥10% higher incidence in entinos tat-treated 
patients versus placebo -treated patients included nausea (49% versus 25%); anorexia (40% versus 16%); 
weight decreased (32% versus 18%); dyspnea (31% versus 18%); vomiting (31% versus 13%); peripheral 
edema (28% versus 13%); anemia (22% versus 11%); thrombocytopenia (15% versus 3%); hypotension 
(14% versus 2%); and stomatitis (12% versus 2%) . In a Phase 2 study in patients with metastatic 
melanoma treated with entinostat monotherapy, the most common TEAEs were nausea (39%), hypophosphatemia (29%), pain in extremity (21%), and back pain and diarrhea (each 18%) ( Hauschild 
2008).  
Additional clinical experience is summarized in the entinostat  IB. As stated previously, there are no 
clinical data with entinostat in combination with  pembrolizumab . 
11.1.2  Pembrolizumab 
Please refer to the current Informed Consent, Investigator ’s Brochure, and the Study Manual for the 
current safety profile and information regarding pembrolizumab.  
11.2 Adverse Event Definitions  
11.2.1  Adverse Events 
An AE is defined in the International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice as “any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical investigation patient  administered a 
pharmaceutical product and that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment” (ICH 
E6:1.2) . 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 97 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Worsening of a pre -existing medical condition, (i.e., diabetes, migraine headaches, gout) should be 
considered an AE if there is either an increase in severity, frequency, or duration of the condition or an 
association with significantly worse outcomes.  
Interventions for pretreatment conditions (i.e., elective cosmetic surgery) or medical procedures that were 
planned before stud y enrollment are not considered AE s. 
Disease progression (PD ) should not be recorded as an AE  unless it results in hospitalization or death . If 
PD occurs, record the date first documented in the EOT visit e CRF. Also record all methods of 
assessment, i.e.,  1 target/non-target lesion, tumor response assessment, and/or clinical disease assessment. 
Indicate if the patient  starts new treatment.  
In the case of death, only record “Fatal” for the event causing death . AEs that are ongoing at the end of 
the study or  time of death are to be noted as “continuing.” Classification of AE s is to be done by the 
Investigator is according to the NCI CTC AE, Version 4.03. The Death eCRF must also be completed.  
The Investigator  is responsible for reviewing laboratory test result s and determining whether an abnormal 
value in an individual patient represents a significant change from baseline. In general, abnormal 
laboratory findings without clinical signific ance (based on the Investigator’s judgment) should not be 
recorded as AEs; however, laboratory value changes requiring therapy or adjustment in prior thera py are 
considered AEs. 
11.2.2  Suspected Adverse Reaction 
A suspected adverse reaction is any AE for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the 
adverse event . For the purposes of Investigational New Drug Application (IND) safety reporting, 
‘reasonable possibility’ means there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the 
AE. A suspected adverse reaction implies a lesser degree of certainty about causality than adverse 
reaction, which means any AE caused by a drug.  
11.2.3  Unexpected Adverse Event 
An unexpected AE or suspected adverse reaction is considered “unexpect ed” if it is not listed in the 
Investigator Brochure or is not listed at the specificity or severity that has been observed; or, if an 
Investigator Brochure is not required or available, is not consistent with the risk information described in 
the General Investigational Plan or elsewhere in the current application, as amended.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 98 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
11.2.4  Serious Ad verse Events  
An AE or suspected adverse reaction is considered “serious” if, in the view of either the Investigator or 
Sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes :  
• is fatal  
• is life -threatening ( i.e., places the patient  at immediate risk of death)  
• requires in -patient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization 
• results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
• is an important medical event  that may not result in death, be life -threatening , or require 
hospitalization  but may be considered a serious adverse drug experience when, based upon 
appropriate medical judgment, it may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this  definition. Examples of such medical 
events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency  or drug abuse.  
A hospitalization meeting the regulatory definition for “serious” is any in -patient hospital admission that 
includes a minimum of an overnight stay in a health care facility. Any AE that does not meet  one of the 
definitions of serious (i.e., emergency room visit, out -patient surgery, or requires urgent investigation) 
may be considered by the Investigator  to meet the “other significant medical hazard” criterion for 
classification as a serious adverse event ( SAE ). 
11.3 Reporting Procedures for All Adverse Events  
The Investigator  is responsible for ensuring that all AEs (as defined in Section 11.2) observed by the 
Investigator or reported by patients are properly captured in the patient s’ medical records and reported on 
the eCRF . The evaluation time period for all adverse events  or events of clinical interest is from the time 
that the informed consent is signed to at least 30 days  after the last dose of entinostat or pembrolizumab, 
or until resolution of all acute toxicities associated with study drug administration, whichever is longer , 
with the exception of SAEs , which must be documented through 90 days following cessation of 
treatment, or 30 days after the initiation of a new anticancer therapy, whichever is earlier ( Section 11.4 ). 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 99 of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
The following AE attributes must be assigned by the Investigator : event description (with detail 
appropriate to the event); serious ness; dates of onset and resolution; severity; assessment of relatedness to 
entinostat  and to  pembrolizumab; and the action taken. The Investigator may be asked to provide follow -
up information, discharge summaries, and extracts from medical records.  
If applicable, the study drug relationship will be assessed by means of the question: “Is there a reasonable 
possibility that the event may have been caused  by one of the two drugs based on mechanism of action 
and/or toxicity profile, or  by the combination of entinostat with pembrolizumab ?” The causal relation 
between an AE and the study drug will be determined by the Investigator on the basis of his or her clinical 
judgment and the following definitions:  
• Related : event can be fully explained by administration of the study drug(s)  
• Possibly R elated : event may be explained by administration of the study drug(s) , or by the 
patient’s clinical state or other agents/therapies  
• Unlikely  Related : event is most likely to be explained by the patient ’s clinical state or other 
agents/therapies  
• Not Related : event can be fully explained by the patient ’s clinic al state or other agents/therapies 
When assessing the relationship between administration of the study drug and the AE, the following 
should be considered: follows a temporal sequence from administration of investigational product is a 
known response to the investigational product based on clinical or preclinical data could not be explained by the known  characteristics of the patient ’s clinical state, environmental or toxic factors, or other therapy 
administered to the patient  disappears or decreases upon cessation or reduction of dose of investigational 
product reappears or worsens when investigational product is reinstated . 
Whenever possible, the CTCAE, Version 4.03,  should be used for assessing the severity of  AEs 
(http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/CTCAE_4.03_2010 -06-14_QuickReference_8.5x11.pdf ).  
For AEs  that are not adequately addressed in the NCI CTCAE, the standard severity grading scale may be 
used (Table 11-1). 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 100  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Table 11-1 Standard Severity Grading Scale  
Grade  Standar d Adverse Event Severity Scoring System  
1 Mild:  Aware of sign or symptom, but easily tolerated.  
2 Moderate : Discomfort enough to cause interference with usual activity.  
3 Severe : Incapacitating with inability to work or do usual activity.  
4 Life-Threatening: Refers to an event in which the patient  was, in the view of the 
Investigator , at risk of death at the time of the event. (This category 
is not to be used for an event that hypothetically might have caused 
death if it were more severe.)  
5 Fatal : Event resulted in death.  
It will be left to the Investigator’s clinical judgment to determine whether an AE is related and of 
sufficient severity to require the patient ’s removal from treatment or from the study. A patient  may also 
voluntarily withdraw from treatment due to what he/she perceives as an intolerable AE. If either of these 
situations arises, the patient  should be strongly encouraged to undergo an end- of-study assessment and be 
under medical supervision until sy mptoms cease or the condition becomes stable.  
11.4 Serious Adverse Event Reporting Procedures  
SAEs will be collected and recorded throughout the study period, beginning with the signing of the 
informed consent form through 90 days after the last dose of  study drug or end of the study (if thought to 
be related to study drug) , or 30 days after the initiation of a new anticancer therapy, whichever is earlier . 
All SAEs must be reported to Syndax or its representative within 24 hours of discovery or notification of the event. Initial SAE information and all amendments or additions must be recorded on a Serious Adverse Event Report Form and provided to Syndax or i ts representative. The SAE reporting procedure is 
provided in the Study Manual.  
For all deaths, available autopsy reports and relevant medical reports should be provided to Syndax or its 
representative. If a patient  is permanently withdrawn from the study because of an SAE, this information 
must be included in the initial or follow -up Serious Adverse Event Report Form as well as the EOT 
eCRF.  
The Investigator  should notify the IRB or EC of SAEs occurring at the site and other AE reports received 
from Synda x, in accordance with local procedures and statutes. 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 101  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
11.4.1  Pregnancy and Lactation Reporting Procedures  
Although pregnancy and lactation are not considered AEs, it is the responsibility of Investigators or their 
designees to report any pregnancy or lactation in a patient (spontaneously reported to them) that occurs 
during the study  or within 120 days of completing the study or 30 days following cessation of treatment if 
the patient initiates new anticancer therapy, whichever is earlier . All patients who become pregnant must 
be followed to the completion/termination of the pregnancy. Pregnancy outcomes of spontaneous 
abortion, missed abortion, benign hydatidiform mole, blighted ovum, fetal death, intrauterine death, miscarriage,  and stillbirth must be reported as SAEs (Important Medical Events) . If the pregnancy 
continues to term, the outcome (health of infant) must also be reported.  
Such events must be reported within 24 hours to the Sponsor either by electronic media or paper . Sponsor 
Contact information can be found in the  Study Manual . 
Please refer to the Study Manual for further details on the pregnancy reporting procedure and associated 
report form .  
11.4.2  Definition of an Overdose for This Protocol and Reporting of Overdose to the Sponsor  
11.4.2.1  Entinostat Overdose  
No information on the treatment of overdose of entinostat is currently available. Entinostat overdoses are defined as a single dose greater than 15mg. This overdose will not be considered an SAE unless the 
outcome of the overdose meets seriousness criteria as defined in Section 11.2.4. In the event of an 
entinostat overdose, the Sponsor should be immediately notified. The patient should be carefully monitored for potential adverse reactions and symptomatic treatment instituted as per institutional standards of care.  
11.4.2.2  Pembrolizumab O verdose  
For this study, a  pembrolizumab overdose will be defined as ≥5 times the dose for pembrolizumab (e.g., 
≥1000 mg) . A pembrolizumab overdose is considered an SAE as described in Section 11.4.3 . No specific 
information is available on the treatment of overdose of pembrolizumab. In the event of overdose, the 
patient should be observed closely for signs of toxicity. Appropriate supportive treatment should be 
provided if clinically indicated. 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 102  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
11.4.3  Events of Clinical Interest with Pembrolizumab  
Selected  adverse events are also known as Events of Clinical Interest ( ECI) and must be reported within 
24 hours  to the Sponsor according to the SAE Reporting Procedures as outlined in Section  11.4. Sponsor 
Contact information can be found in the  Study Manual .  
ECIs for this study include: 
1. An overdose of pembrolizumab, as defined in Section 11.4.2, that is not associated with clinical 
symptoms or abnormal laboratory results.  
2. an elevated AST or ALT value that is ≥3×ULN and an elevated total bilirubin value that is ≥2 ×ULN 
and, at the same time, an alkaline phosphatase value that is <2×ULN, as determined by way of 
protocol -specified laboratory testing or unscheduled laboratory testing.*  
*Note:   These criteria are based upon available regulatory guidance documents. The purpose of the 
criteria is to specify a threshold of abnormal hepatic tests that may require an additional evaluation for an 
underlying etiology. The study  site guidance for assessment and follow up of these criteria, called the 
Drug Induced Liver Injury and Overdose Guidelines, can be found in the  Study Manual . 
11.4.4  Follow -Up of Adverse Even ts 
The Investigator must continue to follow all SAEs and non-serious AEs considered to be reasonably or 
possibly related to study drug either until resolution or the Investigator assesses them as chronic or stable. 
This follow -up may extend after the end of the study.  
11.4.5  Safety Reporting to Health Authorities, Ethics Committees/Institutional Review Boards 
and Investigators  
The Sponsor will send appropriate safety notifications to Health  Authorities in accordance with applicable 
laws and regulations.  
The Investigator must comply with any applicable site-specific requirements related to the reporting of 
SAEs involving his/her patients to the EC/IRB that approved the trial.  
In accordance with ICH GCP guidelines, the Sponsor or designee will inform the investigator of “findings that could adversely affect the safety of study patients , impact the conduct of the trial, or alter the 
EC’s/IRB’s approval/favorable opinion to continue the trial.”  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 103  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
When specifically required by regulations and guidelines, the Sponsor or designee will provide 
appropriate Safety reports directly to the concerned health authority and lead EC / IRB and will maintain 
records of these notifications. When direct reporting by the Sponsor or designee is not clearly defined by national or site-specific regulations, the Investigator will be responsible for promptly notifying the 
concerned EC / IRB of any safety reports provided by the Sponsor or designee and of filing copies of all 
related correspondence in the Investigator Site File.  
For trials covered by the European Directive 2001/20/EC, the Sponsor’s responsibilities regarding the reporting of SAEs / SUSARs / Safety Issues will be carried out in accordance with that Directive and with 
the related detailed guidance.  
11.4.6  Protocol Deviations Due to an Emergency or Adverse Event  
Departures from the protocol will be determined as allowable on a case-by -case basis and only in the 
event of an emergency . The Investigator or other physicia n in attendance in such an emergency must 
contact the Medical Monitor as soon as possible to discuss the circumstances of the emergency.  
The Medical Monitor, in conjunction with the Investigator s, will decide whether the patient  should 
continue to participate in the study . All protocol deviations and reasons for such deviations must be noted 
on the eCRF . 
11.5 Safety Monitoring  
The safety and tolerability of the investigational treatments will be monitored throughout the course of the 
study by the Investigator s and the S ponsor  Study Physicians(s) including the  Medical Monitor.  
The safety and tolerability data that will be reviewed  will include, but are not limited to : AEs, DLTs, 
laboratory test results, and patient discontinuations. Additionally, the development of SAEs will be 
assessed by the Sponsor S tudy Physician(s)  on a continuous basis. (Note that all SAEs must be reported 
to the Sponsor or designee within 24 hours of discovery or notification of the event [ Section 11.4].)   
No formal safety stopping rules are specified in the protocol. However, if any significant safety issues arise, a decision to modify or terminate the study will be made by the Sponsor in collaboration with the Investigators. 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 104  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
12. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
12.1 Sample Size Estimation  
12.1.1  Escalation Phase  
Three to 6 patients will be enrolled in each dose cohort based on a standard Phase 1 dose escalation 
scheme. Each patient will participate in only 1 dose cohort. The total number of patients to be enrolled in 
the Dose Escalation /Confirmation Phase is dependent upon the observed safety profile, which will 
determine the number of patients per dose cohort, as well as the number of dose escalations required to 
achieve the MTD or RP2D. 
A starting sample size of at least 3 patients per dose cohort, expanding to 6 patients in the event of a marginal DLT rate (33%) was deemed to be a safe and conventional approach in the dose escalation of a novel oncologic agent. Assuming a true DLT rate of 5% or less, there would be a 3% chance that dose 
escalation would be halted in a given cohort (i.e., observing 2 or more patients with DLT). If a true DLT 
rate of 50% is assumed, then there would be an 83% chance that dose escalation would be halted in a 
given cohort.   
A total of 9 - additional patients will be enrolled in the Dose Confirmation Cohort to obtain additional AE, 
immune correlate, and anti -tumor activity data on entinostat at the  MTD or RP2D in combination.  
12.1.2  Expansion Phase  
In the Expansion Phase of the study, the safety and preliminary antitumor activity of entinostat when 
administered at the RP2D with pembrolizumab  will be explored in up to 4 cohorts of adult solid tumors as 
previously defined. Up to  252 patients are planned to be enrolled among the 4 cohorts . Patients will be 
enrolled in each cohort according to a single -arm study design with ORR, as determined by irRECIST, as 
the primary endpoint. The Expansion Phase  will be carried out in 2  stages so that enrollment for 1 or more 
of the cohorts evaluated can terminate early in the event the antitumor activity of the combination 
regimen is not sufficient. The decision to terminate or continue enrollment for each cohor t will be made 
independently of the other. The number of patients evaluated in each stage and the minimum number of responders needed to continue to the next stage, as described for cohort 1, w as determined based on the 
optimum version of Simon’s 2-stage design ( Simon 1989), with 80% power and 1-sided significance level 
of 10%. For cohort 4, the number of patients evaluated in each stage and the minimum number of responders needed to continue to the next stage was determined based on the optimum version of Simon’s 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 105  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
2-stage design, with 90% power and 1-sided significance level of 5 %. For cohorts 2 and 3, the number of 
responders needed to declare the study a success was based on single proportion binominal test with 90% 
power and 1- sided  significance level of 5% . Note that the protocol may be amended to allow for 
enrollment of additional or different cohorts, for example, patients with PD -L1-positive NSCLC, based 
on emerging data during study conduct.  
Syndax will conduct one administrative analysis when at least 60% (42 out of 70 patients in 
cohort 2, 31 out of 52 patients in cohort 3) of patient information have accrued in cohorts 2 and 3 
for decision making for late phase development planning. This administrative look will not lead 
to stopping of the study. Nonetheless, 0.01 alpha is being allocated to spend for the first administrative look and leaving 0.04 alpha for the final analysis.  
Cohort 1 (NSCLC patients with squamous cell and adenocarcinom a histology  who have not been 
previously treated with a PD -1 or PD -L1-blocking antibody ) 
A maximum of 46 patients will be enrolled in Cohort 1. A true ORR of 35% is hypothesized for both 
tumor types. An ORR greater than 20% is considered a lower threshold for antitumor activity that would warrant continued development. Based on the design elements specified above, up to 13 patients may be 
enrolled for either tumor type during the first stage:  if  2 or fewer patients achieve an objective response 
(CR or PR), confirmed or unconfirmed, then enrollment will terminate; otherwise, 33  additional patients 
will be enrolled during the second stage. Upon completion of the second stage, if 13 or more patients  out 
of the 46  enrolled achieve CR or PR, then the true ORR for the combination therapy likely exceeds 20%, 
the lower threshold of acceptable antitumor activity. Alternatively, if 12  or fewer patients achieve an 
objective response at the end of the second stage, then the true ORR is likely 20% or lower and further 
evaluation of the combination therapy may not be pursued for that tumor type. If the true ORR is 20% or 
less for a tumor type, then the expected sample size is 29.4, with probability of terminatin g enrollment at 
the end of the first stage equal to 50%.  
Cohort 2 (Patients with NSCLC (any histology) who have previously been treated and progressed on a 
PD-1 or PD-L1-blocking antibody)  
A maximum of 70 patients  will be enrolled in Cohort 2. A true ORR of 15% is hypothesized. A response 
rate greater than 5% is considered the lower threshold for antitumor activity that would warrant continued development in this setting . Based on the design elements specified above, the single proportion (or one 
sample) b inomial test will be used. Ninety -six percent 1 -sided confidence interval of the observed one 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 106  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
sample proportion will be calculated. The trial will be considered a success if the lower limit of 9 6% 
confidence interval is greater than 5%.  
Syndax will conduc t one administrative analysis when at least 60% (42 out of 70 patients) of patient 
information have accrued in cohorts 2 for decision making for late phase development planning. This 
administrative look will not lead to stopping of the study. Nonetheless, 0.01 alpha is being allocated to 
spend for the first administrative look and leaving 0.04 alpha for the final analysis.  
Cohort 3 (Patients with melanoma who have previously been treated and progressed on a PD-1 or PD-
L1-blocking antibody )  
A maximum of  52 patients will be enrolled in cohort 3. A true ORR of 25% is hypothesized. An ORR 
greater than 10% is considered the lower threshold for antitumor activity that would warrant continued development in this setting. Based on the design elements specified abov e,   the single proportion (or one 
sample) binomial test will be used. Ninety -six percent 1 -sided confidence interval of the observed one 
sample proportion will be calculated. The trial will be considered a success if the lower limit of 9 6% 
confidence inte rval is greater than 10%. 
Syndax will  conduct one administrative analysis  when at least 60% (31 out of 52 patients) of patient 
information have accrued in cohorts 3 for decision making for late phase development planning. This 
administrative look will not lead to stopping of the study. Nonetheless, 0.01 alpha is being allocated to 
spend for the first administrative look and leaving 0.04 alpha for the final analysis .  
Cohort 4 (Patients with CRC who have not previously been treated on a PD -1 or PD -L1-blocking 
antibody ) 
A maximum of 84 patients will be enrolled in Cohort 4. A true ORR of 15% is hypothesized. An ORR 
greater than 5% is considered the lower threshold for antitumor activity that would warrant continued 
development in this setting. Based on the des ign elements specified above, up to 37 patients may be 
enrolled during the first stage:  if less than or equal to 2  patients achieve a CR or PR, confirmed or 
unconfirmed, then enrollment will terminate; otherwise, 47 additional patients will be enrolled d uring the 
second stage. Upon completion of the second stage, if 8 or more patients out of the 84 enrolled achieve 
CR or PR, then the true ORR for the combination regimen likely exceeds 5%, the lower threshold of 
acceptable antitumor activity. Alternatively, if 7 or fewer patients achieve an objective response at the end 
of the second stage, then the true ORR is likely 5 % or lower and further evaluation of the combination 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 107  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
therapy may not be pursued in this setting. If the true ORR is 5% or less, then the expected sample size is 
50.2, with probability of terminating enrollment at the end of the first stage equal to 72%.  
12.2 Populations for Analysis  
The Full Analysis Set (FAS) will serve as the primary population for the analysis of tumor response and 
other efficacy -related data. The FAS is a subset of all enrolled patients, with patients excluded for the 
following reasons:  
• Failure to receive at least one dose of entinostat and pembrolizumab  
• Lack of baseline data for those analyses that require baseline data  
A supportive analysis using the Per -Protocol (PP) set may be performed by excluding patients with 
important deviations from the protocol that may substantially affect the results of the primary efficacy analyses. The final determination on protocol violations, and thereby the composition of the PP set, will be made prior to locking the clinical database and final analysis and will be documented in a separate 
memo.  
The safety population will be used for the analysis of safety data in this study. The safety p opulation will 
consist of all patients who receive at least one dose of entinostat and pembrolizumab. At least one 
laboratory or other safety -related assessment subsequent to at least one dose of entinostat and 
pembrolizumab is required for inclusion in the analysis of a specific safety parameter. To assess change from baseline, a baseline measurement is also required.  
A patient that experiences an adverse event meeting DLT criteria during C1 or who receives the full dose 
of pembrolizumab and all doses of e ntinostat during C 1 without experiencing a DLT, is considered a 
DLT -evaluable patient.  
12.3 Analysis Schedule  
12.3.1  Safety Monitoring  
The safety and tolerability of the investigational treatments will be monitored throughout the course of the 
study by the Investigators and S ponsor  Study Physician(s) including ongoing review of serious adverse 
events and other safety trends. Frequent meetings will be held during Phase 1 to review safety aspects of 
the study  and to render dose escalation decisions as applicable.  
Safet y and tolerability data that will be reviewed by the Sponsor Study Physician(s) will include, but are 
not limited to: adverse events, laboratory test results, and patient discontinuations. Note that  all serious 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 108  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
adverse events must be reported to the Sponsor within 24 hours of discovery or notification of the event. 
No formal safety stopping rules are specified in the protocol. However, if any significant safety issues 
arise, a decision to modify or terminate the trial will be made by the Sponsor in collabor ation with the 
study’s  Steering Committee.  
12.3.2  Efficacy Monitoring  
An interim analysis of ORR will be performed for each tumor type after enrollment in the first stage is complete in the Expansion Phase . Patients will be followed for response for a minimum of  two cycles 
following the initiation of study drug. Patients who die or discontinue treatment during the first two 
cycles because of radiographic and/or clinical evidence of disease progression will be considered nonresponders . Enrollment in the second sta ge will be initiated once enrollment in the first stage is 
complete and the minimum number of responders is observed, as described in Section  12.1.2. If the 
minimum is observed prior to the completion of enrollment, then the transition between the first and 
second stages will occur without interruption. If the minimum is not observed at t he time enrollment is 
completed, then enrollment in the second stage will be held until the continuation criterion is met. 
12.4 Statistical Methods  
The safety and efficacy analyses will be presented by study phase. For the escalation phase, tabulations 
will be provided by dose cohort and overall . For the Expansion Phase , tabulations will be provided by 
tumor type and overall . Some analyses may be performed based on the dose escalation and Expansion 
Phases combined.  
The statistical analyses for this study will be performed using SAS
® version 9.2 or later (SAS Institute, 
Inc., Cary, NC). Programming specifications will be prepared which describe the datasets and variables 
created for this study . The datasets will be prepared using the most recent version of CDISC’s  Study Data 
Tabulation Model (SDTM) and Analysis Dataset Model ( ADaM ). The source SDTM and ADaM datasets 
from which a statistical analysis is performed (including interim safety and efficacy reviews) will be archived with the Sponsor.  
12.4.1  Disposition of Patients 
The number of patients included in the efficacy and safety analyses will be summarized, along with the reason for exclusion from one or more analysis populations. Patients discontinuing from study drug  and 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 109  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
the primary reason for discontinuation will be summarized. Patients withdrawing from study and the 
primary reason for withdrawal will be summarized in a similar manner.  
12.4.2  Demographics and Baseline Characteristics  
Descriptive summaries of demographic and baseline characteristics will be tabulated by study phase and 
overall. For the Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase, tabulations will be provided by dose cohort and 
overall. For the Expansion Phase, tabulations will be provided by tumor type and overall .  
12.4.3  Exten t of Exposure  
The overall duration of study drug administration (in months) and the total number of cycles initiated will 
be tabulated for each patient and summarized  by study phase . For the escalation phase, tabulations will be 
provided by dose cohort and overall. For the Expansion Phase, tabulations will be provided by tumor type 
and overall . For patients who receive entinostat, the average dose of entinostat (in mg) administered and 
cumulative dose (in mg) administered will be calculated . These data will be further summarized by 
calculating the mean, standard deviation, median, and range of these values . The number and proportion 
of patients with one or more dosage modification of study drug will be tabulated by treatment arm along with the reason for dos age modification . The primary reason for study drug discontinuation will be 
tabulated in a similar manner.  
Similar tabulations will be provided for the administration of pembrolizumab. 
12.4.4  Concomitant Medications  
Prior and concomitant medications will be coded  to generic term using the current version of the World 
Health Organization Drug Dictionary and will be tabulated and listed by patient.  
12.4.5  Efficacy Analysis 
Efficacy analyses will be conducted using the Full Analysis Set and, where appropriate, the Per -protocol 
Set. 
ORR will be estimated for each cohort evaluated in the Expansion Phase  using irRECIST , as the primary 
endpoint . Crude proportion of patients with best overall response of CR or PR, along with a 2- sided 95% 
CI, will be calculated  for cohorts 1 and 4. The width of the CI will be adjusted to account for the 
multistage design ( Atkinson 1985). Additionally, a 90% one -sided CI of the form (π
L, 1] will be reported 
since the sample size for the Expansion Phase s for cohorts 1 and 4 w ere determined using a one -sided 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 110  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
significance level of 10% . Crude proportion of patients with best overall response of CR or PR, along 
with a 2 -sided 98% CI, will be  calculated for cohorts 2 and 3. CBR at 6 months will be analyzed in a 
similar manner.  
DOR  will be calculated for patients who achieve a CR or PR and is defined as the number of months from 
the start date of the response (and subsequently confirmed) to the first date that recurrent disease or PD is 
documented. PFS is defined as the number of months from the date of the first dose of study drug to the 
earliest of documented PD or death due to any cause without prior progression. OS is defined as the 
number of months from the first dose of study drug to the date of death due to any cause . DOR, PFS, and 
OS will be summarized descriptively using the Kaplan -Meier method with 95%  confidence intervals 
(CIs) calculated using Greenwood’s formula. Median follow -up for each endpoint will be estimated 
according to the Kaplan -Meier estimate of potential follow -up. PFS rate at 6 months and corresponding 
95% CIs will be estimated using the Kaplan -Meier method . Greenwood’s formula will be used to 
calculate the standard errors of the Kaplan -Meier estimate and upper and lower limits of the 95% CI.  
An analysis of efficacy endpoints also will be performed, with response determined using RECIST, version 1.1.  
12.4.6  Immune Correlate Analyses  
Immune correlate values will be summarized in a descriptive manner . For immune correlates measured on 
a continuous scale, the number  of patients with non- missing data, mean, either the standard error or 
standard deviation, median, 25
th percentile (first quartile), 75th percentile (third quartile), minimum, and 
maximum values will be presented . For discrete data, the frequency and percent distribution will be 
presented . Within -patient changes from baseline may be assessed by the Wilcoxon signed rank test and 
Fisher’s exact test, as appropriate. Analysis of covariance models may be used to explore the relationship 
between changes in immun e correlates and selected measures of antineoplastic activity (e.g., maximum 
change from baseline in the sum of product diameters in measurable nodes and nodal masses) . The 
association among the various immune correlates and clinical outcomes (data permitt ing) may be 
explored using heat map and other data visualization techniques.  
12.4.7  Safety Analysis  
Safety will be assessed by clinical review of all relevant parameters including  AEs, SAEs , laboratory 
values, vital signs, and ECG results. Unless specified otherwise, the safety analyses will be conducted for 
the safety population defined in Section  12.2.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 111  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Summary tables and listings will be provided for all reported TEAEs, defined as AE s that start on or after 
the first administration of study drug . The reported AE term will be assigned a standardized preferred 
term using the current version of the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA).  
TEAEs will be summarized based on the number and percentage of patients experiencing the event by 
MedDRA (version 18.0) system organ class (SOC)  and preferred term . The causal relationship between 
the occurrence of an AE and study drug w ill be judged by the Investigator based on the conventions 
described in Section 11.3. In the event a patient experiences repeat episodes of the sa me AE, then the 
event with the highest severity grade and strongest causal relationship to study drug will be used for purposes of incidence tabulations.  
Tabular summaries will be provided for:  
• DLTs (Dose Escalation/Confirmation Phase only)  
• all TEAEs  
• TEAEs  by relationship to study drug and maximum severity grade  
• TEAEs with action of study drug delayed/interrupted or dose reduced 
• TEAEs with action of study drug discontinued  
• SAEs  
For the escalation phase, the observed DLT rate in each dose cohort will be calculated by the crude proportion of patients who experienced DLT with a 2-sided 95% exact binomial CI.  
All deaths that occur on study (defined as during treatment or within 90 days of treatment 
discontinuation) will be reported in a patient listing, which will include the primary cause of death and the number of days between the date of the last dose of study drug and death.  
Hematology, serum chemistries, and vital signs will be summarized in a descriptive manner by calculating the mean, standard deviation, m edian, and range as follows:  
• baseline value 
• minimum post -baseline value  
• maximum post -baseline value  
• average post-baseline value  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 112  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
• last post-baseline value  
Laboratory values will be assigned toxicity grades when available using the NCI CTCAE . Directional 
shifts in laboratory toxicity grades (comparing baseline grade with worst post -baseline grade) will be 
analyzed using standard shift tables, presenting number and proportion of patients and their maximum 
grade shift . For analytes without a toxi city grading scale, the shift table will present directional shifts from 
baseline to above or below the laboratory standard normal range using the maximum increase and/or 
decrease observed throughout the course of treatment/observation.  
Vital signs will be  summarized in a descriptive manner by calculating the mean, standard deviation, 
median, and range in the same manner described for laboratory values. The Wilcoxon signed rank test 
may be used to assist in the identification of any systematic changes.  
ECG results will be listed and summarized in terms of the number and percentage of patients with 
abnormal and normal findings, as reported by the Investigator , at the time points assessed (screen ing and 
EOT).  
12.4.8  Pharmacokinetic , Exposure-Safety , and Anti-pembrol izumab Antibody  Analyses 
A population PK analysis will be used to describe the PK of entinostat. The effects of patient factors (e.g., 
demographics, clinical chemistries, disease) on entinostat PK will be evaluated. In addition, the 
relationship between entinostat exposure parameters and indicators of safety will be assessed.  
Specific details for these analyses as well as analyses of trough pembrolizumab levels and anti -
pembrolizumab antibodies will be provided in a separate analysis plan.  
12.5 Procedures for Reporting Deviations to the Original Statistical Analysis Plan 
A formal statistical plan for the analysis and presentation of data from this study will be prepared before database lock . Deviations from the statistical analyses outlined in this protocol will be indicated in this 
plan; any further modifications will be noted in the final clinical study report.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 113  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
13. INVESTIGATIONAL DRUG PRODUCT  
The study drugs being investigated in combination during this clinical trial are pembrolizumab  and 
entinostat. First study treatment is to be administered within 3 days of enrollment into the study.  
The Investigator shall take responsibility for maintaining applicable records and ensuring appropriate 
supply, storage, handling, distribution, and usage of study drug, in accordance with the protocol and any 
applicable laws and regulations. 
13.1 Entinostat 
13.1.1  Description  
Entinostat is a synthetic small molecule bearing the chemical name 3-Pyridylmethyl N-{4 -[(2-
aminophenyl)carbamoyl]benzyl}carbamate and the molecular formula C 21H20N4O3, with a molecular 
weight of 376.41. Entinost at is classified as an antineoplastic agent, specifically functioning as an 
inhibitor of histone deacetylases and therefore promot es hyperacetylation of nucleosomal histones, 
allowing transcriptional activation of a distinct set of genes that leads to the inhibition of cell 
proliferation, induction of terminal differentiation, and/or apoptosis.  
13.1.2  Formulation 
Entinostat is supplied in 2 strengths of film -coated tablets containing 1 mg (pink to light red) or 5 mg 
(yellow) of entinostat as polymorph B. Each tablet  contains mannitol, sodium starch glycolate, 
hydroxypropyl cellulose, potassium bicarbonate, and magnesium stearate as inert fillers. The film coating 
consists of hypromellose, talc, titanium dioxide, and f erric oxide pigments (red and yellow) as colorants.  
Refer to the Pharmacy Manual for more details regarding entinostat.  
13.1.3  Storage  and Packaging  
Entinostat tablets may be shipped and stored at controlled room temperature , up to 25º C  (77°F ); 
excursions permitted to 15°C to 30°C (59 – 86°F).  The pharmacist will dispense the investigational 
material to the patient  at appropriate intervals throughout the study in childproof containers.  
13.2 Pembrolizuma b 
Pembrolizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that blocks the interaction between PD-1 and its 
ligands, PD -L1 and PD -L2. Pembrolizumab is an IgG4 kappa immunoglobulin with an approximate 
molecular weight of 149 kDa.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 114  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Refer to the Pharmacy Manual for details regarding pembrolizumab formulation, storage, packaging a nd 
supply .  
13.3 Accountability  
The lot number(s) of the study drugs (entinostat and pembrolizumab) received at the site are to be 
recorded on Drug Accountability Log(s)  maintained by the pharmacist. Additional distribution and return 
information will also be r ecorded at the site.  
Patient medication instructions and dosing diaries will be provided to the patient for purposes of 
recording entinostat self -administration. The diaries along with unused entinostat tablets will be returned 
to the clinic to assess com pliance and for entry into the eCRF.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 115  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
14. REGULATORY OBLIGATIO NS 
14.1 Informed Consent  
A sample informed consent form is provided for the Investigator  to prepare the informed consent 
document to be used at his or her site. Updates to the template will be communicated by letter from 
Syndax or designee to the Investigator.  
Before a patient’s participation in the clinical study, the Investigator is responsible for obtaining written 
informed consent from the patient or legally authorized representative after adequate ex planation of the 
aims, methods, anticipated benefits, and potential hazards of the study and before any protocol -specific 
screening procedures or any investigational products are administered. The acquisition of informed consent should be documented in the  patient’s medical records, and the informed consent form should be 
countersigned by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion (not necessarily an 
Investigator). The original signed informed consent form should be retained in accordance with institutional policy, and a copy of the signed consent form should be provided to the patient  or legally 
acceptable representative.  
14.2 Institutional Review Board (IRB) /Ethics Committee (EC)  
A copy of the protocol, proposed informed consent form, other writte n patient information, and any 
proposed advertising material must be submitted to the IRB /EC for written approval. A copy of the 
written approval of the protocol and informed consent form , in addition to other essential regulatory 
documents per Section 14.3 , must be received by Syndax or designee before recruitment of patient s into 
the study and shipment of study drug.  
The Investigator  must submit and obtain approval from the IRB /EC for all subsequent protocol 
amendments and changes to the informed consent document. The Investigator  should notify the IRB/EC 
of deviations from the protocol or SAEs occurring at the site and other AE repor ts received from Syndax, 
in accordance with local procedures.  
The Investigator will be responsible for obtaining annual IRB /EC renewals throughout the duration of the 
study. Copies of the Investigator ’s submission and the IRB /EC continuance of approval must be sent to 
Syndax or its representative.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 116  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
14.3 Pre-study Documentation Requirements  
The Investigator  is responsible for providing the following documents to Syndax or its representative 
before study initiation can occur:  
• Signed and dated protocol signature page (Investigator’s Agreement).  
• Completed Food and Drug Administration form 1572 or equivalent per local regulatory 
requirements.  
• Curricula vitae of Principal Investigator and all sub -investiga tors (updated within 12 months).  
• Copy of the IRB/EC  approval of the protocol, consent form, and patient  information sheet.  
• Copies of Health Authority and Central Ethics Committee approvals, as applicable. 
• IRB/EC  composition or written statement that the board is  in compliance with regulations.  
• Laboratory normal ranges and documentation of laborator y certification (or equivalent).  
• Signed Clinical Trial Agreement between Syndax and the authorized business representative at 
the institution . 
• Completed Financial Disclosure statements for the Principal Investigator  and all 
sub-investigators . 
14.4 Patient  Confidentiality  
The Investigator  must ensure that the patient ’s confidentiality is maintained. On the eCRF s or other study 
documentation submitted to Syndax or its representative, patient s should be identified only by their 
initials and a patient  ID number. Patient samples should be identified only by the patient ID number . 
Documents that are not for submission to Syndax or its representative (i.e., signed informed consent 
forms) should be ke pt in strict confidence by the I nvestigator.  
In compliance with federal guide lines, it is required that the I nvestigator and institution permit authorized 
representatives of the company, of the regulatory agency(s), and the IRB /EC direct access to review the 
patient’ s original medical records for verification of study -related procedures and data. Direct access 
includes examining, analyzing, verifying, and reproducing any records and reports that are important to the evaluation of the study. The Investigator is obligated to inform and obtain the consent of the patient  to 
permit named representatives to have access to his/her study -related records without violating the 
confidentiality of the patient. 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 117  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
15. ADMINISTRATIVE AND L EGAL OBLIGATIONS  
15.1 Protocol Amendments and Study Termination 
All protocol amendments will be implemented by Syndax and must receive IRB /EC approval before 
implementation, except where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to patient s. The Investigator 
must send a copy of the approval letter from the IRB /EC, along with the revised Informed Consent form, 
to Syndax or its representative.  
Both Syndax and the Investigator  reserve the right to terminate the study according to the study contract. 
The Investigator  should notify the IRB /EC in writing of the study’s completion or early termination and 
send a copy of the notification to Syndax or its representative.  
15.2 Study Documentation and Archive  
The Investigator  must maintain a list of appropriately qualified persons to whom he/she has delegated 
study duties. All persons au thorized to make entries and/or corrections on eCRFs will be included on the 
Syndax Delegation of Responsibility Form.  
Source documents are original documents, data, and records from which the patient’s eCRF data are 
obtained. These include but are not lim ited to hospital records, clinical and office charts, laboratory and 
pharmacy records, diaries, microfiches, radiographs, and correspondence.  
The Investigator and study staff are responsible for maintaining a comprehensive and centralized filing 
system of study -related documentation, available for inspection at any time by representatives from 
Syndax and/or applicable regulatory authorities. Ele ments should include:  
• Patient files containing informed consent forms and patient  identification list. 
• Study files containing the P rotocol with all amendments, Investigator’s Brochure, copies of pre -
study documentation ( Section 14.3), and all correspondence to and from the IRB/EC and Syndax. 
• Investigational Product Accountability Records and all drug -related correspondence.  
In addition, all original source documents supporting entries on the eCRF s must be maintained and be 
readily available.  
No study document should be destroyed without prior written agreement between Syndax and the 
Investigator . Should the Investigator  wish to assign the study records to another party or move them to 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 118  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
another location, he/she must notify Syndax in writing of the new responsible person and/or the new 
location.  
15.3 Study Monitoring and Data Collection 
A study monitor will be responsible for contacting and visiting the Investigator  for the purpose of 
inspecting the facilities; verifying the e CRFs at regular intervals throughout the study to assess adherence 
to the protocol; ensuring completeness, accuracy, and consistency of the data; and ensuring adherence to 
local regulations on the conduct of clinical research. The monitor should have access to patient  medical 
records and other study -related records needed to verify the entries on the eCRF s. 
The Investigator  agrees to cooperate with the monitor to ensure that any problems detected in the course 
of these monitoring visits, including delays in completing eCRFs, are resolved.  
In addition to routine monitoring and in accordance with United States 21 CFR Parts 312, 50, and 56, this study may be selected for audit by a designee of Syndax  or its representative. Inspection of site facilities 
(i.e., pharmacy, drug storage areas, laboratories) and review of study -related records will occur to 
evaluate the study conduct  and compliance with the protocol and applicable regulatory requirements.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 119  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
16. REFERENCES 
Alao JP, Lam EW, Ali S, Buluwela L, Bordogna W, Lockey P, et al. Histone deacetylase inhibitor 
trichostatin A represses estrogen receptor alpha-dependent transcription and promotes proteasomal 
degradation of cyclin D1 in human breast carcinoma cell lines. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10(23):8094-104.  
American Association for Cancer Research. PD-1 inhibitors raise survival in NSCLC. Cancer Discov 2014;4(1):6.  
Atkinson EN, Brown BW.  Confidence limits for probability of response in multi -stage phase II clinical 
trials. Biometrics 1985; 41: 741 –744. 
Blank C, Brown I, Peterson AC, Spiotto M, Iwai Y, Honjo T, et al. PD-L1/B7H -1 inhibits the effector  
phase of tumor rejection by T cell receptor (TCR) transgenic CD8+ T cells. Cancer Res 2004;64(3):1140-5. 
Chemnitz JM, Parry RV, Nichols KE, June CH, Riley  L, SHP-1 and SHP -2 Associate with 
Immunoreceptor Tyrosine -Based Switch Motif of Programmed Death 1 upon Primary Human T Cell  
Stimulation, b ut Only Receptor Ligation Prevents T Cell Activation. The Journal of Immunology  
2004; 173: 945– 954. 
Cheng X, Veverka V, Radhakrishnan A, Waters LC, Muskett FW, Morgan SH, et al. Structure and  
interactions of the human programmed cell death 1 receptor. J Biol Chem 2013;288(17):11771-85.  
Creelan BC. Update on immune checkpoint inhibitors in lung cancer. Cancer Control 2014;21(1):80-9.  
Curran MA, Montalvo W, Yagita H, Allison JP. PD -1 and CTLA -4 combination blockade expands 
infiltrating T cells and reduces regu latory T and myeloid cells within B16 melanoma tumors. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 2010;107(9):4275-80.  
Disis ML. Immune regulation of cancer. J Clin Oncol, 2010;28(29):4531- 8. 
Dudley ME, Wunderlich JE, Yang JC, Sherry  RM, Topalian SL, Restifo NP, et al. Adoptive Cell Transfer  
Therapy Following Non- Myeloablative but Lymphodepleting Chemotherapy for the Treatment of Patients  
With Refractory Metastatic Melanoma. Journal of Clinical Oncology ;2005:0732-183. 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 120  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Finn L, Markovic SN, Joseph RW. Therapy for metastatic me lanoma: the past, present, and future. BMC 
Med 2012;10:23.  
Francisco LM, Sage PT, Sharpe AH. The PD-1 pathway in tolerance and autoimmunity. Immunological 
Reviews 2010; 0105-2896 . 
Greenwald RJ, Freeman GJ, Sharpe AH. The B7 Family Revisited. Annual Reviews.2005; 23:515– 48. 
Harvey RD. Immunologic and Clinical Effects of Targeting PD-1 in Lung Cancer. Clinical Pharmacology 
& Therapeutics 2014;96(2):214– 223.  
Hauschild A, Trefzer U, Garbe C, Kaehler KC, Ugurel S, Kiecker F, et al. Multicenter phase II trial of the histone deacetylase inhibitor pyridylmethyl -N-{4 -[(2-aminophenyl) -carbamoyl] -benzyl}-carbamate in  
pretreated metastatic melanoma. Melanoma Res 2008;1 8(4):274-8.  
Hess-Stumpp H, Bracker TU, Henderson D, Politz O. MS -275, a potent orally available inhibitor of  
histone deacetylases--the development of an anticancer agent. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2007;39(7-8):1388-405.  
Hirano F, Kaneko K, Tamura H, Dong H,  Wang S, Ichikawa M, et al. Blockade of B7 -H1 and PD-1 by 
monoclonal antibodies potentiates cancer therapeutic immunity. Cancer Res 2005;65(3):1089- 96.
  
Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, Garshell J, Miller D, Altekruse SF, et al (eds). SEER Cancer  
Statistic s Review, 1975 -2011, National Cancer Institute. Bethesda, MD, based on November 2013 SEER  
data submission, posted to the SEER web site, April 2014. Available at:  http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2011/ . Accessed:  28 October 2014.  
Huang X, Venet F, Wang YL, Lepape A, Yuan Z, Chen Y, et al. PD-1 expression by macrophages plays a  
pathologic role in altering microbial clearance and the innate inflammatory response to sepsis. Proc Natl  
Acad Sci U S A 2009;106(15):6303-8.  
Hunder NN, Wallen H, Cao J, Hendricks DW, Reilly JZ, Rodmyre R, et al. Treatment of metastatic 
melanoma with autologous CD4+ T cells against NY- ESO -1. N Engl J Med 2008;358(25):2698-703 . 
Juergens RA, Wrangle J, Vendetti FP, Murphy SC, Zhao M, Coleman B, et al. Combination epigenetic  
therapy has efficacy in patients with refractory advanced non -small cell lung cancer. Cancer Discov  
2011;1(7):598-607.  
Kaplowitz N, DeLeve LD. Drug -Induced Hepatic Disease. Marcel Decker Inc. New York, 2003.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 121  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Kim K, Skora AD, Li Z, Liu Q, Tam AJ, Blosser RL, et al. Eradication of metastatic mouse cancers 
resistant to immune checkpoint blockade by suppression of myeloid-derived cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A 2014;111(32):11774- 9. 
Lázár-Molnár E, Yan Q, Cao E, Ramagopal U, Nathenson SG, Almo SC. et al. Crystal structure of the complex between programmed death- 1 (PD-1) and its ligand PD -L2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
2008;105(30):10483-8.  
Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H, Bartlett BR, Kemberling  H, Eyring AD, et al. PD -1 Blockade in Tumors with  
Mismatch -Repair Deficiency. N Engl J Med. 2015 Jun 25;372(26):2509- 20. 
Lin DY, Tanaka Y, Iwasaki M, Gittis AG, Su HP, Mikami B, et al. The PD -1/PD -L1 complex resembles 
the antigen -binding Fv domains of antibodies and T cell receptors. Proc Nat l Acad Sci U S A 
2008;105(8):3011- 6. 
Nishimura H, Agata Y, Kawasaki A, Sato M, Imamura S, Minato N, et al. Developmentally regulated expression of the PD -1 protein on the surface of double -negative (CD4 -CD8 -) thymocytes. Int Immunol  
1996;8(5):773-80.  
Nomi T, Sho M, Akahori T, Hamada K, Kubo A, Kanehiro H, et al. Clinical significance and therapeutic 
potential of the programmed death-1 ligand/programmed death-1 pathway in human pancreatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13(7):2151-7.  
Okazaki T, Maeda A, Nishimu ra H, Kurosaki T, Honjo T. PD -1 immunoreceptor inhibits B cell receptor -
mediated signaling by recruiting src homology 2-domain -containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 to 
phosphotyrosine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98(24):13866- 71. 
Parry RV, Chemnitz JM, Frauwirth KA , Lanfranco AR, Braunstein I, Kobayashi SV,  et al. CTLA -4 and 
PD-1 Receptors Inhibit T -Cell Activation by  Distinct Mechanisms. Molecular and Cellular Biology 2005; 
0270- 7306.  
Pedoeem A, Azoulay -Alfaguter I, Strazza M, Silverman GJ, Mor A. Programmed  death -1 pathway in 
cancer and autoimmunity. Clin Immunol 2014;153(1):145-52.  
Peña-Cruz V, McDonough SM, Diaz-Griffero F, Crum CP, Carrasco RD, Freeman GJ. PD -1 on immature  
and PD -1 ligands on migratory human Langerhans cells regulate antigen-presenting cell activity. J Invest 
Dermatol 2010;130(9):2222-30.  
Philips GK, Atkins M. Therapeutic uses of anti-PD -1 antibodies. Int Immunol. 2015;27(1):39-46.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 122  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Pilon -Thomas S, Mackay A, Vohra N, Mulé JJ. Blockade of programmed death ligand 1 enhances the 
therapeutic ef ficacy of combination immunotherapy against melanoma. J Immunol 2010;184(7):3442-9.  
Poole RM. Pembrolizumab: first global approval. Drugs 2014;74(16):1973-81.   
Riley  JL. PD-1 signaling in primary T cells. Immunological Reviews. 2009;0105-2896. 
SEER Cancer Statistics Factsheets:  Lung and Bronchus Cancer. National Cancer Institute. Bethesda, 
MD. Available at:  http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/lungb.html. Accessed:  28  October, 2014.  
SEER Cancer Statistics Factsheets: Melanoma of the Skin. National Cancer Institute. Bethesda, MD. 
Available At:  http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/melan.html. Accessed:  28 October, 2014.  
Seym our L, Bogaerts J, Perrone A, Ford R, Schwartz LH, Mandrekar S, et al. iRECIST: guidelines for  
response criteria for use in trials testing immunotherapeutics. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(3):e143-e152.  
Shah P, Gau Y, Sabnis G. Histone deacetylase inhibitor entinostat reverses epithelial to mesenchymal  
transition of breast cancer cells by reversing the repression of E -cadherin. Breast Cancer Res Treat  
2014;143(1):99-111.  
Sheppard KA, Fitz LJ, Lee JM, Benander C, George JA, Wooters J, et al. PD-1 inhibits T-cell receptor  
induced phosphorylation of the ZAP70/CD3zeta signalosome and downstream signaling to PKCtheta. FEBS Lett, 2004;574(1 -3):37-41.  
Simon R. Optimal two -stage designs for phase II clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 1989;10(1):1-10.  
Spranger S, Koblish H K, Horton B, Scherle PA, Newton R, Gajewski TF. Mechanism of tumor rejection  
with doublets of CTLA -4, PD -1/PD -L1, or IDO blockade involves restored IL -2 production and 
proliferation of CD8(+) T cells directly within the tumor microenvironment. J Immunother  Cancer 
2014.2:3.  
Strome SE, Dong H, Tamura H, Voss SG, Flies DB, Tamada K, et al. B7 -H1 blockade augments adoptive 
T-cell immunotherapy for squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 2003;63(19):6501-5.  
Weber J. Immune checkpoint proteins: a new therapeutic paradigm for cancer --preclinical background: 
CTLA -4 and PD -1 blockade. Semin Oncol 2010;37(5):430-9.  
Yao S, Chen L. PD-1 as an immune modulatory receptor. Cancer J 2014;20(4):262-4.  
Zhang L, Gajewski TF, Kline J. PD -1/PD -L1 interactions inhibit antitumor i mmune responses in a murine 
acute myeloid leukemia model. Blood 2009;114(8):1545-52.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 123  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Zhang X, Schwartz JC, Guo X, Bhatia S, Cao E, Lorenz M, et al, Structural and functional analysis of the  
costimulatory receptor programmed death-1. Immunity 2004;20(3):337-47.  
Zimmerman HJ. Hepatotoxicity: The Adverse Effects of Drugs and Other Chemicals on the Liver.  2nd 
Edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Philadelphia, PA, 1999.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 124  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
17. APPENDICES  
Appendix 1: New York Heart Association Classification of Heart Failure  
 
Class  Symptomatology  
I No symptoms . Ordinary physical activity such as walking and climbing stairs does not 
cause fatigue or dyspnea.  
II Symptoms with ordinary physical activity . Walking or climbing stairs rapidly, walkin g 
uphill, walking or stair climbing after meals, in cold weather, in wind or when under 
emotional stress causes undue fatigue or dyspnea.  
III Symptoms with less than ordinary physical activity . Walking  1 to 2 blocks on the level and 
climbing more than 1 flight of stairs in normal conditions causes undue fatigue or dyspnea.  
IV Symptoms at rest . Inability to carry on any physical activity without fatigue or dyspnea.  
 
  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 125  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Appendix 2: Concomitant Medications to be Avoided  
Examples of sensitive in vivo  CYP substrates and CYP substrates with narrow therapeutic range are 
summarized in  Table 17-1 . 
Table 17-1 Examples of substrates that may be affected by entinostat 
CYP Enzymes  Substrates with  
narrow therapeutic range1 
CYP1A2  Theophylline, tizanidine  
CYP2C8  Paclitaxel  
CYP3A2 Alfentanil, astemizole3, cisapride4, 
cyclosporine, dihydroergotamine, 
ergotamine, fentanyl, pimozide, 
quinidine, sirolimus, tacrolimus,   
terfenadine4 
1 CYP substrates with narrow therapeutic range  refers to drugs whose exposure-response relationship indicates that small 
increases in their exposure levels by the concomitant use of CYP inhibitors may lead to serious safety concerns (e.g., Torsades 
de Pointes).  
2 Because a number of CYP3A substrates (e.g., darunavir, maraviroc) are also substrates of P -gp, the observed increase in 
exposure could be due to inhibition of both CYP3A and P -gp. 
3 Withdrawn from the United States market because of safety reasons.  
Refer to  Table 17-2 for examples of transporter  inhibitors and inducers.  
Table 17-2 P-gp Inhibitors and Inducers  
 
 Inhibitor  Inducer  
P-gp, MDR1 Amiodarone, azithromycin, captopril, 
carvedilol, clarithromycin, conivaptan, 
diltiazem, dronedarone, felodipine, 
lopinavir, quercetin, ranolazine,  ticagrelor, 
ritonavir, cyclosporine, verapamil 
erythromycin, ketoconazole, itraconazole, 
quinidine  Avasimibe, carbamazepi ne, phenytoin, 
rifampin, St John’s Wort, tipranavir/ritonavir  
 
Refer to  Table 17-3 for examples of gastric acid reducing drugs .  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 126  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Table 17-3 Gastric Acid Reducing Drugsa 
Gastric Acid Reducing Drugs  
H2 Inhibitors  • Cimetidine (Tagamet)  
• Ranitidine (Zantac)  
• Famotidine (Pepcid)  
• Nizatidine (Axid)  
Antacids  • Alka -Seltzer  
• Alka -2, Surpass Gum, Titralac, Tums  
• Milk of Magnesia  
• ALternaGEL , Amphojel  
• Gaviscon, Gelusil, Maalox, Mylanta, Rolaids  
• Pepto -Bismol  
 
a Gastric acid reducing drugs:   http://www.everydayhealth.com/ulcer/ulcer -treatment.aspx 
 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 127  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Appendix 3: Description of the iRECIST Process for Assessment of Disease Progression  
Assessment at  Screening and Prior to RECIST 1.1 Progression 
Until radiographic disease progression based on RECIST 1.1, there is no distinct iRECIST assessment.  
Assessment and Decision at RECIST 1.1 Progression  
For participants who show evidence of radiological PD by R ECIST 1.1 as determined by the Investigator, 
the Investigator will decide whether to continue a participant on study treatment until repeat imaging is 
obtained (using iRECIST for pa rticipant management (see Table 9-2 and Figure 9-1). This decision by the 
Investigator should be based on the participant’s overall cl inical condition.  
Clinical stability is defined as the following:  
• Absence of symptoms  and signs  indicating  clinically  significant progression  of disease  
• No decline in ECOG performance status  
• No requirements for intensified management, including increased analgesia, radiation, or other 
palliative care 
Any participant deemed clinically unstable  should be discontinued from study treatment.  
If the Investigator decides to continue treatment, the participant may continue to receive study treatment 
and the tumor  assessment should be repeated 4 to 8 weeks later to confirm PD by iRECIST, per 
Investigator assessment. Images should continue to be sent in to the central imaging vendor for potential retrospective BICR.  
Tumor flare may manifest as any factor causing rad iographic progression per RECIST 1.1, including:  
• Increase in the sum of diameters of target lesion(s) identified at baseline to ≥20% and ≥5  mm 
from nadir  
Note: the iRECIST publication uses the terminology “sum of measurements”, but “sum of 
diameters” is in this protocol, consistent with the original RECIST 1.1 terminology.  
• Unequivocal progression of non-target lesion(s) identified at baseline 
• Development of new lesion(s) 
iRECIST defines new response categories, including iUPD (unconfirmed progressive disease) and iCPD 
(confirmed progressive disease). For purposes of iRECIST assessment, the first visit showing progression 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 128  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
according to RECIST 1.1 will be assigned a visit (overall) response of iUPD, regardless of which factors 
caused the progression.  
At this visit, target and non -target lesions identified at baseline by RECIST 1.1 will be assessed as usual.  
New lesions will be classified as measurable or non -measurable, using the same size thresholds and rules 
as for baseline lesion assessment in RECIST 1.1. Fro m measurable new lesions, up to 5 lesions total (up 
to 2 per organ), may be selected as New Lesions – Target . The sum of diameters of these lesions will be 
calculated, and kept distinct from the sum of diameters for target lesions at baseline. All other ne w lesions 
will be followed qualitatively as New Lesions – Non-target.  
Assessment at the Confirmatory Imaging  
On the confirmatory imaging, the participant will be classified as progression confirmed (with an overall response of iCPD), or as showing persistent unconfirmed progression (with an overall response of iUPD), 
or as showing disease stability or response (iSD/iPR/iCR).  
Confirmation of Progression  
Progression is considered confirmed, and the overall response will be iCPD, if ANY of the following 
occurs:  
• Any of the factors that were the basis for the initial iUPD show worsening 
- For target lesions, worsening is a further increase in the sum of diameters of ≥5  mm, 
compared to any prior iUPD time point  
- For non-target lesions, worsening is any significant growth in lesions overall, compared to a 
prior iUPD time point; this does not have to meet the “unequivocal” standard of RECIST 1.1 
- For new lesions, worsening is any of these:  
o An increase in the new lesion sum of diameters by ≥5  mm fr om a prior iUPD time point  
o Visible growth of new non- target lesions  
o The appearance of additional new lesions 
• Any new factor appears that would have triggered PD by RECIST 1.1  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 129  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Persistent iUPD 
Progression is considered not confirmed, and the overall response remains iUPD, if: 
• None of the progression-confirming factors identified above occurs AND  
• The target lesion sum of diameters (initial target lesions) remains above the initial PD threshold 
(by RECIST 1.1)  
Additional imaging for confirmation should be scheduled 4 to 8 weeks from the imaging on which iUPD 
is seen. This may correspond to the next visit in the original visit schedule . The assessment of the 
subsequent confirmation imaging proceeds in an identical manner, with possible outcomes of iCPD, 
iUPD, and iSD/iPR/iCR.  
Resolution of iUPD  
Progression is considered not confirmed, and the overall response becomes iSD/iPR/iCR, if:  
• None of the progression-confirming factors identified above occurs, AND  
• The target lesion sum of diameters (initial target lesions) is not above the initial PD threshold.  
The response is classified as iSD or iPR (depending on the sum of diameters of the target lesions), or iCR 
if all lesions resolve. 
In this case, the initial iUPD is considered to be pseudo -progression, and the level of suspicion for 
progression is “reset”. This means that the next visit that shows radiographic progression, whenever it 
occurs, is again classified as iUPD by iRECIST, and the confirmation process is repeated before a response of iCPD can be assigned. 
Management Following the Confirmatory Imaging 
If repeat imaging does not confirm PD per iRECIST, as assessed by the Investigator, and the participant 
continues to be clinically stable, study treatment may continue and follow the regular imaging schedule. If  
PD is confirmed, participants will be discontinued from study treatment.  
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 130  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
Detection of Progression at Visits After Pseudo -progression Resolves  
After resolution of pseudo- progression (i.e., achievement of iSD/iPR/iCR), iUPD is indicated by any of 
the follow ing events: 
• Target lesions 
- Sum of diameters reaches the PD threshold (≥20% and ≥5 mm increase from nadir) either for 
the first time, or after resolution of previous pseudo-progression. The nadir is always the 
smallest sum of diameters seen during the entire trial, either before or after an instance of pseudo-progression.  
• Non-target lesions 
- If non -target lesions have never shown unequivocal progression, their doing so for the first 
time results in iUPD.  
- If non -target lesions have shown previous unequivocal progression, and this progression has 
not resolved, iUPD results from any significant further growth of non-target lesions, taken as 
a whole.  
• New lesions 
- New lesions appear for the first time  
- Additional new lesions appear  
- Previously identified new target le sions show an increase of ≥  5 mm in the new lesion sum of 
diameters, from the nadir value of that sum  
- Previously identified non-target lesions show any significant growth  
If any of the events above occur, the overall response for that visit is iUPD, and the iUPD evaluation 
process (see Assessment at the Confirmatory Imaging above) is repeated. Progression must be confirmed 
before iCPD can occur.  
The decision process is identical to the iUPD confirmation process for the initial PD, with one exception:  if new lesions occurred at a prior instance of iUPD, and at the confirmatory imaging the burden of new 
lesions has increased from its smallest value (for new target lesions, the sum of diameters is ≥5 mm 
increased from its nadir), then iUPD cannot resolve to iS D or iPR. It will remain iUPD until either a 
Product:  Entinostat  
Proto col Number:  SNDX -275-0601 
Date:  12 April 2018 Page 131  of 131 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  SYNDAX PHARMACEUTICALS  
 
decrease in the new lesion burden allows resolution to iSD or iPR, or until a confirmatory factor causes 
iCPD. 
Additional details about iRECIST are provided in the iRECIST publication. 