Correspondence:   Approval  of an Amendment  to an Approved  PI/SC 
Project Application,  VA Central IRB Study Number 16‐12
Facility Name: VA Greater Los Angeles Health Care System
Subject:From: VA Central Institutional  Review BoardDate:
Amendment  #: 01
Determination  Date: 6/9/2017  12:15:33 PM
Amendment  Summary:1.
2.6/15/2017
The amendment  request involved 1) Adding Component  B to the study protocol 
which involves Veteran surveys and interviews;  and 2) Adding the Provider Mid‐
Implementation  and Post Implementation  Guides and Email Invitations  for 
Component  A to the study.To:
The VA Central IRB reviewed  the following  request of an amendment  to the project listed above
The VA Central IRB made the following  determination  regarding  the above amendment  to the PI/SC application:
3.
4.APPROVED:   All IRB approval criteria have been met. The modifications  for this amendment  
do not pose an increased  risk to participants.
This approval does not change the date the project is due for continuing  review. All documents  associated  with 
this approved  amendment  have been made available on the VA Central IRB SharePoint  site and an approval 
notice has been forwarded  to you, the local site investigators,  and the local site liaison.  If local policy requires 
R&D Committee  review and approval amendments,  please forward a copy of their review to our office upon 
completion  of review.
Any questions  concerning  the review of this project or for any other administrative  issue pertaining  to this study 
and the functions  and responsibilities  of the VA Central IRB can be addressed  to the VA Central IRB Manager for 
this project, Kendra Clarke, at 202‐443‐5766 or e‐mail, Kendra.Clarke2@va.gov.Protocol Title: Facilitating  Cardiovascular  Risk Screening  and Risk Reduction  in Women VeteransApproval of an Amendment  to the Approved PI/SC Project Application
under expedited  procedures.Bevanne Bean‐Mayberry Bevanne.Bean ‐Mayberry@va Principal Investigator:
Melissa Farmer Coste Melissa.FarmerCoste@va.go v Co‐Principal Investigator:
Hemen Saifu Hemen.Saifu@va.gov Study Coordinator:
Page 1 of 2
VA Central Institutional  Review Board
Documents  posted to the VA Central IRB Share Point website:
01. Form 116_03/30/17
02. Form 112b_03/03/17
03. Form 10‐0493_05/22/17
04. Form 103_03/30/17
05. Protocol tracked version_05/18/17
06. Patient Information  Sheet_05/22/17
07. Patient Baseline Survey_03/30/17
08. Patient Invite Follow‐Up_05/23/17
09. Patient Follow‐Up Survey_03/20/17
10. Patient Invitation_05/18/17
11. Patient Baseline Interview  Guide_
12. Patient Follow‐Up Interview  Guide_03/30/17
13. Provider Mid‐Implemation  Invite_03/30/17  
14. Provider Post‐Implementation  Invite_03/30/17
15. Provider Mid‐Implementation  Interview  Guide_03/30/17  
16. Provider Post‐Implementation  Interview  Guide_03/30/17  
17. Baseline Survey_05/18/17
Copy To:
Local Site(s) Local Site Liaison(s) Local Site Investigator(s)
San Antonio, TX Dennis.Bryan@va.gov Erin.Finley@va.govLos Angeles, CA Elizabeth.Corey@va.g ov Giselle.Henry@va.gov
Los Angeles, CA Elizabeth.Corey@va.g ov Giselle.Henry@va.govPI/SC Site Liaison(s)
Page 2 of 2
 
  
FACILITATING CARDIOVASCULAR RISK SCREEN ING AND 
RISK REDU CTION IN WOMEN VETERANS  
 
  
Project 1 of EMPOWER QUERI   
Protocol Component A  combined with Component  B 
Component B additions are in red in the track change version  
Funding Agency: QUE 15 -272   
Princi pal Investigator /Study Chair : Bevanne Bean -Mayberry, MD  
March 30 , 2017  
 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 2 of 36 
 
 
 Abstract  
Project Background :  Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the number one cause of death in 
American women.  While the American Heart Association has documented that public 
awarene ss of CVD increased from 1997 to 2009 (from 30% to 54%), women still demonstrate 
limited understanding of imminent CVD -associated morbidity and mortality risks.  Moreover, 
women’s control of CVD risk factors, such as lipids, blood pressure and diabetes, is  worse than 
men’s, while women also have higher obesity and inactivity rates nationally.  Given persistent 
VA gender disparities in CVD risks, we conducted a partnered project with VA Women’s Health 
Services to identify barriers and facilitators to CVD scr eening and management in women 
Veterans.  Findings informed development of the proposed multi -component cardiovascular 
(CV) risk reduction toolkit.   
 
Project Objectives :  The objective of this project is to implement and evaluate a (CV) risk 
reduction too lkit (CV toolkit) designed to increase identification of CV risk among Women 
Veterans, enhance patient/provider communication about their risk, and increase Women 
Veterans’ engagement and retention in relevant health services including referrals to key hea lth 
programs (e.g., MOVE!, dieticians, health coaches, and CV specialists as needed).   
 
Project Methods :  The CV toolkit will be implemented at four women’s health clinics over two 
years .  The CV toolkit includes four components: (1) Patient education/act ivation tools, such as 
information al posters and fliers about women’s CV risk (2) a CV risk assessment computerized 
template , which systematically captures CVD risk factor history and data from patients’ medical 
records, and provides open fields for the pr ovider to enter any relevant information from the 
patient’s CV worksheet (worksheet capture s CVD risk of patient and family history), (3) provider 
information and education programs as well as referral tools to internal services (e.g., women’s 
MOVE! Progra m, smoking cessation clinics, dieticians, health coaches, pharmacists and CV or 
mental health specialists as needed), and (4) the Gateway to Healthy Living program  tailored to 
Women Veterans, a facilitated group meeting that occurs in a structured format w ith 
personalized goal setting and identification of key services available at the local site to assist 
with lifestyle changes necessary for patient -targeted CV risk reduction . We will conduct  baseline 
and post -implementation surveys and/or interviews with 260 patients (65 per site)  as well as  
pre-, mid -, and post -implementation non-human subjects research interviews with 60 staff 
(15/site).   
 
Results:  The project is currently in the pre -implementation phase at the first site (GLA)  which 
includes the activi ties from C omponent A (non -human subjects research interviews with staff).  
We have also recruited the second site and will begin pre -implementation work once the site 
application (LSI) is approved .   
 
Anticipated Impacts on Veterans’ Healthcare :  The prop osed toolkit is designed to promote 
patient -centered decision -making and effective clinical action around CV risk reduction among 
women Veterans and their VA primary care providers.  Toolkit implementation and spread 
should ultimately reduce persistent gen der disparities in quality and outcomes of VA care.  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 3 of 36 
 
 
 List of Abbreviations  Used in this Protocol  
1. CV………………………Cardiovascular  
2. CVD…………………….Cardiovascular Disease  
3. AHA……………………..American Heart Association  
 
4. WH………………………Women’s Health  
5. WHS…………………….Women’s Health Serv ices 
6. GLA……………………..Greater Los Angeles  
7. NCP……………………..National Center for Disease Prevention and Health Promotion  
8. BPE……………………...Blueprint for Excellence  
9. CPRS……………………Computerized Patient Record System  
10. EMR……………………..Electronic Medical Record  
11. REP……………………..Replica ting Effective Programs  
12. TECH……………………Tool for Evaluating Research Implementation Challenges  
13. WHRN…………………..Women’s Health Research Network  
14. PBRN……………………Practice -Based Research Network  
15. PACT…………………… Patient Aligned Care Team  
16. DART…………………… Data Access Request Tracke r 
17. MORE…………………… Measuring Organizational Readiness for patient Engagement  
18. MOVE…………………… A VA National Weight Management Program  
19. GLM…………………… ...Generalized Linear Model  
20. EMPOWER ………… ..…Enhancing Mental and Physical health of Women through 
Engagement and Retention  
21. PCP……………………Primary Care Physician  
22. LVN……………………Licensed Vocation Nurse  
23. MSA…………………… Medical Support Assistant  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 4 of 36 
 
 
  
Contents  
Protocol Title:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  5 
1.0 Study Personnel ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  5 
2.0 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  9 
3.0 Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  9 
4.0 Resources and Personnel  ................................ ................................ .............................  9 
5.0 Study Procedures ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  10 
5.1 Study Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  11 
5.2 Recruitment Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 20 
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  ................................ ................................ ......................  22 
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ...........................  23 
5.5 Study Evaluations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  23 
5.6 Data Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  24 
5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 26 
6.0 Reporting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  26 
7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ ..........................  29 
8.0 Communication Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 32 
9.0 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  34 
 
 
The CV Risk protocol is divided into  2 components. Component A was approved on 08/09/2016 
and focus es on providers and key stakeholders in this study (non -patient data collection  and 
only pre -condition interviews ). The current submission is a combin ation of Component A with 
Component B  (in red in track changes version)  and include s our protocol for implementation and 
summative interviews with provider s and key stakeholders,  protocol for patients in this study 
including  patient data collection , and nonrandomized stepped wedge analysis .  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 5 of 36 
 
 
 (Protocol Title: Cardiovascular (CV) Risk)  
1.0 Study Personnel   
Principal Investigator /Study Chair : Bevanne Bean -Mayberry, MD , MHS  
Board Certifications: American Board of Internal Medicine   
VA Employee: 5/8ths  
VA Facility:  VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System   
VA Facility Address : 
VA Greater Los Angeles HSR&D Center of Innovation  
VA Sepulveda Campus  
16111 Plummer St (152)  
North Hills, CA   91343  
Phone :  818-895-9449, x36009    
Fax:  818-895-3858  
VA E -mail: bevanne.bean -mayberry@va.gov  
Affiliations:    
1) VA GLA HSR&D Center for the Study of Healthcare Innovation, Implementation, and Policy  
2) Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA  
 
Co-Principal Investigator : Melissa Farmer Coste , PhD  
VA Employee: 5/8ths  
VA Facility: VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System   
VA Facility Address : 
VA Greater Los Angeles HSR&D Center of Innovation  
VA Sepulveda Campus  
16111 Plummer St (152)  
North Hills, CA  91343  
Phone :  818-895-9449, x36046    
Fax:  818-895-3858  
VA E -mail: Melissa.Farmer@va.gov  
Affiliations:    
1) VA GLA HSR&D Center for the Study of Healthcare Innovation, Implementation, and Policy  
 
Collaborato rs: 
Co-Investigator: Alison Hamilton, PhD  
VA employee: 7/8  
VA Facility: VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System  
Phone: 818 -749-6530  
VA email: Alison.Hamilton@va.gov   
Affiliations  
1) VA GLA HSR&D Center for the  Study of Healthcare Innovation, Implementation, and Policy , 
VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, California  
2) Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 6 of 36 
 
 
  
Co-Investigator: Jessica Zuchowski, PhD  
VA employee: 8/8  
VA Facility: VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System  
Phone: 818.891.7711 Ext 36055  
VA email: Jessica.zuchowski@va.gov   
Affiliations  
1) VA GLA HSR&D Cen ter for the Study of Healthcare Innovat ion, Implementation, and Policy , 
VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, California  
 
Co-Investigator: Erin Finley, PhD  
VA employee:  8/8 
VA Facility: South Texas Veterans Health Care System  
Phone: (210) 617-5300  
VA email: Erin.Finley@va.gov    
Affiliations  
1) Veterans Evidence -based Research Dissemination and Implementation Center (VERDICT) at 
the South Texas Veterans Health Care System,  
2) Adjunct  Assistant Profe ssor with the Division of Clinical Epidemiology, Department of 
Medicine, at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio.  
 
Co-Investigator: Alexis Huynh, PhD, MPH  
VA employee: 8/8  
VA Facility: VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System  
Phone:  310-478-3711 x 49862  
VA email: alexis.huynh@va.gov   
Affiliations  
1) GLA HSR&D Center for the Study of Healthcare Innovation, Implementation, and Policy  
 
 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 7 of 36 
 
 
 2.0 Introduction  
 
BACK GROUND  
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the number one cause of death in American women, and all 
adult women are potentially at risk for CVD. 1,2 While the American Heart Association (AHA) has 
documented that awareness of CVD increased from 30% in 1997 to 54% in 2009, women still 
demonstrate limi ted understanding of the imminent risks of CVD -associated morbidity and 
mortality. Recent updates summarizing the public health impact of CVD in women identify the 
following topics as important issues: (a) greater need for prevention of incident cases of C VD, 
(b) need for increased awareness of CV risk among women, and (c) need for larger 
representation of women in prevention trials. 3,4 The recently released CV guidelines for 
Cholesterol, CV Risk Assessment, Obesity and Lifestyle support directed lipid trea tment and 
more personalized evaluations by providers, in addition to a strong push for educating patients 
about their risks and strongly recommending lifestyle changes (i.e., physical activity, diet, and 
behavioral counseling). 2,5-7 There are clear gender differences in the control of CV risk factors 
such as lipids, blood pressure, and intermediate diabetes outcomes nationally and within the 
VA, 8,9 with women Veterans often at higher CV risk than their male counterparts. 3,10-15 The 
combination of disparitie s and gender -specific CV risk factors suggest an urgent need for CV 
risk factor management in women Veterans.  
 
The goals of this project are to implement and evaluate a CV risk reduction toolkit (CV toolkit) 
designed to increase identification of CV risk among Women Veterans, enhance 
patient/provider communication about their risk, and increase Women Veterans’ engagement 
and retention in relevant health services including referrals to key health programs (e.g., 
MOVE!, dieticians, health coaches, and CV spe cialists as needed). Th is multi-component toolkit 
is based on findings from our recently completed work for VA Women’s Health Services (WHS), 
in partnership with VA GLA WH leadership, where we identified organizational barriers and 
facilitators to CV risk assessment and management in women Veterans. The CV toolkit 
incorporates the Gateway to Healthy Living program, a national program currently being 
implemented by the National Center for Disease Prevention and Health Promotion ( NCP) that 
focuses on motivati ng and supporting VA patients with CV risks to engage in existing VA 
services in order to reduce their risk.  
 
This CV toolkit aligns directly with both VA WHS’s mission to provide comprehensive health care 
for women based on provider competencies and pati ent preferences (Hayes LoS), and NCP’s 
disease prevention goals for all Veterans (Kinsinger LoS). Moreover, per the EMP OWER 
QUERI conceptual framework, the toolkit —a personalized, proactive -patient driven care model 
(BPE 6.2.a) —represents an innovation in women Veterans’ health care (7.2.g) that will enrich 
organizational capacity to engage and retain women Veterans in appropriate care, thereby 
reducing their risk. This particular project is also responsive to the Blueprint for Excellence 
(BPE) Transformati onal Strategy 3.2.b in that we leverage information technology (CPRS 
templates, myHealtheVet tools) and models of healthcare delivery to optimize individual and 
population -based health outcomes.  
 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 8 of 36 
 
 
  
RATIONALE 
 
CV risk redu ction is hamp ered by  provider- and patient-level barr iers that are ad dressab le with 
evidence - based implementation strategies. Provider barriers to working with pat ients on 
appropriate CV risk reduct ion include lack of time, lack of awareness of the latest CVD 
prevention guidelines, difficulty interpreting the guidelines, difficulty accessing re levant electronic 
medical rec ord (EMR) data at the po int of care, low self- efficacy to counsel p atients in 
beha vioral cha nge, hab it or inertia, fragmentation of care, and p erceptions of low pat ient interest 
or capacity to follow-throu gh on recommen dations.16-19 These b arriers may be decreased by  
provider educat ion, training in the d iscuss ion and man agement of CV risk factors, ce ntralization 
of relevant EMR information, patient act ivation suppo rt, and feedback to  providers.16,18 A meta-
analysis of quality impro vement (QI) efforts found  that pat ient and  provider educat ion m aterials 
are effective at impro ving blood pressure  control.20 There is also evidence th at clinical rem inders 
are associated with bet ter CV risk redu ction pract ices in primary  care popu lations.21-24 In the  VA, 
non-CVD clinical reminders have similarly been effective at increasing screening (e.g., fall risk 
screen ing, HIV testing).25,26  While VA has  multiple clinical rem inders bu ilt into the VA electronic 
medical record ( CPRS ), this proposal me rges existing data into a CV template a nd adds  unique 
information for a more comprehe nsive screen ing and doc umentation process to facilitate the 
provider-patient d iscuss ion about each pat ient’s CV risks. Moreover, the information will be 
easily access ible in one CPRS location. 
 
 
Our team’s formative “pre-cond itions” local work on CV risk reduction among women Veterans 
guides our proposed  CV toolkit implementation research. In our F Y2013  WHS-funded  
operations project, we 1) pe rformed a targeted literature search on CV educational and  risk 
assessment tools; 2) identified barriers and facilitators to CV risk assessment and risk reduction 
in women Veterans; and 3) identified key areas to target educa tional programs or tools to 
address needs in CV risk management. We conduc ted three focus  groups with 21 Patient-
Aligned Care Team (PACT) team members and semi-structured interviews with 19 patients at 
the two VA GLA primary care women’s clinics. Provider-identified barriers ranged from system 
difficulties in promoting prevention activities to communication challenges, limited time to dialog 
with patients, and limited pa tient knowledge. Provider-identified facilitators included  strategies 
for effective patient engagement and motivation, tools and educational resources to aid CV risk 
discuss ions (especially in relation to co-morbidities), organized resou rces on CV hea lth and 
available referrals, stronger integration of health coache s, and techno logy-based  resources. 
Patient-identified barriers included  poor motivation and competing demands, while facilitators 
included  educa tion about CV risks and complications in women, motivational and accoun tability 
suppo rt from others (including providers), and exercise programs that fit their lives and 
competing demands. Patients reported that various tools would be accep table if their providers 
suggested us ing them, including paper tools, electronic tools, and in-person sources of supp ort. 
Findings from this formative work indicate that evidence -based  strategies need  to be combined, 
tailored, and implemented at the local system level to facilitate provider-patient d iscussions, 
patient ac tivation, and accou ntability to promote CVD risk reduction for women Veterans. 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 9 of 36 
 
 
 3.0 Objectives  
SPECIFIC AIMS 
 
The goals of this project are to implement and evaluate a CV toolkit  designed to increase 
identification of CV risk among Women Veterans  and enhance provider communication about 
their risk  as well as  increase Women Veterans’ engagement and rete ntion in relevant health 
services including referrals to key health programs (e.g., MOVE!, dieticians, health coaches, 
and CV specialists as needed). The CV toolkit incorporates the Gateway to Healthy Living 
program, a national program currently being impl emented by NCP that focuses on motivating 
and supporting VA patients with CV risks to engage in existing VA services in order to reduce 
their risk  by setting health behavior goals . 
 
This project aims  to 1) Refine the elements of the CV toolkit,  including p atient 
education/activation tools, a CV risk assessment computerized template in CPRS,  provider 
information/education and referral tools , and NCP’s Gateway to Health Living program 
specifically for Women Veterans; 2) Implement the CV toolkit in four VA fac ilities; 3) Evaluate  
CV toolkit implementation using a nonrandomized stepped wedge design and conduct an 
implementation -focused evaluation to further refine the CV toolkit to facilitate future spread.  
 
4.0 Personnel  
STAFF  PROJECT ROLE  STUDY ACTIVITIES  
Staff De
gre
e Sit
e Role 
(Level)  Description  Acc
ess 
to 
PHI Obtai
n 
Infor
med 
Cons
ent Rec
ruit-
men
t Cond
uct 
Intervi
ews Perf
orm 
Data 
Anal
ysis 
SITE  
Bevanne 
Bean -
Mayberr
y MD G
LA Site PI, 
Lead  PI responsible for implementation of the actual CV 
Toolkit Project.  x x X x x 
Melissa 
Farmer 
Coste  Ph
D G
LA Co-PI Co-PI responsible for the evaluation of the 
implementation.  x x X x x 
Alison 
Hamilto
n Ph
D G
LA Co-
Investig
ator Overall EMPOWER QUERI Director and Qualitative 
Expert.  x x X x x 
Jessica 
Zuchow
ski Ph
D G
LA Co-
Investig
ator Will lead qualitative interviews and analysis.  x x X x x 
Erin 
Finley  Ph
D Sa
n 
An
to
ni
o Co-
Investig
ator She is the Implementation Coordinator for the 
overall EMPOWER QUERI and will be the local site 
investigator for San Antonio.  x x X x x 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 10 of 36 
 
 
 Martin 
Lee Ph
D G
LA Biostatis
tician  He is our senior statistician. He will provide 
consultation on all quantitative data analysis.  x    X 
Karen 
Chu MS G
LA Statistic
al 
Analyst  She’s the statistical analysist working on this 
project. She’ll be obtaining data from CDW and 
PBM.  x    X 
Alissa 
Simon  MA G
LA IRB 
Speciali
st She will be the consultant on all IRB issues.       
Catherin
e 
Schweiz
er Ph
D G
LA Fellow  She is a Psychologist/WH Fellow  and will be 
working on all aspects of this project including 
measure development, intervi ews and analysis.  x x X x X 
Catherin
e 
Chanfre
au Ph
D G
LA Fellow  She is a Post -Doctoral Fellow  and will be working 
on all aspects of this project including measure 
development, interviews and analysis.  x x X X X 
Julian 
Brunner  MP
H G
LA Statistic
al 
Analyst  He is the statistical analyst working on this project. 
He’ll be obtaining data from CDW and PBM.   He will 
also assist with interviews and an alysis . x    X 
Alexis 
Huynh  Ph
D G
LA Co-
Investig
ator She is a statistical analyst with qualitative 
experience and will be working on both the 
qualitative and quantitative analysis.  x x X X X 
Cynthia 
Gamma
ge BA G
LA Adminis
trative 
Support  She will be assisting with administrative support.  X     
Hemen 
Saifu  MP
H G
LA Project 
Manager  She will be managing the overall CV Toolk it Project.  x x X X X 
5.0 Study Procedures  
The CV toolkit  study  is part of a large  EMPOWER QUERI program focusing on innovation in 
care for women Veterans at the VA. Project stakeholders include patients as subjects as well as 
staff and leadership personn el as key informants. Products include development of an 
innovative approach for addressing implementation of care models that reduce CV risk for  
wome n Veterans.  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 11 of 36 
 
 
 
5.1 Study Design  
EMPOWER QUERI Concep tual F ramework. EMPOWER QUERI  focuses  on strengthening WH 
organizational capac ity for innovation in patient-centered care, using an Implementation Core 
and three projects as a collective platform for examining how particular characteristics of care 
models contribute to providers’ ability to utilize the models and to patients’ engagement and  
retention in the models.  As depicted in our  conce ptual framework (Fig. 1), the Implementation 
Core forms the backbone  of our p rogram, and relies on an  evidence -based  implementation 
strategy, 
Replicating 
Effective 
Programs (REP) 
and emphasizes 
multilevel 
stakeholder 
engagement 
and complexity 
theory. The Core 
will examine 
organizational 
capac ity for 
innovation in the 
context of local 
WH care 
arrangements, 
which we know 
to be quite diverse, as well as implementation cons tructs such  as climate and  leade rship, and  
novel cons tructs. Knowledge of organizational capac ity will inform implementation of innovative 
care models that add ress CV risk .27 Together, these  activities will contribute to our u ltimate goal 
of enriching VHA’ s organizational capac ity to engage and retain women Veterans in patient-
centered, proactive, pe rsona lized evidence -based  care. EMPOWER QUERI Conceptual Framework Figure 1  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 12 of 36 
 
 
 EMPOWER QUERI 
Implementation 
Strategy: 
Replicating 
Effective Programs 
(REP) . We will use  
REP28 across all 
projects to 
maximize the 
implementation 
science  knowledge 
that will be 
generated by a 
common app roach. 
Grounded  in 
theories of 
Diffusion of 
Innovation and 
Social Lea rning, REP was selected because  of its strong evidence  base  and application in VHA 
health services resea rch.29 It also provides a phased framework for implementation, with 
different discrete implementation strategies being employed in different phases.  REP’ s 
demonstrated effectiveness  in promoting uptake of evidence -based  practices allows us to focus 
on its application in varied settings and care models. Use across all projects will allow for further 
testing and e xpans ion of the framework, particularly through our emphas is on multilevel 
stakeholder e ngagement and incorporation of complexity theory. The REP framework con sists 
of four phases  (Fig. 2) : pre-cond itions, p re-implementation, implementation , and 
maintenanc e/evolution. Careful attention is paid to intervention pac kaging during pre- cond itions 
and pre- implementation; training, techn ical ass istance, and  fidelity assess ment during 
implementation; and recus tomizing during maintenanc e/evolution. 
During each phas e, local con text is paramount, with varying deployment of the intervention 
depend ing on local p riorities, needs, and  resources. One of EMPOWER’s  implementation 
science  goals will be to track the relative importance of each  discrete strategy in each  phase at 
each  site and across sites, as well as in each project and  across projects 
Enhanc ing REP with Multilevel Stakeholder Engagement and Complexity Theory. REP was 
originally designed to guide dissemination of evidence -based practices in community-based  
organizations. Kilbourne and  colleagues29 note that “it was not des igned to address multilevel 
barriers to implementation,” so they enhanced  REP with facilitation, using implementation 
experts as external facilitators to provide guidance  for overcoming implementation barriers. 
Interestingly, outcomes were favorable for enhanced  REP for their primary implementation 
outcome of uptake (i.e., completed contacts with Veterans with serious mental illness who 
had been  lost to care), but not  for increased  utilization of services by patients who had 
dropped out of care.30 This prompted us to cons ider a lternate REP enhance ments that are 1) 
more focused  on participatory action31 within complex adap tive systems32 in VHA WH clinical 
settings,33 and 2) po tentially more effective in increasing patient e ngagement. Accordingly, we 
draw on complexity theory and multilevel stakeholder en gagement. Complexity theory 
Replicating Effective Programs (REP) framework Figure 2  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 13 of 36 
 
 
 postulates that outcomes in complex adap tive systems are nonlinear and  unpredictable; it is a 
highly relational theory, examining how multiple agents involved in implementation interact in 
complex ways and “make sens e” of implementation in different ways.34 This emphasis on 
incorporating multiple perspec tives and differing priorities is cons istent with our VHA WH 
roadmap to delivering gender-sens itive comprehens ive care for women Veterans,35 which 
suggests that multilevel stakeholder en gagement is key to improving women Veterans’ health 
care. 
We will ope rationalize complexity theory through use of the Tool for Evaluating Resea rch 
Implementation Challenges (TECH),36 which was designed to systematically assess  impacts of 
implementation challenges and guide potential solutions. TECH, which has been  used 
succe ssfully in VHA and  community studies, is codified into a series of interactive steps: 
identifying challenges (e.g., through observing day-to-day dynamics, listening to complaints, 
asking questions, etc.), interpreting the challenges in weekly meetings, generating and testing 
solution strategies, and, if nece ssary, addressing regulatory issue s. Solution strategies are 
developed  through open  dialogue among the team members as well as others who might have 
perspectives on potential solutions. TECH will be our research team’s internal way of tracking 
and documenting what’s going on in the clinics. It’s our way of understanding challenges and 
how to address it with people in clinic. We will ask the RAs at the sites to be involved in this  
process so they can give us a description of what’s going on at their sites.  
Multilevel Stakeholder Engagement in the EMPOWER QUERI. Our QUERI capitalizes on our 
seasoned team of implementation scientists, health services researchers, and  clinicians, 
supp orted by a Strategic Advisory Group. Furthermore, we have the distinct advantage of 
being buttressed  by the VHA HSR&D Women’s Health Resea rch Network (WHRN), which is 
comprised of the Women’s Health Resea rch Conso rtium and  the Women’s Health Practice-
Based  Resea rch Network (PBRN ), and a research aim on multilevel stakeholder e ngagement. 
Our en tire team is associated with the WHRN (with EMPOWER QUERI P I Hamilton also being 
one of the WHRN PIs). In fact, this QUERI was developed  with cons istent input from the 
PBRN Site Leads  (some of whom are on our team: Bean-Mayberry (PI), Mattocks, Sadler), 
and the projects will all be conduc ted at PBRN sites (Frayne LoS). Moreover, our QUERI 
proposal has  been strengthened  from its inception by invaluable input of women Veterans 
themselves. Specifically, a newly forming Women Veteran Patient Advisory Counc il has 
agreed to serve as an implementation partner for this QUERI Program (Gottke LoS); Dr. 
Hamilton will serve as an advisor to the Counc il and  will use  principles of patient engagement 
in research37 to guide collaboration and involvement of the Counc il. 
EMPOWER QUERI Methods  
Setting: Women’s Health Practice-Based  Resea rch Network (PBRN ). The PBRN provides a 
resea rch infrastructure for investigators seeking to increase  inclusion of women in VHA resea rch 
or condu ct multi-site women’s focused  research in VHA. Comprised of 60 VAMCs that see  one-
third of women Veteran VHA use rs, the PBRN he lps investigators overcome the challenges of 
multi-site studies through engagement of Site Leads with established  working relationsh ips with 
local c linicians and facility leade rship. Site Leads  have received implementation training, and  
have developed  across-site relationsh ips through regular na tional ca lls and techn ical suppo rt 
organized by the PBRN Coordinating Center in Palo Alto (Frayne LoS). 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 14 of 36 
 
 
 Site Selection, CV Toolkit, and REP I mplementation Phases   
The CV toolkit will be implemented at four VA facilities with moderately large panels of 
women Veterans .  WH clinics are eligible if they have PC pane ls of women patients that total 
at least 2000+ women and they have at least 4-8 PCPs per site whose panels include at 
least 100 women Veterans and women comprise at least 10% of the provider’s patient 
panel . Currently, two sites have been selected for implementation and two other sites will be 
added to our protocol at a future date.  Our first site where we will launch the CV toolkit is 
GLA, where the PI (Bean-Mayberry) is the PBRN Site Lead. Our second site has now been 
recruited (West Haven) and th eir site application will be submitted to CIRB shortly. All site 
selection will be done  in collaboration with Dr. Susan Frayne, Director of the VA WH-PBRN, 
and member of our Strategic Advisory Group (Frayne LoS). 
The CV Toolkit includes  four elements :  (1) Patient educ ation/activation tools, such  as 
informational pos ters and  fliers about women’s CV risk, including information about 
MyHealtheVet website resources. To activate patients to discuss  CV risk with their providers, 
we developed  a CV worksheet (Appendix 6) for patients to fill out at check-in to collect 
information about family history of CVD, pregnancy/gestational h istory, and smoking status, and 
to help patients formulate/docu ment any questions regarding their CV risks that they would like 
to discuss during their visits. The goal is to help make CV risk discuss ion a priority for women 
before they enter the exam room. (2) A CV risk asses sment c omputerized template 
systematically captures CVD risk factor history and data from the medical record, and provides 
open  fields for the provider to enter any  relevant information from the patient worksheet  and the 
clinic visit (e.g., goals and decisions). The template also includes  embedded  links to locate CV 
guideline docu ments. Based  on feedback  from clinical teams at two GLA sites, the template 
includes  data from the current visit as well as the last three entries in the medical record 
(automatically generated by the template) such  as weight, blood pressure, and  cholesterol lab 
results. This enab les the provider to look at trends  in risk factors without having to search the 
chart. The information is stored as a standa rd outpatient note in the patient’s medical record (in 
CPRS ) and is readily accessible (and sea rchab le) at future visits so that CV risk status will be 
an ongoing discussion. Referral options are also included  on the template, including referral to 
the Gateway to Healthy Living program, so the template will be a sha red template available for 
other p roviders to access  (e.g. health coach, dietician, specialist, etc.) to review when the 
patient c omes for the referral.40 (3) Provider information and education programs as well as 
referral tools to internal se rvices (e.g., women’s MOVE! program, smoking cessation clinics, 
dieticians, he alth coache s, pha rmacists and CV or mental hea lth spec ialists as neede d). (4) 
The Gateway to Healthy Living program tailored to Women Veterans is a facilitated group 
meeting that occ urs in a structured format with persona lized goal setting and identification of 
key services available at the local s ite to assist with lifestyle changes necessa ry for patient-
targeted CV risk reduc tion. In addition to the structured group, it includes  at least two follow up 
phone  calls from the facilitator (typically a health coach  or hea lth promotion disease  prevention 
spec ialist) for suppo rt, reinforcement of lifestyle changes, brainstorming of barriers, and  steps 
toward goal realization. 
REP implementation phases :  CV toolkit implementation will be guided by the REP framework 
cons istent with all EMPOWER QUERI projects, and will feature multilevel stakeholder 
engagement to ensu re that each  phase  is informed by women Veterans, providers, 
administrators, and operations pa rtners. REP consists of four phases: 1) pre -conditions, 2) 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 15 of 36 
 
 
 pre-implementation, 3) implementation and 4) maint enance  and evolution.   The TECH will be 
used  to guide asses sment and documentation of implementation challenges during each  REP 
phas e. 
Pre-cond itions (Aim 1): In our p rior work (funded  by WHS), the need for the intervention was 
established  and review of effective interventions completed. Building on work completed from 
partial restoration of our QUERI RRP funding for a smaller scale version of this project, we have 
completed the  refinement, programming, functionality testing and loading of the CPRS-based  
template in the CV toolkit package. We are also culling VA and  AHA information on CVD in 
women and testing online VA media for patient assessments in myHealtheVet. We have also 
been  working with our pa rtners at NCP and  identified the Gateway to Healthy Living program for 
in-person, patient-directed goal se tting. We will work closely with NCP to evaluate the results 
from the Gateway to Healthy Living pilot project (conc luded FY15) to make program 
adjustments and further tailor the program for women Veterans.  Specifically, some of these 
sessions will be offered as women only groups with women facilitators in addition to routine 
mixed gender group availability.  Additionally, sex -specific handouts on cardiovascular risk 
factors in w omen will be available using approved information sheets from VA central office and 
the American Heart Association.   
Furthermore, the pre-conditions phase  has been  completed locally at GLA, which will serve as 
an initial implementation site. For each  additional PBRN site, we will revisit aspec ts of the pre- 
cond itions phase  to ensure that the toolkit, developed  locally at GLA, is appropriate at the 
other sites. During site visits at the additional sites, the toolkit will be discussed  with relevant 
key stakeholders (WH leaders, providers, women Veteran patient representatives), core 
elements will be explained, and, us ing the TECH the local team will discuss  options for 
adapting delivery and anticipated barriers to implementation. For  example, we will need to 
explore care options available at each  site (e.g. health coache s, smoking cessa tion, MOVE!, 
etc.) and educa tional needs  of the various WH teams at each  site. Also during this phas e, 
interviews and surveys will be conduc ted with all consen ting key stakeholders with the 
exception of patients who will be interviewed and surveyed in the implementation phase  (see 
below). 
Pre-implementation (Aim 1 cont.): At each  site, a local CV toolkit champion will be identified by 
the Site Lead when s/he signs onto the project. The toolkit package will be further de veloped  
and locally tailored, with attention to training and techn ical ass istance  needed for each  site. 
Once prepared, the toolkit will be piloted locally to ensure that it works as intended  with local 
systems and process es. Using the TECH, any  challenges with pilot implementation will be 
discussed  and addressed  by the team. When the team determines that cha llenges have been  
sufficiently addresse d, orientation meetings will be held with the broader clinic, where the 
toolkit will be distributed and discusse d. 
Implementation (Aim 2): The implementation phase will begin at the first PBRN site in the latter 
half of Year 2  and will last a total of 15 months to ensure adequate time for implementation 
evaluation and reach.  The second site will begin the implementation phase at the start of year 3, 
and the toolkit will spread to two additional PBRN sites later in Year 3 through Year  4.  For CV 
toolkit training, Dr. Bean-Mayberry (PI and primary care provider in the Sepulveda WH clinic) 
and Dr. Autumn Watson  (Co-Investigator, VA Clinical Psychologist and GLA Health Behavior 
Coordinator, Supervisor of GLA Health Coach  Program, with guidance  from Dr. Ebrihimi , 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 16 of 36 
 
 
 cardiologist and consultant on project ) will lead a series of provider educa tion activities 
including facilitated discussions to educa te the providers and office staff members on the 
importance  of CV risk discuss ions for women within primary care as well as on how  to use the 
toolkit in practice. At GLA, this training will be done  in person, but the training programs will be 
tailored for virtual delivery (e.g. Lync meeting/cyberseminars) to the other s ites.  In addition, our 
partners at NCP will travel to sites to train the Gateway to Healthy Living facilitators or conduct 
virtual training with travel is not feasible . During implementation, we will assess any additional 
need  for provider training and monitor the use of the template in the clinic by generating reports 
on template use. This information will be collected by the research staff, the data will be 
summarized (frequenc ies graphed over time), and then quarterly CV template reports will be 
presented to the WH clinical team. We will also take field notes during the trainings to 
document any  issues  that arise with the users (clinical team) and  the CV toolkit within the 
context of each distinct clinic setting. These  notes will be analyzed  using ATLAS.ti, and will be 
examined in conjunction with other evaluation data as described below. During regular 
implementation meetings, TECH will be used  to assess  and address implementation 
challenges. 
The CV toolkit is an innovative care model that is proactive, patient-centered and persona lized 
to each woman that co mes to an appo intment. A patient b egins using the CV toolkit at ch eck-in 
for her appo intment when she is given the CV worksheet to fill out while waiting to see her 
provider. Patient educ ation materials specifically on women and CV risk will be in the waiting 
room and  exam rooms. The CV worksheet will be used  to initiate the provider-patient 
discussion of CV risk, and her provider or another staff member  will use  the information to fill 
out the CV template in CPRS during or after the appointment .  Depending on the site needs 
and preferences, a research assistant and/or the Gate way facilitator may help populate the CV 
template with the screener information.  The patient and provider will collaboratively determine 
the next steps (i.e. Gateway to Healthy Living, other referral, or waiting) and  the provider will 
document the action plan in the template. All participants will be offered the Gateway to 
Healthy Living program by  providers or other staff member  as engagement and  suppo rt for the 
patient action plan.  
After the appointment, each woman will be asked if she is willing to participate in the project for 
monitoring CV risks and choices and if she consen ts, she  will complete a patient su rvey and  a 
possible  interview  with the RA (every 3rd consented patient will be asked to participate in both 
a survey and interview).   At the site s where it is not feasible to consent a woman immediately 
after her appointment, the research staff will generate a patient list of all women seen in the 
clinic who had a CPRS template activated during her visit.  Based on that list, a  sample of the 
women will be mailed a consent and survey  (and every 3rd consented patient will be asked to 
participate in the interview) .  Follow-up surveys and interviews will be administered to all 
women who completed the base line survey six months after the base line survey. 
Those women who are referred to the Gateway to Healthy Living program will be contacted by 
the program facilitator immediately to arrange the group meeting. The women will be 
cons idered engaged in the Gateway to Healthy Living program when she attends  the first 
group meeting. Information on goal se tting, beha vior change intentions and participation in 
other services will be collected by the facilitator at the group meeting and at the follow-up 
phone  calls.  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 17 of 36 
 
 
 Maintenance  and Evolution: The last phase  in this framework allows us to take the feedb ack 
and make modifications to our implementation process to enhance  adop tion of the toolkit, 
fidelity to the implementation proces s, and dissemination at future sites. Sharing these  details 
with stakeho lders using TECH informs the cu rrent implementation process  and sustainability for 
the future. The four REP phases  allow us to account for each  step of the guided implementation 
strategy. Finally, the interchange between these  phas es and the implementation process 
compone nts provide a granular synergy for unde rstanding whether the implementation of this 
CV toolkit requires further adaptation and customization prior to broader VA dissemination. 
During this phase, the research team will collaborate with the local implementation teams to 
develop points for future dissemination . 
Study Design  
We will use  mixed methods  to evaluate implementation.  To assess our primary implementation 
outcomes, we will conduct pre -implementation, mid -implementation and post -implementation key 
stakeholder interviews (Component A) with providers and staff .  For patients, we will conduct 
baseline and follow -up surveys  as well as interviews with a subsample of those patients who 
completed surveys (interview approximately every 3rd consented patient wit h completed surv ey).   
We will use administrative data from the medical record (CPRS and CDW) to capture use of 
the CV toolkit (CPRS template) and referrals to preventive services.  We will use a non -
randomized stepped wedge design to evaluate the roll out  of the intervention and the change in 
referrals over time across the sites.  
Nonrandomized  Stepped  Wedge Study Design for Implementation Trials.  
The CV Toolkit project will use  a nonrandomized stepped  wedge design, which rely on 
sequential roll-out to participating sites over time, while using other s ites as controls until they 
begin implementation.38 Consistent with our subs tantial prior experience us ing these  designs in 
VHA and  armed with complexity theory’s recognition of nonlinearity of implementation,39 we will 
use nonrandomized stepped wedges (rather than rando mized) given their suitability for studying 
implementation. This design acknowledges that sites are heterogeneo us, face multiple 
cons traints, and,  as a result, are ready  to adopt interventions at different rates. The modified 
design explicitly cons iders the timing of implementation spread and addresses the statistical 
issues  introduced  by lack of randomization in implementation starts and processes. We will 
analytically compensa te for the design by collecting patient-, provider-, and site-level da ta that 
may be assoc iated with timing of the adoption of each  intervention.  We will include three levels 
in our  hierarchical nonrandomized stepped wedge models: (1) patient, (2) time of intervention 
(i.e., when a provider starts using the intervention), and (3) site. Outcomes of interest (e.g. 
referrals to Gateway, other health promotion program and/or specialist) are measured for all 
patients at each site within the given int ervention time period.  
Nonran domized  stepped  wedge designs make efficient use of all data available for within-site 
and between-site comparisons.  For the within-site comparison, s ites act as  their own controls in 
an evaluation that c ompares sites pre- versus post-implementation. The comparison examines 
sites as they cross-over from control to intervention states. The between-site comparison 
evaluates the intervention period for a site vs. all other intervention and control periods for all 
sites. By having these  two types of comparison, the design improves on  the validity of the 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 18 of 36 
 
 
 evaluation of the intervention, by accou nting for historical time trends  that may occur ou tside of 
the intervention and for site contextual characteristics that may affect site performance. 
 
Risk to Subjects  
This study involves  both Veteran (260 total across four sites) and  VA Staff participants (60  total 
across four sites).  
Veteran involvement and Characteristics  
This 4 -site research project aims to implement and evaluate the CV toolkit designed to increase 
identification of CV risk among women Veterans, enhance patient/provider communication 
about CV risk, and increase  women Veterans engagement and retention in relevant health 
services including referrals to key health programs.  We will recruit adult women Vet erans who 
visit their women’s health provider at one of the four study sites if a CPRS CV risk template was 
activated from their primary care visit or they attended the Gateway to Healthy Living program .  
As long as the woman Veteran patient is also able t o give informed consent to complete our 
protocol, she is eligible to participate. We expect to approach  up to  200 women Veterans per 
site over the study period in order to achieve a minimum of 65 women participants in the 
survey/interviews for CV toolkit a t each site. Our goal is to have 260 women total ( minimum 65 
per site across 4 sites) engaged in the project over the course of the study. Participation 
includes a brief survey at baseline and six -month post -baseline, and for a subset of women, a 
brief qua litative interview  (approximately every third consented woman with a completed survey  
will be approached for an intervie w for a minimum of 20 patient interviews at a site ).  Women 
will be consented at the time of the survey and interviews. The  women  will also be consented to 
link their responses to their medical records  at the time of the survey.    
We will also use medical record data (CPRS template data and CDW data) to evaluate the roll -
out of the intervention and the referral rates at all sites.  This  data will be evaluated for all 
women patients seen by the providers in the study over the study period.  The data will only be 
evaluated in the aggregate and will not be linked to the patient survey or interview data (unless 
medical record access consent is received at the time of the survey).    
Provider / VA Staff Involvement and Characteristics  
To obtain feedback from key participants and implementers of the CV toolkit, we intend to 
recruit approximately 15 staff per site. Staff members from each site will comprise of primary 
care providers, RN care managers, LVN provider or health technician, clinic clerk/MSA and 
other clinical staff members (e.g., dietitian, pharmacist, or mental health provider, etc.) and 
administrators (e.g., Women’s Health Medical Dire ctor, Women Veteran Program Manager, 
Primary Care Chief ). Given the diversity of VA staff, this sample will include women, men, and 
members of minority and ethnic groups.  This scope of providers and administrative staff will 
provide broader perspective o f the implementation process in the clinics.  
Potential Risks  
Risks are minimal and primarily rela ted to loss of confidentiality.  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 19 of 36 
 
 
 For patients, study assessments will include potentially sensitive questions and information 
about mental and/or physical heal th symptoms .  Thus,  there is risk for embarrassment and 
negative effects on patient subjects if sensitive information was improperly disclosed and used 
in a discriminatory fashion against the individual.   Additionally, individuals’ social se curity 
numbers will be accessed  in order to obtain data fr om VA databases and to collect information 
to contact them and link to medical records.   If disclosed, this information could cause negative 
financial or legal consequences.  Recruitment may also involve the risk of perceived coercion if 
the Veteran believes/assumes  that refusal might threaten care or benefits.   
For staff subjects, because this study  asks questions about organizational issues at the clinic 
where they are employed, there is risk for embarrassment a nd negative effects on subjects if 
sensitive information was improperly disclosed and used in a discriminatory f ashion against the 
individual. Risks could include psychological stress due to discussing uncomfortable topics or 
challenging situations at work  involving patients or coworkers.  
However, given the safeguards against improper disclosure and steps we are taking to ensure 
protection of sensitive information as detailed below, the likelihood of any disclosure is minimal.  
Adequacy of Protection from R isk 
Procedures to safeguard against adverse events.   All data collection protocols will include 
procedures whereby research staff members report problems with the data collection, concerns 
about risk to subjects or others, or unusual occurrences during the  collection. These allow 
project leaders an opportunity to quickly review and respond to any possible concerns or 
adverse effects.   
Informed consent. Research  subjects are advised of the voluntary nature of participation and 
research subjects are informed  of their right to withdraw from the project at any time . 
Information obtained up to the time of participant withdrawal or termination may be used in the 
data analysis .  Each participant receives a verbal and /or written description of the study. The 
Princi pal Investigator and delegated research team members are available at all points of the 
study to answer questions and to explain assessment procedures, uses to which the data will be 
put, and confidentiality of data. We will request a waiver for documentat ion of informed consent 
for interviews with staff members from each site.  
Mandatory reporting safeguards . Procedures to prevent violation of confidentiality are limited by 
the mandatory nature of legal reporting requirements. Subjects are informed in the c onsent 
document that their responses to the surveys and interviews are confidential, except:  
“1) If we need to protect you or others from harm. An example of this is if you want to hurt 
yourself or others. In that case, we will give information about you t o others that is needed to 
protect you or others from harm.  
2) If you tell us about the abuse of a child or of an elderly person, or if you tell us about being 
abused yourself. In that case, we must report this to a supervisor, who may report it to the 
authorities.”  
Staff training safeguards . As required, all research staff will be credentialed by their VA 
Healthcare System’s research service, and will successfully complete all required trainings. 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 20 of 36 
 
 
 Research staff will meet with their local study supervisor  (the Site Lead or the Project Director) 
on a weekly basis for supervision, ongoing monitoring of interactions with subjects, and problem 
solving. Research and clinical staff are trained to identify events that would fall under mandatory 
reporting guidelin es, such as harm to self or others. The PI will be available at all times by cell 
phone. When the PI is not available, the PI will delegate this responsibility to another qualified, 
credentialed staff member.  
Data safeguards. Before analysis of the data, all identifying information will be removed from the 
data. No information that could identify study subjects will be published or presented. Data will 
be reported only in the aggregate. Identifiable data will be stored separately from coded data 
sets. Acce ss to identifiable study data will be restricted to research team  on a need -to-know 
basis.  
Discomfort with assessment, intervention procedures or disclosure safeguards. During the 
course of participation in the study, a subject could feel uncomfortable an swering the survey or 
interview questions.  All interviewers will be trained in the assessments and with sensitivity to 
the issues to be discussed.  All subjects are informed that they may choose to skip any 
questions that they find uncomfortable or withdr aw from the study at any time.  
For patients who consent to be surveyed, the 30 -minute surveys delivered in person by the RA 
will occur in a private room in the VA clinic setting at each site. Since some patients may not 
attend the group immediately or at all, patient baseline survey packets with an in formation sheet 
will be sent to the patient’s mailing address in CPRS/VISTA.  Patients who agree to the survey, 
by completing the survey , will have a VA addressed stamped envelope to return the survey 
document .  For the subset of women selected for the patient interviews, the interviews will  be 
conducted by telephone , but could be done in person (at the medical center) if the patient 
prefers in -person .  Staff interviews will be conducted in person in a private room in the VA clinic 
setting or by telephone at each site.  
Response procedures for adverse events are described in Section 6 Reporting (below).  
Potential Benefits of the Research to Subjects and Others  
Although individual subjects do not benefit directl y, there are potential benefits to human 
subjects from participation. Participants may be able to impact the development or ongoing 
modifications of the CV risk toolkit and future dissemination for women at their own or other VA 
sites. They may also be abl e to provide feedback on care in the clinic where they receive 
services or are employed, which may affect their treatment or working environment in the future 
if this model is widely adopted.  
5.2 Recruitment Methods  
This study involves  both Veteran patien ts (260 total across 4 sites) and  VA Staff participants (60 
total across 4 sites).  
Patien ts: Patient subjects will be recruited once they have made contact with the 
provider in clinic and asked to participate after a clinic visit by the local RA. The RA wi ll 
check in with the WH PACT members (i.e., providers and RN care manager) to know 
when the template was used in clinic and if the women Veterans have been referred to 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 21 of 36 
 
 
 Gateway.  Using a visit -based sampling method, patients are eligible during their first 
visit with the provider during the 15 -month implementation period. The patient will be 
asked if they would like to participate in the research project and if so, the women will be 
given a packet with the survey and information sheet.  A return envelope wil l be included 
in the packet for the patient to return the completed survey (either by mail or hand it to 
the RA).  For sites where in -person recruitment is not feasible, the research team will 
generate a list of all patients seen in the clinic and had a CP RS template activated.  
Those patients will be contacted by mail about the study.  They will receive the same 
packet described above with the return envelope.   
Staff.  15 VA Staff participants will be recruited from 4 sites (total of 60 participants). Staff 
subjects will be recruited from women’s health clinics that are using a WH PACT model of care.  
To obtain the staff sample, we will work with each site’s PBRN Site Lead to develop a list of 
eligible individuals (and their contact information), who meet the staff categories we would like 
to include.  If needed, the PBRN site leads can work with the Women Veterans Program 
Manager or Women’s Health Medical Director to confirm eligible individuals.  The study PI and 
the Site Lead will present the study to loca l staff and administrators  via email and or phone call .  
Staff members will be emailed an invitation to participate  in an initial interview along with a 
survey, which will be collected at the time of the baseline interview. This email will also inform 
the participant that their participation includes three semi -structured interviews, either in person 
or over the phone, that will take 45 to 60 minutes each, the initial interview in the next few 
weeks, the second interview 10 -12 months later and the final int erview about a year later (the 
expected duration of their participation will be a total of 3 years) . The recruitment process will 
include informing potential staff subjects about the study, who is conducting it, why the 
individual was selected for recruitm ent, and how the information gathered will be used.  Potential 
staff subjects will be informed that their participation is entirely voluntary and their decision 
about participation will not affect their employment, merit, or promotion.  After explaining the  
study, if the staff member is interested, the local research staff will schedule an appointment. 
We will also inform the participant that in 10 -12 months, unless they ask us not to, we will 
contact them again regarding participating in a similar follow -up interview to document events 
across time.  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 22 of 36 
 
 
  
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  
Patients.  We are requesti ng a waiver of documented informed consent.  For the survey, t he 
informe d consent process will include informing potential subjects about the study, who  is 
conducting it, why the individual was selected for recruitment, that their participation in the 
research will be entered in their medical record, how the information gathered will be used, and 
about the patient subject payments.  This will be included on the information sheet included with 
the survey.  Completion and return of the survey will indicate consent. For surveys that are 
mailed to participants, we are requesting a waiver of HIPAA authorization. The HIPAA form is 
not intended for mailing to the  respondent and then having the respondent mail it back. The 
subject does not have an opportunity to ask any questions or voice any concerns if it is done 
through the mail.  Additionally, only when the HIPAA form is completed in person does the 
sensitive d ata of name, date of birth, and last four SSN required by the form stay within the VA 
environment once the form is handed over to the researcher.  The risks of mailing this highly 
sensitive information outweigh the benefits to the respondents . For surveys that are given in 
person, we will have these participants complete a HIPAA authorization form, which will be 
securely locked in the RA’s filing cabinet. Payments include $ 20 VA Canteen vouchers  for each 
of two surveys and, for a subset of patients, an addi tional $10  VA Canteen voucher  for the 
interviews at baseline and six -months post -baseline.  Potential subjects will be informed that 
their participation in the research is entirely voluntary, and that if they choose not to participate, 
there will be no eff ect on the care they receive.  Methods for how subjects’ identity and collected 
data will be protected will be discussed.  For the interviews, verbal consent will be obtained 
before each interview.  For the use of the medical record data, we are requesting a waiver of 
HIPAA Authorization.  
Staff.  We are requesting a waiver  for documentation of informed consent .  Affirmative response 
to email invitation will constitute informed consent  and verbal consent will be recorded at the 
time of interview .  After a re sponse has been received, enrolled staff members will be scheduled 
for an interview  with a member of the research team.   
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Staff  
Inclusion Criteria:  VA staff affiliated with women’s health care and located at PBRN sites. Given 
the diversity of VA staff , we expect this will include women, men, and members of minority and 
ethnic groups . 
Exclusion criteria: Non-VA staff and not located at a PBRN site.  
 
5.5 Study Evaluations  
 
Qualitative Data Collection:  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 23 of 36 
 
 
  
Non-Human Subjects Rese arch Staff Interviews - To evaluate knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, and 
perceived acceptability and feasibility of the CV toolkit from key participants (VA staff, including 
WH primary care providers, nurses, clinical staff and health coaches); we intend to r ecruit 
approximately 15 staff per site who will be asked to complete a brief interview  and survey . The 
brief survey, titled the MORE scale, version 1, measures the extent to which the organization 
our participants work in is willing and able to effective f oster patient engagement in their 
healthcare facility. This survey wi ll be emailed out to  staff before their pre -implementation 
interviews and the data will be collected at the time of their pre -implementation interview.  For 
interviews, p articipation will consist of three 45-60 minute qualitative interviews (pre -, mid -, and 
post-implementation) conducted in -person or over the phone by a research staff member. We 
will focus on knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, and perceived acceptability and feasibility of the 
toolkit for the pre -implementation interviews (approximately five months into the pre -conditions 
phase); perceptions of interim implementation processes and outcomes (approximately six 
months into the implementation phase) and summative perceptions of tool kit implementation 
and potential for spread (last two months of the maintenance/evolution phase). The mid -
implementation assessment will evaluate the progress and implementation barriers and 
facilitators to CV toolkit implementation and be used to continue  to tailor the implementation.  
Final interviews will re -evaluate baseline domains, and will follow -up on CV toolkit 
implementation and sustainability.  
 
Ethnog raphic field notes will be taken  by research team members throughout project  to capture 
aspec ts of the context of implementation and otherwise unmeasu red aspe cts of usual care. The 
two anthropologists on the QUER I Program (Hamilton and Zucho wski) will provide training on 
writing field notes. Also, minutes will be recorded for all project meetings (including trainings) 
and conference  calls. In addition, subs tantive emails and other co mmunications regarding 
implementation will be archived and analyzed. 
Information from and about Veterans:  
Sources of patient data for this project includes (1) Utilization  data on CV services used six 
months prior to the start of the intervention and over the course of the study program obtained 
from enrollees’ medical records, (2) information provided by patient participants via surveys and 
interviews , and (3) The implemen tation facilitator will track participant utilization of the program. 
Information on goal setting, behavior change intentions and participation in other services will be 
collected by the facilitator at the group meeting and during follow -up phone calls and  entered on 
a coded tracking sheet.   Follow -up surveys will be administered to all women who completed 
the baseline survey six months after the baseline survey . 
After consent, all enrolled participants in each project will complete a 30 -minute survey, 
delivered in-person by a research assistant  (RA) at baseline and six -months post -baseline.  For 
sites where it is not feasible to reach all the eligible  women  in person, the surveys and 
information sheets will be mailed to the patients  address listed in VISTA /CPRS .  Patients who 
do not return surveys within a 2 - week window will be sent a reminder post card and then mailed 
a second informed consent and survey packet  by 4 weeks if no survey is received .  The surveys 
focus on patient activation, health -related q uality of life, satisfaction with treatment, and project 
specific measures.  In addition, a subset of approximately 45 women Veterans in each study 
(every third consenting patient) will also be asked to complete an additional 20 -minute 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 24 of 36 
 
 
 qualitative intervie w with a research staff member at baseline and six -months post -baseline  
(either in -person or by telephone) . The RA will record survey answers directly into a VA 
computer storing data on a server behind the VA firewall. Patient semi -structured interviews wi ll 
be coded only with a study ID, digitally audio -recorded, and uploaded to a secure VA server 
behind the VA firewall.  If recording consent is denied, the researchers will take hand written 
notes, which will be securely transported and stored as described  below until they are 
transcribed into an electronic format.  When desired by the patient or the interviewer, or to 
accommodate the cognitive needs of the subject, the survey or interview can be performed at 
two or more sessions.  At the end of the impleme ntation period we will obtain utilization history 
through the Data Access Request Tracker (DART) system, conducting chart review in the VA 
Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI) environment.  
5.6 Data Analysis  
Qualitative Analysis:  All semi-structured interviews will either be conducted in -person in a 
private room or be conducted via telephone with the interviewer in a private, closed office 
(either alone or occupied by other members of the research study team). Interview participants 
will be ins tructed not to use their real names or to provide any identifying information during 
the interviews.  
 
The interview will be recorded via digital recorder and speakerphone. Audio research data will 
be temporarily stored on a Phillips 9600 digital audio reco rder as it is recorded.  Data will 
subsequently be transferred via cable connection (which only works with a security enabled 
dongle) to a secure server. The Phillips 9600 is a VA approved device and is the most secure 
recorder on the market. Voice files c an be encrypted and password -protected to prevent 
unauthorized access, making the 9600 the first HIPAA compliant recorder on the market. It 
allows the user to upload a digital file only once and only via cable with a dongle. Upon 
completion of uploading th e file is erased from the digital recorder; therefore,  only one copy of 
the recording remains, having been saved to a VA server.  
 
The interview content will be transcribed in order to assure that interviewer notes have 
accurately and fully captured interv iew content. To do this, the audio -recordings and 
transcripts will be transmitted via SFTP, PKI, or hand -carry  (as set  out in the executed DUA 
with our transcription service contractor, Alpha Transcription ) files and recordings may be 
transferred between t he VA and the vendor via:  (1) encrypted PKI email,  (2) secure File 
Transfer Protocol (SFTP), or (3) files can be encrypted, copied onto a CD, and hand -carried by 
Vendor or study team staff, in a VA locked travel bag. The transcriptionist will delete any words 
that inadvertently identified the research participant, other research participan ts, or VA 
providers or leaders.   Given that data will be collected by teams remote to Los Angeles, the 
most likely mechanism for file transfer will be SFTP.  
 
The transc ription company will generate an MS Word file transcription of the audio content. 
Data temporarily stored on Alpha Transcription  secure server during the transcription process 
will be destroyed within 30 days after transcription files have been downloaded and verified by 
the study or vendor teams. The MS Word transcripts of the interviews will be stored on the VA 
GLA HSR&D Center of Innovation server, available only to authorized project staff.  
 
Transcripts will be reviewed, ed ited for accuracy, and  summarized by members of the research 
team. Consistent with our team’s approach ac ross multiple projects, matrix analysis methods41 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 25 of 36 
 
 
 will be used  for rapid turn-around of the results42 to share with our Strategic Advisory Group. 
In-depth analysis of the qualitative data will be conduc ted using ATLAS.ti, a qualitative data 
analysis software program that a llows for fluid interaction of data across types and sources. 
Initially, a top-level cod ebook  will be developed  for the base line interviews based  on the semi-
structured interview guide.43   Using a cons tant comparison analytic approach, this codebook  
will be elaborated upon based  on emergent themes, and it will be adjusted as each  round of 
interviews is reviewed. Interviews will be co mpared within each  clinic, across clinics, and over 
time. Additional so urces of qualitative data (i.e. meeting minutes, field notes, and archival 
information) will also be included  in the data set and will be coded  sepa rately and  in relation to 
the interview data. These  multiple approache s and groupings are easily facilitated within the 
software program, which has the capac ity to group data in multiple ways and which allows the 
qualitative resea rchers maximum flexibility in negotiating a complex narrative dataset. Of note, 
the EMPOWER QUERI qualitative team has been working together for over five years; all 
desc ribed analytic procedu res are well established  and all members of the team have 
expertise with qualitative data analysis and dissemination of results. 
 
In the pre-cond itions transcripts, we will identify commonly shared knowledge, attitudes, and  
beliefs related to care model structures, processes, and  effectiveness  and the potential for 
effectiveness.  In mid-implementation interview data, we will identify factors fac ilitating and 
impeding implementation of the care model, and strengths and weaknesses  of the model as 
implemented. We will assess  the extent to which componen ts of the model are being 
implemented, and  which co mponen ts are efficient and  easy to incorporate into routine care. 
We will explore whether particular co mponen ts appe ar to be of limited value in improving care 
and examine clinic and provider characteristics assoc iated with varying levels of care model 
implementation and effectiveness.  In post-implementation interview data, we will take a 
summative approach to characterizing overall experiences  of and perspec tives on 
implementation, with a particular focus  on recommenda tions for scale up and spread.44 
 
For providers, we will compare and contrast da ta from frequent users of the template with 
infrequent users, and track changes in perceptions about the utility and impact of the toolkit on 
clinical practice from p re-conditions to maintenanc e. We will also assess  provider attitudes 
toward ease  of referral to the Gateway to Healthy Living program, and  provider perceptions of 
changes in patient awareness  and activation. For pa tients, we will compare and contrast d ata 
from those  who used  Gateway to Healthy Living with those  who did not, and  those who used  
other se rvices. In order to evaluate the patient impact of Gateway to Healthy Living, we will 
assess chan ges in patient perceptions of CV risk, self-efficacy, and activation. 
 
 
Quantitative Analysis:  We will use  desc riptive and inferential statistics to understand variations 
in the measures desc ribed above. For patients, we will conduct  bivariate analysis to examine 
variations in outcomes (CV risk factor control, cardiac event or procedu re, etc.) by those  who 
participated in the Gateway to Healthy Living program, versus those  who received a referral to 
a different p rogram/service, and those who received no referral. For p roviders, we will examine 
differences in their patient panel  (e.g. those  with CV risk factors under con trol at follow-up) by 
their engagement in the CV toolkit program. To evaluate the CV toolkit, we will use  the 
nonrandomized stepped  wedge design, a generalized mixed model coup led with an allowance  
for non random effects, to evaluate the implementation across the providers at four s ites. The 
intervention will be defined as “turning on” when a provider first engages in the CV toolkit (first 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 26 of 36 
 
 
 uses  the CV template). We will model the effect of the implementation of the CV toolkit 
intervention on referral rates, while controlling for organizational level, provider level and patient 
level co variates. 
 
Impact-focused  evaluation: Seconda ry aims focus on factors that empower Women Veterans to 
engage in and benefit from c are. We will use  gene ralized linear mixed models (GLM) to 
evaluate a) cross-sectional relationsh ips of patient a ctivation, health-related quality of life, and 
care experiences  at en rollment, with provider and site characteristics, adjusting for patient 
social and  demographic characteristics; and  b) prospe ctive changes in patient activation, 
health-related quality of life, and  care experiences  from en rollment to 6-month follow-up, 
adjusting for patient, provider, and site characteristics. We will also cons truct multi-level 
mediation and moderation models to explore whether engagement-related factors such  as 
patient ac tivation, strength of treatment preference s, or the communication subs cale of the 
CAHP S are associated with greater ben efit from or satisfaction with care. 
 
Power Analysis: Our goal with the power analysis was to ascertain the number of providers who 
would need  to “turn on” the intervention (i.e., the number of PCPs who use the CV template, as 
well as the minimum number of patients that would need  to be exposed  to the care model. 
Consistent with our nonrandomized  stepped  wedge design, the po wer analysis presen ted here 
is for a 3-level hierarchical linear model where patients are clustered within PCPs within sites. 
In the final ana lysis structure, patients are the Level 1 units, the timing of PCP template 
use/referrals represents Level 2 units, and sites are the Level 3 units. The outcome of interest 
for CV Toolkit is the number of referrals to services (e.g. Gateway to Healthy Living and other 
services), The outcome is binary (referred/retained vs. no t), and  measu red at the patient level 
(Level 1). Treatment effect is measu red at Le vel 2, i.e., timing of when the PCPs turn on. 
Parameters required for ca lculating power are: alpha (α) = 0.05, sa mple size of patients 
clustered within referring PCPs (n) = at least 260 (based  on prior work), the number of sites (K) 
= 4, the Plausible for Retention among those with low utilization (PI) = 5% to 85%, and Effect 
Size Variability (ESV) = medium or 0.05. Based  on the resulting power curve, we need  at least 
8.78 (rounded  to 9) referring PCPs per site to achieve power at 0.80. Our po wer analyses 
assume that the treatment effect is linear over time, i.e. pa tients that a re retained longer have 
proportionally better outcomes. While selected de tails of the resulting dose respo nse curve may 
vary, sens itivity analyses demonstrate a reasonab le app roximation enab ling detection of 
treatment effects. 
 
 
In addition to project key personnel, t he overall E MPOWER QUERI Implementation Core will 
be involved in data analysis.  The Implementation Core i s directed by Dr. Hamilton 
(EMPOWER QUERI PI), an experienced  and highly trained implementation scientist. She will 
be suppo rted by a seasoned  team of Co- Investigators, many of whom also have 
implementation resea rch experience.  Drs. Hamilton and Zuchowski will lead the qualitative 
analysis  and Drs. Farmer  (Co-PI), Lee and Huynh will lead the team with quantitative  
analyses including the nonrandomized stepped wedge . The implementation core personnel 
are suppo rted by several internationally recognized implementation scientists on the Scientific 
Advisory Group, including Drs. Curran, Mittman, and  Yano, who will help with their expertise in 
guiding the success of this pro ject. The  Scientific Advisory Group will not have access to 
identifiable data . 
 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 27 of 36 
 
 
 5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects  
The PI may terminate a participant in the study at any time if the study participant does not meet 
enrollment criteria or does not comply with study  requirements, e.g., keeping scheduled 
appointments with the interview team.   
Participants may withdraw at any time with no consequences.   
Information obtained up to the time of participant withdrawal or termination may be used in the 
data analysis.   
6.0 Reporting  
We do not expect our project to elicit distress among participants, as the subject matter is not of 
a sensitive nature. However, it is possible that some participants will experience distress at the 
recall of certain experiences. Interviewers w ill be trained to respond to indications of distress by 
redirecting the participant to another area of the interview guide. Should the participant continue 
to indicate distress, the interviewer will ask the participant if she/he needs to speak to a mental 
health professional; local contact information of such professionals will be available to all 
interviewers and will be utilized if necessary.  
 
Under any adverse circumstance, interviewers  will notify Dr . Farmer  or Dr. Bean -Mayberry  of 
any actions taken in  response to the indication of distress  (specifically, Dr. Farmer for VA 
employees and Dr. Bean -Mayberry for  VA patients) , and regarding any unanticipated serious 
adverse events. In addition, the IRB will be notified according to guidelines if there is an adverse 
event.  
Response procedures for adverse events  
Discomfort with disclosure . Staff who collect survey and interview data will be trained on how to 
respond to embarrassment or discomfort in an appropriate and compassionate manner. 
Subjects will be enco uraged to contact the study PI  Co-PI, or other research staff in the event of 
a potential adverse reaction that occurs as a consequence of their participation in the interview. 
They will receive specific written (in the form of a study description and PI /Co-PI's contact 
information) and verbal instructions during the study consent procedures about how to do so, if 
needed.  
Mandatory reporting . One adversity a subject may encounter is the possibility that staff must 
report to authorities instances of physica l abuse or neglect, or threat of physical harm among 
subjects to themselves or others. To anticipate these concerns, the study has established 
procedures and guidelines to respond to risk disclosures and crisis situations. Staff will be 
trained to recogniz e risks or crises that require immediate reporting response. We do not expect 
these events to be common in the CV toolkit study, but will inform all research staff on 
procedures to follow if any of these events arise. More commonly, we expect that discussi on of 
some of the health issues (cardiovascular  related ) may possibly result in some emotional or 
psychological stress  for a patient .  If that does occur, the RA or interviewer will stop the 
research process, check on the patient, and inform the patient th at she will call the PI or 
designated local clinical staff contact for assistance.  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 28 of 36 
 
 
 Each of the possible adverse events is described below, including background, criteria for 
emergency action, and non -emergency action.  
 1) Suicidal ideation or intention to  harm self  
Research staff will not be probing for this information and it is not part of any of the research 
tasks.  However, if a subject spontaneously reports thoughts of self -harm, research staff will 
follow the procedures below:  
a. Emergency: in the rare instance that an individual is in imminent danger and needs 
emergency medical or mental health services, research staff will adhere to their medical 
center’s policies and procedures for managing and reporting such events including, if 
appropriate dial ing 911 or the local police.   
b. Non -emergency: If a subject spontaneously reports that they are thinking of killing themselves 
or taking their life, for example:  
1. “I’m thinking about suicide/killing myself”  
2. “I feel like I want to kill myself”  
3. “I wish I were dead”  
4. “I wish my life were over”  
5. “I can’t go on” or “I feel I can’t go on”  
The research staff person will say, “You seem to be having a difficult time. If you think this is an 
emergency, we can call 911. If you think you need help w ith this problem, you can talk to your 
VA clinician or go to the VA emergency room.” The research staff person will call either the PI or 
their delegate within one hour of this incident. They will determine what further action is needed.  
2) Intent to harm  others  
Research staff will not be probing for this information and it is not part of any of the research 
tasks. Sometimes threats may be voiced spontaneously. If this is a vague statement about 
intent to harm others and it is not an easily identifiable p erson, and does not communicate clear 
intent, capable means or immediate intent to do so, the research staff person will redirect the 
subject to the task at hand. However, if the subject makes a specific threat to a reasonably 
identifiable person, then the  research staff person will remind the subject about the limits of 
confidentiality, and follow these procedures:  
a. Emergency: In the rare instance that an individual is in imminent danger and needs 
emergency medical or mental health services, the researc h staff will adhere to their medical 
center’s policies and procedures for managing and reporting such events including, if 
appropriate dialing 911 or the local police.  
b. Non -emergency: If a subject reports intent to commit harm to others that is a non -emergency 
in nature but that still communicates a reasonably identifiable person, clear intent, capable 
means or an immediate intent to do so, the research staff person will contact the PI within one 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 29 of 36 
 
 
 hour and will complete an incident report the same day. In  addition, the research staff person 
will talk to the subject to express concern and encourage him/her to tell someone. They will 
determine what further action is needed.  
3) Child or dependent abuse/neglect  
Research staff will not be probing for this inf ormation and it is not part of any of the research 
tasks. However, if a subject discusses that a child, dependent or elder is being sexually, 
physically, or verbally abused or there is evidence of neglect (e.g., young child left alone for 
hours), then we w ill follow these procedures:  
a. Emergency: In the rare instance that a child or dependent is in imminent danger, the research 
staff will adhere to their medical center’s policies and procedures for managing and reporting 
such events including, if appropri ate dialing 911 or the local police.  
b. Non -emergency: If there is a report or incident of child or elder abuse that is non -emergency 
in nature, the research staff person will consult with the PI or delegate by phone within one hour 
of the incident and wi ll complete a written incident report the same day.  
Consulting with the VA Research Service, and VA legal representatives as needed, we will 
review what is known about each situation and will assess the legal and ethical characteristics 
of each situation.  If it is determined that the study has a legal or ethical obligation to report the 
incident, we will do so.  Reporting procedures of the VA Research Service will be followed for 
each incident.  
7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  
Assurance of Patient Safety  
The local site research staff will be in regular communication with the research team at the main 
site and are responsible for monitoring patient safety at the participating sites.  The Project 
Director will monitor research operations of the project and ov ersee patient safety.  All research 
staff will be experienced in working with women Veteran patients and will be closely supervised 
by the study local site PI.  Since a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) is required for multi -
site studies, we plan to util ize the central HSR&D DSMB for further oversight.  The DSMB 
provides an ongoing evaluation of the study’s progress including patient accrual and retention, 
monitoring of adverse events, and the adequacy and efficiency of the analysis plan to discern 
outcom es that might require study modifications, or result in early cessation of the study due its 
benefits or harms.  In terms of patient safety, the DSMB will evaluate all adverse and serious 
adverse events, by control and intervention site, including all hosp italizations and deaths.   
Data Security  
VA Research staff use VA computers to collect and analyze study data; either desktop or laptop 
computers with the VA image installed and managed by the local Information Resource 
Management department.   All laptops are encrypted with VA -approved FIPS 140 -2 certified 
encryption software to ensure that if laptops are ever lost or stolen, no data could be 
removed.   Laptop computers are never removed from VA grounds without supervisory approval 
and a VA Property Pass app roved by the VA research service.   Thumb drives are never used as 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 30 of 36 
 
 
 long-term storage of data with identifiers.   If a thumb drive is needed to transfer data from one 
computer to another, only a VA -approved thumb drive with the proper encryption software woul d 
be used after obtaining authorization from the local ISO.  
VA staff practice regular and secure data backup procedures.   Computer users “lock” their 
workstations when not actively in use, and office doors are closed and locked when staff 
members are not p resent.  Hard copies of sensitive data are stored separately from identifiers in 
locked filing cabinet in a locked office.  All research and QI project staff have access to a secure 
VA server managed by the HSR&D CSHIIP.   This server is behind the VA firew all and provides 
individual storage space for each project, and for each member of the study teams.   This server 
is backed up incrementally on a daily basis with full backup occurring monthly.   Backups go to a 
tape library and the tapes are rotated on a qu arterly basis and stored in the safe located in the 
ISO’s office at the Sepulveda campus.  
This server also provides a means to transfer data between local and non -local research 
staff.   Project folders can be created where any approved individual on the V A intranet can gain 
access through their approved VA login to a project server folder.   This allows secure data 
transfers over short and long distances with the smallest risk of accidental data disclosure.   Only 
staff that are listed on delegated authoriti es for the project through the CIRB, are credentialed 
by Research, have completed all required data security training, and are approved by the 
CSHIIP will be given access to the research project folders on the research server.   Staff may 
only access this f older by using their VA login on a VA computer behind the VA firewall. Access 
to these files is immediately revoked for staff members who leave the project.  
All data will be stored on at VA sites behind a VA firewall, and will be shared only among the 
Principal Investigators, study staff, and transcriptions.  
Data Collection Procedures  
A series of identification (ID) numbers will be generated for all patient and staff subjects  and 
participants.  Data from all subjects will be collected in a private office at each site by a trained 
member of the project team.  A 4 digit study ID code will be generated for each participant and 
project staff will maintain a link file that contains the following for each participant:  : (a) for 
patients: ID number, subject name, last four of the social security number, gender and date of 
birth (b) for staff:  ID code, gender, name, site, and wave number. This is how the 4 digit study ID 
codes will be generated for each staff participant: 1st digit=wave #, 2nd digit=site #, Last 2 
digits= random # for unique respondent code.   This link file will be stored on a secure VA server 
behind the VA firewall. Patient survey responses will be coded with the study ID and recorded 
directly into a survey program running on a VA computer and store d in a project -specific folder 
on the CSHIIP secure server .  All information linking subject identifiers to their data will be 
destroyed in accordance with the VA Records Control Schedule and guidance from the Central 
IRB.   
All staff subjects  and a subset  of patient subjects  will complete a semi -structured interview with 
a research staff member. With the participants’ permission, the interviews will be recorded on 
VA-approved devices and uploaded to the project -specific folders. Data on patient subjects 
extracted from VA data systems, will also be stored in project folders.  Paper data collected in 
this project will be limited.  Staff subjects will be emailed a survey prior to their baseline 
interview and this data will be collected at the time of the pre -implementation interview. This 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 31 of 36 
 
 
 data will be coded with a study ID. These surveys  will be keypunched and verified, and securely 
stored in a locked cabinet in a locked office at the local HSR&D site.   
The paper surveys will be stored in a locked file cabinet within a secured room at the local site.  
A limited number of authorized project staff will have access to these  forms.  The study master 
list has the subject ID number, SSN, full name and contact information. This master list is only 
accessible to the PI,  Co-PI, and limited project staff.  The master list is stored on a VA computer 
on a VA server behind the VA firewall.  
The HIPAA forms collected from the participants who complete their surveys in person will be 
stored in a locked file cabinet within a secu red room at the local site. A limited number of 
authorized project staff will have access to these forms.  
-Paper surveys  collected from participants will have only the subject’s ID number and no 
identifying information.  No data will be collected outside t he VA.   Paper data containing PHI is 
never left out on unattended desks.  
Data Transportation Procedures  
If paper data and audio recording devices need to be transported between sites they will be 
securely carried in VA locked bags. Once on site, they will  be secured in a locked file cabinet in 
a secure room.  
Data Transmission Procedures  
The qualitative interviews will generate digital voice files, which are considered identifiable. To 
minimize risk, during recorded interviews subjects will only be identif ied using their project ID 
number, and subjects are instructed not to state any names or other identifying information in 
their interviews.  These audio files will be uploaded from recorders to the secure server  (See 
section 5.6 Data Analysis for more deta ils) and then transmitted to Alpha Transcription  or some 
other reputable transcription service using secure FTP where it will be temporarily securely 
stored according to conditions set out an approved Data Use Agreement.  We have used Alpha 
Transcription  in several previous studies, with great success.  The transcription company will be 
informed not to transcribe any identifying information accidentally disclosed in interviews. Any 
identifying information found in voice files from the qualitative interviews  is accidental and rare; 
no identifying information will be found in transcripts. The study team downloads the 
transcription files to the project -specific folders on the VA server behind the VA firewall. Once 
they have been downloaded and verified, the tra nscription company destroys the copies on their 
own server.  
Access, Storage and Handling of Secondary Data  
In addition to surveys and interviews, other outcome data will be extracted from national VA 
data systems, and patient medical record charts.  There are two specific types of data pulls: (1) 
data abstraction containing information on the women in VA primary care teams  by their 
designated women’s health providers at each site (aggregate) and (2) data to link with 
respondents who consent to  have their responses on the survey / interview linked to their 
medical files.  Data from VA electronic data systems will initially include patients’ social security 
numbers (SSN) along with any other identifiers, since these are used to assure that the data 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 32 of 36 
 
 
 matches th e project participants.  We will merge the extracted data with our existing research 
data. Once the data have been checked to ensure the merge has been successful, within the 
shortest possible time period, the SSNs will be removed from the analytic data fi le and stored in 
a link file kept in a separate, high security folder on secure VA server.   For the data pull 
involving patients who consented to surveys and/or interviews, e ach subject will already have 
been assigned a project ID number that does not con tain any identifiers. The subject’s ID 
number will replace the SSN in the files.  
All information linking subject identifiers to their data will be destroyed in accordance with the 
VA Records Control Schedule and guidance from the CIRB.  
VA records data will  be obtained from CPRS, DSS or CDW.  In order to obtain data, the project 
team will work with a list of SSNs of patients consented and enrolled in the study. Project or VA -
certified database analysts will be given this list of SSNs and will then run a quer y to extract the 
needed data, either working in the VINCI platform or downloading the data to a temporary folder 
on the CSHIIP secure server.  Extracted data will be placed into our secure folder on the local 
CSHIIP server and coded for analysis. This data  will always remain behind the VA firewall.  
Research staff will be thoroughly trained on the online survey system before enrollment begins 
to ensure they can accurately gather information from charts.   Each subject will already have 
been assigned a projec t ID number that does not contain any identifiers. The subject’s ID 
number will replace the SSN in the files.  
All the above data are stored and backed up on a secure VA server.  Computer users “lock” 
their workstations when not actively in use and office d oors are locked when staff members are 
not present.  Hard copies of sensitive data are stored in a separate locked filing cabinet in a 
locked office.   
Special consideration and precautions will be taken with regard to sharing information provided 
by indiv idual employees with supervisors and co -workers.   While general information derived 
from employee interviews related to relevant clinical practices, resources, quality improvement 
activities, and barriers/facilitators will be shared with other site partici pants in aggregate or 
synthesized form, detailed information that would allow identification of individual employee 
responses will not be shared with supervisors of the employees or their co -workers.   
8.0 Communication Plan  
 
This study will be led by Dr. Bean-Mayberry (PI), who will be responsible for the 
implementation of the CV Toolkit  and Dr. Farmer (Co-PI), who will be responsible for the 
evaluation of this project’s  implementation . Key operation partners include, from WHS, Drs. 
Patricia Hayes (Co-Chair, Strategic Advisory Group [SAG]) and Sally Haskell (Co-PI on QUERI 
QI Project); and from NCP, Ms. Hurley and Drs. Dundon, Kinsinger, and Kim  (LoS, SAG). 
Local supp ort stems from GLA WH Medical Director, Dr. Batuman, and WVPM, Ms. 
Andreassen (LoS, SAG), as well as our ACOS Clinical Redes ign and Transformation expert, 
Dr. Lisa Altman.  Drs. Hayes, Haskell, Dundon, Kim, Batuman and Ms. Hurley and Andreassen 
will provide their expertise to help with success of this project and will not have access to 
identifi able data.  Key input will be culled from our Biostatistician, Dr. Lee and Co-Investigators, 
Drs. Alison Hamilton (EMPOWER QUERI Director), Lisa Altman,  Erin Finley, and Dr. Ramin 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 33 of 36 
 
 
 Ebrahimi (LoS, SAG member, Cardiologist), Director of the GLA Cardiac Cath Lab, who will 
help guide the educa tional training for providers and tailoring the CPRS template locally. Dr. 
Farmer (Project Co-PI), a nonrandomized  stepped  wedge  expert, will supe rvise Drs. Jess ica 
Zucho wski, Alexis Huynh and key team members for the implementation evaluation. Mrs. Saifu  
will serve as Project Director.  
The project headquarters will be at the VISN 22 HSR&D CSHIIP offices in Los Angeles. The 
core team for the CV Toolkit (Drs. Bean -Mayberry, Farmer, Hamilton, Chanfreau, Schweizer, 
and Mrs. Sai fu) will meet weekly to ensure progress and discuss updates for the project.  
Dr. Bean -Mayberry  will be responsible for informing local sites of protocol changes, reporting 
compliance issues related to CIRB and VA research service requirements, for reportin g 
progress of research at least annually, and for reporting any injuries or other unanticipated 
problems involving participants or others.   
Local Site leads are responsible for obtaining local approvals, complying with local policies, 
including notifying local facility directors of research engagement.   
Each local site lead will ensure that the study is being conducted according to the IRB -approved 
protocol.  Issues will be discu ssed with the Corresponding PI. Site leads will be responsible for 
tracking l ocal events, complying with local reporting requirements, and reporting all events to 
the Coordinating PI.   
On a weekly to biweekly basis, Dr. Bean -Mayberry  will meet with Local Site leads.  On a 
monthly basis, calls will be held with all leads to ensure cross -level synergies and consistency in 
qualitative approaches to data collection and analysis.  Enrollment, data collection, and 
administrative issues will also be discussed.  Issues may include IRB, protocol changes, 
informed consent, and HIPAA.   
Any e vents that may impact the conduct of the study or the safety of participants will be reported 
by local staff to the Coordinating PI within 1 business day.  This includes any SAEs, 
Unanticipated Problems, concerns about protocol deviations, and any interim results that may 
impact the conduct of the study.  
Although we do not anticipate any SAEs/UAPs if any safety issues (SAEs or UAPs) arise, they 
will be reported to the Coordinating PI within 1 business day.  The PI will follow CIRB reporting 
guidelines and c ollect relevant information.  Data collection occurs at one point in time; 
therefore, it is unlikely we will become aware of any SAEs.  If we become aware of any SAEs, 
we will collect the information by phone. Issues  or interim results that may impact the conduct of 
the study will be reported by the Coordinating PI to Local Site PIs on weekly calls.  
Sites will be informed when the study is over and they are no longer engaged in research. The 
coordinating PI will report to CIRB.  Local Site PIs are responsib le for reporting to local 
authorities.   
We will convene strategic planning calls with the Executive Committee (composed of the PIs, 
the Progra m Manager , the Leads, and the Engagement Project Leads) to internally review 
progress and coordinate efforts at l east quarterly . 
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 34 of 36 
 
 
 9.0 References  
 
1) Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness -based guidelines for the prevention of 
cardiovascular disease in women --2011 update: a guideline from the American Heart 
Association. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57(12):1404 -1423. 
2) Goff DC, Jr., Lloyd -Jones DM, Bennett G, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the assessment of 
cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B):2935 -2959.  
3) Jarvie JL, Foody JM. Recognizing and improving health care disparities in the prevention of 
cardiovascular disease in women. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2010;12(6):488 -496.  
4) Melloni C, Berger JS, Wang TY, et al. Representation of women in randomized clinical trials of 
cardiovascular disease prevention. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2010;3(2):135 -142.  
5) Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of 
blood cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular ris k in adults: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B):2889 -2934.  
6) Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the management of  
overweight and obesity in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society. Circulation. 
2014;129(25 Suppl 2):S102 -138.  
7) Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, et al. 2013 AH A/ACC guideline on lifestyle management to reduce 
cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B):2960 -2984.  
8) Lardizabal JA, Deedwania PC. Benefits of statin therapy and compliance in high risk 
cardiovascular patients. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2010;6:843 -853.  
9) Chou AF, Wong L, Weisman CS, et al. Gender disparities in cardiovascular disease care among 
commercial and medicare managed care plans. Womens Health Issues. 2007;17(3):139 -149.  
10) Bean -Mayberry B, Yano EM, Mor MK, Bayliss NK, Xu X, Fine MJ. Does sex influence immunization 
status for influenza and pneumonia in older veterans? J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009;57(8):1427 -1432.  
11) Vimalananda VG, Miller DR, Hofer TP, Holleman RG, Klamerus ML, Kerr EA. Accounting for 
clinical action reduces estimates of gender disparities in lipid management for diabetic veterans. 
J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28 Suppl 2:S529 -535.  
12) Tseng CL, Sambamoorthi U, Rajan M, et al. Are there g ender differences in diabetes care among 
elderly Medicare enrolled veterans? J Gen Intern Med. 2006;21 Suppl 3:S47 -53. 
13) Jha AK, Perlin JB, Steinman MA, Peabody JW, Ayanian JZ. Quality of ambulatory care for women 
and men in the Veterans Affairs Health Care System. J Gen Intern Med. 2005;20(8):762 -765.  
14) LaMarca BD, Gilbert J, Granger JP. Recent progress toward the understanding of the 
pathophysiology of hypertension during preeclampsia. Hypertension. 2008;51(4):982 -988.  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 35 of 36 
 
 
 15) Farmer MM, Rose DE, Riopelle D, Lanto AB , Yano EM. Gender differences in smoking and 
smoking cessation treatment: an examination of the organizational features related to care. 
Womens Health Issues. 2011;21(4 Suppl):S182 -189.  
16) Cabana MD, Kim C. Physician adherence to preventive cardiology guideli nes for women. 
Womens Health Issues. 2003;13(4):142 -149.  
17) Crosson JC, Heisler M, Subramanian U, et al. Physicians' perceptions of barriers to cardiovascular 
disease risk factor control among patients with diabetes: results from the translating research 
into action for diabetes (TRIAD) study. J Am Board Fam Med. 2010;23(2):171 -178.  
18) Kedward J, Dakin L. A qualitative study of barriers to the use of statins and the implementation 
of coronary heart disease prevention in primary care. Br J Gen Pract. 2003;53(494): 684-689.  
19) Tsui JI, Dodson K, Jacobson TA. Cardiovascular disease prevention counseling in residency: 
resident and attending physician attitudes and practices. J Natl Med Assoc. 2004;96(8):1080 -
1083, 1088 -1091.  
20) Walsh JM, Sundaram V, McDonald K, Owens DK, Gol dstein MK. Implementing effective 
hypertension quality improvement strategies: barriers and potential solutions. J Clin Hypertens 
(Greenwich). 2008;10(4):311 -316.  
21) Kenealy T, Arroll B, Petrie KJ. Patients and computers as reminders to screen for diabetes in  
family practice. Randomized -controlled trial. J Gen Intern Med. 2005;20(10):916 -921.  
22) McMenamin SB, Bellows NM, Halpin HA, Rittenhouse DR, Casalino LP, Shortell SM. Adoption of 
policies to treat tobacco dependence in U.S. medical groups. Am J Prev Med. 2010;39(5):449 -
456.  
23) Shea S, DuMouchel W, Bahamonde L. A meta -analysis of 16 randomized controlled trials to 
evaluate computer -based clinical reminder systems for preventive care in the ambulatory 
setting. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 1996;3(6):399 -409.  
24) Shojania KG,  Jennings A, Mayhew A, Ramsay C, Eccles M, Grimshaw J. Effect of point -of-care 
computer reminders on physician behaviour: a systematic review. CMAJ. 2010;182(5):E216 -225.  
25) Spears GV, Roth CP, Miake -Lye IM, Saliba D, Shekelle PG, Ganz DA. Redesign of an elec tronic 
clinical reminder to prevent falls in older adults. Med Care. 2013;51(3 Suppl 1):S37 -43. 
26) Czarnogorski M, Halloran Cns J, Pedati C, et al. Expanded HIV testing in the US Department of 
Veterans Affairs, 2009 -2011. Am J Public Health. 2013;103(12):e40 -45. 
27) Sharp A, Nguyen H, Hahn E, et al. The Just Do It Playbook for Implementation Science. HMO 
Research Network Conference; April 1 -3, 2014, 2014; Phoenix, Arizona.  
28) Kilbourne AM, Neumann MS, Pincus HA, Bauer MS, Stall R. Implementing evidence -based 
interven tions in health care: application of the replicating effective programs framework. 
Implement Sci. 2007;2:42.  
29) Kilbourne AM, Abraham KM, Goodrich DE, et al. Cluster randomized adaptive implementation 
trial comparing a standard versus enhanced implementation intervention to improve uptake of 
an effective re -engagement program for patients with serious mental illness. Implement Sci. 
2013;8:136.  
 
 
 
 CV Protocol Component A and B combined  –Tracked version  - 05/18/2017 Page 36 of 36 
 
 
 30) Kilbourne AM, Almirall D, Goodrich DE, et al. Enhancing outreach for persons with serious 
mental illness: 12 -month res ults from a cluster randomized trial of an adaptive implementation 
strategy. Implement Sci. 2014;9:163.  
31) Leykum LK, Pugh JA, Lanham HJ, Harmon J, McDaniel RR, Jr. Implementation research design: 
integrating participatory action research into randomized cont rolled trials. Implement Sci. 
2009;4:69.  
32) Jordon M, Lanham HJ, Anderson RA, McDaniel RR, Jr. Implications of complex adaptive systems 
theory for interpreting research about health care organizations. J Eval Clin Pract. 
2010;16(1):228 -231.  
33) Yano EM, Haskell S , Hayes P. Delivery of gender -sensitive comprehensive primary care to 
women veterans: implications for VA Patient Aligned Care Teams. J Gen Intern Med. 2014;29 
Suppl 2:S703 -707.  
34) McDaniel RR, Jr., Lanham HJ, Anderson RA. Implications of complex adaptive sys tems theory for 
the design of research on health care organizations. Health Care Manage Rev. 2009;34(2):191 -
199.  
35) deKleijn M, Lagro -Janssen AL, Canelo I, Yano EM. Creating a roadmap for delivering gender -
sensitive comprehensive care for women Veterans: resu lts of a national expert panel. Med Care. 
2015;53(4 Suppl 1):S156 -164.  
36) Simpson KM, Porter K, McConnell ES, et al. Tool for evaluating research implementation 
challenges: a sense -making protocol for addressing implementation challenges in complex 
research s ettings. Implement Sci. 2013;8:2.  
37) Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute. PCORI Engagement Rubric. Accessed May 9, 
2015.  
38) Brown CA, Lilford RJ. The stepped wedge trial design: a systematic review. BMC Med Res 
Methodol. 2006;6:54.  
39) Rowe A, Hogarth A. Us e of complex adaptive systems metaphor to achieve professional and 
organizational change. J Adv Nurs. 2005;51(4):396 -405.  
40) Daumit GL, Dickerson FB, Wang NY, et al. A behavioral weight -loss intervention in persons with 
serious mental illness. New England Jou rnal of Medicine. 2013;368(17):1594 -1602.  
41) Averill JB. Matrix analysis as a complementary analytic strategy in qualitative inquiry. Qual 
Health Res. 2002 ;12(6):855 -866.  
42) Hamilton A. Qualitative methods in rapid turn -around health services research. Spotlight  on 
Women’s Health. VA HSR&D National Cyberseminar Series December 11, 2013 2013.  
43) Glaser BG, Strauss AL. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. 
Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company; 1967.  
44) Norton WE, McCannon CJ, Schall MW, Mit tman BS. A stakeholder -driven agenda for advancing 
the science and practice of scale -up and spread in health. Implement Sci. 2012;7:118.  