V4; 10.4.17  Basic Info  
Protocol Number: 827345  
Principal Investigator: DELGADO, MUCIO C  
Protocol Title: Pilot trial leveraging smartphone -paired breathalyzers and loss - and gain -framed 
text notifications for reducing drinking driving  
Short Title: BE SAFE  
Protocol Description: This project aims to demonstrate the feasibility of a scalabl e behavioral 
intervention using smartphone -paired breathalyzers and text message s aimed a t reducing drinking and 
driving among individuals who report heavy drinking. Participants re ceive a smartphone breathalyzer to 
provide feedback on their estimated blood alcohol level. The i ntervention compares loss - and gain -
framed messages that make the consequences of drinking and d riving more salient to standard 
messages not to drink and drive.  
Submission Type: Social and Biological Sciences  
Application Type: FULL  
 
Study Instruments  
Discuss the particulars of the research instruments, questionnaires and other evaluation instruments in 
detail. Provide validation documentation and or procedures to  be used to  validate instruments. For well 
know and generally accepted test instruments the detail here can be bri ef. More detail may be required 
for a novel or new instrument. For ethnographic studies identify any study instruments to be used (i .e. 
for deception studies) and describe in detail where, when and how the study will be conducted and who 
or what are the subjects of study. Note: For more information on h ow to conduct ethical and valid 
ethnographic research, follow the link For oral historie s or interview s provide the general framework for 
questioning and means of data collection. If interviews or groups se ttings are to be audio taped or video 
taped describe in detail the conditions under which it will take place. Include a copy of any no vel or new 
test instruments with the IRB submission.  
 
1. Intake Survey (attached to the protocol) a) Driving History and Experience Questionnaire DHEQ  
(Harrison & Fillmore, 2005): This self -report questionnaire gathers information on driving history and  
behavi ors. Included in the questionnaire are measures of driving experience such as length of time  
holding a driver ’s license and number of days and miles driven per week. The questionnaire also gathers  
information about participants driving behaviors, such as l icense revocations, presence and number of  
DUI citations and punishments, traffic accidents, traffic tickets, typical driving environment (rural, urban, 
and interstate), and the type of vehicle transmission (manual, a utomatic, or both). b) Drinking and 
driving questionnaire (McCarthy et al): This self -report questionnaire gathered information on  
individuals drinking and driving history. The questionnaire asked parti cipants to respond to questions 
about drinking and driving history on 4 or 5 point Likert sca les. The q uestionnaire included a measure of 
frequency of drinking and driving and typical quantity of alcoh ol consumed before driving. The items 
were obtained from a scale reported by McCarthy et al.  (2012). c) Delayed discounting questionnaire 
(Senecal, Kable et al 2012). Time discounting (known in terchangeably as present -biased preferences or 
delay discounting) is a measure of impulsivity that  reflects people ’s tendencies to discount the value of a 
V4; 10.4.17  reward as a function of how far in the future it  would b e received. It has been established that people 
who engage in maladaptive behavior such as drink ing and using other drugs have steeper delayed 
discounting functions, meaning they have stronger present biased preferences.  
This is expected because engagement  in unhealthy behaviors enta ils immediate gratifications in 
exchange for future health problems. It is not known whether a similar pa ttern of behavior is present in 
those engaging in drinking and driving. Consistent with prior work, w e will use the 51 -item  monetary 
choice questionnaire developed by Seneca; and colleagues (2012) that defines 10 ranges  of delayed 
discounting by fitting a hyperbolic function to participants expressed pr eferences for smaller immediate 
versus larger delayed rewards. d) Barratt I mpulsiveness Scale BIS -11 (P atton et al., 1995) This 30 -item 
self- report questionnaire is designed to measure the personality dimensi on of impulsivity. Participants 
rated 30 different statements on a 4 -point Likert -type scale ranging from Rarely/Never to Almost  
Always/Always. Higher total scores indicate higher levels of self -reported impulsiveness. e) Self reported  
drinking. We will collect self -reported drinking days and drinks per day using a timeline follow -back 
method. This method has been used by mul tiple res earchers in the Substance abuse literature since its 
development by Sobell and colleagues (1996). We w ill cover the previous month in this assessment. f) 
Basic demographics such a race, age, and education.  g) Self -report of drinking and driving in stances 
(Sloan et al. 2014). This survey is a validated instr ument that asks participants to report on their general 
drinking behavior and its relation to driving.  
 
 2. End of Baseline survey (attached to protocol) a) Driving History and Experience Questio nnaire DHEQ 
(Harrison & Fillmore, 2005): This self-report questionnaire gathers information on driving history and 
beha viors. This will be modified to cover the length of time since this was previously asked (4 weeks), all 
questions that were used in the intake and are no longer relevant will be removed. b) Drinking and 
driving questionnaire (McCart hy et al): This self -report questionnaire gathered information on 
individuals dr inking and driving history. The questionnaire asked participants to respond to q uestions 
about drinkin g and driving history on 4 or 5 point Likert scales. The questionnaire included a measure of 
freque ncy of drinking and driving and typical quantity of alcohol con sumed before driving. The items 
were ob tained from a scale reported by McCarthy et al. (2012). This survey will be modified to cover the 
previous 4 weeks of the baselin e period. c) Self -reported drinking. We will collect self -reported drinking 
days and drinks per day using a timeline follow -back method. This method has been us ed by multip le 
researchers in the Substance abuse literature since its development by Sobell and colleagues (19 96). We 
will cover the previous month in this assessment.  
 
3. End of Study Survey (attached to p rotocol) a) Driving History and Experience Quest ionnaire DHEQ 
(Harrison & Fillmore, 2005): This se lf-report questionnaire gathers information on driving history and 
behaviors. This will be modified to  cover the length of time since this was previously asked (4 weeks), all 
questions that were used in the  intake and are no longer relevant will be removed. b) Drinking and 
driving questionnaire (McCarth y et al): This self -report questionnaire gathered information on 
individuals drinking and driving h istory. The questionnaire asked participants to respond to questions 
about drinking and driving history on 4 or 5 point Likert scales. The  questionnaire included a measure of 
frequency of drinking and driving and typical quantity of alcohol consumed before driving. The items 
were obtained from a scale reported by McCarthy et al. (2012).  
This survey will be modified to cover the previous 4 weeks of the interven tion period. c) Self -
reported drinking. We will collect self -reported drinking days and drinks per d ay using a timeline follow -
back method. This method has be en used by multiple researchers in the Subst ance abuse literature 
since its development by Sobell and colleagues (1996). We will cover the previous month in this 
assessment.  
 
V4; 10.4.17  4. End of study interview (attached to protocol) This interview will ask ab out the experience in the trial 
and help determine if this intervention is acceptable and liked by the part icipants. We will also use this 
interview to inquire about ways it can improve and things that were not liked by each participant.  
 
5. Smartphone Br eathalyzer (BacTrack Mobile Pro) This device was ch osen as one of the most popular 
currently commercially available breathalyzers that pair with smartpho nes, which has received growing 
attention in the national media. (A smartphone breathalyzer, 2015; Joll y, 2015). In a recently completed 
study conducted by our team, this was the most accurate smartphone pair ed breathalyzer available on 
the market and it was actually better than a current police grade breathaly zer at predicting blood 
alcohol levels.  
This s tudy was accepted for presentation at the 2017 Society for the Advancement of Violence 
and Injury Research annual meeting. The device pairs with the BACtrack app available for Android and  
iPhone, which enables the export of data to the study team. The curr ently collected data fields available 
in this free, publically available consumer application include: gues sed BAC, actual BAC, was it 
themselves or friend, GPS coordinates of where BAC was taken, and timestamp of the BAC.  
 
6. TrueMotion Driving app: True Motion.is a leading provider of s martphone applications aimed at 
measuring and improving driving behavior. They are the vendor for Pro gressive Insurances usage -based 
insurance application. The app uses native phone sensors to detect d riving and passenger v s. driver 
status. The app is also able to log passenger episodes in which user is using Uber or Lyft. The  
TrueMotion app will be installed on participants’ phones to track driving e xposure. Once installed it will 
run continuously in the background without any user interaction. Tr ueMotion collects the following 
information for each trip level data set (each will be coded with user I D and trip ID): , 1. Start/stop time, 
location, and intensity of detected braking and acceleration events 2.  Start/stop time, location, and 
intensity of speeding events (excess speed relative to an absolute threshold or relative to local speed 
limits) 3. OS -level events like screen on, screen unlock, call state 4. Start/stop time and location of 
detected distrac tion events using our sensor -based algorithms: phone cal ls (with a detection of in -hand 
versus hands -free) and general non -call usage like tapping, typing. As far  as the time -series sensor data 
which can be linked with a user ID and trip ID, TrueMotion wil l provide: 1. GPS points (lat/lon position, 
speed, accuracy, etc) at 1 Hz IMU sensor data (3 -axis accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer) at 9 
Hz. The standard data fields collected and that will be exported include trip start/ stop time, location, 
and mileage The data will be securely transferred to  the University of Pennsylvania on a weekly basis.  
 
References  
A smartphone breathalyzer. (2015). Retrieved January 4, 2016, from  
http://www.usatoday.com/videos/tech/2013/05/19/2216497/ BACtrack Mobile Pro.  (n.d.). Retrieved  
December 24, 2015, from https://www.bactrack.com/products/bactrack -mobile -
smartphonebreathalyzer  
TrueMotion. https://gotruemotion.com/ Jolly, J. (New Y. T. (2015, December 21). Turning  
Your Smartphone into a Breathalyzer. New York Times.  Retrieved from http://  
well.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/12/21/turning -your -smartphone -into-a-breathalyzer/?smid=fbnytimes&  
smtyp=cur&_r=1 Harrison ELR, Marczinski CA, Fillmore MT. Driver training conditions  
affect sensitivity to the impairing effects of alcoho l on a simulated driving test to the impairing effects  
of alcohol on a simulated driving test. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;15(6):588 -598. doi:http://  
dx.doi.org/10.1037/1064 -1297.15.6.588. Harrison ELR, Fillmore MT. Are bad drivers more impaired  
by alco hol? Sober driving precision predicts impairment from alcohol in a simulated driving task. Accid  
Anal Prev. 2005;37(5):882 -889. doi:10.1016/j.aap.2005.04.005. Test A. Intoxilyzer 9000. http://  
www.alcoholtest.com/intoxilyzer -9000/. Accessed December 24, 20 15. Marczinski, Cecile A; Stamates  
V4; 10.4.17  A. Artificial sweeteners versus regular mixers increase breath alcohol concentrations in male and female  
social drinkers. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2013;37(4):696 -702. McCarthy DM, Niculete ME, Treloar HR,  
Morris DH, Bartholo w BD. Acute alcohol effects on impulsivity: associations with drinking and driving  
behavior. Addiction. 2012;107(12):2109 -2114. doi:10.1111/j.1360 -0443.2012.03974.x. Patton JH,  
Stanford MS, Barratt ES. Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale. J  Clin Psychol. 1995;51  
(6):768 -774. Senecal N, Wang T, Thompson E, Kable JW. Normative arguments from experts and peers  
reduce delay discounting. Judgm Decis Mak. 2012;7(5):568 -589. Sloan FA, Eldred LE, Xu Y. The  
Behavioral Economics of Drunk Driving. Jour nal of Health Economics. Duke University. 2014. Vol 35,  
pp 64 -81. Sobell LC, Sobell MB, Buchan G, Cleland PA, Fedoroff I, Leo GI (1996). The reliability of  
the Timeline Followback method applied to drug, cigarette, and cannabis use. Paper presented at the  
30th Annual Meeting of the Association for Advancement of Behavior Therapy, New York, NY,  
November 1996.  
Group Modifications  
Describe necessary changes that will or have been made to the study instruments for different groups.  
 
During all phases study staf f will collect data from 3 sources:  
 
1) The BACtrack device and app will require the participant to initiate use during all phases of the trial. 
Researc hers will instruct participants to use this device during the study when drinking to help inform 
them o f their level of impairment and ability to operate a vehicle. See section attached screenshots for 
more i nformation on this app and what it tells users. As part of the BACtrack app each participant wi ll be 
asked to guess what their BAC is prior to submit ting a sample. Once a sample is submitted and  
processed the app will display both the actual BAC measure as well as the participants guess. They  will 
also be able to indicate of the sample was provided by them or someone else. Data collected usi ng this 
app and device includes guessed BAC, actual BAC, person submitting the sample, GPS coordinates, and 
timestamps.  
 
2) The TrueMotion app will collect participant driving data without any additional  initiation by the 
participant. Data collected from this app will include GPS coordinates, driving speed, trip length, time of 
drive, and  cellphone use while driving. During a drive or after its comple tion participa nts will be able to 
indicate if they are a passenger or a driver.  
 
3) Self -report in the form of a TLFB  and additional questions about drinking and driving over the past 7 
days will be collected once a week for all participants. Each week participants will be asked to complete 
a brief survey on the Way to H ealth site that asks them about drinking events, drinking and driving 
events, and BACtrack use for th e previous week. At enrollment, the research coordinator will conf irm 
that the participant has an active Uber and/or Lyft app installed and active account. This will be done to 
encourage participants to  not drink and drive.  
 
Baseline Phase:  All participants will receive an identical baseline phase l asting 4 weeks. This phase will 
serve as a way of capturing observed and self -reported incidents of alcohol use and driving episodes 
after drinking. During thi s phase participants will be asked to install and use the TrueMotion app and will 
receive a BACtrack device. Once both app s are installed and working the baseline phase will begin.  
 
After the baseline phase, participants will be randomized into one of three arms for the remaining 4 
weeks of the trial:  
 
V4; 10.4.17  1. Control arm:  Participants assigned to this arm will continue to use the TrueMotion app and 
BACtrack device as in the baseline phase. They will also be asked to complete the same weekly 
self-report survey each week.  
2. Loss -framed messaging arm:  Participants assigned to this arm will continue to use the 
TrueMotion app and BACtrack device as in the baseline phase. They will also be asked to 
complete the same weekly self -report survey. During this phase participants will receive a text 
message  on Thursday, Friday, and Satur day before 6:00 PM  that are framed as  a loss  (financially 
or personal). On each of these days, a text message will be selected from a bank of   messages 
(attached) that utilizes loss aversion  as it reminds participants to use the BACtrack app and to 
not dri nk and drive (for example, “A BAC >0.04 significantly impairs driving and can lead to a 
failed sobriety test. A DUI can land you in jail with $10,000 -15,000 in fines and increased 
insurance costs.  Don’t ruin your life: plan a ride and commit to not drinki ng and driving tonight.  
#BESAFE”) . 
3. Gain -framed messaging arm:  Participants assigned to this arm will continue to use the 
TrueMotion app and  BACtrack device as in the baseline phase. They will also be asked to 
complete the same weekly self -report  survey . During this phase participants will receive  a text 
message  (Thursday, Friday, and Saturday before 6:00 PM)  that are framed as  a gain  (financially 
or personal ). On each of these  days, a message will be selected from a bank of  messages 
(attached) that utiliz es a gain as it reminds participants to use the BACtrack app and to  not drink 
and drive (for example,  “A BAC >0.04 significantly impairs driving and can lead to a failed 
sobriety test.  Save a life : plan a ride and commit to not drinking and driving tonigh t.  #BESAFE”).   
 
Method for Assigning Subjects to Groups  
Describe how subjects will be randomized to groups.  
We will use block randomization where participants and will be to assigned their study arms  
 
Administration of Surveys and/or Process  
Describe the approximate time and frequency for administering surveys a nd/or evaluations. For surveys, 
questionnaires and evaluations presented to groups and in settings su ch as high schools, focus group 
sessions or community treatment centers explain how the process w ill be administered and who will 
oversee the process. For instance, discuss the potential issues of h aving teachers and other school 
personnel administer instruments to minors who are students especially if the content is sensiti ve in 
nature. Describe the procedure for audio and videotaping individual int erviews and/or focus groups and 
the storage of the tapes. For instance, if audio tape recording is to be used in a classroom setting, 
describe how this will be managed if individuals in the class are not pa rticipating in the study. Explain if 
the research involves the review of records (including public databases o r registries) with identifiable 
private information. If so, describe the type of information gathered from the records and if identifiers 
will be collected and retained with the data after it is retrieved. Describe  the kinds of identifiers to be 
obtained, (i.e. names, social security numbers) and how long the i dentifiers will be retained and 
justification for use.  
We are planning to recruit and enro ll approximately 60 individuals th rough recruitment material that 
will be sent out through emails and fliers (see recruitment material attac hed). Participants will also be 
recruited through posted flyers, postcards, email blasts, social media,  and by word -of-mouth/colleague 
referrals at Penn. The flyers will be posted in a variety of public and private locations. Research 
assistants will recruit participants by handing out information in crowded p laces, such as on the street or 
near bars. No one will be app roached to participant who appears intox icated. And No recruitment will 
occur at public or private places without first obtaining permission. The Penn Social Media & Health  
V4; 10.4.17  Innovation Lab will assist with recruitment through a variety of social media outle ts including  
Facebook and Craigslist. Language for these postings have been inc luded with the application. All 
recruitment materials will direct potential participants to either visit th e Way to Health portal for more 
information and to sign up or to call research staff for more information.  
 
When a participant is ready to  register for this study they will be directed to the Way to Health platfor m. 
A participant will create an account and review an Eligibility screening consent. This brief consent will 
grant us access to administer a brief eligibility survey. We have decided to use this proce ss to reduce the 
time needed to read the full consent for those who may not qualify. Once eligibili ty has been 
determined eligible participants will be instructed to re view and sign the full consent for participation .  
 
We are also planning to recruit through the Emergency Department (ED). Through ED recruitment, we 
will have an opportunity to encounter potential participants who may bene fit from this injury 
prevention intervention. The Emergency Departments at the Hospital at the Unive rsity of Pennsylvania 
(HUP) and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center (PPMC) are staffed with Academic Associates (AA). The AAs 
are a  cadre of staff who are trained, provided appropriate access  to patient in formation, and employed 
for the express purpose of screening patients for eligibility upon admission and recruiting patients as 
research participants at clinically appropriate times. The recruitment of research subjects is an ongoing 
procedur e in the ED of HUP and PPMC and their systems for subject recruitment are well established.  
The AAs at all locations participate in training seminars throughou t the year to stay current with 
protocol updates and to orient to upcoming studies. Approximately  2-4 weeks prior to the recruitment 
phase, our research team will initiate training seminars with ED staff  at HUP and PPMC to discuss the 
purpose of the proposed study, to familiarize ED staff with the inta ke protocol and to ensure human 
subjects research requirements are met. The AA program staff at  the HUP and PPMC will evaluate 
patients in the ED for eligibility to be screened. Our research team members who have completed 
appropriate trainings and have access to EPIC/PennChart may also pa rticipate in the se seminars and 
recruit in the ED.  
 
Eligibility for screening will be determined via the  ED tracking system using EPIC. AAs and trained 
research staff in the ED will review the tracking boards to identify patients age 21 -39. This review is for 
screening purposes only. AAs and research staff will  not review medical records for any patient. When 
an eligible patient is identified (age 21 -39), they will check the tracking board and/or confirm with the 
treating physician or resident physician that the pati ent is fit to be approached for research (no altered 
mental status, no active intoxication, not too uncomfortable from pain, n o unstable vital signs, no 
Emergency Severity Index (ESI) level 1 or 2). If the timing  is clinically appropriate, the AA or research 
staff member will confirm with the treating physicia n that the interviewer will not interrupt the flow of 
care. Once confirmed, the interviewer will approach the patient to provide information about the study 
including the inclusion/exclusion criteria. If t he timing is suitable and the  patient is interested, the 
interviewer will proceed through the eligibility screening proces s and the informed consent procedure 
via electronic device (UPHS -approved tablet or laptop, or patients personal device) used to enrol l the 
patient as a participant via Way to Health.  The interview may be conducted with patients in a private 
room in the ED as they await discharge . For patients on the ward, the interview would also be 
conducted in a private room. For patients who are disc harged before being enrolled, the enrollment 
process will continue electronically via the  Way to Health platform. If its clinically appropriate to 
approach, but not enroll, the AA or researc h staff member may approach the patient to provide 
information abo ut the study including the inclusio n/exclusion criteria and obtain contact information for 
the study team to follow up at a later time. For patients who are discharged before completing the 
onboarding portion of the enrollment process  (downloading apps, pr oviding a photo of their ID, 
V4; 10.4.17  receiving a breathalyzer) the AA or research staff m ember may take the patient to a private area in the 
HUP or PPMC lobby to complete this process.  
 
Following this, a member of the research team will contact the participant to answer any questions and 
send text message and email links to download the TrueMotion and BACtrack apps and mail the 
BACtrack device. If enrolled in the ED, the study staff member will set up an a ppointment with the 
participant to go through all of the enrollment steps. Staff will ensure full comprehension of study 
procedures and requirements  during this call. Participants will also be asked to complete the intake 
survey to continue in the trial. T he trial timeline will not begi n until the intake has been completed, all 
apps have been installed and act ivated, and the BACtrack device has been received.  
 
Participants will be asked to complete 2 surveys ou tside of the weekly self -report survey using t he Way 
to Health portal . They will be prompted via way to health to complete an intake survey  and end of study 
survey at predetermined time points (following eligibility and consent  and study completion 
respectively).  
 
Attached to this protocol are the following study instruments for data collection and recruitment: 1) 
Written Informed Consent 2) Eligibi lity Survey 3) Intake Survey 4) End of Study Survey 5) Weekly self -
report survey  
 
Data Management  
Describe how and who manages confidential data, including  how and whe re it will be stored and 
analyzed. For instance, describe if paper or electronic report forms will be used, how corrections to the 
report form will be made, how data will be entered into any database, an d the person(s) responsible for 
creating and maintaining the research database. Describe the use of pseudonyms, code numbers and 
how listing of such identifiers will be kept separate from the research data.  
 
Way to Health (Survey data):  All personal information that the particip ant is as ked to provide will be 
collected via Penn ’s Way To Health study platform. Way To Health co llects subjects names, dates of 
birth, addresses, email addresses, phone numbers, and the last four digits of their social security 
number. They also request the name  and phone number of an al ternate contact. To assure that 
participant confidentiality is preserved, individual identifiers are stored  in a single password protected 
system that is accessible only to study research, analysis and IT staff. The last four digi ts of participant’s  
social security numbers will be stored in a locked cabinet to be destroyed a t a later date. An investigator 
or statistician who logs in will be able to access only non -ident ifiable data. The Way To Health 
administrative group and resear ch coordinators responsible for contac ting participants for follow -up 
study visits or responding to questions about the study are able to vie w participant names and contact 
information. The WTH web development team and Project Directo r currently have admin istrative access 
to PHI. All of these personnel will have completed Huma n Subjects Protection and HIPAA privacy 
training. The system automatically generates logs of all data q ueries which can be reviewed by research 
staff to ensure that no unauthorized per sons have gained access to identifiable information.  
 
This system is hosted on site at The University of Pennsylvania and is pro tected by a secure firewall and 
several layers of operational security. Once a participant has been ent ered into this system, th ey are 
given a unique study identification number (ID). Any datasets and compute r files that leave the firewall 
are stripped of all identifiers and individuals are referred to by their stud y ID. The study ID is also used 
on all analytical files. The Penn M edicine Academic Computing Serv ices (PMACS) is the hub for the 
V4; 10.4.17  hardware and database infrastructure that supports the project and the Wa y To Health web portal is 
built on this infrastructure. The data collected for Way To Health based studi es is stored in mySQL 
databases on a PMACS -operated blade server environment devoted specifically to  Way To Health. The 
data center is housed in Information Systems and Computing at 3401 Walnut Street. All data are stored 
in a single relational database, allowing research ers to correct mistakes. E very SQL transaction, including 
accessing and changing data, is logged for auditing purposes. Data are en tered into the database 
through several different mechanisms. Participants enter their own personal inf ormation and respond 
to surveys through a PHP -based web interface. Researchers have a sepa rate interface that allows them 
to manually enter data if needed. Datasets are stripped of all personally identifiabl e information when 
exported for analysis. The web application automatically removes all identifier s when a researcher 
requests an analytic dataset. The only people with access to identifiable participan t information are pre -
specified Research Coordinators responsible for contacting participants for foll ow-up. Persona l 
information and research data will be stored in separate SQL tables and will be li nked by a computer -
generated ID number. Additionally, any information that leaves this system to co mmunicate with third 
party data sources (i.e. survey software) is strippe d of any identifie rs and transmitted in encrypted 
format.  
 
The same unique study ID is used to link these outside data to the participants.  All data for this project 
will be stored on the secure/firewalled servers of the PMACS Data Cen ter, in data files t hat will be 
protected  by multiple password layers. These data servers are maintained in a guarded facility behind 
several locked doors, with very limited physical access rights. They are al so cyber -protected by extensive 
firewalls and multiple layers of co mmunication encryption. Electro nic access rights are carefully 
controlled by UPenn system managers. Way To Health uses highly se cure methods of data encryption 
for all transactions involving participant's financial information using a level of security com parable to 
what is used in commercial financial transactions. This multi -layer system  of data security, identical to 
the system protecting the University of Pennsylvania Health S ystems medical records, greatly minimizes 
the risk of loss of privacy. All com munications between users  and our site will be encrypted with 
SSL/HTTPs technology.  
 
TrueMotion (Driving data):  TrueMotion requires users to enter in basic  
information to set up the account policy. This includes: Username Password Name Phone number  
Email The TrueMotion app currently tabulates the following data which are uploaded securely to the  
TrueMotion server: The following raw data fields organized at the timestamp level (clustered within  
drives, clustered within participants) will be transferred in C SV files in a way that can be securely  
downloaded in bulk by the University of Pennsylvania: Trip level data set with user ID and trip ID: 5.  
Start/stop time, location, and intensity of detected braking and accelera tion events 6. Start/stop time, 
location,  and intensity of speeding events (excess speed relative to an ab solute threshold or relative to 
local speed limits) 7. OS -level events like screen on, screen unlock, ca ll state 8. Start/stop time and 
location of detected distraction events using our senso r-based algorithms: phon e calls (with a detection 
of in -hand versus hands -free) and general non -call usage like tapping, ty ping. As far as the time -series 
sensor data which can be linked with a user ID and trip ID, TrueMotion will provide: 2. GPS points (l at/ 
lon position, speed, accuracy, etc) at 1 Hz 3. IMU sensor data (3 -axis accelerometer, gyroscope, and 
magnetometer) at 9 Hz Using an established secure data transfer, data collected by the TrueMotion app 
will be posted on a secure FTP server managed by TrueMotion. Our study team has been granted 
password access to pull these data onto PMACS server in one we ek increments. Data will not be tracked 
or analyzed in real time.  
 
V4; 10.4.17  BACTtrack (Breathalyzer Data)  We co llect time -stamped and geocoded data on breath alcohol 
content using the BACTrack App wh ich pairs with the FDA approved BACtrack Mobile Pro. Each 
participant will be instructed to down load the BACTrack View app from the Apple App store and register 
a uniquely assigned, de-identified study email (e.g. besafe24@waytosafety.org) to create a BACTrack 
account. Parti cipants will need to accept the BACTrack privacy policy and accept the option to share 
data with  BACtrack. No identifying HIPAA sensitive information will be entered into BACTrack app 
registratio n portal by study participants. BACtrack will provide the University of Pennsylvania a weekly 
down load of all data collected from designated user accounts (prefix besafe) via access to BACtracks 
secure Box fold er. These password protected CSV files will be downloaded from the BACtracks B ox 
folder by the UPenn research coordinator on a weekly basis and be inputted into Way to Health. This 
includes the de -identified user ID (e.g. besafe24), timestamped and geocoded guessed and actual B AC 
measurements. In addit ion to the BACTrack privacy policy outlines that personally identifiable 
infor mation (account names) will not be shared with outside parties, we will also obtain an NIH 
Certificate of Confidentiality that will  protect the University of Pennsylvania from di sclosing this 
potentially sen sitive information to any third parties.  
 
 
Radiation Exposure*  
Are research subjects receiving any radiation exposure (e.g. X -rays, CT, Fluoroscopy, DEXA, pQCT,  
FDG, Tc -99m, etc.) that they would not receive if they were not en rolled in this protocol?  
No 
 
Human Source Material*  
Does this research include collection or use of human source material (i.e., human blood, blood  
products, tissues or body fluids)?  
No 
 
CACTIS and CT Studies*  
Does the research involve Center for Advanced Computed Tomography Imaging Services (CACTIS)  
and CT studies that research subjects would not receive if they were not part of this protocol?  
No 
 
CAMRIS and MRI Studies*  
Does the research involve Center for Advanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectrosc opy 
(CAMRIS) and MRI studies that research subjects would not receive if they were not part of this 
protocol?  
No 
 
Cancer Related research not being conducted by an NCI cooperative group*  
Does this protocol involve cancer -related studies in any of the follo wing categories?  
No 
 
Medical Information Disclosure*  
Does the research proposal involve the use and disclosure of research subject's medical information for  
research purposes?  
No 
 
V4; 10.4.17  CTRC Resources*  
Does the research involve CTRC resources?  
No 
 
If the answer is YES, indicate which items is is provided with this submission:  
Use of UPHS services*  
Does your study require the use of University of Pennsylvania Health System (UPHS) services, tests or  
procedures*, whether considered routine care or strictly for resea rch purposes?  
No 
 
Primary Focus*  
Sociobehavioral (i.e. observational or interventional)  
 
Protocol Interventions  
x Sociobehavioral (i.e. cognitive or behavioral therapy)  
  Drug  
  Device - therapeutic  
  Device - diagnostic (assessing a device for sensitivity  or specificity in disease diagnosis)  
  Surgical  
  Diagnostic test/procedure (research -related diagnostic test or procedure)  
  Obtaining human tissue for basic research or biospecimen bank  
x Survey instrument  
  None of the above  
 
Sponsors  
 
Business Administrator  
Name: MOORE, ELIZABETH  
Dept / School / Div: 4302 - EG-Emergency Medicine  
Phone: 215-898-6409  
Fax: 215-898-0868  
Pager:  
Email: EMOORE@POBOX.UPENN.EDU  
 
Department budget code  
000 - 000 - 0 - 000000 - 0000 - 0000 – 0000  
 
Funding Sponsors  
Name: UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA  
Type: UPENN Internal  
 
Funding sponsors billing address  
If you have selected a commercial or industry sponsor, please prov ide the appropriate address and 
contact information for the Sponsor for the purposes of billing for I RB review fees (initial review, 
continuing review and convened modification fees apply here). If the Sponsor is not industry/ 
commercial, this information is not necessary to provide with your ap plication.  
V4; 10.4.17  University of Pennsylvania Transdisciplinary Awards Program in Translational Medicine and  
Therapeutics (TAPITMAT) Program in Incentive Based Translational Science (IBTS) 2016  
 
Funding sponsors gift  
Is this research being funded by a philanthropi c gift?  
No 
 
Regulatory Sponsor  
IND Sponsor  
None  
 
000 - 000 - 0 - 000000 - 0000 - 0000 – 0000  
 
Industry Sponsor  
None  
 
Project Funding*  
Is this project funded by or associated with a grant or contract?  
No 
 
Sponsor Funding  
Is this study funded by an industry sponsor?  
Status of contract  
 
Multi -Site Research  
Other Sites  
No other sites  
 
Protocol  
 
Abstract  
 
Nearly 88,000 people die annually from alcohol -related causes, making it the t hird leading cause of 
preventable death in the US.1 Excessive alcohol consumption  is a major r isk factor for injury, assault, 
and suicide. Framed messaging, whether through leveraging health gains or l oss aversion , has been 
found to be effective in motiva ting people to complete certain activities such as quitting smoking ,to 
purchas ing select items , and preventative behaviors like using sunscreen.  10,36,37  However, they may not 
be as effective in other areas such as food choice.14 The next logical step, which is the goal of this 
project, is to demonstrate the feasibility of a scalable in tervention using loss- or gain -framed messaging 
to reduce drinking and driving , compare the effectiveness of each type of messaging,  and to increase 
the use of a personal BAC monitor. Our long -term  objective is to secure federal funding for research that 
leverages insights from behavioral ec onomics supported by smartphone technology to reduce risky 
drinking, drinking and driving, and to increase self -monitoring and understanding of how alcohol affects 
us. This long -term objective is consistent with the rec ently released FY 2016 -20 NIH Strategic Vision that 
strives to deliver ef fective mobile health (mHealth) technologies for health promotion and disease 
V4; 10.4.17  prevention and monitori ng blood -alcohol levels in real time to prevent alcohol -related injury and 
disease . 
 
Objectives  
 
Overall objectives  
 
The overall objective of this project is to leverage smartphone -paired breathaly zers to implement cost -
effective and scalable behavioral interventions to reduce risky drinking  behaviors such as drinking and 
driving. Prospect theory proposes that messages framed in different ways can elicit different responses 
from individuals.36 Loss aversion refers to people's tendency to prefer avoiding  losses to acquiring 
equivalent gains: it's better to not lose $5 than to find $5 . People are more moti vated to avoid losing 
something than they are to win something. Studies have found that delivering messaging framed as  a 
loss are also effective in motivating certain behaviors. On the other hand, gain -framed messages have 
been shown to have a positive effect on preventative healthcare.37 By using automated rem ote 
monitoring, innovative loss aversion and gain -framed messaging  strategies incorporating insights from 
behavioral economics c ould be more easily implemented by delivering effective messaging prior to a 
risky behavior taking plac e. We hope that the use of loss aversive and/or gain -framed messaging will 
lead to individuals improving planning behavior  around drinking, especially in regards to drinking and 
driving. The objectiv e of this project is to demonstrate the feasi bility of a scalable intervention using 
loss- gain -framed messaging to reduce drinking and driving , compare the effectiveness of each type of 
messaging,  and to increase the use of BAC monitors as a way to plan s afer strategies when drinking . Our 
long -term objective is to secure federal funding for research that leverages insights from be havioral 
economics supported by smartphone technology to reduce risky drinking. This long -term objective is 
consistent with the recently released FY 2016 -20 NIH Strategic Vision that strives to deliver effective 
mobile health (mHea lth) technologies for health promotion and disease prevention and monitori ng 
blood -alcohol levels in real time to prevent alcohol -related injury and dise ase. 
 
Primary outcome variable(s)  
The primary outcome will be: Change in proportion of breathalyzer measurements submitted with self -
reported drinking ep isodes across groups . 
 
Secondary outcome variable(s)  
Secondary outcomes will be: 1) Change in frequency of BACtrack monitoring within each intervention 
group from baseline; 2) Drinking and driving episodes in which t heir BAC via self -report or BAC measure 
is expected to be positive; 3) Changes in accuracy of  BAC g uess vs actual BAC measure with continued 
use (Does a participant become more accurate overtime in predicting what their BAC will be prior to 
measuring). Lack of previous research prevents us from calculating the power to detect the  drinking and 
driving outcomes, which is why this pilot trial is critical for securing future funding.  
 
Background  
 
Nearly 88,000 people die annually from alcohol -related causes, making it the third leading cause of 
preventable death in the US.1 Excessive alcohol consumptio n is a major risk factor for injury, assault, and 
suicide.  In 2013, 10,076 people were killed in drinking and driving -related motor vehicle crashes, 
accounting for one -third of all driving -related deaths.5  Individ uals who engage in drinking and driving, 
compared to those do not, have similar cognitive abili ties, actually understand legal consequences 
V4; 10.4.17  better, but are poorer planners and more present -biased, heavily weighing immediate costs and 
benefits relative to future ones when making decisions.6 This su ggests that str ategies such as planning a 
designated driver and providing immediate reinforceme nt of the benefit of moderating alcohol 
consumption are particularly promising approaches to reduce  drinking and driving and binge drinking. 
Nationally, 17% of individuals aged 18 and older report binge drinking in the past month.7,8  Importantly, 
binge drinkers are 14 times more likely to report alcohol -impaired driving than non -binge drinkers.9  
Prospect theory proposes that messages framed in different ways ca n elicit different responses  from 
individuals.36 Loss aversion refers to people's tendency to prefer avoiding losses to acquiring equ ivalent 
gains: it's better to not lose $5 than to find $5. People are more moti vated to avoid losing something 
than they ar e to win something. Studies have found that delivering mess aging framed as a loss are also 
effective in motivating certain behaviors. On the other hand, gain -framed messages have been shown to 
have a positive effect on preventative healthcare.37 By using a utomated rem ote monitoring, innovative 
loss aversion  and gain -framed messaging  strategies incorporating insights from behavioral economics 
could be more easily implemented by delivering effective messaging prior to a risky behavior taking 
place. The effect iveness of this  messaging relies on being able to deliver a well -designed, motivati ng 
messaging prior to the risky behavior occurring and to have a n easy to measure behavior as an indi cator 
of success. As alcohol is metabolized more quickly than most drugs , making it difficult to monitor in the 
community and self -report of drinking and driving incidents can be underestimated these a re not 
desirable metrics to use alone. A recent trial demonstrated the feasibility of sending text  message 
videos of personaliz ed breathalyzer readings in non -dependent frequent drinkers.12 However, thi s 
process is difficult to scale up as study staff had to confirm breathalyzer readings manually in vide os sent 
by participants. In the last two years, breathalyzers that pair with s martphones have come on the 
market,17,19 allowing individuals to monitor and more easily track their own breath alcohol concentration 
(BrAC). Given the popularity of these devices,20,21 booming sales (an $816 million dolla r market),22 and 
the ability to share the data they generate in a secure and automated fashion, the devic es could be used 
to as a way to measure the effectiveness of interventions aimed at reducing risky drinking on a much 
broader scale.  
 
Real time knowledge of your level of intoxication could help educate th e population and lead to better 
planning behavior, reducing incidents of drinking and driving. One difficulty in using these devices to  this 
end is that users may not be inclined to measure their BAC when it matters most. The informati on 
provided by BAC monitors is only effective if it is being used. Combinin g these devices with innovative 
strategies that incorporate insights from behavioral economics to deliver  loss averse messaging prior to 
a risky behavior taking place could not only  increase self -monitori ng but could have a significant impact 
on planning behavior as well.23,24 Communication and framing are important in health care, how 
messages are framed can impact behavior.35 A nutritional study  on children found  educati onal messag es 
paired with loss framed messages, gain fram ed messaged, and a small incentive  positively impact 
behavior  change .34 To date, there are no publi shed studies testing the use of messaging to increase the 
use of smartphone -paired breathalyzers. Our cross -disciplinary research group at Penn recently 
obtained funding to conduct what will be t he first peer -reviewed study to validate the test accuracy of 
the leading smartphone -paired breathalyzers  on the market against a policy grade breathalyzer. The 
next logica l step, which is the goal of this  project, is to demonstrate the feasibility of a scalable 
intervention using messaging to increase the use of the monitors.       
 
References  
1. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Alcohol Facts and Statistic s.; 2015. 
www.niaaa.nih.gov .  
V4; 10.4.17  2. Easton, C.J., Swan, S., & Sinha R. Prevalence of family violence in c lients entering substance abuse 
treatment. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2000;18:23 -28.  
3. McNeill JA, S herwood GD, Starck PL, Thompson CJ. Assessing Clinical Outcomes: Patient Satisfaction 
with  Pain Management. Vol 16. 1998. doi:10.1016/S0885 -3924(98)00034 -7.  
4. White A, Hingson R. The B urden of Alcohol Use: Excessive Alcohol Consumption and Related 
Conseq uences Among C ollege Students.; 2014. http:// pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/arcr352/201 -
218.htm.  
5. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Traffic Safety Facts: Alcohol -Impaired Driving.; 2015 . 
http ://www -nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/  Pubs/812139.pdf.  
6. Sloan FA, Eldred L, Xu Y. The Behavioral Econo mics of Drunk Driving. J Health Econ. 2014;0:64 -81. 
doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2014.01.005.  
7. Su bstance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 2014 Nationa l Survey on Drug Use and 
Health (NSDUH). Table  2.41B  Alcohol Use in Lifetime, Past Year, and Past Month amo ng Persons Aged 18 
or Older, by Demographic Characteristics: Percentages, 2013 and 2014.; 2015. 
http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/  default/files/NSDUH -DetTabs2014/NSDUH -DetTabs2014.htm#tab2 -
41b.  
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. BRFSS Prevalence & Trends Data.; 2015. 
http://www.cdc.gov/brfss/brfssprevalence/  .  
9. Naimi TS, Brewer RD, Mokdad A, Denny  C, Serdula MK, Marks JS. Binge drinking among US adults. 
JAMA. 2003;289(1):70 -75.  
10. Matjasko, J . L. et al. Applying Behavioral Economics to Public Health Policy. Americ an Journal of 
Preventive Medicine , Vo lume 50 , Issue 5 , S13 - S19.  
11. Schneider, T.R.; Salovey, P.; Apanovitch, A.M.; Pizarr o, J.; McCarthy, D.; Zullo, J.; Rothman, A.J. The 
effects of message framing and ethnic targeting on mammography use among low  income women.  
Health Psychology, Vol 20(4), Jul 2001, 256 -266  
12. Toll, B.A.; O'Malley, S.S.; Katulak, N.A.; Wu, R.; Dubin, J.A.; Latimer, A.; Meandzija, B.; George, T.P.; 
Jatlow, P.; Cooney, J.L.; Salovey, P. Comparing gain - and loss -framed messages for smoking c essation 
with sustained -release bupropion: A randomized controlled trial. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, Vol 
21(4), Dec 2007, 534-544.  
13. Blose, J.E., Mack, R.W. , Pitts, R.E. The Influence of Message Framing on Hotel Guests Linen -Reuse 
Intentions. Cornell Hospitality Quarterly, Vol 56, Issue 2 , pp. 145 - 154  
14. List, J.A., Samek, A.S. The behavioralist as nutritionist: Leveraging behavioral economics to improve 
child food choice and consumption. Journal of Health Economics 39 (2015) 135146 .  
15. MacKillop J, Amlung  MT, Few LR, Ray LA, Sweet LH, Munafò MR. Delayed reward discou nting and 
addictive behavior: a meta -analysis. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2011;216(3):305 -321. 
doi:10.1007/s00213 -011-2229 -0.  
16. Petry NM, Martin B, Cooney JL, Kranz ler HR. Give them prizes and they will come: Co ntingency 
management for treatment of alcohol dependence. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2000;68(2):250 -257.  
doi:10.1037/0022 -006X.68.2.250.  
17. Alcohoot Smartphone Breathalyzer. Alcohoot. http:// alcohoot.com/produc ts/alcohoot -breathalyzer. 
Accessed December 24, 2015.  
18. BACtrack Mobile Pro. BACtrack. http://www.bactrack.com/products/bactrack -mobile -
breathalyzer?gclid=Cj0KEQiAzO6zBRC25Ju1idGJiZkBEiQAP3Sf6MVZKaULJEmXCJnBgqXvqrzfuiYe3hpIEsg
Mir1_QXUaAl_o8P8HAQ . Accessed December 24, 2015.  
19. Breathometer. Breathomter Breeze.  http://store.breatho meter.com/ products/breeze. Accessed 
December 24, 2015.  
V4; 10.4.17  20. Jolly J (New YT.  Turning Your Smartphone into a Breathalyzer. New York Times. 
http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/12/ 21/turning -your -smartphoneinto -a-breathalyzer/?smid=fb -
nytimes&smtyp=cur&_r=1. P ublished December 21, 2015.  
21. A smartphone breathalyzer. USA Today. 2015. 
http://www.usatoday.com/videos/ tech/2013/05/19/2216497/. Accessed January 4, 2016.  
22. Wintergreen  Research. Alcohol Breathalyzer And Drug Testing Equipment: Market Shares, Strat egies, 
and Fore casts, Worldwide, 2014 to 2020. 2016. 
http://wintergreenresearch.com/alcohol_breathalyzer_and_drug_testing .  
23. Loewenstein G, Brennan T, KG V. ASymmetric paternalism to improve health behaviors. JAMA. 2007;  
298 (20):2415 -2417. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.298.20.2415 .  
24. MS P, DA A, KG V. WEarable devices as facilitators, not drivers, of health behavior change. JAM A. 
2015; 313(5):459 -460. http:// dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2014.14781.  
25. NIH Unveils FY2016 -2020  Strategic Plan.; 2015. http://www.nih.gov/news -events/news -
releases/nih -unveils -fy2016 -2020 -strategic -plan .  
26. University of Pennsylvania. Faculty and Staff. http://www.med.upenn.edu/ccc/facu lty.html#curtis. 
Accessed March 15, 2016.  
27. CellControl. Technology to eliminate te xting, emailing and unauthorized phone use while  
driving. https://www.cellcontrol.com/company -fleet -safety -distracted -driving -prevention. Accessed  
March 15, 2016.  
28. Uber. Uber Events. 2016. https://www.uber.co m/events .  
29. Sobell LC, Brown J, Leo GI, Sobell MB. The reliability of the Alcohol Timeline Followback when 
administered by telephone and by computer. Drug Alcohol Depend. 1996;42(1):49 -54.  
30. MA C, HA B, KG V, MS P. ACcuracy of smartphone applications and wearable devices for tracking 
physical activity data. JAMA.  
2015;313(6):625 -626. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2014.17841 .  
31. South EC, Kondo MC, Cheney RA, Branas CC. Neighborhood Blight, St ress, and Health: A Walk ing Trial 
of Urban Greening and Ambulatory Heart Rate. Am J Public Health. 2015;105(5):909 -913. 
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2014.302526.  
32. Byrnes HF, Miller BA, Wiebe DJ, Morrison CN, Remer LG, Wiehe SE. Tracking Adolescents With  
Global Positioning System -Enabled Cell Phones to Study Contextual Exposures and Alcohol and  
Marijuana Use: A Pilot Study. J Adolesc Heal. 2015;57(2):245 -247. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/  
j.jadohealth.2015.04.013.  
33. Patel MS, Asch DA, Rosin R, et al. Framing Financial Incentives to Increase Physical Activity Among 
Overweight and Obese AdultsA Randomized, Controlled Trial  Financial Incentives for Physical Activity in 
Overweight and Obese Adults. Ann Intern Med.  2016;164(6):385 -394. http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/M15 -
1635 . 
34. List JA, Samek AS. The behavioralist as nutritionist: Leveraging behavioral economics to improve 
child food choice and consumption. Journal of health economics. 2015 Jan 31;39:135 -46. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2014.11.002   
35. Rothman AJ, Bartels RD, Wlaschin J, Salovey P. The strategic use of gain ‐and l oss‐framed messages to 
promote healthy behavior: How theory can inform practice. Journal of communication. 2006 Aug 
1;56(s1). 10.1111/j.1460 -2466.2006.00290.x  
36. Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Sc ience, 
211(4481), 453 -458. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.7455683  
37. Rothman, A. J., & Salovey, P. (1997). Shaping perceptions to motivate healthy behavior: The role of 
message framing. Psycholo gical Bulletin, 121(1), 3 -19. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033 -2909.121.1.3  
 
V4; 10.4.17  Study Design  
 
Phase*  
Not applicable  
 
Design  
 
Study population : We will recruit 60 participants for this trial. Participan ts must be (a) over 21 years of 
age, (b), Reports an average  of one heavy drinking day (men more th an five drinks, women more than 
four drinks) per week over the preceding 8 weeks. (d) a valid photo ID (e) willing and able to use an  
Uber or Lyft or septa as transportation home (f) drives four or more trips per week  (g) and owns an  
Apple iPhone or Android smartphone. Participants will be excluded if th ey (a) desire alcohol treatment 
now or received it in the past 6 months, (b) alcohol use disorder per DSM -V criteria and (c) non -English -
speaking, and (d) women who are  pregnant (e) individuals  who should not consume alcohol due to a 
medical condition.  
 
Procedures:  Participants will be pr ovided with a smartphone -paired breathalyzer (BACtrack) and a 
smartphone app that tracks (TrueMotion) drivi ng behavior. The drive tracking app has been modified for 
research purposes to run completely  in the background with special privacy protections for research 
participants with an approved NIH Certi ficate of Confidentiality.  
 
Data and information will be collected in 3 ways througho ut this study :  
1) The BACtrack device and app will require the participant to initiate use during all phases of the t rial. 
Researchers will instruct participants to use this device during the study when drinking to help inform 
them  of their level of impairment and ability to operate a vehicle . As part of th e BACtrack app each 
participant will be asked to guess what their BAC is prior to s ubmitting a sample.  Once a sample is 
submitted and processed the app will display both the actual BAC measure as well as th e participants 
guess. They will also be able to indicate of the sample was provided by them or someone else. Data 
collected using thi s app and device includes guessed BAC, actual BAC, person submitti ng the sample, 
GPS coordinates, and timestamps.  
 
2) The TrueMotion app will collect participant driv ing data without any additional initiation by the 
participant. Data collected from this a pp will include GPS coordinates, driving speed, trip length, time of 
drive, and cellphone use while driving. During a drive or after its completion participants will be able to 
indicate if they are a passenger or a driver.  
 
3) Self -report i n the form of a  TLFB will be collected once a week for all participants. Each wee k 
participants will be asked to complete a brief survey on the Way to Health site that asks them abou t 
drinking events, drinking and driving events, and BACtrack use for the p revious week   
 
Participants  will be given educ ational information on the risks of drinking and will be randomized, using 
block randomization, to a control or  one of two  intervention group s for 8 weeks. Par ticipants will be 
blinded as to their group assignment. Participants  in the intervention groups  will receive messag es on 
Thursday, Friday, and Saturday before 6:00 PM  and will be informed of this  random selection  in the 
consent . For the intervention groups , the context of these messages will differ across each gro up and 
participants will not be alerted to this difference. Specifically, the consent will state that rese archers will 
V4; 10.4.17  test the effect of different messaging strategies on the use of self -monitoring. Text messag es will be 
delivered 3 days a week —Thursday, Friday, and Saturday —through the Way  to Health platform and 
Twilio, a texting service that is contracted through W ay to Health.  
 
This program does not encourage drinking and dri ving, in fact it is designed in hopes t hat participants 
will be more informed about their level of intoxication and their ability to drive. Additionally, messages 
delivered following a posi tive BAC reading highlights the dangers and risks of a DUI. Attached to this 
protocol are examples of thes e messages.  
 
Measures and Data Analysis.  Participants will complete a baseline and end of study survey via Way to 
Health with standard measures of drinking and driving behavior, measures of pla nning ability, a delay 
discounting task, and demographic variables. Time -stamped and g eocoded drive trip data will be 
obtained from the TrueMotion app. Self -reported drinking behavior wi ll be recorded weekly using the 
timeline follow back method.  
 
The primary  outcome  measure will  be the change in proportion of breathalyzer measurements 
submitted with self -reported drinking ep isodes across groups.  
 
Secondary  outcomes will be: 1) Change in frequency of BACtrack monitoring  within  each  intervention 
group from baseline; 2) Drinking and driving episodes in which thei r BAC vi a self -report or BAC measure 
is expected to be positive; 3) Changes in accuracy of BAC guess vs ac tual BAC measure with continued 
use (Does a participant become more accurate overtime in predicting what their BAC will be prior to 
measuring). Lack o f previous research prevents us from calculating the power to detect outcome #3, 
which is why this pilot trial is critical for securing future funding.  
 
We will use logistic regression a s our primary analytic model to assess effectiveness, between and wit hin 
the interventions. Altho ugh longitudinal models such as generalized estimating equations might be 
considered in light of the repeated measures among  individual participants, logistic regression is 
preferred in this c ase because the primary outcome collapses most time points into a single 
dichotomous measure. Approa ch to missing data: As our main outcome in this trial is the proportion of 
measures conducted overtime,  missing data will be scored as not completing a measurement.  
 
Participants missing weekly self -report surveys will be reminded to complete a TLFB for any missing 
weeks regularly. If a participant fails to  complete 75% of the self -report surveys under baseline 
conditions they will not be allowed to cont inue to the intervention phase. If participants who have 
moved to the intervention phase fail to complet e self -report data during the intervention phase 
estimates on drinking behavior can be derived from their baseline data.  
 
Study duration  
Participants will be enrolled for eight weeks in th e study. The projected start date of the study is  
September 1, 2017 and the date of completion is March  1, 2018.  
 
Resources necessary for human research protection  
Describe research staff and justify that the staff are adequate in number and qualifications  to conduct 
the research. Describe how you will ensure that all staff assisting with the research are adequately 
informed about the protocol and their research related duties. Please allow adequate time for the 
V4; 10.4.17  researchers to conduct and complete the resea rch. Please confirm that there are adequate facilities for 
the research.  
The project manager will oversee all study operations and research as sistants will be trained in the 
protocol and present at the study sessions. All research staff will be full y trained in the pilot protocol 
and their role in the study, will be supervised by the PI, Dr. Mucio (Kit) Delgado, MD (Assistant  
Professor of Emergency Medicine), and will be trained to refer patients to the appropriate provider  
(emergency department, out patient doctor/clinic, social worker) as warranted.  
 
Characteristics of the Study Population  
 
Target population  
We will recruit 60 participants for this trial. Participants must be (a) ove r 21 years of age, (b), Reports an 
average of one heavy drinking day  (men more than five drinks, w omen more than four drinks) per week 
over the preceding 8 weeks. (d) a valid photo ID (e) willing and  able to use an Uber or Lyft or septa as 
transportation home (f) drives four or more trips per week (g) and owns an Apple iPh one or Android 
smartphone. Participants will be excluded if they (a) desire alc ohol treatment now or received it in the 
past 6 months, (b) alcohol use disorder per DSM -V criteria and (c) non -English -speaking, and  
(d) women who are pregnant (e) individuals who should not consume alcohol due to a medical  
condition.  
 
Subjects enrolled by Penn Researchers  
60 
 
Subjects enrolled by Collaborating Researchers  
0 
 
Accrual  
It is expected that the majority of subjects will volunteer to participate after responding to I RB approved 
advertisements on mass transit and broadcast email messages at institutions (including the  
University of Pennsylvania Health System) that offer such a servi ce; and by posting/distributing 
recruitment materials in community settings with public posting ar eas or other means of providing 
community access to materials (such as hospitals, town halls, public libraries, YMCAs, health fairs/ 
organizations). Research assistants will hand out fliers for the study  in approved public and private 
locations. Research assistants will recruit participants by handing out info rmation in crowded places, 
such as on the street or near bars. No one will be approached to parti cipate who appears intoxicated.  
 
Particip ants recruited at the hospital will be introduced  to the study by a dedicated member of the study 
team and provided with a link to the Way to Health website.  The academic associates or research 
assistant will introduce the study to eligible patients and provide them with an iPad to administer a brief 
eligibility screening ( if applicable). If eligible for the study participants will be  instructed to review and 
sign the full consent for  participation , if willing .  
 
And No recruitment will occur at public or private places without first obtaining permission.  
Recruitment materials may also be posted on social media and in n ewsletters and postings. Social media 
can include Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, Craigslist, and other outlets as they become available.  
V4; 10.4.17  Newsletters can include internal U Penn postings and new sletters sent by organizations who  agree to 
share our recruitment information.  
 
Key inclusion criteria  
Inclusion criteria will be: (a) over 21 years of age, (b), Reports an av erage of one heavy drinking day 
(men more than five drinks, women more than four drinks) per week over the preceding 8 weeks. (d) a 
valid photo ID (e) willing and able to use an Uber or Lyft or septa as tran sportation home (f) drives four 
or more trips per week (g) and owns an Apple iPho ne or Android s martphone. Participants will be 
excluded if they (a) desire alcohol treatment now or received it in the  past 6 months, (b) severe alcohol  
use disorder  (AUD)  per DSM -V criteria (6 or more AUD symptoms reported) and (c) non -English -speaking, 
and (d) women who are pregnant (e) individuals who should not consume alcohol due to a medical 
condition such as liver disease, cance r, and seizure disorders. Participants will be asked to answer yes if 
they have  any disorder that their doctor has suggested that they should not drink alcohol. If they are 
unsure or s ay I dont know we will ask them to speak with their doctor prior to participation.  
 
Key exclusion criteria  
Exclusion criteria will be (a) desire alcohol treatment now or receiv ed it in the past 6 m onths, (b) severe 
alcohol use disorder per DSM -V criteria (6 or more AUD symptoms reported)  and (c) non -English -
speaking, and (d) women who are pregnant (e) individuals who should not consume alcohol due to a 
medical condition.  
 
Vulnerable Populations  
   Children Form  
   Pregnant women (if the study procedures may affect the condition of the pregnant woman or  
   fetus) Form  
   Fetuses and/or Neonates Form  
   Prisoners Form  
   Other  
x None of the above populations are included in the research study  
 
Populations vulnerable to undue influence or coercion  
This study may enroll employees or students of Penn. These participants  will not be recruited directly or 
incentivized differently than other subjects in the study. During inf ormed consent study staff w ill review 
the voluntary nature of their participation and reminded that they  are able to leave the study at any 
time during the study procedures.  
 
Subject recruitment  
 
Subjects for this study will be recruited primarily from individ uals who present themse lves for evaluation 
for study inclusion by calling our research facility. It is expecte d that the majority of subjects will 
volunteer to participate after responding to IRB -approved adve rtisements on mass transit; and 
broadcast email messages at institutio ns (including the University of P ennsylvania Health System) that 
offer such a service; and by posting/distributing recruitment mater ials in community settings with public 
posting areas or other means of providing community access t o materials (such as hosp itals, town halls, 
public libraries, YMCAs, health fairs/organizations). Research assistants will hand out fliers for the study 
V4; 10.4.17  in approved public and private locations. We will obtain pe rmission before distributing or posting the 
approved recruitment mate rials.  
 
For participants recruited at the hospital, those who are eligible will be introduced  to the study by a 
dedicated member of the study team and provided with a link to the Way to Health website.  The 
academic associates or research assistant will introduce the study to eligible patients and provide them 
with an iPad to administer a brief eligibility screening ( if applicable). If eligible for the study participants 
will be  instructed to review and s ign the full consent for  participation , if willing . They will then schedule 
an appointment to review the enrollment procedures over the phone with a study team member.  This 
can also be done in person if the participant requests. If enrollment is completed in person, the 
participant will be provided  their BACtrack breathalyzer and Clincard.  
 
Will the recruitment plan propose to use any Penn media services (communications, marketing, etc.) for 
outreach via social media avenues (examples include: Facebook, Twi tter, blogging, texting, etc.) or does 
the study team plan to directly use social media to recruit for the research?  
Yes 
 
Please identify which method(s) of social media you will utilize, the content of the text to be used, and 
the method(s) for posting th is information (i.e., using Penn supported communication services). When 
proposing the text to utilize, please be aware of any social media limitations (i.e., number of characters 
allowed in a tweet) and any appropriate confidentiality practices necessary to be compliant with posting 
research recruitment text.*  
We plan to use Facebook and Twitter to post recruitment messages. Thes e messages are severely 
limited in terms of the length they can be. Our message will be "Help Upenn researchers reduce drinking 
and driving while earning money" and will include a link to the WTH stud y portal that will contain more 
information such as that listed on our recruitment flyer. We also plan to post our recruitment flyer on  
Craigslist.  
 
Study Procedures  
 
Suicidal Ideation and Behavior  
Does this research qualify as a clinical investigation that will utilize a test article (ie - drug or biological)  
which may carry a potential for central nervous system (CNS) effect(s)?  
No 
 
Procedures  
 
Enrollment:  Potential participants will be directed to the Way to Heal th platform. A participant will 
create an account and review an Eligibility screening consent. This brief consent will grant us access to 
administer a brief eligibility survey. We have decided to use this proce ss to reduce the time needed to 
read the full consent for those who may not qualify. Once eligibility has  been determined eligible 
participants will be instructed to review and sign the full consent for p articipation. Following this, a 
member of the research team will contact the participant to answer any questions and to mail out the  
BACtrack device. Participants will also be asked to complete the intake  survey to continue in the trial.  
The trial timeline will not begin until the intake has been completed and  all devices and apps have been 
received and activated.  
V4; 10.4.17   
Randomization:  Once participants have received  and activated their devices they will be pla ced into 
the baseline phase of the trial for 4 weeks. Following baseline, if the  participants have completed 75% of 
their self -report measures they w ill be randomized to one of t hree  groups : a) control , b) loss-framed 
messaging group, or c) gain -framed mes saging group .  
 
Baseline Measurement:  During the baseline period, the TrueMotion app will passively track driving 
behavior and participants. Pa rticipants will not receive any information on whether to use their 
BACtrack device. At the end of the baseline meas urement period participants will complete an end of 
Baseline survey via way to health.   
 
Intervention Period : After four weeks , participants will be randomized into one of three  arms : control , 
loss-framed messaging group, or gain -framed messaging group .  
 
Weekly Surveys:  Each week, under both phases, participant will be prompted to complete a self -report 
survey and TLFB.  
 
 
Deception  
Does your project use deception?  
No 
 
Analysis Plan  
 
Measures and Data Analysis.  Participants will complete a baseline, end  of baseline period, and end of 
study survey via Way to Health with standard measures of drinking and driving behavior, measures of 
planning ability, a delay discounting task, and demographic variables. Time -stamped and geocoded drive 
trip data will be obt ained from the TrueMotion app. Self -reported drinking behavior will be recorded 
weekly using the timeline follow back method.  
 
Primary outcome : The primary outcome measure will be the change in proportion of breathalyzer 
measurements submitted with self -reported drinking episodes across groups.  
Secondary outcome  measures include: 1) Change in frequency of BACtrack monitoring within each 
intervention group from baseline; 2) Drinking and driving episodes in which their BAC via self -report or 
BAC measure is ex pected to be positive; 3) Changes in accuracy of BAC guess vs actual BAC measure 
with continued use (Does a participant become more accurate overtime in predicting what their BAC will 
be prior to measuring). Lack of previous research prevents us from calcu lating the power to detect the 
drinking and driving outcomes, which is why this pilot trial is critical for securing future funding.  
To measure the primary outcome, we will employ a logistic regression using the participants baseline as 
a predictor and the  intervention vs. control and vs each other as the primary predictors. Although 
longitudinal models such as generalized estimating equations might be considered in light of the 
repeated measures among individual participants, logistic regression is preferr ed in this case because 
the primary outcome collapses most time points into a single dichotomous measure.  
V4; 10.4.17   
Approach to missing data:  As our main outcome in this trial is the proportion of measures conducted 
overtime, missing data will be scored a s not comp leting a measurement. Participants missing weekly 
self-report surveys will be reminded to complete a TLFB for any missing weeks regularly. If a participant 
fails to complete 75% of the self -report surveys unde r baseline conditions they will not be allowed to 
continue to the intervention phase. If participants who have moved to the intervention phase fail to 
complete self -report data during t he intervention phase estimates on drinking behavior can be derived 
from their baseline data.  
 
Data confidentiality  
x Paper -based records will be kept in a secure location and only be accessible to personnel involved  
   in the study.  
x Computer -based files will only be made available to personnel involved in the study through the  
   use of access privileges and passwords.  
   Prior to access to any study -related information, personnel will be required to sign statements  
   agreeing to protect the security and confidentiality of identifiable information.  
x Wherever feasible, identifiers will be removed from study -related inf ormation.  
x A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained, because the research could place the subject at  
   risk of criminal or civil liability or cause damage to the subject's financial standing,  
   employability, or liability.  
   A waiver of docume ntation of consent is being requested, because the only link between the  
   subject and the study would be the consent document and the primary risk is a breach of  
   confidentiality. (This is not an option for FDA -regulated research.)  
x Precautions are in  place to ensure the data is secure by using passwords and encryption, because  
   the research involves web -based surveys.  
x Audio and/or video recordings will be transcribed and then destroyed to eliminate audible  
   identification of subjects.  
 
Subject Confidentiality  
All data and records generated during this study will be kept confidential in accordance with  
Institutional policies on subject privacy and the Investigator and other s ite personnel will not use such 
data and records for any purpose other t han conducting the study. The safeguards described above will 
be implemented to ensure subject confidentiality. No identifiable data will be used for future studies 
without first obtaining IRB approval. The investigator will obtain a data use agre ement bet ween provider 
(the PI) and any recipient researchers (including others at  CHOP) before sharing a limited dataset (dates 
and zip codes). We will be collecting licenses through the  secure Way to Health portal to verify that all 
participants are licensed to d rive. We will destroy these im ages when the participant study participation 
is complete, no more than 1 week after their final survey completion  
 
Sensitive Research Information*  
Does this research involve collection of sensitive information about the subjects that should be excluded  
from the electronic medical record?  
No 
 
Subject Privacy  
V4; 10.4.17  Privacy refers to the person's desire to control access of others to themselves. Privacy concerns people, 
whereas confidentiality concerns data. Describe the strategie s to protect privacy giving consideration to 
the following: The degree to which privacy can be expected in the proposed research and the safeguards 
that will be put into place to respect those boundaries. The methods used to identify and contact 
potential participants. The settings in which an individual will be interacting with an investigator. The 
privacy guidelines developed by relevant professions, professional associations and scholarly disciplines 
(e.g., psychiatry, genetic counseling, oral history, a nthropology, psychology).  
Privacy is of the utmost concern for us. In this trial every participant  will be assigned a participant 
number, this will link their study related data. We will not release any  names or information to anyone 
outside of this study.  Participants will complete all surveys online and wil l not be required to attend any 
in person sessions. We will allow for participants to be placed on te ams with unknown others if they 
chose and will never release their names to team members. We will in clude all risks associated with 
participating such as the potential risk of personal information being o btained in the consent for each 
participant to consider.  
 
Data Disclosure  
Will the data be disclosed to anyone who is not listed under Personnel?  
No. Par ticipant BrAC measurements and survey responses from par ticipants will not be linked to 
participant identifying information, and data will be available only fo r study personnel. However, all 
potential subjects will be informed that the information they pro vide will be held in confidence to the  
extent that the law allows, but that the exception to this confidentiality is any disclosure of potential for 
immediate harm of themselves or others, such as active suicidal or homicidal ideation or child abuse.  
The p articipants will be notified prior to participation that if any of these issues are raised, the 
researchers will take whatever steps are necessary to protect the subjec t or others, including bringing 
risk of harm to the attention of the proper authorities.  As an emer gency physician, Dr. Delgado is 
experienced with assessing this type of risk and committing patient s or notifying child protective 
services or law enforcement when necessary.  
 
Data Protection*  
x Name  
x Street address, city, county, precinct, zip  code, and equivalent geocodes  
   All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual and all ages over 89  
x Telephone and fax number  
x Electronic mail addresses  
x Social security numbers  
   Medical record numbers  
   Health plan  ID numbers  
   Account numbers  
   Certificate/license numbers  
   Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers  
x Device identifiers/serial numbers  
   Web addresses (URLs)  
   Internet IP addresses  
   Biometric identifiers, incl. finger and voice prints  
   Full face photographic images and any comparable images  
   Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code  
   None  
V4; 10.4.17   
Does your research request both a waiver of HIPAA authorization for collection of patient informat ion 
and involve providing Protected Health Information ("PHI") that is classified as a "limited data set"  
(city/town/state/zip code, dates except year, ages less than 90 or agg regate report for over 90) to a 
recipient outside of the University of Pennsylva nia covered entity?  
No 
 
Tissue Specimens Obtained as Part of Research*  
Are Tissue Specimens being obtained for research?  
No 
 
Tissue Specimens - Collected during regular care*  
Will tissue specimens be collected during regulator clinical care (for treatment or diagnosis)?  
No 
 
Tissue Specimens - otherwise discarded*  
Would specimens otherwise be discarded?  
No 
 
Tissue Specimens - publicly available*  
Will tissue specimens be publicly available?  
No 
 
Tissue Specimens - Collected as part of research protocol*  
Will t issue specimens be collected as part of the research protocol?  
No 
 
Tissue Specimens - Banking of blood, tissue etc. for future use*  
Does research involve banking of blood, tissue, etc. for future use?  
No 
 
Genetic testing  
If genetic testing is involved, describe the nature of the tests, including if the testing is predicative or  
exploratory in nature. If predictive, please describe plan for disclosing results to subjects and provision  
of genetic counseling. Describe how subject confidentiality will be pro tected Note: If no genetic testing  
is to be obtained, write: "Not applicable."  
Not applicable  
 
Consent  
 
1. Consent Process  
 
Overview  
Participant consent will be completed via the Way to Health Platform. Par ticipants will be instructed to 
create a username and password through the WTH platform and then review and sign a brief consent  
allowing us to assess eligibility. Following this they will be scre ened with an eligibility survey presented 
V4; 10.4.17  on the WTH platform. Once eligibility has been determined eligible p articipants will be instructed to 
review and sign the full consent for participation . Once complete they will be asked to complete the 
intake survey immediately. Que stions will cover demographics, opinions, perceptions and experiences 
with alcohol consumpt ion and d riving. They will then continue on with their trial participation.  
 
If they are not eligible, the participant  will be informed that they are ineligible for the current study and 
will not complete any study procedures.  
 
A member  of the study team  will then contact the participant to schedule an in person meeting or a 
phone meeting.  If the participant completed consent in the hospital, they will move forward with the 
enrollment procedures or set up a time with a research team member to complete enr ollment 
procedures at a later date and time over the phone . During this meeting the study team will answer any 
questions pertaining to the con sent or the study. Participants will receive an email or a text message 
reminder regarding incomplete steps in WTH  depending on their preference selection for 
communication. A member of the study  team will contact all enrolled participants to ensure 
understanding of study procedures. Ele ctronic signatures will be obtained.  
 
Children and Adolescents  
not applicable  
 
Adult Subjects Not Competent to Give Consent  
Participants will be excluded from the study if they are not competent to consent to the study.  
 
2. Waiver of Consent  
 
Waiver or Alteration of Informed Consent*  
Waiver of written documentation of informed consent: the only rec ord linking the subject and the 
research would be the consent document and the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from 
a breach of confidentiality.  
 
Minimal Risk*  
Impact on Subject Rights and Welfare*  
Waiver Essential to Research*  
Additional Information to Subjects  
 
Written Statement of Research*  
Yes 
 
Risk / Benefit  
 
Potential Study Risks  
This is a minimal risk, behavioral intervention study. Physical risk is no more than the risks already 
caused by risky driving behavior.  Participants will not have to interac t with the TrueMotion app after 
installation and will be instructed to only use the BACtrack device in a safe setting. There are no 
expected serious adverse events related to the intervention or participat ion in this s tudy. This program 
does not encourage drinking and driving, in fact , it is designed in hopes that participants will be more  
V4; 10.4.17  informed about their level of intoxication and their ability to drive. A dditionally, messages delivered 
following a positive BAC rea ding highlights the dangers and risks of a  DUI. Attached to this protocol are 
examples of these messages.  
 
There is some risk that subjects will be id entified as participants in the study and that the confidential 
information provided regarding psychi atric and substance use history will be inadvertently disclosed 
without the subjects permission. To help protect against this we will be using assigned participant IDs 
that will be tied to the data derived in thi s trial. These IDs will be used by our partners (TrueMotion and 
BACtrack) as the key identifier and data  labeling. We will not disclose participants names as part of this 
trial.  
 
Rating Scales and Questionnaires.  To avoid breach of confidentiality, subjects' names will appear only 
on a consent form, a  telephone screening form and a "key" form kept in a locked cabinet. All forms that 
contain identifying information will be kept double locked (i.e., in a locked cabinet, in a locked room) to 
maintain their secu rity. All study data forms will contain only the subject's unique study identification 
number, using a  reference system maintained by the study staff. Completed study forms will be kept in a 
locked cabinet, the key to which will be  available only to the PI and staff working on this study. Subject 
visits will be scheduled and no information about the subject will be provided to anyone (except in 
emergencies as defined above) in person or by telephone. All paper research records will be stored in 
locked cabinets and only the investigators and only IRB a pproved study will have access to those 
records.  
 
Potential Study Benefits  
All participants will benefit by receiving a text message to promote t he use of a BAC monitor to help 
plan less risky driving incidents. Participants are contributing to preparat ion of a larger study, which in 
turn may have benefits to society in general. Understanding the pote ntial of using breathalyzers to 
reduce risky drinking has the potential to benefit society in general.  
 
Alternatives to Participation (optional)  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
All source documents will be identified by study identification (ID)  number, and the key to that ID 
number will be kept in a locked file cabinet. All personally identifiable i nformation also will be kept 
separately in a locked file cabine t. No results will be reported in a pers onally identifiable manner. All 
tracking system data and research database information will be passwor d-protected with several levels 
of protection: first, a password will be required to access the computer of  the us er who has access to 
the database; second, a password will be required to access the database. The principal investigator, Dr.  
Delgado, and the project manager, Jessie Hemmons , will monitor and maintain confidentiality of data.  
 
Risk / Benefit Assessment  
In general the benefits outweigh the risks in this study. Participants will  receive information on alcohol 
consumption and health. Participants are also contributing to preparation o f a larger study, which in 
turn may have benefits to society in general. A lthough there are some risks in volved in participating in 
this study, as mentioned above, these can be minimized to ensure that th e potential benefits exceed the 
potential risks, so that the risk/benefit ratio is favorable.  