 Eprost ID: 20170552  
NCT Number: NCT0327033 2 
Version Date: 04 Augus t 2021 
 
 
Effect of inhaled albuterol on pulmonary hemodynamics in patients 
with group  1 pulmonary  arterial  hypertension  on oral pulmonary  
vasodilator  therapy:  A proof  of concept  study  
Adam  Wanner1,  Barry  Hurwitz2, David  De la Zerda1,  Eliana  S Mendes1 
1Division of Pulmonary,  Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine,  University  
of Miami Miller  School  of Medicine  2 Department  of Psychology  & Department  of Biomedical  Engineering,  
University  of Miami  
 
Abstract  
Inhaled J32-adrenergic agonists  have  been shown  to reduce pulmonary  
vascular resistance (PVR) in hypoxic COPD patients, and right ventricular  
systolic pressure in normoxic COPD patients with mild pulmonary  
hypertension (PH). Furthermore, we have recently found that inhaled albuterol  lowers  PVR  as assessed  by echocardiography  in healthy  smokers 
and non -smokers (Chest 2017; 151: 650- 657). While the pulmonary  
vascular  effects of  J32-adrenergic agonists  could be  indirectly related to the 
drug's bronchodilator action in patients  with COPD, the demonstrated J32- 
adrenergic agonist induced pulmonary vasodilation in healthy subjects  
strongly suggests a direct pulmonary vasodilatory effect. This raises the 
possibility  that inhaled J32-adrenergic agonists could cause pulmonary  
vasodilation in patients with pulmonary hypertension not associated with  
heart disease, chronic lung disease or thromboembolic disease (WHO  
group 1 PAH). In the present proof of concept proposal, we will use  
echocardiography to assess the acute pulmonary hemodynamic  effect of  
albuterol  in 6 patients  with group 1 PAH  documented  by right heart  
catheterization  (mean  pulmonary  arterial  pressure  >25mmHg,  PVR  > 3 
wood/u and pulmonary  wedge pressure  <15).  The patients  
will be on regular oral pulmonary vasodilator therapy. Mean pulmonary  
arterial pressure (MPAP) and cardiac output will be measured before and 
serially for 2 hours after the administration of either 270µg albuterol or  
placebo by inhalation using a spacer. PVR will be calculated by using an 
 estimate of left atrial pressure. This pilot study, if showing that albuterol  
lowers  MPAP  and PVR significantly,  could form the basis  for a phase 2 trial 
in a larger  cohort  of patients  with group 1 PAH in whom  a long acting  J32- 
adrenergic  agonist  is administered as add-on to commonly  used  oral 
pulmonary  vasodilators.  
  
 
Background  
 
While the treatment strategies for PAH are undergoing a paradigm shift  
away  from vasoactive  drugs  towards  tackling  the structural  remodeling of 
the pulmonary  vasculature,  vasodilators  still maintain  a central  position in 
the currently available treatment modalities. Often, drugs that target  
different pathways leading to pulmonary vasodilation are administered 
concomitantly for better effect, especially in patients with group 1 PAH.  
These drugs include orally administered calcium channel blockers,  
endothelin receptor  blockers  and phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors.  J32- 
adrenergic  agonists  are potent  vasodilators  and could be administered by 
inhalation as add- ons to currently used oral vasodilators in patients with 
group 1 PAH. Thus far, this possibility has not been explored in this  
population.  
 
We have previously  reported that the short acting J32-adrenergic agonist  
albuterol, administered by inhalation, markedly and significantly reduced 
PVR in lung- and heart healthy current smokers and never smokers (1).  
Other studies involving inhaled J32- adrene rgic agonists were carried out in 
patients with COPD without or with PAH (group 3). Early studies have 
shown that short -acting  J32-adrenergic agonists  can reduce PVR in hypoxic  
COPD patients with PAH (2,3). More recently, Cazzola et al (4) assessed 
two long -acting  J32-adrenergic agents (formoterol  and salmeterol) in COPD  
patients,  with or without  mild pulmonary  hypertension.  Following 
administration of these  agents,  they observed  a reduction in 
echocardiographic  systolic  pulmonary  arterial  pressure that lasted less than 
180 min, with a trough minimizing between 15 min and 60 min. It is difficult  
to separate direct  from indirect  vasodilation  in these  studies,  i.e. did the J32- 
adrenergic agonists have a direct effect on the pulmonary circulation or an  
indirect effect by improving airway function. This caveat also applies to 
another investigation of albuterol's action in patients with PAH in whom the  
drug caused both bronchodilat ion and pulmonary  vasodilation  at the time of 
right heart catheterization to assess responses to vasodilators, with the 
possibility  that a change in ventilation/perfusion relationship reversed  
hypoxic  vasoconstriction  thereby  lowering pulmonary arterial  pressure (5). 
 
The purpose of the present pilot study is to test the hypothesis that in  
patients  with group 1 PAH  who are on regular oral pulmonary  vasodilator  
 therapy, inhaled albuterol causes transient pulmonary vasodilation. If the 
results support this premise, they could serve as the basis for a phase 2  
trial investigating the potential for using inhaled long- acting 2- adrenergic  
agonists  as add-on therapy  in group 1 PAH.  
 
 
'Research  Plan  
 
Test subjects  
 
 Ten patients  (males  and females)  over the age of 18 years  with group 1 PAH 
will be enrolled on the study . Participants will be  recruited from the 
University of Miami Pulmonary Hypertension Clinic under the direction of  
Dr. David  De la Zerda,  a co-investigator.  
 
Inclusion criteria  
 
- A MPAP >25mmHg,  PVR>3  wood/units  and pulmonary  arterial  
wedge pressure 15mmHg, as documented by right heart  
catheterization within  the last 3 years  
- Regular  use of oral pulmonary  vasodilators  
 
 
Exclusion  criteria  
 
- Presence of chronic  respiratory  disease (as documented by prior lung 
imaging and pulmonary function tests), cardiovascular disease (as  
documented  by prior echocardiography and/or  left heart  
catheterization), thromboembolic PAH (as documented by pulmonary  
angiography)  
- women  of childbearing potential  who do not use accepted  birth- 
control  measures  
- pregnant  and breast -feeding women (vide infra)  
- respiratory  infection  within 4  weeks  of testing  
- A systemic systolic arterial  BP> 150 and/or diastolic  arterial  BP>100  
on the experiment  day 
- A resting  02 saturation of< 90% 
- Current  smoking  
- BMI >35 kg/m2 and/or a diagnosis  of obstructive  sleep apnea  
- Use of inhaled or intravenous  pulmonary  vasodilators  
  
 
 
Targeted  outcomes  
 
Change in MPAP, PVR after inhalation of 270µg albuterol administered 
with a spacer.  These parameters,  measured/calculated by 
echocardiography, will be obtained before and at 15, 30, 60 and 120 after  
albuterol or placebo  inhalation.  At each  measurement  point, systemic blood 
pressure, 02 saturation by pulse oximetry and spirometry will also be  
measured (the latter to rule out drug induced changes in airway function  
that could indirectly influence pulmonary hemodynamics). We previously  
have observed that the albuterol response wanes by 60 min in healthy  
subjects (1). Each participant will serve as his/her own control and the two  
treatments  will be administered  on diff erent experiment  days in random 
order. Participants and investigators will be blinded (HFA albuterol and 
matching placebo are available to the investigators).  
 
Measurements  
 
Echocardiography  and calculation of PVR:  
 
Studies  will be performed  using  the SONOS  5500 ultrasound system  
(Philips  Medical  Systems)  as previously  used in our laboratory  (1). 
Measurements will start following 15 min of supine rest. The imaging will  
proceed according to the following sequence at each time point (baseline 
and 15, 30, 60, and 120min post -drug administration). Images will be 
acquired for 1- 2 breaths or at least 10 cardiac cycles in order to obtain 3 
cycles for quantification.  All measure ments are made offline. Blood 
pressure and heart rate will be measured on the final image of each time  
point  measurement  using an automated monitor (Dinamap,  model 
1846XT). Traditionally, the maximum velocity of the tricuspid regurgitation 
(TRvmax;  cm/sec) has been used  to calculate pulmonary  vascular  resistance  
(PVR).  However,  this method is not feasible when TR is absent  or trivial.  
Therefore, we will also obtain the pulmonary artery acceleration time  
(PAAT), which has been shown to correlate highly with invasively  
measurement of mean pulmonary artery pressure (6). The PAAT will be used as an alternative to the TR method because it does not rely on the  
presence of an anatomic defect or valvular regurgitation and is highly  
correlated  (r = -.96) with TRvmax  (7). TRvmax  will be defined as the maximal  
 velocity  of the TR  jet measured using  continuous -wave Doppler  in the 4- 
chamber  view. Estimated  peak  systolic pulmonary  artery pressure (PSPAP)  
will be calculated  using  the modified  Bernoulli equation:  4 x TRvmax2  + 
10mmHg (to account  for right  atrial  pressure)  (8). The  use of 10mmHg as 
an estimate of right  atrial  pressure has been shown  to yield similar  
correlates  with catheter -based estimates  of right ventricular  systolic  
pressure  (RVSP)  (9). The PAATwill  be measured using the pulse- wave  
Doppler  profile in the parasternal  short axis view. PAAT  (msec) will be  
defined as the interval between the onset of systolic  pulmonary  arterial  flow 
and peak  flow velocity.  The MPAPPAAT  (mm Hg) will be computed  by: 
79 - (PAAT x 0.45) (9). The right ventricular ejection time (RVET) will also  
be obtained and defined as the interval  between the onset  of RV ejection  to 
the point of systolic pulmonary arterial flow cessation. Using pulse- wave  
Doppler in the 5- chamber view, measures of cardiac function will include  
stroke volume (SV), wherein SV = 3.14 x (LVOT diameter/2)2 x VTI. The  
inter-beat interval is used to derive heart rate (HR) and cardiac output (CO)  
is the product of SV and HR.  Left atrial pressure (LAP) is estimated using 
Doppler  echocardiography (1 O); thus,  LAP (mm Hg) is computed from the  
ratio of the E and e' waves of Doppler trans -mitral flow and mitral annulus  
tissue  Doppler  imaging as follows:  LAP = 1.24 x  E/e' +2. 
 
Pulmonary  vascular  resistance (PVR) will be estimated in two ways  based 
on the estimation of pulmonary  artery  pressure  and LAP: a) as derived from 
the TR method,  PSPAP will be used to estimate  mean  pulmonary  artery  
pressure (MPAPrR)  as follows:  MPAPrR  = 0.6 x PSPAP +2 (11). Then, the  
PVRrR  is the ratio of (MPAPrR  - LAP)  and CO; and b) as derived  from the - 
PAAT method, the PVRPAAT is the ratio of (MPAPPAAT - LAP) and CO.  All 
values  used for analysis  will be computed from the average  of three cardiac  
cycles per time point.  
 
Pulmonary  function  
 
Spirometry  will be done to rule out airflow  obstruction (FEV1/FVC  <0.7).  In 
the tracing with the highest  FVC of three forced vital capacity,  FEV1,  FVC, 
FEV1/FVC, IC, MMEF and peak flow will be analyzed.  Predicted normal  
values  will be taken  from Harkinson NHANES  Ill. The results  will be 
expressed in absolute values  and percent  of predicted.  
  
Statistical  analysis  
 
The study is a repeated- measures design with medication treatment vs.  
placebo  and time post -treatment (pre- inhalation baseline,  15, 30, 60,  
120min) as fixed  within  subject  effects.  The resulting factorial  combinations  
will permit ANCOVA estimation of the main effects of treatment and time,  
as well as the 2 -way interaction (treatment by time). In addition, ANCOVA  
analyses will be performed to examine treatment effects on the different  
outcomes.  Significance will be  accep ted at p<0.05.  
 
Procedures  
 
There will be 3 study assessment visits per participant, including the 
screening visit to confirm  study  eligibility.  Visits  2 and 3 will commence  about  
9am. The subjects will be asked to keep taking their usual oral pulmonary  
vasodilator  on the experiment  days.  
 
Visit 1 
On this screening visit, after the subjects  have signed an informed consent  
and HIPAA forms, a medical history will be obtained and then a physical  
examination  will be administered.  If they meet  screening  entr-y c riteria,  they 
will undergo spirometry and the determination of 02 saturation, blood 
pressure and heart rate. If the subjects still meet entry criteria, they will be  
invited  to return for visit 2. 
 
Visit 2 and Visit 3 
Echocardiographic measurements will be made before and at 15, 30, 60,  
and 120 min after active  drug or placebo inhalation.  The choice of drug vs. 
placebo on each visit will be random, and a double blind procedure will be 
implemented such that the participants and investigators will not be  
informed which  study  agent  will be used  on these  visits.  The inhaler  used  
for visit 3 will be the alternate of the one that the subject is randomized to  
for visit 2. 
  
 
 
 
Safety  
 
There is  minimal  risk: 
 
Echocardiography  
No side effects  have been reported.  
 
Pulmonary  function  tests  
There is little risk from spirometry.  Some people may have some chest  
soreness or lightheadedness from the hard blowing.  The chest soreness  
usually  is short -lived,  but can be treated with non-prescription  pain relievers.  
 
Inhaled Albuterol  
This drug is approved for clinical  use in obstructive  lung disease  in the US, 
and will be administered at a clinically  recommended  dose. Possible 
serious side effects include chest and muscular pain, tremor, headache,  
tachycardia, throat irritation, nauseas and vomiting. Although a possible 
interaction between inhaled albuterol and oral pulmonary vasodilators has  
not been systematically evaluated to  our knowledge, we believe that it is  
safe to add a f32 -adrenergic agonist to oral vasodilators based on clinical  
experience in patients  with co-existing  PAH  and obstructive  lung disease.  
 
Study  duration  
 
The total duration of the study will be 6 months from the time of IRS  
approval.  We estimate  a total of 30 participant visits (3 visits each for  
1Qe enrolled participants  plus 4 visits  for screen  failures)  or approximately  
one visit per week.  Screen failures  should be rare given the selection  
criteria  and the extensive  clinical data available prior to considering a 
patient  for screening.  
 
Recruitment  Process  
 
Potential candidates will be identified by the Pl and Co- Pl in the Pulmonary  
Hypertension(PH) clinic at the UHealth. If a patient with PH is eligible for  
the study  and agrees  to participate  in the study,  the Pl or the Sub-Pl will 
 notify  the study  coordinator.  The Research Team  and the Pl will present  
the study to the patient. Eligible patients will be asked to read,  
comprehend,  and sign an informed consent  form.  This procedure will be 
performed according to the local regulatory authorities. Potential  
participants will be given the choice to take a copy of Consent Form to  
review  at home and or discuss with his/her PCP.  
 
No study procedures will be conducted until the informed consent form is  
previously signed. Participants will have to sign a HIPAA Form as well. A  
copy  of the signed consent  and HIPAA Form  will be provided to the patient.  
A review of the subject's medical record will be conducted to confirm that  
the subject  meets  inclusion/exclusion criteria  as per protocol.  
 
 
Pregnancy  
Taking the study drug may involve unknown risks to a pregnant woman, an 
embryo, fetus (unborn baby) or nursing infant. Therefore, if female participant  is pregnant,  planning to become pregnant  or are breastfeeding a 
child,  participant  cannot  participate in this  study. In order to reduce the risk  
of pregnancy,  participant  must  use an effective  method of birth control  
while participating in this study (and for 1 month) after participant complete  
the study treatment. If participant is already using a method of birth control,  
the study doctor or study staff will discuss with her whether her current  
method of birth control  is acceptable for use during this study.  If, during this 
study  and 3_0 days after completion  of the study,  participant  becomes 
pregnant,  she should notify  the study  doctor as soon as possible.  The study  
drug will be stopped and her participation in this study will be ended. Data  
during pregnancy and pregnancy outcome will be collected. For those 
females who become pregnant because their male partner is in the study,  
pregnancy  outcome data will not be collected.  
 
 
 
Data  collection  and storage:  
 
Case Report Forms (CRFs) will be provided for each subject. Participants  
will not be identified  by name  on any study  documents  collected by sponsor  
or its representative but may be identified by an SIN and initials.  
The paper records  will be kept in a secure location (Pulmonary  Research 
Office)  in a locked office with limited  access.  
 All clinical information requested will be recorded in the CRFs .  
CRFs  must  be reviewed and verified  for accuracy by the Principal  
Investigator and signed off before the data is entered on a safety  password 
protected electronic system. A copy of the CRF will remain at the 
Investigator's  site at the completion  of the study.  
 
Data  Recording  
 
All data will be entered into an electronic  database (RedCap).  Patients  will 
be provided with a unique study  number and only the study  team  will have 
access to the database.  
 
Maintenance of data  confidentiality  
The investigator/delegate will ensure that data confidentiality is maintained.  
On CRFs or other documents, subjects will be identified only by number,  
and never  by name or initials,  hospital  numbers,  SSN  or any other 
identifier. The investigator/delegate will keep a subject identification code 
list, at the site, showing the randomization number, the subject's name,  
date of birth and address  or any other locally  accepted identifiers.  CRFs  will 
be kept at the Pulmonary Research Center located at 1321 NW 14th Street  
suite 607, Miami Florida 33136 where only study personnel has access to  
this location.  
 
Database  management  and quality  control  
 
Electronic CRFs will be  used for all subjects through RedCap. The  
investigator will have access to the site CRF data until the database is  
locked.  Thereafter,  they will have  read- only access. The  CRF  will be kept 
current to reflect subject status at any time point during the course of the 
study.  
 
While  entering the data,  the investigator/delegate will be  instantly  alerted to 
data queries by validated programmed checks. Additional data review will  
be performed on an ongoing basis to look for unexpected patterns in data  
and study monitoring by the Principal Investigator. If discrepant data are 
detected, a query specifying the problem and requesting clarification will be issued and visible to the investigator/delegate via the CRF. All electronic  
queries  visible  in the system  either require a data correction (when 
applicable) and/or a response from the investigator/delegate to clarify the  
queried data directly  in the CRF,  or simply  a data correction in the CRF.
 
  
 
 
Confidentiality  
 
All information relating to this research protocol will be kept confidential to 
the extent permitted by law. However, records will be available to the 
University of Miami IRB, sponsor, appropriate governmental agencies, and 
by authorized University  of Miami  employees  or other agents  authorized by 
the University. Study staff is HIPAA trained and complied with our  
Institution  requirements.  
 
A file for each subject will be maintained that includes the signed ICF and  
subject information sheet and the Investigator's copies of all source 
documentation related to that subject. The Investigator will ensure the reliability  and availability  of source  documents  from which  the information in 
the CRF was  derived.
 
 
Data Security  
 
Access is limited to  personnel  involved in the study  (Pl, sub-Pl, and the 
research  team).  
 
Settings  
 
Site name and address:  
Pulmonary  Research Office  at the University of  Miami  Hospital  West  
building,  1321 NW 14th Street Room  607 Miami,  Florida  33125.  
 
Informed  Consent  
 
Potential participants attending to the PH clinics at the University of Miami  
will be invited to participate on this registry  by the Pl or Co-Pl. The purpose  
of the study  and procedures  will be extensively  discussed  with the patients.  
If he/sh e is willin g to participat e1   the Informe d Consen t proces s will take 
place.  Patient s will have enough  time to decid e about  participation  and . if 
requested taking the ICF to be discussed with family members or PCP. If  
Hispanic subjects who do not speak English will be enrolled, a translated approved version of the ICF will be provided to the subject. The study staff  
is bilingual.
 
  
Patient  reimbursement  
 
Patients  will receive  $200 for each visit attended with total amount  of 
$600.00.  This is to defray  costs  of time and travel for each visit.  
 
Removal  of Subjects from Study  
 
A subject  withdrawal  is defined as  a discontinuation from the study  for any 
reason. Subjects may withdraw or be withdrawn from this study for the 
following  reasons:  
 
• at their own request  or at the request  of their authorized representative at 
any time for any reason  
 
• if continuation in the study  would be detrimental to the subject's well- 
being,  in the investigator's  opinion.  
 
Study  Drug  
 
Albuterol  will be administered as Ventolin HFA, purchased by the 
investigator.  Ventolin placebo HFA has been provided to the investigators  
by Glaxo Smith Kline as samples for patient education. The two inhalers  
will be matched in appearance (label with blinded identifier, covering the entire cartridge,  which  is the same  for active  drug and placebo).
 
 
 
References  
1. Hurwitz BE, Mendes ES, Schmid A, Parker M, Arana J, Gonzalez A,  
Wanner  A. Airway  and Pulmonary  2-adrenergic  Vasodilatory  Function in 
Current -smokers and Never -smokers.  Chest  2017;  151: 650-657 
2. Peacock A, Busst C, Dawkins K, Denison OM. Response of pulmonary  
circulation to oral pirbuterol in chronic airflow obstruction. Br Med J 1983;  
287:1178 -80. 3. Biernacki  W1, Prince  
K, Whyte K, MacNee W, Flenley DC.The effect of six months of daily  
treatment  with the beta-2 agonist  oral pirbuterol  on pulmonary  
hemodynamics in patients with chronic hypoxic cor pulmonale receiving 
long- term oxygen  therapy.  Am Rev Respir  Dis. 1989;139:  492-7. 
4. Gazzola M1, Mantero A, Santus P, Carlucci P, Mondoni M, Bosotti L,  
Centanni  S. Doppler  echocardiographic  assessment  of the effects  of 
 inhaled long-acting  beta2 -agonists  on pulmonary  artery  pressure in COPD  
patients.  Pulm  Pharmacol  Ther 2007;20:  258-64. 
5. Spiekerkoetter  E, Fabel  H, Hoeper MM. Effects  of inhaled salbutamol  in 
primary  pulmonary  hypertension.  Eur Respir J  2002;  20:524-8  
6. Beeh KM·, Westerman J, Kirsten KM, HebertJ, Grenke L,  
Hamilton  A, Tetzlaff  K, Derom  E. The 24-h lung-function  profile  of 
once- daily tiotropium and olodaterol fixed- dose combination in  
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Pulm Pharmacol Ther 2015;  
32: 53-59 
7. Kitabatake A,  Inoue M, Asao  M, Masuyama T, Tanouchi  J, Morita  
T, et al. Noninvasive evaluation of pulmonary hypertension by a  
pulsed Doppler  technique.  Circulation  1983;68:302 -9 
8. Yock  PG, Popp RL. Noninvasive  estimation of right ventricular  
systolic pressure by Doppler ultrasound in patients with tricuspid  
regurgitation.  Circulation  1984;70:657- 62 
9. Currie  PJ, Seward JB, Chan KL, Fyfe DA, Hagler DJ, Mair DD, et 
al. Continuous wave Doppler determination of right ventricular  
pressure: a simultaneous Doppler -catheterization study in 127 
patients.  J Am Coll  Cardiol  1985;  6:750-6  
10. Roberts  JD, Forfia  PR. Diagnosis and assessment  of pulmonary  
vascular  disease by Doppler  echocardiography. Pulm  Gire 2011; 1:  
160-181 
11. Nagueh SF, Middleton KJ, Kopelen HA, Zoghbi WA, Quinones  
MA. Doppler  tissue  imaging:  A noninvasive technique for  evaluation 
of left ventricular relaxation and estimation of filling  pressures.  J Am 
Coll Cardiol  1997;30:  1527- 1533  
 
 
 
   
 
.:. 