 
 
 
 
 
Apixaban for Primary Prevention of Venous 
Thromboembolism in Patients with Multiple Myeloma 
Receiving Immunomodulatory Therapy  
 
Version 17.0 
 
Protocol Version Date: November 8 , 201 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gregory Piazza, MD, MS  
Brigham and Women’s Hospital  
Cardiovasc ular Division  
75 Francis Street  
Boston, MA 02115  
(617) 732 -6984  (Phone)  
(617) 738 -7652  (Fax)  
gpiazza@partners.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
2 
 Protocol Version Record  
 
Version 1.0  January 25, 2016  
Version 2.0  January 26, 2016  
Vers ion 3.0  January 31, 2016  
Version 4.0  February 2, 2016  
Version 5.0  February 14, 2016  
Version 6.0  March 4, 2016  
Version 7.0  March 7, 2016  
Version 8.0  April 8, 2016  
Version 9.0  April 19, 2016  
Version 10.0  April 24, 2016  
Version 11.0  April 26, 2016  
Version 12.0  May 16, 2016  
Version 13.0  June 26, 2017  
Version 14.0  July 30, 2017  
Version 15.0  
Version 16.0  October 9 , 2017  
October 26, 2017  
Version 17.0  November 8, 2017  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
 
Section  Page  
Protoco l Summary   4 
Study Flow Diagram  5 
Abbreviations and Definitions  6 
Study Contacts  7 
Specific Aims  9 
Introduction and Background  10 
Rationale for the Proposed Study  12 
Study Objectives  12 
Study Design  13 
Study Duration  13 
Study Population  13 
Study Inclusion Criteria  13 
Study Exclusion Criteria  14 
Screening Procedures  15 
Treatment Description  16 
Safety Outcomes  16 
Efficacy Outcomes  17 
Follow -up 18 
Assessment and Reporting of Adverse 
Events  18 
Data Reporting, Processing, and 
Quality Contro l 23 
Statistical Methods  25 
Investigator Responsibilities  26 
Feasibility  28 
Potential Risks and Benefits  29 
Ethical Considerations  31 
References  33 
Case Report Form  34 
Appendix  45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
4 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Summary  
 
Title:    Apixaban for Primary Preve ntion of Venous Thromboembolism in 
Patients with Multiple Myeloma Receiving Immunomodulatory Therapy  
  
Design:  U.S.-based, single -center, single -arm, open -label, proof -of-concept 
study  
  
Brief Treatment  Description:  Direct anti -factor Xa inhibition with apixaban 
2.5 mg orally twice daily for primary prevention of VTE  
  
Purpose:  To determine the rate of major and clinically relevant non -major 
bleeding and the rate of symptomatic VTE in MM patients on immunomodulatory 
drugs ( IMiDs ) who are receiving apixaban 2.5 mg orally twice daily. This study 
will provide event rates that could inform the design of a larger randomized 
controlled trial.  
  
Population:  Outpatients with MM receiving IMiDs (i.e., thalidomide [Thalomid], 
lenalinomide [Revlimid], and pomalidomide [Pomalyst]).  
  
Enrollment:  50 subjects  
  
Clinical Site Locations:  1 center (Vanderbilt University Medical Center)  
  
Study Duration : 22 months; enrollment period of up to 16 months with 6-
month  follow -up. 
  
Primary Safety and Efficacy Outcomes :  
 
Primary Safety  Outcome :   The 6 -month rate of International Society on 
Thrombosis and Haemostasis major and clinically relevant non -major bleeding in 
MM patients receiving IMiDs who are prescribed apixaban 2.5 mg orally twice 
daily for primary prevention of VTE.  
 
Secondary Safety Outcome:   All-cause mortality at 6 months will be recorded.  
Cause of death will be classified as related to cancer, myocardial infarction, PE, 
or other disease state.   
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
5 
 Primary Efficacy  Outcome :  The 6 -month rate of symptomatic VTE in MM 
patients receiving IMiDs who are prescribed apixaban 2.5 mg orally twice daily 
for primary prevention of VTE.  
  
Secondary Efficacy O bjectives:   The 6-month rate of myocardial infarction and 
stroke will also be calculated.  
 
Follow -Up:  Follow -up will consis t of Electronic Health Record review at 6 -
months from study enrollment.  
 
 
Study Flow Diagram  
 
 
 
IMiDs, immunomodulatory drugs; VTE, venous thromboembolism  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
6 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations  and Definitions  
 
Listed in alphabetical order  
 
DVT, deep vein thrombosi s 
 
eCRF, electronic case report form  
 
IMiDs, immunomodulatory drugs (i.e., thalidomide [Thalomid], lenalinomide 
[Revlimid], and pomalidomide [Pomalyst])  
 
ISTH, International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis  
 
LMWH, low -molecular weight heparin  
 
MM, mul tiple myeloma  
 
NOACs, non -vitamin K oral anticoagulants  
 
PE, pulmonary embolism  
 
PI, Proteasome inhibitors  
 
SAE, significant adverse event  
 
UADE, unanticipated adverse drug effect  
 
VTE, venous thromboembolism  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
7 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Contacts  
 
Study Coord inating 
Center Principal 
Investigator:  
 Gregory Piazza, MD, MS  
Brigham and Women’s Hospital  
75 Francis Street  
Boston MA  02115  
Phone: (617) 732 -6984  
Fax: (617) 738 -7652  
Email: gpiazza@partners.org  
 
Study Coordi nating 
Center Co -Principal 
Investigator:  
 Samuel Z. Goldhaber, MD  
Brigham and Women’s Hospital  
75 Francis Street  
Boston MA  02115  
Phone: 857 -307-1932  
Fax: (857) 307-1955  
Email: sgoldhaber@partners.org   
 
Stud y Enrollment 
Center  Principal 
Investigator s: 
 Javid Moslehi , MD  
Vander bilt University Medical Center  
2220 Pierce Avenue  
Nashville, TN 37232  
Phone: (615) 322 -2318  
Fax: (615) 936 -6414  
Email: javid.moslehi@va nderbilt.edu   
 
R. Frank Cornell, MD, MS  
Division of Hematology and Oncology  
Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
777 Preston Research Building  
Nashville, TN 37232  
Office: (615) 936 -8422  
Fax: (615) 936 -1812  
Email: robert.f.cornell@vanderbilt.edu   
 
Clinical Trial 
Monitoring  Lindsay Harrigan , BS 
Thrombosis Research Group  
1620 Tremont Street  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
8 
 Boston, MA   02115  
Phone: (617) 732 -6984  
Fax: (617) 738 -7652  
Email:  lharrigan@partners.org   
 
Data Coordinating 
Center:  
 Lindsay Harrigan , BS 
Thrombosis Research Group  
1620 Tremont Street  
Boston, MA  02115  
Phone: (617) 732 -6984  
Fax: (617) 738 -7652  
Email: lharrigan@partners.org    
 
Study Safety 
Monitor : 
 Dale Adler, MD  
Cardiovascular Division  
Brigham and Women’s Hospital  
Boston, MA 02115  
Phone: (617) 525 -8359  
Fax: (617) 732 -7170  
Email: DADLER2@PARTNERS.ORG  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
9 
 Speci fic Aims  
 
Patients living with multiple myeloma ( MM) have  an increased risk of venous 
thromboembolism (VTE)  due to the disease itself and the use of targeted 
therapies, including immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs).   Prevention of VTE has 
become a major managem ent challenge  during MM treatment. There is a paucity 
of data with respect to the non -vitamin K oral anticoagulants (NOACs) in the 
cancer population.  However, the NOACs offer comparable efficacy but improved 
safety compared with warfarin.  Apixaban has sh own excellent safety and 
efficacy for treatment and prevention of recurrent VTE  (1,2).  The safety and 
efficac y of apixaban for primary prevention of VTE in MM patients has not been 
established.   
 
Aim #1:   To quantify the 6 -month rate of major and clinically relevant non -major 
bleeding in MM patients receiving IMiDs who are prescr ibed apixaban 2.5 mg 
orally twice  daily for primary prevention of VTE.  
 
Hypothesis #1:   The 6 -month rate of major and clinically relevant non -major 
bleeding in MM patients receiving IMiDs who are prescribed apixaban 2.5 mg 
orally twice daily for primary  prevention of VTE will be ≤3% (2).  Although the MM 
population, in general, has a higher medical acuity than that of the previous large 
randomized controlled trials of apixaban, we will be selectin g a stable population 
of MM patients who are appropriate for immunomodulatory therapy.  
 
Aim #2:   To quantify 6 -month rate of symptomatic VTE in MM patients receiving 
IMiDs who are prescribed apixaban 2.5 mg orally twice daily for primary 
prevention of VTE.  
 
Hypothesis #2:   The 6 -month rate of symptomatic VTE in MM patients receiving 
IMiDs who are prescribed apixaban 2.5 mg orally twice daily for primary  
prevention of VTE will be <7% (3).  Although additional therapies for MM such as 
dexamethasone and erythropoietin -stimulating agents may further increase the 
risk of VTE, the rate of incident VTE should be reduced to <7% with apixaban.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
10 
 Introduction and Background  
 
Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy characterized by clonal 
proliferation of malignant plasma cells in the bone marrow microenvironment, 
monoclonal protein in the blood or urine, and associa ted organ dysfunction  (4). 
Overall survival has improved due to the advent of novel targeted therapies, 
including immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) and proteasome inhibitors (PIs).  As 
with other hematological malignancies, MM is assoc iated with an increased risk 
of venous thromboembolism (VTE).  The risk of VTE is further increased in the 
setting of IMiDs.  Currently used IMiDs include thalidomide (Thalomid), 
lenalinomide (Revlimid), and pomalidomide (Pomalyst).  A meta -analysis of more 
than 3000 MM patients showed that the risk of VTE incr eased nearly 3 -fold when 
the IMi D thalidomide was prescribed and nearly 8 -fold when thalidomide was 
combined with other chemotherapeutics  (5).  The r isk of VTE is amplified when 
IMiDs are combined with a novel proteasome inhibitor, carfilzomib, that was 
recently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (6).  Due to the 
increasing use of IMiD -based regimens, prevention of VTE has become a major 
management challenge  during MM treatment  (Table 1 ) (7).  A systematic 
analysis of MM patients treated with IMiDs, especially in combination with other 
therapies, shows that VTE risk remains an important complication in this 
population (Piazza G and Moslehi  J, unpublished data).   
 
 
Table 1 . VTE incidence in IMiDs trials  (7). 
 
Treatment Regimen  VTE incidence  (%) 
without 
thromboprophylaxis  VTE incidence (%) with 
thromboprophylaxisa 
Thalidomide    
Alone  2-10 NA 
Plus dexamethasone  2-26 8-25 
Plus chemotherapyb 3-58 3-31 
Lenalidomide    
Alone  0-33 NA 
Plus dexamethasone  8-75 3-14 
Plus chemotherapyb 14 5-9 
Pomalidomide    
Alone  NA 2 
Plus dexamethasone  NA 2-5 
VTE, venous thromboembolism; NA, not applicable  
aAspirin (81 -325mg daily), low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), fixed warfarin 
(1-1.25mg daily) and full -dose of warfarin (target INR 2 -3) have been used  for 
prophylaxis. Choice of thromboprophylaxis was largely based on physicians’ 
discretion.   
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
11 
 bThalidomide and lenalidomide were used in combination with other therapeutic 
agents, including melphalan, doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide.  
 
 
MM patients also have a higher risk of arterial thromboembolic events, including 
myocardial infarction and str oke (7).  IMiDs also appear to increase the risk for 
arterial thromboembolic events.  In the long -term follow -up of 704 MM patients in 
two phase 3, randomized clinical trials, the frequency  of myocardial infarction and 
cerebrovacular events were 1.98% and 3.4%, respectively, in patients treated 
with lenalidomide and dexamethasone compared with 0.57% and 1.7%, in 
patients treated with dexamethasone alone (https://www.gov.uk/drug -safety -
update/lenalidomide -risk-of-thrombosis -and-thromboembolism).  Lenalidomide 
carries a black box warning of significant myocardial infarction and stroke risks in 
MM patients receiving lenalidomide and dexamethasone treatment.  
 
Currently, there are no guidelines regarding the optimal thromboprophylactic 
regimen for MM patients receiving  IMiDs.  A broad -based VTE prevention 
guideline for cancer patients is too general to be o f practical use in MM patients 
(8).  In the case of MM, aspirin (81 -325 m g daily), low -molecular weight heparin 
(LMWH), and warfarin (target INR 2 -3) have all been prescribed for VTE 
prophylaxis.  However, the specific prophylactic regimen is ultimately based on 
the treating clinician’s best clinical judgment  (7,9).  The choice of VTE 
prophylaxis is further complicated due to frequent renal dysfunction  in MM 
patients.  Furthermore, these  patients are often  reluctant to undertake a n 
extended duration prophylactic LMWH regimen of daily self -injections  due to 
anxiety and injection -site discomfort .  An unintended consequence of LMWH 
injections is  that injectable prophylactic ant icoagula nt regimens are associated 
with decreased medication adherence (10).   
 
There is a paucity of data with respect to the non -vitamin K oral anticoagulants 
(NOACs) in the cancer population.  However, the NOACs have been shown to 
offer comparable efficacy but improved safety compared with warfarin.  Apixaban 
has shown excellent safety and efficacy for treatment and prevention of recurrent 
VTE (1,2).   
 
In a randomized, double -blind study (AMPLIFY), apixaban (administered as a 
loading dose of 10 mg twice daily for 7 da ys, followed by 5 mg twice daily) was 
compared with subcutaneously -administered enoxaparin followed by warfarin in 
5395 patients with acute venous thromboembolism  (1).  The primary efficacy 
outcome of recurrent symptomatic VTE or VTE -related death occurred in 59 of 
2609 patients (2.3%) in the apixaban group compared with 71 of 2635 (2.7%) in 
the warfarin group (relative risk, 0.84; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.60  to 1.18; 
p < 0.001 for non -inferiority).  Major bleeding occurred in 0.6% of patients who 
received apixaban and in 1.8% of those who received warfarin (relative risk, 0.31; 
95% CI, 0.17 to 0.55; p<0.001 for superiority).  A composite outcome of major 
bleeding and clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding occurred in 4.3% of the 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
12 
 patients in the apixaban group compared with 9.7% of those in the conventional -
therapy group (relative risk, 0.44; 95% CI, 0.36 to 0.55; p<0.001).  
 
In the randomized, double -blind AMPL IFY-EXT study , two doses of apixaban 
(2.5 mg and 5 mg, twice daily) were compared with placebo in patients with VTE 
who had completed 6 to 12 months of anticoagulation therapy and for whom 
there was clinical equipoise regarding the continuation or cessatio n of 
anticoagulation therapy  (2).  A total of 2486 patients underwent randomization .  
Symptomatic recurrent venous thromboembolism or death from venous 
thromboemb olism occurred in 73 of the 829 patients (8.8%) who were receiving 
placebo  versus  14 of the 840 patients (1.7%) who we re receiving 2.5 mg of 
apixaban  and 14 of the 813 patients (1.7%) who were receiving 5 mg of apixaban 
(p<0.001 for both comparisons). The rate of major and clinically relevant non -
major bleeding in patients receiving apixaban 2.5 mg orally twice daily for 
extended -duration prevention of recurrent VTE was similar to that of placebo.   
 
Though the stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation popul ation is different, the 
AVERROES Trial also demonstrated the strong safety profile of apixaban, which 
had the same major bleeding rate as aspirin  (11).   
 
 
Rationale for the Proposed Study  
 
MM is associated with an increased risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE) .  The 
use of targeted therapies, including immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) , has 
improved outcomes for patients with MM but also increase s the risk of VTE .  
Prevention of VTE has become a major management dilemma during MM 
treatment. There is a paucity of data with respect to the non -vitamin K oral 
anticoagulants (NOACs) in the cancer population , including patient s with MM .  
However, the NOACs have been shown  to offer comparable efficacy but 
improved safety compared with warfarin.  Apixaban has shown excellent safety 
and efficacy for treatment and prevention of recurrent VTE  (1,2).  Compared with 
injectable thromboprophylactic regimens such as enoxaparin, apixaban offers the 
advantages of being orally administered and less reliant on renal clearance.  The 
safety and e fficacy of apixaban for primary prevention of VTE in MM patients has 
not been established.  The current study will evaluate apixaban (2.5 mg twice 
daily) in a patient population without a history of prior VTE.  Although the current 
study population is high  risk for VTE, it is likely to be lower risk for VTE than 
those of the prior randomized controlled trials of apixaban for secondary 
prevention.  Furthermore, current practice is to provide MM patients receiving 
IMiDs with prophylactic doses (not treatment doses) of low -molecular weight 
heparin (such as enoxaparin 40 mg injected daily).  Accordingly, the rationale to 
test apixaban (2.5 mg twice daily) is consistent with the standard practice of 
prophylactic anticoagulation.  
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
13 
 The current study will provide ev ent rates that will inform the design of a larger 
randomized controlled trial.  If safe and effective, apixaban will satisfy a critical 
unmet need and will represent a substantial advance and “game changer” in the 
prevention of VTE in this high risk patien t population.  
 
 
Study Objectives  
 
 
Primary Safety Objective:   To quantitatively assess the 6 -month rate of major 
and clinically relevant non -major bleeding in MM patients receiving IMiDs who 
are prescribed apixaban 2.5 mg orally twice daily for primary pre vention of VTE.  
 
Primary Efficacy Outcome:   To quantitatively assess the 6 -month rate of 
symptomatic VTE in MM patients receiving IMiDs who are prescribed apixaban 
2.5 mg orally twice daily for primary prevention of VTE.  
 
Secondary Efficacy Outcome:   To qu antitatively assess the 6 -month rate of 
myocardial infarction and stroke.  
 
 
Study Design  
 
50-patient U.S. -based, single -center, single -arm, open -label, proof -of-concept 
study of apixaban 2.5 mg orally twice daily for primary prevention of VTE.  
 
 
Study Dura tion 
 
The study will be completed in 24 months :  3 months for start -up (including 
Human Research Committee approval, hiring of additional staff, and finalizing the 
Case Report Form), 18 months for patient enrollment and data collection, and 3 
months for da ta analysis and writing up the results  (Table 2 ). 
 
Table 2 .  Study timeline.  
Milestone  Duration (months)  
Start -up 3 
Patient enrollment  12 
Completion of data collection  6 
Data analysis and completion of study 
report  3 
TOTAL  24 
 
 
Study Population  
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
14 
 Patients who are > 18 years of age or older with newly diagnosed  MM, relapsed 
MM, MM on maintenance therapy and receiving IMiDs (i.e., thalidomide 
[Thalomid], lenalinomide [Revlimid], and pomalidomide [Pomalyst]).  
 
Study  Inclusion  Criteria  
 
• Men and women  
• Age > 18 years  
• Current or prior diagnosis of s ymptomatic MM based on International 
Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) guidelines 
(http://imwg.myeloma.org/category/guidelines -2/) and will be starting or 
already receiving IMiD therapy with thalidomide [Thalomid], lenalinomide 
[Revlimid], or pomalidomide [Pomalyst]  
• IMiD therapy given in the setting of newly diagnosed MM, relapsed MM, 
progressive MM, maintenance therapy or consolidation therapy as per 
IMWG cri teria 
 
Patients must have had measurable disease as defined by at least one of 
the following **:  
• Serum M -protein ≥ 0.5 g/dL by serum electrophoresis (SPEP) or for IgA 
myeloma, by quantitative IgA (>750 mg/dl)  
• Urinary M -protein excretion at least 200 mg/24 hours  
• Serum Free Light Chain (FLC) whereby the involved light chain measures 
≥ 10 mg/dL and with an abnormal light chain ratio.  
 
**The patient must have met criteria for measurable disease at some point.  
Criteria do not have to be met at time of enrollmen t. 
 
• Willing to provide written informed consent  
• Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) functional status ≤ 2  
• Providers must plan to treat the patient with IMiD therapy for a minimum of 
6 cycles  
 
Study  Exclusion Criteria  
 
• Pregnancy  
• Breastfeeding  
• Women of child -bearing potential  who are unwilling or unable to use an 
acce ptable method of birth control ( such as oral contraceptives,  other 
hormonal contraceptives [ vaginal products, skin patches, or i mplanted or 
injectable products] , or mechanical products su ch as an intrauterine 
device or barrier methods [diaphragm, condoms, spermicides ]) to avoid  
pregnancy for the entire study  
• Any prior venous thromboembolism  
• Contraindication to anticoagulant therapy  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
15 
 • Conditions for which serious bleeding may occur including : 
o Current or within last 6 months: intracranial bleeding, intraocular 
bleeding, gastrointestinal bleeding, endoscopically documented 
ulcer disease  
o Current or within last month: head trauma or other major trauma , 
major surgery  
o Current or within last 2 weeks:   stroke, neurosurgical procedure  
o Current: gross hematuria, major unhealed wound, major surgery 
planned during the trial period, intracranial mass, vascular 
malformation, or aneurysm, overt bleeding, blood dyscrasia  
o CNS involvement of MM or other history o f CNS malignancy  
• Active and clinically sign ificant liver disease  
• Uncontrolled hypertension: systolic blood pressure >180 mm Hg or 
diastolic blood pressure >100 mm Hg  
• Current endocarditis  
• Requirement for ongoing anticoagulant therapy , including mechanical 
heart valve replacement  and atrial fibrillation  
• Severe valvular heart disease, including rheumatic heart disease and 
mitral stenosis  
• Bioprosthetic heart valve replacement  
• Requirement for dual antiplatelet therapy  or single agent antiplatelet 
therapy with c lopidogrel, prasugrel, or ticagrelor  
• Requirement for aspirin at a dose higher than 165 mg daily.  
• Hemoglobin < 9 mg/dL  at time of screening  
• Platelet count < 100,000/mm3 at time of screening  
• Serum calculated creatinine clearance (CrCl) < 25 ml/m  at time of 
screening  
• Alanine aminotransferase or aspartate aminotransferase level > 2 times 
the upper limit of the normal  at time of screening  
• Total bilirubin level > 1.5 times the upper limit of the normal  at time of 
screening  
• Life expectancy < 12 months  or hospice care 
• Prisoners or subjects who are involuntarily incarcerated  
• Subjects who are compulsorily detained for treatment of either a 
psychiatric or physical (e .g., infectious disease) illness  
• Receiving concurrent non-FDA-approved or investigational agents or has  
received an investigational agent within the past 30 days prior to the first 
dose of study treatment (with the exception of approved medications being 
used for an approved indication, e.g., investigating a new dosing regimen 
for an approved indication).  
• Any condition, which in the opinion of the investigator, would put the 
subject at an unacceptable risk from participating in the study  
• Any other medical, social, logistical, or psychological reason, which in the 
opinion of the investigator, would preclude compliance with, or successful 
completion of, the study protocol  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
16 
  
 
Enrollment of Women of Childbearing Potential and Partners  
 
Although it is highly unlikely that a male or female patient of childbearing 
potential would be enrolled in this trial, the follo wing criteria must be met for  
women of childbearing potential  and their partners:    
 
a) Women of childbearing potential must have a negative serum or urine 
pregnancy test (minimum sensitivity 25 IU/L or equivalent units of 
HCG) within 24 hours prior to the st art of study drug.  
b) Women must not be breastfeeding . 
c) Women of childbearing potential must agree to follow instructions for 
method(s) of contraception for the duration o f treatment with study 
drug 6 months  plus 5 half -lives of study drug ( 2.5 days) plus 30 d ays 
(duration of ovulatory cycle) for a total of 212.5  days post -treatment 
completion.  
d) Males who are sexually active with women of childbearing potential must 
agree to follow instructions for method(s) of contraception for the 
duration of treatment with st udy drug 6 months plus 5 half -lives of the 
study drug ( 2.5 days) plus 90 days (duration of sperm turnover) for a 
total of 272.5 days post -treatment completion.  
e) Azoospermic males and women of childbearing potential  who are 
continuously not heterosexually ac tive are exempt from contraceptive 
requirements.  However , women of childbearing potential who are 
continuously not heterosexually active  must still undergo pregnancy 
testing . 
 
Investigators will counsel women of childbearing potential  and male subjects wh o 
are sexually active with women of childbearing potential  on the importance of 
pregnancy prevention and the implications of an unexpected pregnancy 
Investigators will advise women of childbearing potential  and male subjects who 
are sexually active with women of childbearing potential  on the use of highly 
effective methods of contraception. Highly effective methods of contraception 
have a failure rate of < 1% when used consistently and correctly.  
 
At a minimum, subjects must agree to the use of one method o f highly effective 
contraception as listed below:  
• Male condoms with spermicide  
• Hormonal methods of contraception including combined oral 
contraceptive pills, vaginal ring, injectables, implants and hormone -
impregnated intrauterine devices (IUDs) by wom en of childbearing 
potential subject.  Female partners of male subjects participating in the 
study may use hormone based contraceptives as one of the acceptable 
methods of contraception since they will not be receiving study drug .  
• IUDs  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
17 
 • Tubal ligation  
• Vasectomy  
• Complete Abstinence*  
 
*Complete abstinence is defined as complete avoidance of heterosexual 
intercourse and is an acceptable form of contraception for all study drugs. 
Female subjects must continue to have pregnancy tests. Acceptable alternat ive 
methods of highly effective contraception must be discussed in the event that the 
subject chooses to forego complete abstinence  
 
A woman  of childbearing potential is defined as any female who has experienced 
menarche and who has not undergone surgical sterilization (hysterectomy or 
bilateral oophorectomy) and is not postmenopausal. Menopause is defined as 12 
months of amenorrhea in a woman over age 45 years , in the absence of other 
biological or physiological causes. In addition, females under the age o f 55 years 
must have a serum follicle stimulating hormone, (FSH) level > 40mIU/mL to 
confirm menopause.  
 
*Females treated with hormone replacement therapy, (HRT) are likely to have 
artificially suppressed FSH levels and may require a washout period in orde r to 
obtain a physiologic FSH level. The duration of the washout period is a function 
of the type of HRT used. The duration of the washout period below are 
suggested guidelines and the investigators should use their judgement in 
checking serum FSH levels. If the serum FSH level is >40 mIU/ml at any time 
during the washout period, the woman c an be considered postmenopausal : 
• 1 week minimum for vaginal hormonal product s (rings, creams, 
gels)  
• 4 week minimum for transdermal products  
• 8 week minimum for oral  products  
 
Other parenteral products may require washout periods as long as 6 months.  
 
 
Screening P rocedures  
 
When a potential study subject is identified, the following screening procedures 
will be followed:  
1. The Principal Investigator or designee at the s tudy site where the 
potentially eligible patient is receiving care will be contacted by the 
responsible provider to initiate screening.  
 
2. The Principal Investigator or designee will confirm that patient is > 18 
years of age or older, has MM, and is receivin g an IMiD (i.e., thalidomide 
[Thalomid], lenalinomide [Revlimid], and pomalidomide [Pomalyst]).  
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
18 
 3. The Principal Investigator or designee will also confirm the absence of all 
exclusion criteria . 
 
4. The Principal Investigator or designee will provide the potent ial study 
subject with the study Informed Consent Form to review, sign, and date.  
Informed consent must be obtained from a subject with the capacity for 
medical decision -making and/or the subject’s legally authorized 
representative.  The process for obtai ning informed consent must be in 
compliance with the local ethics committee guidelines and policies.  
Informed consent may be obtained by the Principal Investigator, co -
investigators, study coordinators, or an appointed designee.  Potential 
study subjects will not be enrolled if informed consent cannot be obtained.  
A copy of the signed Informed Consent Form must be provided to the 
subject or the subject’s legally authorized representative.  Signed 
Informed Consent Forms must remain in each subject’s study file and 
must be available for verification at all time s.   
 
5. The study coordinator will enter the patient demographic data into the 
screening portion of the electronic case report form (eCRF).  
 
6. Subjects who agree to participate in the study and sign the In formed 
Consent Form will be considered for enrollment in the study and 
should undergo baseline data acquisition  which includes:  
a. History and physical examination  
b. Serum (β -HCG) or urine pregnancy test (u -HCG)  for women of 
child-bearing potential  
 
7. If the pot ential study subject does not meet all of the inclusion criteria or 
meets any of the exclusion criteria, the rationale for exclusion from the 
study will be recorded in the screening section of the electronic case 
report form (eCRF).  
 
 
Treatme nt Description    
 
Patients will begin prophylactic anticoagulation within 3 weeks of passing the 
screening procedure.  Patients with MM receiving IMiDs will be assigned to 
receive  apixaban 2.5 mg orally twice daily for primary prevention of VTE for a 
duration of 6 month s.   
 
If patients come off IMiD therapy during the 6 -month study period due to 
progression of disease or therapy failure, apixaban will be discontinued.  
 
If during the study period the patient requires an invasive procedure or surgery 
that necessitates the  discontinuation of anticoagulation (study drug), apixaban 
should be held as per the prescribing guidelines  (Appendix , 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
19 
 http://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_eliquis.pdf ).  If appropriate based o n the 
judgment of the responsible clinician, apixaban should be restarted wh en safe to 
do so post operatively.  
 
 
Safety Outcomes  
 
Primary Safety Outcome  
 
The primary safety outcome is the 6 -month rate of major and clinically relevant 
non-major bleeding in M M patients receiving IMiDs who are prescribed apixaban 
2.5 mg orally twice daily for primary prevention of VTE.  
 
Using the ISTH classification, b leeding is defined as major if it is overt and 
associated with a decrease in the hemoglobin l evel of 2 g/dL or more, requires  
the transfusion of 2 or more units of blood, occur s into a critical site, or 
contribute s to death  (12).   
 
Using the ISTH classification, c linically relevant nonmajor bleeding is defin ed as 
overt bleeding not meeting the criteria for major bleeding but associated with 
medical intervention, surgical intervention, or interruption of the study drug.  
 
Secondary Safety Outcome  
 
All-cause mortality at 6 months will be recorded.  Cause of dea th will be 
classified as related to cancer, myocardial infarction, PE, other cardiovascular or 
other disease state.  Death will be attributed to PE if there is evidence to support 
an association with PE.  
 
 
 
Efficacy Outcomes  
 
Primary Efficacy Outcome  
 
The primary efficacy outcome is the 6 -month rate of symptomatic VTE in MM 
patients receiving IMiDs who are prescribed apixaban 2.5 mg orally twice daily 
for primary prevention of VTE.  
 
DVT is diagnosed as a noncompressible venous segment or segments on 
ultraso nography or a filling defect on computed tomographic (CT) venography, 
magnetic resonance (MR) venography, or contrast venography.   
 
PE is diagnosed on the basis of a mismatched perfusion defects on ventilation 
perfusion scan , the presence of a pulmonary a rtery filling defect on contrast -
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
20 
 enhanced chest CT , a finding of intraluminal filling defect on invasive pulmonary 
angiography , or evidence of PE at autopsy.  
 
Secondary Efficacy Outcome  
 
MM patients have an increased risk of atherothrombotic events, includ ing 
myocardial infarction and stroke.  The risk of atherothrombotic events is further 
increased with IMiDs.  Accordingly, the 6 -month rates of myocardial infarction 
and stroke will also be calculated.  
 
An acute MI is defined as the presence of at least 2 o f the 3 following conditions  
(13): 
• The detection of a rise and/or fall of cardiac biomarkers, with at least one 
of the values being elevated [preferably cardiac  troponin (cTn) with at 
least one value above the 99th percentile upper reference limit] and with 
at least one of the following:   
(1) symptoms of myocardial ischemia;  
(2) new (or presumably new) significant ST -segment/T -wave 
changes or left bundle branch block;  
(3) development of pathological Q waves on ECG;  
(4) new loss of viable myocardium or regional wall motion 
abnormality by imaging;  
(5) identification of intracoronary thrombus by angiography or 
autopsy  
 
An acute stroke was defined as a new, focal neurologic deficit o f sudden onset, 
lasting at least 24 hours, not due to a readily identifiable nonvascular cause (i.e. 
brain tumor, trauma) , as confirmed by a neurologist  (2). All strokes during the 
study were assessed by imaging or autopsy, and classified as primary 
hemorrhagic, non -hemorrhagic, infarction with hemorrhagic conversion, or 
unknown, as defined by the American College of Cardiology.  
• Primary hemorrhagic:  a stroke with  documentation on imaging (e.g. , 
CT scan or magnetic resonance imaging) of hemorrhage in the cerebral 
parenchyma, or subarachnoid hemorrhage. Evidence of hemorrhagic 
stroke obtained from lumbar puncture, neurosurgery, or autopsy can also 
confirm the diagno sis.  
• Non-hemorrhagic:  an ischemic focal neurological deficit  (and not due to 
hemorrhage) that appears and is still partially evident at 24 hours.  
• Infarction with hemorrhagic conversion:  no evidence of hemorrhage 
on an initial scan, but found on a subs equent scan  and is clinically 
relevant to the event , as determined by a neurologist . 
• Unknown type/no imaging performed:  the type of stroke could not be 
determined by imaging or other means (lumbar puncture, neurosurgery).  
 
 
Follow -up 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
21 
  
Follow -Up Evaluatio n 
 
Routine follow -up visits with study personnel will not be required.  Study patients 
will be encouraged to follow -up with their primary care providers and other 
appropriate clinicians, including oncologists .  Data regarding study outcomes will 
be abstrac ted from the Electronic Health Record.  
 
We will assess medication adherence via pill count.  Medication adherence will 
be calculated as the total number of doses  taken divided by the total number of 
doses prescribed ([ x / 336] x 100 = medication adherence  [%]). 
 
Subjects will be given a study diary to fill out at home each day.  Subjects will 
write down the time they take their study drug and any side effects.  The study 
diary will be collected at a regularly scheduled office visit at conclusion of the 
study period.  
 
Subject Retention, Withdrawal, and Termination  
 
Continued participation of study subjects will be encouraged at the time of 
outpatient evaluation  through the 6-month  follow -up interval.  However, study 
subjects will be informed that they retain  the right to withdraw from the study at 
any time without compromise to their current or subsequent medical care.  
Subjects will be terminated from the study if they expire or elect to withdraw.   
 
If study subjects elect to withdraw, they will be asked fo r permission to do the 
following:  
1. Be contacted by telephone AND  
2. Have a family member contacted AND  
3. Have their physicians contacted  
 
Withdrawal criteria will include:  
1. Patient requests to withdraw  
2. Reasons related to SAE:  
a. Initiating or continuing study drug p laces the subject at undue 
hazard as determined by the Investigator;   
b. SAE or other safety concern that is related to study drug treatment;   
c. Major or life -threatening bleeding (as defined in the protocol)  
d. ALT or AST ≥ 3 ULN, if suspected to be due to the study drug  
e. Calculated CrCL decreased to < 30 mL/min confirmed by repeat 
testing at least one week later, or need for dialysis  
f. Subjects in whom multiple myeloma is felt to be refractory to 
therapy or who ha ve transitioned to a palliative treatment strategy  
3. Pregnancy;  
4. Patient  develop s severe hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh class C) during 
the trial;  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
22 
 5. Death;  
6. Lost to follow -up (every attempt will be made by the Investigator not to  
have subjects “lost to follow -up”); 
7. Study terminated by sponsor (termination of all or part of the study by the 
sponsor, in concert with the study leadership)  
 
 
Assessment and Reporting of Adverse Events  
 
Definitions  
 
Adverse events  
 
An adverse event (AE) is defined as any new untoward medical occurrence or 
worsening of a pre existing medical condition in a patient or clinical investigation 
subject administered an investigational (medicinal) product and that does not 
necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment.  An AE can therefore 
be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory 
finding, for example), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of 
investigational product, whether or not considered related to the investigational 
product.  The causal relationship to study drug is determined by a physician and 
should be used to assess all AEs.  
 
Adverse events can be spontaneously reported or elicited during open -ended 
questioning, examination, or evaluation of a subject. (In order to prevent  
reporting bias, subjects should not be questioned regarding the specific 
occurrence of one or more adverse events).  
 
All SAEs that occur following the subject’s written consent to participate in the 
study through 30 days of discontinuation of dosing will be reported to BMS 
Worldwide Safety.  
 
Serious Adverse Events  
 
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any untoward medical occurrence at  
any dose that:  
  
• results in death  
• is life -threatening (defined as an event in which the subject was at risk 
of death at the ti me of the event; it does not refer to an event which 
hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe)  
• requires inpatient hospitalization or causes prolongation of existing 
hospitalization  
• results in persistent or significant disability/incap acity 
• is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
23 
 • is an important medical event, defined as a medical event that may not 
be immediately life -threatening or result in death or hospitalization but, 
based on appropriate medical and scientific judgment, may jeopardiz e 
the subject or may require intervention (e.g., medical, surgical) to 
prevent one of the other serious outcomes listed above. Examples of 
such events include but are not limited to intensive treatment in an 
emergency department or at home for allergic bro nchospasm; blood 
dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in hospitalization.  
 
Suspected transmission of an infectious agent (eg, pathogenic or non -
pathogenic) via the study drug is an SAE.  Although pregnancy, overdose, and 
cancer are not always serio us by regulatory definition, these events must be 
handled as SAEs.  
 
 The following hospitalizations are not considered SAEs:  
• A visit to the emergency room or other hospital department lasting 
less than 24 hours that does not result in admission (unless 
considered an “important medical event” or a life -threatening event)  
• Elective surgery planned before signing consent  
• Admissions as per protocol for a planned medical/surgical 
procedure  
• Routine health assessment requiring admission for 
baseline/trending of he alth status (eg, routine colonoscopy)  
• Medical/surgical admission other than remedying ill health state 
that was planned before study entry. Appropriate documentation is 
required in these cases  
• Admission encountered for another life circumstance that carrie s no 
bearing on health status and requires no medical/surgical 
intervention (e .g., lack of housing, economic inadequacy, caregiver 
respite, family circumstances, administrative reason)  
 
Adverse Events of Special Interest  
 
In this study, the following adver se events will to be reported to BMS, regardless 
of whether these reports are classified as serious or unexpected.  
 
• Potential or suspected cases of liver injury including but not limited 
to liver test abnormalities, jaundice, hepatitis or cholestasis.  
 
Pre-Existing Medical Conditions  
 
A pre -existing medical condition is one that is present at the start of the study.  
Pre-existing medical conditions should be recorded in the baseline and 
demographic data section of the electronic case report form (eCRF).  Pr e-
existing medical conditions should be reassessed during the trial and reported as 
an adverse event or severe adverse event only if the frequency, severity, or 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
24 
 character of the conditions worsens significantly or unexpectedly during the 
study.  When repor ting such adverse events, the description should convey that 
the pre -existing condition has changed by including applicable descriptors (for 
example, “more frequent” headaches).  Previously scheduled hospitalizations 
and hospitalizations required for diagn ostic or elective surgical procedures for the 
management of unchanged pre -existing medical condition should not be 
considered adverse events.  
 
Serious Adverse Event Collecting  and Reporting  
 
Following the subject’s written consent to participate in the stu dy, all SAEs, 
whether related or not related to study drug, must be collected, including those 
thought to be associated with protocol -specified procedures. All SAEs must be 
collected that occur during the screening period and within 30 days of 
discontinuin g dosing. If applicable, SAEs must be collected that relate to any 
later protocol -specific procedure (such as follo w-up skin biopsy).  The 
investigator should report any SAE occurring after these time periods that is 
believed to be related to study drug or  protocol -specified procedure.  An SAE 
report should be completed for any event where doubt exists regarding its sta tus 
of seriousness.  If the investigator believes that an SAE is not related to study 
drug, but is potentially related to the conditions of the study (such as withdrawal 
of previous therapy, or a complication of a study procedure), the relationship 
should be specified in the narrative section of the SAE Report Form.  
 
SAEs, whether related or unrelated to the study drug, and pregnancies must be  
reported to BMS within 24 hours:   
 
SAE Email Address:  Worldwide.Safety@BMS.com  
SAE Fax Number:  609-818-3804  
 
SAEs must be recorded on the FDA MedWatch Form 3500A. Pregnancies must 
be reported on a Pregnancy Surveillance Form.  
 
If only limited information is initially available, follow -up reports are required. 
(Note: Follow -up SAE reports should include the same investigator term(s) 
initially reported.)  
 
If an ongoing SAE changes in its intensity or relationship to study drug or if new 
information becomes available, a follow -up SAE report should be sent within 24 
hours to the BMS (or designee) using the same procedure used for transmitting 
the initial SAE report. All SAEs should be followed to resolution or stabilization.  
 
SAE Reconciliation  
 
The investigat or will reconcile the clinical database SAE cases transmitted to 
BMS Global Pharmacovigilance (GPV&E). Frequency of reconciliation will be 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
25 
 done every three months and once prior to study database lock. BMS GPV&E 
will e -mail upon request from the investigat or, the GPV&E reconciliation report. 
Requests for reconciliation should be sent to aepbusinessprocess@bms.com . 
The data elements listed on the GPV&E reconciliation report will be used for 
case identificati on purposes. If the investigator determines a case was not 
transmitted to BMS GPV&E, the case will be sent immediately.  
 
Health Authority Reporting (US FDA IND)  
 
Investigators must adhere to local Health Authority Reporting Requirements. For 
studies conduc ted under an investigator sponsored US FDA IND, provide details 
of the following:  
 
• Any event that is both serious and unexpected must be reported to the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as soon as possible and no later 
than 7 days (for a death or life -threatening event) or 15 days (for all 
other SAEs) after the investigator’s or institution’s initial receipt of the 
information.  
• BMS will be provided with a simultaneous copy of all adverse events 
filed with the FDA. SAEs should be reported on MedWatch Form  
3500A, which can be accessed at: 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/medwatch/.  
 
MedWatch SAE forms should be sent to the FDA at:  
 
MEDWATCH  
5600 Fishers Lane  
Rockville, MD 20852 -9787  
Fax: 1 -800-FDA-0178 (1 -800-332-0178)  
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scr ipts/medwatch/  
 
All SAEs should simultaneously be faxed or e -mailed to BMS at:  
 
Global Pharmacovigilance & Epidemiology  
Bristol -Myers Squibb Company  
Fax Number: 609 -818-3804  
Email: Worldwide.safety@bms.com  
 
 
Non-Serious Adverse Events  
 
A non -serious adver se event is an AE not classified as serious.  
 
Non-Serious Event Collecting and Reporting  
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
26 
 The collection of non -serious adverse event (NSAE) information should begin at 
initiation of study drug. Nonserious AEs should be followed to resolution or 
stabilizat ion, or reported as SAEs if they become serious.  Follow -up is also 
required for nonserious AEs that cause interruption or discontinuation of study 
drug, or those that are present at the end of study treatment as appropriate.  
 
Nonserious Adverse Events ar e provided to BMS via annual safety reports (if 
applicable), and interim or final study reports.  
 
 
Laboratory Test Abnormalities  
 
The following laboratory abnormalities should be captured and reported as 
appropriate:  
 
• Any laboratory test result that is cli nically significant or meets the definition 
of an SAE  
• Any laboratory test result abnormality that required the subject to have 
study drug discontinued or interrupted  
• Any laboratory test result abnormality that required the subject to receive 
specific corre ctive therapy.  
 
It is expected that wherever possible, the clinical rather than the laboratory term 
will be used by the reporting investigator (e .g., use the term anemia rather than 
low hemoglobin value).  Laboratory test abnormalities are provided to BMS  via 
annual safety reports (if applicable), and interim or final study reports.  
 
 
Pregnancy  
 
If, following initiation of apixaban , it is subsequently discovered that a study 
subject is pregnant or may have been pregnant at the time of apixaban exposure, 
including during at least 5 half -lives after product administration, the 
investigational product will be permanently discontinued in an appropriate 
manner .  The investigator must immediately notify WorldwideSafety@BMS.com 
of this event via the Pregnancy Surv eillance Form within 24 hours and in 
accordance with SAE reporting procedures.  
 
 
Follow -up information regarding the course of the pregnancy, including perinatal 
and neonatal outcome and, where applicable, offspring information must be 
reported on a Pregna ncy Surveillance Form.  
 
Any pregnancy that occurs in a female partner of a male study participant should 
be reported to BMS. Information on this pregnancy may also be collected on the 
Pregnancy Surveillance Form.  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
27 
  
Protocol -required procedures for study dis continuation and follow -up must be 
performed on the subject unless contraindicated by pregnancy.  Other 
appropriate pregnancy follow -up procedures should be considered if indicated.  
 
 
Overdose  
 
An overdose is defined as the accidental or intentional admin istration of any dose 
of a product that is considered both excessive and medically important. All 
occurrences of overdose must be reported as SAEs.  
 
 
Other Safety Considerations  
 
Any significant worsening noted during interim or final physical exam inations , 
electrocardiograms, X -rays, and any other potential safety assessments, whether 
or not these procedures are required by the protocol, should also be recorded as 
a non -serious or serious adverse event, as appropriate, and reported 
accordingly.  
 
 
Documenta tion of Adverse Events  
 
Information about potential adverse events should be reviewed during the 6 -
month  follow -up period.  Subjects should be encouraged to report adverse 
events spontaneously or in response to non -directed questioning by their usual 
healt hcare providers.  If it is determined that an adverse event has occurred, the 
study staff member entering data into the eCR F should obtain all of the 
information necessary to complete the Adverse Event section.  All observed or 
reported adverse events, reg ardless of the suspected causal relationship to study 
treatment  must be recorded in the Adverse Event section of the eCRF .  The 
Sponsor will be notified when an event has been entered into the database.  
 
 
Duration of Adverse Event Reporting Period  
 
Bleedin g adverse events and other serious adverse events must be reported 
throughout the 6-month  follow -up period.  All observed or reported serious 
adverse events occurring through the 6-month  follow -up period, regardless of the 
suspected causal relationship wit h treatment , must be recorded in the 
appropriate section of the  eCRF .  Procedures to expedite reporting serious 
adverse events are described later in this section.   
 
 
Specific Adverse Event Reporting Guidelines  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
28 
  
Study investigators should follow the follo wing guidelines to ensure the quality 
and precision of adverse event reporting:  
1. Use recognized medical terms.  
2. Avoid the use of colloquialisms and non -standard abbreviations  
3. If known at the time of adverse event reporting, a diagnosis should be 
reported ins tead of individual symptoms and signs (for example, record 
only “pneumonia” rather than “productive cough” and “elevated white 
blood cell count”).  
4. If the reported symptoms and signs cannot be medically characterized as 
a single diagnosis or syndrome at the  time of adverse event reporting, the 
information that is available should be reported.  If a diagnosis is 
subsequently established, it should be reported as follow -up information 
as described earlier.  
5. A cascade of clinical events (such as sequelae of an a dverse event) 
should be identified as the primary, causative event.  The cascade of 
events can be further described in the adverse event narrative.  For 
example, when recording a death, the event or condition that caused or 
contributed to the fatal outcome  should be reported as the serious adverse 
event.  If the cause of death is unknown and cannot be determined at the 
time of reporting, “unknown cause of death” should be recorded.  
6. Any adverse event that results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongs a 
hospitalization should be reported as a serious adverse event.  If a subject 
is hospitalized to undergo a medical or surgical procedure as a result of an 
adverse event, the event responsible for the procedure (not the procedure 
itself) should be reported as the serious adverse event.  For example, if a 
subject is hospitalized to undergo exploratory surgery as a result of a 
major bleeding event, record the major bleeding event that necessitated 
surgery as the serious adverse event.  
 
All Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) that occur following the subject’s written 
consent to participate in the study through 30 days of discontinuation of dosing 
must be reported to BMS Worldwide Safety.  
 
Categorization of Adverse Events  
 
All adverse events must be classified according to intensity or severity, 
expectedness, relatedness, outcome, and treatment or action taken.  
 
Intensity or Severity  
 
The following categories for intensity or severity of an adverse event should be 
used in reporting:  
 
Mild  Awareness of a symptom or sign t hat does not interfere with the 
patient’s usual activity or is transient and resolves without 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
29 
 treatment and without sequelae  
Moderate  Interferes with the patient’s usual daily activities, but he or she is 
still able to function  
Severe  Interrupts a patien t’s usual daily activities and generally requires 
medication, surgery, or other intervention for treatment  
 
Expectedness  
 
Each adverse event should be evaluated as to whether it was expected or 
unexpected as follows:  
 
Expected  The specificity and severity  of the event is consistent with 
applicable information on apixaban.  
Unexpected  The specificity or severity of the event is not consistent with 
applicable information on apixaban.                
Unanticipated 
Adverse 
Device  Effect 
(UADE)  Any serious adver se effect on health or safety or any life -
threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, 
apixaban , if that effect, problem, or death was not previously 
identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the 
investigational plan or appli cation or any other unanticipated 
serious problem associated with apixaban  that relates to the 
rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 
 
Relatedness  
 
Each adverse event should be evaluated as to whether it was related to the study 
procedures or apixaban as follows : 
 
Definite  An adverse event is clearly related to apixaban  
Probable  An adverse event has a reasonable causal relationship to the 
use of apixaban ; another etiology is significantly less likely  
Possible  An adverse event has a reasonable causal r elationship to the 
use of apixaban ; an alternative etiology is equally or less likely  
Unlikely  An adverse event has little or no causal  relationship to the use 
of apixaban ; an alternative etiology is more likely  
Not related  An adverse event is not relat ed to the use of  apixaban ; there is 
no temporal relationship or a much more likely alternative 
etiology exists  
 
The term “reasonable causal relationship” means there is evidence to suggest a 
causal relationship.  
 
 
Outcome  
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
30 
 The clinical course of all adve rse events should be followed until a medical 
outcome is determined (resolution, stabilization, or determination that it was 
unrelated to study participation).  If a subject is pregnant or becomes pregnant 
within 30 days of receiving apixaban , follow -up sh ould be obtained from the 
medical record to determine the outcome of the pregnancy (successful live -birth, 
etc.).  The clinical outcome of all adverse events should be recorded as follows:  
 
Death  Patient expired  
Recovered  Patient returned to baseline heal th and functional 
status  
Not yet recovered  Patient did not recover and symptoms or 
sequelae persist  
Recovered with sequelae  Patient did recover but continues to experience 
clinical sequelae from the adverse event  
 
Treatment or Action Taken  
 
Adverse even ts and serious adverse events will be categorized by the actions 
taken in response to the event:  
 
Intervention  Surgery or other invasive procedure  
Non-surgical treatment  Drug initiation, interruption, dose reduction, dose 
increase, or discontinuation  
None No action was taken  
 
Expedited Reporting of Serious Adverse Events  (SAE)  
 
The study investigators must use the following procedure for reporting serious 
adverse events:  
1. Report any serious adverse event that occurs to the Sponsor within 24 
hours of knowl edge of the event (Monday through Friday).  If the 
investigator does not have all information regarding the SAE, he/she will 
not wait to receive additional information before notifying the 
Sponsor  of the event and completing the eCRF.  The investigator sha ll 
provide an event update when additional information is received.  
NOTE:  The Sponsor will automatically be notified when an adverse event 
or serious adverse event has been entered into the database when the 
investigator fills in an eCRF.  
 
2. In the reporti ng of serious adverse events, the study investigator shall 
provide any potentially relevant information including:  
a. Subject demographics  
b. Pre-existing conditions  
c. The complete description of the adverse event.  
d. Date and time of adverse event onset  
e. Severity  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
31 
 f. Treatment  
g. Results of diagnostic testing  
h. Duration of sequelae  
i. Outcome (if known)  
j. Date and time of adverse event resolution.  
k. Information on suspected medications including dose, route of 
administration, frequency, dates, lot number, expiration date, and 
concomi tant medications  
 
3. When reporting a death, the primary event or condition that caused or 
contributed to the fatal outcome shall be reported as the serious adverse 
event.  Death will be reported as the outcomes of the serious adverse 
event.  If the cause of death is unknown at the time of reporting, report 
“unknown cause of death.”  
 
4. The investigator shall report unanticipated  adverse device effects 
(UADEs) to the sponsor and Institutional Review Board within 10 working 
days after the investigator first learns  of the event.   
 
Sponsor Unanticipated Adverse Drug  Effects (UADEs) Reporting Responsibilities  
 
Any serious adverse event determined to be caused by apixaban will be 
reviewed for possible reporting to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and 
IRBs.  Upon notice of an unanticipated  adverse drug effect (UADE), the sponsor 
shall immediately conduct an evaluation of the UADE and report the results of 
the evaluation to the FDA, all reviewing IRBs, and participating investigators 
within 10 days of first receivin g the report.   
 
 
Data Reporting, Processing, and Quality Control  
 
Data Acquisition, Monitoring, and Quality Control  
 
Subject data will be collected using a web -based centralized electronic case 
report form (eCRF).  Database monitoring and quality control will be performed 
by the Study Coordinating Center (BWH) .   
Monitoring Plan  
 
Monitoring procedures will consist of the following:  
 
Site Initiation  
 
At the initial site visit, the Study Coordinating Center  shall conduct a full site 
qualification and traini ng.  Study Coordinating Center shall review the terms of 
the protocol with the site investigator and confirm the investigators access to 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
32 
 facilities required to conduct the study.  The Study Coordinating Center will 
answer any questions the investigator may  have concerning the clinical study or 
protocol and instruct the investigator on how to complete the eCRFs.  
 
During the Study  
 
During the study, the Study Coordinating Center  shall perform monthly random  
review s of data submitted by investigators with chec ks for accuracy and 
completeness and document that corrective actions have been taken in response 
to protocol deviations or other forms of non -compliance.  Investigators will be 
contacted and asked to submit any missing information or clarify any 
questiona ble data.  Notes from telephone conversations and copies of written 
correspondence between the Study Coordinating Center and the Investigators 
will be maintained in the Study File.   
 
Independent Study Safety Monitor    
 
A physician with relevant expertise  whose primary responsibility is to p rotect the 
safety of study subjects and to provide ongoing, critical, and unbiased 
evaluation of the progress of the study will be appointed as an independent study 
safety monitor for the duration of the study.  The saf ety monitor will operate in a 
manner similar to that of a Clinical Events Committee/Data and Safety Monitoring 
Board.  
 
The safety monitor will:  
• Provide independent safety evaluation of events and adjudicate all actual and 
potential serious adverse events e xperienced by study subjects during this 
study;  
• Review aggregate safety data including the frequency of adverse safety 
outcomes, particularly death, symptomatic VTE and major bleeding; and c an 
recommend premature stopping of the study to the Sponsor and P rincipal 
Investigator at any time.  
 
Interim Safety and Efficacy Analysis  
 
The safety monitor will review the safety and efficacy outcomes for the first 10 
patients enrolled in the study.   The need for dose adjustment will be made based 
in this interim anal ysis.  The safety monitor will review the safety and efficacy 
outcomes again at the completion of the study.  
 
Stopping Criteria  
 
The study will be terminated by the safety monitor, sponsor, and principal 
investigator if the following stopping criterion is met: 
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
33 
 • An excess of morbidity or mortality is observed in patients receiving 
apixaban.  
a. When 2 patients receiving apixaban experience  an unprovoked 
intracranial hemorrhage , confirmed by independent adjudication,  
and did not have a protocol violation such tha t he/she cannot be 
considered as representative of the intended patient population.  
b. When 3 of the subjects receiving apixaban experience an 
unprovoked major bleed (including fatal hemorrhagic events) and 
did not have a protocol violation such that he/she c annot be 
considered as representative of the intended patient population.  
 
 
Protocol Violations  
 
The Study Coordinating Center  will rapidly and firmly address any protocol 
violations. If a protocol violation is detected or suspected, the study site 
investi gator(s) will first be asked to provide a written explanation.  After 
reviewing the available information, the Study Coordinating Center will 
categorize protocol violations as either major (eligibility or primary/secondary 
endpoint determination compromise d or indefinite) or minor (data still able to be 
used for endpoint determination), and will record and track them.  
 
The Study Coordinating Center will communicate with the study enrollment  site 
personnel to confirm that a process is in place to ensure that  further protocol 
violations do not recur.  
 
Data C onfidentiality  
 
Hardcopy and electronic subject data will be maintained in a locked office at each 
investigational site and will only be available to the study site personnel and 
sponsor personnel during mo nitoring visits.  Patient identifiers including names 
and other personal information will be kept separate from the study data.  
 
Compliance with Laws and Regulations  
 
The study will be conducted in accordance with this protocol, Title 21 Code of 
Federal Re gulations, Parts 10, 50, 54,56 and 812, International Harmonized 
Standards - E6 Good Clinical Practices Guidance, and local ethical and legal 
requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
34 
 Statistical Methods  
 
Sample Size Calculation  
 
The sample size estimate is completed using the 95% confidence interval (CI) 
method. We propose a sample size of 50 patients. It generates a half -width of CI 
less than 10% if the blood clot rate is <15%. Since our study expects an 80% risk 
reduction in VTE, our estimated VTE rate is about 5%. If based o n the 5% VTE 
incidence rate, the half -width CI will be <6%.  Therefore, the precision will be 
improved with narrower CI, since we expect an incidence much lower than 15%.   
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
For this proof -of-concept study, we will calculate:  
1) the 6 -month rate of major and clinically relevant non -major bleeding  
2) the 6 -month rate of symptomatic VTE  
 
We will also calculate 6 -month rates of myocardial infarction and stroke.  
 
The primary analysis will be intention -to-treat.  Although study eligibility cri teria 
warrant that the provider plans to treat the patient with IMiDs for at least 6 cycles, 
we will include  any patient who has received at least 2 cycles in a modified 
intention -to-treat analysis.  
 
Means, medians, and frequency distributions will be calc ulated for continuous 
variables.  Number and percentages will be reported for binary and categorical 
variables.  Differences between subgroups of interest  will be examined using the 
chi-square or Fisher’s exact test for binary and categorical variables and  t-test or 
Wilcoxon Rank Sum for continuous variables  (if the subgroups are of sufficient 
size for statistical comparison).  Potential subgroup analysis will include patients 
newly diagnosed vs. recurrent/relapsed disease and concomitant medications 
(dexam ethasone, etc.).  
 
All tests will be two tailed and a  p-value of <0.05 assumed to represent statistical 
significance.  All analyses will be performed using SAS software.   
 
 
Investigator Responsibilities  
 
Study Initiation  
 
Before enrollment of the first sub ject at the study site, the following documents 
must be on file with the Study Sponsor:  
1. Current curriculum vitae  of the principal investigator and all co -
investigators  
2. Current, dated Institutional Review Board (IRB) membership list  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
35 
 3. Written documentation of  IRB protocol approval (protocol number/title and 
approval date) and Informed Consent Form (protocol number/title and 
approval date)  
4. A copy of the IRB -approved Informed Consent Form (The Informed 
Consent Form must be reviewed by the study Principal Investi gator prior 
to IRB submission.)  
 
Study Completion  
 
The following data and materials must be on file at the study site before the study 
can be considered complete or terminated:  
1. Completed electronic case report forms (eCRFs) for all study subjects.  
2. All regu latory documents including:  
a. Curriculum vitae  for each investigator and study staff member.  
b. Signed confidentiality agreement  
c. Study protocol and protocol amendments  
d. Institutional Review Board approval letter (s) for initial protocol and 
any protocol amendmen ts; as well as continuing review approval 
letters.  
e. All Institutional Review Board correspondence  
f. Study termination letter  
g. Institutional Review Board membership list  
h. Site personnel signature list  
i. Financial Disclosure and Conflict of Interest forms for all site 
investigators  
j. Patient screening and enrollment logs  
k. Signed study Informed Consent Forms for each subject  
l. Supporting source documentation for values and responses in case 
report forms  
m. Supporting source documentation for adverse events  
 
 
Informed Consen t 
 
A template for the Informed Consent Form will be provided to the study site by 
the Study Coordinating Center .  The Informed Consent Form must be signed by 
the subject or his or her legally authorized representative before enrollment into 
the study.  A h ardcopy of the Informed Consent Form must be provided to the 
subject or his or her legally authorized representative.  If applicable, informed 
consent should be obtained using Interpreter Services.  If an interpreter is 
required to explain the study, the i nformed consent presented to the patient for 
signature must be in the language in which the patient is literate.  
 
Signed Informed Consent Forms must remain in  each subject’s study file and be 
available for verification by the Study Sponsor at all times.  D ocumentation of the 
date informed consent was obtained and a notation that a signed copy of the 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
36 
 Informed Consent Form was provided to the study subject should be recorded.  
The informed consent process must always be conducted in a non -coercive 
manner.  
 
Disclosure of Data 
 
Subject data obtained for this study will be maintained as confidential, and 
disclosure to parties other than study personnel will be prohibited.  Upon the 
study subject’s permission, medical information may be given to his or her 
physici an or other medical personnel for his or her welfare.  
 
Retention of Records  
 
Records and documents pertaining to the conduct of this study including case 
report forms, signed informed consent forms, protocol and amendments, 
supporting source documentation for values and responses in the case report 
forms,  and supporting documentation for adverse events must be retained by the 
investigators for at least two years after conclusion of the study.   
 
 
Feasibility  
 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital  
 
Brigham and Women’ s Hospital (BWH) is a 777 -bed acute tertiary care facility 
providing medical and surgical care for patients with general medical, 
cardiothoracic, orthopedic, oncologic, neurologic, obstetric, gynecologic, and 
gastrointestinal conditions.  BWH’s affiliation  with the Dana Farber Cancer 
Institute (DFCI) has resulted in a large population of oncology patients receiving 
care in the inpatient wards and in the Cardiovascular Medicine clinics.  DFCI 
provides care to a large population of MM patients who travel from  around the 
world.  With the opening of the Heart and Vascular Center in 2014, BWH has 
solidified its position as a world leader in cardiovascular care and research, 
supporting an integrated care model in a single location.  BWH is one of the 
world -leaders  in the rapidly growing field of cardio -oncology.  Dr. Piazza’s 
cardiovascular medicine outpatient practice, which is based in the Heart and 
Vascular Center, includes a large number of referrals for thrombosis in the 
setting of malignancy.   
 
The BWH Throm bosis Research Group  
 
The Thrombosis Research Group, directed by Samuel Z. Goldhaber, MD, 
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School and Section Head of Vascular 
Medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital, is based at BWH and Harvard 
Medical School.  The Thrombosis Research Group has a decades -long 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
37 
 commitment to improving the care for patients with cancer and increased 
thrombosis risk.  
 
The Thrombosis Research Group has an infrastructure of experienced 
leadership, with trained personnel in a multidisciplin ary academic team 
(pharmacists, fellows, research nurses, research coordinators, biostatisticians, 
administrators, and medical informatics specialists).  Data storage and computing 
resources, as well as a network of regional, national, and international 
collaborating investigators, facilitate our execution of ongoing research projects 
and our planning of future research projects.  The Thrombosis Research Group 
has studied all aspects of thrombosis in malignancy, including epidemiology, 
diagnosis, and VTE pr evention.  According to www.pubmed.gov, the Group has 
authored more than 90 Original Reports since 2010.  Dr. Piazza appreciates the 
burden of thrombosis on the cancer population through registries that he has le d 
(14) and high -impact reviews that he has published on the subject  (7,15).  Drs. 
Piazza and Goldhaber have extensive experience leading large randomized 
controlled trials focused on prevention of thromboembolic disease.  Examples of 
major Thrombosis Research Group -led trials in thrombosis prevention in clude the 
2500 -patient multicenter Electronic Alert Trial  (16), the 2500 -patient multicenter 
Physician Alert Trial  (17), and the 2500 -patient Discharge Alert Trial  (18).   
 
For this trial, the Clinical Coordinating Center of the Thrombosis Resea rch Group 
will draft and finalize the study protocol, informed consent, and case report form, 
obtain Institutional Review Board approval, create an electronic data repository, 
assist the clinical centers with local IRB approval, file the IND, ensure scient ific 
and financial integrity, approve site payments, plan and host an Investigators 
Meeting, perform the data analysis, and draft and submit for publication the study 
manuscript.  
 
Vanderbilt Cardio -Oncology Program  
 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center wil l be the Study Enrollment Center.  The 
proposed study will be feasible because Vanderbilt is a large Center of 
Excellence for MM care with active clinical research programs. Specifically, the 
Vanderbilt Cardio -Oncology program, directed by Dr. Javid Mosleh i, brings 
together physicians and scientists with a focus on cardiac, vascular and 
thrombotic complications that occur as a result of cancer and cancer therapies. 
The integrative and collaborate nature of the Vanderbilt Cardio -Oncology 
program is illustrat ed by the care of MM patients. The laboratory of Dr. Moslehi is 
investigating the mechanisms of vascular and thrombotic toxicity associated with 
IMiDs and PIs. At the same time, the group is already embarking on several 
clinical and translation studies foc used on cardiovascular effects of MM 
treatments. Dr. Javid Moslehi, Director of Cardio -Oncology at Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center will work closely with colleagues in oncology, including 
Dr. Robert. F. Cornell in spearheading the recruitment effort.  
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
38 
  
Potential Risks and Benefits  
 
Potential benefits to the subject  
 
The potential benefit  of prophylaxis with apixaban in patients with MM receiving 
IMiDs is prevention of VTE, including fatal PE.  
 
Potential Benefits to Society  
 
The major potential benefit to society of the proposed trial of apixaban for primary 
prevention of VTE in patients with MM receiving IMiDs is that if successful, the 
study will provide the foundation for a novel regimen that avoids the discomfort of 
the currently used injectable anti coagulant strategies .  The data acquired from 
the current study will inform the design of a larger randomized controlled trial 
focused on clinical outcomes.   
 
Potential Risks to the Subject  
 
The foreseeable risk  of apixaban for primary prevention of VTE i n patients with 
MM receiving IMiDs is major or clinically relevant non -major bleeding.  
 
Risks of Research Procedures Performed on Subjects  
 
The risk of research procedures include psychological discomfort from 
participating in  a clinical trial (less likely ) and loss of confidentiality of medical 
records or economic data (rare).   
 
Women of childbearing potential (able to get pregnant) must have a negative 
pregnancy test before being considered for the study.  It is not known how 
apixaban could  affect an unb orn child.  Women of childbearing potential must 
use an effective method of birth control while participating in this research, as 
directed by their physician.   
 
Anticipated Risks of D rug 
 
Anticipated risks of apixaban  are categorized as likely, less like ly, and rare.  
 
Likely  
1. Anxiety related to participating in a clinical trial  
2. Discomfort or bruising at sites for blood draws  
 
Less likely  
1. Major bleeding requiring transfusion of blood products  
2. Clinically -relev ant non -major bleeding  
3. Nausea and vomiting  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
39 
 4. Non-severe adverse drug reaction to apixaban  
 
Rare  
1. Severe allergic reaction (such as anaphylaxis) to apixaban  
2. Thromboembolism  
3. Fatal, life -threatening, or intracranial hemorrhage or stroke  
4. Severe internal bleeding (such as gastrointestinal or retroperitoneal) tha t 
requires surgical or interventional laboratory intervention  
5. Death  
6. Other rare or unforeseen adverse effects  
 
Protection of Subjects against the Risks of Research Procedures  
 
Before Study Enrollment  
 
A rigorous screening process will be utilized to ensure that subjects  with an  
increased risk of harm due to enrollment in the study are excluded from the 
study .  This will include performing a detailed history and physical examination 
(to ensure that enrolled subjects truly fulfill all el igibility criteria)  and carefully 
reviewing the results of laboratory testing (in particular, hematocrit, platelet count, 
INR, and serum creatinine).   
 
During Follow -Up 
 
Changes in health status during the 6-month  follow -up period will be evaluated 
by the patient’s primary phys ician, oncologist,  and other routine providers.   As 
apixaban is an FDA -approved drug commonly used for thromboprophylaxis and 
does not require routine follow -up clinical or laboratory monitoring for toxicity , the 
study will not mandate any follow -up visits  or procedures other than those 
required for the patient’s routine myeloma care.  
 
Protection against Loss of Confidentiality  
 
Subject confidentiality will be protected by maintaining all paper records in locked 
file cabinets in locked offices and all elect ronic records in password -protected 
computer files.  All study data will be de -identified for storage in the electronic 
data repository.  In addition, any identifying information will be removed from 
images or other data used in publication or presentation s.  All database 
information will be stored on computer systems that are located behind an 
electronic firewall, which will only permit access to certified study personnel.  
Access to study data files will be password -protected.   
 
Use of Information and Pu blication  
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
40 
 All information concerning and relating to the study is considered confidential 
information.  This information includes the clinical investigational plan, case 
report forms (CRFs), training materials, and scientific data.   
 
 
Ethical Considerati ons 
 
In this prospective, single -arm, single -center clinical study, we will be evaluating 
the impact of apixaban for primary prevention of VTE in patients with MM 
receiving IMiDs .  The benefits of apixaban for primary prevention of VTE in 
patients with MM receiving IMiDs have not been assessed.  The risk of bleeding  
in MM patients receiving apixaban has not been determined .  Currently used 
thromboprophylactic regimens for primary prevention of VTE in MM patients 
receiving IMiDs largely consist of injectable  anticoagulant regimens, such as 
enoxaparin and dalteparin.  These regimens have not been well -evaluated  for 
primary prevention of VTE  in the MM population  and are associated with patient 
discomfort, inconvenience, and limited medication adherence.  Apixaba n 2.5 mg 
orally twice daily has been shown to be safe and effective for prevention of VTE 
in a large general medical population.  Therefore, a solid foundation for 
investigation of this thromboprophylactic regimen and equipoise for the proposed 
clinical tr ial exist .  A successful trial has the potential to provide clinicians and 
patients with a more convenient, more comfortable, and potentially safer 
prophylactic regimen . 
 
Because the proposed clinical trial involves a  novel application of a U.S.  FDA-
approv ed anticoagulant , we will obtain written consent from all study subjects 
and Institutional Review Board approval at all study sites.  
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
41 
 References  
 
 
1. Agnelli G, Buller HR, Cohen A, et al. Oral apixaban for the treatment of 
acute venous  thromboembolism. The New England journal of medicine 
2013;369:799 -808. 
2. Agnelli G, Buller HR, Cohen A, et al. Apixaban for extended treatment of 
venous thromboembolism. The New England journal of medicine 
2013;368:699 -708. 
3. Osman K, Comenzo R, Rajkuma r SV. Deep venous thrombosis and 
thalidomide therapy for multiple myeloma. The New England journal of 
medicine 2001;344:1951 -2. 
4. Palumbo A, Anderson K. Multiple myeloma. The New England journal of 
medicine 2011;364:1046 -60. 
5. El Accaoui RN, Shamseddeen WA, Taher AT. Thalidomide and 
thrombosis. A meta -analysis. Thrombosis and haemostasis 2007;97:1031 -
6. 
6. Stewart AK, Rajkumar SV, Dimopoulos MA, et al. Carfilzomib, 
lenalidomide, and dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma. The 
New England journal of m edicine 2015;372:142 -52. 
7. Weijuan L, Cornell RF, Lenihan D, et al. Cardiovascular Complications of 
Multiple Myeloma Treatment. Circulation 2016; in press.  
8. Kearon C, Akl EA, Comerota AJ, et al. Antithrombotic therapy for VTE 
disease: Antithrombotic The rapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
42 
 American College of Chest Physicians Evidence -Based Clinical Practice 
Guidelines. CHEST 2012;141:e419S -94S. 
9. Palumbo A, Rajkumar SV, Dimopoulos MA, et al. Prevention of 
thalidomide - and lenalidomide -associated t hrombosis in myeloma. 
Leukemia 2008;22:414 -23. 
10. Fanikos J, Stevens LA, Labreche M, et al. Adherence to pharmacological 
thromboprophylaxis orders in hospitalized patients. The American journal 
of medicine 2010;123:536 -41. 
11. Connolly SJ, Eikelboom J, Jo yner C, et al. Apixaban in patients with atrial 
fibrillation. The New England journal of medicine 2011;364:806 -17. 
12. Schulman S, Kearon C. Definition of major bleeding in clinical 
investigations of antihemostatic medicinal products in non -surgical 
patien ts. J Thromb Haemost 2005;3:692 -4. 
13. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Third universal definition of 
myocardial infarction. Circulation 2012;126:2020 -35. 
14. Piazza G, Rao AF, Nguyen TN, et al. Venous thromboembolism in 
hospitalized patients with a ctive cancer. Clinical and applied 
thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of 
Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis 2013;19:469 -75. 
15. Piazza G. Venous thromboembolism and cancer. Circulation 
2013;128:2614 -8. 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
43 
 16. Kucher N, Koo S, Quiroz R, et al. Electronic alerts to prevent venous 
thromboembolism among hospitalized patients. The New England journal 
of medicine 2005;352:969 -77. 
17. Piazza G, Rosenbaum EJ, Pendergast W, et al. Physician alerts to 
prevent symptomatic venous  thromboembolism in hospitalized patients. 
Circulation 2009;119:2196 -201. 
18. Piazza G, Anderson FA, Ortel TL, et al. Randomized trial of physician 
alerts for thromboprophylaxis after discharge. The American journal of 
medicine 2013;126:435 -42. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
44 
  
Table 1. Study Calendar  
Procedure Screeninga 6-month 
Visit 
Informed Consent  X  
Inclusion/Exclusion X  
Demographics  X  
Medical History  X  
Prior/Concomitant Medications  X  
Urine Pregnancy (if clinically 
indicated)  X  
Multiple Myeloma History  X  
Cardio -vascular History  X  
Thrombosis Evaluation   
X 
Bleeding Evaluation  
X 
Pill Diary Collection   X 
aScreening is D -21 through D1 prior to enrollment  
 
 
Case Report Form  
 
Screening  
Inclusion criteria (all 
must be checked)  [ ] Diagnosis of multiple my eloma  
[ ] Receiving immunomodulatory therapy (either thalidomide 
[Thalomid], lenalinomide [Revlimid], and pomalidomide 
[Pomalyst])  
[ ] 18 years of age or older  
[ ] Willing and able to provide written informed consent  
 
Exclusion criteria 
(NONE must be 
chec ked) [ ] Pregnancy  
[ ] Breastfeeding  
[ ] Women of child -bearing potential who are unwilling or 
unable to use an acce ptable method of birth control  to avoid 
pregnancy for the entire study  
[ ] Any prior venous thromboembolism  
[ ] Contraindication to anticoag ulant therapy  
[ ] Conditions for which serious bleeding may occur 
including:  
o Current or within last 6 months: intracranial 
bleeding, intraocular bleeding, gastrointestinal 
bleeding, endoscopically documented ulcer 
disease  
o Current or within last month: head  trauma or 
other major trauma, major surgery  
o Current or within last 2 weeks:  stroke, 
neurosurgical procedure  
o Current: gross hematuria, major unhealed 
wound, major surgery planned during the trial 
period, intracranial mass, vascular 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
45 
 malformation, or aneury sm, overt bleeding, 
blood dyscrasia  
[ ] Active and clinically signficant liver disease  
[ ] Uncontrolled hypertension: systolic blood pressure >180 
mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure >100 mm Hg  
[ ] Current endocarditis  
[ ] Requirement for ongoing anticoagula nt therapy including 
mechanical heart valve replacement and atrial fibrillation  
[ ] Severe valvular heart disease, including rheumatic heart 
disease and mitral stenosis  
[ ] Bioprosthetic heart valve replacement  
[ ] Requirement for dual antiplatelet therap y or single agent 
antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel, prasugrel, or ticagrelor  
[ ] Requirement for aspirin at a dose higher than 165 mg 
daily.  
[ ] Hemoglobin < 9 mg/dL  
[ ] Platelet count < 100,000/mm3 
[ ] Calculated creatinine clearance (CrCl) < 25 ml/ m 
[ ] Alanine aminotransferase or aspartate aminotransferase 
level > 2 times the upper limit of the normal  
[ ] Total bilirubin level > 1.5 times the upper limit of the 
normal  
[ ] Life expectancy < 12 months  or hospice care  
[ ] Prisoners or subjects who are  involuntarily incarcerated  
[ ] Subjects who are compulsorily detained for treatment of 
either a psychiatric or physical (eg, infectious disease) 
illness  
[ ] Receiving concurrent investigational agents or has 
received an investigational agent within the pa st 30 days 
prior to the first dose of study treatment (with the exception 
of approved medications being used for an approved 
indication, e.g., investigating a new dosing regimen for an 
approved indication).  
[ ] Any condition, which in the opinion of the i nvestigator, 
would put the subject at an unacceptable risk from 
participating in the study  
[ ] Any other medical, social, logistical, or psychological 
reason, which in the opinion of the investigator, would 
preclude compliance with, or successful completio n of, the 
study protocol  
 
STOP HERE AND DO NOT ENROLL PATIENT IF ANY OF THE INCLUSION 
CRITERIA ARE ABSENT OR ANY EXCLUSION CRITERIA ARE PRESENT  
Eligible  
 [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
Written informed [ ] Yes  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
46 
 consent signed  [ ] No  
 
 
Patient Demographics  
Study ID num ber _ _ _ _ _ _  
Date of enrollment             ______/______/________  
              MM             DD               YYYY  
Date of birth             ______/______/________  
              MM             DD               YYYY  
Gender  
 [ ] Male                                         
[ ] Female  
Ethnicity  [ ] Hispanic/Latino  
[ ] Non -Hispanic/Non -Latino  
Race  [ ] American Indian or Alaskan Native  
[ ] Asian  
[ ] White  
[ ] Hispanic or Latino  
[ ] Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander  
[ ] Black or African -American  
[ ] Mixed race  
[ ] Other, specify:___________  
Weight (enter either 
weight and h eight OR 
BMI)   
             ___________________(kg)  
Height               ___________________(cm)  
BMI calculated               ___________________(kg/m²)  
 
 
Multiple Myeloma Character istics  
Date of diagnosis             ______/______/________  
              MM             DD               YYYY  
Diagnosis status  [ ] New diagnosis (diagnosis within the last 30 days)  
[ ] Recurrent/relapsed disease  
Diagnostic criteria  International Myeloma  Working Group (IMWG) criteria  
 
Must have at least one of the following:  
[ ] Serum M -protein ≥ 0.5 g/dL by serum electrophoresis 
(SPEP) or for IgA myeloma, by quantitative IgA (>750 mg/dl)  
[ ] Urinary M -protein excretion at least 200 mg/24 hours  
[ ] Seru m Free Light Chain (FLC) whereby the involved light 
chain measures ≥ 10 mg/dL and with an abnormal light chain 
ratio.  
Stage  [ ] R-ISS I  – ISS stage I (B2M <3.5 mg/L and serum albumin 
≥3.5 g/dL) and normal LDH and no del(17p), t(4;14), or 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
47 
 t(14;16) by FISH.   
[ ] R-ISS II  – Neither stage I nor stage III.  
[ ] R-ISS III  – ISS stage III (B2M ≥5.5 mg/L) plus LDH above 
normal limits and/or detection of one of the following by FISH: 
del(17p), t(4;14), or t(14;16).  
Immunomodulatory 
therapy (check one) [ ] thalido mide [Thalomid]  
[ ] lenalinomide [Revlimid]  
[ ] pomalidomide [Pomalyst]  
Other therapies  [ ] proteasome inhibitors (PIs) (i.e., bortezomib [Velcade] and 
carfilzomib [Kyprolis])  
[ ] corticosteroids  (including dexamethasone)  
If yes, provide specific regimen (drug, dose, and 
frequency):___________________________________  
[ ] chemotherapy  
[ ] hematopoietic cell transplantation  
[ ] erythropoiesis stimulating agents  
[ ] other  
 
 
Comorbid Conditions  
Cardiovascular disease  [ ] Cardiomyopathy/diminished left ventri cular 
systolic function  
If yes, EF (%) ____  
[ ] Heart failure  
[ ] Coronary artery disease  
If yes,  
CABG [ ]  
Coronary stent(s) [ ]  
Prior MI [ ]  
Unstable angina [ ]  
Stable angina [ ]  
[ ] Rheumatic heart disease  
[ ] Valvular heart  disease  
[ ] Atrial fibrillat ion or atrial flutter  
[ ] Congenital cardiac abnormality  
[ ] Pulmonary hypertension  
[ ] Other structural cardiac disease  
 
Valvular disease  [ ] Aortic Stenosis  
[ ] Aortic regurgitation  
[ ] Mitral regurgitation  
[ ] Mitral Stenosis  
[ ] Other  
 
If yes,  
Any se vere valve disease?   
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
48 
 [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
Hypertension  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No 
Peripheral 
vascular/artery disease  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No  
Carotid occlusive 
disease  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No  
Cerebrovascular 
accident (strokes or 
TIAs)  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No  
Family history of VTE  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
History of bleeding  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No 
Hypercholesterol emia  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No 
Current a lcohol 
consumption  [ ] None                                              
[ ] 1-2 drinks per day  
[ ] >2 drinks per day  
Chronic liver disease 
(as noted in chart)  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No  
If yes, cirrhosis  
[ ] yes  
[ ] no  
History of falls  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No 
Cigarette smoking  
(check only 1)  [ ] Current smoker           
[ ] Former smoker     
[ ] Never smoker             
Major s urgery within 
the past 3 months  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No 
If yes, date            ______/______/________  
              MM             DD               YYYY  
 
If within the last month, patient s hould not be enrolled.  
Prior hospitalization 
within 30 days  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No  
COPD  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No 
Diabetes mellitus  
(Type I or II)  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No 
Serum creatinine  > 2 .5 
mg/dL  [ ] Yes                                             
[ ] No                        
 If yes, is patient on dialysis?  
[ ] Yes                                             
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
49 
 [ ] No 
 
If yes, patient should n ot be enrolled.  
 
If no, creatinine clearance (Cockroft -Gault) = _ _ _ mg/dL  
Concomitant 
medications  [ ] aspirin  
If yes, dose = _ _ _ mg/daily  
 
If > 165 mg/daily, patient should not be enrolled.  
 
[ ] daily NSAID use  
 
Prior 
thromboprophylaxis 
regimen  [ ] Yes 
[ ] No  
 
If yes, check all that apply:  
[ ] LMWH  
[ ] Fondaparinux  
[ ] Unfractionated heparin  
[ ] Warfarin  
[ ] NOAC  
[ ] Aspirin  
[ ] Other: _________  
 
 
 
 
Study Treatment  
Date study drug 
started  ____/____/_____        
MM     DD     YYYY              
Date study drug 
stopped   ____/____/_____        
MM     DD     YYYY    
 
Completed full 6 months of study drug?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If did not stay on drug for 6 months,  reason why not?  
[ ] Fulfilled criteria for a primary study outcome  (VTE or 
major/clinically relev ant non -major bleed)  
[ ] Patient expired  
[ ] Adverse drug event or side -effect  
[ ] Change in clinical status (such as change in goals of care, 
comfort measures, hospice care)  
[ ] Patient preference/withdrawal of consent            
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
50 
 Medication 
adherence (vi a pill 
count)  Total doses taken/total doses prescribed = ( __ / 336) x 100  
= _ _ _ %  
 
 
Six-Month Study  Outcomes  
Deep vein 
thrombosis  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, date ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
Confirmed by diagn ostic imaging:  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
If yes, by?  
[ ] Ultrasound  
[ ] CT  
[ ] MRI  
[ ] Venography  
 
Location:  
[ ] Upper extremity  
If checked : 
[ ] Right  
[ ] Left  
[ ] Bilateral or SVC  
 
[ ] Lower extremity  
If checked : 
[ ] Right  
[ ] Left  
[ ] Bilateral or IVC  
[ ] Proximal (popliteal or higher)  
[ ] Calf  
 
Hospitalized?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Treatment:  
[ ] Anticoagulation  
[ ] Pharmacomechanical (catheter -based) therapy  
[ ] Surgery  
[ ] IVC filter  
 
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
51 
 Superficial vein 
thrombosis  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, date ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
Other venous 
thrombosis 
(mesenteric, cerebral 
sinus, gonadal, etc.)  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, date ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
Pulmonary embolism  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, date ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
Confirmed by diagnostic imaging:  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
If yes, by?  
[ ] CT  
[ ] MRI  
[ ] Pulmonary angiography  
[ ] V/Q scan  
 
Location:  
[ ] Left  
[ ] Right  
[ ] Bilateral  
 
RV dysfunction o n echocardiogram or CT?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Associated with hemodynamic instability (syncope, shock, 
hypotension, cardiac arrest )? 
[ ] Yes 
[ ] No  
 
Fatal?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Hospitalized?  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
52 
 [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Treatment:  
[ ] Anticoagulation  
[ ] Systemic fibrinolysis  
[ ] Pharmacomechanical (catheter -based) therapy  
[ ] Surgical embolectomy  
[ ] IVC filter  
 
Death  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, date ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
Cause of death:  
[ ] PE 
[ ] Myocardial infarction  
[ ] Other ca rdiovascular  
[ ] Cancer -related  
[ ] Non -cardiovascular, non -cancer  
 
Major or clinically 
relevant non -major 
bleed  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, date ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
Major  bleed  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, da te ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
Location:  
[ ] Intracranial  
[ ] Surgical/operative site  
[ ] Gastrointestinal  
[ ] Genitourinary  
[ ] Retroperitoneal  
[ ] Pericardial  
[ ] Pulmonary  
[ ] Other thoracic  
[ ] Musculoskeletal  
[ ] Nasopharyngeal  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
53 
 [ ] Hematocrit or hemoglobin decrease without clear source  
[ ] Other  
 
Fatal?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Hospitalized?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Associated with hemodynamically instability?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Treatment:  
[ ] Blood products  
[ ] Surgery  
[ ] Invasive procedure  
[ ] Medical therapy (PCC, andexanet, etc.)  
 
Clinically relevant 
non-major bleed  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, date ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
Location:  
[ ] Intracranial  
[ ] Surgical/o perative site  
[ ] Gastrointestinal  
[ ] Genitourinary  
[ ] Retroperitoneal  
[ ] Pericardial  
[ ] Pulmonary  
[ ] Other thoracic  
[ ] Musculoskeletal  
[ ] Nasopharyngeal  
[ ] Hematocrit or hemoglobin decrease without clear source  
[ ] Other : _______________  
 
Hospital ized?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Treatment:  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
54 
 [ ] Blood products  
[ ] Surgery  
[ ] Invasive procedure  
[ ] Medical therapy (PCC, andexanet, etc.)  
 
Non-bleed adverse 
drug reaction  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, date ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
Type of reaction:  
[ ] Anaphylaxis  
[ ] Cutaneous (rash, etc.)  
[ ] Liver function abnormalities  
[ ] Other: _______________  
 
Hospitalized?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Study drug discontinuation?  
[ ] Permanent stop  
[ ] Temporary stop  
[ ] No t discontinued  
 
Myoca rdial infarction  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, date ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
Type:  
[ ] ST elevation  
[ ] Non -ST elevation  
 
Fatal?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Treatment:  
[ ] Systemic fibrinolysis  
[ ] Percutaneous coronary interv ention (angioplasty, stenting, 
etc.) 
[ ] CABG  
[ ] Medical management  
Apixaban for Primar y Prevention of VTE in MM  Piazza, et al. Version  17.0 
  November 8 , 2017  
   
55 
  
Stroke/TIA  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, date ____/____/_____        
                 MM     DD     YYYY              
 
TIA?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Stroke?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
If yes, type of stroke:  
[ ] Ischemic  
[ ] Hemorrhagic  
[ ] Other  
 
Fatal stroke?  
[ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
 
Treatment:  
[ ] Systemic fibrinolysis  
[ ] Percutaneous thrombectomy  
[ ] Surgery  
[ ] Other  
 
 
 
 
Appendix  
 
1. Apixaban Package Insert  
 
2. Informed Consent  
 