 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 1 of 17 Topical Nitroglycerine Treatment for Radial Artery Spasm Prevention  
(TNT -RASP ) 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
September 19 2017  
  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 2 of 17 INFORMED CONSENT DOCUMENT FOR PARTICIPATION  
OF A SUBJECT IN A RESEARCH STUDY  
 
Transdermal Nitroglycerine Treatment for Radial Artery  
Spasm Prevention  
TNT -RASP  
Principal Investigator  Prabhakaran Gopalakrishnan , MD  
Sub-Investigators  Sandeep Anreddy, MD  
Brendan K. Duffy, MD  
Nagapradeep Nagajothi, MD  
John J. Paulowski, MD  
Ramana Podugu, MD 
Rizwan Sardar, MD  
Sourabh Prabhakar, MD  
 
Aultman Cardiology Clinical Trials  
2600 Sixth Street, South West  
Canton, OH 44710  
Phone Number:  (330) 363-7274  
24 Hour Phone Number:  (330) 454 -8076  Aultman Hospital  
2600 Sixth Street, South West  
Canton, OH 44710  
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
You are being asked to participate in a clinical trial, a type of research study.  This consent 
document provides you with important information about the trial to decide if you want to 
participate.  It will outline the purpose of the study, the procedures involve d, any possible risks 
associated with participation, and your rights as a participant.  
Please take time to completely and carefully read the consent document.  You will be able to ask 
the study doctor and study staff any questions you may have.  You may al so discuss your 
participation in the trial with your primary physician and family.  
If you agree to participate in this study, you will be asked to sign this consent form.  You will 
then receive a copy of the signed document.  
In order to participate in this study you will be required to sign both this consent document and 
the authorization document.  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 3 of 17 Your participation in this study is voluntary.  You are free to say yes or no.  If you choose not to 
participate, your regular medical care an d legal rights will not be affected.  If you decide to 
participate, you are permitted to withdraw your consent and stop at any time.  
This is a clinical trial, a type of research study.  Your study doctor will explain the clinical trial 
to you.  Clinical tr ials include only people who choose to take part.  Please take your time to 
make your decision about taking part.  You may discuss your decision with your friends and 
family.  You can also discuss it with your health care team.  If you have any questions, you can 
ask your study doctor for more explanation.  
WHO IS CONDUCTING THIS STUDY?  
Dr. Prabhakaran Gopalakrishnan, a Cardiology Fellow at Aultman Hospital , and Dr. 
Nagapradeep Nagajothi , an Interventional cardiologist and Program director of the Cardiology 
Fellowship  at Aultman Hospital, are  responsible for conducting this clinical study.  Dr. Brendan 
Duffy , an interventional cardiologist  is responsible for the study design and compliance with 
regulations.     
DO I HAVE TO BE IN THIS STUDY?  
You can decide whether to take part in this study or not.  You are free to say yes or no.  If you 
say no, your regular medical care will not change.  Ev en if you join this study, you do not have 
to stay in it.  You may stop at any time.   
A research study is different from routine medical care in three ways:  1) there are  extra risks that 
we will tell you about in this form; 2) you may have some extra med ical tests and visits; 3) the 
study procedures, tests and visits follow a set plan that must be kept.  
WHO CAN TAKE PART IN THIS STUDY?  
You are being asked to take part in this study because you are having a cardiac catheterization  by 
transradial approach ( using the artery in your wrist) . 
WHAT IS THE USUAL APPROACH FOR  CARDIAC 
CATHETERIZATION ? 
Cardiac catheterization can be done either by transfemoral approach (i.e., using the artery in your 
thigh) or transradial approach (i.e., using the artery in your wris t). While each approach has its 
merits and limitations, your provider has elected for you to undergo a transradial approach. 
While transradial approach has been shown to have lower risk of complications as well as 
improved patient discomfort, the smaller s ize of the radial artery (artery in wrist) may lead to 
difficulties during the procedure in a small fraction of patients undergoing the procedure. You 
will be asked to lie flat on the operating table and medications will be given to help you relax. 
Your pr ovider will administer a subcutaneous local anesthetic injection (to block pain sensation) 
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 4 of 17 as well as vasodilatory medications directly into the artery (to improve its size), during the 
procedure.  A sheath ( small tube ) will be  inserted into the radial artery. Medications are given 
through the tube to hel p relax the radial artery, which may cause a temporary burning sensation 
in the hand and arm. Blood thinners are also administered to help prevent the formation of blood 
clots w ithin the artery. Then the catheters will be  moved through the tube and guided to the 
heart. A coronary angiogram and , if required , stent placement may be performed.  After the 
completion of the procedure, the catheters and tubes will be  removed from the ra dial artery . An 
inflatable balloon type device will be placed on your wrist to help stop bleeding.  If cardiac 
catheterization is unsuccessful by transradial approach, a transfemoral approach may be used to 
complete the cardiac catheterization based on your  provider’s clinical judgment.  
EXPLANATION OF TERMS  
• Cardiac Catheterizatio n is a procedure that involves passing small catheters through 
your blood vessels in wrist or groin and injecting contrast dye to study the heart chambers 
(Ventriculogram) or blood v essels supplying the heart (Coronary Angiogram).  
• Coronary Angiogram  is a study of blood vessels supplying the heart (Coronary 
arteries). It is done by injecting contrast dye into the blood vessels and studying them 
with fluoroscopy (A type of imaging stud y using Xrays). It helps to identify any 
blockages in the blood vessels supplying the heart. A significant blockage in these 
arteries can be the cause of chest pain (angina) or heart attack (myocardial infarction).  
• Ventriculogram is a study of ventricle (h eart chamber). It involves injecting dye into the 
heart chamber and studying its size, shape and function using fluoroscopy.  
• Transfemoral: Traditionally cardiac catheterization has been done by passing small 
catheters through the blood vessel in the groin called the Femoral artery. This is called 
the Transfemoral approach.  
• Transradial: Cardiac catheterization can also be done by passing small catheters through 
the blood vessel in the wrist called the Radial artery. This is called the Transradial 
approach. C ompared to transfemoral approach, transradial approach has less 
complications and patient comfort is more. When performed by providers experienced in 
transradial approach it is generally considered safer than transfemoral approach. In about 
5-10% of the pa tients, transradial approach can be unsuccessful and a transfemoral 
approach may be needed.  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 5 of 17 WHAT ARE MY OTHER CHOICES  IF I DO NOT TAKE PART IN THIS 
STUDY ? 
If you decide  not to take part in this study y ou may choose to have the usual approach described 
above . 
WHY IS THIS RESEARCH STUDY BEING DONE?  
The purpose of this study is to improve the success of cardiac catheterization by transradial 
approach and increase  patient comfort by reducing radial artery spasm.  Transradial approach 
chosen by your provider improves patient comfort and reduces bleeding complications 
significantly compared  to the transfemoral approach (u sing the artery in the groin). Since the 
radial  artery is smaller than the femoral artery , it is more prone to spasm.  Cardiac catheterization 
by transradial approach  may be difficult  in some patients and they may need a switch to 
transfemoral approach to complete the procedure.  
This study is designed to look at the possibility o f using topical nitroglycerine, a vasodilator,  to 
increase the radial artery size and reduc e radial artery spasm. This may:  
• increase patient comfort ;  
• improve success of the transradial approach ; and  
• avoid the need for switchin g to transfermoral approach.  
HOW MANY PEOPLE WILL TAKE PART IN THE STUDY?  
There will be up to 300 people taking part in this study.  
WHAT ARE THE STUDY GROUPS?  
If you decide to take part in the study, in addition to the above mentioned usual treatment, you 
will rece ive topical lidocaine ointment, a local anesthetic (numbing cream),  applied on your wrist 
one hour before the procedure. This  may reduce pain felt during  the lidocaine injection given as 
part of usual approach. Additionally , based on your random study assignment  you will  receive 
either topical nitroglycerine ointment (a vasodilator ) or placebo applied to your wrist . The 
nitroglycerine may increase size of the radial artery  and potentially impr ove the success of the 
procedure as well as your comfort during and after the procedure . 
EXPLANATION OF TERMS  
• Local anesthetic is a medication that acts locally on the nerves and blocks pain 
sensation. This is generally used during procedures involving man ipulation of skin and 
superficial tissues to ensure patients do not experience pain or discomfort during the 
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 6 of 17 procedure. It can be in the form of an ointment applied to the skin or a solution injected 
into the skin and tissues immediately below the skin.  
• Vasodilator is a medication that dilates blood vessels.  
You will  be randomly assigned to one of two groups:    
1. Treatment group: Will receive a combination of topical lidocaine and topical 
nitroglycerine applied to the wrist while waiting in the holding area.   
2. Placebo group: Will receive a combination of topical lidocaine and placebo  applied to the 
wrist while waiting in the holding area.   
This is a double -blind study; neither you nor your doctor will know what group yo u are in.  After 
informed consent is obtained, you will be randomized to the treatment group or placebo group.  
Patients and physicians will be blinded to the administered drug ( topical nitroglycerine  vs. 
placebo).  
• Randomization  is a standard procedure use d in clinical trials where subjects are assigned 
by chance to one study group or another.  It is used to make sure that the results of the 
study are not influenced by the selection of subjects/patients in one group as compared to 
the other.  This is import ant to make certain that study results are accurately interpreted 
and therefore beneficial to future patients.  In this study, you have a 50:50 chance of 
being assigned to one group or another.   
• Double Blinding  is a process used in clinical trials where n either the person giving the 
treatment [doing the research] nor the patient [research subject] knows which treatment 
the patient [research subject] is receiving, or which group the research subject is 
participating in.  It is used in order to make sure tha t the subject and the person giving the 
treatment are not influenced by knowledge of the type of treatment that is being used.  
• Placebo  is an inactive substance (with no drug in it, often called a “sugar pill” or 
“dummy pill”) that is compared to a drug in a clinical trial to see if the drug has a real 
effect.  A placebo is often used in clinical trials in order to “blind” the study so th at the 
doctor and the subject cannot be influenced by his/her expectations of the effects of the 
drug.  The study can be “un -blinded” in case of an emergency.  
WHAT WILL HAPPEN IF I TAKE PART IN THE STUDY ? 
Once you agree to participate in the study, you wil l receive all the standard treatment for cardiac 
catheterization by transradial approach , as described above . 
On the day of the procedure you will report to Ambulatory Cardiac  Unit (Same Day Unit) 
opposite to Cardiac Cath eterization  Lab in the Bedford buil ding.  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 7 of 17 As part of standard care , nurses will do the routine pre -procedure evaluation including vital 
signs, verifying lab data , etc.  
As part of the research study a brief ultrasound exam of your radial artery (wrist artery) will be 
done to measure its siz e. You will answer a brief 6 question survey to assess your anxiety level 
before the procedure. Based on the randomized assignment of your treatment, a  combination of 
topical lidocaine (local anesthetic) and nitroglycerine or placebo will be applied to you r wrist at 
least 60 minutes before the pro cedure.  
You will be transferred to the Cardiac Catheterization Lab and the procedure will be done as per 
standard approach described above. As part of the research study a repeat ultrasound exam of 
your radial artery (wrist artery) may be done immediately before the beginning of the procedure.  
HOW LONG WILL I BE IN  THIS STUDY?  
You will be part of the study from the time of consent and enrol lment , which will take place 
during your office visit  or in the  ambulatory cardiac unit  (same day unit ), until discharge from 
the Cardiac Catheterization Lab or admission to the inpat ient unit  after completion of the 
procedure . If you are hospitalized after your procedu re, your participation will end  120 minutes, 
or 2 hours, after the removal of the TR band  or comparable product , which is  a compression 
band placed on your wrist during the procedure.  
WHAT EXTRA TESTS WILL I HAVE IF I TAKE PART IN THIS STUDY?  
An extra test necessary for this study is the m easurement of the size of your radial artery (wrist 
artery) with a portable ultrasound device. This is a brief noninvasive test done b edside and 
involves no risk of injury or pain.  
WHAT  POSSIBLE  RISKS CAN I EXPECT FROM TAKING PART  IN 
THIS STUDY?  
There are minimal risks associated with this study such as a drop in your blood pressure  and 
headache . The drop in blood pressure should be mild and easily reversed with removal of the 
medication and or administration of intravenous  (IV) fluids. The risk of drop in blood pressure is 
lower with topical nitroglycerine  compared to the risk with intraarterial nitroglycerine  (directly 
into the arte ry) given to all patients (both patients enrolled and not enrolled in the study) as part 
of standard approach.  If headache occurs, the patient will be given acetaminophen (Tylenol) for 
relief.  
Pregnancy , Breastfeeding Women , Women of Childbearing Potential , and Contraception  
Women who are pregnant or nursing a child  cannot participate  in this trial.  You must confirm, to 
the b est of your knowledge, that you are not  now pregnant, that you do not intend to bec ome 
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 8 of 17 pregnant, and that you will use highly effective methods of contraception during study treatment.  
Highly effective methods of contraception include:   
• Total abstinence  
• Barrier methods of contraception  
• Use of oral, injected, or implanted hormonal methods of contrace ption or other forms of 
hormonal contraceptio n that have comparable efficacy  
• Placement of an intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS)  
• Female sterilization (have had surgical bilateral oophorectomy with or without 
hysterectomy) or tubal ligati on before taking study treatment.   
• Male sterilization ( prior  to screening).  
 
If you suspect being pregnant during study treatment, you must inform the Study Doctor 
immediately.  You will not be allowed to receive study treatment if you are pregnant. 
WHAT POSSIBLE BENEFITS CAN I EXPECT FROM TAKING PART IN  
THIS  STUDY?  
Taking part in this study may or may not provide additional benefits.  
The treatment group to which you are assigned may prove to be more effective and/or have 
fewer side effects than the ot her treatment group(s) . 
Both treatment and control groups will receive topical lidocaine and you may  
• feel less or no pain at the time of lidocaine injection.  
Patients in the study group will receive topical nitroglycerine and  it may  
• improve your comfort d uring the procedure ,  
• improve the success of the procedure , and/or   
• reduce the need for changing to transfemoral ( groin ) approach . 
CAN  I STOP TAKING PART  IN TH IS STUDY?  
Yes.  You can decide to stop at any time.  If you decide to stop for any reason, it is important to 
let the study doctor know as soon as possible so you can stop safely.  Even if you decide not to 
continue in the study, no therapy will be withheld, and you will still receive standard treatment, 
follow –up, and clinical monitoring.  In addi tion, no changes will be made with regard to 
confidentiality and release of medical information.  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 9 of 17 The study doctor will tell you about new information or changes in the study that may affect 
your health or your willingness to continue in the study.  
WHAT ARE  MY RIGHTS IN THIS STUDY?  
Taking part  in this study is your choice.   No matter  what decision you make, and even if your 
decision changes, there  will be no penalty to you .  You will not lose medical care or any legal 
rights.    
If you have any questions abou t YOUR RIGHTS AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT , contact the Aultman 
Health Foundation Human Research Review Board in the Office of Research, 2600 Sixth Street 
SW, Canton, Ohio   44710 [330 -363-6793] [e -mail: 
HumanResearch.ReviewBoard@aultman.com].  You may also conta ct them if you feel under 
any pressure to enroll or continue to participate in this study.  
WHAT  ARE THE COSTS OF TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY?  
It is expected that you will not have any additional costs to participate in this study.  You will 
receive  topical lidocaine and topical  nitroglycerine  (or placebo ) at no charge.  Any tests that are 
outside the standard of care will be covered by research.  All costs not related to the study, 
including those related to the standard treatment of your disease will be your responsibility.  
You will not be paid for taking  part in this study.  
WHAT HAPPENS IF I AM INJURED OR HURT BECAUSE I TOOK PART 
IN THIS STUDY?  
If you feel you have been injured or hurt as a result of taking part in the study, it is important that 
you contact 24 hour emergency number  at 330-454-8076  immedi ately.  You will get medical 
treatment if you are injured or hurt as a result of taking part in this study.  
Immediate and necessary care for research -related adverse events will be provided at Aultman 
Hospital if you are injured because of participation in  this research project.  Any costs associated 
with providing this care not paid for by your insurance will be your responsibility.  Aultman 
Hospital has not arranged to provide compensation for any injury you may suffer as a direct 
consequence of the non -negligent performance of the procedures described above .  However,  by 
signing this form, you do not give up your right to seek payment for harm you receive while  
participating in this study . 
WHO W ILL SEE MY MEDICAL INFORMATION?  
Your privacy is very importan t to us and the researchers  will make every effort to pro tect it. 
Your information may be given out if required by law . For example, certain states require 
doctors to report to health boards if they fin d a disease like tuberculosis. However, the 
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 10 of 17 researchers  will do their best to make sure that any information that is released will not identify 
you. Some of your health information, and /or information about your specimen, from this study 
will be kept in a central database for research. Your name or contact information will not be put 
in the database.  
There are organizations  and individuals  that may inspect your records.  These organizations  and 
individuals  are required to make sure your information is kept private.  Some of these 
organizations  and in dividuals  are: 
• The Human Research Review Board, HRRB, is a group of people who review the 
research with the goal of protecting the people who take part in the study.  
• The research staff, including the Principal Investigator and Sub -Investigators listed on 
page one of this document, along with other members of the research team responsible 
for collecting and analyzing data.   
• The Food and Drug Administration  
WHERE CAN I GET MORE INFORMATION?  
A description of this clinical trial will be available on  http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required 
by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include info rmation that can identify you. At most, the Web 
site will inc lude a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any t ime. 
WHO CAN ANSWER MY QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS STUDY?  
You can talk to Dr. Prabhakaran Gopalakrishnan , the Principal Investigator, about any 
questions or concerns you have about this study or to re port side effects or injuries. Contact Dr. 
Prabhakaran Gopalakrishnan  at the telephone number and address listed on the first page.  
If you have any questions about COMPENSATION OR MEDICAL TREATMENT FOR RESEARCH -
RELATED INJURIES  contact the Aultman Health Foundation Human Research Review Board in th e 
Office of Research, 2600 Sixth Street SW, Canton, Ohio   44710 [330 -363-6793] [e -mail:  
HumanResearch.ReviewBoard@aultman.com]  
If you have any questions about YOUR RIGHTS AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT , contact the Aultman 
Health Foundation Human Research Review Board in the Office of Research, 2600 Sixth Street 
SW, Canton, Ohio   44710 [330 -363-6793] [e -mail:  
HumanResearch.ReviewBoard@aultman.com].  You may also contact them if you feel under 
any pressure to enroll or continue to participate in this study.  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 11 of 17 Autho rization to Use and/or Disclose (Release) 
Individually Identifiable Health Information for 
Research Purposes  
You have rights regarding the privacy of your medical information collected prior to and in the 
course of this research study.  These rights are pr otected by a federal law that requires the 
Aultman Health Foundation and its affiliated hospitals and clinics, researchers, health care 
providers and physicians (collectively, “Aultman”) to protect the privacy of information that 
identifies you and relates  to your past, present, and future physical and mental health and 
conditions (“protected health information”).   
Before researchers use or share any health information about you as part of this study, Aultman 
is required to obtain your authorization.  This Authorization helps explain to you how this 
information will be used or shared with others involved in the study .   
• The Aultman Health Foundation and its hospitals, clinics, health -care providers and 
researchers are required to protect the privacy of your health information.   
• You should have received a Notice of Privacy Practices when you received health care 
servi ces here.  If not, let us know and a copy will be given to you.  Please carefully 
review this information.  Ask if you have any questions or do not understand any parts of 
this notice.  
• If you agree to take part in this study your health information will be  used and shared 
with others involved in this study.  Also, any new health information about you that 
comes from tests or other parts of this study will be shared with those involved in this 
study.  
• Health information about you that will be used or shared w ith others involved in this 
study may include your research record and any health care records at Aultman.  For 
example, this may include your medical records, x -ray or laboratory results.  
Psychotherapy notes in your health records (if any) will not, howe ver, be shared or used.  
Use of these notes requires a separate, signed authorization.  
• If you decide to participate in this research study, your protected health information will 
be used and shared with others as explained below.  
Purpose of Use and/or Disc losure of Health Information  
By signing this form, you are giving permission to Aultman Health Foundation, Aultman 
Hospital, Cardiovascular Clinical Trials, and all other Aultman Health Foundation affiliated 
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 12 of 17 health care provider organizations to use and/or  disclose your health information that 
individually identifies you for the purposes of the research study (“Study”) listed above.  
What Health Information May be Used and/or Disclosed?  
To do this research study, we need your permission to collect and use so me of your health 
information, or you cannot be in the study.  This information may come from questions we ask, 
forms we ask you to fill out, or your medical record, as described below.  We will only collect 
and use information needed for the study.   
Aultman may use and/or disclose your past, present and future records and information as 
described in the study protocol approved by the Human Research Review Board which may 
include : 
• Lab test results (which 
may include genetic 
tests, HIV/AIDS tests 
and/or tes ts for other 
communicable diseases 
if part of my records)  
• Procedure reports  
• Hospitalization records  • Operative reports  
• Outpatient/Office visits, 
exams, consultations, phone 
call records and notes  
• Radiology/x -ray images 
and/or reports  
• Registration and billin g 
information  • Emergency room reports  
• Medication information 
including drugs, vitamins, 
and herbal remedies  
• Questionnaires and diaries  
• Pathology reports  
• Other (describe):        
 
Why will protected health information [PHI] about me be used or shared with 
others?  
The main reasons include:  
• To conduct and oversee the research described in the consent document and for all 
purposes necessary to conduct and ensure the integrity of the study.  
• To ensure the research meets legal, institutional, and accreditation requirements; and  
• To conduct public health activities (including reporting of adverse events or situations 
where you or others may be at risk of harm).  
Other reasons may include for trea tment, payment or health care operations.  For example, some 
medical information produced by this study may become part of your hospital medical record 
because the information may be necessary for your medical care.  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 13 of 17 Who will use or share protected health i nformation about me at the Aultman 
Health Foundation  
Those who oversee the study will have access to your information, including:  
• Researchers and staff at Aultman will use, share and receive your personal health 
information for this research study.  They w ill make every reasonable effort to protect the 
information and keep it confidential.   
• The only Aultman Hospital employees allowed to handle your health information are 
those on the study team, and those on the Aultman Human Research Review Board, the 
committee that oversees research at Aultman,  and Aultman officials who review the 
research plan and check the research activities to make sure the hospital’s rules are 
followed.  
• Authorized Aultman staff not involved in the study may be aware that you are 
participating in a research study and have access to your information.  If this study is 
related to your medical care, your study -related information may be placed in your 
permanent hospital, clinic or physician’s office records.  As a result, this research 
information may be seen by a uthorized members of the Aultman workforce who need to 
access your medical record in the performance of their duties (for example, to provide 
treatment, to ensure integrity of the research, accounting or billing matters, etc.)  
Will my protected health information be shared with people outside the 
Aultman Health Foundation?  
We may share your information with people who do not work at Aultman Hospital because they 
planned this study, pay for this study, or work with us on this study.  The federal Privacy Rule 
may no longer protect your health information once it leaves Aultman Hospital.  Once your 
health information has been disclosed, the information m ay no longer be protected under the 
laws and regulations that apply to Aultman.  The recipients may share the information with 
others without your permission, if permitted by laws governing them.  
There are organizations that may inspect your records for qu ality assurance and data analysis.  
These organizations are required to make sure your information is kept private, unless required 
by law to provide information.  For this study, we plan to share information with those doctors, 
researchers or government r epresentatives working with us on this study at the institutions or 
companies listed here:  
Your health information may also be shared with federal and state agencies that have oversight 
of the study or to whom access is required under the law.  These may i nclude:  
• The Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 14 of 17 How long will protected health information about me be used or shared with 
others?  
If you sign this form, we plan to keep your information for 10 years after the research study ends 
in case we need to check i t again for this study.  
We will not use your health information for a different study without your permission, or the 
permission of the Aultman Human Research Review Board.  Once all personal identification is 
removed, the information might be used or rele ased for other purposes without asking you.  
May I have access to my medical information that results from my 
participation in this research study?  
In accordance with the Aultman Health Foundation Notices of Privacy Practices document that 
you have been pro vided, you are permitted access to information (including information 
resulting from your participation in this research study) contained within your medical records 
filed with your health care provider.  
During your participation in this study, you will ha ve access to your medical record and any 
study information that is part of that record.  
Statement of Privacy Rights  
If you change your and later and do not want us to collect or share your health information, you 
need to send a letter to the Principal Inve stigator at the mailing address on the first page .  The 
letter must say that you have changed your mind and do not want the researcher to collect and 
share your health information.  If you change your mind and revoke the authorization, you will 
not be allo wed to continue to participate in the Study.  
If you revoke this authorization, Aultman may not continue to use and/or disclose your health 
information for this Study, except that:  
• Your health information that has already been disclosed before you revoked t his 
Authorization cannot be taken back; and  
• Aultman and the recipients may continue to use and disclose your health information 
already collected for this research Study for the purposes of maintaining the integrity of 
the Study, and for regulatory complia nce. 
You have the right to limit the use and sharing of your PHI, and you have the right to see your 
medical records and know who else is seeing them.  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 15 of 17 You have the right to refuse to sign this authorization.  You do not have to give this permission 
for use  of your PHI.  If you decide not to provide permission, you will not be able to participate 
in this research study.  Your health care outside of the study, payment for your health care, and 
your health care benefits will not be affected if you choose not t o sign this form.   
Publication of results or use for teaching purposes  
The information from this study may be published in scientific journals or presented at scientific 
meetings but your identity will be kept strictly confidential.  Your name or other id entifiers will 
not be used in any publication or teaching materials without your specific permission.  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 16 of 17 CONSENT TO PARTICIPATION IN TNT -RASP  
By signing my name below, I confirm the following  
• I have read (or had read to me) this entire consent document.  All of my questions 
have been answered to my satisfaction.  
• The study’s purpose, procedures, risks and possible benefits have been explained to 
me.   
• I agree to let the study team use and share the health information and other 
information gathere d for this study.  
• I voluntarily agree to participate in this research study.  I agree to follow the study 
procedures as directed.  I have been told that I can stop at any time.  
IMPORTANT:  You will be given a copy of this signed document for your records.  A second 
copy will be kept together with the Investigator’s research records on this study.  A third copy 
will be placed in your Aultman Hospital medical record.  
Please keep it where you can find it easily.  It will help you remember what we discussed tod ay 
Research Participant’s Name [PRINT]:  
Research Participant’s Signature:  Date/Time  
 
TNT -RASP Protocol [Version 3, Amendment 2; 14-Jul-2016 ] 
Consent Document Version: 3.0; 14-Jul-2016  
Approved by HRRB:   07-Sep-2016  
Page 17 of 17 INVESTIGATORS CONFIRMING STATEMENT  
I have given this research subject information on the study, which in my opinion is accurate and 
sufficient for the subject to understand  fully the nature, risks and benefits of the study, and the 
rights of a research subject.  There has been no coercion or undue influence.   
INVESTIGATOR/INDIVIDUAL OBTAINING CONSENT  Date /Time  
I have explained the purpose of the research, the study procedur es, identifying those that are 
investigational, the possible risks and discomforts and potential benefits.  I have answered any questions 
regarding the research study to the best of my ability.  